Basic Texts

of the 1972 
World Heritage
Convention

n
o
i
t
i

d
E
 

5
0
0
2

n
o

i
t
n
e
v
n
o
C
 
e
g
a
t
i
r
e
H
d
l
r
o
W
 
2
7
9
1
 
e
h
t
 
f
o

 

 
s
t
x
e
T

 
c
i
s
a
B

For more information contact:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP France
Tel: 33 (0)1 45 68 18 76
Fax: 33 (0)1 45 68 55 70
E-mail: wh-info@unesco.org
http://whc.unesco.org

Basic Texts 

of the 1972 

World Heritage Convention

2005 Edition

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP
France
+33 (0)1 4568 1876
Tel.: 
Fax:  
+33 (0)1 4568 5570
E-mail:  wh-info@unesco.org
Links:  http://whc.unesco.org/

Published in 2005 by the United Nations Educational, 
Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75352 PARIS 07 SP

Typeset and printed in the workshops of UNESCO
WHC-2005/WS/02  //CLD 20571

© UNESCO 2005

Printed in France

Table of Contents

Budapest Declaration on World Heritage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   

  5

Convention concerning the Protection 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   

  7

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation 
of the World Heritage Convention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23

Rules of Procedure of the Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    195

Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly of States Parties 
to the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage . . .    219

Financial Regulations for the World Heritage Fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    227

Budapest Declaration on World Heritage

The World Heritage Committee: 

Noting  that  in  2002,  United  Nations  Year  for  Cultural  Heritage,  the  World  Heritage  Committee 
 celebrates the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention concerning the Protection of the World  Cultural 
and Natural Heritage adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO in 1972;

Considering that in 30 years, the Convention has proven to be a unique instrument of international 
co-operation in the protection of cultural and natural heritage of outstanding universal value; 

Adopts the Budapest Declaration on World Heritage as follows:

1.  We, the members of the World Heritage Committee, recognize the universality of the 1972 
Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage and the conse-
quent need to ensure that it applies to heritage in all its diversity,as an instrument for the 
sustainable development of all societies through dialogue and mutual understanding;

2.  The properties on the World Heritage List are assets held in trust to pass on to generations 

of the future as their rightful inheritance;

3. 

In view of the increasing challenges to our shared heritage, we will:

(a)   encourage  countries  that  have  not  yet  joined  the  Convention  to  do  so  at  the  earli-
est opportunity, as well as join other related international heritage protection instru-
ments;

(b)   invite States Parties to the Convention to identify and nominate cultural and natural 
heritage properties representing heritage in all its diversity, for inclusion on the World 
Heritage List;

(c)  seek to ensure an appropriate and equitable balance between conservation, sustain-
ability and development, so that World Heritage properties can be protected through 
appropriate activities contributing to the social and economic development and the 
quality of life of our communities;

Budapest Declaration on World Heritage

5

(d) 

join to cooperate in the protection of heritage, recognizing that to harm such herit-
age is to harm, at the same time, the human spirit and the world’s inheritance;

(e)   promote World Heritage through communication, education, research, training  and 

public awareness strategies;

(f) 

seek to ensure the active involvement of our local communities at all levels in the 
identiﬁ cation, protection and management of our World Heritage properties;

4.  We, the World Heritage Committee, will cooperate and seek the assistance of all partners for 
the support of World Heritage. For this purpose, we invite all interested parties to co operate 
and to promote the following objectives:

(a)  strengthen  the  Credibility  of  the  World  Heritage  List,  as  a  representative  and  geo-
graphically balanced testimony of cultural and natural properties of outstanding uni-
versal value;

(b)  ensure the effective Conservation of World Heritage properties;

(c)   promote the development of effective Capacity-building measures, including assist-
ance for preparing the nomination of properties to the World Heritage List, for the 
understanding  and  implementation  of  the  World  Heritage  Convention  and  related 
instruments;

(d)   increase  public  awareness,  involvement  and  support  for  World  Heritage  through 

 Communication.

5.   We will evaluate, at our 31st session in 2007, the achievements made in the pursuit of the 

above mentioned objectives and in support of this commitment.

Budapest, 28 June 2002

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

6

WHC-2004/WS/2

Convention concerning 
the Protection of the World Cultural 
and Natural Heritage

Adopted by the General Conference 
at its seventeenth session
Paris, 16 November 1972

This document is also available at the following Web address:

http://whc.unesco.org/en/conventiontext (English)
http://whc.unesco.org/fr/conventiontexte (French)

Convention concerning the Protection 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

The  General  Conference  of  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientiﬁ c  and  Cultural  Organization 
meeting in Paris from 17 October to 21 November 1972, at its seventeenth session,

Noting that the cultural heritage and the natural heritage are increasingly threatened with destruc-
tion not only by the traditional causes of decay, but also by changing social and economic conditions 
which aggravate the situation with even more formidable phenomena of damage or destruction,

Considering that deterioration or disappearance of any item of the cultural or natural heritage consti-
tutes a harmful impoverishment of the heritage of all the nations of the world,

Considering that protection of this heritage at the national level often remains incomplete because of 
the scale of the resources which it requires and of the insufﬁ cient economic, scientiﬁ c, and techno-
logical resources of the country where the property to be protected is situated,

Recalling  that  the  Constitution  of  the  Organization  provides  that  it  will  maintain,  increase,  and 
diffuse knowledge by assuring the conservation and protection of the world’s heritage, and recom-
mending to the nations concerned the necessary international conventions,

Considering that the existing international conventions, recommendations and resolutions concern-
ing cultural and natural property demonstrate the importance, for all the peoples of the world, of 
safeguarding this unique and irreplaceable property, to whatever people it may belong,

Considering that parts of the cultural or natural heritage are of outstanding interest and therefore 
need to be preserved as part of the world heritage of mankind as a whole,

Considering that, in view of the magnitude and gravity of the new dangers threatening them, it is 
incumbent on the international community as a whole to participate in the protection of the cul-
tural  and  natural  heritage  of  outstanding  universal  value,  by  the  granting  of  collective  assistance 
which,  although  not  taking  the  place  of  action  by  the  State  concerned,  will  serve  as  an  efﬁ cient 
complement thereto,

Considering that it is essential for this purpose to adopt new provisions in the form of a convention 
establishing an effective system of collective protection of the cultural and natural heritage of out-
standing universal value, organized on a permanent basis and in accordance with modern scientiﬁ c 
methods,

Having decided, at its sixteenth session, that this question should be made the subject of an interna-
tional convention,

Adopts this sixteenth day of November 1972 this Convention.

Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

9

I.  Definition of the Cultural and Natural Heritage

Article 1

For the purpose of this Convention, the following shall be considered as “cultural heritage”: 

–  monuments:  architectural  works,  works  of  monumental  sculpture  and  painting,  elements  or 
structures of an archaeological nature, inscriptions, cave dwellings and combinations of features, 
which are of outstanding universal value from the point of view of history, art or science;

– 

– 

groups of buildings: groups of separate or connected buildings which, because of their archi-
tecture, their homogeneity or their place in the landscape, are of outstanding universal value 
from the point of view of history, art or science;

sites:  works  of  man  or  the  combined  works  of  nature  and  man,  and  areas  including  archae-
ological sites which are of outstanding universal value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnologi-
cal or anthropological point of view.

Article 2

For the purposes of this Convention, the following shall be considered as “natural heritage”:

– 

– 

– 

natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or groups of such formations, 
which are of outstanding universal value from the aesthetic or scientiﬁ c point of view;

geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated areas which constitute the 
habitat  of  threatened  species  of  animals  and  plants  of  outstanding  universal  value  from  the 
point of view of science or conservation;

natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas of outstanding universal value from the point 
of view of science, conservation or natural beauty.

Article 3

It is for each State Party to this Convention to identify and delineate the different properties situated 
on its territory mentioned in Articles 1 and 2 above.

II. 

 National protection and international protection 
of the Cultural and Natural Heritage

Article 4

Each State Party to this Convention recognizes that the duty of ensuring the identiﬁ cation, protec-
tion, conservation, presentation and transmission to future generations of the cultural and natural 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

10

heritage referred to in Articles 1 and 2 and situated on its territory, belongs primarily to that State. 
It will do all it can to this end, to the utmost of its own resources and, where appropriate, with any 
international assistance and co-operation, in particular, ﬁ nancial, artistic, scientiﬁ c and technical, 
which it may be able to obtain.

Article 5

To ensure that effective and active measures are taken for the protection, conservation and presenta-
tion of the cultural and natural heritage situated on its territory, each State Party to this Convention 
shall endeavor, in so far as possible, and as appropriate for each country:

(a) 

to adopt a general policy which aims to give the cultural and natural heritage a function in the 
life of the community and to integrate the protection of that heritage into comprehensive plan-
ning programmes;

(b)  to set up within its territories, where such services do not exist, one or more services for the pro-
tection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage with an appropriate 
staff and possessing the means to discharge their functions;

(c) 

to develop scientiﬁ c and technical studies and research and to work out such operating methods 
as will make the State capable of counteracting the dangers that threaten its cultural or natural 
heritage;

(d)  to take the appropriate legal, scientiﬁ c, technical, administrative and ﬁ nancial measures nec-
essary for the identiﬁ cation, protection, conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of this 
heritage; and

(e) 

to foster the establishment or development of national or regional centres for training in the 
protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage and to encourage 
scientiﬁ c research in this ﬁ eld.

Article 6

1.  Whilst fully respecting the sovereignty of the States on whose territory the cultural and natural 
heritage mentioned in Articles 1 and 2 is situated, and without prejudice to property right pro-
vided by national legislation, the States Parties to this Convention recognize that such heritage 
constitutes a world heritage for whose protection it is the duty of the international community 
as a whole to co-operate.

2.  The States Parties undertake, in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, to give their 
help in the identiﬁ cation, protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural 
heritage referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11 if the States on whose territory it is situ-
ated so request.

3.  Each State Party to this Convention undertakes not to take any deliberate measures which might 
damage directly or indirectly the cultural and natural heritage referred to in Articles 1 and 2 
situated on the territory of other States Parties to this Convention.

Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

11

Article 7

For the purpose of this Convention, international protection of the world cultural and natural heritage 
shall be understood to mean the establishment of a system of international co-operation and assist-
ance designed to support States Parties to the Convention in their efforts to conserve and identify that 
heritage.

III.   Intergovernmental Committee for the protection 

of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

Article 8

1.  An Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection of the Cultural and Natural Heritage of 
Outstanding  Universal  Value,  called  “the  World  Heritage  Committee”,  is  hereby  established 
within the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization. It shall be com-
posed of 15 States Parties to the Convention, elected by States Parties to the Convention meet-
ing in general assembly during the ordinary session of the General Conference of the United 
Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization. The number of States members of 
the Committee shall be increased to 21 as from the date of the ordinary session of the General 
Conference following the entry into force of this Convention for at least 40 States.

2.   Election of members of the Committee shall ensure an equitable representation of the different 

regions and cultures of the world.

3.  A representative of the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of 
Cultural Property (Rome Centre), a representative of the International Council of Monuments 
and Sites (ICOMOS) and a representative of the International Union for Conservation of Nature 
and Natural Resources (IUCN), to whom may be added, at the request of States Parties to the 
Convention  meeting  in  general  assembly  during  the  ordinary  sessions  of  the  General  Confer-
ence of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization, representatives 
of other intergovernmental or non-governmental organizations, with similar objectives, may 
attend the meetings of the Committee in an advisory capacity.

Article 9

1.  The term of ofﬁ ce of States members of the World Heritage Committee shall extend from the 
end of the ordinary session of the General Conference during which they are elected until the 
end of its third subsequent ordinary session.

2.  The term of ofﬁ ce of one-third of the members designated at the time of the ﬁ rst election shall, 
however, cease at the end of the ﬁ rst ordinary session of the General Conference following that 
at which they were elected; and the term of ofﬁ ce of a further third of the members designated 
at the same time shall cease at the end of the second ordinary session of the General Conference 
following that at which they were elected. The names of these members shall be chosen by lot 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

12

by the President of the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and 
Cultural Organization after the ﬁ rst election.

3. 

States members of the Committee shall choose as their representatives persons qualiﬁ ed in the 
ﬁ eld of the cultural or natural heritage.

Article 10

1.  The World Heritage Committee shall adopt its Rules of Procedure.

2.  The Committee may at any time invite public or private organizations or individuals to partici-

pate in its meetings for consultation on particular problems.

3.  The Committee may create such consultative bodies as it deems necessary for the performance 

of its functions.

Article 11

1.  Every State Party to this Convention shall, in so far as possible, submit to the World Heritage 
Committee an inventory of property forming part of the cultural and natural heritage, situated 
in its territory and suitable for inclusion in the list provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article. 
This inventory, which shall not be considered exhaustive, shall include documentation about 
the location of the property in question and its signiﬁ cance.

2.  On the basis of the inventories submitted by States in accordance with paragraph 1, the Com-
mittee shall establish, keep up to date and publish, under the title of “World Heritage List,” a list 
of properties forming part of the cultural heritage and natural heritage, as deﬁ ned in Articles 1 
and 2 of this Convention, which it considers as having outstanding universal value in terms of 
such criteria as it shall have established. An updated list shall be distributed at least every two 
years.

3.  The inclusion of a property in the World Heritage List requires the consent of the State con-
cerned.  The  inclusion  of  a  property  situated  in  a  territory,  sovereignty  or  jurisdiction  over 
which is claimed by more than one State shall in no way prejudice the rights of the parties to 
the dispute.

4.  The Committee shall establish, keep up to date and publish, whenever circumstances shall so 
require, under the title of “list of World Heritage in Danger”, a list of the property appearing 
in the World Heritage List for the conservation of which major operations are necessary and 
for which assistance has been requested under this Convention. This list shall contain an esti-
mate of the cost of such operations. The list may include only such property forming part of 
the cultural and natural heritage as is threatened by serious and speciﬁ c dangers, such as the 
threat of disappearance caused by accelerated deterioration, large-scale public or private projects 
or  rapid  urban  or  tourist  development  projects;  destruction  caused  by  changes  in  the  use  or 
ownership of the land; major alterations due to unknown causes; abandonment for any reason 
whatsoever; the outbreak or the threat of an armed conﬂ ict; calamities and cataclysms; serious 
ﬁ res, earthquakes, landslides; volcanic eruptions; changes in water level, ﬂ oods and tidal waves. 

Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

13

The  Committee may at any time, in case of urgent need, make a new entry in the List of World 
 Heritage in Danger and publicize such entry immediately.

5.  The Committee shall deﬁ ne the criteria on the basis of which a property belonging to the cul-
tural or natural heritage may be included in either of the lists mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 4 
of this article.

6.  Before refusing a request for inclusion in one of the two lists mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 4 of 
this article, the Committee shall consult the State Party in whose territory the cultural or natural 
property in question is situated.

7.  The Committee shall, with the agreement of the States concerned, co-ordinate and encourage 
the studies and research needed for the drawing up of the lists referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 
of this article.

Article 12

The fact that a property belonging to the cultural or natural heritage has not been included in either 
of the two lists mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11 shall in no way be construed to mean 
that it does not have an outstanding universal value for purposes other than those resulting from 
inclusion in these lists.

Article 13

1.  The World Heritage Committee shall receive and study requests for international assistance for-
mulated by States Parties to this Convention with respect to property forming part of the cultural 
or natural heritage, situated in their territories, and included or potentially suitable for inclu-
sion in the lists mentioned referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11. The purpose of such 
requests may be to secure the protection, conservation, presentation or rehabilitation of such 
property.

2.  Requests for international assistance under paragraph 1 of this article may also be concerned 
with identiﬁ cation of cultural or natural property deﬁ ned in Articles 1 and 2, when preliminary 
investigations have shown that further inquiries would be justiﬁ ed.

3.  The Committee shall decide on the action to be taken with regard to these requests, determine 
where appropriate, the nature and extent of its assistance, and authorize the conclusion, on its 
behalf, of the necessary arrangements with the government concerned.

4.  The Committee shall determine an order of priorities for its operations. It shall in so doing bear 
in mind the respective importance for the world cultural and natural heritage of the property 
requiring protection, the need to give international assistance to the property most representa-
tive of a natural environment or of the genius and the history of the peoples of the world, the 
urgency of the work to be done, the resources available to the States on whose territory the 
threatened property is situated and in particular the extent to which they are able to safeguard 
such property by their own means.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

14

5.  The Committee shall draw up, keep up to date and publicize a list of property for which inter-

national assistance has been granted.

6.  The Committee shall decide on the use of the resources of the Fund established under Article 15 
of this Convention. It shall seek ways of increasing these resources and shall take all useful steps 
to this end.

7.  The  Committee  shall  co-operate  with  international  and  national  governmental  and  non-
 governmental organizations having objectives similar to those of this Convention. For the imple-
mentation of its programmes and projects, the Committee may call on such organizations, par-
ticularly the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of  Cultural 
Property (the Rome Centre), the International Council of Monuments and Sites  (ICOMOS) and 
the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), as well as on 
public and private bodies and individuals.

8.  Decisions of the Committee shall be taken by a majority of two-thirds of its members present 

and voting. A majority of the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.

Article 14

1.  The  World  Heritage  Committee  shall  be  assisted  by  a  Secretariat  appointed  by  the  Director-

 General of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization.

2.  The Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization, 
utilizing to the fullest extent possible the services of the International Centre for the Study of 
the Preservation and the Restoration of Cultural Property (the Rome Centre), the International 
Council of Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) and the International Union for Conservation of 
Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) in their respective areas of competence and capability, 
shall prepare the Committee’s documentation and the agenda of its meetings and shall have the 
responsibility for the implementation of its decisions.

IV.   Fund for the protection of the World Cultural 

and Natural Heritage

Article 15

1.  A Fund for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage of Outstanding Universal 

Value, called “the World Heritage Fund”, is hereby established.

2.  The  Fund  shall  constitute  a  trust  fund,  in  conformity  with  the  provisions  of  the  Financial 

 Regulations of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization.

3.  The resources of the Fund shall consist of:

(a)   compulsory and voluntary contributions made by States Parties to this Convention,

Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

15

(b)   Contributions, gifts or bequests which may be made by:

(i)   other States;
(ii)   the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization, other organi-
zations of the United Nations system, particularly the United Nations Development 
Programme or other intergovernmental organizations;

(iii)  public or private bodies or individuals;

(c)   any interest due on the resources of the Fund;

(d)   funds raised by collections and receipts from events organized for the beneﬁ t of the fund; 

and

(e)   all other resources authorized by the Fund’s regulations, as drawn up by the World Heritage 

Committee.

4.  Contributions  to  the  Fund  and  other  forms  of  assistance  made  available  to  the  Committee 
may be used only for such purposes as the Committee shall deﬁ ne. The Committee may accept 
contributions to be used only for a certain programme or project, provided that the Committee 
shall have decided on the implementation of such programme or project. No political condi-
tions may be attached to contributions made to the Fund.

Article 16

1.  Without  prejudice  to  any  supplementary  voluntary  contribution,  the  States  Parties  to  this 
 Convention undertake to pay regularly, every two years, to the World Heritage Fund, contribu-
tions, the amount of which, in the form of a uniform percentage applicable to all States, shall 
be determined by the General Assembly of States Parties to the Convention, meeting during the 
sessions of the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural 
Organization. This decision of the General Assembly requires the majority of the States Parties 
present  and  voting,  which  have  not  made  the  declaration  referred  to  in  paragraph  2  of  this 
Article. In no case shall the compulsory contribution of States Parties to the Convention exceed 
1% of the contribution to the regular budget of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and 
Cultural Organization.

2.  However, each State referred to in Article 31 or in Article 32 of this Convention may declare, at 
the time of the deposit of its instrument of ratiﬁ cation, acceptance or accession, that it shall not 
be bound by the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article.

3.  A State Party to the Convention which has made the declaration referred to in paragraph 2 of this 
Article may at any time withdraw the said declaration by notifying the Director-General of the 
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization. However, the withdrawal of 
the declaration shall not take effect in regard to the compulsory contribution due by the State 
until the date of the subsequent General Assembly of States parties to the Convention.

4. 

In order that the Committee may be able to plan its operations effectively, the contributions 
of States Parties to this Convention which have made the declaration referred to in paragraph 2 
of this Article, shall be paid on a regular basis, at least every two years, and should not be less 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

16

than the contributions which they should have paid if they had been bound by the provisions 
of paragraph 1 of this Article.

5.  Any State Party to the Convention which is in arrears with the payment of its compulsory or vol-
untary contribution for the current year and the calendar year immediately preceding it shall 
not be eligible as a Member of the World Heritage Committee, although this provision shall not 
apply to the ﬁ rst election. The terms of ofﬁ ce of any such State which is already a member of the 
Committee shall terminate at the time of the elections provided for in Article 8, paragraph 1 of 
this Convention.

Article 17

The States Parties to this Convention shall consider or encourage the establishment of national public 
and private foundations or associations whose purpose is to invite donations for the protection of 
the cultural and natural heritage as deﬁ ned in Articles 1 and 2 of this Convention.

Article 18

The  States  Parties  to  this  Convention  shall  give  their  assistance  to  international  fund-raising  cam-
paigns organized for the World Heritage Fund under the auspices of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization. They shall facilitate collections made by the bodies mentioned 
in paragraph 3 of Article 15 for this purpose.

V. 

 Conditions and arrangements for international assistance

Article 19

Any State Party to this Convention may request international assistance for property forming part of 
the cultural or natural heritage of outstanding universal value situated within its territory. It shall 
submit with its request such information and documentation provided for in Article 21 as it has in 
its possession and as will enable the Committee to come to a decision.

Article 20

Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 13, sub-paragraph (c) of Article 22 and Article 23, 
international assistance provided for by this Convention may be granted only to property forming 
part of the cultural and natural heritage which the World Heritage Committee has decided, or may 
decide, to enter in one of the lists mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11.

Article 21

1.  The World Heritage Committee shall deﬁ ne the procedure by which requests to it for interna-
tional assistance shall be considered and shall specify the content of the request, which should 
deﬁ ne the operation contemplated, the work that is necessary, the expected cost thereof, the 
degree of urgency and the reasons why the resources of the State requesting assistance do not 

Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

17

allow it to meet all the expenses. Such requests must be supported by experts’ reports when-
ever possible.

2.  Requests based upon disasters or natural calamities should, by reasons of the urgent work which 
they may involve, be given immediate, priority consideration by the Committee, which should 
have a reserve fund at its disposal against such contingencies.

3.  Before coming to a decision, the Committee shall carry out such studies and consultations as it 

deems necessary.

Article 22

Assistance granted by the World Heritage Fund may take the following forms:

(a)  studies  concerning  the  artistic,  scientiﬁ c  and  technical  problems  raised  by  the  protec-
tion, conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of the cultural and natural heritage, as 
deﬁ ned in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11 of this Convention;

(b)  provisions of experts, technicians and skilled labour to ensure that the approved work is 

correctly carried out;

(c) 

training of staff and specialists at all levels in the ﬁ eld of identiﬁ cation, protection, conser-
vation, presentation and rehabilitation of the cultural and natural heritage;

(d)  supply of equipment which the State concerned does not possess or is not in a position to 

acquire;

(e) 

low-interest or interest-free loans which might be repayable on a long-term basis;

(f) 

the granting, in exceptional cases and for special reasons, of non-repayable subsidies.

Article 23

The  World  Heritage  Committee  may  also  provide  international  assistance  to  national  or  regional 
centres for the training of staff and specialists at all levels in the ﬁ eld of identiﬁ cation, protection, 
conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of the cultural and natural heritage.

Article 24

International assistance on a large scale shall be preceded by detailed scientiﬁ c, economic and tech-
nical studies. These studies shall draw upon the most advanced techniques for the protection, con-
servation, presentation and rehabilitation of the natural and cultural heritage and shall be consistent 
with the objectives of this Convention. The studies shall also seek means of making rational use of the 
resources available in the State concerned.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

18

Article 25

As a general rule, only part of the cost of work necessary shall be borne by the international com-
munity.  The  contribution  of  the  State  beneﬁ ting  from  international  assistance  shall  constitute  a 
substantial share of the resources devoted to each programme or project, unless its resources do not 
permit this.

Article 26

The World Heritage Committee and the recipient State shall deﬁ ne in the agreement they conclude 
the conditions in which a programme or project for which international assistance under the terms 
of this Convention is provided, shall be carried out. It shall be the responsibility of the State  receiving 
such  international  assistance  to  continue  to  protect,  conserve  and  present  the  property  so  safe-
guarded, in observance of the conditions laid down by the agreement.

VI.  Educational programmes

Article 27

1.  The States Parties to this Convention shall endeavor by all appropriate means, and in particular 
by educational and information programmes, to strengthen appreciation and respect by their 
peoples of the cultural and natural heritage deﬁ ned in Articles 1 and 2 of the Convention.

2.  They  shall  undertake  to  keep  the  public  broadly  informed  of  the  dangers  threatening  this 

 heritage and of the activities carried on in pursuance of this Convention.

Article 28

States Parties to this  Convention which receive international assistance under the  Convention shall 
take appropriate measures to make known the importance of the property for which assistance has 
been received and the role played by such assistance.

VII. Reports

Article 29

1.  The States Parties to this Convention shall, in the reports which they submit to the General Con-
ference of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization on dates and in 
a manner to be determined by it, give information on the legislative and administrative provi-
sions which they have adopted and other action which they have taken for the application of 
this Convention, together with details of the experience acquired in this ﬁ eld.

Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

19

2.  These reports shall be brought to the attention of the World Heritage Committee.

3.  The Committee shall submit a report on its activities at each of the ordinary sessions of the 

General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization.

VIII.  Final clauses

Article 30

This Convention is drawn up in Arabic, English, French, Russian and Spanish, the ﬁ ve texts being 
equally authoritative.

Article 31

1.  This Convention shall be subject to ratiﬁ cation or acceptance by States members of the United 
Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization in accordance with their respective 
constitutional procedures.

2.  The instruments of ratiﬁ cation or acceptance shall be deposited with the Director-General of the 

United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization.

Article 32

1.  This Convention shall be open to accession by all States not members of the United Nations Edu-
cational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization which are invited by the General Conference of 
the Organization to accede to it.

2.  Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Director-Gen-

eral of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization.

Article 33

This Convention shall enter into force three months after the date of the deposit of the twentieth 
instrument of ratiﬁ cation, acceptance or accession, but only with respect to those States which have 
deposited their respective instruments of ratiﬁ cation, acceptance or accession on or before that date. 
It shall enter into force with respect to any other State three months after the deposit of its instru-
ment of ratiﬁ cation, acceptance or accession.

Article 34

The following provisions shall apply to those States Parties to this Convention which have a federal or 
non-unitary constitutional system:

(a)  with regard to the provisions of this Convention, the implementation of which comes under 
the legal jurisdiction of the federal or central legislative power, the obligations of the  federal 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

20

or central government shall be the same as for those States parties which are not federal 
States;

(b)  with regard to the provisions of this Convention, the implementation of which comes under 
the legal jurisdiction of individual constituent States, countries, provinces or cantons that 
are not obliged by the constitutional system of the federation to take legislative measures, 
the federal government shall inform the competent authorities of such States, countries, 
provinces or cantons of the said provisions, with its recommendation for their adoption.

Article 35

1.  Each State Party to this Convention may denounce the Convention.

2.   The denunciation shall be notiﬁ ed by an instrument in writing, deposited with the Director-

General of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization.

3.  The denunciation shall take effect twelve months after the receipt of the instrument of denun-
ciation. It shall not affect the ﬁ nancial obligations of the denouncing State until the date on 
which the withdrawal takes effect.

Article 36

The Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization shall 
inform the States members of the Organization, the States not members of the Organization which 
are referred to in Article 32, as well as the United Nations, of the deposit of all the instruments of 
ratiﬁ cation, acceptance, or accession provided for in Articles 31 and 32, and of the denunciations 
provided for in Article 35.

Article 37

1.  This Convention may be revised by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientiﬁ c  and  Cultural  Organization.  Any  such  revision  shall,  however,  bind  only  the  States 
which shall become Parties to the revising convention.

2. 

If the General Conference should adopt a new convention revising this Convention in whole or 
in part, then, unless the new convention otherwise provides, this Convention shall cease to be 
open to ratiﬁ cation, acceptance or accession, as from the date on which the new revising con-
vention enters into force.

Article 38

In conformity with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations, this Convention shall be regis-
tered with the Secretariat of the United Nations at the request of the Director-General of the United 
Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization.

Done in Paris, this twenty-third day of November 1972, in two authentic copies bearing the signature 
of the President of the seventeenth session of the General Conference and of the Director-General 

Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

21

of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization, which shall be deposited in 
the archives of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization, and certiﬁ ed 
true copies of which shall be delivered to all the States referred to in Articles 31 and 32 as well as to 
the United Nations.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

22

WHC.05/2
2 February 2005

Operational Guidelines
for the Implementation of the
World Heritage Convention

Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

World Heritage Centre

The Operational Guidelines are periodically revised to reﬂ ect the decisions of the World Heritage Commit-
tee. Please verify that you are using the latest version of the Operational Guidelines by checking the date of 
the Operational Guidelines on the UNESCO World Heritage Centre Web address indicated below.

http://whc.unesco.org/en/guidelines (English)
http://whc.unesco.org/fr/orientations (French)

(WHC-2005/WS/1)

Table of Contents

Chapter 
number 

 

I. 

Acronyms and abbreviations 

Introduction 

I.A 

The Operational Guidelines 

I.B 

The World Heritage Convention 

I.C 

The States Parties to the World Heritage Convention 

I.D 

The General Assembly of States Parties to the World Heritage Convention 

I.E 

The World Heritage Committee  

Paragraph
number(s)

1-3

4-9

10-16

17-18

19-26

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

I.F 

The Secretariat to the World Heritage Committee (the World Heritage Centre)  27-29

I.G 
 
 
 

The Advisory Bodies to the World Heritage Committee: 
•  ICCROM 
•  ICOMOS 
•  IUCN 

I.H  Other organizations 

I.I 

I.J 

Partners in the protection of World Heritage 

Other Conventions, Recommendations and Programmes  

30-37
32-33
34-35
36-37

38

39-40

41-44

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

25

II. 

The World Heritage List 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

II.A  Deﬁ nition of World Heritage 
 
 
 
 
 

•  Cultural and Natural Heritage 
•  Mixed Cultural and Natural Heritage 
•  Cultural landscapes 
•  Movable Heritage 
•  Outstanding universal value 

II.B 
 

 A Representative, Balanced and Credible World Heritage List 
• 

 The Global Strategy for a Representative, Balanced 
and Credible World Heritage List 

 

•  Other measures 

II.C  Tentative Lists 
 
 
 

• 
• 
• 

 Procedure and Format 
 Tentative Lists as a planning and evaluation tool 
 Assistance and Capacity-Building for States Parties 
in the preparation of Tentative Lists 

II.D  Criteria for the assessment of outstanding universal value 

II.E 
 
 

Integrity and/or authenticity 
•  Authenticity 
•  Integrity 

II.F  Protection and management 
 
 
 
 
 

•  Legislative, regulatory and contractual measures for protection 
•  Boundaries for effective protection 
•  Buffer zones 
•  Management systems 
•  Sustainable use 

III. 

 Process for the inscription of properties 
on the World Heritage List

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

III.A  Preparation of Nominations 

III.B  Format and content of nominations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.  Identiﬁ cation of the Property 
2.  Description of the Property 
3.  Justiﬁ cation for Inscription 
4.  State of conservation and factors affecting the property 
5.  Protection and Management 
6.  Monitoring 
7.  Documentation 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

26

45-53
45
46
47
48
49-53

54-61

55-58
59-61

62-76
62-69
70-73

74-76

79-95
79-86
87-95

96-119
98
99-102
103-107
108-118
119

120-128

129-133
132.1
132.2
132.3
132.4
132.5
132.6
132.7

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

8.  Contact Information of responsible authorities 
9.  Signature on behalf of the State Party(ies) 

III.C  Requirements for the nomination of different types of properties  
 
 

•  Transboundary properties 
•  Serial properties 

III.D  Registration of nominations 

III.E  Evaluation of nominations by the Advisory Bodies 

III.F  Withdrawal of nominations  

III.G  Decision of the World Heritage Committee 
 
 
 
 

•  Inscription 
•  Decision not to inscribe 
•  Referral of nominations 
•  Deferral of nominations 

III.H  Nominations to be processed on an emergency basis 

III.I 

 
 
 

 

 Modiﬁ cations to the boundaries, to the criteria used 
to justify inscription or to the name of a World Heritage property 
•  Minor modiﬁ cations to the boundaries 
•  Signiﬁ cant modiﬁ cations to the boundaries 
• 

 Modiﬁ cations to the criteria used 
to justify inscription on the World Heritage List 

•  Modiﬁ cation to the name of a World Heritage property 

III.J  Timetable – overview 

IV. 

 Process for monitoring the state 
of conservation of World Heritage properties

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

IV.A  Reactive monitoring  
 
 
 
 

•  Deﬁ nition of Reactive Monitoring 
•  Objective of Reactive Monitoring 
•  Information received from States Parties and/or other sources 
•  Decision by the World Heritage Committee 

IV.B  The List of World Heritage in Danger 
 

• 

 Guidelines for the inscription 
of properties on the List of World Heritage in Danger 
 Criteria for the inscription 
of properties on the List of World Heritage in Danger 
 Procedure for the inscription 

 

 

• 

• 

132.8
132.9

134-139
134-136
137-139

140-142

143-151

152

153-160
154-157
158
159
160

161-162

163-167
163-164
165

166
167

168

169-176
169
170-171
172-174
175-176

177-191

177

178-182

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

27

 

 

 

• 

of properties on the List of World Heritage in Danger 
 Regular review of the state of conservation 
of properties on the List of World Heritage in Danger 

IV.C 

 Procedure for the eventual deletion 
of properties from the World Heritage List 

V. 

 Periodic reporting on the implementation 
of the World Heritage Convention 

  V.A  Objectives 

  V.B  Procedure and Format 

  V.C  Evaluation and follow up  

VI. 

 Encouraging support for 
the World Heritage Convention

  VI.A  Objectives 

  VI.B  Capacity-building and research 
 
 
 
 

•  The Global Training Strategy 
•  National training strategies and regional co-operation 
•  Research 
•  International Assistance 

 
 
 
 

  VI.C  Awareness-raising and education 
 
 
 

 Awareness-raising 
 Education 
 International Assistance 

 
 
 

• 
• 
• 

VII. 

 The World Heritage Fund 
and international assistance

  VII.A  The World Heritage Fund 

  VII.B   Mobilization of other technical and ﬁ nancial resources 

and partnerships in support of the World Heritage Convention 

  VII.C  International Assistance 

  VII.D  Principles and priorities for International Assistance 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

28

183-189

190-191

192-198

199-202

203-207

208-210

211

212-216
213
214
215
216

217-222
217-218
219
220-222

223-224

225-232

233-235

236-240

  VII.E  Summary table 

  VII.F  Procedure and format  

  VII.G  Evaluation and approval of International Assistance  

  VII.H  Contractual Arrangements  

  VII.I  General evaluation and follow-up of International Assistance 

VIII.  The World Heritage Emblem

  VIII.A Preamble 

  VIII.B Applicability  

  VIII.C Responsibilities of States Parties 

  VIII.D Increasing proper uses of the World Heritage Emblem 
 

 Production of plaques to commemorate 
the inscription of properties on the World Heritage List 

 

• 

  VIII.E Principles for the use of the World Heritage Emblem 

  VIII.F Authorization procedure for the use of the World Heritage Emblem 
 
 
 

•  Simple agreement of the national authorities 
•  Agreement requiring quality control of content 
•  Content Approval Form 

 
 
 

  VIII.G Right of States Parties to exert quality control 

IX. 

Information sources

 

 

 

IX.A  Information archived by the Secretariat 

IX.B 

 Speciﬁ c Information for World Heritage 
Committee members and other States Parties 

IX.C  Information and publications available to the public 

241

242-246

247-254

255

256-257

258-265

266

267

268-274

269-274

275

276-278
276-277
278

279

280-284

285-287

288-290

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

29

 
 

Annexes

  1. 

Model Instrument of Ratiﬁ cation/Acceptance and Accession 

  2. 

Tentative List submission format 

  3. 

 Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c 
types of properties on the World Heritage List 

  4. 

Authenticity in relation to the World Heritage Convention 

  5. 

 Format for the nomination of properties
 for inscription on the World Heritage List 

  6. 

Evaluation procedures of the Advisory Bodies for nominations 

  7. 

 Format for the Periodic Reporting on 
the application of the World Heritage Convention 

  8. 

International Assistance Request Form 

  9. 

 Evaluation criteria of the Advisory Bodies 
for International Assistance requests 

Select bibliography on World Heritage 

Index  

Page

number(s)

115

117

119

129

135

151

159

169

179

181

187

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

30

 
 

Acronyms and abbreviations

DoCoMoMo 

ICCROM 

 International Committee for the Documentation and Conservation of 
Monuments and Sites of the Modern Movement

 International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of 
Cultural Property

ICOMOS 

International Council on Monuments and Sites

IFLA 

IUCN 

IUGS 

MAB 

NGO  

TICCIH 

International Federation of Landscape Architects

 World Conservation Union (formerly the International Union for Conser-
vation of Nature and Natural Resources)

International Union of Geological Sciences

Man and the Biosphere programme of UNESCO

Non-governmental organization

 International Committee for the Conservation 
of the Industrial Heritage

UNEP 

United Nations Environment Programme

UNEP-WCMC 

World Conservation Monitoring Centre (UNEP)

UNESCO 

United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

31

I. 

Introduction

I.A 

The Operational Guidelines

1. 

The Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage 
Convention (hereinafter referred to as the Operational Guidelines) aim to 
facilitate the implementation of the Convention concerning the Protection 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (hereinafter referred to as “the 
World  Heritage  Convention”  or  “the  Convention”),  by  setting  forth  the 
procedure for:

(a) 

 the inscription of properties on the World Heritage List and the 
List of World Heritage in Danger;

(b) 

the protection and conservation of World Heritage properties;

(c) 

 the granting of International Assistance under the World Heritage 
Fund; and 

(d) 

 the mobilization of national and international support in favor of 
the Convention.

2. 

The Operational Guidelines are periodically revised to reﬂ ect the decisions 
of the World Heritage Committee. 

3. 

The key users of the Operational Guidelines are:

(a) 

the States Parties to the World Heritage Convention;

(b) 

 the  Intergovernmental  Committee  for  the  Protection  of  the 
 Cultural  and  Natural  Heritage  of  Outstanding  Universal  Value, 
hereinafter referred to as “the World Heritage Committee” or “the 
Committee”;

(c) 

 the UNESCO World Heritage Centre as Secretariat to the World 
Heritage Committee, hereinafter referred to as “the Secretariat”;

(d) 

the Advisory Bodies to the World Heritage Committee;

(e) 

 site  managers,  stakeholders  and  partners  in  the  protection  of 
World Heritage properties.

The historical development 
of the Operational 
Guidelines is available at 
the following Web address: 
http://whc.unesco.org/en/
guidelineshistorical

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

33

I.B  The World Heritage Convention

4. 

The cultural and natural heritage is among the priceless and irreplace-
able assets, not only of each nation, but of humanity as a whole. The 
loss,  through  deterioration  or  disappearance,  of  any  of  these  most 
prized assets constitutes an impoverishment of the heritage of all the 
peoples of the world. Parts of that heritage, because of their exceptional 
qualities, can be considered to be of “outstanding universal value” and 
as such worthy of special protection against the dangers which increas-
ingly threaten them.

5.  To ensure, as far as possible, the proper identiﬁ cation, protection, con-
servation and presentation of the world’s heritage, the Member States 
of UNESCO adopted the World Heritage Convention in 1972. The Con-
vention  foresees  the  establishment  of  a  “World  Heritage  Committee” 
and a “World Heritage Fund”. Both the Committee and the Fund have 
been in operation since 1976.

6. 

7. 

8. 

Since the adoption of the Convention in 1972, the international com-
munity has embraced the concept of “sustainable development”. The 
protection and conservation of the natural and cultural heritage are a 
signiﬁ cant contribution to sustainable development.

The Convention aims at the identiﬁ cation, protection, conservation, pres-
entation and transmission to future generations of cultural and natural 
heritage of outstanding universal value. 

The criteria and conditions for the inscription of properties on the World 
Heritage List have been developed to evaluate the outstanding universal 
value of properties and to guide States Parties in the protection and man-
agement of World Heritage properties. 

9.  When a property inscribed on the World Heritage List is threatened by 
serious and speciﬁ c dangers, the Committee considers placing it on the 
List of World Heritage in Danger. When the outstanding universal value 
of the property which justiﬁ ed its inscription on the World Heritage List 
is  destroyed,  the  Committee  considers  deleting  the  property  from  the 
World Heritage List. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

34

I.C 

 The States Parties to the World Heritage 
Convention

10.  States  are  encouraged  to  become  party  to  the  Convention.  Model 
instruments for ratiﬁ cation/acceptance and accession are included as 
Annex 1. The original signed version should be sent to the Director-
General of UNESCO. 

11.  The list of States Parties to the Convention is available at the following 

Web address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/statesparties

12.  States Parties to the Convention are encouraged to ensure the participa-
tion of a wide variety of stakeholders, including site managers, local 
and  regional  governments,  local  communities,  non- governmental 
organizations  (NGOs)  and  other  interested  parties  and  partners  in 
the  identiﬁ cation,  nomination  and  protection  of  World  Heritage 
properties.

13.  States Parties to the Convention should provide the Secretariat with the 
names  and  addresses  of  the  governmental  organization(s)  primarily 
responsible  as  national  focal  point(s)  for  the  implementation  of  the 
Convention, so that copies of all ofﬁ cial correspondence and documents 
can be sent by the Secretariat to these national focal points as appropri-
ate. A list of these addresses is available at the following Web address: 
http://whc.unesco.org/en/statespartiesfocalpoints
States Parties are encouraged to publicize this information nationally 
and ensure that it is up to date.

 

14.  States Parties are encouraged to bring together their cultural and natu-
ral heritage experts at regular intervals to discuss the implementation 
of the Convention. States Parties may wish to involve representatives of 
the Advisory Bodies and other experts as appropriate.

15.  While  fully  respecting  the  sovereignty  of  the  States  on  whose  terri-
tory the cultural and natural heritage is situated, States Parties to the 
Convention recognize the collective interest of the international com-
munity to cooperate in the protection of this heritage. States Parties to 
the World Heritage Convention, have the responsibility to:

Article 6(1) of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(a)  ensure the identiﬁ cation, nomination, protection, conservation, 
presentation, and transmission to future generations of the cul-
tural and natural heritage found within their territory, and give 
help in these tasks to other States Parties that request it;

Article 4 and 6(2) of the 
World Heritage Convention.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

35

(b)  adopt general policies to give the heritage a function in the life of 

the community;

Article 5 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(c) 

integrate heritage protection into comprehensive planning pro-
grammes;

(d)  establish services for the protection, conservation and presenta-

tion of the heritage;

(e)  develop  scientiﬁ c  and  technical  studies  to  identify  actions  that 

would counteract the dangers that threaten the heritage;

(f) 

(g) 

take  appropriate  legal,  scientiﬁ c,  technical,  administrative  and 
ﬁ nancial measures to protect the heritage;

foster the establishment or development of national or regional 
centres for training in the protection, conservation and presen-
tation of the heritage and encourage scientiﬁ c research in these 
ﬁ elds;

(h)  not take any deliberate measures that directly or indirectly damage 

their heritage or that of another State Party to the  Convention; 

Article 11(1) of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(i) 

submit to the World Heritage Committee an inventory of proper-
ties suitable for inscription on the World Heritage List (referred to 
as a Tentative List);

Article 6(3) of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(j)  make  regular  contributions  to  the  World  Heritage  Fund,  the 
amount of which is determined by the General Assembly of States 
Parties to the Convention;

Article 16(1) of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(k)  consider and encourage the establishment of national, public and 
private foundations or associations to facilitate donations for the 
protection of World Heritage;

Article 17 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(l) 

give assistance to international fund-raising campaigns organized 
for the World Heritage Fund;

Article 18 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(m)  use  educational  and  information  programmes  to  strengthen 
appreciation  and  respect  by  their  peoples  of  the  cultural  and 
natural  heritage  deﬁ ned  in  Articles  1  and  2  of  the  Convention, 
and to keep the public informed of the dangers threatening this 
heritage;

Article 27 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

36

(n)  provide  information  to  the  World  Heritage  Committee  on  the 
implementation of the World Heritage Convention and state of con-
servation of properties.

16.  States Parties are encouraged to attend sessions of the World Heritage 

Committee and its subsidiary bodies.

I.D 

 The General Assembly of States Parties 
to the World Heritage Convention

Article 29 of the World 
Heritage Convention. 
Resolution adopted by the 
11th General Assembly of 
States Parties (1997)

Rule 8.1 of the Rules of 
Procedure of the World 
Heritage Committee.

17.  The General Assembly of States Parties to the World Heritage Conven-
tion meets during the sessions of the General Conference of UNESCO. 
The  General  Assembly  manages  its  meetings  according  to  its  Rules  of 
 Procedure, available at the following Web address: 
http://whc.unesco.org/en/garules

 

Article 8(1), of the World 
Heritage Convention, Rule 
49 of the Rules of Procedure 
of the World Heritage 
Committee.

18.  The General Assembly determines the uniform percentage of contribu-
tions to the World Heritage Fund applicable to all States Parties and 
elects  members  to  the  World  Heritage  Committee.  Both  the  General 
Assembly and General Conference of UNESCO receive a report from 
the World Heritage Committee on its activities.

Articles 8(1), 16(1) and 
29 of the World Heritage 
Convention and Rule 49 of 
the Rules of Procedure of the 
World Heritage Committee.

I.E 

The World Heritage Committee

19.  The World Heritage Committee is composed of 21 members and meets 
at  least  once  a  year  (June/July).  It  establishes  its  Bureau,  which  meets 
during the sessions of the Committee as frequently as deemed necessary. 
The  composition  of  the  Committee  and  its  Bureau  is  available  at  the 
 following Web address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/committeemembers 

The World Heritage 
Committee can be 
contacted through its 
Secretariat, the World 
Heritage Centre.

20.  The Committee manages its meetings according to its Rules of  Procedure, 

available at the following Web address: 
http://whc.unesco.org/committeerules

 

21.  The term of ofﬁ ce of Committee members is six years but, in order to 
ensure equitable representation and rotation, States Parties are invited 
by the General Assembly to consider voluntarily reducing their term of 
ofﬁ ce from six to four years and are discouraged from seeking consecu-
tive terms of ofﬁ ce.

Article 9(1) of the World 
Heritage Convention.

Article 8(2) of the World 
Heritage Convention and 
the Resolutions of the 
7th (1989), 12th (1999) 
and 13th (2001) General 
Assembly of States Parties 
to the World Heritage 
Convention.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

37

22.  A certain number of seats may be reserved for States Parties who do not 
have a property on the World Heritage List, upon decision of the Com-
mittee at the session that precedes the General Assembly.

Rule 14.1 of the Rules of 
Procedure of the General 
Assembly of States Parties.

23.  Committee decisions are based on objective and scientiﬁ c considerations, 
and any appraisal made on its behalf must be thoroughly and responsibly 
carried out. The Committee recognizes that such decisions depend upon:

(a)  carefully prepared documentation; 

(b) 

thorough and consistent procedures; 

(c)  evaluation by qualiﬁ ed experts; and

(d) 

if necessary, the use of expert referees. 

24.  The main functions of the Committee are, in co-operation with States 

Parties, to:

(a) 

identify, on the basis of Tentative Lists and nominations submit-
ted by States Parties, cultural and natural properties of outstand-
ing universal value which are to be protected under the Conven-
tion and to inscribe those properties on the World Heritage List;

Article 11(2) of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(b)  examine the state of conservation of properties inscribed on the 
World Heritage List through processes of Reactive Monitoring (see 
Chapter IV) and Periodic Reporting (see Chapter V);

Articles 11(7) and 29 of the 
World Heritage Convention.

(c)  decide which properties inscribed on the World Heritage List are 
to be inscribed on, or removed from the List of World Heritage in 
Danger;

Article 11(4) and 11(5) 
of the World Heritage 
Convention.

(d)  decide  whether  a  property  should  be  deleted  from  the  World 

 Heritage List (see Chapter IV);

(e)  deﬁ ne the procedure by which requests for International Assist-
ance are to be considered and carry out studies and consultations 
as necessary before coming to a decision (see Chapter VII);

Article 21(1) and 21(3) 
of the World Heritage 
Convention.

(f)  determine how the resources of the World Heritage Fund can be 
used most advantageously to assist States Parties in the protection 
of their properties of outstanding universal value; 

Article 13(6) of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(g) 

seek ways to increase the World Heritage Fund;

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

38

(h)  submit  a  report  on  its  activities  every  two  years  to  the  General 
Assembly of States Parties and to the UNESCO General Confer-
ence;

(i) 

review and evaluate periodically the implementation of the Con-
vention;

Article 29(3) of the World 
Heritage Convention and 
Rule 49 of the Rules of 
procedure of the World 
Heritage Committee.

(j) 

revise and adopt the Operational Guidelines.

25.  In order to facilitate the implementation of the Convention, the Com-
mittee  develops  Strategic  Objectives;  they  are  periodically  reviewed 
and revised to ensure that new threats placed on World Heritage are 
addressed effectively.

26.  The current Strategic Objectives (also referred to as “the 4 Cs”) are the 

following:

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Strengthen the Credibility of the World Heritage List;

Ensure the effective Conservation of World Heritage Properties; 

Promote the development of effective Capacity-building in States 
Parties; 

Increase  public  awareness,  involvement  and  support  for  World 
Heritage through Communication.

I.F 

 The Secretariat to the World Heritage 
Committee (World Heritage Centre)

27.  The World Heritage Committee is assisted by a Secretariat appointed 
by  the  Director-General  of  UNESCO.  The  function  of  the  Secretariat 
is  currently  assumed  by  the  World  Heritage  Centre,  established  in 
1992 speciﬁ cally for this purpose. The Director-General designated the 
Director of the World Heritage Centre as Secretary to the Committee. 
The  Secretariat assists and collaborates with the States Parties and the 
Advisory Bodies. The Secretariat works in close co-operation with other 
sectors and ﬁ eld ofﬁ ces of UNESCO.

The ﬁ rst “Strategic 
Orientations” adopted 
by the Committee in 
1992 are contained in 
Annex II of document 
WHC-92/CONF.002/12

In 2002 the World 
Heritage Committee 
revised its Strategic 
Objectives. The Budapest 
Declaration on World 
Heritage (2002) is 
available at the following 
Web address:  
http://whc.unesco.org/en/
budapestdeclaration

UNESCO World Heritage 
Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP
France
Tel: +33 (0) 1 4568 1571
Fax: +33 (0) 1 4568 5570
E-mail: wh-info@unesco.org
www: http://whc.unesco.org/
 
Article 14 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

Rule 43 of Rules of 
Procedure of the World 
Heritage Committee.

Circular Letter 16 
of 21 October 2003
http://whc.unesco.org/
circs/circ03-16e.pdf

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

39

28.  The Secretariat’s main tasks are:

(a) 

the organization of the meetings of the General Assembly and the 
Committee;

Article 14.2 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

the  implementation  of  decisions  of  the  World  Heritage  Com-
mittee and resolutions of the General Assembly and reporting to 
them on their execution;

Article 14.2 of the World 
Heritage Convention and the 
Budapest Declaration 
on World Heritage (2002)

the  receipt,  registration,  checking  the  completeness,  archiving 
and transmission to the relevant Advisory Bodies of nominations 
to the World Heritage List;

the co-ordination of studies and activities as part of the Global 
Strategy for a Representative, Balanced and Credible World Herit-
age List;

(e) 

the organization of Periodic Reporting and co-ordination of Reac-
tive Monitoring;

(f) 

the co-ordination of International Assistance; 

(g) 

the  mobilisation  of  extra-budgetary  resources  for  the  conserva-
tion and management of World Heritage properties; 

(h) 

the assistance to States Parties in the implementation of the Com-
mittee’s programmes and projects; and 

(i) 

the promotion of World Heritage and the Convention through the 
dissemination of information to States Parties, the Advisory Bod-
ies and the general public.

29.  These  activities  follow  the  decisions  and  Strategic  Objectives  of  the 
Committee and the resolutions of the General Assembly of the States 
Parties  and  are  conducted  in  close  co-operation  with  the  Advisory 
 Bodies.

I.G 

 Advisory Bodies to the World 
Heritage Committee 

30.  The Advisory Bodies to the World Heritage Committee are ICCROM (the 
International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of 
Cultural Property), ICOMOS (the International Council on Monuments and 
Sites), and IUCN - the World Conservation Union.

Article 8.3 of the World 
Heritage Convention

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

40

31.  The roles of the Advisory Bodies are to:

(a)  advise on the implementation of the World Heritage Convention in 

the ﬁ eld of their expertise;

Article 13.7 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(b)  assist the Secretariat, in the preparation of the Committee’s docu-
mentation, the agenda of its meetings and the implementation of 
the Committee’s decisions;

(c)  assist with the development and implementation of the Global 
Strategy for a Representative, Balanced and Credible World Herit-
age List, the Global Training Strategy, Periodic Reporting, and the 
strengthening of the effective use of the World Heritage Fund;

(d)  monitor  the  state  of  conservation  of  World  Heritage  properties 

and review requests for International Assistance; 

Article 14.2 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

(e) 

in the case of ICOMOS and IUCN evaluate properties nominated 
for inscription on the World Heritage List and present evaluation 
reports to the Committee; and

(f) 

attend meetings of the World Heritage Committee and the Bureau 
in an advisory capacity.

Article 8.3 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

ICCROM

32. 

ICCROM (the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and 
Restoration  of  Cultural  Property)  is  an  international  intergovernmental 
organization with headquarters in Rome, Italy. Established by UNESCO in 
1956, ICCROM’s statutory functions are to carry out research, documenta-
tion, technical assistance, training and public awareness programmes to 
strengthen conservation of immovable and moveable cultural heritage.

ICCROM
Via di S. Michele, 13
I-00153 Rome, Italy
Tel: +39 06 585531
Fax: +39 06 5855 3349
E-mail: iccrom@iccrom.org
http://www.iccrom.org/

33.  The  speciﬁ c  role  of  ICCROM  in  relation  to  the  Convention  includes: 
being the priority partner in training for cultural heritage, monitoring 
the state of conservation of World Heritage cultural properties, review-
ing  requests  for  International  Assistance  submitted  by  States  Parties, 
and providing input and support for capacity-building activities.

 

ICOMOS

34.  ICOMOS  (the  International  Council  on  Monuments  and  Sites)  is  a 
non-governmental  organization  with  headquarters  in  Paris,  France. 
Founded in 1965, its role is to promote the application of theory, meth-
odology and scientiﬁ c techniques to the conservation of the architec-
tural and archaeological heritage. Its work is based on the principles of 
the 1964 International Charter on the Conservation and Restoration of 
Monuments and Sites (the Venice Charter).

ICOMOS
49-51, rue de la Fédération 
75015 Paris, France
Tel: +33 (0)1 45 67 67 70
Fax: +33 (0)1 45 66 06 22
E-mail: 
secretariat@icomos.org
http://www.icomos.org/

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

41

35.  The  speciﬁ c  role  of  ICOMOS  in  relation  to  the  Convention  includes: 
evaluation of properties nominated for inscription on the World Herit-
age List, monitoring the state of conservation of World Heritage cultural 
properties, reviewing requests for International Assistance submitted by 
States Parties, and providing input and support for  capacity- building 
activities.

 

IUCN

36.  IUCN  –  The  World  Conservation  Union  (formely  the  International 
Union  for  the  Conservation  of  Nature  and  Natural  Resources)  was 
founded  in  1948  and  brings  together  national  governments,  NGOs, 
and scientists in a worldwide partnership. Its mission is to inﬂ uence, 
encourage  and  assist  societies  throughout  the  world  to  conserve  the 
integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural 
resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable. IUCN has its head-
quarters in Gland, Switzerland. 

IUCN 
The World 
Conser vation Union
rue Mauverney 28
CH-1196 Gland, 
Switzerland
Tel: + 41 22 999 0001
Fax: +41 22 999 0010
E-mail: mail@hq.iucn.org
http://www.iucn.org

37.  The speciﬁ c role of IUCN in relation to the Convention includes: evalu-
ation of properties nominated for inscription on the World Heritage 
List,  monitoring  the  state  of  conservation  of  World  Heritage  natural 
properties,  reviewing  requests  for  International  Assistance  submitted 
by States Parties, and providing input and support for capacity- building 
activities. 

I.H  Other organizations

38.  The Committee may call on other international and non    - governmental 
organizations with appropriate competence and expertise to assist in 
the implementation of the programmes and projects.

I.I 

 Partners in the protection 
of World Heritage

39.  A partnership approach to nomination, management and monitoring 
provides a signiﬁ cant contribution to the protection of World Heritage 
properties and the implementation of the Convention.

40.  Partners in the protection and conservation of World Heritage can be 
those  individuals  and  other  stakeholders,  especially  local  communi-
ties, governmental, non-governmental and private organizations and 
owners who have an interest and involvement in the conservation and 
management of a World Heritage property.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

42

I.J 

 Other Conventions, Recommendations 
and Programmes 

41.  The  World  Heritage  Committee  recognizes  the  beneﬁ ts  of  closer  co-
ordination of its work with other UNESCO programmes and their rel-
evant  Conventions.  For  a  list  of  relevant  global  conservation  instru-
ments, Conventions and programmes see paragraph 44.

42.  The World Heritage Committee with the support of the Secretariat will 
ensure  appropriate  co-ordination  and  information-sharing  between 
the  World  Heritage  Convention  and  other  Conventions,  programmes 
and international organizations related to the conservation of cultural 
and natural heritage.

43.  The  Committee  may  invite  representatives  of  the  intergovernmental 
bodies under related Conventions to attend its meetings as observers. 
It may appoint a representative to observe meetings of the other inter-
governmental bodies upon receipt of an invitation. 

44.  Selected global Conventions and programmes relating to the protec-

tion of cultural and natural heritage

 

UNESCO Conventions and Programmes

Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed 
Conﬂ ict (1954)
Protocol I (1954)
Protocol II (1999)
http://www.unesco.org/culture/laws/hague/html_eng/page1.shtml

Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, 
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (1970)
http://www.unesco.org/culture/laws/1970/html_eng/page1.shtml

Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural 
Heritage (1972)
http://www.unesco.org/whc/world_he.htm

Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage (2001)
http://www.unesco.org/culture/laws/underwater/html_eng/convention.shtml

Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003)
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001325/132540e.pdf

Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme
http://www.unesco.org/mab/

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

43

Other Conventions

Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as 
Waterfowl Habitat (Ramsar) (1971)
http://www.ramsar.org/key_conv_e.htm

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna 
and Flora (CITES) (1973)
http://www.cites.org/eng/disc/text.shtml

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals 
(CMS) (1979)
http://www.unep-wcmc.org/cms/cms_conv.htm

United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) (1982)
http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/
closindx.htm

Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
http://www.biodiv.org/convention/articles.asp

UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects 
(Rome, 1995)
http://www.unidroit.org/english/conventions/culturalproperty/c-cult.htm

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (New York, 
1992)
http://unfccc.int/essential_background/convention/background/
items/1350.php

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

44

II. 

The World Heritage List

II.A  Definition of World Heritage

 

Cultural and Natural Heritage

45.  Cultural  and  natural  heritage  are  deﬁ ned  in  Articles  1  and  2  of  the 

World Heritage Convention.

Article 1

For the purposes of this Convention, the following shall be considered as 
“cultural heritage”:
–   monuments:  architectural  works,  works  of  monumental  sculpture  and 
painting, elements or structures of an archaeological nature, inscriptions, 
cave  dwellings  and  combinations  of  features,  which  are  of  outstanding 
universal value from the point of view of history, art or science;

–    groups of buildings: groups of separate or connected buildings which, because 
of their architecture, their homogeneity or their place in the landscape, are 
of  outstanding  universal  value  from  the  point  of  view  of  history,  art  or 
science;

–    sites: works of man or the combined works of nature and of man, and areas 
including archaeological sites which are of outstanding universal value from 
the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological points of view.

Article 2

For  the  purposes  of  this  Convention,  the  following  shall  be  considered  as 
“natural heritage”:
–    natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or groups 
of  such  formations,  which  are  of  outstanding  universal  value  from  the 
aesthetic or scientiﬁ c point of view;

–   geological  and  physiographical  formations  and  precisely  delineated 
areas  which  constitute  the  habitat  of  threatened  species  of  animals  and 
plants of outstanding universal value from the point of view of science or 
conservation;

–    natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas of outstanding universal 

value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

45

 

Mixed Cultural and Natural Heritage

46.  Properties shall be considered as “mixed cultural and natural heritage” 
if they satisfy a part or the whole of the deﬁ nitions of both cultural and 
natural heritage laid out in Articles 1 and 2 of the Convention.

 

Cultural landscapes

47.  Cultural landscapes are cultural properties and represent the “combined 
works of nature and of man” designated in Article 1 of the  Convention. 
They  are  illustrative  of  the  evolution  of  human  society  and  settle-
ment over time, under the inﬂ uence of the physical constraints and/or 
opportunities presented by their natural environment and of succes-
sive social, economic and cultural forces, both external and internal.

Annex 3

 

Movable Heritage

48.  Nominations of immovable heritage which are likely to become mov-

able will not be considered.

 

Outstanding universal value

49.  Outstanding  universal  value  means  cultural  and/or  natural  signiﬁ -
cance which is so exceptional as to transcend national boundaries and 
to be of common importance for present and future generations of all 
humanity. As such, the permanent protection of this heritage is of the 
highest importance to the international community as a whole. The 
Committee deﬁ nes the criteria for the inscription of properties on the 
World Heritage List.

50.  States Parties are invited to submit nominations of properties of cul-
tural and/or natural value considered to be of “outstanding universal 
value” for inscription on the World Heritage List.

51.  At the time of inscription of a property on the World Heritage List, the 
Committee  adopts  a  Statement  of  Outstanding  Universal  Value  (see 
paragraph 154) which will be the key reference for the future effective 
protection and management of the property.

52.  The Convention is not intended to ensure the protection of all proper-
ties of great interest, importance or value, but only for a select list of 
the most outstanding of these from an international viewpoint. It is 
not to be assumed that a property of national and/or regional impor-
tance will automatically be inscribed on the World Heritage List.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

46

53.  Nominations presented to the Committee shall demonstrate the full 
commitment  of  the  State  Party  to  preserve  the  heritage  concerned, 
within its means. Such commitment shall take the form of appropriate 
policy,  legal,  scientiﬁ c,  technical,  administrative  and  ﬁ nancial  meas-
ures adopted and proposed to protect the property and its outstanding 
universal value.

II.B 

 A Representative, Balanced and Credible 
World Heritage List

54.  The Committee seeks to establish a representative, balanced and cred-
ible World Heritage List in conformity with the four Strategic Objec-
tives adopted by the Committee at its 26th session (Budapest, 2002).

Budapest Declaration 
on World Heritage (2002) 
at http://whc.unesco.org/
en/budapestdeclaration

The Global Strategy for a Representative, Balanced 
and Credible World Heritage List

55.  The Global Strategy for a Representative, Balanced and Credible World 
Heritage List is designed to identify and ﬁ ll the major gaps in the World 
Heritage  List.  It  does  this  by  encouraging  more  countries  to  become 
States Parties to the Convention and to develop Tentative Lists as deﬁ ned 
in paragraph 62 and nominations of properties for inscription on the 
World Heritage List (see http://whc.unesco.org/en/globalstrategy)

56.  States Parties and the Advisory Bodies are encouraged to participate in 
the  implementation  of  the  Global  Strategy  in  co-operation  with  the 
Secretariat  and  other  partners.  Regional  and  thematic  Global  Strategy 
meetings and comparative and thematic studies are organized for this 
purpose. The results of these meetings and studies are available to assist 
States Parties in preparing Tentative Lists and nominations. The reports 
of  the  expert  meetings  and  studies  presented  to  the  World  Heritage 
Committee are available at the following Web address: 
http://whc.unesco.org/en/globalstrategy

 

The report of the Expert 
Meeting on the «Global 
Strategy» and thematic 
studies for a representative 
World Heritage List (20-
 22 June 1994) was adopted 
by the World Heritage 
Committee at its 18th 
session (Phuket, 1994).

The Global Strategy was 
initially developed with 
reference to cultural 
heritage. At the request 
of the World Heritage 
Committee, the Global 
Strategy was subsequently 
expanded to also include 
reference to natural 
heritage and combined 
cultural and natural 
heritage.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

47

57.  All efforts should be made to maintain a reasonable balance between 

cultural and natural heritage on the World Heritage List.

58.  No  formal  limit  is  imposed  on  the  total  number  of  properties  to  be 

inscribed on the World Heritage List.

Other measures

59.  To promote the establishment of a representative, balanced and credi-
ble World Heritage List, States Parties are requested to consider whether 
their heritage is already well represented on the List and if so to slow 
down their rate of submission of further nominations by:

Resolution adopted by the 
12th General Assembly of 
States Parties (1999).

(a) 

spacing  voluntarily  their  nominations  according  to  conditions 
that they will deﬁ ne, and/or;

(b)  proposing  only  properties  falling  into  categories  still  under-

 represented, and/or;

(c) 

linking each of their nominations with a nomination presented 
by a State Party whose heritage is under-represented; or

(d)  deciding,  on  a  voluntary  basis,  to  suspend  the  presentation  of 

new nominations.

60.  States Parties whose heritage of outstanding universal value is under-

represented on the World Heritage List are requested to: 

Resolution adopted by the 
12th General Assembly of 
States Parties (1999).

(a)  give priority to the preparation of their Tentative Lists and nomi-

nations;

(b) 

initiate and consolidate partnerships at the regional level based 
on the exchange of technical expertise;

(c)  encourage bilateral and multilateral co-operation so as to increase 
their  expertise  and  the  technical  capacities  of  institutions  in 
charge of the protection, safeguarding and management of their 
heritage; and,

(d)  participate, as much as possible, in the sessions of the World Her-

itage Committee.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

48

61.  The Committee has decided, on an experimental and transitory basis, 

to apply the following mechanism at its 30th session (2006):

Decisions 24 COM VI.2.3.3, 
28 COM 13.1 
and 7 EXT.COM 4B.1

(a)  examine  up  to  two  complete  nominations  per  State  Party,  pro-
vided that at least one of such nominations concerns a natural 
property; and, 

(b) 

set at 45 the annual limit on the number of nominations it will 
review, inclusive of nominations deferred and referred by previous 
sessions  of  the  Committee,  extensions  (except  minor  modiﬁ ca-
tions of limits of the property), transboundary and serial nomina-
tions, 

(c) 

the following order of priorities will be applied: 
(i)  nominations  of  properties  submitted  by  States  Parties  with 

no properties inscribed on the List;

(ii)  nominations of properties from any State Party that illustrate 
un-represented or less represented categories of natural and 
cultural categories;

(iii) other nominations; 
(iv)  when  applying  this  priority  system,  date  of  receipt  of  full 
and  complete  nominations  by  the  Secretariat  shall  be  used 
as  secondary  determining  factor  within  the  category  where 
the number of nomination ﬁ xed by the Committee has been 
reached. 

 

This decision will be re-examined at the Committee’s 31st session (2007).

II.C  Tentative Lists

Procedure and Format

62.  A Tentative List is an inventory of those properties situated on its ter-
ritory which each State Party considers suitable for inscription on the 
World  Heritage  List.  States  Parties  should  therefore  include,  in  their 
Tentative Lists, the names of those properties which they consider to 
be cultural and/or natural heritage of outstanding universal value and 
which they intend to nominate during the following years.

Articles 1, 2 and 11(1) 
of the World Heritage 
Convention.

63.  Nominations  to  the  World  Heritage  List  are  not  considered  unless 
the nominated property has already been included on the State Party’s 
 Tentative List.

Decision 24 COM 
para. I.2.3.2 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

49

64.  States Parties are encouraged to prepare their Tentative Lists with the 
participation of a wide variety of stakeholders, including site managers, 
local and regional governments, local communities, NGOs and other 
interested parties and partners.

65.  States Parties shall submit Tentative Lists to the Secretariat, preferably at 
least one year prior to the submission of any nomination. States Parties 
are encouraged to re-examine and re-submit their Tentative List at least 
every ten years.

66.  States Parties are requested to submit their Tentative Lists in English 
or French using the standard format in Annex 2, containing the name 
of the properties, their geographical location, a brief description of the 
properties, and justiﬁ cation of their outstanding universal value.

67.  The original duly signed version of the completed Tentative List shall 

be submitted by the State Party, to: 

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP
France
Tel: +33 (0) 1 4568 1136
E-mail: wh-tentativelists@unesco.org

68.  If all information has been provided, the Tentative List will be regis-
tered by the Secretariat and transmitted to the relevant Advisory Bodies 
for information. A summary of all Tentative Lists is presented annu-
ally to the Committee. The Secretariat, in consultation with the States 
Parties concerned, updates its records, in particular by removing from 
the Tentative Lists the inscribed properties and nominated properties 
which were not inscribed.

Decision 7 EXT.COM 4A

69.  The Tentative Lists of States Parties are available at the following Web 

Decision 27 COM 8A 

address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists 

Tentative Lists as a planning and evaluation tool

70.  Tentative  Lists  are  a  useful  and  important  planning  tool  for  States 
 Parties, the World Heritage Committee, the Secretariat, and the Advi-
sory Bodies, as they provide an indication of future nominations.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

50

71.  States  Parties  are  encouraged  to  consult  the  analyses  of  both  the 
World Heritage List and Tentative Lists prepared at the request of the 
 Committee by ICOMOS and IUCN to identify the gaps in the World 
Heritage  List.  These  analyses  could  enable  States  Parties  to  compare 
themes, regions, geo-cultural groupings and bio-geographic provinces 
for prospective World Heritage properties.

72.  In addition, States Parties are encouraged to consult the speciﬁ c the-
matic studies carried out by the Advisory Bodies (see paragraph 147). 
These studies are informed by a review of the Tentative Lists submit-
ted by States Parties and by reports of meetings on the harmonization 
of Tentative Lists, as well as by other technical studies performed by 
the Advisory Bodies and qualiﬁ ed organizations and individuals. A list 
of  those  studies  already  completed  is  available  at  the  following  Web 
address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/globalstrategy 

Decision 24 COM 
para. VI.2.3.2(ii)
Documents WHC-04/28.
COM/13.B I and II
http://whc.unesco.org/
archive/2004/whc04-
28com-13b1e.pdf and 
http://whc.unesco.org/
archive/2004/whc04-28com-
13b2e.pdf
Thematic studies are 
different than the 
comparative analysis to 
be prepared by States 
Parties when nominating 
properties for inscription in 
the World Heritage List (see 
paragraph 132).

73.  States  Parties  are  encouraged  to  harmonize  their  Tentative  Lists  at 
regional and thematic levels. Harmonization of Tentative Lists is the 
process whereby States Parties, with the assistance of the Advisory Bod-
ies, collectively assess their respective Tentative List to review gaps and 
identify common themes. The outcome of harmonization can result in 
improved Tentative Lists, new nominations from States Parties and co-
operation amongst groups of States Parties in the preparation of nomi-
nations.

Assistance and Capacity-Building for States Parties 
in the preparation of Tentative Lists

74.  To implement the Global Strategy, cooperative efforts in capacity-build-
ing  and  training  may  be  necessary  to  assist  States  Parties  to  acquire 
and/or  consolidate  their  expertise  in  the  preparation,  updating  and 
harmonisation of their Tentative List and the preparation of nomina-
tions.

75.  International  Assistance  may  be  requested  by  States  Parties  for  the 
purpose of preparing, updating and harmonizing Tentative Lists (see 
Chapter VII).

76.  The Advisory Bodies and the Secretariat will use the opportunity of eval-
uation missions to hold regional training workshops to assist under-
represented States in the methods of preparation of their  Tentative List 
and nominations.

Decision 24COM 
VI.2.3.5(ii)

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

51

These criteria were 
formerly presented as two 
separate sets of criteria - 
criteria (i)-(vi) for cultural 
heritage and (i)-(iv) for 
natural heritage. 
The 6th extraordinary 
session of the World 
Heritage Committee 
decided to merge 
the ten criteria 
(De cision 6 EXT.COM 5.1)

II.D 

 Criteria for the assessment 
of outstanding universal value

77.  The  Committee  considers  a  property  as  having  outstanding  universal 
value (see paragraphs 49-53) if the property meets one or more of the 
following criteria. Nominated properties shall therefore: 

(i) 

represent a masterpiece of human creative genius;

(ii)  exhibit an important interchange of human values, over a span 
of time or within a cultural area of the world, on developments in 
architecture or technology, monumental arts, town-planning or 
landscape design;

(iii)  bear a unique or at least exceptional testimony to a cultural tradi-
tion or to a civilization which is living or which has disappeared;

(iv)  be an outstanding example of a type of building, architectural or 
technological ensemble or landscape which illustrates (a) signiﬁ -
cant stage(s) in human history;

(v)  be  an  outstanding  example  of  a  traditional  human  settlement, 
land-use, or sea-use which is representative of a culture (or cul-
tures),  or  human  interaction  with  the  environment  especially 
when it has become vulnerable under the impact of irreversible 
change;

(vi)  be directly or tangibly associated with events or living traditions, with 
ideas, or with beliefs, with artistic and literary works of outstanding 
universal signiﬁ cance. (The Committee considers that this criterion 
should preferably be used in conjunction with other criteria) ;

(vii)  contain  superlative  natural  phenomena  or  areas  of  exceptional 

natural beauty and aesthetic importance;

(viii) be  outstanding  examples  representing  major  stages  of  earth’s 
 history,  including  the  record  of  life,  signiﬁ cant  on-going  geo-
logical processes in the development of landforms, or signiﬁ cant 
geomorphic or physiographic features;

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

52

(ix)  be  outstanding  examples  representing  signiﬁ cant  on-going  eco-
logical  and  biological  processes  in  the  evolution  and  develop-
ment  of  terrestrial,  fresh  water,  coastal  and  marine  ecosystems 
and communities of plants and animals;

(x)  contain the most important and signiﬁ cant natural habitats for 
in-situ conservation of biological diversity, including those con-
taining  threatened  species  of  outstanding  universal  value  from 
the point of view of science or conservation.

78.  To  be  deemed  of  outstanding  universal  value,  a  property  must  also 
meet the conditions of integrity and/or authenticity and must have an 
 adequate protection and management system to ensure its safeguarding.

II.E 

Integrity and/or authenticity

Authenticity

79.  Properties  nominated  under  criteria  (i)  to  (vi)  must  meet  the  condi-
tions of authenticity. Annex 4 which includes the Nara Document on 
Authenticity, provides a practical basis for examining the authenticity 
of such properties and is summarized below.

80.  The ability to understand the value attributed to the heritage depends 
on the degree to which information sources about this value may be 
understood as  credible or truthful. Knowledge and understanding of 
these  sources  of  information,  in  relation  to  original  and  subsequent 
characteristics of the cultural heritage, and their meaning, are the req-
uisite bases for assessing all aspects of authenticity.

81.  Judgments  about  value  attributed  to  cultural  heritage,  as  well  as  the 
credibility of related information sources, may differ from culture to 
culture, and even within the same culture. The respect due to all cul-
tures  requires  that  cultural  heritage  must  be  considered  and  judged 
primarily within the cultural contexts to which it belongs.

82.  Depending on the type of cultural heritage, and its cultural context, 
properties may be understood to meet the conditions of authenticity if 
their cultural value (as recognized in the nomination criteria proposed) 
are  truthfully  and  credibly  expressed  through  a  variety  of  attributes 
including:

•  form and design;
•  materials and substance;
•  use and function; 
•  traditions, techniques and management systems;

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

53

•  location and setting;
•  language, and other forms of intangible heritage;
•  spirit and feeling; and
•  other internal and external factors.

83.  Attributes such as spirit and feeling do not lend themselves easily to 
practical applications of the conditions of authenticity, but neverthe-
less are important indicators of character and sense of place, for exam-
ple, in communities maintaining tradition and cultural continuity.

84.  The use of all these sources permits elaboration of the speciﬁ c artistic, 
historic, social, and scientiﬁ c dimensions of the cultural heritage being 
examined. “Information sources” are deﬁ ned as all physical, written, 
oral, and ﬁ gurative sources, which make it possible to know the nature, 
speciﬁ cities, meaning, and history of the cultural heritage.

85.  When  the  conditions  of  authenticity  are  considered  in  preparing  a 
nomination for a property, the State Party should ﬁ rst identify all of 
the applicable signiﬁ cant attributes of authenticity. The statement of 
authenticity should assess the degree to which authenticity is present 
in, or expressed by, each of these signiﬁ cant attributes.

86.  In relation to authenticity, the reconstruction of archaeological remains 
or historic buildings or districts is justiﬁ able only in exceptional cir-
cumstances. Reconstruction is acceptable only on the basis of complete 
and detailed documentation and to no extent on conjecture.

Integrity

87.  All  properties  nominated  for  inscription  on  the  World  Heritage  List 

Decision 20 COM IX.13

shall satisfy the conditions of integrity.

88.  Integrity  is  a  measure  of  the  wholeness  and  intactness  of  the  natu-
ral  and/or  cultural  heritage  and  its  attributes.  Examining  the  condi-
tions of integrity, therefore requires assessing the extent to which the 
 property:

(a) 

includes all elements necessary to express its outstanding univer-
sal value;

(b) 

is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the 
features and processes which convey the property’s signiﬁ cance;

(c) 

suffers from adverse effects of development and/or neglect.

 

This should be presented in a statement of integrity.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

54

89.  For properties nominated under criteria (i) to (vi), the physical fabric 
of the property and/or its signiﬁ cant features should be in good condi-
tion,  and  the  impact  of  deterioration  processes  controlled.  A  signiﬁ -
cant proportion of the elements necessary to convey the totality of the 
value conveyed by the property should be included. Relationships and 
dynamic  functions  present  in  cultural  landscapes,  historic  towns  or 
other  living  properties  essential  to  their  distinctive  character  should 
also be maintained.

Examples of the application 
of the conditions of 
integrity to properties 
nominated under criteria 
(i) - (vi) are under 
development.

90.  For  all  properties  nominated  under  criteria  (vii)  -  (x),  bio-physical 
 processes and landform features should be relatively intact. However, 
it is recognized that no area is totally pristine and that all natural areas 
are in a dynamic state, and to some extent involve contact with peo-
ple. Human activities, including those of traditional societies and local 
communities, often occur in natural areas. These activities may be con-
sistent with the outstanding universal value of the area where they are 
ecologically sustainable. 

91.  In addition, for properties nominated under criteria (vii) to (x), a cor-
responding condition of integrity has been deﬁ ned for each criterion.

92.  Properties proposed under criterion (vii) should be of outstanding uni-
versal  value  and  include  areas  that  are  essential  for  maintaining  the 
beauty  of  the  property.  For  example,  a  property  whose  scenic  value 
depends  on  a  waterfall,  would  meet  the  conditions  of  integrity  if  it 
includes adjacent catchment and downstream areas that are integrally 
linked to the maintenance of the aesthetic qualities of the property.

93.  Properties proposed under criterion (viii) should contain all or most of 
the key interrelated and interdependent elements in their natural rela-
tionships. For example, an “ice age” area would meet the conditions of 
integrity if it includes the snow ﬁ eld, the glacier itself and samples of 
cutting patterns, deposition and colonization (e.g. striations, moraines, 
pioneer stages of plant succession, etc.); in the case of volcanoes, the 
magmatic series should be complete and all or most of the varieties of 
effusive rocks and types of eruptions be represented.

94.  Properties proposed under criterion (ix) should have sufﬁ cient size and 
contain the necessary elements to demonstrate the key aspects of proc-
esses that are essential for the long term conservation of the ecosys-
tems and the biological diversity they contain. For example, an area of 
tropical rain forest would meet the conditions of integrity if it includes 
a certain amount of variation in elevation above sea level, changes in 
topography and soil types, patch systems and naturally regenerating 
patches;  similarly  a  coral  reef  should  include,  for  example,  seagrass, 
mangrove or other adjacent ecosystems that regulate nutrient and sedi-
ment inputs into the reef.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

55

95.  Properties proposed under criterion (x) should be the most important 
properties for the conservation of biological diversity. Only those prop-
erties which are the most biologically diverse and/or representative are 
likely to meet this criterion. The properties should contain habitats for 
maintaining the most diverse fauna and ﬂ ora characteristic of the bio-
geographic province and ecosystems under consideration. For exam-
ple,  a  tropical  savannah  would  meet  the  conditions  of  integrity  if  it 
includes a complete assemblage of co-evolved herbivores and plants; 
an island ecosystem should include habitats for maintaining endemic 
biota;  a  property  containing  wide  ranging  species  should  be  large 
enough  to  include  the  most  critical  habitats  essential  to  ensure  the 
survival of viable populations of those species; for an area containing 
migratory species, seasonal breeding and nesting sites, and migratory 
routes, wherever they are located, should be adequately protected.

II.F  Protection and management

96.  Protection and management of World Heritage properties should ensure 
that the outstanding universal value, the conditions of integrity and/or 
authenticity at the time of inscription are maintained or enhanced in 
the future.

97.  All properties inscribed on the World Heritage List must have adequate 
long-term  legislative,  regulatory,  institutional  and/or  traditional  pro-
tection and management to ensure their safeguarding. This protection 
should include adequately delineated boundaries. Similarly States Par-
ties should demonstrate adequate protection at the national, regional, 
municipal, and/or traditional level for the nominated property. They 
should append appropriate texts to the nomination with a clear expla-
nation of the way this protection operates to protect the property.

Legislative, regulatory and contractual measures for protection

98.  Legislative and regulatory measures at national and local levels should 
assure the survival of the property and its protection against develop-
ment and change that might negatively impact the outstanding uni-
versal value, or the integrity and/or authenticity of the property. States 
Parties should also assure the full and effective implementation of such 
measures.

Boundaries for effective protection

99.  The delineation of boundaries is an essential requirement in the estab-
lishment of effective protection of nominated properties. Boundaries 
should be drawn to ensure the full expression of the outstanding uni-
versal value and the integrity and/or authenticity of the property.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

56

100. For  properties  nominated  under  criteria  (i)  -  (vi),  boundaries  should 
be drawn to include all those areas and attributes which are a direct 
tangible expression of the outstanding universal value of the property, 
as well as those areas which in the light of future research possibilities 
offer potential to contribute to and enhance such understanding.

101. For properties nominated under criteria (vii) - (x), boundaries should 
reﬂ ect the spatial requirements of habitats, species, processes or phe-
nomena that provide the basis for their inscription on the World Herit-
age List. The boundaries should include sufﬁ cient areas immediately 
adjacent to the area of outstanding universal value in order to protect 
the property’s heritage values from direct effect of human encroach-
ments and impacts of resource use outside of the nominated area.

102. The boundaries of the nominated property may coincide with one or 
more existing or proposed protected areas, such as national parks or 
nature reserves, biosphere reserves or protected historic districts. While 
such established areas for protection may contain several management 
zones, only some of those zones may satisfy criteria for inscription.

Buffer zones

103. Wherever  necessary  for  the  proper  conservation  of  the  property,  an 

adequate buffer zone should be provided.

104. For the purposes of effective protection of the nominated property, a 
buffer zone is an area surrounding the nominated property which has 
complementary legal and/or customary restrictions placed on its use 
and development to give an added layer of protection to the property. 
This should include the immediate setting of the nominated property, 
important views and other areas or attributes that are functionally impor-
tant as a support to the property and its protection. The area constituting 
the buffer zone should be determined in each case through appropriate 
mechanisms. Details on the size, characteristics and authorized uses of 
a buffer zone, as well as a map indicating the precise boundaries of the 
property and its buffer zone, should be provided in the nomination. 

105. A clear explanation of how the buffer zone protects the property should 

also be provided.

106. Where no buffer zone is proposed, the nomination should include a 

statement as to why a buffer zone is not required.

107. Although buffer zones are not normally part of the nominated prop-
erty, any modiﬁ cations to the buffer zone subsequent to inscription of 
a property on the World Heritage List should be approved by the World 
Heritage Committee.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

57

Management systems

108. Each  nominated  property  should  have  an  appropriate  management 
plan or other documented management system which should specify 
how the outstanding universal value of a property should be preserved, 
preferably through participatory means. 

109. The purpose of a management system is to ensure the effective protec-

tion of the nominated property for present and future generations.

110. An  effective  management  system  depends  on  the  type,  characteris-
tics and needs of the nominated property and its cultural and natural 
context.  Management  systems  may  vary  according  to  different  cul-
tural perspectives, the resources available and other factors. They may 
incorporate traditional practices, existing urban or regional planning 
instruments,  and  other  planning  control  mechanisms,  both  formal 
and informal.

111. In recognizing the diversity mentioned above, common elements of an 

effective management system could include:

(a)  a  thorough  shared  understanding  of  the  property  by  all  stake-

holders;

(b)  a cycle of planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and 

feedback;

(c) 

the involvement of partners and stakeholders;

(d) 

the allocation of necessary resources; 

(e)  capacity-building; and

(f) 

an accountable, transparent description of how the management 
system functions.

112. Effective  management  involves  a  cycle  of  long-term  and  day-to-day 

actions to protect, conserve and present the nominated property.

113. Moreover, in the context of the implementation of the Convention, the 
World Heritage Committee has established a process of Reactive Monitor-
ing (see Chapter IV) and a process of Periodic Reporting (see Chapter V).

114. In the case of serial properties, a management system or mechanisms 
for ensuring the co-ordinated management of the separate components 
are essential and should be documented in the nomination (see para-
graphs 137-139).

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

58

115. In some circumstances, a management plan or other management sys-
tem may not be in place at the time when a property is nominated for 
the  consideration  of  the  World  Heritage  Committee.  The  State  Party 
concerned  should  then  indicate  when  such  a  management  plan  or 
system  would  be  put  in  place,  and  how  it  proposes  to  mobilize  the 
resources required for the preparation and implementation of the new 
management plan or system. The State Party should also provide other 
document(s) (e.g. operational plans) which will guide the management 
of the site until such time when a management plan is ﬁ nalized.

116. Where the intrinsic qualities of a property nominated are threatened 
by  action  of  man  and  yet  meet  the  criteria  and  the  conditions  of 
authenticity or integrity set out in paragraphs 78-95, an action plan 
outlining the corrective measures required should be submitted with 
the  nomination  ﬁ le.  Should  the  corrective  measures  submitted  by 
the nominating State Party not be taken within the time proposed by 
the State Party, the property will be considered by the Committee for 
delisting in accordance with the procedure adopted by the Committee 
(see Chap  ter IV.C).

117. States Parties are responsible for implementing effective management 
activities for a World Heritage property. State Parties should do so in 
close collaboration with property managers, the agency with manage-
ment authority and other partners, and stakeholders in property man-
agement.

118. The  Committee  recommends  that  States  Parties  include  risk  pre-
paredness  as  an  element  in  their  World  Heritage  site  management 
plans and training strategies.

Decision 28 COM 10B.4

Sustainable use

119. World Heritage properties may support a variety of ongoing and pro-
posed uses that are ecologically and culturally sustainable. The State 
Party  and  partners  must  ensure  that  such  sustainable  use  does  not 
adversely  impact  the  outstanding  universal  value,  integrity  and/or 
authenticity of the property. Furthermore, any uses should be ecologi-
cally and culturally sustainable. For some properties, human use would 
not be appropriate.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

59

III. 

 Process for the inscription 
of properties on the World Heritage List

III.A  Preparation of nominations

120. The nomination document is the primary basis on which the Commit-
tee considers the inscription of the properties on the World Heritage 
List. All relevant information should be included in the nomination 
document and it should be cross-referenced to the source of informa-
tion.

121. Annex 3 provides guidance to States Parties in preparing nominations 

of speciﬁ c types of properties.

122. Before States Parties begin to prepare a nomination of a property for 
inscription  on  the  World  Heritage  List,  they  should  become  familiar 
with the nomination cycle, described in Paragraph 168.

123. Participation of local people in the nomination process is essential to 
enable them to have a shared responsibility with the State Party in the 
maintenance of the property. States Parties are encouraged to prepare 
nominations with the participation of a wide variety of stakeholders, 
including site managers, local and regional governments, local com-
munities, NGOs and other interested parties.

124. Preparatory Assistance, as described in Chapter VII.E, may be requested 

by States Parties for the preparation of nominations.

125. States Parties are encouraged to contact the Secretariat, which can pro-

vide assistance throughout the nomination process.

126. The Secretariat can also provide:

(a)  assistance in identifying appropriate maps and photographs and 

the national agencies from which these may be obtained; 

(b)  examples of successful nominations, of management and legisla-

tive provisions; 

(c)  guidance for nominating different types of  properties,  such  as 
Cultural  Landscapes,  Towns,  Canals,  and  Heritage  Routes  (see 
Annex 3) 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

61

(d)  guidance for nominating serial and transboundary properties (see 

paragraphs 134-139). 

127. States Parties may submit draft nominations to the Secretariat for com-
ment and review by 30 September of each year (see paragraph 168). 
This submission of a draft nomination is voluntary. 

128. Nominations  may  be  submitted  at  any  time  during  the  year,  but 
only those nominations that are “complete” (see paragraph 132) and 
received  by  the  Secretariat  on  or  before  1  February  will  be  consid-
ered for inscription on the World Heritage List by the World Heritage 
 Committee during the following year. Only nominations of properties 
included  in  the  State  Party’s  Tentative  List  will  be  examined  by  the 
Committee (see paragraph 63). 

III.B  Format and content of nominations

129. Nominations of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List 
should be prepared in accordance with the format set out in Annex 5.

130. The format includes the following sections:

Identiﬁ cation of the Property

1. 
2.  Description of the Property
3. 
Justiﬁ cation for Inscription
State of conservation and factors affecting the property
4. 
5. 
Protection and Management
6.  Monitoring
7.  Documentation
8.   Contact Information of responsible authorities
9. 

Signature on behalf of the State Party(ies)

131. Nominations to the World Heritage List are evaluated on content rather 

than on appearance.

132. For  a  nomination  to  be  considered  as  “complete”,  the  following 

requirements are to be met:

1.   Identiﬁ cation of the Property

 

The boundaries of the property being proposed shall be clearly deﬁ ned, 
unambiguously  distinguishing  between  the  nominated  property  and 
any buffer zone (when present) (see paragraphs 103-107). Maps shall be
sufﬁ ciently detailed to determine precisely which area of land and/or

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

62

  

water is nominated. Ofﬁ cially up-to-date published topographic maps 
of the State Party annotated to show the property boundaries shall be 
provided if available. A nomination shall be considered “incomplete” 
if it does not include clearly deﬁ ned boundaries.

 

 

 

 

2.   Description of the Property

The Description of the property shall include the identiﬁ cation of the 
property, and an overview of its history and development. All compo-
nent parts that are mapped shall be identiﬁ ed and described. In par-
ticular, where serial nominations are proposed, each of the component 
parts shall be clearly described. 

The History and Development of the property shall describe how the 
property has reached its present form and the signiﬁ cant changes that 
it has undergone. This information shall provide the important facts 
needed to support and give substance to the argument that the prop-
erty meets the criteria of outstanding universal value and conditions of 
integrity and/or authenticity.

3.   Justiﬁ cation for Inscription

This section shall indicate the World Heritage criteria (see Paragraph 77) 
under which the property is proposed, together with a clearly stated 
argument  for  the  use  of  each  criterion.  Based  on  the  criteria,  a  pro-
posed Statement of Outstanding Universal Value (see paragraphs 49-53 
and 155) of the property prepared by the State Party shall make clear 
why the property is considered to merit inscription on the World Her-
itage List. A comparative analysis of the property in relation to simi-
lar properties, whether or not on the World Heritage List, both at the 
national and international levels, shall also be provided. The compara-
tive analysis shall explain the importance of the nominated property 
in its national and international context. Statements of integrity and/
or authenticity shall be included and shall demonstrate how the prop-
erty satisﬁ es the conditions outlined in paragraphs 78-95.

The comparative analyses 
prepared by States 
Parties when nominating 
properties for inscription 
in the World Heritage List 
should not be confused 
with the thematic studies 
prepared by the Advisory 
Bodies at the request of the 
Committee (paragraph 148 
below)

Decision 7 EXT.COM 4A

4.   State of conservation and factors affecting the property

This section shall include accurate information on the present state of 
conservation  of  the  property  (including  information  on  its  physical 
condition of the property and conservation measures in place). It shall 
also include a description of the factors affecting the property (includ-
ing threats). Information provided in this section constitutes the base-
line data which are necessary to monitor the state of conservation of 
the nominated property in the future.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

63

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.   Protection and management

Protection: Section 5 shall include the list of the legislative, regulatory, 
contractual, planning, institutional and/ or traditional measures most 
relevant to the protection of the property and provide a detailed analysis 
of the way in which this protection actually operates. Legislative, regula-
tory, contractual planning and/or institutional texts, or an abstract of 
the texts, shall also be attached in English or French.

Management: An appropriate management plan or other management 
system is essential and shall be provided in the nomination. Assurances 
of the effective implementation of the management plan or other man-
agement system are also expected.

A copy of the management plan or documentation of the management 
system  shall  be  annexed  to  the  nomination.  If  the  management  plan 
exists  only  in  a  language  other  than  English  or  French,  an  English  or 
French detailed description of its provisions shall be annexed. 

A detailed analysis or explanation of the management plan or a docu-
mented management system shall be provided. 

A  nomination  which  does  not  include  the  above-mentioned  docu-
ments is considered incomplete unless other documents guiding the 
management of the property until the ﬁ nalization of the management 
plan are provided as outlined in paragraph 115. 

6.   Monitoring

States Parties shall include the key indicators proposed to measure and 
assess the state of conservation of the property, the factors affecting it, 
conservation measures at the property, the periodicity of their exami-
nation, and the identity of the responsible authorities.

7.   Documentation

All  necessary  documentation  to  substantiate  the  nomination  shall  be 
provided. In addition to what is indicated above, this shall include pho-
tographs, 35 mm slides, image inventory and photograph authorization 
form. The text of the nomination shall be transmitted in printed form as 
well as in electronic format (Diskette or CD-Rom).

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

64

8.   Contact Information of responsible authorities

Detailed  contact  information  of  responsible  authorities  shall  be  pro-
vided.

9.   Signature on behalf of the State Party

The nomination shall conclude with the original signature of the ofﬁ -
cial empowered to sign it on behalf of the State Party.

10.  Number of printed copies required

• 

 Nominations of cultural properties (excluding cultural landscapes): 
2 copies

•  Nominations of natural properties: 3 copies
•  Nominations of mixed properties and cultural landscapes: 4 copies

11.  Paper and electronic format

Nominations shall be presented on A4-size paper (or “letter”); and in 
electronic format (diskette or CD-ROM). At least one paper copy shall 
be presented in a loose-leaf format to facilitate photocopying, rather 
than in a bound volume.

12.  Sending

States Parties shall submit the nomination in English or French duly 
signed, to: 

 

 

 

 

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP
France
Tel: +33 (0) 1 4568 1136
Fax: +33 (0) 1 4568 5570
E-mail: wh-nominations@unesco.org

133. The Secretariat will retain all supporting documentation (maps, plans, 

photographic material, etc.) submitted with the nomination.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

65

III.C 

 Requirements for the nomination 
of different types of properties 

Transboundary properties

134. A nominated property may occur:

Decision 7 EXT.COM 4A

(a)  on the territory of a single State Party, or

(b)  on  the  territory  of  all  concerned  States  Parties  having  adjacent 

borders (transboundary property).

135. Wherever possible, transboundary nominations should be prepared 
and  submitted  by  States  Parties  jointly  in  conformity  with  Article 
11.3 of the Convention. It is highly recommended that the States Par-
ties  concerned  establish  a  joint  management  committee  or  similar 
body  to  oversee  the  management  of  the  whole  of  a  transboundary 
property.

136. Extensions to an existing World Heritage property located in one State 

Party may be proposed to become transboundary properties.

Serial properties

137. Serial  properties  will  include  component  parts  related  because  they 

belong to:

(a) 

the same historico – cultural group; 

(b) 

the same type of property which is characteristic of the geograph-
ical zone; 

(c) 

the same geological, geomorphological formation, the same bio-
geographic province, or the same ecosystem type;

 

and provided it is the series as a whole – and not necessarily the indi-
vidual parts of it – which are of outstanding universal value. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

66

138. A serial nominated property may occur:

Decision 7 EXT.COM 4A

(a)  on the territory of a single State Party (serial national property); 

or

(b)  within the territory of different States Parties, which need not be 
contiguous and is nominated with the consent of all States Parties 
concerned (serial transnational property) 

139. Serial nominations, whether from one State Party or multiple States, 
may  be  submitted  for  evaluation  over  several  nomination  cycles, 
provided that the ﬁ rst property nominated is of outstanding univer-
sal value in its own right. States Parties planning serial nominations 
phased over several nomination cycles are encouraged to inform the 
Committee of their intention in order to ensure better planning.

III.D  Registration of nominations

140. On  receipt  of  nominations  from  States  Parties,  the  Secretariat  will 
acknowledge receipt, check for completeness and register nominations. 
The  Secretariat  will  forward  complete  nominations  to  the  relevant 
Advisory Bodies for evaluation. The Secretariat will request any addi-
tional information from the State Party and when required by Advisory 
Bodies. The timetable for registration and processing of nominations is 
detailed in paragraph 168.

141. The Secretariat establishes and submits at each Committee session a list of 
all nominations received, including the date of reception, an indication 
of their status “complete” or “incomplete”, as well as the date at which 
they are considered as “complete” in conformity with paragraph 132.

Decisions 26 COM 14 and 
28 COM 14B.57

142. A nomination passes through a cycle between the time of its submis-
sion  and  the  decision  by  the  World  Heritage  Committee.  This  cycle 
normally lasts one and a half years between submission in February of 
Year 1 and the decision of the Committee in June of Year 2. 

III.E 

 Evaluation of nominations 
by the Advisory Bodies

143. The Advisory Bodies will evaluate whether or not properties nominated 
by States Parties have outstanding universal value, meet the conditions 
of integrity and/or authenticity and meet the requirements of protec-
tion  and  management.  The  procedures  and  format  of  ICOMOS  and 
IUCN evaluations are described in Annex 6.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

67

144. Evaluations  of  cultural  heritage  nominations  will  be  carried  out  by 

ICOMOS.

145. Evaluations  of  natural  heritage  nominations  will  be  carried  out  by 

IUCN.

146. In  the  case  of  nominations  of  cultural  properties  in  the  category  of 
“cultural  landscapes”,  as  appropriate,  the  evaluation  will  be  carried 
out by ICOMOS in consultation with IUCN. For mixed properties, the 
evaluation will be carried out jointly by ICOMOS and IUCN.

147. As requested by the World Heritage Committee or as necessary,  ICOMOS 
and IUCN will carry out thematic studies to evaluate proposed World 
Heritage properties in their regional, global or thematic context. These 
studies should be informed by a review of the Tentative Lists submitted 
by States Parties and by reports of meetings on the harmonization of 
Tentative Lists, as well as by other technical studies performed by the 
Advisory Bodies and qualiﬁ ed organizations and individuals. A list of 
those studies already completed may be found in section III of Annex 
3,  and  on  the  Web  addresses  of  the  Advisory  Bodies.  These  studies 
should not be confused with the comparative analysis to be prepared 
by States Parties in nominating properties for inscription on the World 
Heritage List (see paragraph 132).

ICOMOS: 
http://www.icomos.org/
studies/

IUCN: 
http://www.iucn.org/
themes/wcpa/pubs/
Worldheritage.htm

148. The following principles must guide the evaluations and presentations 

Decision 28 COM 14B.57.3

of ICOMOS and IUCN. The evaluations and presentations should:

(a)  adhere  to  the  World  Heritage  Convention  and  the  relevant 
 Operational Guidelines and any additional policies set out by the 
 Committee in its decisions;

(b)  be objective, rigorous and scientiﬁ c in their evaluations;

(c)  be conducted to a consistent standard of professionalism; 

(d)  comply to standard format, both for evaluations and presentations, 
to  be  agreed  with  the  Secretariat  and  include  the  name  of  the 
evaluator(s) who conducted the site visit;

(e) 

(f) 

indicate clearly and separately whether the property has outstand-
ing universal value, meets the conditions of integrity and/or authen-
ticity, a management plan/system and legislative protection;

evaluate  each  property  systematically  according  to  all  relevant 
criteria, including its state of conservation, relatively, that is, by 
comparison with that of other properties of the same type, both 
inside and outside the State Party’s territory;

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

68

(g) 

include references to Committee decisions and requests concern-
ing the nomination under consideration;

(h)  not take into account or include any information submitted by 
the  State  Party  after  31  March  in  the  year  in  which  the  nomi-
nation is considered. The State Party should be informed when 
information has arrived after the deadline and is not being taken 
into account in the evaluation. This deadline should be rigorously 
enforced; and

(i)  provide a justiﬁ cation for their views through a list of references 

(literature) consulted, as appropriate.

Decision 28 COM 14B.57.3

149. The  Advisory  Bodies  are  requested  to  forward  to  States  Parties  by 
31 January of each year any ﬁ nal question or request for information 
that they may have after the examination of their evaluation.

Decision 7 EXT.COM 4B.1

Decision 7 EXT.COM 4B.1

150. The concerned States Parties are invited to send, at least two working 
days before the opening of the session of the Committee, a letter to 
the  Chairperson,  with  copies  to  the  Advisory  Bodies,  detailing  the 
factual  errors  they  might  have  identiﬁ ed  in  the  evaluation  of  their 
nomination made by the Advisory Bodies. This letter will be distrib-
uted in the working languages to the members of the Committee and 
may  be  read  by  the  Chairperson  following  the  presentation  of  the 
evaluation.

151.  ICOMOS and IUCN make their recommendations under three categories:

(a)  properties which are recommended for inscription without res-

ervation;

(b)  properties which are not recommended for inscription;

(c)  nominations which are recommended for referral or deferral.

III.F  Withdrawal of nominations 

152. A  State  Party  may  withdraw  a  nomination  it  has  submitted  at  any 
time  prior  to  the  Committee  session  at  which  it  is  scheduled  to  be 
examined. The State Party should inform the Secretariat in writing of 
its intention to withdraw the nomination. If the State Party so wishes it 
can resubmit a nomination for the property, which will be considered 
as a new nomination according to the procedures and timetable out-
lined in paragraph 168.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

69

III.G 

  Decision of the World Heritage 
Committee

153. The  World  Heritage  Committee  decides  whether  a  property  should 
or  should  not  be  inscribed  on  the  World  Heritage  List,  referred  or 
deferred. 

Inscription

154. When deciding to inscribe a property on the World Heritage List, the 
Committee,  guided  by  the  Advisory  Bodies,  adopts  a  Statement  of 
 Outstanding Universal Value for the property.

155. The Statement of Outstanding Universal Value should include a sum-
mary  of  the  Committee’s  determination  that  the  property  has  out-
standing  universal  value,  identifying  the  criteria  under  which  the 
property was inscribed, including the assessments of the conditions of 
integrity or authenticity, and of the requirements for protection and 
management in force. The Statement of Outstanding Universal Value 
shall  be  the  basis  for  the  future  protection  and  management  of  the 
property.

156. At the time of inscription, the Committee may also make other recom-
mendations concerning the protection and management of the World 
Heritage property.

157. The Statement of Outstanding Universal Value (including the criteria 
for which a speciﬁ c property is inscribed on the World Heritage List) 
will be set out by the Committee in its reports and publications.

Decision not to inscribe

158. If  the  Committee  decides  that  a  property  should  not  be  inscribed 
on  the  World  Heritage  List,  the  nomination  may  not  again  be  pre-
sented to the Committee except in exceptional circumstances. These 
exceptional circumstances may include new discoveries, new scientiﬁ c 
information about the property, or different criteria not presented in 
the original nomination. In these cases, a new nomination shall be 
submitted. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

70

Referral of Nominations

159. Nominations which the Committee decides to refer back to the State 
Party for additional information may be resubmitted to the following 
Committee session for examination. The additional information shall 
be  submitted  to  the  Secretariat  by  1  February  of  the  year  in  which 
examination by the Committee is desired. The Secretariat will imme-
diately  transmit  it  to  the  relevant  Advisory  Bodies  for  evaluation.  A 
referred nomination which is not presented to the Committee within 
three years of the original Committee decision will be considered as a 
new nomination when it is resubmitted for examination, following the 
procedures and timetable outlined in paragraph 168.

Deferral of Nominations

160. The Committee may decide to defer a nomination for more in-depth 
assessment or study, or a substantial revision by the State Party. Should 
the State Party decide to resubmit the deferred nomination, it shall be 
resubmitted to the Secretariat by 1 February. These nominations will 
then be revaluated by the relevant Advisory Bodies during the course 
of the full year and a half evaluation cycle according to the procedures 
and timetable outlined in paragraph 168.

III.H 

 Nominations to be processed 
on an emergency basis

161. The normal timetable and deﬁ nition of completeness for the submis-
sion and processing of nominations will not apply in the case of prop-
erties  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  relevant  Advisory  Bodies,  would 
unquestionably meet the criteria for inscription on the World  Heritage 
List and which have suffered damage or face serious and speciﬁ c dan-
gers from natural events or human activities. Such nominations will be 
processed on an emergency basis and may be inscribed simultaneously 
on the World Heritage List and on the List of World Heritage in Danger 
(see paragraphs 177-191).

162. The procedure for nominations to be processed on an emergency basis 

is as follows:

(a)  A State Party presents a nomination with the request for process-
ing  on  an  emergency  basis.  The  State  Party  shall  have  already 
included, or immediately include, the property on its Tentative 
List. 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

71

(b)  The nomination shall:

(i)  describe and identify the property; 
(ii)   justify its outstanding universal value according to the criteria;
(iii) justify its integrity and/or authenticity;
(iv)  describe its protection and management system; 
(v)   describe  the  nature  of  the  emergency,  including  the  nature 
and extent of the damage or danger and showing that imme-
diate action by the Committee is necessary for the survival of 
the property.

(c)  The Secretariat immediately transmits the nomination to the rel-
evant Advisory Bodies, requesting an assessment of its outstand-
ing universal value, and of the nature of the emergency, damage 
and/or danger. A ﬁ eld visit may be necessary if the relevant Advi-
sory Bodies consider it appropriate;

(d) 

If  the  relevant  Advisory  Bodies  determine  that  the  property 
un questionably meets the criteria for inscription, and that the 
requirements (see (a) above) are satisﬁ ed, the examination of the 
nomination will be added to the agenda of the next session of the 
Committee.

(e)  When  reviewing  the  nomination  the  Committee  will  also  con-

sider: 
(i) 
(ii)   allocation of International Assistance to complete the nomi-

inscription on the List of World Heritage in Danger; 

nation; and

(iii)  follow-up missions as necessary by the Secretariat and the rel-

evant Advisory Bodies as soon as possible after inscription.

III.I 

 Modifications to the boundaries, to the 
criteria used to justify inscription or to 
the name of a World Heritage property

Minor modiﬁ cations to the boundaries

163. A minor modiﬁ cation is one which has not a signiﬁ cant impact on the 

extent of the property nor affects its outstanding universal value. 

164. If a State Party wishes to request a minor modiﬁ cation to the boundaries 
of  a  property  already  on  the  World  Heritage  List,  it  shall  submit  this 
by  1  February  to  the  Committee  through  the  Secretariat,  which  will 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

72

 

seek the advice of the relevant Advisory Bodies. The Committee can 
approve such modiﬁ cation, or it may consider that the modiﬁ cation 
to  the  boundary  is  sufﬁ ciently  important  to  constitute  an  extension 
of the property, in which case the procedure for new nominations will 
apply.

Signiﬁ cant modiﬁ cations to the boundaries

165. If a State Party wishes to signiﬁ cantly modify the boundary of a prop-
erty  already  on  the  World  Heritage  List,  the  State  Party  shall  submit 
this proposal as if it were a new nomination. This re-nomination shall 
be presented by 1 February and will be evaluated in the full year and 
a half cycle of evaluation according to the procedures and timetable 
outlined in paragraph 168. This provision applies to extensions, as well 
as reductions.

Modiﬁ cations to the criteria used to justify inscription
on the World Heritage List

166. Where a State Party wishes to have the property inscribed under addi-
tional or different criteria other than those used for the original inscrip-
tion, it shall submit this request as if it were a new nomination. This re-
nomination shall be presented by 1 February and will be evaluated in 
the full year and a half cycle of evaluation according to the procedures 
and timetable outlined in paragraph 168. Properties recommended will 
only be evaluated under the new criteria and will remain on the World 
Heritage List even if unsuccessful in having additional criteria recog-
nized.

Modiﬁ cation to the name of a World Heritage property

167. A State Party may request that the Committee authorize a modiﬁ cation 
to the name of a property already inscribed on the World Heritage List. 
A request for a modiﬁ cation to the name shall be received by the Secre-
tariat at least 3 months prior to the meeting of the Committee.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

73

III.J  Timetable – overview

168.  TIMETABLE 

PROCEDURES

30 September (before Year 1)

15 November (before Year 1)

1 February Year 1

1 February – 1 March Year 1

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

74

Voluntary deadline for receipt of draft nomina-
tions from States Parties by the Secretariat. 

Secretariat  to  respond  to  the  nominating  State 
Party concerning the completeness of the draft 
nomination, and, if incomplete, to indicate the 
missing information required to make the nomi-
nation complete.

Deadline by which complete nominations must 
be received by the Secretariat to be transmitted 
to the relevant Advisory Bodies for evaluation.

Nominations shall be received by 17h00 GMT, or, 
if the date falls on a weekend by 17h00 GMT the 
preceeding Friday. 

Nominations  received  after  this  date  will  be 
examined in a future cycle.

Registration,  assessment  of  completeness  and 
transmission to the relevant Advisory Bodies.

The  Secretariat  registers  each  nomination, 
acknowledges  receipt  to  the  nominating  State 
Party  and  inventories  its  contents.  The  Secre-
tariat  will  inform  the  nominating  State  Party 
whether or not the nomination is complete.

Nominations  that  are  not  complete  (see  para-
graph 132) will not be transmitted to the relevant 
Advisory Bodies for evaluation. If a nomination 
is incomplete, the State Party concerned will be 
advised of information required to complete the 
nomination by the deadline of 1 February of the 
following year in order for the nomination to be 
examined in a future cycle.

Nominations that are complete are transmitted 
to the relevant Advisory Bodies for evaluation.

1 March Year 1

Deadline  by  which  the  Secretariat  informs  the 
State  Party  of  the  receipt  of  a  Nomination, 
whether it is considered complete and whether 
it has been received by 1 February.

March Year 1 – May Year 2

Evaluation by the Advisory Bodies

31 January Year 2

31 March Year 2

Six weeks prior to the annual 
World Heritage Committee session Year 2

At least two working days before 
the opening of the annual World Heritage 
Committee session Year 2

If  necessary,  the  relevant  Advisory  Bodies  may 
request States Parties to submit additional infor-
mation during the evaluation and no later than 
31 January Year 2.

Deadline  by  which  additional 
information 
requested by the relevant Advisory Bodies shall 
be submitted by the State Party to them via the 
Secretariat. 

Additional information shall be submitted in the 
same number of copies and electronic formats as 
speciﬁ ed in Paragraph 132 to the Secretariat. To 
avoid confusing new and old texts, if the addi-
tional information submitted concerns changes 
to  the  main  text  of  the  nomination,  the  State 
Party shall submit these changes in an amended 
version  of  the  original  text.  The  changes  shall 
be clearly identiﬁ ed. An electronic version (CD-
ROM or diskette) of this new text shall accom-
pany the paper version.

The relevant Advisory Bodies deliver their evalu-
ations  and  recommendations  to  the  Secretariat 
for transmission to the World Heritage Commit-
tee as well as to States Parties.

Correction of factual errors by States Parties

The  concerned  States  Parties  can  send,  at  least 
two working days before the opening of the ses-
sion of the Committee, a letter to the Chairper-
son, with copies to the Advisory Bodies, detail-
ing the factual errors they might have identiﬁ ed 
in the evaluation of their nomination made by 
the Advisory Bodies.

Annual session of the World Heritage 
Committee (June/July) Year 2

The Committee examines the nominations and 
makes its decisions.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

75

Immediately following the annual 
session of the World Heritage Committee

Immediately following the annual 
session of the World Heritage Committee

Notiﬁ cation to the States Parties

The Secretariat notiﬁ es all States Parties whose 
nominations have been examined by the Com-
mittee  of  the  relevant  decisions  of  the  Com-
mittee.

Following  the  decision  of  the  World  Heritage 
Committee to inscribe a property on the World 
Heritage  List,  the  Secretariat  writes  to  the  State 
Party and site managers providing a map of the 
area  inscribed  and  the  Statement  of  Outstand-
ing Universal Value (to include reference to the 
criteria met).

The  Secretariat  publishes  the  updated  World 
Heritage  List  every  year  following  the  annual 
session of the Committee.

The name of the States Parties having nominated 
the  properties  inscribed  on  the  World  Heritage 
List are presented in the published form of the 
List under the following heading: “Contracting 
State  having  submitted  the  nomination  of  the 
property in accordance with the Convention”.

In the month following the closure 
of the annual session of the World Heritage 
Committee

The Secretariat forwards the published report of 
all the decisions of the World Heritage Commit-
tee to all States Parties.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

76

IV. 

 Process for monitoring the 
state of conservation 
of World Heritage properties

IV.A  Reactive Monitoring 

Deﬁ nition of Reactive Monitoring

169. Reactive  Monitoring  is  the  reporting  by  the  Secretariat,  other  sectors 
of  UNESCO  and  the  Advisory  Bodies  to  the  Committee  on  the  state 
of  conservation  of  speciﬁ c  World  Heritage  properties  that  are  under 
threat. To this end, the States Parties shall submit by 1 February to the 
Committee through the Secretariat, speciﬁ c reports and impact stud-
ies each time exceptional circumstances occur or work is undertaken 
which may have an effect on the state of conservation of the property. 
Reactive Monitoring is also foreseen in reference to properties inscribed, 
or to be inscribed, on the List of World Heritage in Danger as set out in 
paragraphs 177-191.Reactive Monitoring is foreseen in the procedures 
for the eventual deletion of properties from the World Heritage List as 
set out in paragraphs 192-198. 

Objective of Reactive Monitoring 

170. When  adopting  the  process  of  Reactive  Monitoring,  the  Committee 
was particularly concerned that all possible measures should be taken 
to prevent the deletion of any property from the List and was ready to 
offer technical co-operation as far as possible to States Parties in this 
connection. 

171. The  Committee  recommends  that  States  Parties  cooperate  with  the 
Advisory  Bodies  which  have  been  asked  by  the  Committee  to  carry 
out  monitoring  and  reporting  on  its  behalf  on  the  progress  of  work 
undertaken for the preservation of properties inscribed on the World 
Heritage List.

Article 4 of the Convention:
Each State Party to this 
Convention recognizes that 
the duty of ensuring the 
identiﬁ cation, protection, 
conservation, presentation 
and transmission to future 
generations of the cultural 
and natural heritage 
referred to in Articles 1 
and 2 and situated on its 
territory, belongs primarily 
to that State ... .

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

77

Information received from States Parties and/or other sources 

172. The World Heritage Committee invites the States Parties to the Conven-
tion to inform the Committee, through the Secretariat, of their inten-
tion to undertake or to authorize in an area protected under the Con-
vention major restorations or new constructions which may affect the 
outstanding universal value of the property. Notice should be given as 
soon as possible (for instance, before drafting basic documents for spe-
ciﬁ c projects) and before making any decisions that would be difﬁ cult 
to  reverse,  so  that  the  Committee  may  assist  in  seeking  appropriate 
solutions to ensure that the outstanding universal value of the prop-
erty is fully preserved.

173. The  World  Heritage  Committee  requests  that  reports  of  missions  to 
review  the  state  of  conservation  of  the  World  Heritage  properties 
include:

Decision 27 COM 7B.106.2

(a)  an indication of threats or signiﬁ cant improvement in the conser-
vation of the property since the last report to the World Heritage 
Committee; 

(b)  any follow-up to previous decisions of the World Heritage Com-

mittee on the state of conservation of the property;

(c) 

information  on  any  threat  or  damage  to  or  loss  of  outstanding 
universal value, integrity and/or authenticity for which the prop-
erty was inscribed on the World Heritage List.

174. When  the  Secretariat  receives  information  that  a  property  inscribed 
has  seriously  deteriorated,  or  that  the  necessary  corrective  measures 
have  not  been  taken  within  the  time  proposed,  from  a  source  other 
than  the  State  Party  concerned,  it  will,  as  far  as  possible,  verify  the 
source and the contents of the information in consultation with the 
State Party concerned and request its comments.

Decision by the World Heritage Committee

175. The  Secretariat  will  request  the  relevant  Advisory  Bodies  to  forward 

comments on the information received.

176. The  information  received,  together  with  the  comments  of  the  State 
Party and the Advisory Bodies, will be brought to the attention of the 
Committee in the form of a state of conservation report for each prop-
erty, which may take one or more of the following steps:

(a) 

it may decide that the property has not seriously deteriorated and 
that no further action should be taken;

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

78

(b)  when  the  Committee  considers  that  the  property  has  seriously 
deteriorated, but not to the extent that its restoration is impossible, 
it  may  decide  that  the  property  be  maintained  on  the  List,  pro-
vided that the State Party takes the necessary measures to restore 
the property within a reasonable period of time. The Committee 
may  also  decide  that  technical  co-operation  be  provided  under 
the World Heritage Fund for work connected with the restoration 
of the property, proposing to the State Party to request such assist-
ance, if it has not already been done; 

(c)  when the requirements and criteria set out in paragraphs 177-182 
are met, the Committee may decide to inscribe the property on the 
List of World Heritage in Danger according to the procedures set 
out in paragraphs 183-189;

(d)  when there is evidence that the property has deteriorated to the 
point  where  it  has  irretrievably  lost  those  characteristics  which 
determined its inscription on the List, the Committee may decide 
to  delete  the  property  from  the  List.  Before  any  such  action  is 
taken, the Secretariat will inform the State Party concerned. Any 
comments which the State Party may make will be brought to the 
attention of the Committee;

(e)  when  the  information  available  is  not  sufﬁ cient  to  enable  the 
Committee to take one of the measures described in a), b), c) or d) 
above, the Committee may decide that the Secretariat be author-
ized to take the necessary action to ascertain, in consultation with 
the State Party concerned, the present condition of the property, 
the  dangers  to  the  property  and  the  feasibility  of  adequately 
restoring  the  property,  and  to  report  to  the  Committee  on  the 
results  of  its  action;  such  measures  may  include  the  sending  of 
a  fact-ﬁ nding  or  the  consultation  of  specialists.  In  cases  where 
emergency action is required, the Committee may authorize the 
ﬁ nancing from the World Heritage Fund of the Emergency Assist-
ance that is required.

IV.B  The List of World Heritage in Danger

Guidelines for the inscription of properties on the List 
of World Heritage in Danger

177. In accordance with Article 11, paragraph 4, of the Convention, the Com-
mittee may inscribe a property on the List of World Heritage in Danger 
when the following requirements are met:

(a) 

the property under consideration is on the World Heritage List;

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

79

(b) 

the property is threatened by serious and speciﬁ c danger;

(c)  major  operations  are  necessary  for  the  conservation  of  the 

property; 

(d)  assistance under the Convention has been requested for the prop-
erty; the Committee is of the view that its assistance in certain 
cases may most effectively be limited to messages of its concern, 
including  the  message  sent  by  inscription  of  a  property  on  the 
List of World Heritage in Danger and that such assistance may be 
requested by any Committee member or the Secretariat. 

Criteria for the inscription of properties on the List 
of World Heritage in Danger

178. A  World  Heritage  property  -  as  deﬁ ned  in  Articles  1  and  2  of  the 
 Convention - can be inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger by 
the Committee when it ﬁ nds that the condition of the property corre-
sponds to at least one of the criteria in either of the two cases described 
below. 

179. In the case of cultural properties:

(a)  ASCERTAINED DANGER - The property is faced with speciﬁ c and proven 

imminent danger, such as: 
(i)  serious deterioration of materials; 
(ii)  serious  deterioration  of  structure  and/or  ornamental  fea-

tures;

(iii) serious deterioration of architectural or town-planning coher-

ence;

(iv)  serious deterioration of urban or rural space, or the natural 

environment;

(v)  signiﬁ cant loss of historical authenticity;
(vi)  important loss of cultural signiﬁ cance.

(b)  POTENTIAL DANGER - The property is faced with threats which could 
have  deleterious  effects  on  its  inherent  characteristics.  Such 
threats are, for example: 
(i)  modiﬁ cation of juridical status of the property diminishing 

the degree of its protection; 
(ii)  lack of conservation policy; 
(iii) threatening effects of regional planning projects; 
(iv)  threatening effects of town planning; 
(v)  outbreak or threat of armed conﬂ ict; 
(vi)  gradual changes due to geological, climatic or other environ-

mental factors. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

80

180. In the case of natural properties:

(a)  ASCERTAINED DANGER - The property is faced with speciﬁ c and proven 

imminent danger, such as: 
(i)  A serious decline in the population of the endangered species 
or the other species of outstanding universal value for which 
the property was legally established to protect, either by natural 
factors such as disease or by man-made factors such as poach-
ing. 

(ii)  Severe  deterioration  of  the  natural  beauty  or  scientiﬁ c  value 
of the property, as by human settlement, construction of res-
ervoirs which ﬂ ood important parts of the property, industrial 
and agricultural development including use of pesticides and 
fertilizers, major public works, mining, pollution, logging, ﬁ re-
wood collection, etc. 

(iii)  Human  encroachment  on  boundaries  or  in  upstream  areas 

which threaten the integrity of the property. 

(b)  POTENTIAL DANGER - The property is faced with major threats which 
could have deleterious effects on its inherent characteristics. Such 
threats are, for example:
(i)  a modiﬁ cation of the legal protective status of the area; 
(ii)  planned resettlement or development projects within the prop-

erty or so situated that the impacts threaten the property; 

(iii)  outbreak or threat of armed conﬂ ict; 
(iv)  the  management  plan  or  management  system  is  lacking  or 

inadequate, or not fully implemented. 

181. In  addition,  the  factor  or  factors  which  are  threatening  the  integrity 
of  the  property  must  be  those  which  are  amenable  to  correction  by 
human  action.  In  the  case  of  cultural  properties,  both  natural  factors 
and man-made factors may be threatening, while in the case of natural 
properties, most threats will be man-made and only very rarely a natural 
factor  (such  as  an  epidemic  disease)  will  threaten  the  integrity  of  the 
property. In some cases, the factors threatening the integrity of a prop-
erty may be corrected by administrative or legislative action, such as the 
cancelling of a major public works project or the improvement of legal 
status.

182. The Committee may wish to bear in mind the following supplemen-
tary  factors  when  considering  the  inclusion  of  a  cultural  or  natural 
property in the List of World Heritage in Danger:

(a)  Decisions  which  affect  World  Heritage  properties  are  taken  by 
Governments after balancing all factors. The advice of the World 
Heritage Committee can often be decisive if it can be given before 
the property becomes threatened.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

81

(b)  Particularly in the case of ascertained danger, the physical or cul-
tural deteriorations to which a property has been subjected should 
be judged according to the intensity of its effects and analyzed 
case by case.

(c)  Above all in the case of potential danger to a property, one should 

consider that:
(i)  the threat should be appraised according to the normal evo-
lution  of  the  social  and  economic  framework  in  which  the 
property is situated;

(ii)  it  is  often  impossible  to  assess  certain  threats  -  such  as  the 
threat of armed conﬂ ict - as to their effect on cultural or natu-
ral properties;

(iii) some  threats  are  not  imminent  in  nature,  but  can  only  be 

anticipated, such as demographic growth.

(d)  Finally, in its appraisal the Committee should take into account 
any cause of unknown or unexpected origin which endangers a 
cultural or natural property.

Procedure for the inscription of properties on the List 
of World Heritage in Danger

183. When considering the inscription of a property on the List of World 
Heritage in Danger, the Committee shall develop, and adopt, as far as 
possible, in consultation with the State Party concerned, a programme 
for corrective measures.

184. In order to develop the programme of corrective measures referred to 
in the previous paragraph, the Committee shall request the Secretar-
iat to ascertain, as far as possible in co-operation with the State Party 
concerned, the present condition of the property, the dangers to the 
property  and  the  feasibility  of  undertaking  corrective  measures.  The 
Committee may further decide to send a mission of qualiﬁ ed observers 
from the relevant Advisory Bodies or other organizations to visit the 
property, evaluate the nature and extent of the threats and propose the 
measures to be taken.

185. The information received, together with the comments as appropriate 
of  the  State  Party  and  the  relevant  Advisory  Bodies  or  other  organi-
zations,  will  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Committee  by  the 
 Secretariat.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

82

186. The  Committee  shall  examine  the  information  available  and  take 
a  decision  concerning  the  inscription  of  the  property  on  the  List  of 
World Heritage in Danger. Any such decision shall be taken by a major-
ity of two-thirds of the Committee members present and voting. The 
Committee will then deﬁ ne the programme of corrective action to be 
taken. This programme will be proposed to the State Party concerned 
for immediate implementation.

187. The State Party concerned shall be informed of the Committee’s deci-
sion and public notice of the decision shall immediately be issued by 
the Committee, in accordance with Article 11.4 of the Convention.

188. The Secretariat publishes the updated List of World Heritage in  Danger 
in  printed  form  and  is  also  available  at  the  following  Web  address: 
http://whc.unesco.org/en/danger

189. The  Committee  shall  allocate  a  speciﬁ c,  signiﬁ cant  portion  of  the 
World Heritage Fund to ﬁ nancing of possible assistance to World Herit-
age properties inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger.

Regular review of the state of conservation of properties on the List of 
World Heritage in Danger

190. The  Committee  shall  review  annually  the  state  of  conservation  of 
properties on the List of World Heritage in Danger. This review shall 
include such monitoring procedures and expert missions as might be 
determined necessary by the Committee.

191. On the basis of these regular reviews, the Committee shall decide, in 

consultation with the State Party concerned, whether:

(a)  additional measures are required to conserve the property;

(b) 

to delete the property from the List of World Heritage in Danger 
if the property is no longer under threat; 

(c) 

to  consider  the  deletion  of  the  property  from  both  the  List  of 
World Heritage in Danger and the World Heritage List if the prop-
erty has deteriorated to the extent that it has lost those character-
istics which determined its inscription on the World Heritage List, 
in accordance with the procedure set out in paragraphs 192-198.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

83

IV.C 

 Procedure for the eventual 
deletion of properties from 
the World Heritage List

192. The  Committee  adopted  the  following  procedure  for  the  deletion  of 

properties from the World Heritage List in cases: 

(a)  where the property has deteriorated to the extent that it has lost 
those characteristics which determined its inclusion in the World 
Heritage List; and 

(b)  where the intrinsic qualities of a World Heritage site were already 
threatened at the time of its nomination by action of man and 
where the necessary corrective measures as outlined by the State 
Party at the time, have not been taken within the time proposed 
(see paragraph 116). 

193. When  a  property  inscribed  on  the  World  Heritage  List  has  seriously 
deteriorated, or when the necessary corrective measures have not been 
taken within the time proposed, the State Party on whose territory the 
property is situated should so inform the Secretariat.

194. When  the  Secretariat  receives  such  information  from  a  source  other 
than  the  State  Party  concerned,  it  will,  as  far  as  possible,  verify  the 
source and the contents of the information in consultation with the 
State Party concerned and request its comments.

195. The  Secretariat  will  request  the  relevant  Advisory  Bodies  to  forward 

comments on the information received.

196. The Committee will examine all the information available and will take 
a decision. Any such decision shall, in accordance with Article 13(8) 
of  the  Convention,  be  taken  by  a  majority  of  two-thirds  of  its  mem-
bers present and voting. The Committee shall not decide to delete any 
property unless the State Party has been consulted on the question.

197. The  State  Party  shall  be  informed  of  the  Committee’s  decision  and 
public notice of this decision shall be immediately given by the Com-
mittee.

198. If  the  Committee’s  decision  entails  any  modiﬁ cation  to  the  World 
 Heritage List, this modiﬁ cation will be reﬂ ected in the next updated 
List that is published. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

84

V. 

  Periodic reporting on the implementation 
of the World Heritage Convention

V.A  Objectives

199. States Parties are requested to submit reports to the UNESCO General 
Conference through the World Heritage Committee on the legislative 
and  administrative  provisions  they  have  adopted  and  other  actions 
which they have taken for the application of the Convention, including 
the state of conservation of the World Heritage properties located on 
their territories.

Article 29 of the World 
Heritage Convention and 
Resolutions of the 11th 
session of the General 
Assembly of States Parties 
(1997) and the 29th session 
of the UNESCO General 
Conference.

200. States Parties may request expert advice from the Advisory Bodies and 
the Secretariat, which may also (with agreement of the States Parties 
concerned) commission further expert advice.

201. Periodic Reporting serves four main purposes:

(a) 

to provide an assessment of the application of the World Heritage 
Convention by the State Party; 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

to provide an assessment as to whether the outstanding universal 
value  of  the  properties  inscribed  on  the  World  Heritage  List  is 
being maintained over time;

to provide up-dated information about the World Heritage prop-
erties to record the changing circumstances and state of conserva-
tion of the properties;

to provide a mechanism for regional co-operation and exchange 
of information and experiences between States Parties concerning 
the implementation of the Convention and World Heritage conser-
vation.

202. Periodic Reporting is important for more effective long term conserva-
tion of the properties inscribed, as well as to strengthen the credibility 
of the implementation of the Convention.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

85

V.B 

Procedure and format

203. World Heritage Committee: 

Decision 22 COM VI.7 

(a)  adopted the Format and Explanatory Notes set out in Annex 7; 

(b) 

invited States Parties to submit periodic reports every six years;

(c)  decided to examine the States Parties’ periodic reports region by 

region according to the following table:

Region

Examination 
of properties 
inscribed up to 
and including

Year of Examination 

by Committee

Arab States

Africa

Asia and the Paciﬁ c

Latin America 
  and the Caribbean 
Europe and North
  America 

1992 

1993 

1994 

1995

December 2000

December 2001/
July 2002

June-July 2003

June-July2004

1996/1997

June-July 2005/2006

(d) 

requested  the  Secretariat,  jointly  with  the  Advisory  Bodies,  and 
making use of States Parties, competent institutions and expertise 
available within the region, to develop regional strategies for the 
periodic reporting process as per the timetable established under 
(c) above. 

204. The  above-mentioned  regional  strategies  should  respond  to  speciﬁ c 
characteristics of the regions and should promote co-ordination and 
synchronization  between  States  Parties,  particularly  in  the  case  of 
transboundary  properties.  The  Secretariat  will  consult  States  Parties 
with regard to the development and implementation of those regional 
strategies.

205. After  the  ﬁ rst  six-year  cycle  of  periodic  reports,  each  region  will  be 
assessed again in the same order as indicated in the table above. Fol-
lowing the ﬁ rst six-year cycle, there may be a pause for evaluation to 
assess and revise the periodic reporting mechanism before a new cycle 
is initiated.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

86

This Format was adopted 
by the Committee at 
its 22nd session (Kyoto 
1998) and may be revised 
following the completion 
of the ﬁ rst cycle of Periodic 
Reporting in 2006. For this 
reason, the Format has not 
been revised.

206. The Format for the periodic reports by the States Parties consists of two 

sections:

(a)  Section  I  refers  to  the  legislative  and  administrative  provisions 
which the State Party has adopted and other actions which it has 
taken for the application of the Convention, together with details of 
the experience acquired in this ﬁ eld. This particularly concerns the 
general obligations deﬁ ned in speciﬁ c articles of the Convention.

(b)  Section II refers to the state of conservation of speciﬁ c World Heritage 
properties located on the territory of the State Party concerned. This 
Section should be completed for each World Heritage property.

 

Explanatory Notes are provided with the Format in Annex 7.

207. In  order  to  facilitate  management  of  information,  States  Parties  are 
requested to submit reports, in English or French, in electronic as well 
as in printed form to: 

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP
France
+33 (0)1 45 68 15 71
Tel: 
Fax: 
+33 (0)1 45 68 55 70
E-mail:  wh-info@unesco.org

V.C 

Evaluation and follow-up 

208. The Secretariat consolidates national reports into Regional State of the 
World Heritage reports, which are available in electronic format at the 
following  Web  address  http://whc.unesco.org/en/publications  and  in 
paper version (series World Heritage Papers).

209. The  World  Heritage  Committee  carefully  reviews  issues  raised  in 
 Periodic Reports and advises the States Parties of the regions concerned 
on matters arising from them.

210. The  Committee  requested  the  Secretariat  with  the  Advisory  Bodies, 
in consultation with the relevant States Parties, to develop long-term 
follow-up  Regional  Programmes  structured  according  to  its  Strategic 
Objectives  and  to  submit  them  for  its  consideration.  These  should 
accurately reﬂ ect the needs of World Heritage in the Region and facilitate 
the granting of International Assistance. The Committee also expressed 
its support to ensure direct links between the Strategic Objectives and 
the International Assistance.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

87

VI. 

 Encouraging support for 
the World Heritage Convention

VI.A  Objectives

211. The objectives are:

Article 27 of the World 
Heritage Convention

(a) 

to enhance capacity-building and research;

(b) 

to raise the general public’s awareness, understanding and appre-
ciation of the need to preserve cultural and natural heritage;

(c) 

to enhance the function of World Heritage in the life of the com-
munity; and

Article 5(a) of the World 
Heritage Convention

(d) 

to increase the participation of local and national populations in 
the protection and presentation of heritage.

VI.B 

 Capacity-building and research

212. The  Committee  seeks  to  develop  capacity-building  within  the  States 

Parties in conformity with its Strategic Objectives.

Budapest Declaration on 
World Heritage (2002)

The Global Training Strategy

213. Recognizing the high level of skills and multidisciplinary approach nec-
essary for the protection, conservation, and presentation of the World 
Heritage,  the  Committee  has  adopted  a  Global  Training   Strategy  for 
World Cultural and Natural Heritage. The primary goal of the  Global 
Training  Strategy  is  to  ensure  that  necessary  skills  are  developed  by 
a  wide  range  of  actors  for  better  implementation  of  the   Convention. 
In order to avoid overlap and effectively implement the Strategy, the 
Committee will ensure links to other initiatives such as the Global Strat-
egy  for  a  Representative,  Balanced  and  Credible  World  Heritage  List 
and Periodic Reporting. The Committee will annually review  relevant 
training issues, assess training needs, review annual reports on training 
initiatives, and make recommendations for future training initiatives.

Global Training Strategy for 
World Cultural and Natural 
Heritage adopted by the 
World Heritage Committee 
at its 25th session (Helsinki, 
Finland, 2001) 
(see Annex X of document 
WHC-01/CONF.208/24).

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

89

National training strategies and regional co-operation

214. States  Parties  are  encouraged  to  ensure  that  their  professionals  and 
specialists at all levels are adequately trained. To this end, States Par-
ties are encouraged to develop national training strategies and include 
regional co-operation for training as part of their strategies.

Research

215. The Committee develops and coordinates international co-operation 
in the area of research needed for the effective implementation of the 
Convention. States Parties are also encouraged to make resources avail-
able  to  undertake  research,  since  knowledge  and  understanding  are 
fundamental  to  the  identiﬁ cation,  management,  and  monitoring  of 
World Heritage properties.

International Assistance

216. Training  and  Research  Assistance  may  be  requested  by  States  Parties 

from the World Heritage Fund (see Chapter VII).

VI.C  Awareness-raising and education

Awareness-raising

217. States Parties are encouraged to raise awareness of the need to preserve 
World Heritage. In particular, they should ensure that World Heritage 
status is adequately marked and promoted on-site.

218. The  Secretariat  provides  assistance  to  States  Parties  in  developing 
activities  aimed  at  raising  public  awareness  of  the  Convention  and 
informing  the  public  of  the  dangers  threatening  World  Heritage. 
The  Secretariat  advises  States  Parties  regarding  the  preparation  and 
implementation of on-site promotional and educational projects to 
be funded through International Assistance. The Advisory Bodies and 
appropriate State agencies may also be solicited to provide advice on 
such projects.

Education

219. The World Heritage Committee encourages and supports the develop-

ment of educational materials, activities and programmes.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

90

International Assistance

220. States Parties are encouraged to develop educational activities related to 
World Heritage with, wherever possible, the participation of schools, uni-
versities, museums and other local and national educational authorities.

Article 27.2 of the World 
Heritage Convention

221. The  Secretariat,  in  co-operation  with  the  UNESCO  Education  Sector 
and other partners, produces and publishes a World Heritage Educa-
tional Resource Kit, “World Heritage in Young Hands”, for use in sec-
ondary schools around the world. The Kit is adaptable for use at other 
educational levels.

“World Heritage in Young 
Hands” is available at the 
following Web address
http://whc.unesco.org/
education/index.htm

222. International Assistance may be requested by States Parties from the 
World  Heritage  Fund  for  the  purpose  of  developing  and  implement-
ing  awareness-raising  and  educational  activities  or  programmes  (see 
 Chapter VII).

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

91

VII.   The World Heritage Fund 

and International Assistance

VII.A  The World Heritage Fund

223. The  World  Heritage  Fund  is  a  trust  fund,  established  by  the  Conven-
tion in conformity with the provisions of the Financial Regulations of 
UNESCO. The resources of the Fund consist of compulsory and volun-
tary contributions made by States Parties to the Convention, and any 
other resources authorized by the Fund’s regulations.

Article 15 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

224. The ﬁ nancial regulations for the Fund are set out in document WHC/7 

available at the following Web address: 
http://whc.unesco.org/en/ﬁ nancialregulations

 

VII.B 

  Mobilization of other technical 
and financial resources and partnerships 
in support of the World Heritage Convention

225. To the extent possible, the World Heritage Fund should be used to mobi-

lize additional funds for International Assistance from other sources.

226. The Committee decided that contributions offered to the World Herit-
age  Fund  for  international  assistance  campaigns  and  other  UNESCO 
projects for any property inscribed on the World Heritage List shall be 
accepted and used as international assistance pursuant to Section V of 
the Convention, and in conformity with the modalities established for 
carrying out the campaign or project.

227. States Parties are invited to provide support to the Convention in addi-
tion to obligatory contributions paid to the World Heritage Fund. This 
voluntary support can be provided through additional contributions 
to the World Heritage Fund or direct ﬁ nancial and technical contribu-
tions to properties.

Article 15(3) of the World 
Heritage Convention

228. States  Parties  are  encouraged  to  participate  in  international  fund -
 raising  campaigns  launched  by  UNESCO  and  aimed  at  protecting 
World Heritage. 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

93

229. States Parties and others who anticipate making contributions towards 
these campaigns or other UNESCO projects for World Heritage prop-
erties are encouraged to make their contributions through the World 
Heritage Fund.

230. States Parties are encouraged to promote the establishment of national, 
public and private foundations or associations aimed at raising funds 
to support World Heritage conservation efforts.

Article 17 of the World 
Heritage Convention 

231. The Secretariat provides support in mobilizing ﬁ nancial and technical 
resources for World Heritage conservation. To this end, the Secretariat 
develops partnerships with public and private institutions in conform-
ity with the Decisions and the Guidelines issued by the World Heritage 
Committee and UNESCO regulations.

232. The Secretariat should refer to the “Directives concerning UNESCO’s 
co-operation  with  private  extra-budgetary  funding  sources”  and 
“Guidelines  for  mobilizing  private  funds  and  criteria  for  selecting 
potential  partners”  to  govern  external  fund-raising  in  favour  of  the 
World  Heritage Fund. These documents are available at the following 
Web address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/privatefunds 

VII.C  International Assistance

233. The Convention provides International Assistance to States Parties for 
the  protection  of  the  world  cultural  and  natural  heritage  located  on 
their  territories  and  inscribed,  or  potentially  suitable  for  inscription 
on the World Heritage List. International Assistance should be seen as 
supplementary  to  national  efforts  for  the  conservation  and  manage-
ment of World Heritage and Tentative List properties when adequate 
resources cannot be secured at the national level.

“Directives concerning 
UNESCO’s co-operation 
with private extra-
budgetary funding 
sources” (Annex to the 
Decision 149 EX/Dec.7.5) 

“Guidelines for mobilizing 
private funds and criteria 
for selecting potential 
partners” 
(Annex to the Decision 
156 EX/Dec.9.4) 

See Articles 13 (1&2) 
and 19-26 of the World 
Heritage Convention.

234. International Assistance is primarily ﬁ nanced from the World Heritage 
Fund, established under the World Heritage Convention. The Committee 
determines International Assistance on a biennal basis.

Section IV of the World 
Heritage Convention

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

94

235. The  World  Heritage  Committee  co-ordinates  and  allocates  types  of 
International  Assistance  in  response  to  State  Party  requests.  These 
types of International Assistance, described in the summary table set 
out below, in order of priority are:

(a)  Emergency assistance

(b)  Preparatory assistance

(c)  Training and research assistance 

(d)  Technical co-operation

(e)  Assistance for education, information and awareness raising.

VII.D    Principles and priorities 

for International Assistance

236. Priority is given to International Assistance for properties inscribed on 
the List of World Heritage in Danger. The Committee created a speciﬁ c 
budget line to ensure that a signiﬁ cant portion of assistance from the 
World Heritage Fund is allocated to properties inscribed on the List of 
World Heritage in Danger.

Article 13(1) of the World 
Heritage Convention.

237. States Parties in arrears of payment of their compulsory or voluntary 
contributions  to  the  World  Heritage  Fund  are  not  eligible  for  inter-
national assistance, it being understood that this provision does not 
apply to requests for emergency assistance. 

Decision 13 COM XII.34

238. To support its Strategic Objectives, the Committee also allocates Inter-
national Assistance in conformity with the priorities set out by Regional 
Programmes. These Programmes are adopted as follow up to Periodic 
Reports and regularly reviewed by the Committee based on the needs 
of States Parties identiﬁ ed in Periodic Reports (see chapter V). 

Decisions 26 COM 17.2, 
26 COM 20 and 26 COM 
25.3

239. In addition to the priorities outlined in paragraphs 236-238 above, the 
following considerations govern the Committee’s decisions in granting 
International Assistance:

(a) 

the likelihood that the assistance will have a catalytic and multi-
plier effect (“seed money”) and promote ﬁ nancial and technical 
contributions from other sources;

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

95

(b)  whether the International Assistance request is from a State Party 
which is a Least Developed Country or Low Income Country as 
deﬁ ned  by  the  United  Nations  Economic  and  Social  Council’s 
Committee for Development Policy;

(c) 

the urgency of the protective measures to be taken at World Herit-
age properties;

(d)  whether  the  legislative,  administrative  and,  wherever  possible, 
ﬁ nancial commitment of the recipient State Party is available to 
the activity;

(e) 

(f) 

the impact of the activity on furthering the Strategic Objectives 
decided by the Committee;

Paragraph 26

the  degree  to  which  the  activity  responds  to  needs  identiﬁ ed 
through  the  reactive  monitoring  process  and/or  the  analysis  of 
regional Periodic Reports; 

Decision 20 COM XII

(g) 

the exemplary value of the activity in respect to scientiﬁ c research 
and the development of cost effective conservation techniques;

(h) 

the cost of the activity and expected results; and

(i) 

the educational value both for the training of experts and for the 
general public.

240. A balance will be maintained in the allocation of resources to activities 
for cultural and natural heritage. This balance is reviewed and decided 
upon on a regular basis by the Committee.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

96

VII.E  Summary Table
241.

Type of 

inter national 

assistance

Emergency 
assistance

Preparatory 
assistance

Budget 
ceilings

Up to 
US$ 75,000 

Over 
US$ 75,000 

Deadline for 
submission 
of request

Authority for 

approval

At any time

Chairperson 
of the Committee 

1 February

Committee

Purpose

This assistance may be requested to address ascertained 
or  potential  threats  facing  properties  included  on 
the  List  of  World  Heritage  in  Danger  and  the  World 
Heritage List which have suffered severe damage or are 
in imminent danger of severe damage due to sudden, 
unexpected phenomena. Such phenomena may include 
land subsidence, extensive ﬁ res, explosions, ﬂ ooding or 
man-made disasters including war. This assistance does 
not concern cases of damage or deterioration caused 
by  gradual  processes  of  decay,  pollution  or  erosion. 
It  addresses  emergency  situations  strictly  relating  to 
the  conservation  of  a  World  Heritage  property  (see 
Decision 28 COM 10B 2.c). It may be made available, 
if necessary, to more than one World Heritage property 
in a single State Party (see Decision 6 EXT. COM 15.2). 
The  budget  ceilings  relate  to  a  single  World  Heritage 
property. 

The assistance may be requested to:
(i) 

 undertake  emergency  measures  for  the  safe-
guarding of the property; 

(ii)  draw up an emergency plan for the property.

Up to 
US$ 30,000 

At any time

Chairperson 
of the Committee

This assistance may be requested to:
(i) 

 prepare  or  update  national  Tentative  Lists  of 
properties  suitable  for  inscription  on  the  World 
Heritage List; 
 organize  meetings 
for  the  harmonization  of 
national  Tentative  Lists  within  the  same  geo-
cultural area;

(ii) 

(iii)   prepare  nominations  of  properties  for  inscription 
on  the  World  Heritage  List  (this  may  include 
the  preparation  of  a  comparative  analysis  of  the 
property in relation to other similar properties (see 
3.c of Annex 5);

(iv)   prepare 

requests 

research 
assistance and for technical co-operation for World 
Heritage properties.

training  and 

for 

Requests  by  States  Parties  whose  heritage  in  un-
represented or under-represented in the World Heritage 
List will be given priority for preparatory assistance.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

97

Budget 
ceilings

Up to 
US$ 30,000 

Over 
US$ 30,000

Deadline for 
submission 
of request

Authority for 

approval

At any time

Chairperson 
of the Committee

1 February

Committee

Up to 
US$ 30,000 

Over 
US$ 30,000 

At any time

Chairperson 
of the Committee

1 February

Committee

Up to 
US$ 5,000

Any time

Director 
of the World 
Heritage Centre

Between 
US$ 5,000 
and 
US$ 10,000

Any time

Chairperson 
of the Committee

Type of 

inter national 

assistance
Training 
and research 
assistance

Technical co-
operation 

Assistance 
for 
education, 
information 
and 
awareness 
raising

Purpose

This assistance may be requested for:
(i) 

 the training of staff and specialists at all levels in the 
ﬁ elds  of  identiﬁ cation,  monitoring,  conservation, 
management and presentation of World Heritage, 
with an emphasis on group training; 
 scientiﬁ c 
properties;

research  beneﬁ ting  World  Heritage 

(ii) 

(iii)   studies on the scientiﬁ c and technical problems of 
conservation,  management,  and  presentation  of 
World Heritage properties.

Note:  Requests  for  support  for  individual  training 
courses  from  UNESCO  should  be  submitted  on  the 
standard  “Aplication  for  fellowship”  form  available 
from the Secretariat.

This assistance may be requested for: 
(i) 

 provision of experts, technicians and skilled labour 
for the conservation, management, and presentation 
of properties inscribed on the List of World Heritage 
in Danger and the World Heritage List;
 supply of equipment which the State Party requires 
for the conservation, management, and presentation 
of properties inscribed on the List of World Heritage 
in Danger and the World Heritage List;

(ii) 

(iii)   low-interest  or  interest-free  loans  for  undertaking 
activities  for  the  conservation,  management,  and 
presentation  of  properties  inscribed  on  the  List  of 
World Heritage in Danger and the World Heritage List, 
which may be repayable on a long- term basis.

This assistance may be requested: 
(i) 

levels 

international 

for 
 At  the  regional  and 
Programmes, activities and the holding of meetings 
that could:
- 

 help to create interest in the Convention within 
the countries of a given region;
 create  a  greater  awareness  of  the  different 
issues  related  to  the  implementation  of  the 
Convention to promote more active involvement 
in its application;

- 

-  be a means of exchanging experiences;
- 

 stimulate  joint  education,  information  and 
promotional  programmes 
activities, 
especially  when  they  involve  the  participation 
of  young  people  for  the  beneﬁ t  of  World 
Heritage conservation.

and 

-    meetings  speciﬁ cally  organized  to  make  the 
Convention  better  known,  especially  amongst 
young  people,  or  for  the  creation  of  national 
World  Heritage  associations,  in  accordance 
with Article 17 of the Convention;
 preparation  and  discussion  of  education  and 
information material (such as brochures, publications, 
exhibitions, ﬁ lms, multimedia tools) for the general 
promotion of the Convention and the World Heritage 
List  and  not  for  the  promotion  of  a  particular 
property, and especially for young people.

-  

(ii)  At the national level for:

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

98

VII.F  Procedure and format 

242. All  States  Parties  submitting  requests  for  international  assistance  are 
encouraged to consult the Secretariat and the Advisory Bodies during 
the  conceptualization,  planning  and  elaboration  of  each  request.  To 
facilitate States Parties, examples of successful international assistance 
requests may be provided upon request.

243. The  application  form  for  International  Assistance  is  presented  in 
Annex  8  and  the  types,  amounts,  deadlines  for  submission  and  the 
authorities responsible for approval are outlined in the summary table 
in  Chapter VII.E.

244. The request should be submitted in English or French, duly signed and 
transmitted by the National Commission for UNESCO, the State Party 
Permanent Delegation to UNESCO and/or appropriate governmental 
Department or Ministry:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP
France
Tel: +33 (0) 1 4568 1276
Fax: +33 (0) 1 4568 5570
E-mail: wh-intassistance@unesco.org

245. Requests for international assistance may be submitted by electronic 
mail by the State Party but must be accompanied by an ofﬁ cially signed 
hard copy.

246. It is important that all information requested in this application form 
is provided. If appropriate or necessary, requests may be supplemented 
by additional information, reports, etc.

VII.G   Evaluation and approval 

of International Assistance requests

247. Provided that a request for assistance from a State Party is complete, 
the Secretariat, with the assistance of the Advisory Bodies, will process 
each request in a timely manner, as follows. 

248. All  requests  for  international  assistance  for  cultural  heritage  are 

Decision 13 COM XII.34

 evaluated by ICOMOS and ICCROM.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

99

249. All requests for international assistance for mixed heritage are evalu-

ated by ICOMOS, ICCROM and IUCN. 

250. All requests for international assistance for natural heritage are evalu-

ated by IUCN. 

251. The  evaluation  criteria  used  by  the  Advisory  Bodies  are  outlined  in 

Annex 9.

252. All  requests  for  the  approval  of  the  Chairperson  can  be  submitted 
at  anytime  to  the  Secretariat  and  approved  by  the  Chairperson  after 
appropriate evaluation.

253. The Chairperson is not authorized to approve requests submitted by 

his own country. These will be examined by the Committee.

254. All requests for the approval of the Committee should be received by 
the Secretariat on or before 1 February. These requests are submitted 
to the Committee at its next session.

VII.H  Contractual arrangements

255. Agreements are established between UNESCO and the concerned State 
Party or its representative(s) for the implementation of the approved 
International Assistance requests in conformity with UNESCO regula-
tions, following the work plan and budget breakdown described in the 
originally approved request.

VII.I 

 Evaluation and follow-up 
of International Assistance 

256. The  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  implemention  of  the  Inter-
national Assistance requests will take place within 12 months of the 
activities’ completion. The results of these evaluations will be collated 
and maintained by the Secretariat in collaboration with the Advisory 
Bodies and examined by the Committee on a regular basis. 

257. The  Committee  reviews  the  implementation,  evaluation  and  follow-
up  of  International  Assistance  in  order  to  evaluate  the  International 
Assistance effectiveness and to redeﬁ ne its priorities. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

100

VIII.  The World Heritage Emblem

VIII.A  Preamble

258. At  its  second  session  (Washington,  1978),  the  Committee  adopted 
the World Heritage Emblem, which had been designed by Mr. Michel 
Olyff.  This  Emblem  symbolizes  the  interdependence  of  cultural  and 
natural properties: the central square is a form created by man and the 
circle represents nature, the two being intimately linked. The Emblem 
is  round,  like  the  world,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  a  symbol  of  pro-
tection. It symbolizes the Convention, signiﬁ es the adherence of States 
 Parties to the Convention, and serves to identify properties inscribed 
in the World Heritage List. It is associated with public knowledge about 
the  Convention  and  is  the  imprimatur  of  the  Convention’s  credibility 
and prestige. Above all, it is a representation of the universal values for 
which the Convention stands.. 

259. The Committee decided that the Emblem proposed by the artist could 
be used, in any colour or size, depending on the use, the technical pos-
sibilities and considerations of an artistic nature. The Emblem should 
always carry the text “WORLD HERITAGE . PATRIMOINE MONDIAL”. 
The  space  occupied  by  “PATRIMONIO  MUNDIAL”  can  be  used  for 
its  translation  into  the  national  language  of  the  country  where  the 
Emblem is to be used.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

101

260. In order to ensure the Emblem beneﬁ ts from as much visibility as pos-
sible  while  preventing  improper  uses,  the  Committee  at  its  twenty-
second session (Kyoto, 1998) adopted “Guidelines and Principles for 
the  Use  of  the  World  Heritage  Emblem”  as  set  out  in  the  following 
paragraphs.

261. Although there is no mention of the Emblem in the Convention, its 
use has been promoted by the Committee to identify properties pro-
tected  by  the  Convention  and  inscribed  on  the  World  Heritage  List 
since its adoption in 1978.

262. The World Heritage Committee is responsible for determining the use 
of  the  World  Heritage  Emblem  and  for  making  policy  prescriptions 
regarding how it may be used.

263. As requested by the Committee at its 26th session (Budapest, 2002), the 
World Heritage Emblem, the “World Heritage” name and its derivatives 
are currently being registered under Article 6ter of the Paris  Convention 
for the Protection of Industrial Property and are therefore protected. 

Decision 26 COM 15

264. The Emblem also has fund-raising potential that can be used to enhance 
the marketing value of products with which it is associated. A balance 
is needed between the Emblem’s use to further the aims of the Conven-
tion and optimize knowledge of the Convention worldwide and the 
need to prevent its abuse for inaccurate, inappropriate, and unauthor-
ized commercial or other purposes. 

265. The Guidelines and Principles for the Use of the Emblem and modali-
ties for quality control should not become an obstacle to co-operation 
for  promotional  activities.  Authorities  responsible  for  reviewing  and 
deciding  on  uses  of  the  Emblem  need  parameters  on  which  to  base 
their decisions. 

VIII.B  Applicability 

266. The Guidelines and Principles proposed herein cover all proposed uses 

of the Emblem by:

(a)  The World Heritage Centre;

(b)  The UNESCO Publishing Ofﬁ ce and other UNESCO ofﬁ ces;

(c)  Agencies or National Commissions, responsible for implementing 

the Convention in each State Party;

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

102

(d)  World Heritage properties; 

(e)  Other  contracting  parties,  especially  those  operating  for  pre-

dominantly commercial purposes.

VIII.C  Responsibilities of States Parties

267. States Parties to the Convention should take all possible measures to 
prevent  the  use  of  the  Emblem  in  their  respective  countries  by  any 
group or for any purpose not explicitly recognized by the Committee. 
States Parties are encouraged to make full use of national legislation 
including Trade Mark Laws.

VIII.D  Increasing proper uses 

of the World Heritage Emblem

268. Properties inscribed on the World Heritage List should be marked with 
the emblem jointly with the UNESCO logo, which should, however, be 
placed in such a way that they do not visually impair the property in 
question. 

Production of plaques to commemorate 
the inscription of properties on the World Heritage List

269. Once a property is inscribed on the World Heritage List, the State Party 
should place a plaque, whenever possible, to commemorate this inscrip-
tion. These plaques are designed to inform the public of the country 
concerned and foreign visitors that the property visited has a particular 
value which has been recognized by the international community. In 
other words, the property is exceptional, of interest not only to one 
nation, but also to the whole world. However, these plaques have an 
additional  function  which  is  to  inform  the  general  public  about  the 
World Heritage Convention or at least about the World Heritage concept 
and the World Heritage List.

270. The  Committee  has  adopted  the  following  Guidelines  for  the  pro-

duction of these plaques: 

(a) 

the plaque should be so placed that it can easily be seen by  visitors, 
without disﬁ guring the property;

(b) 

the World Heritage Emblem should appear on the plaque;

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

103

(c) 

(d) 

the  text  should  mention  the  property’s  outstanding  universal 
value; in this regard it might be useful to give a short description 
of the property’s outstanding characteristics. States Parties may, 
if they wish, use the descriptions appearing in the various World 
Heritage publications or in the World Heritage exhibit, and which 
may be obtained from the Secretariat;

the text should make reference to the World Heritage Convention 
and  particularly  to  the  World  Heritage  List  and  to  the  interna-
tional recognition conferred by inscription on this List (however, 
it is not necessary to mention at which session of the Commit-
tee the property was inscribed); it may be appropriate to produce 
the text in several languages for properties which receive many 
 foreign visitors.

271. The Committee proposes the following text as an example: 

 

“(Name of property) has been inscribed upon the World Heritage List of 
the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural 
Heritage.  Inscription  on  this  List  conﬁ rms  the  outstanding  universal 
value of a cultural or natural property which deserves protection for 
the beneﬁ t of all humanity.”

272. This text could be then followed by a brief description of the property 

concerned. 

273. Furthermore, the national authorities should encourage World  Heritage 
properties to make a broad use of the Emblem such as on their letter-
heads, brochures and staff uniforms. 

274. Third parties which have received the right to produce communication 
products related to the World Heritage Convention and World Heritage 
properties must give the Emblem proper visibility. They should avoid 
creating a different Emblem or logo for that particular product. 

VIII.E   Principles on the use 

of the World Heritage Emblem

275. The responsible authorities are henceforth requested to use the follow-

ing principles in making decisions on the use of the Emblem:

(a)   The Emblem should be utilized for all projects substantially associ-
ated with the work of the Convention, including, to the maximum 
extent  technically  and  legally  possible,  those  already  approved 
and adopted, in order to promote the Convention.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

104

(b)  A decision to approve use of the Emblem should be linked strongly 
to the quality and content of the product with which it is to be 
associated, not on the volume of products to be marketed or the 
ﬁ nancial return expected. The main criterion for approval should 
be the educational, scientiﬁ c, cultural, or artistic value of the pro-
posed  product  related  to  World  Heritage  principles  and  values. 
Approval should not routinely be granted to place the Emblem on 
products that have no, or extremely little, educational value, such 
as cups, T-shirts, pins, and other tourist souvenirs. Exceptions to 
this policy will be considered for special events, such as meetings 
of the Committee and ceremonies at which plaques are unveiled.

(c)   Any decision with respect to authorizing the use of the Emblem 
must be completely unambiguous and in keeping with the explicit 
and implicit goals and values of the World Heritage Convention.

 
(d)  Except when authorized in accordance with these principles it is 
not legitimate for commercial entities to use the Emblem directly 
on  their  own  material  to  show  their  support  for  World  Herit-
age.  The  Committee  recognizes,  however,  that  any  individual, 
organization, or company is free to publish or produce whatever 
they consider to be appropriate regarding World Heritage proper-
ties, but ofﬁ cial authorization to do so under the World Heritage 
Emblem remains the exclusive prerogative of the Committee, to 
be exercised as prescribed in these Guidelines and Principles. 

(e)  Use  of  the  Emblem  by  other  contracting  parties  should  nor-
mally  only  be  authorized  when  the  proposed  use  deals  directly 
with World Heritage properties. Such uses may be granted after 
approval by the national authorities of the countries concerned. 

(f) 

In cases where no speciﬁ c World Heritage properties are involved 
or are not the principal focus of the proposed use, such as gen-
eral seminars and/or workshops on scientiﬁ c issues or conserva-
tion techniques, use may be granted only upon express approval 
in accordance with these Guidelines and Principles. Requests for 
such uses should speciﬁ cally document the manner in which the 
proposed use is expected to enhance the work of the Convention.

(g)  Permission  to  use  the  Emblem  should  not  be  granted  to  travel 
agencies, airlines, or to any other type of business operating for 
predominantly  commercial  purposes,  except  under  exceptional 
circumstances and when manifest beneﬁ t to the World Heritage 
generally or particular World Heritage properties can be demon-
strated. Requests for such use should require approval in accord-
ance with these Guidelines and Principles and the concurrence of 
the national authorities of countries speciﬁ cally concerned. 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

105

   

The Secretariat is not to accept any advertising, travel, or other 
promotional considerations from travel agencies or other, similar 
companies in exchange or in lieu of ﬁ nancial remuneration for 
use of the Emblem. 

(h)  When commercial beneﬁ ts are anticipated, the Secretariat should 
ensure that the World Heritage Fund receives a fair share of the 
revenues and conclude a contract or other agreement that docu-
ments the nature of the understandings that govern the project 
and  the  arrangements  for  provision  of  income  to  the  Fund.  In 
all cases of commercial use, any staff time and related costs for 
 personnel assigned by the Secretariat or other reviewers, as appro-
priate, to any initiative, beyond the nominal, must be fully  covered 
by the party requesting authorization to use the Emblem. 

National  authorities  are  also  called  upon  to  ensure  that  their 
properties or the World Heritage Fund receive a fair share of the 
revenues and to document the nature of the understandings that 
govern the project and the distribution of any proceeds. 

(i) 

If sponsors are sought for manufacturing products whose distri-
bution the Secretariat considers necessary, the choice of partner 
or partners should be consistent, at a minimum, with the criteria 
set  forth  in  the  “Directives  concerning  UNESCO’s  co-operation 
with  private  extra-budgetary  funding  sources”  and  “Guidelines 
for  mobilizing  private  funds  and  criteria  for  selecting  potential 
partners”  and  with  such  further  fund-raising  guidance  as  the 
Committee may prescribe. The necessity for such products should 
be clariﬁ ed and justiﬁ ed in written presentations that will require 
approval in such manner as the Committee may prescribe. 

“Directives concerning 
UNESCO’s co-operation 
with private extra-
budgetary funding sources” 
(Annex to the Decision 
149 EX/Dec. 7.5) and 
“Guidelines for mobilizing 
private funds and criteria 
for selecting potential 
partners” (Annex to the 
Decision 156 EX/Dec. 9.4) 

VIII.F   Authorization procedure for the use 

of the World Heritage Emblem

Simple agreement of the national authorities

276. National authorities may grant the use of the Emblem to a national 
entity,  provided  that  the  project,  whether  national  or  international, 
involves only World Heritage properties located on the same national 
territory. National authorities’ decision should be guided by the Guide-
lines and Principles.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

106

277. States  Parties  are  invited  to  provide  the  Secretariat  with  the  names 
and addresses of the authorities in charge of managing the use of the 
Emblem.  

Circular letter dated 14 
April 1999

http://whc.unesco.org/
circs/circ99-4e.pdf

Agreement requiring quality control of content

278. Any other request for authorization to use the Emblem should adopt 

the following procedure:

(a)  A  request  indicating  the  objective  of  the  use  of  the  Emblem, 
its  duration  and  territorial  validity,  should  be  addressed  to  the 
 Director of the World Heritage Centre.

(b)  The Director of the World Heritage Centre has the authority to 
grant the use of the Emblem in accordance with the Guidelines 
and Principles. For cases not covered, or not sufﬁ ciently covered, 
by the Guidelines and Principles, the Director refers the matter 
to the Chairperson who, in the most difﬁ cult cases, might wish 
to refer the matter to the Committee for ﬁ nal decision. A yearly 
report on the authorized uses of the Emblem will be submitted to 
the World Heritage Committee. 

(c)  Authorization to use the Emblem in major products to be widely 
distributed  over  an  undetermined  period  of  time  is  conditional 
upon obtaining the manufacturer’s commitment to consult with 
countries  concerned  and  secure  their  endorsement  of  texts  and 
images illustrating properties situated in their territory, at no cost 
to the Secretariat, together with the proof that this has been done. 
The text to be approved should be provided in either one of the 
ofﬁ cial  languages  of  the  Committee  or  in  the  language  of  the 
country concerned. A draft model to be used by States Parties to 
authorize the use of the Emblem to third parties appears below. 

Content Approval Form:

   

[Name of responsible national body], ofﬁ cially identiﬁ ed as the body 
responsible  for  approving  the  content  of  the  texts  and  photos  relating 
to  the  World  Heritage  properties  located  in  the  territory  of  [name  of 
country], hereby conﬁ rms to [name of producer] that the text and the 
images  that  it  has  submitted  for  the  [name  of  properties]  World  Her-
itage  property(ies)  are  [approved]  [approved  subject  to  the  following 
changes requested] [are not approved] 

   

(delete whatever entry does not apply, and provide, as needed, a corrected 
copy of the text or a signed list of corrections). 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

107

Notes:

It is recommended that the initials of the responsible national ofﬁ cial be 
afﬁ xed to each page of text. 

The National Authorities are given one month from their acknowledged 
receipt in which to authorize the content, following which the pro  ducers 
may  consider  that  the  content  has  been  tacitly  approved,  unless  the 
responsible National Authorities request in writing a longer period. 

Texts should be supplied to the National Authorities in one of the two 
ofﬁ cial  languages  of  the  Committee,  or  in  the  ofﬁ cial  language  (or  in 
one of the ofﬁ cial languages) of the country in which the properties are 
located, at the convenience of both parties. 

(d)  After having examined the request and considered it as accepta-
ble, the Secretariat may establish an agreement with the partner. 

(e) 

If  the  Director  of  the  World  Heritage  Centre  judges  that  a  pro-
posed use of the Emblem is not acceptable, the Secretariat informs 
the requesting party of the decision in writing. 

VIII.G  Right of States Parties 
to exert quality control

279. Authorization to use the Emblem is inextricably linked to the require-
ment that the national authorities may exert quality control over the 
products with which it is associated.

(a)  The States Parties to the Convention are the only parties author-
ized to approve the content (images and text) of any distributed 
product appearing under the World Heritage Emblem with regard 
to the properties located in their territories. 

(b)  States Parties that protect the Emblem legally must review these 

uses. 

(c)  Other  States  Parties  may  elect  to  review  proposed  uses  or  refer 
such proposals to the Secretariat. States Parties are responsible for 
identifying an appropriate national authority and for informing 
the Secretariat whether they wish to review proposed uses or to 
identify uses that are inappropriate. The Secretariat maintains a 
list of responsible national authorities. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

108

IX. 

Information sources

IX.A 

Information archived by the Secretariat

280. The  Secretariat  maintains  a  database  of  all  documents  of  the  World 
Heritage Committee and the General Assembly of States Parties to the 
World Heritage Convention. This database is available at the following Web 
address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/statutorydoc

281. The  Secretariat  ensures  that  copies  of  Tentative  Lists,  World   Heritage 
nominations,  including  copies  of  maps  and  relevant  information 
received from States Parties are archived in hard copy and in electronic 
format where possible. The Secretariat also arranges for the archiving of 
relevant information relating to inscribed properties, including evalu-
ations  and  other  documents  developed  by  the  Advisory  Bodies,  any 
correspondence  and  reports  received  from  States  Parties  (including 
Reactive  Monitoring  and  Periodic  Reports)  and  correspondence  and 
material from the Secretariat and World Heritage Committee.

282. Archived material will be kept in a form appropriate to long-term stor-
age. Provisions will be made for the storage of paper copies and elec-
tronic copies, as relevant. Provision will be made for copies to be pro-
vided to States Parties as requested.

283. Nominations of those properties inscribed on the World Heritage List 
by the Committee will be made available for consultation. States Par-
ties  are  urged  to  place  a  copy  of  the  nomination  on  their  own  Web 
addresses and inform the Secretariat of this action. States Parties pre-
paring nominations may wish to use such information as guides for 
identifying and elaborating nomination of properties within their own 
territories.

284. Advisory Body evaluations for each nomination and the decision of the 
Committee concerning each nomination are available at the following 
Web address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/advisorybodies

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

109

IX.B 

 Specific Information for World 
Heritage Committee members 
and other States Parties

285. The Secretariat maintains two electronic mailing lists: one for Commit-
tee  members  (wh-committee@unesco.org)  and  one  for  all  States  Par-
ties  (wh-states@unesco.org).  States  Parties  are  requested  to  supply  all 
appropriate e-mail addresses for the establishment of these lists. These 
electronic mailing lists, which supplement but do not replace the tra-
ditional means of notifying States Parties, allow the Secretariat to com-
municate, in a timely manner, announcements about the availability 
of documents, changes to meeting schedules, and other issues relevant 
to Committee members and other States Parties.

286. Circular letters to the States Parties are available at the following Web 

address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/circularletters

 

Another  Web  address,  linked  to  the  public  Web  address  through 
restricted access, is maintained by the Secretariat and contains speciﬁ c 
information targeted at Committee members, other States Parties and 
Advisory Bodies.

287. The Secretariat maintains also a database of decisions of the Commit-
tee and resolutions of the General Assembly of States Parties. These are 
available at the following Web addres: 
http://whc.unesco.org/en/decisions

 

Decision 28 COM 9

IX.C 

 Information and publications 
available to the public

288. The Secretariat provides access to information labelled as publicly avail-
able and copyright free on World Heritage properties and other  relevant 
matters, wherever possible.

289. Information  on  issues  related  to  World  Heritage  is  available  at  the 
 Secretariat’s  Web  address  (http://whc.unesco.org),  on  the  Web 
addresses of the Advisory Bodies and in libraries. A list of databases 
accessible on the web and links to relevant web addresses can be found 
in the  Bibliography. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

110

290. The Secretariat produces a wide variety of World Heritage publications, 
including the World Heritage List, the List of World Heritage in Dan-
ger,  Brief  Descriptions  of  World  Heritage  properties,  World  Heritage 
Papers series, newsletters, brochures and information kits. In addition, 
other information materials aimed speciﬁ cally at experts and the gen-
eral public are also developed. The list of World Heritage publications 
can  be  found  in  the  Bibliography  or  at  the  following  Web  address: 
http://whc.unesco.org/en/publications. 

 

These  information  materials  are  distributed  to  the  public  directly  or 
through the national and international networks established by States 
Parties or by World Heritage partners.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

111

Annexes
to the Operational Guidelines 
for the Implementation 
of the World Heritage Convention

Model Instrument of Ratiﬁ cation/Acceptance and Accession 

Annex 1

MODEL INSTRUMENT OF RATIFICATION / ACCEPTANCE

WHEREAS the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage 

was adopted on 16 November 1972 by the General Conference of UNESCO at its seventeenth 

session; 

NOW  THEREFORE  the  Government  of  ..................................................  having  considered  the  

aforesaid Convention, hereby     

[ratiﬁ es] 

  the same and undertakes faithfully to carry out  

 

 

[accepts] 

  the stipulations therein contained. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have signed and sealed this instrument. 

Done at ……………………  this ……………………  day of ……………  20…… .

(Seal) 

 

 

Signature of Head of State,

Prime Minister or 

Minister of Foreign Affairs

(cid:127)  The model instrument of ratiﬁ cation/acceptance is available from the UNESCO World Heritage Centre and at the 

following Web address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/modelratiﬁ cation.

•  The original signed version of the completed form should be sent, preferably with an ofﬁ cial translation in English 

or French, to: Director-General, UNESCO, 7 place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

115

Annex 1 

Model Instrument of Ratiﬁ cation/Acceptance and Accession

MODEL INSTRUMENT OF ACCESSION

WHEREAS  the  Convention  concerning  the  Protection  of  the  World  Cultural  and  Natural 

Heritage was adopted on 16 November 1972 by the General Conference of UNESCO at its 

seventeenth session; 

NOW  THEREFORE  the  Government  of  ..................................................  having  considered 

the aforesaid Convention, hereby accedes the same and undertake faithfully to carry out the 

stipulations therein contained. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have signed and sealed this instrument. 

Done at ……………………  this ……………………  day of ……………  20…… .

(Seal) 

 

 

Signature of Head of State,

Prime Minister or 

Minister of Foreign Affairs

•  The model instrument of accession is available from the UNESCO World Heritage Centre and at the following Web 

address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/modelratiﬁ cation.

•  The original signed version of the completed form should be sent, preferably with an ofﬁ cial translation in English 

or French, to: Director-General, UNESCO, 7 place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

116

Tentative List Submission Format 

Annex 2

TENTATIVE LIST SUBMISSION FORMAT

STATE PARTY: 

DATE OF SUBMISSION:

Submission prepared by:

Name: 
Address: 
Institution: 

E-mail:
Fax:
Telephone:

NAME OF PROPERTY:

State, Province or Region:

Latitude and Longitude, or UTM coordinates:

DESCRIPTION:

JUSTIFICATION FOR OUTSTANDING UNIVERSAL VALUE

Criteria met [see Paragraph 77 of the Operational Guidelines]:
(Please tick the box corresponding to the proposed criteria and justify the use of each below)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

Statements of authenticity and/or integrity [see Paragraphs 78-95 of the Operational Guidelines]:

Comparison with other similar properties: 

•  The Tentative List submission format is available from the UNESCO World Heritage Centre and at the following 

Web address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists.

•  Further  guidance  on  the  preparation  of  Tentative  Lists  can  be  found  in  Paragraphs  62-67  of  the  Operational 

Guidelines.

•  An example of a completed Tentative List submission format can be found at the following Web address: http://whc.

unesco.org/en/tentativelists.

•  All Tentative Lists submitted by States Parties are available at the following Web address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/

tentativelists.

•  The original signed version of the completed Tentative List submission format should be sent in English or French 

to: UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 7 place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France.

•  States Parties are encouraged to also submit this information in electronic format (diskette or CD-Rom) or by e-mail 

to wh-tentativelists@unesco.org.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

117

Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c types of properties on the World Heritage List 

Annex 3

GUIDELINES ON THE INSCRIPTION OF SPECIFIC TYPES 

OF PROPERTIES ON THE WORLD HERITAGE LIST1

INTRODUCTION

1.  This annex provides information on speciﬁ c types of properties to guide States Parties in pre-
paring  nominations  of  properties  for  inscription  on  the  World  Heritage  List.  The  following 
information constitutes guidelines that should be used in association with Chapter II of the 
Operational Guidelines, which contains the criteria for inscription of properties on the World Heritage 
List.

2.  The Committee has endorsed the ﬁ ndings of expert meetings on the subject of cultural land-

scapes, towns, canals and routes (Part I, below).

3.  The reports of other expert meetings requested by the World Heritage Committee, in the frame-
work of the Global Strategy for a representative, balanced and credible World Heritage List, are 
referred to in Part II.

4.  Part III lists various comparative and thematic studies prepared by the Advisory Bodies.

I.   CULTURAL LANDSCAPES, TOWNS, CANALS AND ROUTES

5.  The World Heritage Committee has identiﬁ ed and deﬁ ned several speciﬁ c types of cultural and 
natural properties and has adopted speciﬁ c guidelines to facilitate the evaluation of such proper-
ties when nominated for inscription on the World Heritage List. To date, these cover the follow-
ing categories, although it is likely that others may be added in due course:

(a)  Cultural Landscapes;
(b)  Historic Towns and Town Centres;
(c)  Heritage Canals;
(d)  Heritage Routes. 

1. 

 The Committee may develop additional guidelines for other types of properties in future years.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

119

Annex 3 

Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c types of properties on the World Heritage List

CULTURAL LANDSCAPES2

Deﬁ nition

6.  Cultural landscapes are cultural properties and represent the “combined works of nature and of 
man” designated in Article 1 of the Convention. They are illustrative of the evolution of human 
society and settlement over time, under the inﬂ uence of the physical constraints and/or oppor-
tunities presented by their natural environment and of successive social, economic and cultural 
forces, both external and internal. 

7.  They  should  be  selected  on  the  basis  both  of  their  outstanding  universal  value  and  of  their 
representativity in terms of a clearly deﬁ ned geo-cultural region and also for their capacity to 
illustrate the essential and distinct cultural elements of such regions.

8.  The term “cultural landscape” embraces a diversity of manifestations of the interaction between 

humankind and its natural environment.

9.  Cultural landscapes often reﬂ ect speciﬁ c techniques of sustainable land-use, considering the char-
acteristics and limits of the natural environment they are established in, and a speciﬁ c spiritual 
relation to nature. Protection of cultural landscapes can contribute to modern techniques of sus-
tainable land-use and can maintain or enhance natural values in the landscape. The continued 
existence  of  traditional  forms  of  land-use  supports  biological  diversity  in  many  regions  of  the 
world. The protection of traditional cultural landscapes is therefore helpful in maintaining bio-
logical diversity.

Deﬁ nition and Categories

10.  Cultural landscapes fall into three main categories, namely:

(i)  The most easily identiﬁ able is the clearly deﬁ ned landscape designed and created inten-
tionally by man. This embraces garden and parkland landscapes constructed for aesthetic 
reasons which are often (but not always) associated with religious or other monumental 
buildings and ensembles.

(ii)  The second category is the organically evolved landscape. This results from an initial social, 
economic, administrative, and/or religious imperative and has developed its present form by 
association with and in response to its natural environment. Such landscapes reﬂ ect that proc-
ess of evolution in their form and component features. They fall into two sub-categories:

- 

a relict (or fossil) landscape is one in which an evolutionary process came to an end at 
some time in the past, either abruptly or over a period. Its signiﬁ cant distinguishing 
features are, however, still visible in material form;

2. 

 This text was prepared by an Expert Group on Cultural Landscapes (La Petite Pierre, France, 24-26 October 1992) 
(see  document  WHC-92/CONF.202/10/Add).  The  text  was  subsequently  approved  for  inclusion  in  the  Opera-
tional Guidelines by the World Heritage Committee at its 16th session (Santa Fe 1992) (see document WHC-92/
CONF.002/12).

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

120

Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c types of properties on the World Heritage List 

Annex 3

- 

a  continuing  landscape  is  one  which  retains  an  active  social  role  in  contemporary 
society  closely  associated  with  the  traditional  way  of  life,  and  in  which  the  evolu-
tionary process is still in progress. At the same time it exhibits signiﬁ cant material 
evidence of its evolution over time.

(iii)  The  ﬁ nal  category  is  the  associative  cultural  landscape.  The  inscription  of  such  land-
scapes on the World Heritage List is justiﬁ able by virtue of the powerful religious, artistic or 
cultural associations of the natural element rather than material cultural evidence, which 
may be insigniﬁ cant or even absent.

Inscription of Cultural Landscapes on the World Heritage List

11.  The extent of a cultural landscape for inscription on the World Heritage List is relative to its 
functionality and intelligibility. In any case, the sample selected must be substantial enough to 
adequately represent the totality of the cultural landscape that it illustrates. The possibility of 
designating long linear areas which represent culturally signiﬁ cant transport and communica-
tion networks should not be excluded.

12.  General criteria for protection and management are equally applicable to cultural landscapes. It 
is important that due attention be paid to the full range of values represented in the landscape, 
both cultural and natural. The nominations should be prepared in collaboration with and the 
full approval of local communities.

13.  The existence of a category of “cultural landscape”, included on the World Heritage List on the 
basis of the criteria set out in Paragraph 77 of the Operational Guidelines, does not exclude the 
possibility of properties of exceptional importance in relation to both cultural and natural crite-
ria continuing to be inscribed (see deﬁ nition of mixed properties as set out in Paragraph 46). In 
such cases, their outstanding universal value must be justiﬁ ed under both sets of criteria.

HISTORIC TOWNS AND TOWN CENTRES3

Deﬁ nition and Categories

14.  Groups of urban buildings eligible for inscription on the World Heritage List fall into three main 

categories, namely:

(i) 

towns  which  are  no  longer  inhabited  but  which  provide  unchanged  archaeological  evi-
dence  of  the  past;  these  generally  satisfy  the  criterion  of  authenticity  and  their  state  of 
conservation can be relatively easily controlled;

3. 

 This text was included in the January 1987 version of the Operational Guidelines following the discussion by the 
Committee at its 8th session (Buenos Aires, 1984) of the conclusions of the Meeting of Experts to Consult on His-
toric Towns which met in Paris from 5 to 7 September 1984 organized by ICOMOS.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

121

Annex 3 

Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c types of properties on the World Heritage List

(ii)  historic towns which are still inhabited and which, by their very nature, have developed 
and will continue to develop under the inﬂ uence of socio-economic and cultural change, a 
situation that renders the assessment of their authenticity more difﬁ cult and any conserva-
tion policy more problematical;

(iii)  new towns of the twentieth century which paradoxically have something in common 
with both the aforementioned categories: while their original urban organization is clearly 
recognizable  and  their  authenticity  is  undeniable,  their  future  is  unclear  because  their 
development is largely uncontrollable.

Inscription of Historic Towns and Town Centres on the World Heritage List

15.  The signiﬁ cance of Historic Towns and Town Centres can be examined under the factors out-

lined below:

(i)  Towns no longer inhabited

 

The evaluation of towns that are no longer inhabited does not raise any special difﬁ culties 
other than those related to archaeological properties in general: the criteria which call for 
uniqueness or exemplary character have led to the choice of groups of buildings notewor-
thy for their purity of style, for the concentrations of monuments they contain and some-
times for their important historical associations. It is important for urban archaeological 
sites to be listed as integral units. A cluster of monuments or a small group of buildings 
is not adequate to suggest the multiple and complex functions of a city which has disap-
peared;  remains  of  such  a  city  should  be  preserved  in  their  entirety  together  with  their 
natural surroundings whenever possible.

(ii)  Inhabited historic towns

 

In the case of inhabited historic towns the difﬁ culties are numerous, largely owing to the 
fragility of their urban fabric (which has in many cases been seriously disrupted since the 
advent of the industrial era) and the runaway speed with which their surroundings have 
been urbanized. To qualify for inscription, towns should compel recognition because of 
their architectural interest and should not be considered only on the intellectual grounds 
of the role they may have played in the past or their value as historical symbols under 
criterion (vi) for the inscription of cultural properties on the World Heritage List (see Para-
graph 77 (vi) of the Operational Guidelines). To be eligible for inscription in the List, the 
spatial organization, structure, materials, forms and, where possible, functions of a group 
of buildings should essentially reﬂ ect the civilization or succession of civilizations which 
have prompted the nomination of the property. Four categories can be distinguished:

(a)  Towns which are typical of a speciﬁ c period or culture, which have been almost wholly 
preserved and which have remained largely unaffected by subsequent developments. 
Here the property to be listed is the entire town together with its surroundings, which 
must also be protected;

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

122

Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c types of properties on the World Heritage List 

Annex 3

(b)  Towns that have evolved along characteristic lines and have preserved, sometimes in 
the  midst  of  exceptional  natural  surroundings,  spatial  arrangements  and  structures 
that are typical of the successive stages in their history. Here the clearly deﬁ ned his-
toric part takes precedence over the contemporary environment;

(c)  “Historic  centres”  that  cover  exactly  the  same  area  as  ancient  towns  and  are  now 
enclosed within modern cities. Here it is necessary to determine the precise limits of 
the property in its widest historical dimensions and to make appropriate provision for 
its immediate surroundings;

(d)  Sectors, areas or isolated units which, even in the residual state in which they have 
survived, provide coherent evidence of the character of a historic town which has dis-
appeared. In such cases surviving areas and buildings should bear sufﬁ cient testimony 
to the former whole.

 

 

Historic centres and historic areas should be listed only where they contain a large number 
of ancient buildings of monumental importance which provide a direct indication of the 
characteristic features of a town of exceptional interest. Nominations of several isolated 
and  unrelated  buildings  which  allegedly  represent,  in  themselves,  a  town  whose  urban 
fabric has ceased to be discernible, should not be encouraged.

However, nominations could be made regarding properties that occupy a limited space but 
have had a major inﬂ uence on the history of town planning. In such cases, the nomina-
tion should make it clear that it is the monumental group that is to be listed and that the 
town is mentioned only incidentally as the place where the property is located. Similarly, 
if a building of clearly outstanding universal value is located in severely degraded or insuf-
ﬁ ciently  representative  urban  surroundings,  it  should,  of  course,  be  listed  without  any 
special reference to the town.

(iii)  New towns of the twentieth century

 

 

 

It is difﬁ cult to assess the quality of new towns of the twentieth century. History alone 
will tell which of them will best serve as examples of contemporary town planning. The 
examination of the ﬁ les on these towns should be deferred, save under exceptional circum-
stances.

Under present conditions, preference should be given to the inscription in the World Her-
itage  List  of  small  or  medium-sized  urban  areas  which  are  in  a  position  to  manage  any 
potential growth, rather than the great metropolises, on which sufﬁ ciently complete infor-
mation and documentation cannot readily be provided that would serve as a satisfactory 
basis for their inscription in their entirety. 

In view of the effects which the inscription of a town on the World Heritage List could have 
on its future, such entries should be exceptional. Inscription in the List implies that legisla-
tive and administrative measures have already been taken to ensure the protection of the 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

123

Annex 3 

Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c types of properties on the World Heritage List

group of buildings and its environment. Informed awareness on the part of the population 
concerned, without whose active participation any conservation scheme would be imprac-
tical, is also essential.

HERITAGE CANALS

16.  The concept of “canals” is discussed in detail in the Report of the Expert Meeting on Heritage 

Canals (Canada, September 1994)4.

Deﬁ nition 

17.  A canal is a human-engineered waterway. It may be of outstanding universal value from the 
point of view of history or technology, either intrinsically or as an exceptional example rep-
resentative  of  this  category  of  cultural  property.  The  canal  may  be  a  monumental  work,  the 
deﬁ ning feature of a linear cultural landscape, or an integral component of a complex cultural 
landscape. 

Inscription of Heritage Canals on the World Heritage List

18.  Authenticity depends holistically upon values and the relationships between these values. One 
distinctive feature of the canal as a heritage element is its evolution over time. This is linked 
to how it was used during different periods and the associated technological changes the canal 
underwent. The extent of these changes may constitute a heritage element. 

19.  The authenticity and historical interpretation of a canal encompass the connection between the 
real property (subject of the Convention), possible movable property (boats, temporary naviga-
tion items) and the associated structures (bridges, etc) and landscape. 

20.  The signiﬁ cance of canals can be examined under technological, economic, social, and land-

scape factors as outlined below: 

(i)  Technology

 

Canals can serve a variety of purposes: irrigation, navigation, defence, water-power, ﬂ ood 
mitigation, land-drainage and water-supply. The following are areas of technology which 
may be of signiﬁ cance: 

(a)  The lining and waterprooﬁ ng of the water channel; 
(b)  The engineering structures of the line with reference to comparative structural fea-

tures in other areas of architecture and technology;

4. 

 Expert  meeting  on  “Heritage  Canals»  (Canada,  15-19  September  1994)  (see  document  WHC-94/CONF.003/
INF.10)  discussed  by  the  World  Heritage  Committee  at  its  19th  session  (Berlin,  1995)  (see  document  WHC-95/
CONF.203/16).

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

124

Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c types of properties on the World Heritage List 

Annex 3

(c)  The development of the sophistication of construction methods; and
(d)  The transfer of technologies. 

(ii)  Economy
 
 

Canals contribute to the economy in a variety of ways, e.g. in terms of economic develop-
ment and the conveyance of goods and people. Canals were the ﬁ rst man-made routes for 
the effective carriage of bulk cargoes. Canals played and continue to play a key role in eco-
nomic development through their use for irrigation. The following factors are important:

Industrial development; 

(a)  Nation building; 
(b)  Agricultural development; 
(c) 
(d)  Generation of wealth; 
(e)  Development of engineering skills applied to other areas and industries; and 
(f)  Tourism. 

(iii)  Social factors

The building of canals had, and their operation continues to have, social consequences: 

(a)  The redistribution of wealth with social and cultural results; and
(b)  The movement of people and the interaction of cultural groups. 

(iv)  Landscape

 

Such large-scale engineering works had and continue to have an impact on the natural land-
scape. Related industrial activity and changing settlement patterns cause visible changes to 
landscape forms and patterns.

HERITAGE ROUTES

21.  The concept of “routes” or cultural itineraries was discussed by the expert meeting on “Routes 

as a Part of our Cultural Heritage” (Madrid, Spain, November 1994)5.

Deﬁ nition

22.  The concept of heritage routes is shown to be a rich and fertile one, offering a privileged frame-
work in which mutual understanding, a plural approach to history and a culture of peace can 
all operate.

5. 

 Expert  Meeting  on  “Routes  as  part  of  Our  Cultural  Heritage”  (Madrid,  24-25  November  1994)  (see  document 
WHC-94/CONF.003/INF.13)  discussed  by  the  World  Heritage  Committee  at  its  19th  session  (Berlin,  1995)  (see 
 document WHC-95/CONF.203/16).

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

125

Annex 3 

Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c types of properties on the World Heritage List

23.  A heritage route is composed of tangible elements of which the cultural signiﬁ cance comes from 
exchanges and a multi-dimensional dialogue across countries or regions, and that illustrate the 
interaction of movement, along the route, in space and time.

Inscription of Heritage Routes on the World Heritage List 

24.  The following points should be considered when determining whether a heritage route is suit-

able for inscription on the World Heritage List:

(i)  The requirement to hold outstanding universal value should be recalled.

(ii)  The concept of heritage routes:

- 

- 

- 
- 

is based on the dynamics of movement and the idea of exchanges, with continuity 
in space and time;
refers to a whole, where the route has a worth over and above the sum of the elements 
making it up and through which it gains its cultural signiﬁ cance;
highlights exchange and dialogue between countries or between regions;
is multi-dimensional, with different aspects developing and adding to its prime pur-
pose which may be religious, commercial, administrative or otherwise.

(iii)  A heritage route may be considered as a speciﬁ c, dynamic type of cultural landscape, just 

as recent debates have led to their acceptance within the Operational Guidelines.

(iv)  The identiﬁ cation of a heritage route is based on a collection of strengths and tangible ele-

ments, testimony to the signiﬁ cance of the route itself.

(v)  The  conditions  of  authenticity  are  to  be  applied  on  the  grounds  of  its  signiﬁ cance  and 
other elements making up the heritage route. It will take into account the duration of the 
route, and perhaps how often it is used nowadays, as well as the legitimate wishes for devel-
opment of peoples affected.

 

These points will be considered within the natural framework of the route and its intangible and 
symbolic dimensions.

II.  REPORTS OF REGIONAL AND THEMATIC EXPERT MEETINGS

25.  The World Heritage Committee, in the framework of the Global Strategy for a representative, bal-
anced and credible World Heritage List has requested a number of regional and thematic expert 
meetings on different types of properties. The results of these meetings may guide States Parties 
in preparing nominations. The reports of the expert meetings presented to the World Heritage 
Committee are available at the following Web address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/globalstrategy

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

126

Guidelines on the inscription of speciﬁ c types of properties on the World Heritage List 

Annex 3

III.  THEMATIC AND COMPARATIVE STUDIES BY THE ADVISORY BODIES

26.  To fulﬁ l their obligations concerning evaluations of nominations of cultural and natural proper-
ties, the Advisory Bodies have undertaken comparative and thematic studies, often with partner 
organizations, in different subject areas in order to provide a context for their evaluations. These 
reports, most of which are available on their respective Web addresses, include:
Earth’s Geological History - A Contextual Framework for Assessment of World Heritage Fossil 
Site Nominations (September 1996)

International Canal Monuments List (1996)
http://www.icomos.org/studies/canals-toc.htm

World Heritage Bridges (1996)
http://www.icomos.org/studies/bridges.htm

A Global Overview of Forest Protected Areas on the World Heritage List (September 1997)
http://www.unep-wcmc.org/wh/reviews/forests/

A Global Overview of Wetland and Marine Protected Areas on the World Heritage List (September 1997)
http://www.unep-wcmc.org/wh/reviews/wetlands/

Human Use of World Heritage Natural Sites (September 1997)
http://www.unep-wcmc.org/wh/reviews/human/

Fossil Hominid Sites (1997)
http://www.icomos.org/studies/hominid.htm

The Urban Architectural Heritage of Latin America (1998)
http://www.icomos.org/studies/latin-towns.htm

Les Théâtres et les Amphithéâtres antiques (1999)
http://www.icomos.org/studies/theatres.htm

Railways as World Heritage Sites (1999)
http://www.icomos.org/studies/railways.htm

A Global Overview of Protected Areas on the World Heritage List of Particular
Importance for Biodiversity (November 2000)
http://www.unep-wcmc.org/wh/reviews/

Les villages ouvriers comme éléments du patrimoine de l’industrie (2001)
http://www.icomos.org/studies/villages-ouvriers.htm

A Global Strategy for Geological World Heritage (February 2002)

Rock-Art Sites of Southern Africa (2002)
http://www.icomos.org/studies/sarockart.htm

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

127

Authenticity in relation to the World Heritage Convention 

Annex  4

AUTHENTICITY IN RELATION 

TO THE WORLD HERITAGE CONVENTION

INTRODUCTION

This Annex reproduces the Nara Document on Authenticity, drafted by the 45 participants to the Nara 
Conference on Authenticity in Relation to the World Heritage Convention, held at Nara, Japan, from 
1-6 November 1994. The Nara Conference was organized in co-operation with UNESCO, ICCROM 
and ICOMOS. 

The World Heritage Committee examined the report of the Nara meeting on Authenticity at its 18th 
session (Phuket, Thailand, 1994) (see document WHC-94/CONF.003/16).

Subsequent  expert  meetings  have  enriched  the  concept  of  authenticity  in  relation  to  the  World 
Heritage Convention (see Bibliography of the Operational Guidelines).

I.  THE NARA DOCUMENT ON AUTHENTICITY

Preamble

1. 

2.  

3.  

4. 

 We, the experts assembled in Nara (Japan), wish to acknowledge the generous spirit and intellectual 
courage  of  the  Japanese  authorities  in  providing  a  timely  forum  in  which  we  could  challenge 
conventional  thinking  in  the  conservation  ﬁ eld,  and  debate  ways  and  means  of  broadening  our 
horizons to bring greater respect for cultural and heritage diversity to conservation practice. 

 We  also  wish  to  acknowledge  the  value  of  the  framework  for  discussion  provided  by  the  World 
Heritage Committee’s desire to apply the test of authenticity in ways which accord full respect to the 
social and cultural values of all societies, in examining the outstanding universal value of cultural 
properties proposed for the World Heritage List.

 The Nara Document on Authenticity is conceived in the spirit of the Charter of Venice, 1964, and 
builds on it and extends it in response to the expanding scope of cultural heritage concerns and 
interests in our contemporary world. 

 In  a  world  that  is  increasingly  subject  to  the  forces  of  globalization  and  homogenization,  and 
in  a  world  in  which  the  search  for  cultural  identity  is  sometimes  pursued  through  aggressive 
nationalism and the suppression of the cultures of minorities, the essential contribution made by 
the consideration of authenticity in conservation practice is to clarify and illuminate the collective 
memory of humanity.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

129

Annex 4 

Authenticity in relation to the World Heritage Convention

Cultural Diversity and Heritage Diversity

5. 

6. 

7.  

8.  

 The  diversity  of  cultures  and  heritage  in  our  world  is  an  irreplaceable  source  of  spiritual  and 
intellectual richness for all humankind. The protection and enhancement of cultural and heritage 
diversity in our world should be actively promoted as an essential aspect of human development.

 Cultural heritage diversity exists in time and space, and demands respect for other cultures and all 
aspects of their belief systems. In cases where cultural values appear to be in conﬂ ict, respect for 
cultural diversity demands acknowledgment of the legitimacy of the cultural values of all parties.

 All cultures and societies are rooted in the particular forms and means of tangible and intangible 
expression which constitute their heritage, and these should be respected.

 It  is  important  to  underline  a  fundamental  principle  of  UNESCO,  to  the  effect  that  the  cultural 
heritage of each is the cultural heritage of all. Responsibility for cultural heritage and the management 
of it belongs, in the ﬁ rst place, to the cultural community that has generated it, and subsequently to 
that which cares for it. However, in addition to these responsibilities, adherence to the international 
charters and conventions developed for conservation of cultural heritage also obliges consideration 
of  the  principles  and  responsibilities  ﬂ owing  from  them.  Balancing  their  own  requirements  with 
those of other cultural communities is, for each community, highly desirable, provided achieving this 
balance does not undermine their fundamental cultural values.

Values and authenticity

9.  

 Conservation  of  cultural  heritage  in  all  its  forms  and  historical  periods  is  rooted  in  the  values 
attributed to the heritage. Our ability to understand these values depends, in part, on the degree 
to  which  information  sources  about  these  values  may  be  understood  as  credible  or  truthful. 
Knowledge and understanding of these sources of information, in relation to original and subsequent 
characteristics  of  the  cultural  heritage,  and  their  meaning,  is  a  requisite  basis  for  assessing  all 
aspects of authenticity.

10.   Authenticity, considered in this way and afﬁ rmed in the Charter of Venice, appears as the essential 
qualifying factor concerning values. The understanding of authenticity plays a fundamental role 
in all scientiﬁ c studies of the cultural heritage, in conservation and restoration planning, as well 
as within the inscription procedures used for the World Heritage Convention and other cultural 
heritage inventories.

11.  

 All judgements about values attributed to cultural properties as well as the credibility of related 
information sources may differ from culture to culture, and even within the same culture. It is thus 
not possible to base judgements of values and authenticity within ﬁ xed criteria. On the contrary, 
the  respect  due  to  all  cultures  requires  that  heritage  properties  must  be  considered  and  judged 
within the cultural contexts to which they belong.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

130

Authenticity in relation to the World Heritage Convention 

Annex  4

12.  

13. 

 Therefore, it is of the highest importance and urgency that, within each culture, recognition be 
accorded to the speciﬁ c nature of its heritage values and the credibility and truthfulness of related 
information sources.

 Depending on the nature of the cultural heritage, its cultural context, and its evolution through time, 
authenticity judgements may be linked to the worth of a great variety of sources of information. 
Aspects of the sources may include form and design, materials and substance, use and function, 
traditions  and  techniques,  location  and  setting,  and  spirit  and  feeling,  and  other  internal  and 
external factors. The use of these sources permits elaboration of the speciﬁ c artistic, historic, social, 
and scientiﬁ c dimensions of the cultural heritage being examined.

Appendix 1: Suggestions for follow-up (proposed by Herb Stovel)

1. 

2. 

 

 

 

 

3. 

4. 

 Respect for cultural and heritage diversity requires conscious efforts to avoid imposing mechanistic 
formulae or standardized procedures in attempting to deﬁ ne or determine authenticity of particular 
monuments and sites. 

 Efforts to determine authenticity in a manner respectful of cultures and heritage diversity requires 
approaches which encourage cultures to develop analytical processes and tools speciﬁ c to their nature 
and needs. Such approaches may have several aspects in common: 

-    efforts  to  ensure  assessment  of  authenticity  involve  multidisciplinary  collaboration  and  the 

appropriate utilisation of all available expertise and knowledge;

-    efforts to ensure attributed values are truly representative of a culture and the diversity of its 

interests, in particular monuments and sites;

-    efforts to document clearly the particular nature of authenticity for monuments and sites as a 

practical guide to future treatment and monitoring;

-    efforts to update authenticity assessments in light of changing values and circumstances.

 Particularly  important  are  efforts  to  ensure  that  attributed  values  are  respected,  and  that  their 
determination  included  efforts  to  build,  as  far  as  possible,  a  multidisciplinary  and  community 
consensus concerning these values. 

 Approaches should also build on and facilitate international co-operation among all those with an 
interest in conservation of cultural heritage, in order to improve global respect and understanding for 
the diverse expressions and values of each culture. 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

131

Annex 4 

Authenticity in relation to the World Heritage Convention

5. 

6. 

 Continuation and extension of this dialogue to the various regions and cultures of the world is a 
prerequisite to increasing the practical value of consideration of authenticity in the conservation of 
the common heritage of humankind. 

 Increasing awareness within the public of this fundamental dimension of heritage is an absolute 
necessity in order to arrive at concrete measures for safeguarding the vestiges of the past. This means 
developing greater understanding of the values represented by the cultural properties themselves, as 
well as respecting the role such monuments and sites play in contemporary society. 

Appendix 2: Deﬁ nitions

Conservation: all efforts designed to understand cultural heritage, know its history and meaning, ensure 
its material safeguard and, as required, its presentation, restoration and enhancement. (Cultural heritage 
is understood to include monuments, groups of buildings and sites of cultural value as deﬁ ned in Article 
1 of the World Heritage Convention). 

Information sources: all material, written, oral and ﬁ gurative sources which make it possible to know the 
nature, speciﬁ cations, meaning and history of the cultural heritage.

II.  CHRONOLOGICAL BIBLIOGRAPHY - ON AUTHENTICITY

Publications  which  preceded  the  Nara  meeting  and  which  helped  prepare  the  ground  for  the 
authenticity discussion which took place in Nara:

Larsen, Knut Einar, A note on the authenticity of historic timber buildings with particular reference to Japan, 
Occasional Papers for the World Heritage Convention, ICOMOS, December 1992.

Larsen,  Knut  Einar,  Authenticity  and  Reconstruction:  Architectural  Preservation  in  Japan,  Norwegian 
Institute of Technology, Vols. 1-2, 1993.

Preparatory meeting for the Nara Meeting, held in Bergen, Norway, 31 January - 1 February 1994: 

Larsen, Knut Einar and Marstein, Nils (ed.), Conference on authenticity in relation to the World Heritage 
Convention  Preparatory  workshop,  Bergen,  Norway,  31  January  -  2  February  1994,  Tapir  Forlag, 
Trondheim 1994.

The Nara meeting, 1-6 November 1994, Nara, Japan: 

Larsen, Knut Einar with an editorial group (Jokilehto, Lemaire, Masuda, Marstein, Stovel), Nara conference 
on authenticity in relation to the World Heritage Convention. Conférence de Nara sur l’authenticité dans le cadre 
de  la  Convention  du  Patrimoine  Mondial.  Nara,  Japan,  1-6  November  1994,  Proceedings  published  by 
UNESCO - World Heritage Centre, Agency for Cultural Affairs of Japan, ICCROM and ICOMOS, 1994.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

132

Authenticity in relation to the World Heritage Convention 

Annex  4

The Nara meeting brought together 45 experts from 26 countries and international organizations 
from around the world. Their papers are contained in the volume cited above, as is the Nara document 
prepared in a working group of 12 meeting participants and edited by Raymond Lemaire and Herb 
Stovel. This volume of Proceedings invites members of ICOMOS and others to extend the discussions 
of the Nara Document issues to other regions of the world. 

Signiﬁ cant post-Nara regional meetings (as of January 2005):

Authenticity and Monitoring, October 17-22, 1995, Cesky Krumlov, Czech Republic, ICOMOS European 
Conference, 1995.

The  European  ICOMOS  Conference  of  17-22  October,  1995  which  took  place  in  Cesky  Krumlov, 
Czech Republic brought together 18 European members of ICOMOS to present national views of 
the  application  of  authenticity  concepts  from  14  countries.  A  synthesis  of  presentations  afﬁ rmed 
the importance of authenticity  within the analytical processes we apply to conservation problems 
as a means of assuring  truthful, sincere and honest approaches to conservation problems, and gave 
emphasis to strengthening the notion of dynamic conservation in order to apply authenticity analysis 
appropriately to cultural landscapes and urban settings.

Interamerican symposium on authenticity in the conservation and management of the cultural heritage, US/
ICOMOS, The Getty Conservation Institute, San Antonio, Texas 1996.

This Authenticity meeting which took place in San Antonio, Texas, USA in March 1996, brought 
together participants from ICOMOS national committees of North, Central and South America to 
debate the application of the concepts of Nara. The meeting adopted the Declaration of San Antonio, 
which discussed the relationship between authenticity and identity, history, materials, social value, 
dynamic and static sites, stewardship and economics, and contained recommendations extending 
“proofs” of authenticity to include reﬂ ection of its true value, integrity, context, identity, use and function, 
as well as recommendations pertinent to different typologies of sites. 

Saouma-Forero, Galia, (edited by), Authenticity and integrity in an African context: expert meeting, Great 
Zimbabwe, Zimbabwe, 26-29 May 2000, UNESCO - World Heritage Centre, Paris 2001.

The Great Zimbabwe meeting organised by the World Heritage Centre (26-29 May 2000) focused 
attention  on  both  authenticity  and  integrity  in  an  African  context.  Eighteen  speakers  looked  at 
issues arising in management of both cultural and natural heritage properties. The meeting resulted 
in  the  publication  cited  above,  which  includes  a  set  of  recommendations  coming  from  meeting 
participants. Among recommendations were suggestions to include management systems, language, 
and other forms of intangible heritage among attributes expressing authenticity, and an emphasis given 
to the place of local communities in the sustainable heritage management process.

Reconstruction discussions in the context of the World Heritage Convention (as of January 2005):

The Riga Charter on authenticity and historical reconstruction in relationship to cultural heritage adopted 
by  regional  conference,  Riga,  24  October  2000,  Latvian  National  Commission  for  UNESCO  -  World 
Heritage Centre, ICCROM.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

133

Annex 4 

Authenticity in relation to the World Heritage Convention

Incerti  Medici,  Elena  and  Stovel,  Herb,  Authenticity  and  historical  reconstruction  in  relationship  with 
cultural heritage, regional conference, Riga, Latvia, October 23-24 2000: summary report, UNESCO - World 
Heritage Centre, Paris, ICCROM, Rome 2001.

Stovel,  Herb,  The  Riga  Charter  on  authenticity  and  historical  reconstruction  in  relationship  to  cultural 
heritage, Riga, Latvia, October 2000, in Conservation and management of archaeological sites, Vol. 4, n. 4, 
2001.

Alternatives to historical reconstruction in the World Heritage Cities, Tallinn, 16-18 May 2002, Tallinn 
Cultural Heritage Department, Estonia National Commission for UNESCO, Estonia National Heritage 
Board.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

134

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List 

Annex 5

FORMAT FOR THE NOMINATION OF PROPERTIES 
FOR INSCRIPTION ON THE WORLD HERITAGE LIST

This Format must be used 

for all nominations

submitted after 2 February 2005

•  The Nomination Format is available at the following Web address: http://whc.unesco.org/en/nominationform
 
•  The original signed version of the completed Nomination Format should be sent in English or French to

Further guidance on the preparation of nominations can be found in Section III of the Operational Guidelines

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP
France
Telephone: +33 (0) 1 4568 1571
Fax: +33 (0) 1 4568 5570
E-mail: wh-nominations@unesco.org

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

135

Annex 5 

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List

Executive Summary

This information, to be provided by the State Party, will be updated by the Secretariat following the 
decision by the World Heritage Committee.  It will then be returned to the State Party conﬁ rming the 
basis on which the property is inscribed on the World Heritage List.

State Party

State, Province or Region

Name of Property

Geographical coordinates 
to the nearest second

Textual description of the boundary(ies) 
of the nominated property

A4 (or “letter”) size map of the nominated 
property, showing boundaries and buffer 
zone (if present)

Justiﬁ cation
Statement of Outstanding Universal Value 
(text should clarify what is considered to be 
the outstanding universal value embodied by 
the nominated property)

Criteria under which property is nominated 
(itemize criteria) 
(see Paragraph 77 of the Operational Guidelines)

Name and contact information 
of ofﬁ cial local institution/agency

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

136

Attach A4 (or “letter”) size map

Organization:
Address:
Tel:
Fax:
E-mail:
Web address:

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List 

Annex 5

Properties for inscription on the World Heritage List

Note: 

 In preparing the nomination, States Parties should use this format but delete the explana-
tory notes.

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

1. 

Identiﬁ cation of the Property

1.a 

1.b 

1.c 

Country (and State Party if different)

State, Province or Region 

Name of Property

1.d 

Geographical coordinates 
to the nearest second

Together with Section 2, this is the most important section 
in the nomination. It must make clear to the Committee 
precisely  where  the  property  is  located  and  how  it  is 
geographically deﬁ ned. In the case of serial nominations, 
insert a table that shows the name of the component part, 
region (if different for different components), coordinates, 
area  and  buffer  zone.  Other  ﬁ elds  could  also  be  added 
(page reference or map number, etc.) that differentiate the 
several components.

This is the ofﬁ cial name of the property that will appear 
in published material about World Heritage. It should be 
concise. Do not exceed 200 characters, including spaces 
and punctuation. 

In the case of serial nominations (see Paragraphs 137-140 
of the Operational Guidelines), give a name for the ensemble 
(e.g., Baroque Churches of the Philippines). Do not include 
the  name  of  the  components  of  a  serial  nomination, 
which should be included in a table as part of 1.d and 1.f.

In this space provide the latitude and longitude coordinates 
(to the nearest second) or UTM coordinates (to the nearest 
10  metres)  of  a  point  at  the  approximate  centre  of  the 
nominated property. Do not use other coordinate systems. 
If in doubt, please consult the Secretariat.

In the case of serial nominations, provide a table showing 
the  name  of  each  property,  its  region  (or  nearest  town 
as  appropriate),  and  the  coordinates  of  its  centre  point. 
Coordinate format examples:

N 45° 06’ 05” W 15° 37’ 56” or
UTM  Zone 18 Easting: 545670 
                         Northing: 4586750

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

137

Annex 5 

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

1.e 

Maps and plans, showing the boundaries 
of the nominated property and buffer zone 

Annex to the nomination, and list below with scales and 
dates:

(i)   An original copy of a topographic map showing the 
property  nominated,  at  the  largest  scale  available 
which shows the entire property. The boundaries of the 
nominated property and buffer zone should be clearly 
marked.  Either  on  this  map,  or  an  accompanying 
one, there should also be a record of the boundaries 
of  zones  of  special  legal  protection  from  which  the 
property beneﬁ ts. Multiple maps may be necessary for 
serial nominations.

  Maps may be obtained from the addresses shown at 

 

 

the following Web address:
http://whc.unesco.org/en/mapagencies 

If topographic maps are not available at the appropriate 
scale, other maps may be substituted. All maps should 
be capable of being geo-referenced, with a minimum 
of  three  points  on  opposite  sides  of  the  maps  with 
complete sets of coordinates.  The maps, untrimmed, 
should  show  scale,  orientation,  projection,  datum, 
property name and date. If possible, maps should be 
sent rolled and not folded.

  Geographic Information in digital form is encouraged 
if  possible,  suitable  for  incorporation  into  a  GIS 
(Geographic  Information  System).  In  this  case  the 
delineation  of  the  boundaries  (nominated  property 
and buffer zone) should be presented in vector form, 
prepared  at  the  largest  scale  possible.    The  State 
Party  is  invited  to  contact  the  Secretariat  for  further 
information concerning this option.

(ii)  A Location Map showing the location of the property 

within the State Party,

(iii) Plans  and  specially  prepared  maps  of  the  property 
showing individual features are helpful and may also 
be annexed.

 

To facilitate copying and presentation to the Advisory 
Bodies  and  the  World  Heritage  Committee  A4  (or 
“letter”) size reduction and a digital image ﬁ le of the 
principal maps should be included in the nomination 
text if possible. 

  Where  no  buffer  zone  is  proposed,  the  nomination 
must include a statement as to why a buffer zone is not 
required for the proper conservation of the nominated 
property.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

138

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List 

Annex 5

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

1.f 

Area of nominated property (ha.) and 
proposed buffer zone (ha.) 

Area of nominated property: ________ ha

In  the  case  of  serial  nominations  (see  Paragraphs  137-
140 of the Operational Guidelines), insert a table that shows 
the name of the component part, region (if different for 
different components), coordinates, area and buffer zone. 

Buffer zone 

________ ha

Total  

________ ha

2. 

2.a 

Description

Description of Property

The serial nomination table should also be used to show 
the size of the separate nominated areas and of the buffer 
zone(s).

This  section  should  begin  with  a  description  of  the 
nominated property at the date of nomination. It should 
refer to all the signiﬁ cant features of the property.

In the case of a cultural property this section will include 
a  description  of  whatever  elements  make  the  property 
culturally signiﬁ cant. It could include a description of any 
building  or  buildings  and  their  architectural  style,  date 
of construction, materials, etc.  This section should also 
describe important aspects of the setting such as gardens, 
parks etc. For a rock art site, for example, the description 
should  refer  to  the  rock  art  as  well  as  the  surrounding 
landscapes. In the case of an historic town or district, it 
is not necessary to describe each individual building, but 
important public buildings should be described individually 
and an account should be given of the planning or layout 
of the area, its street pattern and so on.

In the case of a natural property the account should deal 
with  important  physical  attributes,  geology,  habitats, 
species  and  population  size,  and  other  signiﬁ cant 
ecological  features  and  processes.  Species  lists  should  be 
provided where practicable, and the presence of threatened 
or  endemic  taxa  should  be  highlighted.  The  extent  and 
methods  of  exploitation  of  natural  resources  should  be 
described.

In the case of cultural landscapes, it will be necessary to 
produce  a  description  under  all  the  matters  mentioned 
above. Special attention should be paid to the interaction 
of man and nature.

The  entire  nominated  property  identiﬁ ed  in  section  1 
(Identiﬁ cation  of  the  Property)  should  be  described.  In 
the case of serial nominations (see Paragraphs 137-140 of 
the Operational Guidelines), each of the component parts 
should be separately described.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

139

Annex 5 

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

Describe  how  the  property  has  reached  its  present  form 
and  condition  and  the  signiﬁ cant  changes  that  it  has 
undergone, including recent conservation history.

This should include some account of construction phases 
in  the  case  of  monuments,  sites,  buildings  or  groups 
of  buildings.  Where  there  have  been  major  changes, 
demolitions or rebuilding since completion they should 
also be described.

In  the  case  of  a  natural  property,  the  account  should 
cover  signiﬁ cant  events  in  history  or  pre-history  that 
have affected the evolution of the property and give an 
account  of  its  interaction  with  humankind.    This  will 
include changes in the use of the property and its natural 
resources  for  hunting,  ﬁ shing  or  agriculture,  or  changes 
brought about by climatic change, ﬂ oods, earthquake or 
other natural causes.

Such  information  will  also  be  required  in  the  case  of 
cultural  landscapes,  where  all  aspects  of  the  history  of 
human activity in the area needs to be covered.

This  section  must  make  clear  why  the  property  is 
considered to be of “outstanding universal value”.

The  whole  of  this  section  of  the  nomination  should  be 
written with careful reference to the criteria for inscription 
found  in  Paragraph  75  of  the  Operational  Guidelines.    It 
should not include detailed descriptive material about the 
property or its management, which are addressed in other 
sections, but should concentrate on why the property is 
important.

See Paragraph 77 of the Operational Guidelines.

Provide a separate justiﬁ cation for each criterion cited.

State brieﬂ y how the property meets those criteria under 
which  it  has  been  nominated  (where  necessary,  make 
reference to the “description” and “comparative analysis” 
sections  below,  but  do  not  duplicate  the  text  of  these 
sections.).

2.b 

History and Development

3. 

Justiﬁ cation for Inscription

3.a 

Criteria under which inscription is 
proposed (and justiﬁ cation for inscription 
under these criteria)

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

140

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List 

Annex 5

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

3.b 

Proposed Statement of Outstanding 
Universal Value

3.c 

Comparative analysis (including state 
of conservation of similar properties)

3.d 

Integrity and/or Authenticity 

Based on the criteria used above, the proposed Statement 
of Outstanding Universal Value should make clear why the 
property is considered to merit inscription on the World 
Heritage  List  (see  Paragraphs  154-157  of  the  Operational 
Guidelines).  It  may  be  a  unique  survival  of  a  particular 
building  form  or  habitat  or  designed  town.  It  may  be  a 
particularly ﬁ ne or early or rich survival and it may bear 
witness to a vanished culture, way of life or eco-system. It 
may comprise assemblages of threatened endemic species, 
exceptional eco-systems, outstanding landscapes or other 
natural phenomena.

The  property  should  be  compared  to  similar  properties, 
whether on the World Heritage List or not. The comparison 
should  outline  the  similarities  the  nominated  property 
has with other properties and the reasons that make the 
nominated property stand out.  The comparative analysis 
should aim to explain the importance of the nominated 
property  both  in  its  national  and  international  context 
(see Paragraph 132)

The  statement  of  integrity  and/or  authenticity  should 
demonstrate  that  the  property  fulﬁ ls  the  conditions  of 
integrity and/or authenticity set out in Section II.D of the 
Operational Guidelines, which describe these conditions in 
greater detail.

In  the  case  of  a  cultural  property  it  should  also  record 
whether repairs have been carried out using materials and 
methods traditional to the culture, in conformity with the 
Nara Document (1995) (see Annex 4).

In  the  case  of  natural  properties  it  should  record  any 
intrusions from exotic species of fauna or ﬂ ora and any 
human activities that could compromise the integrity of 
the property.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

141

Annex 5 

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

4. 

State of Conservation and factors 
affecting the Property 

4.a 

Present state of conservation

4.b 

Factors affecting the property

(i) 

Development Pressures (e.g., 
encroachment, adaptation, agriculture, 
mining)

The  information  presented  in  this  section  constitutes 
the  base-line  data  necessary  to  monitor  the  state  of 
conservation  of  the  nominated  property  in  the  future. 
Information  should  be  provided  in  this  section  on  the 
physical  condition  of  the  property,  any  threats  to  the 
property and conservation measures at the property (see 
Paragraph 132)

For  example,  in  a  historic  town  or  area,  buildings, 
monuments or other structures needing major or minor 
repair  works,  should  be  indicated  as  well  as  the  scale 
and duration of any recent or forthcoming major repair 
projects.

In the case of a natural property, data on species trends 
or the integrity of eco-systems should be provided. This is 
important because the nomination will be used in future 
years for purposes of comparison to trace changes in the 
condition of the property.

For the indicators and statistical benchmarks used to 
monitor the state of conservation of the property see 
section 6 below.

This section should provide information on all the factors 
which are likely to affect or threaten a property. It should 
also describe any difﬁ culties that may be encountered in 
addressing  such  problems.  Not  all  the  factors  suggested 
in  this  section  are  appropriate  for  all  properties.  They 
are  indicative  and  are  intended  to  assist  the  State  Party 
to  identify  the  factors  that  are  relevant  to  each  speciﬁ c 
property.

Itemize  types  of  development  pressures  affecting  the 
property, e.g., pressure for demolition, rebuilding or new 
construction; the adaptation of existing buildings for new 
uses  which  would  harm  their  authenticity  or  integrity; 
habitat modiﬁ cation or destruction following encroaching 
agriculture, forestry or grazing, or through poorly managed 
tourism  or  other  uses;  inappropriate  or  unsustainable 
natural resource exploitation; damage caused by mining; 
the introduction of exotic species likely to disrupt natural 
ecological  processes,  creating  new  centres  of  population 
on or near properties so as to harm them or their settings.

(ii) 

Environmental pressures (e.g., pollution, 
climate change, desertiﬁ cation)

List  and  summarize  major  sources  of  environmental 
deterioration affecting building fabric, ﬂ ora and fauna.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

142

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List 

Annex 5

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

(iii) 

Natural disasters and risk preparedness 
(earthquakes, ﬂ oods, ﬁ res, etc.)

(iv) 

Visitor/tourism pressures

(v) 

Number of inhabitants within 
the property and the buffer zone

Estimated population located within:

Area of nominated property _____________

Buffer zone _____________________

Total ___________________________

Year _____________

5. 

Protection and Management 
of the Property

5.a 

Ownership

Itemize those disasters which present a foreseeable threat 
to the property and what steps have been taken to draw 
up contingency plans for dealing with them, whether by 
physical protection measures or staff training.

Describe  the  “carrying  capacity”  of  the  property.  Can  it 
absorb  the  current  or  likely  number  of  visitors  without 
adverse effects?

An indication should also be given of the steps taken to 
manage visitors and tourists. Possible forms of deterioration 
due  to  visitor  pressure  are:  wear  on  stone,  timber,  grass 
or  other  ground  surfaces;  increases  in  heat  or  humidity 
levels;  disturbances  to  species  habitats;  or  disruption  of 
traditional cultures or ways of life.

Give the best available statistics or estimate of the number 
of inhabitants living within the nominated property and 
any buffer zone. Indicate the year this estimate or count 
was made.

This  section  of  the  nomination  is  intended  to  provide 
a  clear  picture  of  the  legislative,  regulatory,  contractual, 
planning,  institutional  and/  or  traditional  measures 
(see  Paragraphs  132  of  the  Operational  Guidelines)  and 
the  management  plan  or  other  management  system 
(Paragraphs  of the Operational Guidelines) that is in place to 
protect and manage the property as required by the World 
Heritage Convention. It should deal with policy aspects, legal 
status and protective measures and with the practicalities 
of day-to-day administration and management.

Indicate the major categories of land ownership (including 
State,  Provincial,  private,  community, 
traditional, 
customary and non-governmental ownership, etc.).

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

143

Annex 5 

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

5.b 

Protective designation

List the relevant legal, regulatory, contractual, planning, 
institutional and/ or traditional status of the property: For 
example, national or provincial park; historic monument, 
protected  area  under  national  law  or  custom;  or  other 
designation.

Provide the year of designation and the legislative act(s) 
under which the status is provided.

If the document cannot be provided in English or French, 
an  English  or  French  executive  summary  should  be 
provided highlighting the key provisions.

Describe  how  the  protection  afforded  by  its  legal, 
regulatory,  contractual,  planning,  institutional  and/  or 
traditional status indicated in section 5.b. actually works.

Means of implementing 
protective measures. 

5.c 

5.d 

Existing plans related to municipality and 
region in which the proposed property 
is located (e.g., regional or local plan, 
conservation plan, tourism development 
plan)

List the agreed plans which have been adopted with the 
date and agency responsible for preparation. The relevant 
provisions should be summarized in this section. A copy 
of the plan should be included as an attached document 
as indicated in section 7.b. 

5.e 

Property management plan or other 
management system 

If the plans exist only in a language other than English or 
French, an English or French executive summary should 
be provided highlighting the key provisions.

As noted in Paragraphs 132 of the Operational Guidelines, 
an appropriate management plan or other management 
system  is  essential  and  shall  be  provided  in  the 
nomination. Assurances of the effective implementation 
of the management plan or other management system are 
also expected.

A copy of the management plan or documentation of the 
management system shall be annexed to the nomination, 
in English or French as indicated in section 7.b. 

If the management plan exists only in a language other 
than  English  or  French,  an  English  or  French  detailed 
description  of  its  provisions  shall  be  annexed.  Give  the 
title, date and author of management plans annexed to 
this nomination.

A  detailed  analysis  or  explanation  of  the  management 
plan  or  a  documented  management  system  shall  be 
provided. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

144

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List 

Annex 5

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

5.f 

Sources and levels of ﬁ nance

5.g 

Sources of expertise and training in 
conservation and management techniques

5.h 

Visitor facilities and statistics

5.i 

Policies and programmes related 
to the presentation and promotion 
of the property

Show the sources and level of funding which are available 
to  the  property  on  an  annual  basis.  An  estimate  could 
also  be  given  of  the  adequacy  or  otherwise  of  resources 
available, in particular identifying any gaps or deﬁ ciencies 
or any areas where assistance may be required.

Indicate  the  expertise  and  training  which  are  available 
from  national  authorities  or  other  organizations  to  the 
property.

As well as providing any available statistics or estimates of 
visitor numbers or patterns over several years, this section 
could describe the facilities available on site for visitors, 
for example interpretation/explanation, whether by trails, 
guides, notices or publications; property museum, visitor 
or 
interpretation  centre;  overnight  accommodation; 
restaurant  or  refreshment  facilities;  shops;  car  parking; 
lavatories; search and rescue. 

This  section  refers  to  Articles  4  and  5  of  the  Convention 
regarding  the  presentation  and  transmission  to  future 
generations  of  the  cultural  and  natural  heritage.  States 
Parties  are  encouraged  to  provide  information  on  the 
policies  and  programmes  for  the  presentation  and 
promotion of the nominated property.

5.j 

Stafﬁ ng levels (professional, technical, 
maintenance)

Indicate the skills and training which are available at the 
property. 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

145

Annex 5 

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

6. 

Monitoring

6.a 

Key indicators for measuring state of 
conservation

This  section  of  the  nomination  is  intended  to  provide 
the evidence for the state of conservation of the property 
which can be reviewed and reported on regularly so as to 
give an indication of trends over time.

List in table form those key indicators that have been chosen 
as the measure of the state of conservation of the whole 
property (see section 4.a above). Indicate the periodicity 
of the review of these indicators and the location where 
the records are kept. They could be representative of an 
important aspect of the property and relate as closely as 
possible to the Statement of Outstanding Universal Value 
(see  section  2.b  above).  Where  possible  they  could  be 
expressed numerically and where this is not possible they 
could be of a kind which can be repeated, for example by 
taking  a  photograph  from  the  same  point.  Examples  of 
good indicators are the:

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

number  of  species,  or  population  of  a  keystone 
species on a natural property;
percentage of buildings requiring major repair in a 
historic town or district;
number  of  years  estimated  to  elapse  before  a 
major  conservation  programme  is  likely  to  be 
completed;
stability  or  degree  of  movement  in  a  particular 
building or element of a building;
rate  at  which  encroachment  of  any  kind  on  a 
property has increased or diminished.

INDICATOR

PERIODICITY

LOCATION OF RECORDS

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

146

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List 

Annex 5

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

6.b 

Administrative  arrangements 
for monitoring property

Give the name and contact information of the agency(ies) 
responsible for the monitoring referenced in 6.a.

6.c 

Results of previous reporting exercises

7. 

Documentation

7.a 

Photographs,  slides,  image  inventory  and 
authorization  table  and  other  audiovisual 
materials

List, with a brief summary, earlier reports on the state of 
conservation  of  the  property  and  provide  extracts  and 
references  to  published  sources  (for  example,  reports 
submitted  in  compliance  with  international  agreements 
and programmes, e.g., Ramsar, MAB).

This  section  of  the  nomination  is  the  check-list  of  the 
documentation  which  shall  be  provided  to  make  up  a 
complete nomination.

States Parties shall provide a sufﬁ cient number of recent 
images  (prints,  slides  and,  where  possible,  electronic 
formats, videos and aerial photographs) to give a good 
general picture of the property.

Slides  shall  be  in  35mm  format  and  electronic  images 
in jpg format at a minimum of 300 dpi (dots per inch) 
resolution. If ﬁ lm material is provided, Beta SP format is 
recommended for quality assurances.

This  material  shall  be  accompanied  by  the  image 
inventory and photograph and audiovisual authorization 
form as set out below.

At least one photograph that may be used on the public 
web page illustrating the property shall be included.

States  Parties  are  encouraged  to  grant  to  UNESCO,  in 
written form and free of charge, the non exclusive cession 
of  rights  to  diffuse,  to  communicate  to  the  public,  to 
publish,  to  reproduce,  to  exploit,  in  any  form  and  on 
any support, including digital, all or part of the images 
provided and license these rights to third parties.

The non exclusive cession of rights does not impinge upon 
intellectual property rights (rights of the photographer / 
director of the video or copyright owner if different) and 
that when the images are distributed by UNESCO a credit 
to the photographer / director of the video is always given, 
if clearly provided in the form.

All possible proﬁ ts deriving from such cession of rights 
will go to the World Heritage Fund.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

147

Annex 5 

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List

IMAGE INVENTORY AND PHOTOGRAPH AND AUDIOVISUAL AUTHORIZATION FORM

Id. No

Format 
(slide/ 
print/ 
video)

Caption

Date of 
Photo 
(mo/yr)

Photographer/

Director 

of the video

Copyright 
owner (if 

different than 
photographer/

director of 

video)

Contact details 

of copyright 
owner (Name, 
address, tel/fax, 

and e-mail)

Non 

exclusive 
cession of 

rights

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

148

Format for the nomination of properties for inscription on the World Heritage List 

Annex 5

NOMINATION FORMAT

EXPLANATORY NOTES

7.b 

Texts relating to protective designation, 
copies of property management plans 
or documented management systems 
and extracts of other plans relevant 
to the property

7.c 

Form and date of most recent 
records or inventory of property

7.d 

Address where inventory, records 
and archives are held

7.e 

Bibliography

8. 

Contact Information 
of responsible authorities

8.a  

Preparer

Name:
Title:
Address:
City, Province/State, Country:
Tel:
Fax:
E-mail:

8.b 

Ofﬁ cial Local Institution/Agency

8.c 

Other Local Institutions

8.d 

Ofﬁ cial Web address

http://
Contact name:
E-mail:

9. 

Signature on behalf of the State Party

Attach the texts as indicated in sections 5.b, 5.d and 5.e 
above.

Provide  a  straightforward  statement  giving  the  form 
and date of the most recent records or inventory of the 
property.  Only  records  that  are  still  available  should  be 
described.

Give  the  name  and  address  of  the  agencies  holding 
inventory records (buildings, monuments, ﬂ ora or fauna 
species).

List  the  principal  published  references,  using  standard 
bibliographic format. 

This section of the nomination will allow the Secretariat 
to  provide  the  property  with  current  information  about 
World Heritage news and other issues.

Provide the name, address and other contact information 
of the individual responsible for preparing the nomination. 
If an e-mail address cannot be provided, the information 
must include a fax number.

Provide  the  name  of  the  agency,  museum,  institution, 
community  or  manager  locally  responsible  for  the 
management  of  the  property.  If  the  normal  reporting 
institution is a national agency, please provide that contact 
information.

List  the  full  name,  address,  telephone,  fax  and  e-mail 
addresses  of  all  museums,  visitor  centres  and  ofﬁ cial 
tourism ofﬁ ces who should receive the free World Heritage 
Newsletter  about  events  and  issues  related  to  World 
Heritage.

Please provide any existing ofﬁ cial web addresses of the 
nominated  property.  Indicate  if  such  web  addresses  are 
planned for the future with the contact name and e-mail 
address.

The  nomination  should  conclude  with  the  signature  of 
the  ofﬁ cial  empowered  to  sign  it  on  behalf  of  the  State 
Party.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

149

Evaluation procedures of the Advisory Bodies for nominations 

Annex 6

EVALUATION PROCEDURES 

OF THE ADVISORY BODIES FOR NOMINATIONS

This Annex includes:

A.  THE ICOMOS PROCEDURE FOR THE EVALUATION OF CULTURAL PROPERTIES

B.  THE IUCN PROCEDURE FOR THE EVALUATION OF NATURAL PROPERTIES

C. 

 ADVISORY BODY COLLABORATION - PROCEDURE FOR THE EVALUATION 
OF CULTURAL AND NATURAL PROPERTIES AND OF CULTURAL LANDSCAPES

For further information please also refer to Paragraphs 143-151 of the Operational Guidelines.

A.  THE ICOMOS PROCEDURE FOR THE EVALUATION OF CULTURAL PROPERTIES

1. 

2. 

 In carrying out its evaluation of nominations of cultural properties ICOMOS (the International 
Council of Monuments and Sites) is guided by the Operational Guidelines; (see Paragraph 148).

 The  evaluation  process  (see  Figure  1)  involves  consultation  of  the  wide  range  of  expertise 
represented by the membership of ICOMOS and its National and International Committees, 
as well as the many other specialist networks with which it is linked. Members are also sent 
on  expert  missions  to  carry  out  conﬁ dential  on-site  evaluations.  This  extensive  consultation 
results in the preparation of detailed recommendations that are submitted to the World Heritage 
Committee at its annual meetings.

Choice of experts

3. 

 There  is  a  clearly  deﬁ ned  annual  procedure  for  the  submission  of  properties  to  the  World 
Heritage  List.  Once  new  nominations  have  been  checked  for  completeness  by  the  UNESCO 
World Heritage Centre and the Advisory Bodies, the nomination dossiers are then delivered to 
ICOMOS, where they are handled by the ICOMOS World Heritage secretariat. The ﬁ rst action 
involved is the choice of the experts who are to be consulted. This involves two separate groups. 
First, there are those who can advise on the “outstanding universal value” of the nominated 
property.  This  is  essentially  a  “library”  exercise  for  specialist  academics,  and  may  sometimes 
involve  non-ICOMOS  members,  in  cases  where  there  is  no  adequate  expertise  within  the 
ICOMOS membership on a speciﬁ c topic: an example is the occasional nomination of fossil 
hominid sites, where the services of palaeontologists are required.

4. 

 The second group of experts are those with practical experience of the management, conservation, 
and authenticity aspects of individual properties, who are required to carry out site missions. 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

151

Annex 6 

Evaluation procedures of the Advisory Bodies for nominations

The process of selecting these experts makes full use of the ICOMOS network. The advice of 
International Scientiﬁ c Committees and individual members is sought, as is that of specialist 
bodies with whom ICOMOS has partnership agreements, such as The International Committee 
for  the  Conservation  of  the  Industrial  Heritage  (TICCIH),  the  International  Federation  of 
Landscape  Architects  (IFLA),  and  the  International  Committee  for  the  Documentation  and 
Conservation of Monuments and Sites of the Modern Movement (DoCoMoMo).

Site missions

5. 

 In selecting experts to carry out on-site evaluation missions, the policy of ICOMOS is wherever 
possible to choose someone from the region in which the nominated property is located. Such 
experts  are  required  to  be  experienced  in  heritage  management  and  conservation:  they  are 
not  necessarily  high  academic  experts  in  the  type  of  property.  They  are  expected  to  be  able 
to talk to site managers on a basis of professional equality and to make informed assessments 
of  management  plans,  conservation  practices,  visitor  handling,  etc.  They  are  provided  with 
detailed brieﬁ ngs, which include copies of the relevant information from the dossiers. The dates 
and programmes of their visits are agreed in consultation with States Parties, who are requested 
to  ensure  that  ICOMOS  evaluation  missions  are  given  a  low  proﬁ le  so  far  as  the  media  are 
concerned. ICOMOS experts submit their reports in conﬁ dence to the Executive Committee on 
practical aspects of the properties concerned, and premature publicity can cause embarrassment 
both to ICOMOS and to the World Heritage Committee.

World Heritage Panel

6. 

 The  two  reports  (cultural  assessment  and  site  mission  report)  that  emerge  from  these 
consultations are received by the ICOMOS secretariat in Paris, and from them a draft evaluation 
is  prepared.  This  contains  a  brief  description  and  history  of  the  property,  summaries  of  its 
legislative protection, management, and state of conservation, comments on these aspects, and 
recommendations to the World Heritage Committee. Draft evaluations are then presented to 
a  two  or  three-day  meeting  of  the  ICOMOS  World  Heritage  Panel.  The  Panel  comprises  the 
members of the Executive Committee, who come from all parts of the world and who possess 
a wide range of skills and experience. The Executive Committee members are supplemented by 
experts in certain categories of heritage that ﬁ gure on the annual list of nominations but which 
are not represented on the Committee. 

7. 

 Each nominated property is the subject of a 10–15 minute illustrated presentation by a representative 
of ICOMOS, followed by discussion. Following the objective and exhaustive examination of the 
nominations, the collective recommendations of ICOMOS are prepared, and the evaluations are 
revised and printed, for presentation to the World Heritage Committee.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

152

Evaluation procedures of the Advisory Bodies for nominations 

Annex 6

Figure 1:  IUCN EVALUATION PROCEDURE

ICOMOS REPORT 

TO WORLD HERITAGE COMMITTEE

ICOMOS World Heritage Panel

ICOMOS Experts

ICOMOS World Heritage Secretariat

Cultural Evaluations

On-site 

Expert Mission Reports

ICOMOS International
Scientiﬁ c Committees

Associated 

Scientiﬁ c Institutions

ICOMOS 

National Committees

Individual Experts

ICOMOS World Heritage Secretariat

UNESCO World Heritage Centre

Nomination Dossiers

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

153

Annex 6 

Evaluation procedures of the Advisory Bodies for nominations

B.  THE IUCN PROCEDURE FOR THE EVALUATION OF NATURAL PROPERTIES

8. 

In carrying out its evaluation of nominations of natural properties, IUCN (the World Conservation 
Union) is guided by the Operational Guidelines (see Paragraph 148).  The evaluation process (see 
Figure 2) involves ﬁ ve steps:

(i)  Data Assembly. Following receipt of the nomination dossier from the World Heritage Centre, 
a standardised data sheet is compiled on the property by the UNEP-World Conservation 
Monitoring Centre (UNEP-WCMC), using the Protected Area database, and veriﬁ ed with 
the State Party during the ﬁ eld inspection.

(ii)  External Review.  The nomination is normally sent for desk review to up to 15 experts 
knowledgeable about the property, primarily members of IUCN’s specialist Commissions 
and networks.

(iii)  Field  Inspection.  One  or  two  IUCN  experts  visit  each  nominated  property  to  clarify 
details about the area, to evaluate site management and to discuss the nomination with 
relevant authorities and stakeholders. IUCN experts, selected for their global perspective on 
conservation and natural history as well as their knowledge of the Convention, are usually 
members  of  the  IUCN  World  Commission  on  Protected  Areas’  World  Heritage  Expert 
Network  or  are  IUCN  secretariat  staff.  (This  ﬁ eld  inspection  is  undertaken  jointly  with 
ICOMOS in certain situations - see Part C below)

(iv)  Other sources of information. IUCN may also consult additional literature and receive 

comments from local NGOs and others.

(v)  IUCN  World  Heritage  Panel  Review.  The  IUCN  World  Heritage  Panel  reviews  all 
ﬁ eld  inspection  reports,  reviewers’  comments,  the  UNEP-WCMC  data  sheet  and  other 
background  material  before  ﬁ nalising  the  text  of  the  IUCN  evaluation  report  for  each 
nominated property. 

 

Each  evaluation  report  presents  a  concise  summary  of  the  outstanding  universal  value  of 
the property nominated, a comparison with other similar sites and a review of integrity and 
management issues. It concludes with the assessment of the applicability of the criteria, and a 
clear recommendation to the World Heritage Committee. The UNEP-WCMC data sheets are also 
made available to the World Heritage Committee.

The Udvardy biogeographic classiﬁ cation system

9. 

In  the  evaluations,  IUCN  uses  Udvardy’s  “Biogeographical  Provinces  of  the  World”  (1975) 
biogeographic classiﬁ cation system.  This is a classiﬁ cation system for freshwater and terrestrial 
areas  of  the  world  which  enables  predictions  and  assumptions  to  be  made  about  similar 
biogeographical  regions.    The  Udvardy  system  provides  an  objective  means  of  comparing 
nominated properties with sites of similar climatic and ecological conditions.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

154

Evaluation procedures of the Advisory Bodies for nominations 

Annex 6

10.  It is stressed, however, that the Biogeographical Province concept is used as a basis for comparison 
only and does not imply that World Heritage properties are to be selected solely on this criterion. 
The guiding principle is that World Heritage properties must be of outstanding universal value.

Systems to identify priority areas for conservation

11.  IUCN also uses systems which identify priority areas for conservation such as the Worldwide Fund 
for Nature’s (WWF) Global Ecoregions, WWF/IUCN’s Centres of Plant Diversity, Conservation 
International’s  Biodiversity  Hotspots,  and  Birdlife  International’s  Endemic  Bird  Areas  and 
Important Bird Areas.

Systems to evaluate properties for earth science value 

12.  In evaluating properties which have been nominated for their geological value, IUCN consults 
with  a  range  of  specialised  organisations  such  as  the  UNESCO  Earth  Sciences  Division,  the 
International Union of Speleology and the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS).

Relevant publications used in the evaluation process

13.  The evaluation process is aided by the publication of some 20 reference volumes on the world’s 
protected  areas  published  by  IUCN,  UNEP,  UNEP-WCMC,  Birdlife  International  and  other 
publishers.  These include:

(i)  Reviews of Protected Area Systems in Oceania, Africa, and Asia; 
(ii)  The four volume directory of Protected Areas of the World; 
(iii)  The World Atlas of Coral Reefs; 
(iv)  The six volume Conservation Atlas series;
(v)  The four volume “A Global Representative System of Marine Protected Areas”; 
(vi)  The three volume Centres of Plant Diversity; and
(vii) Important Bird Areas and Endemic Bird Areas of the World

14.  These  documents  together  provide  system-wide  overviews  which  allow  comparison  of  the 
conservation importance of protected areas throughout the world. With the development of 
the Global Strategy work for natural heritage, IUCN is increasingly using its “global overview” 
papers to identify gaps in natural World Heritage coverage and properties of World Heritage 
potential.  These can be viewed on the IUCN website at http://iucn.org/themes/wcpa/wheritage/
globalstrategy.htm

Evaluation of Cultural Landscapes (see also Annex 3)

15.  IUCN  has  an  interest  in  many  cultural  properties,  especially  those  nominated  as  cultural 
landscapes. For that reason, it will on occasion participate in joint ﬁ eld inspections to nominated 
cultural landscapes with ICOMOS (see Part C below). IUCN’s evaluation of such nominations is 
guided by an internal paper, “The Assessment of Natural Values in cultural landscapes”, available 
on the IUCN web site at http://www.iucn.org/themes/wcpa/wheritage/culturallandscape.htm

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

155

Annex 6 

Evaluation procedures of the Advisory Bodies for nominations

16.  In accordance with the natural qualities of certain cultural landscapes identiﬁ ed in Annex 3, 

Paragraph 11, IUCN’s evaluation is concerned with the following factors:

(a)  Conservation of natural and semi-natural systems, and of wild species of fauna and ﬂ ora
(b)  Conservation of biodiversity within farming systems;
(c)  Sustainable land use;
(d)  Enhancement of scenic beauty;
(e)  Ex-situ collections;
(f)  Outstanding examples of humanity’s inter-relationship with nature;
(g)  Historically signiﬁ cant discoveries

 

The  following  table  sets  each  of  the  above  list  in  the  context  of  the  categories  of  cultural 
landscapes in Annex 3, thereby indicating where each consideration is most likely to occur (the 
absence of a consideration does not mean that it will never occur, only that this is unlikely):

Cultural Landscape type
(see also Annex 3)

Natural considerations most likely to be relevant 
(see Paragraph 16 above)

Designed landscape

(e)

Organically evolving landscape – 
continuous

Organically evolving landscape – 
fossil

(a)

(a)

Associative landscape

(b)

(c)

(d)

(f)

(g)

C.  ADVISORY BODY COLLABORATION – THE EVALUATION OF MIXED 

PROPERTIES AND OF CULTURAL LANDSCAPES

Mixed properties 

17.  Properties that are nominated as having both natural and cultural value entail a joint IUCN 
and ICOMOS mission to the nominated property. Following the mission, IUCN and ICOMOS 
prepare separate evaluation reports of the property under the relevant criteria (see A, Paragraph 5 
and B, Paragraph 9 (iii) above).

Cultural Landscapes

18.  Properties nominated as Cultural Landscapes are evaluated by ICOMOS under criteria (i)-(vi) 
(see Paragraph 77 of the Operational Guidelines). IUCN is called upon by ICOMOS to review the 
natural values and the management of the nominated property. This has been the subject of an 
agreement between the Advisory Bodies.  In some cases, a joint mission is required.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

156

Evaluation procedures of the Advisory Bodies for nominations 

Annex 6

Figure 2:  IUCN EVALUATION PROCEDURE

IUCN REPORT TO WORLD 
HERITAGE COMMITTEE

IUCN World 
Heritage Panel

Field 

Inspection

Consultation with:

Government Ofﬁ cials

Local NGOs

Local Communities
Other Stakeholders

External 
Reviewers

UNEP 
World 

Conservation 
Monitoring 

Centre 

(UNEP-WCMC)

Datasheet

IUCN Programme 
on Protected Areas

UNESCO World Heritage Centre

Nomination Dossiers

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

157

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention 

Annex 7

FORMAT FOR THE PERIODIC REPORTING 

ON THE APPLICATION 

OF THE WORLD HERITAGE CONVENTION

•  The Format for Periodic Reporting is available at the following Web address: 
 

http://whc.unesco.org/en/periodicreporting.

•  Further guidance on Periodic Reporting can be found in Section V of the Operational Guidelines.

• 

In  order  to  facilitate  management  of  information,  States  Parties  are  requested  to  submit  reports,  in  English  or 
French, in electronic as well as in printed form to: 

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP
France
Telephone: +33 (0) 1 4568 1571
Fax: +33 (0) 1 4568 5570
http://whc.unesco.org/en/contacts

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

159

Annex 7 

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention

FORMAT

PERIODIC REPORTING ON THE APPLICATION 

OF THE WORLD HERITAGE CONVENTION

General requirements

• 

• 

• 

• 

Information should be as precise and speciﬁ c as possible. It should be quantiﬁ ed where possible 
and fully referenced.

Information should be concise. In particular long historical accounts of sites and events which 
have taken place there should be avoided, especially when they can be found in readily available 
published sources.

Expressions of opinion should be supported by reference to the authority on which they are made 
and the veriﬁ able facts which support them.

Periodic reports should be completed on A4 paper (210mm x 297mm), with maps and plans a 
maximum of A3 paper (297mm x 420mm). States Parties are also encouraged to submit the full 
text of the periodic reports in electronic form.

SECTION I: 

 APPLICATION OF THE WORLD HERITAGE CONVENTION BY THE STATE PARTY

States Parties are requested to give information on the legislative and administrative provisions which 
they have adopted and other action which they have taken for the application of this Convention, 
together  with  details  of  the  experience  acquired  in  this  ﬁ eld  (Article  29.1  of  the  World  Heritage 
Convention).

I.1  Introduction

(i)  State Party
(ii)  Year of ratiﬁ cation or acceptance of the Convention
(iii)  Organization(s) or entity(ies) responsible for the preparation of the report
(iv)  Date of the report
(v)  Signature on behalf of the State Party 

I.2  Identiﬁ cation of cultural and natural heritage properties

This item refers in particular to Articles 3, 4 and 11 of the Convention regarding the identiﬁ cation 
of cultural and natural heritage and the nomination of properties for inscription on the World 
Heritage List.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

160

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention 

Annex 7

(i)  National inventories

Inventories  of  cultural  and  natural  heritage  of  national  signiﬁ cance  form  the  basis  for  the 
identiﬁ cation of possible World Heritage properties. 

Indicate which institutions are in charge of the preparation and keeping up-to-date of these 
national inventories and if, and to what extent, inventories, lists and/or registers at the local, 
state and/or national level exist and have been completed.

(ii)  Tentative List

Article 11 of the Convention refers to the submission by States Parties of inventories of property 
suitable  for  inscription  on  the  World  Heritage  List.  These  tentative  lists  of  cultural  and 
natural properties should be prepared with reference to Paragraphs 62-69 and Annex 2 of the 
Operational Guidelines. States Parties should report on actions taken to implement the decision 
of the Committee at its twenty-fourth session (Cairns, December 2000) and the twelfth General 
Assembly of States Parties (UNESCO Headquarters, 1999) whereby tentative lists are to be used 
as a planning tool to reduce the imbalances in the World Heritage List. 

Provide the date of submission of the Tentative List or any revision made since its submission. 
States  Parties  are  also  encouraged  to  provide  a  description  of  the  process  of  preparation  and 
revision  of  the  Tentative  List,  e.g.  has  (have)  any  particular  institution(s)  been  assigned  the 
responsibility for identifying and delineating World Heritage properties, have local authorities 
and local population been involved in its preparation? If so, provide exact details.

(iii)  Nominations 

The  periodic  report  should  list  properties  that  have  been  nominated  for  inscription  on  the 
World Heritage List. States Parties are encouraged to provide an analysis of the process by which 
these nominations are prepared, the collaboration and cooperation with local authorities and 
people,  the  motivation,  obstacles  and  difﬁ culties  encountered  in  that  process  and  perceived 
beneﬁ ts and lessons learnt.

I.3  Protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage

This  item  refers  in  particular  to  Articles  4  and  5  of  the  Convention,  in  which  States  Parties 
recognise their duty of ensuring the identiﬁ cation, protection, conservation, presentation and 
transmission to future generations of the cultural and natural World Heritage and that effective 
and active measures are taken to this effect. Additional guidance on States Parties obligations 
can be found in Paragraphs 10-16 of the Operational Guidelines. 

Article 5 of the Convention speciﬁ es the following measures:

(i)  General policy development

Provide  information  on  the  adoption  of  policies  that  aim  to  give  the  cultural  and  natural 
heritage a function in the life of the community. Provide information on the way the State Party 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

161

Annex 7 

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention

or the relevant authorities has (have) taken steps to integrate the protection of World Heritage 
properties  into  comprehensive  planning  programmes.  Areas  where  improvement  would  be 
desirable, and towards which the State Party is working should be indicated. 

(ii)  Status of services for protection, conservation and presentation

 

Provide information on any services within the territories of the State Party which have been 
set  up  or  have  been  substantially  improved  since  the  previous  periodic  report,  if  applicable. 
Particular  attention  should  be  given  to  services  aiming  at  the  protection,  conservation  and 
presentation of the cultural and natural heritage, indicating the appropriate staff and the means 
to discharge their functions. Areas where improvement would be desirable, and towards which 
the State Party is working should be indicated. 

(iii)  Scientiﬁ c and technical studies and research

 

 

 

Additional guidance on research can be found in Paragraph 215 of the Operational Guidelines. 

List signiﬁ cant scientiﬁ c and technical studies or research projects of a generic nature that would 
beneﬁ t World Heritage properties, initiated or completed since the last periodic report. Areas 
where improvement would be desirable, and towards which the State Party is working should 
be indicated. 

Site speciﬁ c scientiﬁ c studies or research projects should be reported upon under Section II.4 of 
this Format.

(iv)  Measures for identiﬁ cation, protection, conservation, presentation and rehabilitation 

 

 

 

 

Indicate appropriate legal and administrative measures that the State Party or relevant authorities 
have taken for the identiﬁ cation, protection, conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of 
cultural and natural heritage. Particular attention should be given to measures concerning visitor 
management and development in the region. The State Party is also encouraged to indicate if, on 
the basis of the experiences gained, policy and/or legal reform is considered necessary. It is also 
relevant to note which other international conventions for the protection of cultural or natural 
heritage have been signed or ratiﬁ ed by the State Party and if so, how the application of these 
different legal instruments is co-ordinated and integrated in national policies and planning.

Indicate relevant scientiﬁ c, and technical measures that the State Party or relevant institutions 
within the State have taken for the identiﬁ cation, protection, conservation, presentation and 
rehabilitation of cultural and natural heritage.

Indicate relevant ﬁ nancial measures that the State Party or relevant authorities have taken for 
the  identiﬁ cation,  protection,  conservation,  presentation  and  rehabilitation  of  cultural  and 
natural heritage.
Information on the presentation of the heritage can refer to publications, internet web-pages, 
ﬁ lms, stamps, postcards, books etc.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

162

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention 

Annex 7

 

Areas where improvement would be desirable, and towards which the State Party is working 
should be indicated.

(v)  Training 

 

 

 

 

Additional  guidance  on  training  can  be  found  in  Paragraphs  213-214  of  the  Operational 
Guidelines.

Provide information on the training and educational strategies that have been implemented 
within  the  State  Party  for  professional  capacity  building,  as  well  as  on  the  establishment  or 
development  of  national  or  regional  centres  for  training  and  education  in  the  protection, 
conservation, and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage, and the degree to which 
such training has been integrated within existing university and educational systems.

Indicate the steps that the State Party has taken to encourage scientiﬁ c research as a support to 
training and educational activities.

Areas where improvement would be desirable, and towards which the State Party is working 
should be indicated.

I.4  International cooperation and fund raising

 

 

 

 

This item refers particularly to Articles 4, 6, 17 and 18 of the Convention. Additional guidance on 
this issue can be found in Paragraphs 227-231 of the Operational Guidelines.

Provide  information  on  the  cooperation  with  other  States  Parties  for  the  identiﬁ cation, 
protection, conservation and preservation of the World Heritage located on their territories. 

Also  indicate  which  measures  have  been  taken  to  avoid  damage  directly  or  indirectly  to  the 
World Heritage on the territory of other States Parties. 

Have  national,  public  and  private  foundations  or  associations  been  established  for,  and  has 
the State Party given assistance to, raising funds and donations for the protection of the World 
Heritage?

I.5  Education, information and awareness building 

 

 

This item refers particularly to Articles 27 and 28 of the Convention on educational programmes. 
Additional guidance on these matters can be found in Chapter IX of the Operational Guidelines.

Indicate steps that the State Party has taken to raise the awareness of decision-makers, property 
owners, and the general public about the protection and conservation of cultural and natural 
heritage.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

163

Annex 7 

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention

 

 

Provide  information  on  education  (primary,  secondary  and  tertiary)  and  information 
programmes that have been undertaken or are planned to strengthen appreciation and respect 
by the population, to keep the public broadly informed of the dangers threatening the heritage 
and  of  activities  carried  out  in  pursuance  of  the  Convention.  Does  the  State  Party  participate 
in  the  UNESCO  Special  Project  Young  People’s  Participation  in  World  Heritage  Preservation  and 
Promotion? 

Information  on  site-speciﬁ c  activities  and  programmes  should  be  provided  under  item  II.4 
concerning management, below.

I.6  Conclusions and recommended action

 

 

The main conclusions under each of the items of Section I of the report should be summarized 
and tabulated together with the proposed action(s) to be taken, the agency(ies) responsible for 
taking the action(s) and the timeframe for its execution:

(i)  Main conclusions
(ii)  Proposed future action(s)
(iii)  Responsible implementing agency(ies)
(iv)  Timeframe for implementation
(v)  Needs for international assistance

States Parties are also encouraged to provide in their ﬁ rst periodic report an analysis of the process 
by which they ratiﬁ ed the Convention, the motivation, obstacles and difﬁ culties encountered in 
that process and perceived beneﬁ ts and lessons learnt.

SECTION II:  STATE OF CONSERVATION OF SPECIFIC WORLD HERITAGE PROPERTIES

 

 

 

 

 

The preparation of periodic state of conservation reports should involve those who are responsible 
for the day-to-day management of the property. For transboundary properties it is recommended 
that reports be prepared jointly by or in close collaboration between the agencies concerned. 

The  ﬁ rst  periodic  report  should  update  the  information  provided  in  the  original  nomination 
dossier.  Subsequent  reports  will  then  focus  on  any  changes  that  may  have  occurred  since  the 
previous report was submitted.

This section of the periodic report follows, therefore, the format for the nomination dossier. 

The state of properties included on the List of World Heritage in Danger are reviewed by the World 
Heritage Committee at regular intervals, in general once every year. This review concentrates on 
the speciﬁ c factors and considerations that led to the inscription of the property on the List of 
World Heritage in Danger. It will still be necessary to prepare a complete periodic report on the 
state of conservation of these properties.

This section should be completed for each individual World Heritage property. 

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

164

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention 

Annex 7

II.1  Introduction

(i)  State Party
(ii)  Name of the World Heritage property
(iii)  Geographical coordinates to the nearest second
(iv)  Date of inscription on the World Heritage List
(v)  Organization(s) or entity(ies) responsible for the preparation of the report
(vi)  Date of the report
(vii) Signature on behalf of the State Party

II.2  Statement of  Outstanding Universal Value

 

 

 

 

At  the  time  of  inscription  of  a  property  on  the  World  Heritage  List,  the  World  Heritage 
Committee indicates its outstanding universal value by deciding on the criteria for inscription. 
Please indicate the justiﬁ cation for inscription provided by the State Party, and the criteria under 
which the Committee inscribed the property on the World Heritage List. 

In the view of the State Party, does the Statement of Outstanding Universal Value adequately 
reﬂ ect  the  outstanding  universal  value  of  the  property  or  is  a  re-submission  necessary?  This 
could  be  considered,  for  example,  to  recognise  cultural  values  of  a  World  Heritage  property 
inscribed for its outstanding natural value, or vice-versa. This may become necessary either due 
to the substantive revision of the criteria by the World Heritage Committee or due to better 
identiﬁ cation or knowledge of speciﬁ c outstanding universal value of the property.

Another issue that might be reviewed here is whether the delimitation of the World Heritage 
property, and its buffer zone if appropriate, is adequate to ensure the protection and conservation 
of the outstanding universal value embodied in it. A revision or extension of the boundaries 
might be considered in response to such a review.

If a Statement of Outstanding Universal Value is not available or incomplete, it will be necessary, 
in the ﬁ rst periodic report, for the State Party to propose such a statement. The Statement of 
Outstanding  Universal  Value  should  reﬂ ect  the  criterion  (criteria)  on  the  basis  of  which  the 
Committee inscribed the property on the World Heritage List. It should also address questions 
such  as:  What  does  the  property  represent,  what  makes  the  property  outstanding,  what  are 
the speciﬁ c values that distinguish the property, what is the relationship of the property with 
its  setting,  etc.?  Such  Statement  of  Outstanding  Universal  Value  will  be  examined  by  the 
Advisory Body(ies) concerned and transmitted to the World Heritage Committee for approval, 
if appropriate.

II.3  Statement of authenticity and/or integrity

 

Under this item it is necessary to review whether the value on the basis of which the property was 
inscribed on the World Heritage List, and reﬂ ected in the Statement of Outstanding Universal 
Value under item II.2 above, are being maintained. 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

165

Annex 7 

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention

 

 

This should also include the issue of authenticity and/or integrity in relation to the property. 
What  was  the  evaluation  of  the  authenticity  and/or  integrity  of  the  property  at  the  time  of 
inscription? What is the authenticity and/or integrity of the property at present? 

Please note that a more detailed analysis of the conditions of the property is required under item 
II.6 on the basis of key indicators for measuring its state of conservation.

II.4  Management

 

 

 

 

 

 

Under this item, it is necessary to report on the implementation and effectiveness of protective 
legislation  at  the  national,  provincial  or  municipal  level  and/or  contractual  or  traditional 
protection as well as of management and/or planning control for the property concerned, as well 
as on actions that are foreseen for the future, to preserve the value described in the Statement of 
Outstanding Universal Value under item II.2. Additional guidance on this issue can be found in 
Section III.D of the Operational Guidelines. 

The State Party should also report on signiﬁ cant changes in the ownership, legal status and/or 
contractual  or  traditional  protective  measures,  management  arrangements  and  management 
plans as compared to the situation at the time of inscription or the previous periodic report. In 
such case, the State Party is requested to attach to the periodic report all relevant documentation, 
in particular legal texts, management plans and/or (annual) work plans for the management and 
maintenance of the property. Full name and address of the agency or person directly responsible 
for the property should also be provided.

The  State  Party  could  also  provide  an  assessment  of  the  human  and  ﬁ nancial  resources  that 
are available and required for the management of the property, as well as an assessment of the 
training needs for its staff.

The State Party is also invited to provide information on scientiﬁ c studies, research projects, 
education, information and awareness building activities directly related to the property and to 
comment on the degree to which heritage values of the property are effectively communicated 
to residents, visitors and the public. Matters that could be addressed are, among other things: 
is there a plaque at the property indicating that the property is a World Heritage property? Are 
there  educational  programmes  for  schools?    Are  there  special  events  and  exhibitions?  What 
facilities, visitor centre, site museum, trails, guides, information material etc. are made available 
to visitors? What role does the World Heritage designation play in all these programmes and 
activities?

Furthermore, the State Party is invited to provide statistical information, if possible on an annual 
basis, on income, visitor numbers, staff and other items if appropriate.

On  the  basis  of  the  review  of  the  management  of  the  property,  the  State  Party  may  wish 
to  consider  if  a  substantive  revision  of  the  legislative  and  administrative  provisions  for  the 
conservation of the property is required.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

166

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention 

Annex 7

II.5  Factors affecting the property

 

 

 

 

Please comment on the degree to which the property is threatened by particular problems and 
risks. Factors that could be considered under this item are those that are listed in the nomination 
format, e.g. development pressure, environmental pressure, natural disasters and preparedness, 
visitor/tourism pressure, number of inhabitants.

Considering  the  importance  of  forward  planning  and  risk  preparedness,  provide  relevant 
information  on  operating  methods  that  will  make  the  State  Party  capable  of  counteracting 
dangers that threaten or may endanger its cultural or natural heritage. Problems and risks to 
be  considered  could  include  earthquakes,  ﬂ oods,  land-slides,  vibrations,  industrial  pollution, 
vandalism, theft, looting, changes in the physical context of properties, mining, deforestation, 
poaching,  as  well  as  changes  in  land-use,  agriculture,  road  building,  construction  activities, 
tourism. Areas where improvement would be desirable, and towards which the State Party is 
working should be indicated.

This  item  should  provide  up-to-date  information  on  all  factors  which  are  likely  to  affect  or 
threaten the property. It should also relate those threats to measures taken to deal with them.

An assessment should also be given if the impact of these factors on the property is increasing or 
decreasing and what actions to address them have been effectively taken or are planned for the 
future.

II.6  Monitoring

  Whereas item II.3 of the periodic report provides an overall assessment of the maintenance of 
the outstanding universal value of the property, this item analyses in more detail the conditions 
of the property on the basis of key indicators for measuring its state of conservation. 

 

 

 

 

If no indicators were identiﬁ ed at the time of inscription of the property on the World Heritage 
List, this should be done in the ﬁ rst periodic report. The preparation of a periodic report can also 
be an opportunity to evaluate the validity of earlier identiﬁ ed indicators and to revise them, if 
necessary.

Up-to-date information should be provided in respect to each of the key indicators. Care should 
be taken to ensure that this information is as accurate and reliable as possible, for example by 
carrying out observations in the same way, using similar equipment and methods at the same 
time of the year and day.

Indicate which partners if any are involved in monitoring and describe what improvement the 
State Party foresees or would consider desirable in improving the monitoring system.

In speciﬁ c cases, the World Heritage Committee and/or its Bureau may have already examined 
the state of conservation of the property and made recommendations to the State Party, either 
at the time of inscription or afterwards. In such cases the State Party is requested to report on 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

167

Annex 7 

Format for the Periodic Reporting on the application of the World Heritage Convention

the actions that have been taken in response to the observations or recommendations made by 
the Bureau or Committee.

II.7  Summary of conclusions and recommended actions

 

 

The main conclusions under each of the items of the state of conservation report, in particular, 
whether the outstanding universal value of the property are maintained, should be summarized 
and tabulated together with:

(i)  Main conclusions regarding the state of the outstanding universal value of the property (see 

items II.2. and II.3. above)

(ii)  Main conclusions regarding the management and factors affecting the property (see Items 

II.4 and II.5. above)

(iii)  Proposed future action(s)
(iv)  Responsible implementing agency(ies)
(v)  Timeframe for implementation
(vi)  Needs for international assistance

The State Party is also requested to indicate what experience the State Party has obtained that 
could be relevant to others dealing with similar problems or issues. Please provide names and 
contact details of organizations or specialists who could be contacted for this purpose.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

168

International Assistance Request Form 

Annex 8

INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE REQUEST FORM

(cid:127)  The International Assistance request form is available at the following Web address: whc.unesco.org/en/intassistance
(cid:127)  Further guidance on International Assistance can be found in Section VII of the Operational Guidelines 
(cid:127)  The original signed version of the completed International Assistance request form should be sent in English or 

French to: 

  UNESCO World Heritage Centre
  7, place de Fontenoy
  75352 Paris 07 SP
 
  Telephone: +33 (0)1 45 68 12 76
 
  E-mail: wh-intassistance@unesco.org

Fax: +33 (0)1 45 68 55 70

France

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

169

Annex 8 

International Assistance Request Form

1. 

STATE PARTY .........................................................................................................................................................................

2. 

TITLE OF ACTIVITY

 

 

 

 

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

3. 

THE ACTIVITY WILL BENEFIT A PROPERTY OR PROPERTIES:

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

첸    inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger
첸    inscribed on the List of World Heritage 
첸     nominated for inscription on the List of World Heritage (i.e. Tentative List)

If any of the above, please indicate the name of the property(ies):

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

4. 

TYPE OF ACTIVITY (for more details see summary table in Paragraph 241 of the Operational 
Guidelines). Please select only one type of activity.

첸    Emergency Assistance
첸    Preparatory Assistance
첸    Training and Research Assistance 
첸    Technical Co-operation
첸    Assistance for Education, Information and Awareness Raising

 
 
 
 
 

5. 
5.a 

PREVIOUS CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE WORLD HERITAGE FUND:
If the activity is to beneﬁ t a World Heritage property or properties, have there been previous 
contributions from the World Heritage Fund beneﬁ ting this / these properties? 
 

 
5.b  Have  similar  or  related  activities  been  previously  implemented  within  the  State  Party  with 

첸  yes 

첸  no

contributions from the World Heritage Fund? 
 

첸  yes 

 

첸  no

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

170

International Assistance Request Form 

Annex 8

 

If yes to either 5.a or 5.b, indicate all previous contributions from the World Heritage Fund in the 
following format: 

Type of international 

assistance

Year

Amount 
in US$

Title of activity

6. 

PLACE OF ACTIVITY: 

 

 

 

 

Will the activity be held at a World Heritage property? 

Will the activity include a ﬁ eld component?  

 

 

 

첸    yes 

  첸   no

첸    yes 

  첸   no

If yes, where?  ..........................................................................................................................................................................

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

7. 

DATES AND DURATION OF ACTIVITY (foreseen or determined)

 

 

Dates :  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................

Duration:  ...................................................................................................................................................................................

8. 

THE ACTIVITY IS

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

첸    local
첸    national
첸    sub-regional involving a few States Parties from a region 
첸    regional involving most States Parties from a region
첸    international involving States Parties from different regions

If the activity is sub-regional, regional or international, please indicate the countries which will 
participate / beneﬁ t from the activity: 

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

171

Annex 8 

International Assistance Request Form

9. 

JUSTIFICATION FOR ACTIVITY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Indicate the problems or issues to be discussed/addressed.  This description should justify the 
need for the activity and should provide indications on the degree of urgency of the activities to 
be undertaken where appropriate. If relevant, give details of ascertained or potential threat to the 
property(ies) concerned. Whenever possible support the justiﬁ cation with documentary evidence, 
such as reports, photographs, slides, maps, etc.  Please list all documentation submitted. 

If relevant, explain how the activity contributes to the implementation of: 

(i) 

decisions of the World Heritage Committee; 

(ii) 

 recommendations  of  international  expert  missions  undertaken  at  the  request  of  the 
Committee, Chairperson or UNESCO;

(iii) 

recommendations of the Advisory Bodies; 

(iv) 

recommendations of UNESCO World Heritage Centre or other UNESCO Divisions; 

(v) 

recommendations of management plans concerning the property;

(vi) 

 guidelines elaborated from results of previous activities supported by  the World Heritage 
Fund at the World Heritage property or State Party.

10.   OJECTIVE(S) OF ACTIVITY(IES)

 

Clearly  state  the  objectives  of  the  activity  proposed  to  be  supported  by  the  World  Heritage 
Fund.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

172

International Assistance Request Form 

Annex 8

11.  PROGRAMME AND WORK PLAN OF THE ACTIVITY(IES)

 

Describe the programme and work plan of the activity(ies) to be undertaken with speciﬁ c reference 
to the objectives mentioned in Paragraph 10 above.  For meetings and training activities, tentative 
programmes should be provided including the themes, issues and problems to be discussed.

12.  TIMETABLE OF ACTIVITY(IES)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Provide a schedule (eg. bar-chart) covering the whole duration of the activity and giving the 
details such as:

(i) 

preparation of the activity;

(ii)  duration of each action;

(iii) 

schedule for purchase of the equipment, if relevant;

(iv) 

 dates on which certain funds are required to enable the successful completion 
of the activity(ies); 

(v) 

evaluation following the implementation (mandatory).

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

173

Annex 8 

International Assistance Request Form

13.  PROFILES  OF  SPECIALISTS,  TRAINERS,  TECHNICIANS  AND  /  OR  SKILLED  LABOUR,  IF 

THE ACTIVITY FORESEES THE PARTICIPATION OF SUCH PERSONS

 

Indicate the precise ﬁ eld of specialization and the work to be undertaken by each specialist as 
well as the duration required.  The World Heritage Centre and the Advisory Bodies are available 
to recommend resource persons / trainers, should the State(s) Party(ies) concerned so request. 

14.  PROFILES OF TRAINEES / PARTICIPANTS, IF THE ACTIVITY FORESEES THE PARTICIPATION 

OF SUCH PERSONS

 

Indicate  the  target  groups  and  beneﬁ ciaries  of  the  activity,  their  professions,  institutions,  or 
ﬁ eld(s) of specialization. 

15.  EQUIPMENT

 

If provision of equipment is foreseen in the activity, provide a detailed list of the equipment to 
be purchased attaching copies of pro-forma invoices.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

174

International Assistance Request Form 

Annex 8

16.  EXPECTED RESULTS, OUTCOME, FOLLOW-UP 

 

 

 

Describe the expected results from the activity, especially with reference to the impact the activity 
will have to enhance the conservation, management and presentation of the World Heritage 
property(ies) concerned.

Describe the indicators and evidence which will demonstrate the impact the activity(ies) will 
have on the objectives mentioned in section 10 above.

Indicate the provisions made for reviewing the outcome of the activity at a national level, and 
any follow-up activities foreseen.

17.  BUDGET

17.a  Provide a detailed breakdown of costs in United States dollars of the individual elements within 

the following sections, including unit costs, if possible:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(i) 

(ii) 

 Organization (venue, ofﬁ ce expenses such as photocopies, stationery, secretarial 
assistance, translation, interpretation, audio-visual arrangements)

 Personnel and Consultancy Services (fees paid to international/national resource 
persons, indicating fee per day/week/month, etc.)

(iii)  Travel (international, national or local travel)

(iv)  Accommodation, Daily Subsistence Allowance (per day, etc.)

(v)  Equipment (if relevant)

(vi) 

 Reporting, evaluation, and publication (if the publication of the proceedings of the 
training exercise is foreseen, translation, editing, printing, layout, distribution, and 
communication costs, etc.)

(vii)  Miscellaneous (visas, other costs).

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

175

Annex 8 

International Assistance Request Form

EXAMPLE OF DETAILED BREAKDOWN OF COSTS:

Item

Detail US$

Subtotal US$

Organization
•  venue
•  ofﬁ ce expenses
• 
• 
• 
•  audio-visual equipment
•  other

secretarial assistance
translation
simultaneous interpretation

US$ __ /day / week / month = US$ __
US$ __ /day / week / month = US$ __
US$ __ /day / week / month = US$ __
US$ __ /page  = US$ __
US$ __ /day / week = US$ __
US$ __
US$ __

Personnel / consultancy service
• 

international  expert  (ﬁ eld  of 
expertise)

•  national trainer
•  national coordinator
•  other

Travel
• 

international  round  trip  (RT) 
airfare

•  domestic travel costs
•  other

Accommodation, Daily 
subsistence allowance
• 
food 
•  board

US$ __ / week for __ weeks = US$ __
US$ __ / week for __ weeks = US$ __
US$ __ / week for __ weeks = US$ __
US$ __ / week for __ weeks = US$ __

US$ __ / RT for __ experts = US$ __
US$ __ / bus / day for __ days =
US$ __

US$ __ / day for __ persons = US$ __
US$ __ / day for __ persons = US$ __

Equipment

US$ __ / unit for __ units =

Reporting, evaluation and 

publication
reporting
evaluation
editing, layout

• 
• 
• 
•  printing
•  distribution
•  other

Miscellaneous
•  visas
•  other

TOTAL

US$ __
US$ __
US$ __
US$ __
US$ __
US$ __

US$ __ for __ participants = US$ __
US$ __ for __ participants = US$ __

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

176

US$ ___

US$ ___

US$ ___

US$ ___

US$ ___

US$ ___

US$ ___

US$ ___

International Assistance Request Form 

Annex 8

17.b  Indicate how the total estimated costs listed in Paragraph 17.a above will be met by contributions 

from:

 

(i) 

National agency(ies) in kind (specify in detail) 

 

(ii)  

National agency(ies) in cash (specify)

 

(iii) 

 Other bi / multi-lateral organizations, donors, etc (specify whether or not the resources 
are already available or being requested)

 

(iv) 

 World Heritage Fund: Describe the reasons why the resources are insufﬁ cient at the 
national level. 

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

177

Annex 8 

International Assistance Request Form

18.  AGENCY(IES) RESPONSIBLE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACTIVITY

 

Please provide the name, title, address and all contact details of the person, agency(ies) who will 
be responsible for the implementation of the activity as well as those of any other participating 
agencies.

19. 

SIGNATURE ON BEHALF OF STATE PARTY

 

 

 

Full name  ..................................................................................................................................................................................

Title  ...............................................................................................................................................................................................

Date  ...............................................................................................................................................................................................

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

178

Evaluation criteria of the Advisory Bodies 
for International Assistance request

Annex 9

EVALUATION CRITERIA OF THE ADVISORY BODIES 

FOR INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE REQUESTS

This Annex is under preparation

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

179

Bibliography

SELECT WORLD HERITAGE BIBLIOGRAPHY

WORLD HERITAGE CENTRE DOCUMENTS DATABASE

http://whc.unesco.org/statutorydoc

The UNESCO World Heritage Centre “Ofﬁ cial Records” searchable online document collection 

permits the retrieval of information contained in the reports 

of the World Heritage Committee and General Assembly of States Parties to the Convention

BASIC TEXTS

UNESCO, Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, adopted by 
the General Conference at its seventeenth session, Paris, 16 November 1972, WHC-2001/WS/2
http://whc.unesco.org/en/conventiontext

UNESCO,  Intergovernmental  Committee  for  the  protection  of  the  World  Cultural  and  Natural 
Heritage, Rules of Procedure, WHC.2003/5.
http://whc.unesco.org/en/committee

UNESCO, General Assembly of States Parties to the Convention concerning the Protection of the World 
Cultural and Natural Heritage, Rules of Procedure, WHC-03/GA/1 Rev. 2 (as of 15 October 2003).
http://whc.unesco.org/en/garules

UNESCO,  Intergovernmental  Committee  for  the  protection  of  the  World  Cultural  and  Natural 
Heritage, Financial Regulations for the World Heritage Fund, Paris 1995 (WHC/7, August 1995).
http://whc.unesco.org/en/committeerules

UNESCO,  World  Heritage  Centre,  Properties  inscribed  on  the  World  Heritage  List  http://whc.unesco.
org/en/list

UNESCO,  World  Heritage  Centre,  Brief  Descriptions  of  the  Properties  inscribed  on  the  World  Heritage 
List.
http://whc.unesco.org/briefdescriptions

Pressouyre, Léon, The World Heritage Convention, Twenty Years Later, UNESCO, Paris 1993.

Batisse, Michel and Bolla, Gérard, L’invention du «patrimoine mondial», Les Cahiers de l’Histoire, AAFU, 
Paris 2003.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

181

Bibliography

STRATEGIC DOCUMENTS

World Heritage Committee, Strategic Orientations, in Annex II of the Report of the 16th Session of the 
World Heritage Committee, Santa Fe, United States of America 7-14 December 1992, Paris, December 
1992 (WHC-92/CONF.002/12).

Report of the Expert Meeting on the “Global Strategy” and thematic studies for a representative World Heritage 
List (20-22 June 1994) (WHC-94/CONF.003/INF.6)

World Heritage Committee, A Strategic Plan for World Heritage Documentation, Information and Education 
Activities, Paris 1998 (WHC-98/CONF.203/15).

World Heritage Committee, Global Training Strategy for World Cultural and Natural Heritage, adopted 
by the World Heritage Committee at its 25th session in Helsinki, Finland, 11-16 December 2001 (see 
ANNEX X of WHC-01/CONF.208/24)

World Heritage Committee, Budapest Declaration on World Heritage, 2002
http://whc/unesco.org/en/budapestdeclaration

WORLD HERITAGE PAPER SERIES6

Pedersen,  A.,  Managing  Tourism  at  World  Heritage  Sites:  a  Practical  Manual  for  World  Heritage  site 
managers, World Heritage Manual No. 1, UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, Paris 2002.

Investing in World Heritage: Past Achievements, Future Ambitions, World Heritage Paper No. 2, UNESCO, 
World Heritage Centre, Paris 2002.

Periodic Report Africa, World Heritage Report No. 3, UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, Paris 2003.

Hillary, A., Kokkonen, M. and Max, L., (edited by), Proceedings of the World Heritage Marine Biodiversity 
Workshop, Hanoi, Viet Nam (February 25-March 1, 2002), World Heritage Paper No. 4, UNESCO, World 
Heritage Centre, Paris 2003.

Identiﬁ cation  and  Documentation  of  Modern  Heritage,  World  Heritage  Paper  No.  5,  UNESCO,  World 
Heritage Centre, Paris 2003.

Fowler, P. J., (edited by), World Heritage Cultural Landscapes 1992-2002, World Heritage Paper No. 6, 
UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, Paris 2003.

Cultural  Landscapes:  the  Challenges  of  Conservation,  World  Heritage  Paper  No.  7,  UNESCO,  World 
Heritage Centre, Paris 2003.

6 

For online consultation: http://whc.unesco.org/publications

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

182

Bibliography

Mobilizing  Young  People  for  World  Heritage,  World  Heritage  Paper  No.  8,  UNESCO,  World  Heritage 
Centre, Paris 2003.

Partnerships  for  World  Heritage  Cities:  Culture  as  a  Vector  for  Sustainable  Urban  Development,  World 
Heritage Paper No. 9, UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, Paris 2004.

Monitoring  World  Heritage,  World  Heritage  Paper  No.  10,  UNESCO,  World  Heritage  Centre,  Paris 
2004.

Periodic  Report  and  Regional  Programme  -  Arab  States  –  2000-2003,  World  Heritage  Paper  No.  11, 
UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, Paris 2004.

The State of World Heritage in the Asia-Paciﬁ c Region – 2003, World Heritage Paper No. 12, UNESCO, 
World Heritage Centre, Paris 2004.

Linking Universal and Local Values: Managing a Sustainable Future for World Heritage, World Heritage 
Paper No. 13, UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, Paris 2004.

CULTURAL LANDSCAPES

Von Droste, Bernd, Plachter, Harald, and Rössler, Mechtild (edited by), Cultural Landscapes of Universal 
Value, Components of a Global Strategy, Stuttgart New York 1995.

Rössler, Mechtild, and Saouma-Forero, Galia (edited by), The World Heritage Convention and Cultural 
Landscapes in Africa Expert Meeting (Tiwi, Kenya 9-14 March 1999), UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, 
Paris 2000.

Fowler, P. J., (edited by), World Heritage Cultural Landscapes 1992-2002, World Heritage Paper No. 6, 
UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, Paris 2003.

Cultural  Landscapes:  the  Challenges  of  Conservation,  World  Heritage  Paper  No.  7,  UNESCO,  World 
Heritage Centre, Paris 2004.

GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR A BALANCED REPRESENTATIVE AND CREDIBLE WORLD HERITAGE LIST

Report  of  the  Expert  Meeting  on  the  “Global  Strategy”  and  Thematic  Studies  for  a  Representative  World 
Heritage List (20-22 June 1994) (WHC-94/CONF.003/INF.6)

Report of the Expert Meeting on Evaluation of General Principles and Criteria for Nominations of Natural 
World Heritage sites (Parc national de la Vanoise, France, 22 - 24 March 1996) (WHC-96/CONF.202/
INF.9).

African Cultural Heritage and the World Heritage Convention, Fourth Global Strategy meeting (Porto-Novo, 
Benin, 16-19 September 1998), UNESCO 1998.

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

183

Bibliography

Von Droste, Bernd, and Rössler, Mechtild, and Titchen, Sarah (edited by), Linking Nature and Culture, 
Report of the Global Strategy, Natural and Cultural Heritage Expert Meeting (Theatre Institute, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands 25 - 29 March 1998), (WHC-98/CONF.203/INF.7).

Saouma-Forero, Galia, (edited by), Authenticity and Integrity in an African Context: Expert Meeting, Great 
Zimbabwe, Zimbabwe, 26-29 May 2000, UNESCO - World Heritage Centre, Paris 2001.

UNESCO Thematic Expert Meeting on Asia-Paciﬁ c Sacred Mountains (5-10 September 2001, Wakayama 
City, Japan), Final Report, UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, Agency for Cultural Affairs, Japan, Tokyo 
2001.

Linking Universal and Local Values: Managing a Sustainable Future for World Heritage, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands (22 - 24 May, 2003).
http://whc.unesco.org/archive/2003/Amsterdam_05_2003_en.pdf

MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES

Feilden,  Bernard  M.,  and  Jokilehto,  Jukka,  Management  Guidelines  for  World  Cultural  Heritage  Sites, 
ICCROM, Rome 1993.

Stovel,  Herb,  Risk  Preparedness:  a  Management  Manual  for  World  Cultural  Heritage,  ICCROM,  Rome 
1998.

Phillips, Adrian, (edited by), Economic Values of Protected Areas - Guidelines for Protected Area Managers 
(Task Force on Economic Beneﬁ ts of protected Areas of the World Commission on Protected Areas 
(WCPA)  of  IUCN,  in  collaboration  with  the  Economics  Service  Unit  of  IUCN),  IUCN,  The  World 
Conservation Union, World Commission of Protected Areas (WCPA), Best Practice protected Area 
Guidelines Series No. 2, 1998.

Kelleher,  G.  and  Philips,  Adrian,  (edited  by),  Guidelines  for  Marine  Protected  Areas,  IUCN,  World 
Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA), Best Practice Protected Area Guidelines Series No. 3, 1999.

Philips,  Adrian,  (edited  by),  Evaluating  Effectiveness  -  A  Framework  for  Assessing  the  Management  of 
Protected Areas, IUCN, The World Conservation Union 2001, World Commission of Protected Areas 
(WCPA), Best Practice Protected Area Guidelines Series No. 6, 2001.

Phillips,  Adrian  (edited  by),  Transboundary  Protected  Areas  for  Peace  and  Co-operation  (Based  on  the 
proceedings  of  workshops  held  in  Bormio  (1998)  and  Gland  (2000),  IUCN,  The  World  Conservation 
Union, World Commission of Protected Areas (WCPA) Best Practice Protected Area Guidelines Series 
No. 7, 2001.

Philips,  Adrian,  Management  Guidelines  for  IUCN  Category  V  Protected  Areas,  Protected  Landscapes/
Seascapes, Cardiff University, IUCN, Cambridge 2002.

Thomas, Lee, and Middleton, Julie, and Philips, Adrian (edited by), Guidelines for Management Planning 
of Protected Areas, Cardiff University, IUCN, Cambridge 2003.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

184

Bibliography

OTHER

World  Heritage  in  Young  Hands.  To  Know,  Cherish  and  Act,  an  Educational  Resource  Kit  for  Teachers, 
UNESCO 2002.

World  Heritage  2002.  Shared  Legacy,  Common  Responsibility,  International  Congress  organized  by 
UNESCO’s  World  Heritage  Centre  and  Regional  Bureau  for  Science  in  Europe  (ROSTE)  with  the 
support of the Italian Government on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the World Heritage 
Convention, Cini Foundation, Island of San Giorgio Maggiore, Venice, Italy 14-16 November 2002, 
UNESCO, World Heritage Centre, Paris 2003.

WEB ADDRESSES

UNESCO
http://www.unesco.org

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
http://www.whc.unesco.org

ICCROM
http://www.iccrom.org

ICOMOS
http://www.icomos.org

UNESCO-ICOMOS Documentation Centre
http://www.international.icomos.org/centre_documentation/index.html

IUCN
http://www.iucn.org

UNEP - World Conservation Monitoring Centre, Protected Area Database
http://sea.unep-wcmc.org/wdbpa/
Documentation and Conservation of Monuments and Sites of the Modern Movement 
(DOCOMOMO)
http://www.docomomo-us.org/
http://www.docomomo.nl
The International Committee for the Conservation of the Industrial Heritage (TICCIH)
http://www.mnactec.com/TICCIH/

The International Federation of Landscape Architects (IFLA)
Email: info@iﬂ aonline.org
http://www.iﬂ aonline.org/home.html
http://www.archi.fr/DOCOMOMO-FR/

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

185

INDEX

A

Accession
Acceptance
Advisory Bodies

Assistance (see International Assistance)
Authenticity

- conditions of
- statement of
Awareness raising

B

Boundaries
Buffer zones
Bureau of the World Heritage Committee

C

Canals (see Heritage Canals)
Capacity building
Committee (see World Heritage Committee)
Comparative analyses
Convention concerning the Protection 
 
 
Conventions (others)
Corrective measures
Criteria for inscription of a property on the World Heritage List
Criteria for inscription of a property on the List 
 

  of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage
 

(see World Heritage Convention)

  of World Heritage in Danger 

Index

Paragraph No.

Annex 1
Annex 1
30-37, 143-151, 247-254,
Annex 6, Annex 9 

17-18
79-86
85
217-218

99-102
103-107
19

26, 74, 212-216

132 (3), Annex 3, Annex 6

41-43
178-182
77-78

178-182

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

187

Index

Cultural heritage (deﬁ nition)
Cultural landscapes

D

Deferral of nominations
Deletion
DoCoMoMo
Draft nominations

E

Education
Emblem (see World Heritage Emblem)
Emergency assistance
Evaluation

- of nominations by ICOMOS and IUCN
- of requests for International Assistance

Extensions

F

Fellowships

45
47, Annex 3, Bibliography

160
192-198
Annex 6
168

219-222

235, 241

143-151, Annex 6
247-254, Annex 9
136, 164-165

- Application for fellowship

Financial Regulations of the World Heritage Fund
Fossil landscape

241
223-224
Annex 3

G

  to the World Heritage Convention

General Assembly of States Parties 
 
Global Strategy for a Representative, Balanced 
 
Groups of buildings

  and Credible World Heritage List

17-18

55-58, Bibliography
Annex 3

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

188

H

Harmonization of Tentative Lists
Heritage canals
Heritage route
Historic areas
Historic centres
Historic towns

I

ICCROM

- evaluation of requests for International Assistance

ICOMOS

- evaluation of nominations
- evaluation of requests for International Assistance

Identiﬁ cation of the property
IFLA
Immovable heritage
Information 

- archived by the Secretariat
- speciﬁ c information for Committee members
- available to the public

Inhabited historic towns
Inscription

- on the World Heritage List (also see Nominations)
- on the World Heritage List in Danger

Integrity

- conditions of,
- statement of,

International assistance

- contractual arrangements
- evaluation and approval 
- general evaluation and follow-up
- principles and priorities
- procedure and format
- types of

Index

73, 75
Annex 3
Annex 3
Annex 3
Annex 3
Annex 3

32-33
247-254, Annex 9
34-35,
143-151, Annex 6
247-254, Annex 9
132 (1)
Annex 6
48

280-284
285-287
288-290
Annex 3

154-157
183-189

87-95
88
233-235
255
247-254, Annex 9
256-257
236-240
242-246, Annex 8
241

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

189

Index

IUCN

- evaluation of nominations
- evaluation of requests for International Assistance

IUGS

L

Legislative, regulatory and contractual measures
List of World Heritage in Danger

- inscription of properties
- regular review of the state of conservation

Local communities
Logo (see World Heritage Emblem)

M

Management 

- plan/system

Mixed cultural and natural heritage
Modiﬁ cations

- to the boundaries
- to the criteria
- to the name

Monitoring (see also Reactive Monitoring)
Monumental group
Monuments
Movable heritage

N

Natural areas
Natural heritage (deﬁ nition)
New towns of the twentieth century
Nominations

- contact information of responsible authorities
- decision of the World Heritage Committee

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

190

36-37
143-151, Annex 6
247-254, Annex 9
Annex 6

98
177-191
177-189
190-191
12, 40, 64, 90, 123, Annex 3

96-97
108-118
46, Annex 3

163-165
166
167

Annex 3
Annex 3
48

90
45
Annex 3

132 (8)
153-160

- deferral of
- description of the property
- different types of
- documentation
- draft
- emergency basis (to be processed on)
- evaluation of
- format 
- format and content
- identiﬁ cation of the property
- justiﬁ cation for inscription
- monitoring
- number of printed copies required
- paper and electronic format
- preparation of
- protection and management
- referral of
- registration
- serial properties
- signature on behalf of the State Party(ies)
- state of conservation
- timetable - overview
- transboundary properties
- withdrawal of

O

Operational Guidelines 
Organizations (other)
Outstanding universal value

- criteria for the assessment of
- Statement of

P

Periodic Reporting

- evaluation and follow-up
- objectives

Index

160
132 (2)
134-139
132 (7)
168
161-162
143-151
Annex 5
129-133
132 (1)
132 (3)
132 (6)
132 (10)
132 (11)
120-128
132 (5)
159
140-142
137-139
132 (9)
132 (4)
168
134-136
152

1-3
38
49-53
77-78
154-157

208-210
199-202

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

191

Index

- procedure and format
- Preparatory Assistance

Priorities 

- nominations
- International Assistance

Promotional activities
Protection
Publications

R

Ratiﬁ cation
Reactive Monitoring

- deﬁ nition
- objective
- information received
- decision by the World Heritage Committee

Reconstruction
Reduction of the area of a World Heritage property
Relict (or fossil) landscape
Reporting (see Periodic Reporting)
Rules of Procedure

- General Assembly
- World Heritage Committee

S

Secretariat 
Serial properties
State of conservation
- regular review of
- at time of nomination
Statement of authenticity
Statement of integrity
Statement of Outstanding Universal Value
States Parties
Strategic Objectives
Sustainable use

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

192

203-207, Annex 7
235, 241

61
235-240
218
96-107
290

Annex 1
169-176
169
170-171
172-174
175-176
86
165
Annex 3

17, Bibliography
20, Bibliography

27-29
137-139

190-191
132 (4)
85
88
154-157
10-16
26
119

T

Technical Co-operation
Tentative List

- submission format

TICCIH
Training

- national strategies and regional co-operation

Training and Research Assistance
Transboundary properties

U

UNEP- WCMC
Urban areas

W

Withdrawal of nominations
World Heritage

- deﬁ nition of

World Heritage Bureau (see Bureau of the World Heritage Committee)
World Heritage Centre (see Secretariat)
World Heritage Convention
World Heritage Committee
World Heritage Emblem
World Heritage Fund
World Heritage List

- deﬁ nition
- criteria
- process for the inscription of properties

Index

235, 241
62-76
Annex 2
Annex 6

214
235, 241
134-136

Annex 7
Annex 3

152

45-48

4-9
19-26
258-279
223-232

45-53
77-78
120-168

Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention

193

WHC.2003/5

Rules of Procedure

Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

World Heritage Centre

The Rules of Procedure were last revised by the World Heritage Committee at its sixth extraordinary session 
(Paris, March 2003). 

This document is also available at the following Web address:

http://whc.unesco.org/en/committeerules (English)
http://whc.unesco.org/fr/comitereglement (French)

(WHC-2004/WS/11)

Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection

of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage

Established under the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage 
adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO at its seventeenth session on 16 November 1972.

Rules of Procedure

Adopted by the Committee at its ﬁ rst session (Paris, 1977) and amended at its second, (Washing-
ton D.C., 1978), third (Luxor, 1979), twentieth (Mérida, 1996), twenty-fourth, (Cairns, 2000) and 
twenty-ﬁ fth (Helsinki, 2001) ordinary and sixth extraordinary (Paris, 2003) sessions.1, 2

All the terms used in these Rules to designate the person discharging duties or functions are to be 
interpreted as implying that men and women are equally eligible to ﬁ ll any post or seat associated 
with the discharge of these duties and functions.3

1.  Amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).
2.    The revisions made to these Rules have resulted in a change to the numbering in certain sections and Rules. To trace the 

changes in the numbering see the report of the sixth extraordinary session (document WHC-03/6 EXT. COM/8, Annex II).

3.    Adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003). The Rules amended as a consequence are not 

mentioned in the footnotes.

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

197

Table of Contents

I.  Membership

Rule  1  The World Heritage Committee

II.  Sessions

Rule  2  Ordinary and extraordinary sessions
 
 

3  Convocation
4  Date and Place

III.  Participants

Rule  5  Delegations
 
 
 

6  Organizations attending in an advisory capacity
7 
8  Observers

Invitations for consultation

IV.  Agenda

Rule  9  Provisional Agenda
 
 

10  Adoption of the Agenda
11  Amendments, deletions and new items

V.  Bureau

Rule  12  Bureau
 
 
 
 

13  Elections
14  Duties of the Chairperson
15  Replacement of Chairperson
16  Replacement the Rapporteur

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

199

VI.  Conduct of business

Rule  17  Quorum
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18  Public meetings
19  Private meetings
20  Consultative bodies 
21  Subsidiary bodies
22  Order and time-limit of speeches
23  Text of proposals
24  Division of proposals
25  Voting on amendments
26  Voting on Proposals
27  Withdrawal of proposals
28  Points of order
29  Procedural motions
30  Suspension or adjournment of the meeting
31  Adjournment of debate
32  Closure of debate
33  Order of procedural motions
34  Decisions

VII. 

 Voting

Rule  35  Voting rights
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36  Conduct during voting
37  Two-thirds majority
38  Simple majority
39  Counting of votes
40  Show of hands
41  Secret ballot
42  Conduct of voting by secret ballot

VIII. Secretariat of the Committee

Rule  43  The Secretariat

IX. 

 Working languages and reports

Rule  44  Working languages
 
 

45  Deadline for distribution of documents
46  Reports of the session

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

200

 
 
 

47  Summary Record
48  Communication of the documentation
49   Reports to the General Assembly of States Parties and to the UNESCO General 

Conference 

X. 

 Adoption, amendment and suspension 
of the Rules of Procedure

Rule  50  Adoption
 
 

51  Amendment
52  Suspension 

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

201

I.  Membership

Rule 1.  The World Heritage Committee

Convention
Article 8.1

The Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natu-
ral Heritage called the World Heritage Committee and hereinafter referred to as the 
“Committee” is composed of the States Parties to the Convention elected in accord-
ance with Article 8 of the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and 
Natural Heritage hereinafter referred to as the “Convention”.

II. 

Sessions

Rule 2.  Ordinary and Extraordinary Sessions4

2.1   The Committee shall meet at least once per year in ordinary session.

2.2   The Committee shall meet in extraordinary session at the request of at least two-

thirds of the States members.

Rule 3.  Convocation5

3.1   Sessions of the Committee shall be convened by the Chairperson of the Commit-
tee, hereinafter referred to as «the Chairperson», in consultation with the Direc-
tor-General of UNESCO, hereinafter referred to as «the Director-General».

3.2   The Director-General shall notify the States members of the Committee, the date, 
place and provisional agenda of each session, not less than sixty days in advance 
in the case of an ordinary session and, if possible, not less than thirty days in 
advance in the case of an extraordinary session.

3.3   The Director-General shall, at the same time, notify to the States, organizations 
and individuals mentioned in Rules 6, 7 and 8, the date, place and provisional 
agenda of each session. 

Rule 4.  Date and Place

4.1   The Committee shall determine at each session, in consultation with the Director-
General, the date and the place of the next session. The date and/or place may be 
modiﬁ ed, if necessary, by the Bureau, in consultation with the Director-General.

4.2   Any State member of the Committee may invite the Committee to hold a session 

in its territory.

4.   Rule 2.1 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).
5.   Rule 3.1 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

203

 

4.3   In determining the place of the next session, the Committee shall give due regard 
to the need to ensure an equitable rotation among the different regions and cul-
tures of the world.

III.  Participants

Rule 5.  Delegations6

5.1   Each State member of the Committee shall be represented by one delegate, who 

may be assisted by alternates, advisers and experts.

Convention
Article 9.3

5.2   States members of the Committee shall choose as their representatives persons 
qualiﬁ ed in the ﬁ eld of cultural or natural heritage.  They are strongly encouraged 
to include in their delegation persons qualiﬁ ed in both ﬁ elds.

5.3   States members of the Committee shall transmit to the Secretariat in writing the 

names, designations and qualiﬁ cations of their representatives.

5.4   In order to ensure a fair representation within the Committee of the various geo-
graphical and cultural areas, the Committee allocates in its budget a sum intended 
to cover the cost of participation, in its sessions and sessions of its Bureau, of rep-
resentatives of developing countries, but only for persons who are experts in cul-
tural or natural heritage. And, if the budget allows, representatives of developing 
countries who are non-members of the Committee may also be supported; their 
representatives too must be experts in cultural or natural heritage.

5.5   Requests  for  assistance  to  participate  in  the  Bureau  and  Committee  meetings 
should  reach  the  Secretariat  at  least  four  weeks  before  the  session  concerned. 
These requests shall be considered within the resources available as decided by 
the Committee, in increasing order of GNP income per capita of each member of 
the Committee. In no event may the World Heritage Fund ﬁ nance more than two 
representatives of each State member, who must in this case be one expert in the 
natural and one in the cultural heritage ﬁ eld. If ﬁ nancial resources permit, other 
requests for assistance to attend shall be considered.

Rule 6.  Organizations attending in an advisory capacity7, 8

Convention
Article 8.3

A representative of the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Res-
toration of Cultural Property (ICCROM), a representative of the International Council 
on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) and a representative of the World Conservation 

6.   Rule 5.2 amended and Rules 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).
7.    Not to confuse the Advisory Bodies (Article 8.3 of the World Heritage Convention and Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
World Heritage Committee) with the consultative bodies (Article 10.3 of the World Heritage Convention and Rule 20 of the 
Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee).

8.   Rule 6 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

204

Union, formerly International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources 
(IUCN), to whom may be added, at the request of States Parties to the Convention meet-
ing in General Assembly during the ordinary sessions of the General Conference of the 
United  Nations  Educational,  Scientiﬁ c  and  Cultural  Organization,  representatives  of 
other intergovernmental or non-governmental organizations, with similar objectives, 
may attend the meetings of the Committee in an advisory capacity. 

Rule 7. 

Invitations for consultation9

Convention
Article 10.2

The Committee may at any time invite public or private organizations or individuals 
to participate in its sessions for consultation on particular problems. 

Rule 8.  Observers10

8.1   States Parties to the Convention which are not members of the Committee may 
attend the sessions of the Committee and its Bureau as observers. They shall be 
consulted by the Committee on all matters in respect of which consultation is 
prescribed by the Convention.

8.2   Non States Parties to the Convention who are Member States of UNESCO or of the 
United Nations may also be permitted by the Committee, upon written request, 
to attend the sessions of the Committee and its Bureau as observers.

8.3   The United Nations and organizations of the United Nations system, as well as, 
upon written request, other international governmental and non-governmental 
organizations, permanent observer missions to UNESCO and non proﬁ t- making 
institutions  having  activities  in  the  ﬁ elds  covered  by  the  Convention,  may  be 
authorized by the Committee to participate in the sessions of the Committee as 
observers. 

8.4   The  Director-General  may  provisionally  invite  any  organization  referred  to  in 

Rule 8.3 subject to subsequent conﬁ rmation by the Committee.

IV.  Agenda

Rule 9.  Provisional Agenda11

Convention
Article 14.2

9.1  The provisional agenda of the sessions of the Committee shall be prepared by the 
Director-General, utilizing to the fullest extent possible the services of the Inter-
national Centre for the Study of the Preservation and the Restoration of Cultural 

9.   Rule 7 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).
10.  Title and Rule 8.1 amended and Rule 8.2 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003); Rule 8.3 
amended by the Committee at its twenty-ﬁ fth ordinary session (Helsinki, 2001) and at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 
2003).

11. Rule 9.1 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

205

 Property (ICCROM), the International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) 
and the World Conservation Union, formerly International Union for Conservation 
of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), in their respective areas of competence.

9.2   The provisional agenda of an ordinary session of the Committee shall include:

(a)  all questions, the inclusion of which has been decided by the Committee at 

previous sessions;

(b)  all questions proposed by members of the Committee;
(c)  all questions proposed by States Parties to the Convention not members of 

the Committee;

(d)  all questions proposed by the Director-General.

9.3   The provisional agenda of an extraordinary session shall include only those ques-

tions for the consideration of which the session has been convened.

Rule 10.  Adoption of the Agenda

The Committee shall adopt its agenda at the beginning of each session.

Rule 11.  Amendments, deletions and new items

The Committee may amend, delete or add items to the agenda so adopted if so decided 
by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting.

V.  Bureau12

Rule 12.  Bureau13

12.1 The Bureau of the Committee shall consist of the Chairperson, the ﬁ ve Vice-Chair-
persons and the Rapporteur. The Bureau shall co-ordinate the work of the Commit-
tee and ﬁ x the dates, hours and order of business of meetings. The Vice- Chairpersons 
and the Rapporteur shall assist the Chairperson in carrying out his duties.

12.2 The  Bureau  shall  meet  during  the  sessions  of  the  Committee  as  frequently  as 

deemed necessary. 

Rule 13.  Elections14

13.1 The Committee, at the end of each ordinary session, shall elect, from amongst 
those members whose term continues through the next ordinary session, a Chair-

12. Title amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003) with respect to the English version.
13.  Rule 12.1 amended by the Committee at its second  ordinary session (Washington D.C., 1978) and Rule 12.2 adopted by 

the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).

14.  Rule 13.1 amended by the Committee at its second (Washington D.C., 1978) and twentieth (Mérida 1996) ordinary sessions 

and at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

206

person, ﬁ ve Vice-Chairpersons and a Rapporteur who shall remain in ofﬁ ce until 
the end of that session.

13.2 The Chairperson, the Vice-Chairpersons and the Rapporteur shall be eligible for 

immediate re-election for a second term of ofﬁ ce.

13.3 In electing the Bureau, due regard shall be given to the need to ensure an equitable 
representation of the different regions and cultures of the world and a proper bal-
ance between the cultural and natural heritage as provided in the Convention.

Rule 14.  Duties of the Chairperson

14.1 In addition to exercising the powers which are conferred upon him elsewhere by 
the present Rules, the Chairperson shall open and close each plenary meeting of 
the Committee. He shall direct the discussions, ensure observance of these Rules, 
accord the right to speak, put questions to the vote and announce decisions. He 
shall rule on points of order and, subject to the present Rules, shall control the 
proceedings and the maintenance of order. He shall not vote, but he may instruct 
another  member  of  his  delegation  to  vote  on  his  behalf.  He  shall  exercise  all 
other functions given to him by the Committee.

14.2 A Vice-Chairperson acting as Chairperson shall have the same powers and duties 

as the Chairperson.

14.3 The  Chairperson  and  Vice-Chairperson,  or  Vice-Chairpersons,  of  a  subsidiary 
body  of  the  Committee  shall  have  the  same  duties  with  regard  to  the  bodies 
over  which  they  are  called  upon  to  preside  as  the  Chairperson  and  the  Vice  -
 Chairpersons of the Committee.

Rule 15.  Replacement of Chairperson15

15.1 If the Chairperson is unable to act at any session of the Committee or Bureau, or 
part thereof, his functions shall be exercised by a Vice-Chairperson, in the Eng-
lish alphabetical order of States members of the Bureau commencing with the 
country of the Chairperson.

15.2 If the Chairperson ceases to represent a State member of the Committee or is for any 
reason unable to complete his term of ofﬁ ce, he is replaced by a Vice-  Chairperson, 
in the English alphabetical order of States members of the Bureau commencing 
with the country of the Chairperson, for the remainder of the term of ofﬁ ce.

15.3 The Chairperson shall abstain from exercising his functions for all issues relating 
to a property situated on the territory of the State Party of which he is a national.

15. Rules 15.1 and 15.2 amended and Rule 15.3 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003).

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

207

Rule 16.  Replacement of the Rapporteur16

16.1 If the Rapporteur is unable to act at any session of the Committee or Bureau, or 
part thereof, his functions shall be exercised by a Vice-Chairperson in the English 
alphabetical order of States members of the Bureau commencing with the coun-
try of the Rapporteur.

16.2 If the Rapporteur ceases to represent a State member of the Committee or if he is for 
any reason unable to complete his term of ofﬁ ce, he is replaced by a Vice- Chairperson, 
in the English alphabetical order of States members of the Bureau commencing with 
the country of the Rapporteur, for the remainder of the term of ofﬁ ce.

VI.  Conduct of business

Rule 17.  Quorum

Convention
Article 13.8

17.1 At plenary meetings, a quorum shall consist of a majority of the States members 

of the Committee.

17.2 At  meetings  of  subsidiary  bodies,  a  quorum  shall  consist  of  a  majority  of  the 

States which are members of the bodies concerned.

17.3 Neither the Committee nor its subsidiary bodies shall decide on any matter unless 

a quorum is present.

Rule 18.  Public meetings17

Meetings shall be held in public unless decided otherwise by the Committee.  This rule 
cannot be suspended by the Bureau.

Rule 19.  Private meetings18

19.1 When  in  exceptional  circumstances,  the  Committee  decides  to  hold  a  private 
meeting, it shall determine the persons who, in addition to the representatives of 
States members, shall be present.

19.2 Any decision taken by the Committee at a private meeting shall be presented in 

written form at a subsequent public meeting.

19.3 At each private meeting, the Committee shall decide whether the Summary Record 
and  the  working  documents  of  that  meeting  shall  be  published.   Documents 

16.  Rules  16.1  and  16.2    adopted  by  the  Committee  at  its  third  ordinary  session  (Luxor,  1979)  and  amended  at  its  sixth 

extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)

17. Rule 18 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
18. Rules 19.2 and 19.3  adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

208

resulting  from  private  meetings  shall  be  made  public  after  a  period  of  twenty 
years.

Rule 20.  Consultative bodies19

Convention
Article 10.3

20.1 The Committee may create such consultative bodies as it deems necessary for the 

performance of its functions.

20.2 The composition and the terms of reference (including mandate and duration of 
ofﬁ ce) of such consultative bodies shall be deﬁ ned by the Committee at the time of 
their creation. These bodies can  include States non members of the Committee.

20.3 The Committee shall also determine the extent to which the present Rules shall 

apply to any such consultative body.

20.4 Each consultative body shall elect its Chairperson and, if necessary, its Rapporteur.

20.5 In appointing members of consultative bodies, due regard shall be given to the 
need to ensure an equitable representation of the different regions and cultures 
of the world.

Rule 21.  Subsidiary bodies20

21.1 The Committee may establish such subsidiary bodies as it deems necessary for 

the conduct of its work, within the limits of the technical facilities available.  

21.2 The composition and the terms of reference (including mandate and duration of 
ofﬁ ce) of such subsidiary bodies shall be deﬁ ned by the Committee at the time of 
their creation. These bodies can only be constituted from amongst States mem-
bers of the Committee. 

21.3 These Rules shall be applicable mutatis mutandis to the subsidiary bodies, unless 

otherwise decided by the Committee.

21.4 Each  subsidiary  body  shall  itself  elect  its  Chairperson  and,  if  necessary,  its 

 Rapporteur.

21.5 In  appointing  members  of  subsidiary  bodies,  due  regard  shall  be  given  to  the 
need to ensure an equitable representation of the different regions and cultures 
of the world.

19.  Rules 20.2 and 20.3 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003) and Rule 20.5 adopted at the 
twenty-fourth ordinary session of the Committee (Cairns, 2000) and amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary 
session (Paris, 2003)

20.  Rules 21.2 and 21.3 adopted and Rule 21.4 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003); Rule 
21.5 adopted by the Committee at its twenty-fourth ordinary session (Cairns, 2000) and amended at its sixth extraordinary 
session (Paris, 2003)

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

209

Rule 22.  Order and time-limit of speeches21

22.1 The Chairperson shall call upon speakers in the order in which they signify their 

wish to speak.

22.2 The Chairperson may limit the time allowed to each speaker if the circumstances 

make this desirable.

22.3 The  representatives  of  organizations,  individuals  and  observers  referred  to  in 
Rules 6, 7 and 8 may address the meeting with the prior consent of the Chair-
person.

22.4 Representatives  of  a  State  Party,  whether  or  not  a  member  of  the  Committee, 
shall not speak to advocate the inclusion in the World Heritage List of a property 
nominated or the approval of an assistance request submitted by that State, but 
only to deal with a point of information in answer to a question.  This provision 
also applies to other observers mentioned in Rule 8.

Rule 23.  Text of proposals22

At the request of any member of the Committee, supported by two other members, dis-
cussion of any substantive motion, resolution or amendment shall be suspended until 
the text is circulated in the working languages to all Committee members present. 

Rule 24.  Division of proposals23

Part of a proposal shall be voted on separately if a member of the Committee requests 
that the proposal be divided. 

Rule 25.  Voting on amendments24

25.1 When an amendment to a proposal is moved, the amendment shall be voted on 
ﬁ rst. When two or more amendments to a proposal are moved, the Committee 
shall  ﬁ rst  vote  on  the  amendment  deemed  by  the  Chairperson  to  be  furthest 
removed in substance from the original proposal, and then on the amendment 
next furthest removed therefrom and so on, until all the amendments have been 
put to the vote.

25.2 If one or more amendments are adopted, the amended proposal shall then be 

voted upon as a whole.

21. Rules 22.1 and 22.2 amended and Rule 22.4 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
22. Title and Rule 23 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
23. Title and Rule 24 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
24. Rule 25.1 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003) with respect to the English version

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

210

25.3 A motion is considered an amendment to a proposal if it merely adds to, deletes 

from or revises part of that proposal.

Rule 26.  Voting on proposals

If two or more proposals relate to the same question, the Committee shall, unless it 
decides otherwise, vote on the proposals in the order in which they have been submit-
ted. The Committee may, after each vote on a proposal, decide whether to vote on the 
next proposal.

Rule 27.  Withdrawal of proposals

A  proposal  may  be  withdrawn  by  its  proposer  at  any  time  before  voting  on  it  has 
begun, provided that the proposal has not been amended. A proposal withdrawn may 
be reintroduced by any State member of the Committee.

Rule 28.  Points of order25

28.1 During a discussion, any State member may raise a point of order; such point of 

order shall be immediately decided upon by the Chairperson.

28.2 An appeal may be made against the ruling of the Chairperson. Such appeal shall 
be put to the vote immediately and the Chairperson’s ruling shall stand unless 
overruled.

Rule 29.  Procedural motions26

During  the  discussion  on  any  matter,  a  member  of  the  Committee  may  propose  a 
procedural motion: suspension or adjournment of the meeting, adjournment of the 
debate or closure of the debate.

Rule 30.  Suspension or adjournment of the meeting

During the discussion of any matter, any State member of the Committee may move 
the suspension or adjournment of the meeting. Such motions shall not be debated but 
shall be immediately put to the vote.

Rule 31.  Adjournment of debate

During the discussion of any matter, any State member of the Committee may move 
the adjournment of the debate on the item under discussion. On moving the adjourn-
ment the State member shall indicate whether he moves the adjournment sine die or 

25.  Rule 28.1 amended and Rule 28.2 (with respect to the English version) amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary 

session (Paris, 2003) 

26. Title and Rule 29 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

211

to a particular time which he shall specify. In addition to the proposer of the motion, 
one speaker may speak in favour of, and one against, the motion.

Rule 32.  Closure of debate

A State member of the Committee may at any time move the closure of the debate, 
whether or not any other speaker has signiﬁ ed his wish to take part in the discussion. 
If application is made for permission to speak against the closure, it may be accorded 
to not more than two speakers. The Chairperson shall then put to the vote the motion 
for  closure  and,  if  the  Committee  is  in  favour  of  the  motion,  he  shall  declare  the 
 closure of the debate.

Rule 33.  Order of procedural motions

Subject to Rule 28 the following motions shall have precedence in the following order 
over all other proposals or motions before the meeting: 

(a)   suspension of the meeting; 
(b)   adjournment of the meeting; 
(c)   adjournment of the debate on the question under discussion; 
(d)   closure of the debate on the question under discussion.

Rule 34.  Decisions27

34.1 The Committee shall adopt such decisions and recommendations as it may deem 

appropriate.

34.2 The text of each decision shall be adopted at the end of the discussion of the 

agenda item.

VII.  Voting28

Rule 35.  Voting rights29

Each State member of the Committee shall have one vote in the Committee.

Rule 36.  Conduct during voting30

After the Chairperson has announced the beginning of voting, no one shall interrupt 
the voting except on a point of order in connection with the actual conduct of the 
voting.

27. Title amended and Rule 34.2 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
28. Title adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
29. Title and Rule 35 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
30. Title and Rule 36 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

212

Rule 37.  Two-thirds majority31

Convention
Article 13.8

Decisions of the Committee on matters covered by the provisions of the Convention 
shall be taken by a majority of two-thirds of its members present and voting.

Rule 38.  Simple majority32

38.1 Except  where  otherwise  speciﬁ ed  in  the  present  Rules,  all  other  decisions  of  the 
Committee shall be taken by a majority of the States members present and voting.

38.2 Decisions as to whether a particular matter is covered by the provisions of the 
Convention and decisions on any other matters not covered by the present Rules 
shall be taken by a majority of the States members present and voting.

Rule 39.  Counting of votes33

For the purpose of the present Rules, the expression “States members present and vot-
ing” shall mean States members casting an afﬁ rmative or negative vote. States mem-
bers abstaining from voting shall be regarded as not voting.

Rule 40.  Show of hands34

40.1 Voting shall normally be by a show of hands.

40.2 When the result of a vote by a show of hands is in doubt, the Chairperson may 

take a second vote by a roll-call. 

40.3 A vote by a roll-call shall also be taken if it is requested by not less than two States 

members before the voting takes place. 

Rule 41.  Secret ballot35

A decision shall be voted on by secret ballot whenever two or more States members 
shall so request or if the Chairperson so decides.

Rule 42.  Conduct of voting by secret ballot36

42.1 Before the vote begins, the Chairperson shall appoint two tellers from amongst 

the Delegations of the members of the Committee to scrutinize the votes cast.

31. Title adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
32. Title adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
33. Title adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
34.  Title adopted and Rule 40.2 amended (with respect to the English version) by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary 

session (Paris, 2003) 

35. Title adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
36. Title and Rules 42.1 and 42.2 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

213

42.2 When the counting of the votes is completed and the tellers have reported to the 
Chairperson, he shall announce the results of the ballot bearing in mind that the 
voting will be recorded as follows: 

the number of members absent, if any;

From the total number of members of the Committee will be deducted:
(a) 
(b)  the number of blank ballot papers, if any;
(c) 
the number of invalid ballot papers, if any.

The remaining number will constitute the number of votes recorded.

VIII. Secretariat of the Committee

Rule 43.  The Secretariat37

Convention
Article 14.1

43.1 The  Committee  shall  be  assisted  by  a  Secretariat  appointed  by  the  Director-

 General.

43.2 The Director-General, utilizing to the fullest extent possible the services of the 
International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and the Restoration of 
Cultural  Property  (ICCROM),  the  International  Council  of  Monuments  and 
Sites  (ICOMOS)  and  the  World  Conservation  Union,  formerly  International 
Union  for  Conservation  of  Nature  and  Natural  Resources  (IUCN),  in  their 
respective areas of competence and capability, shall prepare the Committee’s 
documentation and shall have the responsibility for the implementation of its 
decisions.

43.3 The  Director-General  or  his  representative  shall  participate  in  the  work  of  the 
Committee, the consultative and subsidiary bodies without the right to vote. He 
may at any time make either oral or written statements on any question under 
consideration.

43.4 The Director-General shall appoint an ofﬁ cial of the Secretariat of UNESCO to act 
as Secretary to the Committee, and other ofﬁ cials who shall together constitute 
the Secretariat of the Committee.

43.5 The Secretariat shall receive, translate and distribute all ofﬁ cial documents of the 
Committee  and  shall  arrange  for  the  interpretation  of  the  discussions,  as  pro-
vided in Rule 44.

43.6 The Secretariat shall perform all other duties necessary for the proper conduct of 

the work of the Committee.

37. Rule 43.2 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

214

IX.  Working languages and reports38

Rule 44.  Working languages39

44.1 The working languages of the Committee shall be English and French. When the 
conditions permit, the ofﬁ cial languages recognized by the United Nations may 
be used as well as the working languages.

44.2 Interventions made at a meeting of the Committee in one of the working lan-

guages shall be interpreted into the other language.

44.3 Speakers may, however, speak in any other language, provided they make their 
own arrangements for interpretation of their speeches into one of the working 
languages.

44.4 The documents of the Committee shall be issued simultaneously in English and 
French.  When the conditions permit, they shall also be issued in the ofﬁ cial lan-
guages recognized by the United Nations.

Rule 45.  Deadline for distribution of documents40

The  documents  relating  to  the  items  on  the  Provisional  Agenda  of  each  session  of 
the Committee shall be distributed at the latest six weeks before the beginning of the 
session in the two working languages to the Members of the Committee, and to the 
International Center for the Study of the Preservation and the Restoration of Cultural 
Property (ICCROM), the International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) 
and the World Conservation Union, formerly International Union for Conservation 
of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), as well as to all other organizations invited 
to the session. They shall also be made available to States Parties non members of the 
Committee in electronic format.

Rule 46.  Reports of the Session41

At  the  closure  of  each  session,  the  Committee  shall  adopt  its  report  of  the  session 
comprising a list of Decisions.  This shall be published in the month that follows the 
closure of the said session.

Rule 47.  Summary Record42

47.1 The  Secretariat  shall  prepare  a  Summary  Record  of  all  the  interventions  made 
during the Plenary session of the Committee.  A provisional text of the Summary 

38. Title amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
39. Rules 44.1, 44.2 and 44.4 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
40. Title and Rule 45 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
41. Title and Rule 46 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
42. Title and  Rules 47.1 and 47.2 adopted by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

215

Record,  which  is  not  intended  to  be  published,  shall  be  submitted  as  soon  as 
possible to the Members of the Committee and the representatives of organiza-
tions, individuals and observers mentioned in Rules 6, 7 and 8 so that they may 
indicate any corrections to their own statements.

47.2 The ﬁ nal version of the Summary Record shall be published as an information 

document within three months following the closure of the said session.

Rule 48.  Communication of the documentation43

The Reports of the sessions, the Summary Records and all ﬁ nal documents, once pub-
lished, shall be transmitted to the States members of the Committee, and to the Interna-
tional Centre for the Study of the Preservation and the Restoration of Cultural Property 
(ICCROM), the International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) and the World 
Conservation Union, formerly International Union for Conservation of Nature and Nat-
ural Resources (IUCN), as well as to all other organizations invited to the session.

Rule 49.   Reports to the General Assembly of States Parties 

and to the UNESCO General Conference44

Convention
Article 29.3

49.1 The Committee shall submit a report on its activities at each General Assembly 
of States Parties and at each of the ordinary sessions of the General Conference of 
UNESCO.

49.2 The  Committee  may  authorize  its  Chairperson  to  submit  these  reports  on  its 

behalf.

49.3 Copies of these reports shall be sent to all States Parties to the Convention.

X. 

 Adoption, amendment and suspension 
of the Rules of Procedure

Rule 50.  Adoption

Convention
Articles 10.1 
& 13.8

The Committee shall adopt its Rules of Procedure by a decision taken in plenary meet-
ing by a two-thirds majority of the States members present and voting.

Rule 51.  Amendment

The  Committee  may  amend  these  Rules  of  Procedure  except  when  they  reproduce 
provisions of the Convention by a decision taken in plenary meeting by a two-thirds 

43. Rule 48 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)
44. Title and Rules 49.1, 49.2 and 49.3 amended by the Committee at its sixth extraordinary session (Paris, 2003)

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

216

majority of the States members present and voting, provided the proposal has been 
included in the agenda of the session in accordance with Rules 9 and 10.

Rule 52.  Suspension

The Committee may suspend the application of any of these Rules, except when they 
reproduce provisions of the Convention, by a decision taken in plenary meeting by a 
two-thirds majority of the States members present and voting.

Rules of Procedure of the World Heritage Committee 

217

WHC-03/GA/1 Rev.2
Paris, 15 October 2003

Rules of Procedure

General Assembly of States Parties 
to the Convention concerning the Protection 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage1

World Heritage Centre

1. 

 Adopted  by  the  Second  General  Assembly  of  States  Parties  (Paris,  24  November  1978)  and  amended  at  the  Tenth  General 
Assembly of States Parties (Paris, 2-3 November 1995), Thirteenth General Assembly of States Parties (Paris, 30-31 October 2001) 
and Fourteenth General Assembly of States Parties (Paris, 14-15 October 2003). Articles 13.6 and 13.7 concerning the voting 
papers have been aligned with Article 13.4, amended by the Tenth General Assembly of States Parties (2-3 November 1995), in 
accordance with the decision of the Bureau of the World Heritage Committee at its 23rd session (5-10 July 1999).

This document is also available at the following Web address:

http://whc.unesco.org/en/garules (English)
http://whc.unesco.org/fr/agreglement (French)

(WHC-2004/WS/1)

I.  Participation

Rule 1.  Chief participants

The representatives of all States Parties to the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural 
and Natural Heritage, adopted by the General Conference on 16 November 1972, may take part, with 
the right to vote, in the work of the Assembly.

Rule 2.  Representatives and observers

2.1  The representatives of Member States of UNESCO not parties to the Convention concerning the 
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage and permanent observer missions to UNESCO 
may participate in the work of the Assembly as observers, without the right to vote, and subject 
to Rule 7.3.

2.2  Representatives of the United Nations and organizations of the United Nations system and other 
intergovernmental  organizations  which  have  concluded  mutual  representation  agreements 
with UNESCO, as well as observers of intergovernmental and international non- governmental 
organizations  invited  by  the  Director-General,  may  participate  in  the  work  of  the  Assembly, 
without the right to vote, and subject to Rule 7.3.

II.  Organization of the Assembly

Rule 3.  Election of ofﬁ cers

The Assembly shall elect a Chairperson, one or more Vice-Chairpersons and a Rapporteur.

III.  Conduct of business

Rule 4.  Duties of the Chairperson

4.1  In addition to exercising the powers which are conferred upon him elsewhere by the present 
Rules, the Chairperson shall open and close each plenary meeting of the Assembly. He/She 
shall direct the discussions, ensure observance of these Rules, accord the right to speak, put 
questions to the vote and announce decisions. He/She shall rule on points of order and, sub-
ject to the present Rules, shall control the proceedings and the maintenance of order. He/She 
shall not vote, but he/she may instruct another member of his/her delegation to vote on his/
her behalf.

4.2  Should the Chairperson be absent during a meeting, or any part thereof, he/she shall be replaced 
by the Vice-Chairperson or one of the Vice-Chairperson. A Vice-Chairperson acting as Chairper-
son shall have the same powers and duties as the Chairperson.

Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly of States Parties to the World Heritage Convention

221

Rule 5.  Public nature of meetings

Meetings shall be held in public unless decided otherwise by the Assembly.

Rule 6.  Quorum

6.1  A quorum shall consist or a majority of the States referred to in Rule 1 and represented at the 

Assembly.

6.2  The Assembly shall not decide on any matter unless a quorum is present.

Rule 7.  Order and time-limit of speakers

7.1  The  Chairperson  shall  call  upon  speakers  in  the  order  in  which  they  signify  their  wish  to 

speak.

7.2  For the convenience of the discussion, the Chairperson may limit the time to be allowed to each 

speaker.

7.3  The consent of the Chairperson must be obtained whenever an observer wishes to address the 

Assembly.

Rule 8.  Points of order

8.1  During a discussion, any delegation may raise a point of order; such a point of order shall be 

immediately decided upon by the presiding ofﬁ cer.

8.2  An appeal may be made against the ruling of the presiding ofﬁ cer. Such an appeal shall be put to 
the vote immediately and the presiding ofﬁ cer’s ruling shall stand, unless overruled by a major-
ity of the delegations present and voting.

Rule 9.  Procedural motions

9.1  During a discussion, any delegation may move the suspension or adjournment of the meeting 

or the adjournment or closure of the debate.

9.2  Such a motion shall be put to the vote immediately. Subject to Rule 8.1, such motions shall have 

precedence in the following order over all other proposals or motions before the  meeting:

(a)   suspension of the meeting;

(b)   adjournment of the meeting;

(c)   adjournment of the debate on the question under discussion;

(d)   closure of the debate on the question under discussion.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

222

Rule 10.  Working languages

10.1 The working languages of the Assembly shall be Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and 

Spanish.

10.2 Speeches made at the Assembly in one of the working languages shall be interpreted into the 

other languages.

Rule 11.   Resolutions and amendments

11.1 Draft resolutions and amendments may be proposed by the participants referred to in Rule 1 
and shall be transmitted in writing to the Secretariat of the Assembly, which shall circulate cop-
ies to all participants.

11.2 As a general rule, no draft resolution or amendment shall be discussed or put to the vote unless 
it has been circulated sufﬁ ciently in advance to all participants in the working languages of the 
Assembly.

Rule 12.  Voting

12.1 The representative of each State referred to in Rule 1 shall have one vote in the Assembly.

12.2 Subject to the provisions of Rules 6.2 and 16, decisions shall be taken by a majority of the States 

present and voting, except for the provisions of Rule 12.3.

12.3 The decision concerning the amount of the contributions, in the form of a uniform percentage 
applicable to all States which have not made the declaration referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 
16 of the Convention, shall be determined by a majority vote of the States Parties present and 
voting. This decision of the General Assembly requires the majority of the States Parties present 
and voting which have not made the above-mentioned declaration.

12.4 For the purpose of the present Rules, the expression “States present and voting” shall mean 
States casting an afﬁ rmative or negative vote. States abstaining from voting shall be regarded as 
having not voted.

12.5 Voting shall normally be by a show of hands.

12.6 When the result of a vote by show of hands is in doubt, the presiding ofﬁ cer may take a second 
vote by a roll-call. A vote by roll-call shall also be taken if it is requested by not less than two 
delegations before the voting takes place and for the decision mentioned in Rule 12.3.

12.7 When an amendment to a proposal is moved, the amendment shall be voted on ﬁ rst. When 
two or more amendments to a proposal are moved, the Assembly shall ﬁ rst vote on the amend-
ment deemed by the presiding ofﬁ cer to be furthest removed in substance from the original 
proposal, and then on the amendment next furthest removed there from and so on, until all 
the amendments have been put to the vote.

Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly of States Parties to the World Heritage Convention

223

12.8 If one or more amendments are adopted, the amended proposal shall then be voted upon as a 

whole.

12.9 A motion is considered an amendment to a proposal if it merely adds to, deletes from or revises 

part of that proposal.

Rule 13.  Procedures for the presentation of candidatures to the World Heritage Committee

13.1 The  Secretariat  shall  ask  all  States  Parties,  at  least  three  months  prior  to  the  opening  of  the 
 General Assembly, whether they intend to stand for election to the World Heritage Committee. 
If so, its candidature should be sent to the Secretariat at least six weeks prior to the opening of 
the General Assembly.

13.2 At least four weeks prior to the opening of the General Assembly the Secretariat shall send to 
all States Parties the provisional list of States Parties candidates. The Secretariat will also pro-
vide information on the status of all compulsory and voluntary contributions to the World 
Heritage Fund made by each of the candidates.  This list of candidatures will be revised as 
necessary.

13.3 This list of candidatures shall be ﬁ nalised 48 hours before the opening of the General Assembly. 
No other candidatures nor payments of compulsory and voluntary contributions to the World 
Heritage Fund (for the purpose of presenting a candidature to the Committee) will be accepted 
in the 48-hour period prior to the opening of the General Assembly.

Rule 14.  Election of members of the World Heritage Committee

14.1 The election of members of the World Heritage Committee shall be conducted by secret ballot 
whenever ﬁ ve or more delegations having the right to vote so request, or if the Chairperson so 
decides.

A certain number of seats may be reserved for State Parties who do not have sites on the World 
Heritage List, upon decision of the World Heritage Committee at the session that precedes the 
General Assembly. Such a ballot for reserved seats would precede the open ballot for the remain-
ing seats to be ﬁ lled. Unsuccessful candidates in the reserved ballot would be eligible to stand 
in the open ballot.

14.2 Before the election begins, the Chairperson shall appoint two tellers from among the delegates 
present; he/she shall hand to them the list of States entitled to vote and the list of States candi-
dates. He/She shall announce the number of seats to be ﬁ lled.

14.3 The Secretariat shall distribute to the delegations a voting paper in the form of a list of all the 

States which are candidates.

14.4 Each delegation shall cast its vote by encircling the names of those States for which it desires to 

vote.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

224

14.5 The tellers shall collect from each delegation their voting paper and shall proceed to count the 

votes, under the supervision of the Chairperson.

14.6 Voting papers on which all names of States have been circled shall be considered to be absten-

tions.

14.7 Voting papers on which more names have been circled than there are seats to be ﬁ lled shall be 

considered invalid.

14.8 Those  States  obtaining  in  the  ﬁ rst  ballot  the  required  majority  shall  be  elected,  unless  the 
number of States obtaining that majority is greater than the number of seats to be ﬁ lled. In that 
case, the States obtaining the greatest number of votes, up to the number of seats to be ﬁ lled, 
shall be declared elected. If the number of States obtaining the majority required is less than the 
number of seats to be ﬁ lled, there shall be a second ballot. If the number of States obtaining the 
majority required is still less than the number of seats to be ﬁ lled there shall be a third and, if 
necessary a fourth ballot, to ﬁ ll the remaining seats. For the third and fourth ballots, the voting 
shall be restricted to the States obtaining the greatest number of votes in the previous ballot, up 
to a number twice that of the seats remaining to be ﬁ lled.

14.9 After  the  fourth  ballot,  the  candidates  obtaining  to  the  greatest  number  of  votes,  up  to  the 

number of seats to be ﬁ lled, shall be declared elected.

14.10 If, in the ﬁ fth ballot, two or more candidates obtain the same number of votes, the Chairperson 

shall decide between them by drawing lots.

14.11 The Chairperson shall announce the results of the election.

IV.  Secretariat of the meeting

Rule 15.  Secretariat

15.1 The Director-General of UNESCO or his/her representative shall participate in the work of the 
Assembly, without the right to vote. He/She may, at any time, make either oral or written state-
ments to the Assembly on any question under discussion.

15.2 The Director-General of UNESCO shall appoint an ofﬁ cial of the Secretariat of UNESCO to act 
as Secretary to the Assembly, and other ofﬁ cials who shall together constitute the Secretariat of 
the Assembly.

15.3 The Secretariat shall receive, translate and distribute all ofﬁ cial documents of the  Committee 
and shall arrange for the interpretation of the discussions, as provided in Rule 10. It shall also 
perform all other duties necessary for the proper conduct of the work of the Assembly.

Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly of States Parties to the World Heritage Convention

225

V.  

 Adoption and amendment of the rules of procedure

Rule 16.  Adoption

The Assembly shall adopt its Rules of Procedure by a decision taken in plenary meeting by a simple 
majority of the representatives of States present and voting.

Rule 17.  Amendment

The Assembly may amend these Rules of Procedure by a decision taken in plenary meeting by a two-
thirds majority of the representatives of States present and voting.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

226

WHC/7

Financial Regulations 
for the World Heritage Fund

World Heritage Centre

This document is also available at the following Web address:

http://whc.unesco.org/en/ﬁ nancialregulations (English)
http://whc.unesco.org/fr/regulationsﬁ nancieres (French)

Financial Regulations 
for the World Heritage Fund

Article 15 of the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (here-
inafter referred to as “the Convention”), establishes a Fund, called “the World Heritage Fund” herein-
after referred to as “the Fund” which is to constitute a trust fund, in conformity with the provisions 
of the Financial Regulations of UNESCO. Consequently, in accordance with Regulation 6.7 of the 
Financial Regulations of the Organization, the Director-General has established the following special 
ﬁ nancial regulations to govern the operations of this Fund.

1.   Purpose of the Fund

1.1.  The purpose of this Fund shall be to receive contributions from the sources indicated in 3.1 
below and to make payments there from to assist in the protection of properties forming part 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage of Outstanding Universal Value in accordance with 
the terms of the Convention and of the present Regulations.

2.   Financial period of the Fund

2.1.  The ﬁ nancial period shall be two consecutive calendar years coinciding with the ﬁ nancial period 

of the Regular Budget of UNESCO.

3.  Provision of funds

3.1.  The resources of the Fund shall consist of:

(a)  contributions  made  by  the  States  Parties  to  the  Convention,  in  accordance  with  its 

 Article 16;

(b)  contributions, gifts or bequests which may be made by:

(i)   other States;
(ii)  the United Nations Educational Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization, other organiza-
tions  of  the  United  Nations  system,  particularly  the  United  Nations  Development 
Programme or other intergovernmental organizations;

(iii)  public or private bodies or individuals;

(c)  any interest due on the resources of the Fund;

(d)  funds raised by collections and receipts from events organized for the beneﬁ t of the Fund; 

and

(e)  any other resources acceptable to the World Heritage Committee.

Financial Regulations for the World Heritage Fund

229

3.2.  As stipulated in Article 16 of the Convention, the contributions of States which have not made the 
declaration referred to in paragraph 2 of that Article shall be made according to the scale of assess-
ments determined every two years by the General Assembly of States Parties to the Convention.

3.3.  The method and the procedure for the payment of all contributions of States Parties are those 

determined by the ﬁ rst General Assembly of States Parties to the Convention.

4.  Expenditure

4.1.  The resources of the Fund may be used only for such purposes as the World Heritage Committee 

shall deﬁ ne and may take the following form:

(a)  studies  concerning  the  artistic,  scientiﬁ c  and  technical  problems  raised  by  the  protec-
tion, conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of the cultural and natural heritage, as 
deﬁ ned under the terms of the Convention:

(b)  provision of experts, technicians and skilled labour to ensure that the approved work is 

correctly carried out;

(c) 

training of staff and specialists at all levels in the ﬁ eld of identiﬁ cation, protection, conser-
vation, presentation and rehabilitation of the cultural and natural heritage;

(d)  supply of equipment which the State concerned does not possess or is not in a position to 

acquire;

(e) 

low-interest or interest-free loans which might be repayable on a long-term basis;

(f) 

the granting, in exceptional cases and for special reasons, of non-repayable subsidies.

4.2.  Expenditure shall be made within the limits of funds available.

4.3.  The undisposed balance of the Fund may be carried forward from one ﬁ nancial period to the 

next.

5.  Reserve Fund

5.1.  There shall be established a reserve fund to meet requests for assistance resulting from  disasters 
or  natural  calamities,  as  foreseen  under  Article  21(2)  of  the  Convention.  The  amount  of  the 
reserve fund which shall be credited with transfers from “the World Heritage Fund” shall be 
determined from time to time by the Director-General.

6.  Accounts

6.1.  The Director-General shall maintain such accounting records as are necessary and shall include 
in his annual ﬁ nancial report accounts showing for the ﬁ nancial period to which they relate the 
receipts and disbursements of the Fund.

Basic Texts of the 1972 World Heritage Convention

230

6.2.  The annual accounts of the Fund shall be presented in dollars of the United States of America. 
Accounting records may, however, be kept in such currency or currencies as the Director- General 
may deem necessary.

6.3.  The annual accounts shall be submitted by the Director -General for audit to the External  Auditor 

of UNESCO.

6.4.  The  accounts  shall  be  submitted  by  the  Director-General  to  the  General  Assembly  of  States 

 Parties to the Convention.

7.   Custody of Funds

7.1.  The Director-General shall designate the bank or banks in which the resources of the Fund shall 

be kept.

8.  

Investment of Funds

8.1.  The Director-General may make short-term investment of sums standing to the credit of the 

Fund.

8.2.  Interest earned on these investments shall be credited to the Fund.

9.  General Provisions

9.1.  Except as provided for in the above Regulations, the Fund shall be administered in accordance 

with the Financial Regulations of UNESCO

Financial Regulations for the World Heritage Fund

231

Basic Texts

of the 1972 
World Heritage
Convention

n
o
i
t
i

d
E
 

5
0
0
2

n
o

i
t
n
e
v
n
o
C
 
e
g
a
t
i
r
e
H
d
l
r
o
W
 
2
7
9
1
 
e
h
t
 
f
o

 

 
s
t
x
e
T

 
c
i
s
a
B

For more information contact:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP France
Tel: 33 (0)1 45 68 18 76
Fax: 33 (0)1 45 68 55 70
E-mail: wh-info@unesco.org
http://whc.unesco.org


