Page 319

ANNEX 1C

AGREEMENT ON TRADE-RELATED ASPECTS OF

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

PART I

GENERAL PROVISIONS AND BASIC PRINCIPLES

PART II

STANDARDS  CONCERNING  THE  AVAILABILITY,  SCOPE  AND  USE  OF
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Copyright and Related Rights
Trademarks
Geographical Indications
Industrial Designs
Patents
Layout-Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits
Protection of Undisclosed Information
Control of Anti-Competitive Practices in Contractual Licences

PART III

ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

General Obligations
Civil and Administrative Procedures and Remedies
Provisional Measures
Special Requirements Related to Border Measures
Criminal Procedures

PART IV

ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
AND RELATED INTER-PARTES  PROCEDURES

PART V

DISPUTE PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT

PART VI

TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

PART VII

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS;  FINAL PROVISIONS

Page 320

Members,

AGREEMENT ON TRADE-RELATED ASPECTS OF

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

Desiring to reduce distortions and impediments to international trade, and taking into account
the need to promote effective and adequate protection of intellectual property rights, and to ensure that
measures and procedures to enforce intellectual property rights do not themselves become barriers to
legitimate trade;

Recognizing, to this end, the need for new rules and disciplines concerning:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

the applicability of the basic principles of GATT 1994 and of relevant international
intellectual property agreements or conventions;

the provision of adequate standards and principles concerning the availability, scope
and use of trade-related intellectual property rights;

the provision of effective and appropriate means for the enforcement of trade-related
intellectual property rights, taking into account differences in national legal systems;

the provision of effective and expeditious procedures for the multilateral prevention
and settlement of disputes between governments;  and

transitional  arrangements  aiming  at  the  fullest  participation  in  the  results  of  the
negotiations;

Recognizing the need for a multilateral framework of principles, rules and disciplines dealing

with international trade in counterfeit goods;

Recognizing that intellectual property rights are private rights; 

Recognizing the underlying public policy objectives of national systems for the protection of

intellectual property, including developmental and technological objectives;

Recognizing  also  the  special  needs  of  the  least-developed  country  Members  in  respect  of
maximum flexibility in the domestic implementation of laws and regulations in order to enable them
to create a sound and viable technological base;

Emphasizing the importance of reducing tensions by reaching strengthened commitments to

resolve disputes on trade-related intellectual property issues through multilateral procedures;

Desiring  to  establish  a  mutually  supportive  relationship  between  the  WTO  and  the  World
Intellectual Property Organization (referred to in this Agreement as "WIPO") as well as other relevant
international organizations;

Hereby agree as follows:

Page 321

PART I

GENERAL PROVISIONS AND BASIC PRINCIPLES

Article 1

Nature and Scope of Obligations

1.
Members shall give effect to the provisions of this Agreement.  Members may, but shall not
be obliged to, implement in their law more extensive protection than is required by this Agreement,
provided that such protection does not contravene the provisions of this Agreement.  Members shall
be free to determine the appropriate method of implementing the provisions of this Agreement within
their own legal system and practice.

For the purposes of this Agreement, the term "intellectual property" refers to all categories of

2.
intellectual property that are the subject of Sections 1 through 7 of Part II. 

3.
Members shall accord the treatment provided for in this Agreement to the nationals of other
Members.1  In respect of the relevant intellectual property right, the nationals of other Members shall
be understood as those natural or legal persons that would meet the criteria for eligibility for protection
provided for in the Paris Convention (1967), the Berne Convention (1971), the Rome Convention and
the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits, were all Members of the WTO
members of those conventions.2  Any Member availing itself of the possibilities provided in paragraph 3
of Article 5 or paragraph 2 of Article 6 of the Rome Convention shall make a notification as foreseen
in those provisions to the Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (the "Council
for TRIPS"). 

Article 2

Intellectual Property Conventions

In respect of Parts II, III and IV of this Agreement, Members shall comply with Articles 1 through

1.
12, and Article 19, of the Paris Convention (1967).

2.
Nothing in Parts I to IV of this Agreement shall derogate from existing obligations that Members
may have to each other under the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention and
the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits.

                                                                   

      1When "nationals" are referred to in this Agreement, they shall be deemed, in the case of a separate customs territory
Member of the WTO, to mean persons, natural or legal, who are domiciled or who have a real and effective industrial or
commercial establishment in that customs territory.

      2In this Agreement, "Paris Convention" refers to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property;  "Paris
Convention (1967)" refers to the Stockholm Act of this Convention of 14 July 1967.  "Berne Convention" refers to the Berne
Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Literary  and  Artistic  Works;  "Berne  Convention  (1971)"  refers  to  the  Paris  Act  of  this
Convention of 24 July 1971.  "Rome Convention" refers to the International Convention for the Protection of Performers,
Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations, adopted at Rome on 26 October 1961.  "Treaty on Intellectual
Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits" (IPIC Treaty) refers to the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated
Circuits, adopted at Washington on 26 May 1989.  "WTO Agreement" refers to the Agreement Establishing the WTO.

Page 322

Article 3

National Treatment

Each Member shall accord to the nationals of other Members treatment no less favourable than
1.
that it accords to its own nationals with regard to the protection3 of intellectual property, subject to
the  exceptions  already  provided 
the  Berne
Convention (1971), the Rome Convention or the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated
Circuits.  In  respect  of  performers,  producers  of  phonograms  and  broadcasting  organizations,  this
obligation only applies in respect of the rights provided under this Agreement.  Any Member availing
itself of the possibilities provided in Article 6 of the Berne Convention (1971) or paragraph 1(b) of
Article 16 of the Rome Convention shall make a notification as foreseen in those provisions to the Council
for TRIPS.

the  Paris  Convention  (1967), 

in,  respectively, 

2.
Members may avail themselves of the exceptions permitted under paragraph 1 in relation to
judicial  and  administrative  procedures,  including  the  designation  of  an  address  for  service  or  the
appointment of an agent within the jurisdiction of a Member, only where such exceptions are necessary
to secure compliance with laws and regulations which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Agreement and where such practices are not applied in a manner which would constitute a disguised
restriction on trade.

Article 4

Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

With regard to the protection of intellectual property, any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity
granted  by  a  Member  to  the  nationals  of  any  other  country  shall  be  accorded  immediately  and
unconditionally to the nationals of all other Members.  Exempted from this obligation are any advantage,
favour, privilege or immunity accorded by a Member:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

deriving from international agreements on judicial assistance or law enforcement of
a general nature and not particularly confined to the protection of intellectual property;

granted in accordance with the provisions of the Berne Convention (1971) or the Rome
Convention  authorizing  that  the  treatment  accorded  be  a  function  not  of  national
treatment but of the treatment accorded in another country; 

in  respect  of  the  rights  of  performers,  producers  of  phonograms  and  broadcasting
organizations not provided under this Agreement;

deriving from international agreements related to the protection of intellectual property
which entered into force prior to the entry into force of the WTO Agreement, provided
that such agreements are notified to the Council for TRIPS and do not constitute an
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against nationals of other Members.

                                                                   

      3For  the  purposes  of  Articles  3  and  4,  "protection"  shall  include  matters  affecting  the  availability,  acquisition,  scope,
maintenance and enforcement of intellectual property rights as well as those matters affecting the use of intellectual property
rights specifically addressed in this Agreement.

Page 323

Article 5

Multilateral Agreements on Acquisition or

Maintenance of Protection

The  obligations  under  Articles  3  and  4  do  not  apply  to  procedures  provided  in  multilateral
agreements  concluded  under  the  auspices  of  WIPO  relating  to  the  acquisition  or  maintenance  of
intellectual property rights.

Article 6

Exhaustion

For  the  purposes  of  dispute  settlement  under  this  Agreement,  subject  to  the  provisions  of
Articles  3  and  4  nothing  in  this  Agreement  shall  be  used  to  address  the  issue  of  the  exhaustion  of
intellectual property rights.

Article 7

Objectives

The protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights should contribute to the promotion
of technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage
of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic
welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations.

Article 8

Principles

1.
Members may, in formulating or amending their laws and regulations, adopt measures necessary
to protect public health and nutrition, and to promote the public interest in sectors of vital importance
to  their  socio-economic  and  technological  development,  provided  that  such  measures  are  consistent
with the provisions of this Agreement. 

2.
Appropriate measures, provided that they are consistent with the provisions of this Agreement,
may  be  needed  to  prevent  the  abuse  of  intellectual  property  rights  by  right  holders  or  the  resort  to
practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international transfer of technology. 

Page 324

PART II

STANDARDS CONCERNING THE AVAILABILITY, SCOPE

AND USE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

SECTION 1:  COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

Article 9

Relation to the Berne Convention

1.
Members  shall  comply  with  Articles  1  through  21  of  the  Berne  Convention  (1971)  and  the
Appendix thereto.  However, Members shall not have rights or obligations under this Agreement in
respect of the rights conferred under Article 6bis of that Convention or of the rights derived therefrom.

Copyright  protection  shall  extend  to  expressions  and  not  to  ideas,  procedures,  methods  of

2.
operation or mathematical concepts as such.

Article 10

Computer Programs and Compilations of Data

Computer programs, whether in source or object code, shall be protected as literary works under

1.
the Berne Convention (1971).

2.
Compilations of data or other material, whether in machine readable or other form, which by
reason of the selection or arrangement of their contents constitute intellectual creations shall be protected
as such.  Such protection, which shall not extend to the data or material itself, shall be without prejudice
to any copyright subsisting in the data or material itself.

Article 11

Rental Rights

In respect of at least computer programs and cinematographic works, a Member shall provide
authors and their successors in title the right to authorize or to prohibit the commercial rental to the
public of originals or copies of their copyright works.  A Member shall be excepted from this obligation
in respect of cinematographic works unless such rental has led to widespread copying of such works
which is materially impairing the exclusive right of reproduction conferred in that Member on authors
and their successors in title.  In respect of computer programs, this obligation does not apply to rentals
where the program itself is not the essential object of the rental.

Article 12

Term of Protection

Whenever the term of protection of a work, other than a photographic work or a work of applied
art, is calculated on a basis other than the life of a natural person, such term shall be no less than 50 years

from the end of the calendar year of authorized publication, or, failing such authorized publication within
50 years from the making of the work, 50 years from the end of the calendar year of making.

Page 325

Article 13

Limitations and Exceptions

Members shall confine limitations or exceptions to exclusive rights to certain special cases which
do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate
interests of the right holder. 

Article 14

Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms
(Sound Recordings) and Broadcasting Organizations

1.
In respect of a fixation of their performance on a phonogram, performers shall have the possibility
of preventing the following acts when undertaken without their authorization: the fixation of their unfixed
performance  and  the  reproduction  of  such  fixation.  Performers  shall  also  have  the  possibility  of
preventing the following acts when undertaken without their authorization:  the broadcasting by wireless
means and the communication to the public of their live performance.

Producers of phonograms shall enjoy the right to authorize or prohibit the direct or indirect

2.
reproduction of their phonograms.

Broadcasting organizations shall have the right to prohibit the following acts when undertaken
3.
without their authorization: the fixation, the reproduction of fixations, and the rebroadcasting by wireless
means of broadcasts, as well as the communication to the public of television broadcasts of the same.
Where Members do not grant such rights to broadcasting organizations, they shall provide owners of
copyright in the subject matter of broadcasts with the possibility of preventing the above acts, subject
to the provisions of the Berne Convention (1971).

4.
The  provisions  of  Article  11  in  respect  of  computer  programs  shall  apply  mutatis mutandis
to producers of phonograms and any other right holders in phonograms as determined in a Member's
law.  If on 15 April 1994 a Member has in force a system of equitable remuneration of right holders
in respect of the rental of phonograms, it may maintain such system provided that the commercial rental
of phonograms is not giving rise to the material impairment of the exclusive rights of reproduction
of right holders. 

5.
The  term  of  the  protection  available  under  this  Agreement  to  performers  and  producers  of
phonograms shall last at least until the end of a period of 50 years computed from the end of the calendar
year in which the fixation was made or the performance took place.  The term of protection granted
pursuant to paragraph 3 shall last for at least 20 years from the end of the calendar year in which the
broadcast took place.

6.
Any Member may, in relation to the rights conferred under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, provide for
conditions, limitations, exceptions and reservations to the extent permitted by the Rome Convention.
However, the provisions of Article 18 of the Berne Convention (1971) shall also apply, mutatis mutandis,
to the rights of performers and producers of phonograms in phonograms.

Page 326

SECTION 2:  TRADEMARKS

Article 15

Protectable Subject Matter

1.
Any sign, or any combination of signs, capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one
undertaking from those of other undertakings, shall be capable of constituting a trademark.  Such signs,
in particular words including personal names, letters, numerals, figurative elements and combinations
of colours as well as any combination of such signs, shall be eligible for registration as trademarks.
Where signs are not inherently capable of distinguishing the relevant goods or services, Members may
make registrability depend on distinctiveness acquired through use. Members may require, as a condition
of registration, that signs be visually perceptible.

2.
Paragraph 1 shall not be understood to prevent a Member from denying registration of a trademark
on other grounds, provided that they do not derogate from the provisions of the Paris Convention (1967).

3.
Members may make registrability depend on use.  However, actual use of a trademark shall
not be a condition for filing an application for registration.  An application shall not be refused solely
on the ground that intended use has not taken place before the expiry of a period of three years from
the date of application.

The nature of the goods or services to which a trademark is to be applied shall in no case form

4.
an obstacle to registration of the trademark.

Members  shall  publish  each  trademark  either  before  it  is  registered  or  promptly  after  it  is
5.
registered and shall afford a reasonable opportunity for petitions to cancel the registration.  In addition,
Members may afford an opportunity for the registration of a trademark to be opposed.

Article 16

Rights Conferred

1.
The owner of a registered trademark shall have the exclusive right to prevent all third parties
not having the owner’s consent from using in the course of trade identical or similar signs for goods
or services which are identical or similar to those in respect of which the trademark is registered where
such use would result in a likelihood of confusion.  In case of the use of an identical sign for identical
goods or services, a likelihood of confusion shall be presumed.  The rights described above shall not
prejudice any existing prior rights, nor shall they affect the possibility of Members making rights available
on the basis of use.

2.
Article  6bis  of  the  Paris  Convention  (1967)  shall  apply,  mutatis  mutandis,  to  services.  In
determining whether a trademark is well-known, Members shall take account of the knowledge of the
trademark in the relevant sector of the public, including knowledge in the Member concerned which
has been obtained as a result of the promotion of the trademark.

3.
Article 6bis of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to goods or services
which are not similar to those in respect of which a trademark is registered, provided that use of that
trademark in relation to those goods or services would indicate a connection between those goods or

services and the owner of the registered trademark and provided that the interests of the owner of the
registered trademark are likely to be damaged by such use.

Page 327

Article 17

Exceptions

Members may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as fair
use of descriptive terms, provided that such exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the
owner of the trademark and of third parties.

Article 18

Term of Protection

Initial registration, and each renewal of registration, of a trademark shall be for a term of no

less than seven years.  The registration of a trademark shall be renewable indefinitely.

Article 19

Requirement of Use

1.
If  use  is  required  to  maintain  a  registration,  the  registration  may  be  cancelled  only  after  an
uninterrupted period of at least three years of non-use, unless valid reasons based on the existence of
obstacles to such use are shown by the trademark owner.  Circumstances arising independently of the
will of the owner of the trademark which constitute an obstacle to the use of the trademark, such as
import restrictions on or other government requirements for goods or services protected by the trademark,
shall be recognized as valid reasons for non-use.

When subject to the control of its owner, use of a trademark by another person shall be recognized

2.
as use of the trademark for the purpose of maintaining the registration.

Article 20

Other Requirements

The use of a trademark in the course of trade shall not be unjustifiably encumbered by special
requirements, such as use with another trademark, use in a special form or use in a manner detrimental
to its capability to distinguish the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings.
This will not preclude a requirement prescribing the use of the trademark identifying the undertaking
producing the goods or services along with, but without linking it to, the trademark distinguishing the
specific goods or services in question of that undertaking.

Page 328

Article 21

Licensing and Assignment

Members may determine conditions on the licensing and assignment of trademarks, it being
understood that the compulsory licensing of trademarks shall not be permitted and that the owner of
a registered trademark shall have the right to assign the trademark with or without the transfer of the
business to which the trademark belongs. 

SECTION 3:  GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS

Article 22

Protection of Geographical Indications

1.
Geographical indications are, for the purposes of this Agreement, indications which identify
a good as originating in the territory of a Member, or a region or locality in that territory, where a given
quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical origin.

In respect of geographical indications, Members shall provide the legal means for interested

2.
parties to prevent: 

(a)

(b)

the  use  of  any  means  in  the  designation  or  presentation  of  a  good  that  indicates  or
suggests that the good in question originates in a geographical area other than the true
place of origin in a manner which misleads the public as to the geographical origin
of the good;

any  use  which  constitutes  an  act  of  unfair  competition  within  the  meaning  of
Article 10bis of the Paris Convention (1967).

3.
A Member shall, ex officio if its legislation so permits or at the request of an interested party,
refuse or invalidate the registration of a trademark which contains or consists of a geographical indication
with respect to goods not originating in the territory indicated, if use of the indication in the trademark
for such goods in that Member is of such a nature as to mislead the public as to the true place of origin.

4.
The protection under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be applicable against a geographical indication
which, although literally true as to the territory, region or locality in which the goods originate, falsely
represents to the public that the goods originate in another territory.

Page 329

Article 23

Additional Protection for Geographical Indications  

for Wines and Spirits

1.
Each Member shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent use of a geographical
indication identifying wines for wines not originating in the place indicated by the geographical indication
in question or identifying spirits for spirits not originating in the place indicated by the geographical
indication in question, even where the true origin of the goods is indicated or the geographical indication
is used in translation or accompanied by expressions such as "kind", "type", "style", "imitation" or the
like.4

The registration of a trademark for wines which contains or consists of a geographical indication
2.
identifying wines or for spirits which contains or consists of a geographical indication identifying spirits
shall be refused or invalidated, ex officio if a Member's legislation so permits or at the request of an
interested party, with respect to such wines or spirits not having this origin.

3.
In the case of homonymous geographical indications for wines, protection shall be accorded
to each indication, subject to the provisions of paragraph 4 of Article 22. Each Member shall determine
the practical  conditions  under which the homonymous indications in question will be differentiated
from each other, taking into account the need to ensure equitable treatment of the producers concerned
and that consumers are not misled.

4.
In  order  to  facilitate  the  protection  of  geographical  indications  for  wines,  negotiations  shall
be  undertaken  in  the  Council  for  TRIPS  concerning  the  establishment  of  a  multilateral  system  of
notification and registration of geographical indications for wines eligible for protection in those Members
participating in the system.

Article 24

International Negotiations;  Exceptions

1.
Members  agree  to  enter  into  negotiations  aimed  at  increasing  the  protection  of  individual
geographical indications under Article 23.  The provisions of paragraphs 4 through 8 below shall not
be used by a Member to refuse to conduct negotiations or to conclude bilateral or multilateral agreements.
In the context of such negotiations, Members shall be willing to consider the continued applicability
of these provisions to individual geographical indications whose use was the subject of such negotiations.

The Council for TRIPS shall keep under review the application of the provisions of this Section;
2.
the first such review shall take place within two years of the entry into force of the WTO Agreement.
Any matter affecting the compliance with the obligations under these provisions may be drawn to the
attention of the Council, which, at the request of a Member, shall consult with any Member or Members
in respect of such matter in respect of which it has not been possible to find a satisfactory solution
through bilateral or plurilateral consultations between the Members concerned.  The Council shall take
such action as may be agreed to facilitate the operation and further the objectives of this Section.

3.
In  implementing  this  Section,  a  Member  shall  not  diminish  the  protection  of  geographical
indications that existed in that Member immediately prior to the date of entry into force of the WTO
Agreement.

                                                                   

      4Notwithstanding the first sentence of Article 42, Members may, with respect to these obligations, instead provide for
enforcement by administrative action.

Page 330

Nothing in this Section shall require a Member to prevent continued and similar use of a particular
4.
geographical indication of another Member identifying wines or spirits in connection with goods or
services  by  any  of  its  nationals  or  domiciliaries  who  have  used  that  geographical  indication  in  a
continuous manner with regard to the same or related goods or services in the territory of that Member
either (a) for at least 10 years preceding 15 April 1994 or (b) in good faith preceding that date.

Where a trademark has been applied for or registered in good faith, or where rights to a trademark

5.
have been acquired through use in good faith either:

(a)

before the date of application of these provisions in that Member as defined in Part VI;
or

(b)

before the geographical indication is protected in its country of origin; 

measures  adopted  to  implement  this  Section  shall  not  prejudice  eligibility  for  or  the  validity  of  the
registration of a trademark, or the right to use a trademark, on the basis that such a trademark is identical
with, or similar to, a geographical indication.

6.
Nothing in this Section shall require a Member to apply its provisions in respect of a geographical
indication  of  any  other  Member  with  respect  to  goods  or  services  for  which  the  relevant  indication
is identical with the term customary in common language as the common name for such goods or services
in the territory of that Member.  Nothing in this Section shall require a Member to apply its provisions
in respect of a geographical indication of any other Member with respect to products of the vine for
which the relevant indication is identical with the customary name of a grape variety existing in the
territory of that Member as of the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement.

7.
A Member may provide that any request made under this Section in connection with the use
or registration of a trademark must be presented within five years after the adverse use of the protected
indication has become generally known in that Member or after the date of registration of the trademark
in that Member provided that the trademark has been published by that date, if such date is earlier than
the  date  on  which  the  adverse  use  became  generally  known  in  that  Member,  provided  that  the
geographical indication is not used or registered in bad faith.

8.
The provisions of this Section shall in no way prejudice the right of any person to use, in the
course of trade, that person’s name or the name of that person’s predecessor in business, except where
such name is used in such a manner as to mislead the public.

9.
There shall be no obligation under this Agreement to protect geographical indications which
are not or cease to be protected in their country of origin, or which have fallen into disuse in that country.

SECTION 4:  INDUSTRIAL DESIGNS

Article 25

Requirements for Protection

1.
Members shall provide for the protection of independently created industrial designs that are
new or original.  Members may provide that designs are not new or original if they do not significantly
differ from known designs or combinations of known design features.  Members may provide that such
protection shall not extend to designs dictated essentially by technical or functional considerations.

Each  Member  shall  ensure  that  requirements  for  securing  protection  for  textile  designs,  in
2.
particular in regard to any cost, examination or publication, do not unreasonably impair the opportunity
to seek and obtain such protection.  Members shall be free to meet this obligation through industrial
design law or through copyright law.

Page 331

Article 26

Protection

1.
The owner of a protected industrial design shall have the right to prevent third parties not having
the owner’s consent from making, selling or importing articles bearing or embodying a design which
is a copy, or substantially a copy, of the protected design, when such acts are undertaken for commercial
purposes. 

2.
Members may provide limited exceptions to the protection of industrial designs, provided that
such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal exploitation of protected industrial designs
and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the owner of the protected design, taking
account of the legitimate interests of third parties.

3.

The duration of protection available shall amount to at least 10 years.

SECTION 5:  PATENTS

Article 27

Patentable Subject Matter

1.
Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, patents shall be available for any inventions,
whether products or processes, in all fields of technology, provided that they are new, involve an inventive
step and are capable of industrial application.5  Subject to paragraph 4 of Article 65, paragraph 8 of
Article 70 and paragraph 3 of this Article, patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without
discrimination as to the place of invention, the field of technology and whether products are imported
or locally produced.

2.
Members may exclude from patentability inventions, the prevention within their territory of
the commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public or morality, including to protect
human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment, provided that
such exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited by their law.

3.

Members may also exclude from patentability:

(a)

(b)

diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans or animals;

plants and animals other than micro-organisms, and essentially biological processes
for the production of plants or animals other than non-biological and microbiological
processes.  However,  Members shall provide for the protection of plant varieties either
by patents or by an effective sui generis system or by any combination thereof.  The

                                                                   

      5For the purposes of this Article, the terms "inventive step" and "capable of industrial application" may be deemed by
a Member to be synonymous with the terms "non-obvious" and "useful" respectively.

Page 332

provisions of this subparagraph shall be reviewed four years after the date of entry into
force of the WTO Agreement.

Article 28

Rights Conferred

1.

A patent shall confer on its owner the following exclusive rights:

(a)

(b)

where the subject matter of a patent is a product, to prevent third parties not having
the  owner’s  consent  from  the  acts  of:  making,  using,  offering  for  sale,  selling,  or
importing6 for these purposes that product;

where the subject matter of a patent is a process, to prevent third parties not having
the owner’s consent from the act of using the process, and from the acts of:  using,
offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes at least the product obtained
directly by that process.

Patent owners shall also have the right to assign, or transfer by succession, the patent and to

2.
conclude licensing contracts.

Article  29

Conditions on Patent Applicants

Members shall require that an applicant for a patent shall disclose the invention in a manner
1.
sufficiently clear and complete for the invention to be carried out by a person skilled in the art and
may require the applicant to indicate the best mode for carrying out the invention known to the inventor
at the filing date or, where priority is claimed, at the priority date of the application.

Members may require an applicant for a patent to provide information concerning the applicant’s

2.
corresponding foreign applications and grants.

Article 30

Exceptions to Rights Conferred

Members may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent, provided
that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the legitimate
interests of third parties.

                                                                   

      6This right, like all other rights conferred under this Agreement in respect of the use, sale, importation or other distribution
of goods, is subject to the provisions of Article 6.

Page 333

Article 31

Other Use Without Authorization of the Right Holder

Where the law of a Member allows for other use7 of the subject matter of a patent without the
authorization of the right holder, including use by the government or third parties authorized by the
government, the following provisions shall be respected:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

authorization of such use shall be considered on its individual merits;

such use may only be permitted if, prior to such use, the proposed user has made efforts
to  obtain  authorization  from  the  right  holder  on  reasonable  commercial  terms  and
conditions and that such efforts have not been successful within a reasonable period
of  time.  This  requirement  may  be  waived  by  a  Member  in  the  case  of  a  national
emergency  or  other  circumstances  of  extreme  urgency  or  in  cases  of  public  non-
commercial use.  In situations of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme
urgency, the right holder shall, nevertheless, be notified as soon as reasonably practicable.
In the case of public non-commercial use, where the government or contractor, without
making a patent search, knows or has demonstrable grounds to know that a valid patent
is or will be used by or for the government, the right holder shall be informed promptly;

the scope and duration of such use shall be limited to the purpose for which it was
authorized, and in the case of semi-conductor technology shall only be for public non-
commercial  use  or  to  remedy  a  practice  determined  after  judicial  or  administrative
process to be anti-competitive;

such use shall be non-exclusive;

such use shall be non-assignable, except with that part of the enterprise or goodwill
which enjoys such use;

any such use shall be authorized predominantly for the supply of the domestic market
of the Member authorizing such use;

authorization for such use shall be liable, subject to adequate protection of the legitimate
interests of the persons so authorized, to be terminated if and when the circumstances
which led to it cease to exist and are unlikely to recur.  The competent authority shall
have the authority to review, upon motivated request, the continued existence of these
circumstances;

the right holder shall be paid adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each case,
taking into account the economic value of the authorization;

the legal validity of any decision relating to the authorization of such use shall be subject
to judicial review or other independent review by a distinct higher authority in that
Member;

any decision relating to the remuneration provided in respect of such use shall be subject
to judicial review or other independent review by a distinct higher authority in that
Member;

                                                                   

      7"Other use" refers to use other than that allowed under Article 30.

Page 334

(k)

(l)

Members are not obliged to apply the conditions set forth in subparagraphs (b) and (f)
where  such  use  is  permitted  to  remedy  a  practice  determined  after  judicial  or
administrative  process  to  be  anti-competitive.  The  need  to  correct  anti-competitive
practices may be taken into account in determining the amount of remuneration in such
cases.  Competent  authorities  shall  have  the  authority  to  refuse  termination  of
authorization if and when the conditions which led to such authorization are likely to
recur;

where such use is authorized to permit the exploitation of a patent ("the second patent")
which  cannot  be  exploited  without  infringing  another  patent  ("the  first  patent"),  the
following additional conditions shall apply:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

the invention claimed in the second patent shall involve an important technical
advance  of  considerable  economic  significance  in  relation  to  the  invention
claimed in the first patent;

the owner of the first patent shall be entitled to a cross-licence on reasonable
terms to use the invention claimed in the second patent;  and

the use authorized in respect of the first patent shall be non-assignable except
with the assignment of the second patent.

Article 32

Revocation/Forfeiture

An opportunity for judicial review of any decision to revoke or forfeit a patent shall be available.

Article 33

Term of Protection

The term of protection available shall not end before the expiration of a period of twenty years

counted from the filing date.8

Article 34

Process Patents:  Burden of Proof

1.
For the purposes of civil proceedings in respect of the infringement of the rights of the owner
referred to in paragraph 1(b) of Article 28, if the subject matter of a patent is a process for obtaining
a product, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to order the defendant to prove that the process
to obtain an identical product is different from the patented process.  Therefore, Members shall provide,
in at least one of the following circumstances, that any identical product when produced without the
consent  of  the  patent  owner  shall,  in  the  absence  of  proof  to  the  contrary,  be  deemed  to  have  been
obtained by the patented process:

                                                                   

      8It is understood that those Members which do not have a system of original grant may provide that the term of protection
shall be computed from the filing date in the system of original grant.

Page 335

(a)

(b)

if the product obtained by the patented process is new;

if there is a substantial likelihood that the identical product was made by the process
and the owner of the patent has been unable through reasonable efforts to determine
the process actually used.

2.
Any Member shall be free to provide that the burden of proof indicated in paragraph 1 shall
be on the alleged infringer only if the condition referred to in subparagraph (a) is fulfilled or only if
the condition referred to in subparagraph (b) is fulfilled.

In the adduction of proof to the contrary, the legitimate interests of defendants in protecting

3.
their manufacturing and business secrets shall be taken into account. 

SECTION 6:  LAYOUT-DESIGNS (TOPOGRAPHIES) OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

Article 35

Relation to the IPIC Treaty

Members agree to provide protection to the layout-designs (topographies) of integrated circuits
(referred to in this Agreement as "layout-designs") in accordance with Articles 2 through 7 (other than
paragraph 3 of Article 6), Article 12 and paragraph 3 of Article 16 of the Treaty on Intellectual Property
in Respect of Integrated Circuits and, in addition, to comply with the following provisions.

Article 36

Scope of the Protection

Subject to the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 37, Members shall consider unlawful the
following acts if performed without the authorization of the right holder:9 importing, selling, or otherwise
distributing for commercial purposes a protected layout-design, an integrated circuit in which a protected
layout-design is incorporated, or an article incorporating such an integrated circuit only in so far as
it continues to contain an unlawfully reproduced layout-design.

Article 37

Acts Not Requiring the Authorization of the Right Holder

1.
Notwithstanding Article 36, no Member shall consider unlawful the performance of any of the
acts referred to in that Article in respect of an integrated circuit incorporating an unlawfully reproduced
layout-design or any article incorporating such an integrated circuit where the person performing or
ordering such acts did not know and had no reasonable ground to know, when acquiring the integrated
circuit or article incorporating such an integrated circuit, that it incorporated an unlawfully reproduced
layout-design.  Members shall provide that, after the time that such person has received sufficient notice
that the layout-design was unlawfully reproduced, that person may perform any of the acts with respect
to the stock on hand or ordered before such time, but shall be liable to pay to the right holder a sum

                                                                   

      9The term "right holder" in this Section shall be understood as having the same meaning as the term "holder of the right"
in the IPIC Treaty.

Page 336

equivalent to a reasonable royalty such as would be payable under a freely negotiated licence in respect
of such a layout-design.

2.
The conditions set out in subparagraphs (a) through (k) of Article 31 shall apply mutatis mutandis
in the event of any non-voluntary licensing of a layout-design or of its use by or for the government
without the authorization of the right holder.

Article 38

Term of Protection

In Members requiring registration as a condition of protection, the term of protection of layout-
1.
designs shall not end before the expiration of a period of 10 years counted from the date of filing an
application for registration or from the first commercial exploitation wherever in the world it occurs.

2.
In  Members  not  requiring  registration  as  a  condition  for  protection,  layout-designs  shall  be
protected for a term of no less than 10 years from the date of the first commercial exploitation wherever
in the world it occurs.

Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Member may provide that protection shall lapse 15 years

3.
after the creation of the layout-design.

SECTION 7:  PROTECTION OF UNDISCLOSED INFORMATION 

Article 39

1.
In  the  course  of  ensuring  effective  protection  against  unfair  competition  as  provided  in
Article 10bis of the Paris Convention (1967), Members shall protect undisclosed information in accordance
with  paragraph  2  and  data  submitted  to  governments  or  governmental  agencies  in  accordance  with
paragraph 3.

2.
Natural and legal persons shall have the possibility of preventing information lawfully within
their control from being disclosed to, acquired by, or used by others without their consent in a manner
contrary to honest commercial practices10 so long as such information:

(a)

(b)

(c)

is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise configuration and assembly
of its components, generally known among or readily accessible to persons within the
circles that normally deal with the kind of information in question; 

has commercial value because it is secret;  and 

has been subject to reasonable steps under the circumstances, by the person lawfully
in control of the information, to keep it secret.

3.
Members, when requiring, as a condition of approving the marketing of pharmaceutical or of
agricultural chemical products which utilize new chemical entities, the submission of undisclosed test
or other data, the origination of which involves a considerable effort, shall protect such data against

                                                                   

      10For the purpose of this provision, "a manner contrary to honest commercial practices" shall mean at least practices such
as breach of contract, breach of confidence and inducement to breach, and includes the acquisition of undisclosed information
by third parties who knew, or were grossly negligent in failing to know, that such practices were involved in the acquisition.

Page 337

unfair commercial use.  In addition, Members shall protect such data against disclosure, except where
necessary to protect the public, or unless steps are taken to ensure that the data are protected against
unfair commercial use.

SECTION 8:  CONTROL OF ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES 

IN CONTRACTUAL LICENCES

Article 40

1.
Members agree that some licensing practices or conditions pertaining to intellectual property
rights which restrain competition may have adverse effects on trade and may impede the transfer and
dissemination of technology.

2.
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent Members from specifying in their legislation licensing
practices or conditions that may in particular cases constitute an abuse of intellectual property rights
having an adverse effect on competition in the relevant market.  As provided above, a Member may
adopt,  consistently  with  the  other  provisions  of  this  Agreement,  appropriate  measures  to  prevent  or
control  such  practices,  which  may  include  for  example  exclusive  grantback  conditions,  conditions
preventing challenges to validity and coercive package licensing, in the light of the relevant laws and
regulations of that Member.

3.
Each Member shall enter, upon request, into consultations with any other Member which has
cause to believe that an intellectual property right owner that is a national or domiciliary of the Member
to which the request for consultations has been addressed is undertaking practices in violation of the
requesting Member's laws and regulations on the subject matter of this Section, and which wishes to
secure compliance with such legislation, without prejudice to any action under the law and to the full
freedom  of  an  ultimate  decision  of  either  Member.  The  Member  addressed  shall  accord  full  and
sympathetic consideration to, and shall afford adequate opportunity for, consultations with the requesting
Member,  and  shall  cooperate  through  supply  of  publicly  available  non-confidential  information  of
relevance to the matter in question and of other information available to the Member, subject to domestic
law  and  to  the  conclusion  of  mutually  satisfactory  agreements  concerning  the  safeguarding  of  its
confidentiality by the requesting Member.

A  Member  whose  nationals  or  domiciliaries  are  subject  to  proceedings  in  another  Member
4.
concerning alleged violation of that other Member's laws and regulations on the subject matter of this
Section shall, upon request, be granted an opportunity for consultations by the other Member under
the same conditions as those foreseen in paragraph 3. 

Page 338

PART III

ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

SECTION 1:  GENERAL OBLIGATIONS

Article 41

1.
Members shall ensure that enforcement procedures as specified in this Part are available under
their law so as to permit effective action against any act of infringement of intellectual property rights
covered by this Agreement, including expeditious remedies to prevent infringements and remedies which
constitute a deterrent to further infringements.  These procedures shall be applied in such a manner
as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to provide for safeguards against their abuse.

2.
Procedures concerning the enforcement of intellectual property rights shall be fair and equitable.
They shall not be unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time-limits or unwarranted
delays.

3.
Decisions on the merits of a case shall preferably be in writing and reasoned.  They shall be
made available at least to the parties to the proceeding without undue delay.  Decisions on the merits
of a case shall be based only on evidence in respect of which parties were offered the opportunity to
be heard.

4.
Parties to a proceeding shall have an opportunity for review by a judicial authority of final
administrative  decisions  and,  subject  to  jurisdictional  provisions  in  a  Member's  law  concerning  the
importance of a case, of at least the legal aspects of initial judicial decisions on the merits of a case.
However, there shall be no obligation to provide an opportunity for review of acquittals in criminal
cases.

It is understood that this Part does not create any obligation to put in place a judicial system
5.
for the enforcement of intellectual property rights distinct from that for the enforcement of law in general,
nor does it affect the capacity of Members to enforce their law in general.  Nothing in this Part creates
any obligation with respect to the distribution of resources as between enforcement of intellectual property
rights and the enforcement of law in general.

SECTION 2:  CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND REMEDIES

Page 339

Article 42

Fair and Equitable Procedures

Members  shall  make  available  to  right  holders11  civil  judicial  procedures  concerning  the
enforcement of any intellectual property right covered by this Agreement.  Defendants shall have the
right to written notice which is timely and contains sufficient detail, including the basis of the claims.
Parties shall be allowed to be represented by independent legal counsel, and procedures shall not impose
overly  burdensome  requirements  concerning  mandatory  personal  appearances.  All  parties  to  such
procedures shall be duly entitled to substantiate their claims and to present all relevant evidence.  The
procedure shall provide a means to identify and protect confidential information, unless this would be
contrary to existing constitutional requirements.

Article 43

Evidence

1.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority, where a party has presented reasonably available
evidence  sufficient  to  support  its  claims  and  has  specified  evidence  relevant  to  substantiation  of  its
claims which lies in the control of the opposing party, to order that this evidence be produced by the
opposing party, subject in appropriate cases to conditions which ensure the protection of confidential
information. 

In cases in which a party to a proceeding voluntarily and without good reason refuses access
2.
to, or otherwise does not provide necessary information within a reasonable period, or significantly
impedes a procedure relating to an enforcement action, a Member may accord judicial authorities the
authority  to  make  preliminary  and  final  determinations,  affirmative  or  negative,  on  the  basis  of  the
information presented to them, including the complaint or the allegation presented by the party adversely
affected by the denial of access to information, subject to providing the parties an opportunity to be
heard on the allegations or evidence.

Article 44

Injunctions

1.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order a party to desist from an infringement,
inter alia to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce in their jurisdiction of imported goods
that involve the infringement of an intellectual property right, immediately after customs clearance of
such goods.  Members are not obliged to accord such authority in respect of protected subject matter
acquired or ordered by a person prior to knowing or having reasonable grounds to know that dealing
in such subject matter would entail the infringement of an intellectual property right. 

2.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Part and provided that the provisions of Part II
specifically addressing use by governments, or by third parties authorized by a government, without
the authorization of the right holder are complied with, Members may limit the remedies available against

                                                                   

      11For the purpose of this Part, the term "right holder" includes federations and associations having legal standing to assert
such rights.

Page 340

such use to payment of remuneration in accordance with subparagraph (h) of Article 31.  In other cases,
the  remedies  under  this  Part  shall  apply  or,  where  these  remedies  are  inconsistent  with  a  Member's
law, declaratory judgments and adequate compensation shall be available.

Article 45

Damages

1.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order the infringer to pay the right holder
damages adequate to compensate for the injury the right holder has suffered because of an infringement
of that person’s intellectual property right by an infringer who knowingly, or with reasonable grounds
to know, engaged in infringing activity.

2.
The judicial authorities shall also have the authority to order the infringer to pay the right holder
expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees.  In appropriate cases, Members may authorize
the judicial authorities to order recovery of profits and/or payment of pre-established damages even
where the infringer did not knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to know, engage in infringing activity.

Article 46

Other Remedies

In order to create an effective deterrent to infringement, the judicial authorities shall have the
authority to order that goods that they have found to be infringing be, without compensation of any
sort, disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid any harm caused to
the right holder, or, unless this would be contrary to existing constitutional requirements, destroyed.
The  judicial  authorities  shall  also  have  the  authority  to  order  that  materials  and  implements  the
predominant use of which has been in the creation of the infringing goods be, without compensation
of any sort, disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to minimize the risks
of  further  infringements. 
In  considering  such  requests,  the  need  for  proportionality  between  the
seriousness of the infringement and the remedies ordered as well as the interests of third parties shall
be taken into account.  In regard to counterfeit trademark goods, the simple removal of the trademark
unlawfully affixed shall not be sufficient, other than in exceptional cases, to permit release of the goods
into the channels of commerce.

Article 47

Right of Information

Members may provide that the judicial authorities shall have the authority, unless this would
be out of proportion to the seriousness of the infringement, to order the infringer to inform the right
holder of the identity of third persons involved in the production and distribution of the infringing goods
or services and of their channels of distribution. 

Page 341

Article 48

Indemnification of the Defendant

The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order a party at whose request measures were
1.
taken and who has abused enforcement procedures to provide to a party wrongfully enjoined or restrained
adequate compensation for the injury suffered because of such abuse.  The judicial authorities shall
also  have  the  authority  to  order  the  applicant  to  pay  the  defendant  expenses,  which  may  include
appropriate attorney's fees.

2.
In  respect  of  the  administration  of  any  law  pertaining  to  the  protection  or  enforcement  of
intellectual property rights, Members shall only exempt both public authorities and officials from liability
to appropriate remedial measures where actions are taken or intended in good faith in the course of
the administration of that law.

Article 49

Administrative Procedures

To  the  extent  that  any  civil  remedy  can  be  ordered  as  a  result  of  administrative  procedures
on the merits of a case, such procedures shall conform to principles equivalent in substance to those
set forth in this Section.

SECTION 3:  PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Article 50

The  judicial  authorities  shall  have  the  authority  to  order  prompt  and  effective  provisional

1.
measures:

(a)

to  prevent  an  infringement  of  any  intellectual  property  right  from  occurring,  and  in
particular to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce in their jurisdiction of
goods, including imported goods immediately after customs clearance;

(b)

to preserve relevant evidence in regard to the alleged infringement.

The judicial authorities shall have the authority to adopt provisional measures inaudita altera
2.
parte where appropriate, in particular where any delay is likely to cause irreparable harm to the right
holder, or where there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed. 

3.
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to require the applicant to provide any reasonably
available evidence in order to satisfy themselves with a sufficient degree of certainty that the applicant
is the right holder and that the applicant’s right is being infringed or that such infringement is imminent,
and to order the applicant to provide a security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant
and to prevent abuse.

4.
Where provisional measures have been adopted inaudita altera parte, the parties affected shall
be given notice, without delay after the execution of the measures at the latest.  A review, including
a right to be heard, shall take place upon request of the defendant with a view to deciding, within a

Page 342

reasonable period after the notification of the measures, whether these measures shall be modified, revoked
or confirmed.

The applicant may be required to supply other information necessary for the identification of

5.
the goods concerned by the authority that will execute the provisional measures. 

6.
Without prejudice to paragraph 4, provisional measures taken on the basis of paragraphs 1 and
2 shall, upon request by the defendant, be revoked or otherwise cease to have effect, if proceedings
leading  to  a  decision  on  the  merits  of  the  case  are  not  initiated  within  a  reasonable  period,  to  be
determined by the judicial authority ordering the measures where a Member's law so permits or, in
the absence of such a determination, not to exceed 20 working days or 31 calendar days, whichever
is the longer.

7.
Where the provisional measures are revoked or where they lapse due to any act or omission
by the applicant, or where it is subsequently found that there has been no infringement or threat of
infringement of an intellectual property right, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to order
the applicant, upon request of the defendant, to provide the defendant appropriate compensation for
any injury caused by these measures.

8.
To the extent that any provisional measure can be ordered as a result of administrative procedures,
such procedures shall conform to principles equivalent in substance to those set forth in this Section. 

SECTION 4:  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO BORDER MEASURES 12

Article 51

Suspension of Release by Customs Authorities

Members shall, in conformity with the provisions set out below, adopt procedures13 to enable
a right holder, who has valid grounds for suspecting that the importation of counterfeit trademark or
pirated copyright goods14 may take place, to lodge an application in writing with competent authorities,
administrative or judicial, for the suspension by the customs authorities of the release into free circulation
of such goods.  Members may enable such an application to be made in respect of goods which involve
other infringements of intellectual property rights, provided that the requirements of this Section are

                                                                   

      12Where a Member has dismantled substantially all controls over movement of goods across its border with another Member
with which it forms part of a customs union, it shall not be required to apply the provisions of this Section at that border.

      13It is understood that there shall be no obligation to apply such procedures to imports of goods put on the market in another
country by or with the consent of the right holder, or to goods in transit.

      14For the purposes of this Agreement:

(a)

(b)

"counterfeit trademark goods" shall mean any goods, including packaging, bearing without authorization
a trademark which is identical to the trademark validly registered in respect of such goods, or which cannot
be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trademark, and which thereby infringes the rights
of the owner of the trademark in question under the law of the country of importation;

"pirated copyright goods" shall mean any goods which are copies made without the consent of the right
holder or person duly authorized by the right holder in the country of production and which are made
directly or indirectly from an article where the making of that copy would have constituted an infringement
of a copyright or a related right under the law of the country of importation.

met. Members may also provide for corresponding procedures concerning the suspension by the customs
authorities of the release of infringing goods destined for exportation from their territories.

Page 343

Article 52

Application  

Any right holder initiating the procedures under Article 51 shall be required to provide adequate
evidence to satisfy the competent authorities that, under the laws of the country of importation, there
is  prima facie an infringement of the right holder’s intellectual property right and to supply a sufficiently
detailed description of the goods to make them readily recognizable by the customs authorities.  The
competent authorities shall inform the applicant within a reasonable period whether they have accepted
the application and, where determined by the competent authorities, the period for which the customs
authorities will take action.

Article 53

Security or Equivalent Assurance  

1.
The competent authorities shall have the authority to require an applicant to provide a security
or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant and the competent authorities and to prevent
abuse.  Such security or equivalent assurance shall not unreasonably deter recourse to these procedures.

2.
Where pursuant to an application under this Section the release of goods involving industrial
designs, patents, layout-designs or undisclosed information into free circulation has been suspended
by customs authorities on the basis of a decision other than by a judicial or other independent authority,
and the period provided for in Article 55 has expired without the granting of provisional relief by the
duly empowered authority, and provided that all other conditions for importation have been complied
with, the owner, importer, or consignee of such goods shall be entitled to their release on the posting
of a security in an amount sufficient to protect the right holder for any infringement.  Payment of such
security shall not prejudice any other remedy available to the right holder, it being understood that the
security shall be released if the right holder fails to pursue the right of action within a reasonable period
of time.

Article 54

Notice of Suspension

The importer and the applicant shall be promptly notified of the suspension of the release of

goods according to Article 51.

Page 344

Article 55

Duration of Suspension

If, within a period not exceeding 10 working days after the applicant has been served notice
of the suspension, the customs authorities have not been informed that proceedings leading to a decision
on  the  merits  of  the  case  have  been  initiated  by  a  party  other  than  the  defendant,  or  that  the  duly
empowered authority has taken provisional measures prolonging the suspension of the release of the
goods, the goods shall be released, provided that all other conditions for importation or exportation
have been complied with;  in appropriate cases, this time-limit may be extended by another 10 working
days.  If  proceedings  leading  to  a  decision  on  the  merits  of  the  case  have  been  initiated,  a  review,
including a right to be heard, shall take place upon request of the defendant with a view to deciding,
within  a  reasonable  period,  whether  these  measures  shall  be  modified,  revoked  or  confirmed.
Notwithstanding the above, where the suspension of the release of goods is carried out or continued
in accordance with a provisional judicial measure, the provisions of paragraph 6 of Article 50 shall
apply.

Article 56

Indemnification of the Importer 
and of the Owner of the Goods

Relevant  authorities  shall  have  the  authority  to  order  the  applicant  to  pay  the  importer,  the
consignee and the owner of the goods appropriate compensation for any injury caused to them through
the wrongful detention of goods or through the detention of goods released pursuant to Article 55.

Article 57

Right of Inspection and Information 

Without  prejudice  to  the  protection  of  confidential  information,  Members  shall  provide  the
competent authorities the authority to give the right holder sufficient opportunity to have any goods
detained by the customs authorities inspected in order to substantiate the right holder’s claims.  The
competent authorities shall also have authority to give the importer an equivalent opportunity to have
any  such  goods  inspected.  Where  a  positive  determination  has  been  made  on  the  merits  of  a  case,
Members may provide the competent authorities the authority to inform the right holder of the names
and  addresses  of  the  consignor,  the  importer  and  the  consignee  and  of  the  quantity  of  the  goods  in
question.

Article 58

Ex Officio Action

Where Members require competent authorities to act upon their own initiative and to suspend
the release of goods in respect of which they have acquired prima  facie evidence that an intellectual
property right is being infringed:

(a)

the competent authorities may at any time seek from the right holder any information
that may assist them to exercise these powers;

Page 345

(b)

(c)

the importer and the right holder shall be promptly notified of the suspension.  Where
the importer has lodged an appeal against the suspension with the competent authorities,
the suspension shall be subject to the conditions, mutatis mutandis, set out at Article 55;

Members  shall  only  exempt  both  public  authorities  and  officials  from  liability  to
appropriate remedial measures where actions are taken or intended in good faith.

Article 59

Remedies

Without prejudice to other rights of action open to the right holder and subject to the right of
the defendant to seek review by a judicial authority, competent authorities shall have the authority to
order the destruction or disposal of infringing goods in accordance with the principles set out in Article
46. In regard to counterfeit trademark goods, the authorities shall not allow the re-exportation of the
infringing goods in an unaltered state or subject them to a different customs procedure, other than in
exceptional circumstances.

Article 60

De Minimis Imports

Members may exclude from the application of the above provisions small quantities of goods
of a non-commercial nature contained in travellers' personal luggage or sent in small consignments.

SECTION 5:  CRIMINAL PROCEDURES

Article 61

Members  shall  provide  for  criminal  procedures  and  penalties  to  be  applied  at  least  in  cases
of wilful trademark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale.  Remedies available shall
include imprisonment and/or monetary fines sufficient to provide a deterrent, consistently with the level
of penalties applied for crimes of a corresponding gravity.  In appropriate cases, remedies available
shall also include the seizure, forfeiture and destruction of the infringing goods and of any materials
and implements the predominant use of which has been in the commission of the offence.  Members
may  provide  for  criminal  procedures  and  penalties  to  be  applied  in  other  cases  of  infringement  of
intellectual property rights, in particular where they are committed wilfully and on a commercial scale.

Page 346

PART IV

ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

RIGHTS AND RELATED INTER-PARTES  PROCEDURES

Article 62

Members may require, as a condition of the acquisition or maintenance of the intellectual property
1.
rights provided for under Sections 2 through 6 of Part II, compliance with reasonable procedures and
formalities.  Such procedures and formalities shall be consistent with the provisions of this Agreement.

Where the acquisition of an intellectual property right is subject to the right being granted or
2.
registered, Members shall ensure that the procedures for grant or registration, subject to compliance
with the substantive conditions for acquisition of the right, permit the granting or registration of the
right within a reasonable period of time so as to avoid unwarranted curtailment of the period of protection.

3.

Article 4 of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply mutatis mutandis to service marks. 

4.
Procedures concerning the acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property rights and, where
a Member's law provides for such procedures, administrative revocation and inter partes procedures
such  as  opposition,  revocation  and  cancellation,  shall  be  governed  by  the  general  principles  set  out
in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 41.

5.
Final administrative decisions in any of the procedures referred to under paragraph 4 shall be
subject to review by a judicial or quasi-judicial authority.  However, there shall be no obligation to
provide an opportunity for such review of decisions in cases of unsuccessful opposition or administrative
revocation, provided that the grounds for such procedures can be the subject of invalidation procedures.

PART V

DISPUTE PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT

Article 63

Transparency

Laws and regulations, and final judicial decisions and administrative rulings of general application,
1.
made effective by a Member pertaining to the subject matter of this Agreement (the availability, scope,
acquisition, enforcement and prevention of the abuse of intellectual property rights) shall be published,
or where such publication is not practicable made publicly available, in a national language, in such
a manner as to enable governments and right holders to become acquainted with them.  Agreements
concerning  the  subject  matter  of  this  Agreement  which  are  in  force  between  the  government  or  a
governmental agency of a Member and the government or a governmental agency of another Member
shall also be published.

2.
Members shall notify the laws and regulations referred to in paragraph 1 to the Council for
TRIPS in order to assist that Council in its review of the operation of this Agreement.  The Council
shall attempt to minimize the burden on Members in carrying out this obligation and may decide to
waive the obligation to notify such laws and regulations directly to the Council if consultations with
WIPO on the establishment of a common register containing these laws and regulations are successful.

Page 347

The Council shall also consider in this connection any action required regarding notifications pursuant
to  the  obligations  under  this  Agreement  stemming  from  the  provisions  of  Article  6ter  of  the  Paris
Convention (1967).

Each Member shall be prepared to supply, in response to a written request from another Member,
3.
information of the sort referred to in paragraph 1.  A Member, having reason to believe that a specific
judicial decision or administrative ruling or bilateral agreement in the area of intellectual property rights
affects its rights under this Agreement, may also request in writing to be given access to or be informed
in sufficient detail of such specific judicial decisions or administrative rulings or bilateral agreements.

4.
Nothing in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall require Members to disclose confidential information
which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would prejudice
the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.

Article 64

Dispute Settlement 

1.
The provisions of Articles XXII and XXIII of GATT 1994 as elaborated and applied by the
Dispute  Settlement  Understanding  shall  apply  to  consultations  and  the  settlement  of  disputes  under
this Agreement except as otherwise specifically provided herein.

2.
Subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of Article XXIII of GATT 1994 shall not apply to the settlement
of disputes under this Agreement for a period of five years from the date of entry into force of the
WTO Agreement.

During the time period referred to in paragraph 2, the Council for TRIPS shall examine the
3.
scope and modalities for complaints of the type provided for under subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of Article
XXIII of GATT 1994 made pursuant to this Agreement, and submit its recommendations to the Ministerial
Conference for approval.  Any decision of the Ministerial Conference to approve such recommendations
or to extend the period in paragraph 2 shall be made only by consensus, and approved recommendations
shall be effective for all Members without further formal acceptance process. 

PART VI

TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

Article 65

Transitional Arrangements

1.
Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, no Member shall be obliged to apply the
provisions of this Agreement before the expiry of a general period of one year following the date of
entry into force of the WTO Agreement.

2.
A developing country Member is entitled to delay for a further period of four years the date
of application, as defined in paragraph 1, of the provisions of this Agreement other than Articles 3,
4 and 5.

Page 348

Any other Member which is in the process of transformation from a centrally-planned into a
3.
market, free-enterprise economy and which is undertaking structural reform of its intellectual property
system and facing special problems in the preparation and implementation of intellectual property laws
and regulations, may also benefit from a period of delay as foreseen in paragraph 2. 

4.
To the extent that a developing country Member is obliged by this Agreement to extend product
patent protection to areas of technology not so protectable in its territory on the general date of application
of  this  Agreement  for  that  Member,  as  defined  in  paragraph  2,  it  may  delay  the  application  of  the
provisions on product patents of Section 5 of Part II to such areas of technology for an additional period
of five years.

5.
A Member availing itself of a transitional period under paragraphs 1, 2, 3 or 4 shall ensure
that any changes in its laws, regulations and practice made during that period do not result in a lesser
degree of consistency with the provisions of this Agreement.

Article 66

Least-Developed Country Members

1.
In  view  of  the  special  needs  and  requirements  of  least-developed  country  Members,  their
economic,  financial  and  administrative  constraints,  and  their  need  for  flexibility  to  create  a  viable
technological base, such Members shall not be required to apply the provisions of this Agreement, other
than Articles 3, 4 and 5, for a period of 10 years from the date of application as defined under paragraph
1 of Article 65. The Council for TRIPS shall, upon duly motivated request by a least-developed country
Member, accord extensions of this period.

Developed country Members shall provide incentives to enterprises and institutions in their
2.
territories for the purpose of promoting and encouraging technology transfer to least-developed country
Members in order to enable them to create a sound and viable technological base.

Article 67

Technical Cooperation

In order to facilitate the implementation of this Agreement, developed country Members shall
provide, on request and on mutually agreed terms and conditions, technical and financial cooperation
in favour of developing and least-developed country Members. Such cooperation shall include assistance
in the preparation of laws and regulations on the protection and enforcement of intellectual property
rights as well as on the prevention of their abuse, and shall include support regarding the establishment
or reinforcement of domestic offices and agencies relevant to these matters, including the training of
personnel. 

Page 349

PART VII

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS;  FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 68

Council for Trade-Related Aspects of 

Intellectual Property Rights

The Council for TRIPS shall monitor the operation of this Agreement and, in particular, Members'
compliance with their obligations hereunder, and shall afford Members the opportunity of consulting
on matters relating to the trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights.  It shall carry out such
other responsibilities as assigned to it by the Members, and it shall, in particular, provide any assistance
requested by them in the context of dispute settlement procedures.  In carrying out its functions, the
Council for TRIPS may consult with and seek information from any source it deems appropriate.  In
consultation  with  WIPO,  the  Council  shall  seek  to  establish,  within  one  year  of  its  first  meeting,
appropriate arrangements for cooperation with bodies of that Organization.

Article 69

International Cooperation 

Members agree to cooperate with each other with a view to eliminating international trade in
goods infringing intellectual property rights.  For this purpose, they shall establish and notify contact
points in their administrations and be ready to exchange information on trade in infringing goods.  They
shall, in particular, promote the exchange of information and cooperation between customs authorities
with regard to trade in counterfeit trademark goods and pirated copyright goods. 

Article 70

Protection of Existing Subject Matter

This Agreement does not give rise to obligations in respect of acts which occurred before the

1.
date of application of the Agreement for the Member in question. 

2.
Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Agreement gives rise to obligations
in respect of all subject matter existing at the date of application of this Agreement for the Member
in  question,  and  which  is  protected  in  that  Member  on  the  said  date,  or  which  meets  or  comes
subsequently to meet the criteria for protection under the terms of this Agreement.  In respect of this
paragraph and paragraphs 3 and 4, copyright obligations with respect to existing works shall be solely
determined under Article 18 of the Berne Convention (1971), and obligations with respect to the rights
of producers of phonograms and performers in existing phonograms shall be determined solely under
Article 18 of the Berne Convention (1971) as made applicable under paragraph 6 of Article 14 of this
Agreement.

There  shall  be  no  obligation  to  restore  protection  to  subject  matter  which  on  the  date  of

3.
application of this Agreement for the Member in question has fallen into the public domain.

4.
In respect of any acts in respect of specific objects embodying protected subject matter which
become infringing under the terms of legislation in conformity with this Agreement, and which were

Page 350

commenced, or in respect of which a significant investment was made, before the date of acceptance
of the WTO Agreement by that Member, any Member may provide for a limitation of the remedies
available to the right holder as to the continued performance of such acts after the date of application
of this Agreement for that Member.  In  such cases the Member shall, however, at least provide for
the payment of equitable remuneration. 

5.
A Member is not obliged to apply the provisions of Article 11 and of paragraph 4 of Article 14
with respect to originals or copies purchased prior to the date of application of this Agreement for that
Member.

6.
Members shall not be required to apply Article 31, or the requirement in paragraph 1 of Article 27
that patent rights shall be enjoyable without discrimination as to the field of technology, to use without
the authorization of the right holder where authorization for such use was granted by the government
before the date this Agreement became known.

7.
In the case of intellectual property rights for which protection is conditional upon registration,
applications for protection which are pending on the date of application of this Agreement for the Member
in  question  shall  be  permitted  to  be  amended  to  claim  any  enhanced  protection  provided  under  the
provisions of this Agreement.  Such amendments shall not include new matter.

8.
Where  a  Member  does  not  make  available  as  of  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  the  WTO
Agreement patent protection for pharmaceutical and agricultural chemical products commensurate with
its obligations under Article 27, that Member shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

notwithstanding the provisions of Part VI, provide as from the date of entry into force
of the WTO Agreement a means by which applications for patents for such inventions
can be filed;

apply to these applications, as of the date of application of this Agreement, the criteria
for patentability as laid down in this Agreement as if those criteria were being applied
on the date of filing in that Member or, where priority is available and claimed, the
priority date of the application;  and

provide patent protection in accordance with this Agreement as from the grant of the
patent  and  for  the  remainder  of  the  patent  term,  counted  from  the  filing  date  in
accordance with Article 33 of this Agreement, for those of these applications that meet
the criteria for protection referred to in subparagraph (b).

9.
Where  a  product  is  the  subject  of  a  patent  application  in  a  Member  in  accordance  with
paragraph 8(a), exclusive marketing rights shall be granted, notwithstanding the provisions of Part VI,
for a period of five years after obtaining marketing approval in that Member or until a product patent
is granted or rejected in that Member, whichever period is shorter, provided that, subsequent to the
entry into force of the WTO Agreement, a patent application has been filed and a patent granted for
that product in another Member and marketing approval obtained in such other Member. 

Article 71

Review and Amendment  

1.
The Council for TRIPS shall review the implementation of this Agreement after the  expiration
of the transitional period referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 65.  The Council shall, having regard
to the experience gained in its implementation, review it two years after that date, and at identical intervals

Page 351

thereafter.  The Council may also undertake reviews in the light of any relevant new developments
which might warrant modification or amendment of this Agreement. 

2.
Amendments merely serving the purpose of adjusting to higher levels of protection of intellectual
property  rights  achieved,  and  in  force,  in  other  multilateral  agreements  and  accepted  under  those
agreements by all Members of the WTO may be referred to the Ministerial Conference for action in
accordance with paragraph 6 of Article X of the WTO Agreement on the basis of a consensus proposal
from the Council for TRIPS. 

Article 72

Reservations

Reservations may not be entered in respect of any of the provisions of this Agreement without

the consent of the other Members. 

Article 73

Security Exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:

(a)

(b)

to require a Member to furnish any information the disclosure of which it considers
contrary to its essential security interests;  or

to  prevent  a  Member  from  taking  any  action  which  it  considers  necessary  for  the
protection of its essential security interests;

(i)

(ii)

relating to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are derived;

relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such
traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying a military establishment;

(iii)

taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;  or

(c)

to prevent a Member from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under the
United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security.


