International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Setting Moon and Rising Nationalism: Lugou
Bridge as Monument and Memory

James A. Flath

To cite this article: James A. Flath (2004) Setting Moon and Rising Nationalism: Lugou Bridge
as Monument and Memory, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 10:2, 000-000, DOI:
10.1080/13527250410001692886
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250410001692886

Published online: 17 Feb 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 182

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 10, No. 2, May 2004, pp. 175–192

Setting Moon and Rising Nationalism: 
Lugou Bridge as Monument and 
Memory
James A. Flath

102000000May 2004
Taylor and Francis Ltd
rjhs10204.sgm
10.1080/13527250410001692886
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2004Taylor & Francis Ltd

This paper examines Beijing’s Lugou Bridge (Marco Polo Bridge) in terms of monument
and memory. With 800 years of history to its credit, this structure carries with it a select set
of textual memories passed down from one dynasty to the next, and finally into the 20th
century when its traditional associations of architectural and natural beauty were supple-
mented by its modern association with the beginning of the Anti-Japanese War of Resis-
tance (Second World War in China). With the opening of Sino-Japanese diplomacy in the
1970s, the Chinese authorities began to accredit further significance to the bridge as a site
of Chinese indignation over Japan’s perceived refusal to take responsibility for its wartime
aggression.  This  point  was  driven  home  most  forcefully  through  the  construction  of  the
Anti-Japanese War Memorial Hall in 1985, and the continuing use of the site as a tool of
diplomacy.  Lugou  Bridge,  therefore,  serves  to  demonstrate  how  political  authority  and
cultural nationalism are constructed through the continuing appropriation of monumental
artefacts and traditions.

Keywords: Marco Polo Bridge; Anti-Japanese War of Resistance; Monument; Chinese 
Heritage; Nationalism

On a summer’s day in 1985 one last bus trundled over the elegant arches of Beijing’s
Lugou (Marco Polo) Bridge, and after 793 years of service the span was sealed off to
begin a new career as a national monument. This act of bureaucratic finesse did not
create  the  monument,  nor  did  it  create  the  concept  of  monumentality  by  which
concrete objects are given extraordinary historical significance. The process of designa-
tion,  however,  does  mark  an  important  development  in  China  of  how  historical
artefacts are treated by the state.

Lugou Bridge has long been appreciated for its beauty and antiquity, but in the 20th
century  it  was  destined  to  play  a  strikingly  different  role  in  China’s  grim  struggle

James A. Flath, University of Western Ontario. Correspondence to: jflath@uwo.ca

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/13527250410001692886

176

J. A. Flath

against Japan in the war of 1937–1945, thus creating an alternative national identity as
a  modern  symbol  of  anti-imperialism.  The  combination  of  explicit  narratives  of
heritage and nationalism in one site thus offers an opportunity to study how the two
interact in the production of the modern historical site. Having said that, however, it
must be recognised that terms like heritage, nation and nationalism are problematic
and widely contested concepts. Recent publications such as Chinese Nationalism edited
by Jonathan Unger (1996), and the more recent Exploring Nationalisms of China edited
by Xiaoyuan Liu and C. X. George Wei (2002), have begun to untangle some of the
many complexities of Chinese nationalism, but they have also made it clear that with
its  constantly  evolving  dimensions,  Chinese  nationalism  can  never  be  reduced  to  a
simple or standard definition.

Some generalisations about Chinese nationalism, however, are relatively useful. In
particular,  the  ‘culturalism–nationalism’  thesis  has  been  influencing  discussions  of
Chinese nationalism ever since it was revised and published by Joseph Levenson in the
late 1950s. Levenson’s idea, greatly simplified, was that China’s traditional polity oper-
ated under a system in which the elite owed its allegiance not to a particular territory
but to a more abstract belief in the superiority of Chinese culture—i.e. ‘culturalism’. In
the late 19th and early 20th century this worldview came into conflict with the emerg-
ing system of nation-states and its imperative of territorial sovereignty. The response,
Levenson  argued,  was  for  the  Chinese  elite  to  adopt  nationalism  through  which
territorial claims could be asserted. The cultural past was not exactly abandoned in the
process, but it was reduced to the function of traditionalism.1

This thesis, with its overtones of modernisation theory, does contain problematic
assumptions about the dichotomy between culture and nation, and the absence of any
sense  of  nationalism  in  pre-modern  China.  The  culturalism–nationalism  thesis,
however, remains a useful starting point for the discussion of changing concepts of
monumentalism because, as the following discussion will argue, pre-modern Chinese
regimes  essentially  treated  their  monuments  as  culturalist  artefacts.  That  is  to  say,
monuments  were  used  by  cultural/political  elites  to  legitimate  authority  not  over  a
geographic space but over a universal culture. This began to change in the 20th century
when monuments and other cultural artefacts began to reflect the heightened concerns
over  the  territorial  integrity  of  the  nation.  Where  this  discussion  departs  from  the
culturalism–nationalism  thesis,  however,  is  in  the  observation  that  those  artefacts
never ceased to represent culturalism, and now serve to legitimate authority over both
culture  and  national  space.  By  situating  the  historical  monument  within  nationalist
discourse it can be shown that culturalism, or more specifically the cultural monument,
is thoroughly embedded in what Wang Gungwu has referred to as ‘restoration nation-
alism’. The monument, in other words, is not a remnant of sentimental traditionalism,
it is a concrete structure of authority.

In the post-Mao era the PRC has had to deal with multiple challenges to its identity,
ranging from the loss of its primary icon (Chairman Mao) to rapid modernisation, the
end of the Cold War and the 1989 Tiananmen uprising. In response, Wang Gungwu
suggests,  China  has  become  engaged  in  a  soul-searching  form  of  nationalism  that
‘combines elements of both preservation and renewal, but ties in the faith in a glorious

International Journal of Heritage Studies

177
past  more  directly  with  a  vision  of  a  great  future’.2  In  that  sense  the  monumental
conception of the nation, too, is built on the appropriation of earlier forms of monu-
mental narratives which themselves were constructed in the interests of power. In this
way the monument becomes part of a structure of power that follows the logic of gene-
alogy, depending on the selection and superscription of authoritative and monumental
inscriptions of the past to create authority in the present. The construction of a modern
monument, or the reconstitution of an ancient monument, does not invalidate past
inscriptions  as  negative  examples,  but  rather  manipulates  them  as  positive  tools  of
legitimacy. Successful use does now depend, and has always depended, on channelling
representations  into  specific  forms  of  memory  that  support  the  interests  of  those
having  authority  over  the  site.  The  glorious  past,  like  the  glorious  future,  has  its
primary application in supporting authority in the present.

While  concentrating  on  the  nation  as  an  expression  of  monumentality,  it  is  also
important to note the diversity of monuments in China and the fact that many are
only problematically connected with this national meta-narrative. I have argued else-
where  that  provincial  museums  and  monuments  show  significantly  more  scope  for
alternative  narratives,  and  thus  work  at  cross-purposes  to  the  establishment  of  a
monolithic national heritage structure (2002). But in turning attention to Beijing, one
cannot help but recognise the powerful impression that the Chinese state has made on
the  public  spaces  under  the  jurisdiction  of  its  capital  city.  This  impression  has
appeared in other studies of Beijing monuments and museums, including Wu Hung’s
examination of Tiananmen Square in the wake of the 1989 Tiananmen Square massa-
cre,3  which  focuses  on  the  process  of  destruction  and  construction  by  which  the
Chinese  Communist  Party  (CCP)  remoulded  the  space  in  its  own  image.  Rubie
Watson’s expanded view of Beijing considers how the city has been spatially organised
to  reflect  a  national  narrative,4  and  in  a  more  focused  evaluation  of  a  single  site
Tamara Hamlish argues that the Palace Museum has become an ideal venue for the
assertion of state hegemony.5

Although Lugou Bridge has much in common with each of these sites, it is also a
unique historical experience. The structure is not as awesome as the Great Wall, nor
does it possess the grandeur of the Palace Museum or the architecture of Tiananmen
Square. But few heritage sites can match Lugou Bridge in its ability to draw the visitor
into an imaginary teleology or evolutionary chronology that begins over eight centuries
in the past, and progresses inexorably toward the modern nation-state. It is the power
literally to bridge past and present that makes this site so emotive of the continuing
relevance of monumentalism.

Lugou Bridge in Imperial China

Lugou Bridge was completed in 1192 under the direction of the Jin, a dynasty founded
by the Jurchen people of Manchuria who conquered north China and established their
capital on the site of Yanjing, where Beijing stands today.6 With 11 spans stretching
266 m over the Lugou River, and its virtually countless stone lions,7 the bridge imme-
diately  attracted  admirers,  including  the  Zhangzong  emperor  (r.1190–1208).

178

J. A. Flath

Although  the  Jurchen  had  once  been  culturally  distinct,  the  Jin  is  widely  cited  in
Chinese  history  as  a  model  case  of  sinicisation—a  foreign  dynasty  that  gave  up  its
militaristic traditions and adopted settled Chinese ways.8 The Zhangzong emperor, in
particular, is remembered as one of the emperors who presided over this cultural tran-
sition, and it seems fitting that it was he who gave up the practice of hunting and began
to  seek  the  finer  points  of  nature  in  the  hills  outside  the  capital.  The  best  vistas  he
summarised as the ‘Eight Sights of Mount Yan’ (Yanshan bajing), and among them he
included the vision of a full moon setting over the Lugou River.9 This, along with the
bridge that defined that view, would become the most enduring part of the Jin cultural
legacy, and while other sights were forgotten or altered over the subsequent dynasties,
the ‘Moon Over the Lugou at Dawn’ (Lugou xiaoyue) has persisted into the present as
a widely celebrated vista.

The Jin had only a few years to enjoy the view over the Lugou before their capital fell
to Genghis Khan in 1215. The bridge, however, stood firm and when Kubilai Khan
returned to establish the Yuan dynasty in 1279, it continued to serve as an inspiration
to those who crossed it, including Marco Polo who described it in his memoir as ‘a very
handsome bridge of stone, perhaps unequalled by another in the world’, and thus lent
the bridge his name in later Western accounts.10 More relevant to the Chinese concep-
tion of the bridge are the poets and artists who captured the structure in word and
image not as a singular monolith but as complement to nature.

This  understanding  of  the  place  of  Lugou  Bridge  within  the  grandeur  of  nature
continued to develop through the Yuan dynasty,11 but was carried forward with greater
articulation in the subsequent Ming dynasty when the bridge and its environs were
again  grouped  together  with  other  scenic  wonders  as  the  ‘Eight  Scenes  of  Yanjing’
(Yanjing  bajing).  As  Susan  Naquin  suggests,  the  artistic  development  of  the  ‘Eight
Scenes’ should not be taken merely as a flight of artistic enterprise but as a concerted
effort to lend scenic and historic legitimacy to the region as it was prepared to accept
the renewed designation as capital of the Ming dynasty.12

Liu Tong’s descriptive Ming dynasty text Dijing jingwu lue (1635), in addition to
outlining  the  history  of  the  bridge,  devotes  considerable  space  to  transcribing
poems that pay homage to it. Certainly the most eminent of those poets was Hu Guang
(1370–1418), a scholar who rose in the early Ming to obtain, among other appoint-
ments,  the  positions  of  Chancellor  of  the  Hanlin  Academy,  and  the  highest  court
position of Grand Secretary of the Wenyuan Hall. Unofficially Hu Guang was also a
close confidant of the third Ming emperor Yongle, under whose authority the capital
would  be  officially  moved  from  Nanjing  to  Beijing  in  1420.13  Hu  accompanied  the
emperor on a number of his journeys to and from his home base in Beijing, and it may
have been on one of those occasions that he stopped at Lugou Bridge to compose the
following lines: 

Lugou Bridge
Broken cloud, a tilted pale moon,
The waters of the Sanggan [Lugou] River shine yellow.
A man in a thatched cottage dreams peacefully,
The travellers on the stone bridge alert to the twilight.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

179

The distant city is illuminated flame-red,
Frost on the plain as far as the eye can see.
Attendants to the emperor stationed upon the bridge,
The flags are soughing; the horses neighing long.

Hu Guang

Wang Fu (1362–1416) was both a contemporary and colleague of Hu Guang, and it was
owing to his skill as a calligrapher that Wang found an official position as a draftsman.
Beyond the confines of his day job, however, Wang was recognised as perhaps the finest
painter and calligrapher of the early Ming dynasty. Following in the style of the great
Yuan dynasty master Ni Zan, Wang Fu was described by his contemporaries as 

particularly  skilled  in  painting  landscapes,  bamboos,  and  stones.  Whenever  he  got
drunk he used to put on a yellow hat and robe and took on a haughty mien. He spread
out some paper, rolled up his sleeves, waved the brush and went on splashing and scat-
tering, doing the strangest things which are quite impossible to describe.14

In 1413 and 1414 Wang Fu also accompanied the emperor on his journeys to Beijing,
and it was on the second trip in 1414 that he composed the hand-scroll ‘Picture of Eight
Scenes’.15 This imagined landscape included, naturally, ‘A Picture of the Moon Over
the Lugou at Dawn’, which he also described in an associated poem Crossing Lugou
Bridge in the Emperor’s Retinue: 

The emperor’s retinue dons its morning clothes,
Cock’s crow; setting moon; trees in mist.
Clouds cast shadows across the expanse of mountain peaks,
A light shimmers across the horizon.
Whispers are heard from the lonely garrison fire,
Horse hooves clatter across the frost covered bridge.
The landscape inspires the imagination,
And the towers are the hometown of the emperor.16

Wang Fu

While it is notable that individuals as powerful as Hu Guang or as talented as Wang Fu
chose Lugou Bridge as their artistic subject, it is more important to our understanding
of their concept of monumentality that in doing so their descriptions diminish or even
ignore the physical structure of the bridge itself. This is best explained through refer-
ence to contemporary artistic values, where the mastery of landscape painting, poetry
and calligraphy were recognised as the peak of civility. In the pursuit of an art form that
could give full rein to the individual’s emotional expression there was little call for the
technical accuracy or frank description that the manufactured object demanded. For
that reason objects such as bridges were seldom included as more than a supporting
text  to  the  soaring  mountains,  stately  trees,  or  in  this  case  setting  moon  that  could
represent the spirit of the artist. In the context of the Ming dynasty, therefore, an object
like Lugou Bridge is best understood not as a singular monument but as a prop to a
grander and more abstract form of monument found in the natural surroundings, and
authorised by celebrity recognition in past and present. That was also the impression
that would be retained in the text-based memory.

180

J. A. Flath

With the fall of the Ming dynasty in 1644, Lugou Bridge once again passed into the
hands of an alien dynasty, and one that perceived itself to be heir to the earlier Jin.17
As the sole physical reminder of the earlier dynasty, Lugou Bridge was a living state-
ment  of  Manchu  legitimacy.  Repairs  to  the  bridge  were  conducted  repeatedly
throughout  the  dynasty,  beginning  with  the  reign  of  the  Kangxi  emperor  (r.1662–
1722), who was a frequent visitor to the site. In 1698 he renamed the river Yongding
(Ever Stable), in the apparent hope that the new nomenclature would help control the
river’s  unpredictable  behaviour.  Three  years  later  he  marked  the  occasion  with  a
poem and stele bearing the title ‘Perusing the Yongding River’.18 The real boost to the
bridge’s  image,  however,  came  in  the  Qianlong  reign  (r.1736–1795)  when  the
emperor renewed its status as one of the ‘Eight Sights of Beijing’, and offered his own
views of ‘Moon Over the Lugou at Dawn’ in 1751.19 The Qianlong emperor, however,
bettered his predecessors by having his calligraphic interpretation of the Zhangzong
emperor’s  550-year-old  words  inscribed  on  a  3.6  m  tablet  mounted  on  a  granite
tortoise  at  the  eastern  approach  to  the  bridge.20  Given  the  perceived  lineage  of  the
Manchu, and the real lineage of the bridge, the Qianlong emperor’s attention to the
structure might be interpreted as an act of piety toward his alleged ancestors, and a
potent claim for Manchu legitimacy.

Lugou Bridge in 1771. Nan xun shengdian 95: 5226—27; reproduced from Susan Naquin, Peking: Temples and City Life, 1400—1900. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
Moon Over the Lugou at Dawn . Stele in calligraphy of the Qianlong emperor, 1751. Author s photo.

What  the  Qianlong  emperor  had  accomplished  in  the  process  was  not  simply  to
stake  a  claim  to  territory  but  to  legitimate  that  claim  by  appropriating  the  literary
authority of the past and delivering that idea into the common realm by fixing it in

Figure 1 Lugou Bridge in 1771. Nan xun shengdian 95: 5226–27; reproduced from Susan
Naquin, Peking: Temples and City Life, 1400–1900. Berkeley: University of California Press,
2000.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

181

Figure 2 ‘Moon Over the Lugou at Dawn’. Stele in calligraphy of the Qianlong emperor,
1751. Author’s photo.

stone. Whether or not most people understood the reference to the Jin dynasty, the idea
of ‘Moon Over the Lugou at Dawn’ was no longer just a poetic allusion by which an
educated elite could contextualise the past; it was now on public display as a physical
link to the past for all who crossed the bridge. That display, however, was not for the
purpose of honouring the past or being remembered in the future; it was about sustain-
ing political legitimacy in the present. The Qianlong emperor had created and patron-
ised a concrete link to past authority as an element of political authority in his present;
the bridge had become a monument.

Lugou Bridge in the Age of Nationalism

The reputation of Lugou Bridge as a venerable antique and object of beauty began to
undergo a radical transformation in the 20th century. Travel guides to Beijing from the
late Qing and early Republican years continued to portray the bridge as an interesting
artefact, although the construction of a railway bridge several hundred metres from the
original meant that the original was no longer the primary passage in the south-western
approach to Beijing.21 The bridge continued to serve local traffic, but for long-distance
travellers the structure had become an object more likely to be observed in passage
from the speeding train. In any case, the deteriorating international situation and the

182

J. A. Flath

growing threat of war with Japan increasingly overshadowed preoccupations such as
tourism. Far from being forgotten amid the turmoil, however, Lugou Bridge was to
become one of the greatest symbols of anti-Japanese resistance.

The  emergence  of  a  strong  Japanese  military  in  the  late  19th  century  posed  a
continuing threat to China, beginning with defeat and the loss of territory in the First
Sino-Japanese  War  of  1894–1895,  and  continuing  through  Japan’s  ever-increasing
encroachments on Chinese sovereignty as spelled out by the infamous ‘21 Demands’ of
1915, and the 1919 Treaty of Versailles which gave Japan control over former German
holdings in Shandong province. Tensions had been heightened in the 1930s with the
occupation of Manchuria by the Japanese Kwantung army, and the establishment of
the puppet-state Manchukuo.

According to treaty, Japan had also obtained the right to exercise troops in the vicin-
ity of Lugou Bridge and the neighbouring railway bridge, which now appeared as stra-
tegically important to the control of rail traffic throughout the region. It was during
one such manoeuvre on 7 July 1937 that a Chinese military detachment on the opposite
side of the river lobbed a shell into the Japanese camp, and although this produced no
casualties the failure of one Japanese soldier to appear for role-call prompted an abor-
tive attack on the Chinese position in the town of Wanping. From that point the diplo-
matic  and  military  situation  deteriorated,  and  by  the  end  of  the  month  Japan  had
occupied the entire Beijing–Tianjin region in what was effectively the first offensive of
the  Second  World  War,  better  known  in  China  as  the  Anti-Japanese  War  (kang-Ri
zhanzheng).22

The recognition of Lugou Bridge as a symbol of resistance was immediate. It took
only three days for a collective of Shanghai dramatists to write a three-act play titled
Protect Lugou Bridge.23 Within weeks, other poems and memorials began to appear
with  titles  such  as  ‘Battle  Anthem  of  Lugou  Bridge’  (Lugouqiao  zhange)  by  Huo
Songlin, and ‘July Seventh Incident’ by Tang Runmin.24 Popular songs also emerged
and were taken up as marching tunes by the Chinese military, including the following
known simply as Lugou Bridge: 

Lugou Bridge, Lugou Bridge,
Where our men laid down their lives,
We will avenge their sacrifice.
No fear when planes and tanks attack,
We lift our swords and drive them back.
Lugou Bridge, Lugou Bridge,
This is where our nation lives or dies.25

The battle also coincides with the early development of Chinese journalistic correspon-
dence,  and  it  was  largely  through  the  medium  of  the  newspaper  that  Lugou  Bridge
began  to  develop  its  status  as  an  icon  of  resistance.  The  leading  Tianjin  newspaper
Dagongbao, for example, began to cover the story on 9 July and continued to do so in
subsequent days as the details unfolded. In the heat of war the reports naturally focused
on problems of immediate importance rather than any sentimentality about the history
or scenic beauty of Lugou Bridge. Many of those reports, however, did carry with them
a  visual  reminder  as  photographs  began  to  juxtapose  the  arches  and  stone  lions  of

International Journal of Heritage Studies

183
Lugou Bridge with the headlines of Japanese aggression.26 These were supplemented
after 23 July by the stirring editorials of Fan Changjiang, one of China’s more cele-
brated correspondents, who illustrated the first instalment of his three piece series on
the Lugou Bridge Incident with a photograph of the Qianlong emperor’s setting moon
stele.27 Another contemporary newspaper, Shibao, took a more traditional approach to
Lugou  Bridge,  reproducing  ancient  poetry  to  commemorate  the  situation  on  9  July
1937, and on 13 July printing an ode to the stone lions that had been witness to the
battle a week earlier.28 Although the bridge never again figured prominently in battle,
the media had played their role in securing the place of the bridge as a definitive symbol
of the war.

Popular as the bridge was as a symbol of resistance, it nonetheless took a remarkably
long time for it to acquire official recognition. The 10th anniversary of the 7 July inci-
dent might have been an appropriate moment to commemorate the site, and indeed
Dagongbao’s Wang Lingqi did return to the scene on 8 July 1947, where he reported
that the stele ‘Moon Over the Lugou’ still stood erect—its lettering now coloured red
as if to symbolise ‘the bloodbath of the Anti-Japanese War’.29 When the communists
came to power in 1949, Lugou Bridge continued to appear in newspapers on important
anniversaries,  including  7  July  1957  when  it  was  acknowledged  in  Renmin  ribao
(People’s  Daily,  the  official  voice  of  the  CCP)  with  an  article  going  by  the  title  of
‘Remembering this Day Twenty Years Ago’.30 The tone of the article, however, was set
by  its  opening  phrase  ‘9/18’,  referring  not  to  the  Lugou  Bridge  Incident  but  to  the
Mukden Incident on 18 September 1931—a date that is regarded in PRC historiogra-
phy as the real beginning of the Japanese invasion, which Chiang Kai-shek had suppos-
edly declined to resist until that fateful day in 1937. The recognition of the event was
thus not without its political implications, and these had to be handled with care lest
the  authors  appeared  to  sanction  a  rival  that  still  posed  a  significant  threat  from
Taiwan.  The  appropriation  of  GMD  glory,  therefore,  required  that  the  incident  be
framed within the wider ‘people’s war’ that the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) had
patronised.  A  following  article  in  the  same  newspaper,  using  the  prevailing  tone  of
socialist romanticism, squeezed further significance out of the anniversary by contrast-
ing the violence of 20 years past with the present peaceful scenery, and promised to
return in 20 more years to report on how things had turned out.31

In  terms  of  physical  protection  and  preservation,  only  in  1961  did  the  National
Representative Committee designate the bridge and adjacent walled town of Wanping
as national historic sites.32 This in itself should be regarded as a departure from policy
in a state where what little had been done to preserve historical artefacts had been left
to  local  and  provincial  authorities.33  The  timing  of  1961  corresponds  to  the  more
significant, although temporary, political departure of Mao Zedong from the apex of
power, and his replacement by Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. The creation of a state-
sponsored  programme  of  heritage  conservation  under  this  rival  administration
suggests the intent to diversify state iconography, and draw attention away from Mao
himself. But even with that level of recognition there was no attempt physically to inter-
pret  the  bridge  as  a  symbol  of  nationalism  or  anti-militarism  through  any  form  of
public facility.

184

J. A. Flath

Whatever intentions the Deng/Liu administration may have had for developing a
system of state-protected historical artefacts, all such policies went into abeyance with
the  return  of  Mao  and  the  beginning  of  the  Cultural  Revolution  in  1966,  when  far
beyond simply ignoring objects of antiquity the state and its radical adherents actively
demolished them. Although Lugou Bridge survived this period, the People’s Daily of 7
July 1967 demonstrates its diminished reputation. As in previous decennial anniversa-
ries, the editorial returned to the subject of the Anti-Japanese War, but not to Lugou
Bridge, focusing exclusively on the evils of Japanese imperialism and the brilliance of
Mao Zedong thought.34 Likewise, in 1977, if anyone had actually been lured back by
the promise of 20 years earlier, they would have been disappointed to find that the 40th
Anti-Japanese War anniversary issue of People’s Daily contained not a single reference
to either the war or the bridge.35

China is by no means the only country to have neglected its memories of the Second
World  War  during  this  timeframe,  but  it  is  worth  considering  why  the  memory  of
Lugou Bridge and other notable battle sites were languishing after four decades. An
obvious  reason  relating  especially  to  Lugou  Bridge  is  the  fact  that  the  bridge  had
originally been defended not by the communist PLA but by the Kuomintang (KMT)
military, with which the communists had engaged in a long and bloody civil war. A
more subtle reason concerning wartime memories in general may be, as Diana Lary
and Stephen MacKinnon suggest, that the society had simply been too traumatised by
continual warfare to have any desire to preserve it in memory.36

A less emotional but equally relevant factor in the underdevelopment of monuments
and museums of all sorts concerns the nature of recreation under the PRC. The devel-
opment of tourism has had a profound effect on the development of museums and
monuments elsewhere in the world, and a consideration of this dynamic in China also
helps to explain why they were slow to develop before the 1980s. China had always
upheld  a  tradition  of  pilgrimage  to  well-known  temples  and  scenic  mountains,  and
while this was curtailed under communist rule it was in part replaced by pilgrimages to
sites of political interest, such as Chairman Mao’s hometown of Shaoshan, the revolu-
tionary base of Yan’an and the model commune of Dazhai. Mao personally inspired the
first real wave of popular interest in the Great Wall with his statement ‘He who has not
been to the Great Wall is not a real man.’ And as the place where one could most likely
catch  a  glimpse  of  Mao  himself,  Beijing’s  Tiananmen  Square  attracted  enormous
crowds,  especially  during  the  high  tide  of  the  Cultural  Revolution.  It  was  also  at
Tiananmen that the new National Museum of History and the central Monument to
the People’s Martyrs had been constructed in the late 1950s.37 Outside of this small
selection  of  mass-tourist  destinations,  however,  there  was  little  encouragement  for
people to travel to historic sites such as battlefields, and nothing for them to do or see
should they make the effort. The nature of Mao-era tourism, however, also highlights
the primary reason why Lugou Bridge and past wars in general were largely overlooked
during  Maoist  China—the  monolithic  nature  of  Mao  himself.  From  the  mid-1950s
through to the mid-1970s it was the Great Leader alone who stood as the symbol of the
nation,  and  virtually  all  other  developments  were  explicitly  designed  to  support  his
further aggrandisement.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

185

The Awakening Lion and the War of Memory

The passing of the Mao era, following his death in 1976, and the final return of Deng
Xiaoping  ushered  in  the  so-called  Reform  Era  in  the  late  1970s,  bringing  about  a
gradual diversification in the previously monolithic national culture. Official attitudes
toward Lugou Bridge began to change in 1979 when the Beijing Planning Committee
announced  its  intention  to  establish  a  Lugou  Bridge  Artefact  Preservation  Institute
(Lugouqiao wenwu baoguan suo), inaugurating it on 7 July 1981—the 44th anniversary
of the Lugou Bridge Incident. Accompanying this Institute was a small exhibit hall near
the eastern approach to the bridge. This was initially divided into two sections—the
first being a general history of the bridge and town of Wanping, the second dealing with
the struggle against Japan.38
Lugou Bridge. Author s photo.This shift in policy can be attributed to several factors. First, the 1980s saw the maturity
of the first modern generation to have grown up without protracted war, and conse-
quently the first generation in need of concrete reminders that the CCP had been forged
during the Anti-Japanese War, and that the PLA had liberated the country from its
enemies. More significantly, this same period marks the final rise to power of Deng Xiaop-
ing and the implementation of his policy of economic development and opening to the
outside world. Tourism, both domestic and international, was to become a key element
in promoting China’s economic growth and international stature, and as part of that
promotion the country would begin to develop its battlefields as potential tourist sites.

Figure 3 Lugou Bridge. Author’s photo.

186

J. A. Flath

The commemoration of the Anti-Japanese War must also be read in connection to
continuing  anti-Japanese  sentiments  that  have  been  piqued  repeatedly  since  the  re-
establishment of official ties in the 1970s. Foremost among these issues is the question
of Japanese war responsibility. With some justification, China regularly charges Japan
with distorting the circumstances of the war, especially through high-school textbooks
that  ignore  such  incidents  as  the  1937  Nanjing  Massacre,  which  Chinese  historians
believe to have claimed some 300,000 civilian lives.39 Although Japan and China re-
established  diplomatic  ties  in  1972  and  signed  a  friendship  pact  in  1978,  relations
continue to be tainted by China’s demand for a formal apology, and Japan’s reluctance
to comply. High-level diplomatic visits from Japan to China tend to be prefaced by a
recapitulation  of  the  Chinese  evaluation  of  Japanese  atrocities  and  the  call  for  an
apology, and conclude with a Japanese expression of ‘regret’ for any mistakes it may
have made in the past. It may be an exaggeration to say that the Anti-Japanese War
Memorial Hall functions as a branch of foreign affairs, but because of the nature of
Sino-Japanese relations, edifices like this are international in scope and must be evalu-
ated in those terms.

On the 10th anniversary of the normalisation of relations between China and Japan
the two countries became embroiled in the ‘textbook controversy’. In June of 1982 the
Japanese Ministry of Education publicised the results of its recent textbook screening
process, and by the end of the month the Japanese press had begun to describe text-
book language as having reverted to an aggressive ‘prewar’ tone.40 These reports were
quickly picked up by the Chinese press, which began a media campaign that marked
the 15 August anniversary of the Japanese surrender with the People’s Daily headline
‘Past experience, if not forgotten, is a guide to the future.’41 Before the year was out it
had been determined that there would be an Anti-Japanese War Memorial Hall, and in
December 1982 the Cultural Artefact division of the Department of Culture ratified
the decision to repair the city walls of Wanping town, and to establish the memorial
hall.42

The Anti-Japanese War Memorial Hall Committee was established in 1985 under
the direction of the Departments of Propaganda and Culture, and chaired by Minister
of Culture Zhu Muzhi. At the opening meeting it was determined that the hall would
be under the jurisdiction of the city of Beijing, and exhibits were to be managed by the
Political  Department  of  the  PLA  and  the  Chinese  People’s  Military  Revolution
Museum.43  The  National  People’s  Congress  joined  the  effort  in  April  1986  by
confirming that the Anti-Japanese War Memorial Hall was to be a key construction
item  of  the  7th  Five  Year  Plan.  Shortly  thereafter  the  Beijing  People’s  Government
established the Lugou Bridge Historical Renovation Committee and a Bridge Repair
Steering  Department  staffed  by  a  Who’s  Who  of  high-end  political  leaders,  such  as
Beijing  vice-mayors  Bai  Jiefu  and  Chen  Haosu.44  In  1987  the  Anti-Japanese  War
Memorial Hall was finally opened with due ceremony, and the curtain was raised by
senior General Yang Shangkun on 7 July—the 50th anniversary of the Lugou Bridge
Incident.45

The Anti-Japanese War Memorial Hall, described in detail elsewhere by Rana Mitter,
is  defined  largely  by  its  architecture.46  The  emphasis  throughout  is  on  creating  a

International Journal of Heritage Studies

187

monument, but despite the grandiosity of its implementation the hall itself is certainly
less than monumental. In lieu of that, organisers make every effort to connect the site
to the true national monuments, myths and myths in the making. Standing a short
distance  from  Lugou  Bridge  in  Wanping  town,  the  hall  is  enclosed  by  a  traditional
courtyard that both blocks any outside view of the interior and preserves the historical
appearance of the town. On entering the courtyard the visitor is greeted by ‘The Awak-
ening Lion’, a massive sculpture that ties the museum to the historical site by invoking
the bridge’s most famous attribute, while giving expression to the popular idea that the
modern Chinese ‘sleeping giant’ is becoming a world power. Cheng Yunxian, one of
three collaborators on the project, indicated that the sculpture had also been designed
to incorporate elements of the Great Wall in order to create the ‘sense of a historic
remnant’  and  gunshot  marks  ‘to  let  the  people  feel  the  history’.47  A  less  obvious
reference is to a form of the festive ‘lion dance’ in which the term ‘Awakening Lion’
refers to General Guan Yu (ca AD 220), regarded throughout East Asia as one of China’s
greatest military heroes, ultimate model of honour and loyalty, and God of War to the
Qing dynasty. Inside the main entrance, which is itself decorated by the calligraphic
inscription  of  Deng  Xiaoping,  a  second  sculpture  provides  an  equally  resounding
statement of the museum’s message through reference to another of China’s proudest

Figure 4 ‘The Waking Lion’, by Pan He, Lian Mingcheng, and Cheng Yunxian. Author’s
photo.

188

J. A. Flath

representatives. Standing some 20 feet high and 100 feet across, the sculpture presents
row upon row of stolid soldiers and citizens as living stone—the title is borrowed from
a verse of China’s militaristic national anthem (which is itself inscribed on an adjacent
wall), and makes the intent of the piece apparent to all: ‘Build a New Great Wall with
our Flesh and Blood’.

The Waking Lion , by Pan He, Lian Mingcheng, and Cheng Yunxian. Author s photo.

One of the key functions of the Anti-Japanese War Memorial Hall has been to wage
the war of memory and hold Japan to historical account. Following its opening in 1987,
Lugou Bridge and the Anti-Japanese War Memorial Hall stood again at the front lines
when  China  and  the  world  marked  the  50th  anniversary  of  Japan’s  unconditional
surrender and the conclusion of the Second World War. To mark the occasion, Japan’s
Prime  Minister  Tomiichi  Muruyama  chose  this  time  to  pay  an  official  state  visit  to
China,  and  on  4  May  1995  toured  the  memorial  hall  and  bridge  where  the  People’s
Daily photographed him beside the Qianlong emperor’s memorial to the setting moon.
The  editorial  board  of  the  People’s  Daily  returned  again  the  following  22  June  with
another article ‘Gunshots Awaken the Ferocious Lion: A Sketch of the Resistance War
Memorial of the Chinese People’, and again on 7 July to mark the 58th anniversary of
the Lugou Bridge Incident. A final editorial appeared on the armistice anniversary of
15 August, when Jiang Zemin visited the memorial hall and bridge where he repeated
the now-familiar line ‘the past, if not forgotten, can be a guide to the future’.48

If  the  Chinese  authorities  had  felt  they  were  making  progress  in  negotiating  the
memory of the Anti-Japanese War, they received affirmation six years later when on 8
October 2001 Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi raised the political stakes set
by his predecessor by placing a wreath at the sculpture ‘Build a New Great Wall of our
Flesh and Blood’. But if anyone had thought that this constituted the long-sought  apol-
ogy  they  were  sorely  disappointed  when  Koizumi  negated  the  goodwill  after  seven
months by visiting the controversial Yasukuni Shrine to Japan’s war dead on 21 April
2002, and again on 14 January 2003. Fulfilling its role as critic, the Anti-Japanese War
Memorial Hall rose to the occasion two days later by hosting a historical seminar to
reiterate  the  Chinese  position  on  the  war,  condemn  the  Japanese  Prime  Minister’s
actions  as  ‘absurd’  and  ‘notorious’,  and  to  remind  Koizumi  that  he  ‘cannot  change
historical facts’.49

There may not be a direct causation between politics and the production of monu-
ments  in  modern  China,  but  an  overview  of  the  connection  between  Anti-Japanese
War memorials and the development of Sino-Japanese relations makes it clear that the
two are intimately connected. The development of Lugou Bridge and the Anti-Japa-
nese War Memorial Hall had been conceived as part of China’s response to the 1982
textbook crisis, and the museum has ever since played the role as arbiter of truth from
the  Chinese  perspective.  But  in  terms  of  diplomacy,  truth  and  memory  are  not  the
only issues on the table. Indeed, with the high-stakes negotiation of trade and invest-
ment,  truth  and  memory  may  not  even  be  the  key  issues.  But  the  negotiation  of
memory  is  nonetheless  the  one  issue  that  precedes  and  contextualises  all  else.  By
extension, Lugou Bridge and the Anti-Japanese War Memorial Hall are the venue of
political  theatre  in  which  the  ritual  of  Sino-Japanese  relations  is  increasingly
performed.

Conclusion

International Journal of Heritage Studies

189

Nothing seems to represent the past so concretely as the concrete object itself. Armed
with  a  little  information  and  imagination  any  visitor  to  an  historic  monument  can
perceive the venerable physical construction not merely as the arrangement of brick,
stone or concrete that it technically is, but as a profound statement on the past in which
it was made, or made to represent. The logic of the monument is simple, and it is the
ease of association between the tangible object and the abstract past that makes the
monument so compelling as a concrete historical text, and so inviting as a venue for
partisan  historical  interpretation.  Of  course,  the  problem  is  seldom  as  simple  as  it
appears and the historian might point out that the relationship between the object and
the past is infinitely more complicated, or perhaps depressingly more mundane than it
first appears. Such opinions, however, are peripheral to the process of monumentality,
which is less about examining the complications of actual history than it is about creat-
ing social memory by which the object is reduced to a simple and effective monumental
identity.

Prasenjit  Duara  has  argued  that  historical  narratives  create  a  linear  history  that
supports  a  ‘self-same,  national  subject  evolving  through  time’.50  I  agree  with  this
observation, at least in respect to Lugou Bridge, but would add that in historicising a
monument such as Lugou Bridge it is apparent that these objects have been involved
in  an  ongoing  process  of  legitimating  their  present  through  reference  to  the  past.
The  constitution  of  present  legitimacy  (i.e.  the  ‘national  subject’)  depends  not  just
on  contemporary  authorisation  but  also  on  the  continuing  appropriation  of  the
authoritative  lineage.  In  other  words,  the  monument  and  museum  have  a  strong
potential to encode past authorisations in the present not through pure imagination
but through recognition of the patterns of authority that have always been present in
the  authoritative  texts  that  form  the  basis  for  the  modern  museum  or  ancient
monument.

While  the  Zhangzong  emperor  staked  his  own  political/cultural  claim  to  Lugou
Bridge by coining the poetic phrase ‘Moon Over the Lugou at Dawn’, that stake was
appropriated  by  later  generations  of  literati  who  wished  to  establish  the  bridge  as  a
symbol of antiquity by which their present, and the political structure that employed
them, gained relevance. During the Qing dynasty the Qianlong emperor took that same
textual fragment, but fixed it in concrete form and made it the defining element of the
bridge for all to see. The Zhangzong emperor’s setting moon, as appropriated by the
Qianlong emperor’s stele, still makes up a dominant component of the bridge’s iden-
tity, so that photographing a Japanese Prime Minister standing beside that stele in 1995
still has the effect of invoking that 800 years of history. But in much the same way as
the Qianlong emperor inscribed his interpretation on the bridge in 1751, present-day
political leaders draw on past legitimacy while selecting other historical fragments to be
monumentalised under the weight of their own authority. The subtle forms of the past
are now embedded in the modern and expanded historical site, and serve to authorise
the modern message of nationalism and internationalism that is delivered through the
interpretation of the modern museum.

190

J. A. Flath

Notes

J. Levenson, Confucian China and its Modern Fate, 1958, 95–108.

[1]
[2] Cited in Zheng Yongnian, Discovering Chinese Nationalisms in China, 1999, 15.
[3] Wu Hung, ‘Tiananmen Square: A Political History of Monuments’.
[4] Rubie Watson, ‘Palaces, Museums, and Squares: Chinese National Spaces’.
[5] Tamara  Hamlish,  ‘Global  Culture,  Modern  Heritage:  Re-membering  the  Chinese  Imperial

Collections’.

[6] The  original  name  used  by  the  Jin  was  Guangli.  The  name  Lugou  (‘Reed  Ditch’)  was
adopted  in  the  Yuan  dynasty.  Beijing  bowuguan  xuehui,  Beijing  bolan  (Beijing  exhibits),
1987, 146–47.

[7] Technically there are 485 stone lions on the bridge, but folklore holds them to be defiant of
attempts  at  enumeration.  See  Luo  Zhewen  et  al.,  ‘Luetan  Lugouqiao  de  lishi  yu  jianzhu’
(Remarks on the history and architecture of Lugou Bridge), 1987, 44–45.

[8] See,  in  particular,  the  discussion  by  Tao  Jing-shen,  The  Jurchen  in  Twelfth-century  China,

1976.

[9] Luo Zhewen, Lugou qiao wenji, 1987, 16.
[10] Thomas Wright, The Travels of Marco Polo, 1854, 238.
[11] For examples of relevant Yuan dynasty poetry see Liu Tong, Dijing jingwu lue (A record of the
scenery  of  the  capital),  2000,  144;  and  Luo,  Lugou  qiao  wenji,  1987,  n.p.,  for  samples  of
relevant Yuan dynasty graphic art.
Susan Naquin, Peking: Temples and City Life, 1400–1900, 2000, 112.

[12]
[13] Carrington Goodrich, Dictionary of Ming Biography, 1976, vol. II, 627.
[14] Wusheng shishi, cited in Osvald Siren, A History of Later Chinese Painting, 1938, vol. I, 31–32.
[15] Goodrich, Dictionary of Ming Biography, 1976, 1374.
[16] Hu  Guang  and  Wang  Fu  are  both  reproduced  in  Liu  Tong,  Dijing  jingwu  lue,  2000,  145.

Translated by Jianmeng He, University of Western Ontario.

[17] On the topic of Jin heritage see Evelyn Rawski, The Last Emperors, 1998, 295.
[18] Luo, Lugou qiao wenji, 1987, 59. The name of the river had earlier been changed from Lugou
to Wuding (Never Stable). Repairs were conducted in 1662, 1668, 1752, 1785 and 1787 (Luo,
ibid., 1987, 36).

[19] The other sites were ‘Layered Shades of Green at Juyong Pass’; ‘Cascading Rainbow at Jade
Spring Hill’; ‘Crystal Clear Waves on Taiye Pond’; ‘Spring Clouds on Jasper Flower Island’;
‘Misty Trees at the Gate of Jizhou’; ‘Clearing Snow in the Western Hills’; and ‘Sunset at the
Golden  Terrace’.  Sun  Chengze,  Tianfu  guangji  (Extensive  records  on  the  Celestial  Capital),
2000, 564; translations based on Naquin, Peking: Temples and City Life, 1400–1900, 111–12.

[20] Luo, Luguo qiao wenji, 1987, 70.
[21]
[22] For a full account of this stage of the war, see Marvin Williamsen, ‘The Military Dimension,

See, for example, Beiping zhinan (Guide to Beiping), 1929, 61.

1937–1941’, 1992, 135–56.

[23] Leo Ou-fan Lee, ‘Literary Trends in the Road to Revolution’, 1985, 470.
[24] Xiong Xianyu et al., Lugou qiao kangzhan shici xuan (Collected Poems Concerning the War of

Resistance and Lugou Bridge), 1997, 8, 11.
Ibid., 15; author’s translation.
See Dagongbao, 9 July 1937, 10 July 1937, 17 July 1936.
See Fan Changjiang’s reports in Dagongbao, 23 July 1936, 24 July 1936, 25 July 1936.
Shibao, 9 July 1937, 13 July 1937.

[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29] Dagongbao, 8 July 1947.
[30] RMRB, 7 July 1957.
[31]
[32] BBN 1912–1987, 255. The Beijing City Government had extended protected status in the late

Ibid.

1950s.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

191

[33] On  provincial  artefact  preservation  policies  during  the  1950s  see  James  Flath,  ‘Managing

Historical Capital in Shandong’, 2002, 47–50.

[34] RMRB, 7 July 1967.
[35] RMRB, 7 July 1977.
[36] Lary and MacKinnon, Scars of War.
[37] On  the  modern  development  of  tourism  at  the  Great  Wall  see  Arthur  Waldron, The  Great
Wall  of  China,  1990,  194–226.  On  the  construction  of  Tiananmen  Square  see  Wu  Hung,
‘Tiananmen Square’, 1991, 84–117.

[38] BBN 1912–1987, 1987, 255.
[39] Recent protests have focused on the textbook by Nishio Kanji et al., Atarashii rekishi kyokasho,
Fushosha, 2001, which was approved for school distribution in 2002. See report by the Center
for  Research  and  Documentation  on  Japan’s  War  Responsibility  (JWRC)  at  http://
www.jca.apc.org. Chinese high-school textbooks, on the other hand, use increasingly strong
language to portray the Nanjing Massacre as ‘hell on earth’, explaining variously that Chinese
citizens were ‘buried alive’, ‘burnt to death’, ‘had their intestines removed’, and were ‘killed
after  being  raped’.  Students  are  also  reminded  ‘the  debt  of  blood  caused  by  the  Japanese
aggressors  will  never  be  forgotten  by  the  Chinese  people’.  Chang  Jui-te,  ‘The  Politics  of
Commemoration’, 2001, 152.

[40] Caroline Rose, Interpreting History in Sino-Japanese Relations, 1998, 80–82.
[41] RMRB, 15 August 1982.
[42] BBN 1912–1987, 1987, 255.
[43] BBN 1988–1991, 1987, 75.
[44] BBN 1912–1987, 1987, 255–57.
[45] BBN 1912–1987, 1987, 105–8.
[46] Rana  Mitter,  ‘Behind  the  Scenes  at  the  Museum’,  2000,  286–90.  Mitter  uses  the  transla-
tion  of  ‘Memorial  Museum  of  the  Chinese  People’s  War  of  Resistance  against  Japan’,
which  is  one  of  the  memorial  hall’s  own  translations  of  Zhongguo  kang-Ri  zhanzheng
jinianguan.  The  institution  also  translates  its  title  as  ‘The  Museum  of  the  War  of  Chinese
People’s  Resistance  against  Japan’,  and  ‘The  Memorial  Hall  of  the  War  of  Resistance
against  Japan’.  In  light  of  the  inconsistencies  I  use  my  own  translation  of  ‘Anti-Japanese
War  Memorial  Hall  of  the  Chinese  People’,  abbreviated  hereafter  as  ‘Anti-Japanese  War
Memorial Hall’.
John T. Young, Contemporary Public Art in China, 1999, 32.

[47]
[48] RMRB, 4 May 1995, 22 June 1995, 7 July 1995, 15 August 1995.
[49] RMRB, 16 January 2003.
[50] Prasenjit Duara, Rescuing History from the Nation, 1995, 4.

References

[Abbreviations:  BBN  1912–1987:  Beijing  bowuguan  nianjian,  1912–1987;  BBN  1988–1991:  Beijing

bowuguan nianjian, 1988–1991; RMRB: Renmin ribao (People’s Daily).]

Barmé, G. Shades of Mao: The Posthumous Cult of the Great Leader. New York: ME Sharpe, 1996.
Beijing bowuguan nianjian 1912–1987 (Yearbook of Beijing Museums, 1912–1987). Beijing: Yanshan

chubanshe, 1987.

Beijing bowuguan nianjian 1988–1991 (Yearbook of Beijing Museums, 1988–1991). Beijing: Yanshan

chubanshe, 1991.

Beijing bowuguan nianjian 1992–1994 (Yearbook of Beijing Museums, 1992–1994). Beijing: Yanshan

chubanshe, 1995.

Beijing  bowuguan  xuehui  (Beijing  Museum  Studies  Association).  Beijing  bolan  (Beijing  exhibits).

Beijing: Beijing bowuguan xuehui, 1987.

Beiping zhinan (Guide to Beiping). Beijing: Beiping minshi, 1929.

192

J. A. Flath

Chang, Jui-te. ‘The Politics of Commemoration’. In Scars of War: The Impact of Warfare on Modern
China,  edited  by  D.  Lary  and  S.  MacKinnon.  Vancouver:  University  of  British  Columbia
Press, 2001: 136–60.

Duara, P. Rescuing History from the Nation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Flath, J. ‘Managing Historical Capital in Shandong: Museum, Monument and Memory in Provincial

China’. The Public Historian 24, no. 2 (2002): 41–59.

Goodrich, C., ed. Dictionary of Ming Biography. Vols. I, II. New York: Columbia University Press,

1976.

Hamlish, T. ‘Global Culture, Modern Heritage: Re-membering the Chinese Imperial Collections’.
In Museums and Memory, edited by S. E. Crane. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 2000:
137–58.

Lary, D., and S. MacKinnon, eds. Scars of War: The Impact of Warfare on Modern China. Vancouver:

University of British Columbia Press, 2001.

Lee, Leo Ou-fan. ‘Literary Trends in the Road to Revolution’. In Cambridge History of China, edited
by D. Twitchett and J. K. Fairbank. Vol. 13, no. II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1985.

Levenson, J. Confucian China and its Modern Fate: A Trilogy. Berkeley: University of California Press,

1958.

Liu Tong [1635]. Dijing jingwu lue (A record of the scenery of the capital). Reprint. Beijing: Guji

chubanshe, 2000.

Liu Xiaoyuan, and C. X. George Wei, eds. Exploring Nationalisms of China: Themes and Conflicts.

Westport: Greenwood Press, 2002.

Luo Zhewen et al., eds. Lugou qiao wenji (Collected writings on Lugou Bridge). Beijing: 1987.
Mitter, R. ‘Behind the Scenes at the Museum: Nationalism, History, and Memory in the Beijing War

of Resistance Museum, 1987–1997’. The China Quarterly 161 (2000): 279–93.

Naquin, S. Peking: Temples and City Life, 1400–1900. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
Rawski, E. The Last Emperors: A Social History of Qing Imperial Institutions. Berkeley: University of

California Press, 1998.

Rose, C. Interpreting History in Sino-Japanese Relations: A Case Study in Political Decision-making.

New York: Routledge, 1998.

Siren, O. A History of Later Chinese Painting. Vols. I, II. London: Medici, 1938.
Sun  Chengze  (1596–1676).  Tianfu  guangji  (Extensive  records  on  the  Celestial  Capital).  Beijing:

Beijing guji chubanshe, 2000.

TaoJing-shen. The  Jurchen  in  Twelfth-century  China:  A  Study  of  Sinicization.  Seattle:  University  of

Washington Press, 1976.

Unger, J., ed. Chinese Nationalism. Armonk: M.E. Sharpe, 1996.
Waldron,  A.  The  Great  Wall  of  China:  From  History  to  Myth.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University

Press, 1990.

Watson,  R.  ‘Palaces,  Museums,  and  Squares:  Chinese  National  Spaces’.  Museum  Anthropology  19,

no. 2 (1995): 7–19.

Williamsen, M. ‘The Military Dimension, 1937–1941’. In China’s Bitter Victory: The War with Japan,

1937–1945, edited by J. C. Hsiung and S. Levine. Armonk: M.E. Sharpe, 1992: 135–56.

Wright, T., ed. The Travels of Marco Polo. Translated by Wm. Marsden. London: Henry G. Bohn,

1854.

WuHung.  ‘Tiananmen  Square:  A  Political  History  of  Monuments’.  Representations  35  (Summer

1991): 84–117.

Xiong Xianyu et al., eds. Lugou qiao kangzhan shici xuan (Collected Poems Concerning the War of

Resistance and Lugou Bridge). Beijing: Yanshan chubanshe, 1997.

Young, J. T. Contemporary Public Art in China: A Photographic Tour. Seattle: University of Washington

Press, 1999.

Zheng  Yongnian.  Discovering  Chinese  Nationalisms  in  China:  Modernization,  Identity  and  Interna-

tional Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.


