International Journal of Cultural Property (2008) 15:297–320. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2008 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S094073910808017X

Art in Dispute at the Beaverbrook
Art Gallery
Deborah Cushing*

Abstract: A long-running dispute between the Beaverbrook Art Gallery and its
benefactor foundations illustrates the need for documentation of gifts or loans
of artwork. At issue in this dispute is ownership of over 200 of the paintings on
display at the gallery valued at up to $200 million. None of the parties to the
dispute has been able to produce records to establish that the paintings were
either a gift or on loan to the Beaverbrook. Instead the parties have had to rely
on newspaper and magazine articles, speeches, gallery catalogues, and export
documents to substantiate their positions. Central to the dispute has been the
role of the First Lord Beaverbrook and whether his actions amounted to a
breach of his fiduciary duty to the gallery. This article examines the particulars
of the parties’ claims as well as the decisions that have been made to date. Final
resolution of the dispute is not expected until all appeals have been decided.

INTRODUCTION

In 2005 to 2006 the Beaverbrook Art Gallery (the Beaverbrook) held an extremely
successful exhibition titled Art in Dispute. During the nine months of the exhibit,
more than 40,000 people attended.1 For the city of Fredericton, New Brunswick,
with a population of approximately 49,000, the attendance was remarkable. Un-
fortunately, the reason for the title of the exhibit and the interest in the artworks
was a legal dispute between the heirs of the First Lord Beaverbrook and the Bea-
verbrook. The heirs claim that the artworks belong to the Canadian and U.K. Bea-
verbrook foundations and were merely on loan to the Beaverbrook. The
Beaverbrook claims that the artworks were a gift from the First Lord Beaverbrook
to the people of New Brunswick and therefore will not be returned to the foun-
dations. If the foundations are successful in their legal actions, the paintings could
be removed from the Beaverbrook and from the province completely.

*Lawson Lundell LLP, Vancouver, Canada. Email: dcushing@lawsonlundell.com

297

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

298

DEBORAH CUSHING

Without question, the artwork in dispute deserves a lot of attention: The paint-
ings have been valued at up to $200 million and include works by artists such as
Sandro Botticelli, Salvador Dalí, Lucian Freud, Cornelius Krieghoff, and Jean-Paul
Riopelle.2 The Beaverbrook foundations commenced legal action to confirm their
ownership of more than 200 paintings so that some of the artwork may be sold to
provide much needed financial capital. The Beaverbrook has opposed the foun-
dations’ claims, in order that all the paintings in question are retained by the Bea-
verbrook for exhibit to the people of the province. Legal actions were commenced
by the parties in the spring of 2004 but are unresolved. Regardless of who is suc-
cessful, the dispute will have long-term consequences for the relationship between
the Canadian and U.K. Beaverbrook foundations and the Beaverbrook as well as
for the people of New Brunswick.

BACKGROUND

Lord Beaverbrook

The First Lord Beaverbrook, William Maxwell Aitken, was born in Ontario in 1879
but raised in Newcastle, New Brunswick.3 The son of a Presbyterian preacher, he
grew up to be a self-made businessman, millionaire, press baron, and British pol-
itician. Aitken’s political career began after moving to England in 1910 and in-
cluded serving as a cabinet minister during both world wars. He also built a
newspaper empire, owning both the Daily Express and the Evening Standard, and
was referred to as the first baron of Fleet Street.

In New Brunswick, the First Lord Beaverbrook has a reputation as a benefactor
of the province. His gifts included scholarships and buildings at the University of
New Brunswick, Beaverbrook Art Gallery, Lady Beaverbrook Arena, Fredericton
Playhouse, and Lord Beaverbrook Hotel.

Apparently, the generosity of Lord Beaverbrook to the province of his child-
hood has not benefited his heirs. The current Lord Beaverbrook, Sir Maxwell Ait-
ken, the grandson of the First Lord Beaverbrook, is reported to have inherited
only £250,000 from his father.4 He declared bankruptcy in 1992 and forfeited his
right to sit in the House of Lords.5 Sir Maxwell is the chair of the Beaverbrook
Foundation (the U.K. foundation), which recently has focused its funds and ef-
forts on the restoration of the First Lord Beaverbrook’s country home of Cherkley
Court in Surrey, England. Timothy Aitken is the cousin of Sir Maxwell and is an-
other grandson of the First Lord Beaverbrook. He is the president and a director
of the Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation (the Canadian foundation), a trustee of
the U.K. foundation, and custodian of the Beaverbrook.

The other person of note in the Beaverbrook family history is Lady Dunn, the
widow of Sir James Dunn, who became Lady Beaverbrook when she married the
First Lord Beaverbrook in 1963, the last year of his life.6 The Sir James Dunn Foun-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

299

dation, like other donors, was persuaded by the First Lord Beaverbrook to provide
paintings to the Beaverbrook. After the First Lord Beaverbrook’s death, Lady Bea-
verbrook claimed that she had inherited works of art held by the Beaverbrook
under the terms of the First Lord Beaverbrook’s will. As part of its claim to title to
the artworks in dispute, the Canadian foundation maintains that in 1970 it pur-
chased 77 paintings that were on display in the Beaverbrook from Lady Beaver-
brook and the Sir James Dunn Foundation.

Beaverbrook Art Gallery

Central to this dispute is the Beaverbrook, which officially opened in 1959. The
parties do not question that the First Lord Beaverbrook gifted the physical build-
ing to the Province of New Brunswick but do not agree whether more than 200
paintings that are part of the gallery’s collection were a gift or a loan. The oper-
ation of the Beaverbrook is governed by the Beaverbrook Art Gallery Act7 (Gallery
Act), which replaced the former Lord Beaverbrook Art Gallery Act8 (1957 Act). Sec-
tion 10(3) of the Gallery Act provides that: “All gifts heretofore or hereafter made
in favour of the body corporate called ‘The Board of Governors of the Lord Bea-
verbrook Art Gallery’ [the corporate body under the previous legislation] shall
avail to and be vested in The Beaverbrook Art Gallery [the corporate body under
the Gallery Act].”

Under section 5(2) the board of governors is made up of 18 members who are
appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council plus the custodian appointed
under section 4(1). The custodian is currently Timothy Aitken. The First Lord
Beaverbrook was the original custodian under the 1957 Act. The custodian was
given final authority over which paintings were brought into or taken out of the
Beaverbrook, which created some questions about the responsibility and author-
ity of any person appointed as curator of the Beaverbrook.9

Under section 5(2) of the Gallery Act, the custodian can nominate 4 of the 18
governors. One of the current governors is Vincent Prager, director and vice pres-
ident of the Canadian foundation.10 The Beaverbrook has argued that a conflict
of interest exists for Timothy Aitken and Vincent Prager, who were allegedly act-
ing to forward the best interests of the Canadian foundation while in their posi-
tions as board members of the Beaverbrook.

THE DISPUTE

Timeline

In the fall of 2003, the two foundations proposed that the board of governors
enter into agreements with them acknowledging that title to certain works in the
Beaverbrook belonged with the U.K. or Canadian foundation, to formalize a loan

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

300

DEBORAH CUSHING

FIGURE 1. Lucian Freud (British, 1922–); Hotel Bedroom, 1954; oil on canvas; The Beaver-
brook Art Gallery/The Beaverbrook Foundation (in dispute, 2004); Reproduced with per-
mission of the artist.

agreement for the works, and to sell two works, in return for which the Beaver-
brook would receive $5 million. The two works proposed for sale were Hotel Room
by Lucian Freud and Fountain of Indolence by J. M. W. Turner. The Freud is re-
ported to have been appraised by Sotheby’s at $4 million to $5 million, whereas
the Turner has been appraised at $25 million.11

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

301

A media release by the Canadian foundation asserts that the proposal came about
because of strengthened legal obligations in the United Kingdom on trustees of
foundations to protect assets and ensure they are available for public viewing.12
Sotheby’s was engaged by the foundations to take an inventory, which determined
that the paintings in the Beaverbrook were underinsured and some were not on
display as required under U.K. tax and charity rules. The proposed 10-year loan
agreement was to provide for adequate insurance, maintenance, and display.13 How-
ever, Stuart Smith, curator of the Beaverbrook from 1964 to 1969, is reportedly of
the opinion that “the complaint by the Aitkens that not enough people see the
gallery’s art work is an attempt to disguise their real motive, which he believes is
selling the paintings.”14

After receiving draft agreements from the foundations in writing, the board of
governors decided to conduct due diligence into the foundations’ claim to title as
the paintings in total represented a significant part of the Beaverbrook’s collec-
tion.15 The Beaverbrook was unable to complete its investigations into title in a
time frame acceptable to the foundations. By March 2004, some members of the
board felt threatened by the demands being made by Timothy Aitken. In his affi-
davit dated October 15, 2004, board member Dr. Robert Neill quotes this passage
from a letter to the chair of the board of governors from Timothy Aitken received
on March 12, 2004:

Finally let me make it crystal clear that I am in constant touch with Lord
Beaverbrook, that we have fully discussed all these matters in detail and
are of one mind as to what the positive outcome should be. Should you
choose to imperil that outcome for whatever personal reasons you and
some other directors have developed, then not only will you be subject
to the financial consequences of those actions, but so will the Gallery
and the rest of the Board.16

On March 14, 2004, 14 members of the board resigned on the grounds it would
be impossible to carry out their statutory duties in light of the pressure from
Mr. Aitken to sign the agreements. New board members were appointed effective
April 8, 2004, and included reappointments of previous members as well as some
members new to the board. The new appointees included Roy Heenan, senior
partner at Heenan Blaikie; Richard Currie, chair of BCE Inc.; and Allison McCain,
chair of McCain Foods Limited.17 At a special meeting of the board of governors
held on April 16, 2004, a resolution was passed to conclude negotiations with
the foundations regarding the paintings by April 30, 2004.18 On April 26, 2004,
the Beaverbrook informed the U.K. and Canadian foundations of the conclu-
sions reached on the basis of its research: The paintings were gifted to the Bea-
verbrook, and no evidence was found to support that title to the works belonged
with the foundations.19

At the end of April 2004, the Beaverbrook and the two foundations entered into
discussions about the use of mediation to resolve the dispute over the artworks.
These discussions came to an end when the U.K. foundation commenced legal

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

302

DEBORAH CUSHING

action against the Beaverbrook in London, England, on May 5, 2004.20 Timothy
Aitken stated that it was, “very painful to me and my cousin, the current Lord
Beaverbrook (on behalf of the Beaverbrook Foundation), to have just taken the
drastic step of initiating legal action against the Beaverbrook Art Gallery that bears
my grandfather’s name.”21 The Beaverbrook responded by filing its own action in
New Brunswick against the U.K. foundation, the Canadian foundation, Timothy
Aitken, and Vincent Prager.

In July 2004, the U.K. foundation and the Beaverbrook agreed to resolve their
U.K. dispute about the ownership of 133 of the Beaverbrook’s paintings through
binding arbitration (U.K. foundation dispute). The Honorable Peter Corey, a for-
mer justice of the Supreme Court of Canada, was named as arbitrator with evi-
dence to be heard in New Brunswick and through video conference from England.22
As a result of the agreement to arbitrate, the Beaverbrook discontinued its action
against the U.K. foundation. (The title to 78 paintings in dispute between the Bea-
verbrook and the Canadian foundation is not covered by the arbitration.)

On August 17, 2004, the Canadian foundation and Timothy Aitken commenced
an action in New Brunswick against the Beaverbrook and Judy Budovitch, one of
the governors, alleging misrepresentation as to the title of the artworks in dis-
pute.23 This action was discontinued on March 15, 2005.

On August 20, 2004, an action was commenced by the Canadian foundation
against the Beaverbrook regarding ownership of the 78 paintings in dispute (Ca-
nadian foundation dispute). This action was later consolidated with the action by
the Beaverbrook against the Canadian foundation by a consent order on June 21,
2005.24 The Canadian foundation is the plaintiff in the consolidated action and
the Beaverbrook is the defendant with its claims asserted through counterclaim.

Ancillary Issues

On September 15, 2004, Timothy Aitken and Vincent Prager commenced an ac-
tion against the Beaverbrook claiming indemnification for their legal costs. Their
application for an order was dismissed.25 Justice W.T. Grant found that significant
facts remained in dispute between the parties so as to prevent granting an order
on an application. These facts in dispute included whether Mr. Aitken and Mr.
Prager were acting in their capacities as members of the board of the Beaverbrook
or as representatives of the Canadian foundation and whether Mr. Aitken and Mr.
Prager breached their fiduciary duties through dishonesty, willful neglect, or de-
fault.26 These matters must be determined at trial.

On December 17, 2004, the provincial government announced that it would
provide financial assistance to the Beaverbrook by way of a $1 million interest-
free, five-year loan.27 The government would also provide an operating grant of
$50,000 that it promised to increase to $200,000 in the future.28 The Canadian
foundation had ceased its $200,000 annual operating grant to the Beaverbrook as

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

303

well as any funding or donations in the province. Timothy Aitken explained that
the actions of the Beaverbrook will not

help the many educational, sporting and social institutions in the prov-
ince who have benefited from the philanthropic and charitable work of
the Canadian Foundation. As long as these legal disputes continue, funds
normally available to them must be used to prevent the foundation’s as-
sets from being seized by the gallery.29

The charitable funding withdrawn was estimated to be in the hundreds of thou-
sands of dollars.30

In March 2005 an application by Timothy Aitken and Vincent Prager for an
order to compel the chair of the board of governors of the Beaverbrook to attend
at an examination for discovery was dismissed.31 The order was sought because
Mr. Aitken and Mr. Prager intended to commence an action against the Beaver-
brook alleging that the terms of the Gallery Act prevented the Beaverbrook from
borrowing funds. Justice Grant found that Mr. Aitken and Mr. Prager were in a
conflict of interest because of their positions with both organizations in the dis-
pute and had no standing to pursue the issue before the Court. Although the Gal-
lery Act does not expressly allow the Beaverbrook to borrow money, it could be
interpreted to permit a loan, particularly when the funds were needed to defend
against a claim to ownership of a substantial part of the Beaverbrook’s collection,

In my opinion the Board would be derelict in its duty to manage, con-
trol and administer what it believes to be the property of the Gallery if
it did not resist the claims to ownership advanced by the Foundations.
Doing so requires money which, I infer, they do not have in their oper-
ating budget. The only way they can fulfill their duty as set out in the
Act, therefore, is to borrow money. The Act doesn’t expressly authorize
them to do so but I find that the power to do so can and should be
reasonably implied in Section 6(c) of the Act in the circumstances now
faced by the Board. Any other finding would, in my opinion, tie their
hands in a manner that I cannot conceive to have been intended by the
Legislature or any of the persons involved in the creation of this corpo-
ration as it would prevent them from doing that which the legislation
mandates them to do—manage, control and administer the Gallery’s
property.32

As of September 2007, the provincial government is reported to have provided a
total of $4.5 million of financial assistance to the Beaverbrook in respect of the
costs the Beaverbrook has incurred to resolve the U.K. foundation and Canadian
foundation disputes.33

Subsequent legal challenges were brought before the court as to whether the
examination for discovery of Timothy Aitken should take place in Fredericton or
London, England.34 The New Brunswick Court of Appeal agreed with the lower
court that the discovery should take place in Fredericton, but the Canadian foun-
dation was given leave to appeal the portion of the order that gave the defendant

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

304

DEBORAH CUSHING

gallery the option to decide that the discovery could take place in London.35 The
examination of Timothy Aitken has yet to take place.

U.K. FOUNDATION DISPUTE

The arbitration hearing into the dispute between the trustees of the U.K. founda-
tion and the Beaverbrook took place over 32 days from October to December in
2006. The award was issued by the arbitrator, The Honourable Peter Cory on March
20, 2007.36

Issues

At issue in the arbitration was whether the works in question were gifted to the
Beaverbrook or, if not gifted, were intended to remain on permanent loan to the
Beaverbrook as long as the paintings were on exhibit. The U.K. foundation argued
that the works were not a gift to the Beaverbrook or if they were a gift, that the
foundation had valid defenses to the Beaverbrook’s claim.

The arbitrator divided the works in issue into two categories: the 88 works in
issue that were located in the Beaverbrook prior to or at the time of opening of
the Beaverbrook (opening works in issue) and the remaining 45 works in issue
that were acquired by the U.K. foundation after the opening of the Beaverbrook
(postopening works in issue). Included in the opening works in issue were several
paintings that had been taken by the U.K. foundation and had either been sold or
retained without providing compensation to the Beaverbrook (converted works).

Opening Works in Issue

The arbitrator concluded that the 88 opening works in issue were a perfected gift
made to the Beaverbrook by the U.K. foundation and this gift was irrevocable.
The three elements of a perfected gift were found to have been satisfied: (1) the
intention to donate, (2) an acceptance, and (3) a sufficient act of delivery.
Intention to Donate

Lord Beaverbrook’s intention to make a gift of the paintings in the Beaverbrook at
the date of its opening was established by various newspaper and magazine arti-
cles, speeches given at that time, the Beaverbrook catalog, export documents, and
the evidence of witnesses at the hearing. Regarding the newspaper and magazine
articles published at the time of the Beaverbrook opening, the arbitrator consid-
ered each article in depth. The articles made various references to the generosity
of Lord Beaverbrook and his gift of a gallery fully equipped with paintings.

The U.K. foundation argued that newspaper articles could not be used to es-
tablish an intention to make a gift. The arbitrator disagreed. Relying in particular

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

305

on a decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal, Canadian Pacific v. Lamont et al.,37
the arbitrator concluded that newspaper articles, although hearsay, should be given
weight in situations where an article is brought to a person’s attention and the
person does not object or attempt to correct the article. In respect of many of the
articles, the First Lord Beaverbrook either approved or commissioned the articles
or specifically praised or adopted them. As a result, the arbitrator concluded the
following:

Applying the highest standard of proof, the articles establish the clear
intent of Lord Beaverbrook to give paintings, including the Opening
Works in Issue to the Gallery. The gift was perfected by the delivery and
further confirmed by the speeches given at the time of the opening. Some
of the articles standing alone, and to an even greater extent when con-
sidered as a whole, establish the intention of Lord Beaverbrook to make
a gift of the paintings. The articles, taken together, and in context, have
a cumulative effect that very clearly and irrefutably establish that intent.38

Lord Beaverbrook’s intention was held to be the intention of the U.K. foundation
because he was a trustee of the foundation and a directing mind. In addition, the
speeches, records, correspondence, and trust documents entered into evidence es-
tablished that the opening works in issue were a gift to the Beaverbrook and not a
loan.

Similar to the articles, speeches given at or around the time of the opening of
the Beaverbrook were found to demonstrate a clear intention to make a perma-
nent gift of the works of art in question and not a loan. The catalog prepared for
the opening of the Beaverbrook was also held to reinforce the intention to make a
gift. The preparation of the catalog had been overseen by the First Lord Beaver-
brook who emphasized the need to take extraordinary care and avoid mistakes.
The catalog clearly identified works of art that were on loan, but none of the open-
ing works in issue were so identified. The arbitrator concluded that “those paint-
ings in issue in the gallery on the day of its opening that were not designated as
loans were indeed gifts made to the Gallery.”39

Reliance by the arbitrator on designations made in the catalog has been ques-
tioned.40 The catalog may have only identified paintings as on loan if they were
loaned by third parties, not by Lord Beaverbrook, so as to acknowledge the con-
tributions of other persons. Additionally, a 2003 decision of the Supreme Court of
Victoria cautions against reliance on exhibition catalogs as proof of attribution of
ownership.41 This decision was not referred to in the arbitration award.

Export documents prepared by the U.K. foundation were found to be evidence
of an intention to gift the opening works in issue. The arbitrator saw no reason to
distinguish the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Finestone,42 where
the Court concluded that although customs forms contained hearsay informa-
tion, the source of the information was trustworthy because “the law reposes such
a confidence in public officers that it presumes they will discharge their several
trusts with accuracy and fidelity.” Furthermore, a four-part test for admissibility

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

306

DEBORAH CUSHING

of public documents as an exception to the rule against hearsay evidence had been
satisfied on the facts.43 The arbitrator found that the documents were supplied on
behalf of the exporter by a public official; in discharge of public functions; in-
tended to serve as a permanent record; and available for inspection in the public
records. Therefore, the arbitrator concluded that the export documents could be
considered as evidence of a continuing intention by the U.K. foundation to make
a gift of the paintings to which they referred.

In terms of witnesses, the arbitrator placed particular emphasis on the evidence
of Thomas Forrestall, who had maintained the accession records of the Beaver-
brook at the time of its opening. Although the arbitrator remarked that it was
unfortunate that the U.K. foundation had been led to believe at discovery that Mr.
Forrestall’s role at the Beaverbrook was relatively unimportant, counsel had ample
opportunity to cross-examine this witness at the hearing. According to Mr. For-
restall, notations on the accession records that certain paintings were the “Prop-
erty of the Beaverbrook Foundations” were not on the accession sheets at the time
of the Beaverbrook’s opening.44 The arbitrator concluded that the accession records
were altered subsequent to the opening of the Beaverbrook to change the desig-
nation of the works to be the property of the foundation.

The U.K. foundation and the Beaverbrook called expert witnesses on the inter-
pretation of the trust deed under which the foundation acted in presenting paint-
ings to the Beaverbrook. At issue was whether one of the original clauses of the
deed could be interpreted so as to permit a loan of the paintings or whether this
clause only permitted gifts. The wording of this clause was amended on January 1,
1960, to clearly permit the purchase of art works by the U.K. foundation, which
could then be loaned to museums, galleries, or libraries for public exhibition. The
arbitrator concluded that the natural meaning of the original clause indicated that
it referred to gifts and not loans. The amendment of the trust deed in January
1960 supported the conclusion that prior to that date, the trustees intended to
make gifts of the paintings to the Beaverbrook and not loans. Only after the Jan-
uary 1960 amendment was the U.K. foundation permitted to make loans of paint-
ings without any transfer of ownership.
Delivery and Acceptance of the Gift

At common law, the transfer of possession does not have to be contemporane-
ous with the expression of the intention to donate so long as the intention con-
tinues until the gift is complete. As well, the physical act of delivery is sufficient
to complete a gift of personal property, such as a painting. Further, once an in-
tended gift is completed, the gift is not revocable at the option of the donor
unless the donor has expressly reserved a power of revocation at the time of
making the gift.45

Applying these principles to the facts and having found that the intention to
make a gift of the opening works in issue was clearly established, the arbitrator
concluded that the works were delivered to and accepted by the Beaverbrook. The

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

307

gift was completed and could not be revoked. This conclusion was reinforced by
the 1957 Act, which provided at section 7(3) that any gifts made shall inure to the
benefit of the board of governors. Accordingly, the arbitrator found the following:

It is significant that neither the common law nor the Act require any
special language of gift for it to be valid and no special acceptance is
required. In this case, I have found that the expressed intention of Lord
Beaverbrook and through him, the Foundation, was to make a gift of
the Opening Works in Issue to the Gallery. The Works in Issue which
were the subject matter of the gift were delivered to the Gallery. They
were accepted and displayed by the Gallery as its collection. The gift was
completed and perfected at the latest when the Gallery was opened. It is
reasonable to infer and I do so find that the Board of Governors was
intended to be benefited.46

The arbitrator concluded that the U.K. foundation had made a perfected gift of
the 88 opening works in issue to the Beaverbrook and the gift was irrevocable.
Included in the opening works in issue were the converted works that were re-
turned to the U.K. foundation at its request. The arbitrator found that these works
were converted, and the Beaverbrook was entitled to be paid the value of the con-
verted works plus interest from the time of conversion until the date of payment
or until the works were returned to the Beaverbrook. The parties had agreed that
the value of the converted works was $2.4 million.

Postopening Works in Issue

The postopening works in issue were shipped to the Beaverbrook more than a
year after it opened and after the trust deed had been amended to permit loans.
The accession records of the Beaverbrook clearly indicated that these works were
on loan from the U.K. foundation.

The Beaverbrook argued that the terms of the loan were that the loan would
continue so long as the works were on exhibit for the benefit of the people of the
province of New Brunswick. The arbitrator did not agree with this position, be-
cause such a loan would require specific terms of a trust, which were not estab-
lished. As a result these works were held to be on loan and could be recalled by the
U.K. foundation at any time.

Although this aspect of the award represented a potential loss to the Beaver-
brook of approximately one-third of the works in question if the U.K. founda-
tion recalls the paintings, it has been commented that the most valuable works
with very few exceptions are included in the opening works in issue.47 For ex-
ample, the two works which were at the genesis of the dispute, J.M.W. Turner’s
The Fountain of Indolence and Lucien Freud’s Hotel Bedroom, are part of the open-
ing works in issue and according to the arbitrator were irrevocably gifted to the
Beaverbrook.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

308

DEBORAH CUSHING

Defenses of the U.K. Foundation

The Beaverbrook acknowledged that for more than 40 years up until shortly be-
fore the beginning of this litigation, it believed that the U.K. foundation owned
the works at issue. The U.K. foundation argued that had it not been for these
admissions by the Beaverbrook, it would not have allowed the Beaverbrook to re-
tain possession of the works in issue. According to the U.K. foundation, it was
severely prejudiced by the resulting delay in its commencing proceedings against
the Beaverbrook and therefore the principles of waiver, acquiescence, estoppel, and
laches should prevent the Beaverbrook from denying the U.K. foundation’s title to
the works at issue.

The arbitrator found that the delay in addressing the ownership of the works in
issue was in large part because of the failure of the First Lord Beaverbrook to advise
the Beaverbrook of his change of position from giving the paintings to the Beaver-
brook to loaning them. Lord Beaverbrook was found to have carefully concealed this
change of intention until he had his assistant make changes to the records of the Bea-
verbrook. As a fiduciary in a special position with regard to the Beaverbrook, the First
Lord Beaverbrook was found to have breached his duty to fully disclose matters of
importance to the Beaverbrook. As a consequence of this breach, the issue of own-
ership of the works did not crystallize for the Beaverbrook until many years later.
Regarding the defense of prejudice, the arbitrator found that the loss of docu-
ments or the testimony of witnesses affected both parties and did not automati-
cally create prejudice. As well, the paramount responsibility for the delay was on
the First Lord Beaverbrook who had insisted that the 1957 Act provide that he be
a member of the board of governors and the custodian of the Beaverbrook. These
positions imposed strict fiduciary duties.

The U.K. foundation argued that various curators of the Beaverbrook had known
that the foundation asserted ownership of the works in issue and the curators
accepted this ownership. According to the U.K. foundation, the curators’ actions
should bind the Beaverbrook. The arbitrator disagreed, finding the terms of the
statute did not authorize the curator to dispose of or transfer ownership of works
of art. These actions required the approval of the board of governors.

The argument of estoppel was dismissed as not applicable in the face of an ex-
press statutory provision. To allow a curator’s confirmation of ownership as the
basis of an estoppel when the Gallery Act specifies only the board of governors
could divest the Beaverbrook of ownership would be inconsistent. Even if the prin-
ciples of estoppel would apply, the arbitrator found that the U.K. foundation could
not reasonably rely on the representations by the Beaverbrook when those repre-
sentations came about because the foundation concealed material facts from the
Beaverbrook. The U.K. foundation was found to have either actual knowledge or
constructive knowledge of the concealed facts.

The actions of Lord Beaverbrook himself were fatal to the U.K. foundation’s

position. The arbitrator dismissed the foundation’s defenses:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

309

The Gallery’s claim cannot, therefore, be barred by principles of estop-
pel or any other equitable principles. It was the lack of disclosure and
calculated concealment by Lord Beaverbrook himself which led to the
problems presented in this case. He did not act in the best interests of
the Gallery. He breached his fiduciary duty to the Gallery. His acts and
his failure to disclose material facts to the Gallery prevent the Founda-
tion from using defences of estoppel, laches or limitations. It was his
actions and his failure to disclose pertinent facts which gave rise to this
unfortunate situation and the ensuing litigation.48

The arbitrator went further to find that the actions of Lord Beaverbrook amounted
to a fraudulent concealment of a cause of action as to the ownership of the open-
ing works in issue and as a result, the operation of any limitation period was
suspended.

Costs

In a subsequent award, the arbitrator awarded costs in favor of the Beaverbrook of
$4.8 million.49 In making this award, the arbitrator considered that the U.K. foun-
dation had rejected a settlement offer from the Beaverbrook prior to the com-
mencement of the hearing.

Appeal

The U.K. foundation immediately announced its intention to appeal and served
its notice of appeal on the Beaverbrook on April 19, 2007. In essence, the appeal
seeks to overturn all the arbitrator’s findings. The U.K. foundation seeks dismissal
of all claims made by the Beaverbrook regarding the opening works in issue or the
converted works or, alternatively, that all portions of the award in favor of the
Beaverbrook be set aside and a new hearing be held before a new arbitrator.

The grounds of the appeal include that the arbitrator erred in finding that the
opening works in issue had been gifted to the Beaverbrook. Numerous errors by
the arbitrator are alleged including that Justice Cory failed to apply the correct
legal tests and failed to give effect to important factual and legal distinctions be-
tween the First Lord Beaverbrook and the U.K. foundation.

The U.K. foundation alleges more than 20 errors in the arbitrator’s findings in
favor of the Beaverbrook, such as his failure to take into account the absence of
documents by which Lord Beaverbrook or the U.K. foundation purported to do-
nate the opening works at issue to the Beaverbrook. The U.K. foundation argues
that the arbitrator erred in finding certain magazine and newspaper articles and
public speeches effected a gift of the opening works in issue and by relying on the
1959 gallery catalog as distinguishing between works that were gifts and works
that were on loan. Also at issue are the arbitrator’s reliance on export forms, which
were not filled out by the U.K. foundation, and the arbitrator’s interpretation of
the trust deed. The arbitrator’s reliance on the evidence of Thomas Forrestall was

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

310

DEBORAH CUSHING

alleged to be an error in light of the Beaverbrook’s admission at discovery that Mr.
Forrestall was a peripheral witness with little or no direct involvement in the main-
tenance of the Beaverbrook’s accession records.

Alternatively, the U.K. foundation argues that the arbitrator erred in failing to
find that the defenses raised by the foundation applied to the facts. The U.K. foun-
dation raised 14 particular grounds of appeal under this heading.

In addition, the U.K. foundation appealed the arbitrator’s findings regarding
the converted works and awarding damages in respect to some of those works.
The U.K. foundation took issue with some of the arbitrator’s comments, includ-
ing his comments during the hearing comparing the First Lord Beaverbrook to
Joseph Goebbels, the propaganda minister in Hitler’s Third Reich.

The appeal is to be heard by a panel of three retired judges. The chair of the
panel is Edward Bayda, a former chief justice of the Saskatchewan Court of Ap-
peal. The chair was selected by the other two judges: Coulter Osborne, former
chief justice of Ontario, who was chosen by the Beaverbrook, and Thomas Braid-
wood, a former member of the British Columbia Court of Appeal, who was
chosen by the U.K. foundation.50 In March 2008 the U.K. foundation filed its 284-
page factum with the panel.51 The Beaverbrook had until June 2008 to file its re-
sponse. The appeal hearing is tentatively scheduled for September 2008.52

The appeal is expected to delay hearing of the Canadian dispute, which has
been put on hold pending a decision in the U.K. foundation matter.53 In the in-
terim, the arbitration process is reported to have caused serious financial difficul-
ties for the U.K. foundation. In September 2007 the foundation sold 93% of its
stock portfolio and put one-third of the proceeds, approximately $3 million, to-
ward its legal bills arising from the dispute.54 Those legal bills are estimated at
more than $7 million to date.55

Canadian Foundation Dispute

The Canadian foundation dispute is being held in abeyance until the U.K. foun-
dation dispute is resolved. The positions of the parties to this dispute can be de-
termined from the statements of claim and defense that have been filed by the
Canadian foundation and by the Beaverbrook, respectively.

The Plaintiff: Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation

In its statement of claim, the Canadian foundation alleges that in 1970 it acquired
ownership of numerous works of art on display in the Beaverbrook, which were
subsequently loaned to the Beaverbrook subject to the order and direction of the
Canadian foundation.56 The plaintiff alleges that it has retained title to the loaned
paintings, which has been acknowledged by the Beaverbrook without exception
since 1970. The Canadian foundation has demanded the return of the paintings,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

311

but the Beaverbrook has refused to deliver the artworks; so the Canadian foun-
dation claims that the Beaverbrook has wrongfully detained its property and that
the property has been converted by the Beaverbrook for its own use. The relief
sought by the plaintiff includes an order that the Canadian foundation is the legal
owner of the paintings; Beaverbrook deliver the paintings to the Canadian foun-
dation; or alternatively, damages be paid in the amount of the value of the artworks.
The relief sought by the Canadian foundation is based on the tort of detinue:
The plaintiff has a right to the immediate possession of the artwork, it has de-
manded its return, and the defendant has refused to comply with the demand.57
The most common remedy provided if the tort is proven is an order to return the
chattel or pay damages for its value and for its detention. The Canadian founda-
tion is also claiming conversion: The Beaverbrook has intentionally interfered with
assets to which the Canadian foundation has title and the interference is so seri-
ous that the Beaverbrook should be ordered to pay the full market value of the
assets to the Canadian foundation.58 One can assume that the Canadian founda-
tion does not have an actual loan agreement with the Beaverbrook or else the
plaintiff would also have an action for breach of contract and a claim for expec-
tation losses.59 In the U.K. foundation dispute, the Beaverbrook argued that the
postopening works in issue were on permanent loan but had no written agree-
ment to support its position which was ultimately unsuccessful.

In terms of the claim of detinue, the Canadian foundation has certainly de-
manded the return of the artworks, and the Beaverbrook has refused to comply.
As with the U.K. foundation dispute, the main question of fact for the claims of
detinue and conversion will be whether the Canadian foundation can show that
it does hold title to the paintings. The Canadian foundation alleges to have ac-
quired title through the purchase of paintings displayed in the Beaverbrook in
1970. In November 1970, its directors authorized the purchase of 47 paintings
from Lady Beaverbrook for $132,000 and the purchase of 30 paintings from the
Sir James Dunn Foundation for $118,000 with the paintings to be left on loan to
the Beaverbrook.60 Lady Beaverbrook had threatened to remove the paintings
from the Beaverbrook. The paintings, which include two works by Salvador Dalí
and three by Walter Richard Sickert, were described by New Brunswick’s then–
Lieutenant Governor Wallace Bird as the “life blood of the gallery” and their
removal would strike a “grievous blow.”61 Sir Maxwell interceded and Lady Bea-
verbrook agreed to accept payment for the paintings that remained on display in
the Beaverbrook.

The agreements of sale were sent to the Beaverbrook and acknowledged in a
letter dated January 7, 1976, from the secretary of the Beaverbrook, stating in part
the following:

I confirm:

(a) that the Gallery recognizes that all of the paintings and sculptures
described in the agreement are now the property of the Beaverbrook
Canadian Foundation; and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

312

DEBORAH CUSHING

(b) that the Gallery will hold those works of art hence forward sub-
ject to the order and direction of the Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation.62

The Canadian foundation also relies on plaques in the Beaverbrook, catalog
records, and other documents prepared by the Beaverbrook that confirm the paint-
ings were on loan from the Canadian foundation. On this basis, the plaintiff ar-
gues that the Beaverbrook is estopped from now claiming ownership. However,
the evidence referred to by the plaintiff does not include a resolution of the board
of governors entering into a loan agreement with the Canadian foundation as would
be required under the terms of the Gallery Act. Timothy Aitken is of the opinion
that the evidence uncovered by the Canadian and U.K. foundations is sufficient to
prove ownership. In a newspaper interview in 2004, he is quoted as saying the
following:

And I think eventually that it (ownership) will be proved beyond a
shadow of a doubt. At the present time, the English foundation has em-
ployed forensic accountants who were responsible for doing a lot of the
work with the Holocaust case against the Swiss banks. They are doing
work on the original documentation which the English Foundation has
now surfaced and the case will be completely convincing.63

Mr. Aitken may be less confident today given the documentation was insufficient
to convince Justice Corey that the U.K. foundation retained title to the opening
works in issue in the U.K. foundation dispute.

The Defendant: Beaverbrook Art Gallery
Statement of Defense

The Beaverbrook claims that it was the intended beneficiary of a gift of the art-
works in question and that title vested in the Beaverbrook by operation of the
common law or by the provisions of the Gallery Act.64 Section 10(3) of the act
vests all gifts under the predecessor act in the Beaverbrook. The plaintiff argues
that title to the artworks could only pass to the Canadian foundation by a reso-
lution of the board of governors under section 7 and a resolution has not been
passed despite pressure from the Canadian foundation.

Alternatively, the Beaverbrook claims if the Canadian foundation ever held title
to the artworks then the title was held in trust for the benefit of the Beaverbrook.
The plaintiff allegedly breached the trust by removing and disposing of paintings
in the past and by seeking to assert title and remove further works of art, contrary
to the interests of the beneficiary, the Beaverbrook.

As with the U.K. foundation dispute, the Beaverbrook relies on evidence from
journal articles, speeches, and records to show that the First Lord Beaverbrook
intended to make a gift of the gallery building and the artworks it contained to
the people of the province of New Brunswick. By establishing the donor’s inten-
tion to give and the delivery and acceptance of artworks by the Beaverbrook, the
Beaverbrook argues that it obtained a gift of the artworks in question and that the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

313

gift was irrevocable. This evidence and argument was successful in the U.K. foun-
dation dispute regarding the opening works in issue. If the arbitration award is
upheld on appeal and the works in issue in the Canadian foundation dispute were
in the Beaverbrook at its opening, the Beaverbrook will have significantly strength-
ened its position.

The Beaverbrook acknowledges that the title may have been temporarily placed
with the predecessor foundations from time to time for tax and estate planning
purposes but that the title to the works was always held for the benefit of the
Beaverbrook. Timothy Aitken does not agree that the artworks may have been listed
as on loan for tax advantages:

That’s crap. . . . These boys down in New Brunswick are very stubborn. . . .
The whole thing about tax is complete rubbish. There was no tax issue.
There was no tax issue with my grandfather either, as they are maintain-
ing. I am so tired of this rubbish.65

The particular question in the Canadian foundation dispute that differs from the
facts in the U.K. foundation dispute is whether title to the works in issue passed to
the Canadian foundation by reason of the transaction with Lady Beaverbrook in
1970. The defendant states that the claim of inheritance by Lady Beaverbrook of
50 artworks from the First Lord Beaverbrook is specious because those works were
gifted to the Beaverbrook. Sir Maxwell Aitken (Sir Maxwell), son of the First Lord
Beaverbrook and then cocustodian of the Beaverbrook, allegedly resisted the claims
by Lady Beaverbrook at the time and asserted that the paintings belonged to the
Beaverbrook. The Beaverbrook argues that the Canadian foundation could not
have acquired good title to the paintings through a purchase from Lady Beaver-
brook and the Sir James Dunn Foundation because the vendors did not hold title
to the goods.

If the Canadian foundation did acquire good title in 1970, the Beaverbrook ar-
gues in the alternative that the title was held on trust for the benefit of the Bea-
verbrook and that the Canadian foundation has breached its obligations as trustee.
The trust is implied because the Beaverbrook does not refer to any agreement es-
tablishing an express trust. An argument of an implied trust of the postopening
works in issue was unsuccessful in the U.K. foundation dispute because the arbi-
trator found that such an agreement must be put in writing.

The alleged breach of trust relates to representations by the Canadian founda-
tion and Sir Maxwell, in particular, to volunteers and staff at the Beaverbrook that
the artworks were owned by the Canadian foundation. The Beaverbrook argues
that the Canadian foundation knew that the Beaverbrook staff would not chal-
lenge the directions of Sir Maxwell and acted on his instructions to change the
records of ownership. The Beaverbrook argues that Sir Maxwell, as the custodian
and a member of the board of governors, owed a duty of care to the Beaverbrook
to safeguard its property and his actions on behalf of the foundations conflicted
with this duty. The Canadian foundation is also argued to have owed a duty of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

314

DEBORAH CUSHING

care to the beneficiary gallery and failed to discharge that duty. As a result, the
Beaverbrook argues that the Canadian foundation is estopped from relying on
any acknowledgement by the Beaverbrook of the title held by the Canadian foun-
dation since 1970, because such statements were made in reliance on the plaintiff ’s
misrepresentations.

In the U.K. foundation dispute, the arbitrator found that estoppel as argued by
the U.K. foundation could not apply in the face of express statutory provisions,
which required the board of governors of the Beaverbrook to approve transfer of
ownership of works of art. In addition, the First Lord Beaverbrook was found to
have breached his fiduciary duty to the Beaverbrook by his actions, including his
lack of disclosure and concealment of information. The First Lord Beaverbrook
was no longer alive in 1970; so the Beaverbrook must establish that, similar to his
father, Sir Maxwell breached his fiduciary duties as a member of the board of gov-
ernors and custodian of the Beaverbrook.

If the Beaverbrook is estopped from asserting its ownership based on corre-
spondence, records, and documents, the Beaverbrook argues that the Canadian
foundation is also estopped from relying on these various documents because they
resulted from the alleged misrepresentations of the Canadian foundation. “As a
result, the doctrine of cross-estoppel applies and sets the matter at large.”66
Counterclaim

The Beaverbrook alleges that in the past the Canadian foundation, in concert with
the U.K. foundation, wrongfully removed works of art that were the property
of the Beaverbrook and either retained the works or sold them and retained the
proceeds.67 The Beaverbrook asserts that the Canadian foundation converted the
property of the Beaverbrook and is liable for the current value of those works.
The relief sought by the Beaverbrook includes a declaration that the works at issue
in the plaintiff ’s action were gifts to the Beaverbrook and vest in the Beaverbrook,
an injunction restraining the Canadian foundation from removing or disposing
of the artworks, damages for the present day value of the removed paintings es-
timated at $10 million, and an order that works wrongfully removed be returned
to the Beaverbrook.

In its defense to the counterclaim, the Canadian foundation denies that the Bea-
verbrook is the owner of the works of art or that it removed artworks that were
the property of the Beaverbrook.68 The plaintiff also argues that the claim in re-
gards to the removed paintings is barred by the Limitations of Actions Act.69 The
defendant responded that the Beaverbrook was unaware of a cause of action until
it performed its due diligence in response to the request from the Canadian and
U.K. foundations to execute loan agreements in the winter of 2004. The action
would not be time barred if the limitation period began at that time.70

In the U.K. foundation dispute, the arbitrator found that the actions of the First
Lord Beaverbrook prevented the U.K. foundation from relying on defenses of estop-
pel, laches, or limitations. In addition, the First Lord Beaverbrook was found to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

315

have fraudulently concealed a cause of action regarding the ownership of the works
in issue, and therefore the operation of any limitation period was suspended. In
the Canadian foundation dispute, the court must assess the actions of Sir Maxwell
and determine if they amounted to a breach of fiduciary duty or fraudulent con-
cealment and would similarly prevent the Canadian foundation from relying on
any equitable defenses.

If the Canadian foundation is found to have title to the works in issue, more of
the paintings currently on exhibit in the Beaverbrook may be sold. The current
Lord Beaverbrook has been quoted as saying he is not concerned about selling
more works from his grandfather’s collection. As reported in the Independent,

“The collection has evolved over the years. We’ve sold some and bought
some as well,” said Lord Beaverbrook, who also indicated that he con-
siders selling expensive works to be the best strategy. “You can sell one
valuable painting or 20 cheap ones but if you’ve got an art gallery you
probably need to retain quantity because you need to cover the walls,”
he said.71

ISSUES ARISING FROM THE DISPUTE

The various legal actions raise questions about the structure of the board of gov-
ernors of the Beaverbrook under the Gallery Act. Section 4(1) of the act provides
the following:

Sir John William Maxwell Aitken and Lady Beaverbrook are Custodians
of the Gallery until his or her death or resignation and after the death or
resignation of Sir John William Maxwell Aitken, the Lieutenant-Governor
in Council shall appoint another Custodian nominated by The Beaver-
brook Canadian Foundation as occasion requires.

Under section 5(2) the custodian is able to nominate four of the 18 governors to
be appointed by the lieutenant governor in council. These provisions of the act
that allow nomination of the custodian by the Canadian foundation and then
permit the custodian to further nominate four governors appear to recognize the
historic importance of the Canadian foundation to the Beaverbrook. The First
Lord Beaverbrook gave or loaned to the Beaverbrook a substantial part of its
collection and the Canadian foundation until recently has provided operating
funds to the Beaverbrook.

In its statement of defense, the Beaverbrook alleges that Sir Maxwell, then the
custodian of the Beaverbrook, was in a conflict of interest between his duties to
the Beaverbrook and to the Canadian and U.K. foundations when he directed gal-
lery staff to designate the ownership of artworks displayed at the Beaverbrook. In
a brief prepared regarding the application of Timothy Aitken and Vincent Prager
for indemnification, the Beaverbrook argued that Mr. Aitken, the custodian, and
Mr. Prager, a governor, breached their duty of loyalty to the Beaverbrook when

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

316

DEBORAH CUSHING

they subordinated the best interest of the Beaverbrook to the interests of the Ca-
nadian foundation.72 Timothy Aitken is reported in the press as stating his moti-
vation: “Number one, number one and number one is to protect the assets of the
foundation and respective foundations. We have a legal obligation to the trustees
to protect the assets of the foundation.”73

Dr. Neill, a governor of the Beaverbrook, in his affidavit refers to abusive and
intimidating conduct by Mr. Aitken. He also mentions the refusal by Aitken and
Prager to acknowledge a conflict of interest or to absent themselves from meet-
ings regarding the foundations’ proposed loan agreements.74

Beyond the repercussions of the structure of the board of governors for the
evolution of the current dispute are considerations of how that structure may need
to be changed depending on the outcome. If the Canadian foundation is success-
ful in its action, all the artworks in question may be removed from the Beaver-
brook. Mr. Prager has been quoted as saying that the Canadian foundation will
open a new gallery in Saint John, New Brunswick, to display the paintings.75 With
this outcome, the Canadian foundation would likely cease any financial support
of the Beaverbrook and the selection of the custodian and governors under the
act would need to be amended.

Given the acrimonious nature of the dispute to date, at a minimum the Bea-
verbrook may wish to implement some guidelines for the conduct of nominee
governors. In addition, a review of the Gallery Act may be in order. The province
should consider whether the procedure for nominating members of the board of
governors should be amended and in particular whether the legislation should
still provide that the custodian will be nominated by the Canadian foundation or
should instead be nominated by the Lieutenant Governor in Council.

CONCLUSION

Resolution of the two disputes is still some time into the future. The parties to the
Canadian foundation dispute have yet to resolve all preliminary matters, examine
their witnesses, or review all the documents. If the appeal of the U.K. foundation
dispute is heard in the fall of 2008 and a decision is made by the end of the year,
that decision may assist the Beaverbrook and the Canadian foundation to reach a
settlement of their dispute without incurring the significant cost of going to trial.
At the end of the legal actions, the Beaverbrook could lose a significant part of
its collection if the Beaverbrook foundations are given title to at least some of
the works in issue. Even if successful in its position, the paintings will remain on
display but the primary source of the Beaverbrook’s operating funds may be in
jeopardy. If the foundation removes or reduces its funding, the Beaverbrook’s
survival could depend on finding other donors willing to support the Beaver-
brook or relying on the provincial government to continue with its financial sup-
port. Both parties continue to incur significant legal costs. As Timothy Aitken

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

317

has commented, “This could all end up in tragedy for them. . . . They could end
up with no pictures. And the costs! Our costs already are horrendous.”76

The parties are in difficult positions. As stated by Justice Grant, “the Board
would be derelict in its duty to manage, control and administer what it believes
to be the property of the Beaverbrook if it did not resist the claims to ownership
advanced by the Foundations.”77 The governors were required to conduct due
diligence and resist the claims of ownership if their research showed the paint-
ings were owned by the Beaverbrook. In doing so they may have irreparably dam-
aged the relationship with their benefactors, the Canadian and U.K. foundations.
The Canadian and U.K. foundations themselves are in need of funds and see the
paintings in the Beaverbrook as assets available for sale. By pursuing their claim
to the paintings, however, the foundations may have tarnished their family’s image
in the province.

A favorable outcome to the legal actions would be one that reaches an agree-
ment on the ownership of the paintings and rebuilds the relationship between the
parties. History shows a long and fond affiliation between the First Lord Beaver-
brook, his successors, and the Province of New Brunswick. Ideally, when the dis-
putes are over, the reputation of the First Lord Beaverbrook and his family will be
restored, the Beaverbrook Art Gallery will remain as the designated provincial art
gallery, and the people of New Brunswick will still be able to view an impressive
collection of art but a collection that is not longer in dispute.

ENDNOTES

1. “Controversial Exhibit Ends Successful Run,” CBC News.
2. “Controversial Exhibit Ends Successful Run,” CBC News.
3. This brief biography of Lord Beaverbrook is based on “Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook.”
Available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Max_Aitken%2C_1st_Baron_Beaverbrook/; and “Lord Bea-
verbrook William Maxwell Aitken,” CBC News (accessed 30 June 2008).

4. Ian Herbert, “Read All About It.”
5. Marcus Warren, “Beaverbrooks Accused of Plundering.”
6. This description of events is based on McInnes Cooper and Osler, Hoskin and Harcourt LLP,
“Statement of Defence and Counterclaim” in The Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation v. The Beaver-
brook Art Gallery (August 22, 2005).

7. R.S.N.B. 1973, c.B-1.
8. 1957 c.10–6 Elizabeth II.
9. Poitras, Beaverbrook, 101.
10. Affidavit of Dr. Robert Donald Neill for application to be heard October 22, 2004, regarding

Timothy Aitken and Vincent Prager v. The Beaverbrook Art Gallery (October 15, 2004) at para. 4.

11. Grant, “Beaverbrook Art Gallery Controversy.”
12. Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation, “Beaverbrook Family Clarify.”
13. Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation, “Beaverbrook Family Clarify.”
14. “Art Attack.” Stratford Beacon Herald.
15. Neill Affidavit 2004, at para. 16.
16. Neill Affidavit 2004, at para. 26.
17. “New Gallery Board Appointed,” CBC News.
18. Neill Affidavit 2004, at para. 37–39.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

318

DEBORAH CUSHING

19. Aitken v. Beaverbrook Art Gallery, [2004] N.B.J. No. 512 (Q.B. (T.D.)) at para. 10 [Aitken].
20. “Indepth: Lord Beaverbrook Timeline,” CBC News.
21. Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation, “Beaverbrook Family Clarify.”
22. “Canada to Rule on Disputed Art Works.” Toronto Star.
23. Neill Affidavit 2004, at para. 51.
24. Affidavit of Bernard Riordan O.C. re: The Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation v. The Beaver-

brook Art Gallery (December 12, 2005) at para. 14.

25. Aitken v. Beaverbrook Art Gallery, [2004] N.B.J. No. 512 (Q.B. (T.D.)) at para. 10.
26. Aitken v. Beaverbrook Art Gallery, [2004] N.B.J. No. 512 (Q.B. (T.D.)) at para. 20–22.
27. Prager v. Beaverbrook Art Gallery, [2005] N.B.J. No. 168 (Q.B. (T.D.)) at para. 5.
28. Globe and Mail, “Art Gallery Gets Funding Boost for Battle.”
29. Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation, News Release, December 17, 2004.
30. “Indepth: Lord Beaverbrook Timeline,” CBC News.
31. Prager v. Beaverbrook Art Gallery, [2005] N.B.J. No. 168 (Q.B. (T.D.)) at para. 5.
32. Prager v. Beaverbrook Art Gallery, [2005] N.B.J. No. 168 (Q.B. (T.D.)) at para. 30.
33. “Judging Panel to Hear Appeal,” CBC News.
34. The Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation v. The Beaverbrook Art Gallery (December 16, 2005),

Fredericton F/C/407/04 (N.B. Q.B. (T.D.)).

35. Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation v. Beaverbrook Art Gallery, [2006] N.B.J. No. 121 (C.A.).
36. The Trustees of the Beaverbrook Foundation v. the Beaverbrook Art Gallery, 2007 (Corey). Avail-
able at http://www.beaverbrookartgallery.org/admin/assets/documents/2007–03–26-decision.pdf/
(accessed 30 June 2008).

37. Canadian Pacific v. Lamont et al (1983), 43 A.R. 257 (ABCA).
38. The Trustees of the Beaverbrook Foundation v. the Beaverbrook Art Gallery at 71.
39. The Trustees of the Beaverbrook Foundation v. the Beaverbrook Art Gallery at 42.
40. Jahn, “Loans versus Gifts,” 88–90.
41. Nolan v. Nolan, [2003] V.S.C. 121.
42. R. v. Finestone, [1953] 2 S.C.R. 107.
43. R. v. P. (A) (1996), 92 O.A.C. 376, 109 C.C.C. (3d) 385 (Ont. C.A.).
44. The Trustees of the Beaverbrook Foundation v. the Beaverbrook Art Gallery at 83.
45. See, for example, Lind, Jarvis, and Phelan, Art and Museum Law, 574.
46. The Trustees of the Beaverbrook Foundation v. the Beaverbrook Art Gallery at 74.
47. Poitras, Beaverbrook, 276.
48. The Trustees of the Beaverbrook Foundation v. the Beaverbrook Art Gallery, at 106–107.
49. “Beaverbrook Foundation Ordered,” CBC News.
50. “Judging Panel to Hear Appeal,” CBC News.
51. Beaverbrook Foundation, Factum of the Appellants.
52. “Beaverbrook Foundation Outlines,” CBC News.
53. “85 Disputed Paintings,” CBC News.
54. Drache, “Canadian Beaverbrook Wins Another Round.”
55. “Beaverbrook Foundation Ordered to Pay Gallery’s Legal Bills,” CBC News.
56. Description of the plaintiff ’s claim is based on Gilbert McGloan Gillis, “Statement of Claim”

in The Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation v. The Beaverbrook Art Gallery (August 20, 2004).

57. Osborne, The Law of Torts, 959.
58. Osborne, The Law of Torts, 962.
59. Palmer, Art Loans, 24–25.
60. Gilbert McGloan Gillis, “Reply and Defence to Counterclaim” in The Beaverbrook Canadian

Foundation v. The Beaverbrook Art Gallery (September 6, 2005) at para. 10.

61. Poitras, Beaverbrook, 154–159.
62. Reply and Defence to Counterclaim, at para. 10(5).
63. Taylor, “Timothy Aitken Is Not Amused.”
64. The description of the defendant’s claim is based on Statement of Defence and Counterclaim.
65. Goddard, “The Ghost in the Gallery.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

BEAVERBROOK DISPUTE

319

66. Osler Hoskin and Harcourt and McInnes Cooper “Reply to Defence to Counterclaim on Be-
half of the Beaverbrook Art Gallery” in The Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation and The Beaverbrook
Art Gallery (September 13, 2005).

67. This description is based on Statement of Defense and Counterclaim.
68. Reply and Defence to Counterclaim, at para 16.
69. R.S.N.B. 1973, c.L-8.
70. Reply to Defence to Counterclaim.
71. Herbert, Ian. “Read All About It.”
72. McInnes Cooper, Brief on Law on behalf of the Respondent, The Beaverbrook Art Gallery for
application to be heard October 22, 2004, regarding Timothy Aitken and Vincent Prager v. The Bea-
verbrook Art Gallery (October 20, 2004) at para. 61.

73. Taylor, “Timothy Aitken Is Not Amused.”
74. Neill Affidavit 2004, at para. 29–45.
75. “Beaverbrook Heirs Propose New Gallery,” CBC News.
76. Goddard, “The Ghost in the Gallery.”
77. Prager v. Beaverbrook Art Gallery, at para. 30.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

“85 Disputed Paintings Belong to Beaverbrook Gallery: Arbitrator.” CBC News, CBC, March 26, 2007.
Available at http://www.cbc.ca/arts/story/2007/03/26/nb-beaverbrookruling.html/ (accessed 30 June
2008).

“Art Attack; Outrage Grows Among Art Lovers Over Threatened Raid of New Brunswick Gallery.”
Stratford Beacon Herald, April 23, 2004.

Beaverbrook Canadian Foundation. “Beaverbrook Family Clarify Ownership of Paintings.” News re-
lease, May 14, 2004.

Beaverbrook Foundation. Factum of the Appellants, the Trustees of the Beaverbrook Foundation
(2008). Available at http://www.beaverbrookfoundation.org/news/appeal-factum.doc/ (accessed 30
June 2008).

“Beaverbrook Foundation Ordered to Pay Gallery’s Legal Bills.” CBC News, CBC, October 5, 2007.
Available at http://www.cbc.ca/arts/story/2007/10/05/nb-beaverbrook.html/ (accessed 30 June 2008).

“Beaverbrook Foundation Outlines Argument in Artwork Appeal.” CBC News, CBC, March 10, 2008.
Available at http://www.cbc.ca/arts/artdesign/story/2008/03/10/beaverbrook-appeal.html/ (accessed
30 June 2008). )

“Beaverbrook Heirs Propose New Gallery to Settle Dispute.” CBC News, CBC, October 26, 2005.
Available at http://www.cbc.ca/story/arts/national/2005/10/26/Arts/beaverbrook_newgallery_
051026.html/ (accessed 30 June 2008).

“Canada to Rule on Disputed Art Works.” Toronto Star, July 27, 2004.
“Controversial Exhibit Ends Successful Run.” CBC News, CBC, March 6, 2006. Available at http://
www.cbc.ca/nb/story/nb_beaverbrook20060306.html/ (accessed 30 June 2008).

Drache, Arthur B.C., ed. “Canadian Beaverbrook Wins Another Round,” Not-For-Profit News 15, No.
11 (November 2007): 84–85.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X

320

DEBORAH CUSHING

Globe and Mail. “Art Gallery Gets Funding Boost for Battle.” December 17, 2004, Available at http://
www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/RTGAM.20041217.wfred17/BNStory/Entertainment/ (ac-
cessed 30 June 2008).

Goddard, Peter. “The Ghost in the Gallery.” Toronto Star, July 23, 2005.

Grant, Daniel. “Beaverbrook Art Gallery Controversy.” Maine Antique Digest, May 2004.

Herbert, Ian. “Read All About It: Beaverbrook’s Gallery Forced to Sell Works of Art Just To Survive.”
Independent (London), March 26, 2004.
“Indepth: Lord Beaverbrook Timeline.” CBC News, CBC, August 30, 2004. Available at http://
www.cbc.ca/news/background/beaverbrook/timeline.html/ (accessed 30 June 2008).

Jahn, Ina. “Loans versus Gifts: Determining the Donor’s Intention.” Art Antiquity and Law 12 (2007):
81–101.

“Judging Panel to Hear Appeal for Beaverbrook Art Dispute.” CBC News, CBC, September 20, 2007.
Available at http://www.cbc.ca/arts/artdesign/story/2007/09/20/beaverbrook-appeal-3judges.html/ (ac-
cessed 30 June 2008).

Lind, Robert C., Robert M. Jarvis, and Marilyn E. Phelan. Art and Museum Law. Durham NC: Car-
olina Academic Press, 2002.
“Lord Beaverbrook William Maxwell Aitken.” CBC News, CBC, April 30, 2004. Available at http://
www.cbc.ca/news/background/beaverbrook/ (accessed 30 June 2008).

“New Gallery Board Appointed To Face Lord Beaverbrook.” CBC News, CBC, April 15, 2004. Avail-
able at http://www.cbc.ca/story/arts/national/2004/04/15/Arts/newbbboard20040415.html/ (ac-
cessed 30 June 2008).

Osborne, Philip H. The Law of Torts, 2nd ed. Toronto: Irwin Law, 2003.

Palmer, Norman. Art Loans. London: Kluwer Law International, 1997.

Poitras, Jacques. Beaverbrook: A Shattered Legacy. Fredericton, New Brunswick: Goose Lane Editions,
2007.

Taylor, Mark. “Timothy Aitken Is Not Amused.” Daily Gleaner, October 16, 2004.

Warren, Marcus. “Beaverbrooks Accused of Plundering Press Baron’s Art Treasures.” Daily Telegraph
(London), July 30, 2004.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:19:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910808017X


