International Journal of Cultural Property (2011) 18:255–258. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2011 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739111000105

Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary
Art Foundation v. Christoph Büchel: An
Appellate Perspective on the Visual
Artists Rights Act
Anastasia Telesetsky*

When the U.S. Congress passed the Visual Artists Rights Act (VARA) in 19901, no
legislator really anticipated that courts would be applying the act to art installa-
tions that were only half-finished. But this was the very challenge that the U.S.
Appellate Court for the First Circuit faced in Massachusetts Museum of Contem-
porary Art Foundation, Inc. v. Christoph Büchel.2 Deliberating over a failed football-
field-sized art installation wryly entitled “Training Ground for Democracy,” the
appellate court was asked to determine whether VARA protected Swiss artist Büch-
el’s moral rights in his half-finished work that if completed would have given view-
ers “training to be an immigrant, training to vote, protest, and revolt, training to
loot, training [in] iconoclasm, training to join a political rally, training to be the
objects of propaganda, training to be interrogated and detained and to be tried or
to judge, training to reconstruct a disaster, training to be in conditions of sus-
pended law, and training various other social and political behaviors.”3

The dispute arose in fall 2006 when Büchel and the Massachusetts Museum of
Contemporary Art (MASS MoCA) attempted an ill-fated artist–museum collab-
oration. From the start, Christoph Büchel ignored MASS MoCA’s efforts to for-
malize the working relationship through a signed written proposal. MASS MoCA
in turn ignored Büchel’s proposed contract requiring it to transport and orga-
nize the materials for the installation. Subsequently, the parties clashed over the
budget of the exhibition, as Büchel requested a movie theater interior, a house,
a bar, a mobile home, several sea cargo containers, a variety of vehicles, an air-
craft fuselage, and a bomb carousel in order to complete the installation.4 These
disagreements, coupled with additional disagreements over whether MASS
MoCA was properly assisting Büchel in properly executing the exhibit, led to
major delays.

*University of Idaho College of Law. Email: atelesetsky@uidaho.edu

255

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:11:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739111000105

256

ANASTASIA TELESETSKY

By January 2007, Büchel refused to return to finish the exhibit. MASS MoCA
sued Büchel in the District Court of Massachusetts in 2007, seeking a declaratory
judgment that it was “entitled to present to the public the materials and partial
constructions assembled in connection with an exhibit planned with the Swiss
artist Büchel.”5 Büchel counterclaimed under VARA and Section 106 the Copy-
right Act. On a motion for summary judgment, the court ruled in favor of MASS
MoCA, finding that Büchel had no legally cognizable claim under VARA or the
Copyright Act.6 In the district court’s own words:

When an artist makes a decision to begin work on a piece of art and
handles the process of creation long-distance via e-mail using someone
else’s property, someone else’s materials, someone else’s money, some-
one else’s staff, and, to a significant extent, someone else’s suggestions
regarding the details of fabrication—with no enforceable written or oral
contract defining the parties’ relationship—and that artist becomes un-
happy part-way through the project and abandons it, then nothing in
the Visual Artists Rights Act or elsewhere in the Copyright Act gives that
artist the right to dictate what that “someone else” does with what he
has left behind, so long as the remnant is not explicitly labeled as the
artist’s work.7

The appellate court disagreed with the district court’s analysis, holding instead
that artists protected under VARA have the right to artistic integrity, which in-
cludes a right “to prevent any intentional distortion, mutilation, or other modifi-
cation of that work which would be prejudicial to his or her honor or reputation.”8
The appellate court explicitly decided what the district court had left implicitly
undecided: Does VARA apply to unfinished works of art?

Focusing on the Copyright Act and VARA’s statutory plain language, the appel-
late court reasoned that even though VARA did not comprehensively define “work
of visual art,” the Copyright Act, which includes VARA, provides that a work may
be protected when it is “fixed” and “where a work is prepared over a period of
time, the portion of it that has been fixed . . . constitutes the work as of that time.”9
Therefore, a work in progress could be protected under VARA as long as it was
“fixed” so that it “is sufficiently permanent or stable to permit it to be perceived,
reproduced, or otherwise communicated for a period of more than transitory du-
ration.”10 After its brief statutory analysis, the First Circuit Court gave a nod of
approval to the Second Circuit for its implicit finding in Carter v. Helmsley-Spear,
Inc., 71 F. 3d 77 (2nd Cir. 1995) that VARA could apply to an unfinished sculpture
being installed in a building lobby.11 This decision, while conclusive, remains con-
troversial in light of the fact that much of Büchel’s installation involved ordinary
functional objects that only became artistically expressive when “fixed” in a final
configuration.

Holding that VARA applies to the partially completed “Training Ground for
Democracy,” the court went on to evaluate rights of integrity and rights of attri-
bution. The court found that under VARA’s right to integrity, artists have a right
to be protected from modification of their works that cause injury or damage to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:11:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739111000105

AN APPELLATE PERSPECTIVE ON VISUAL ARTISTS RIGHTS ACT

257

their reputation “in relation to the altered work of art.”12 Under VARA’s right to
attribution, artists can claim injunctive relief to assert or disclaim authorship of a
work.13 On the right of attribution, the appellate court had no need to review
injunctive relief since the art installation had already been completely dismantled.
On the right of integrity, the First Circuit concluded that because the museum
may have modified the installation without Büchel’s authorization in a manner
that impacted Büchel’s reputation, there were material disputes of fact that should
have been resolved by the jury at the district court level of review.14

The appellate court agreed with the district court that there was no intentional
distortion or modification of Büchel’s work simply by covering the project with
tarps. It did not matter that some observers may have formed impressions of “Train-
ing Ground for Democracy” based on the layout of the tarped objects.15 Curi-
ously, appellate court Judge Lipez continued on in his analysis to comment on the
mens rea of MASS MoCA in shrouding Büchel’s exhibit by opining that “[i]t might
be a fair inference that the Museum was deliberately communicating its anger with
the Büchel by juxtaposing his unfinished work with the successful artistic collab-
orations depicted in its new exhibition.”16

Concluding its analysis of VARA, the court found that in spite of Büchel’s claims,
VARA did not provide any right of disclosure preventing a party from disclosing
a work without an author’s consent. Although the court refused to proceed on
Büchel’s lack of consent as a moral right issue, the court examined Büchel’s lack
of consent as a traditional copyright claim based on Büchel’s economic rights to
be the exclusive party entitled to “display the copyrighted work publicly.”17

The appellate court strongly disagreed with MASS MoCA that finding in favor
of Büchel’s VARA claim would foreclose long-distance collaboration between art-
ists and museums in the future. They found that as long as the artist’s vision guides
the collaborative relationship and not the institution’s vision, artists and institu-
tions can continue to work cooperatively. Unfortunately, the appellate court pro-
vided no further insight on where an artist’s vision may blur with an art institution’s
mission. In a collaborative project, is there only room for one artist and his or her
singular vision?

While Büchel may not have achieved his grand artistic vision, the controversy
over “Training Ground for Democracy” has proved to be an active training ground
for both moral rights activists and museum curators. Given that the case has been
remanded to the district court for review of Büchel’s VARA claim on right of in-
tegrity and his claim under the Copyright Act, the last chapter of this saga of con-
temporary gallery drama has yet to be written.

Yet this case serves as a cautionary tale.18 Museums that intend to collaborate
with living artists need to insist on clearly written contracts from any would-be
artists that spell out in detail the working relationship between the institution and
the artist. Museums that fear a similar incident in their galleries may also insist on
joint authorship of large-scale installations, especially where museums are supply-
ing staff and materials. Up-and-coming artists will need to read these contracts

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:11:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739111000105

258

ANASTASIA TELESETSKY

carefully to ensure that they are not inadvertently waiving their rights under VARA
to protect of any finished or partial works.

Meanwhile, Christoph Büchel continues to create his hyper-real art across Eu-
rope, and MASS MoCA continues to engage edgy contemporary artists to design
exhibitions. With this appellate court ruling now widely circulated among art law
practitioners, it seems that there may be a need for a few more lawyers to help
navigate and negotiate future creative transactions among artists, galleries, and
museums.

ENDNOTES

1. Pub L. No. 101-650; 104 Stat. 5089
2. Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art Foundation, Inc. v. Christoph Büchel, 593 F. 3d 38

(1st Cir. 2010) (“Appellate Decision”).

3. Id., at 43 (Quoting an affidavit submitted by Büchel to the district court.)
4. Id., at 44.
5. Id., at 46. (Quoting MASS MoCA’s complaint.)
6. Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art Foundation, Inc. v. Christoph Büchel, 565 F.Supp.2d

245 (D.Mass.,2008)

7. Id. at 248.
8. VARA, supra note 1 at 17 U.S.C. §106A(a)
9. Appellate decision, supra note 2 at 51 (Citing 17 U.S.C. § 101.)
10. VARA, supra note 1at 17 U.S.C. § 101.
11. Appellate decision, supra note 2 at 51, fn. 11 (Noting that the Second Circuit exempted the

sculpture in the Carter case from VARA because it was a “work for hire.”)

12. Id. at 54.
13. Id. at 55.
14. Id. at 58.
15. Id. at 61.
16. Id. at 62.
17. 17 U.S.C. § 106(5).
18. Appellate Decision, supra note 2 at 61.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:11:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739111000105


