International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Political imprisonment and the sanctity of death:
performing heritage in ‘Troubled’ Ireland

Michael Welch

To cite this article: Michael Welch (2016) Political imprisonment and the sanctity of death:
performing heritage in ‘Troubled’ Ireland, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 22:9, 664-678,
DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2016.1184702
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2016.1184702

Published online: 18 May 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 348

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

InternatIonal Journal of HerItage StudIeS , 2016
Vol. 22, no. 9, 664–678
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2016.1184702

Political imprisonment and the sanctity of death: performing 
heritage in ‘Troubled’ Ireland*

Michael Welcha,b

aProgramme in Criminal Justice, rutgers university, new Brunswick, new Jersey, uSa; bdepartment of Social Policy, 
Mannheim Centre for Criminology, london School of economics, london, england

ARTICLE HISTORY
received 26 January 2016 
accepted 23 april 2016

KEYWORDS
Political imprisonment; 
sanctity of death; Ireland; 
durkheim

ABSTRACT
The ‘Troubles’ is a euphemism associated with sectarian conflict in Northern 
Ireland from the late 1960s until the late 1990s. Similarly, that term also is 
used to depict turmoil in all of Ireland between 1916 through 1924. During 
both eras, political imprisonment coupled with various forms of political 
violence (e.g. bombings, executions, and prisoner abuse) marred Irish society 
in ways that invoke socio-religious meaning. In particular, the sanctity of 
death captures the intense semiotics of those events and points to further 
theorising along lines of the Durkheimian tradition. As we shall examine 
herein, violations of the sanctity of death compound social conflict and the 
resistance it creates. Fieldwork was undertaken in Dublin and Belfast where 
official landmarks were explored in-depth: Kilmainham Gaol and the Crumlin 
Road Prison, respectively. Additionally in Belfast, other – unofficial – cultural 
sites provide further evidence of socio-religious symbolism, most notably the 
Irish Republican History Museum, Roddy McCorley’s Club in West Belfast, and 
murals in both Loyalist and Republican communities. Whereas Durkeimian 
theory remains at the forefront of the analysis, insights also are informed by 
heritage studies, in particular notions of cultural performance in contested 
societies.

Introduction
In her cultural characterisation of Ireland, Jessica Scarlata writes ‘imprisonment is a central trope of 
Irish nationalism, often deployed to portray the injustice of an Ireland occupied by foreign rule. Irish 
nationalism celebrates people gaoled for resistance to British forces’ (2014: front flap). Indeed, political 
imprisonment – along with political violence – permeate the social landscape during momentous 
periods of Irish history known euphemistically as the ‘Troubles’. Whereas that expression has more 
recently been used to describe the conflict in Northern Ireland (from c. 1969 to c. 1998), the term was 
also common in all of Ireland, especially during the 1916 Rising (followed by the War of Independence 
and the Irish Civil War). The cultural nature of the ‘Troubles’ reaches so deeply into Irish society that 
it invokes socio-religious meaning. To be examined in detail, multiple forms of victimhood are not 
only mourned but also celebrated for their sacrifice to Irish Republicanism. From a Durkheimian 
perspective, those socio-religious impulses activate what is described as the sanctity of death. Especially 

CONTACT  Michael Welch 
*a version of this article was presented at the Centre for Cultural Sociology, Yale university (20 february 2015).
© 2016 Michael Welch. Published with license by taylor & francis.

 retrowelch@aol.com

INTeRNATIoNAL JouRNAL oF HeRITAGe STuDIeS 

  665

in the context of the ‘Troubles’, communities go to great lengths to uphold the cultural demand for a 
proper memorialisation after the tragic loss of life (see Seaton 1996; Stone 2006; Stone and Sharpley 
2008). Robert Hertz – an early Durkheimian scholar – delved into that phenomenon, declaring that 
‘death has a specific meaning for the social consciousness; it is the object of a collective representation’ 
(Hertz 2009 [1960], 28). Burial rites, to be sure, figure prominently in Irish culture, and those rituals 
are powerful expressions of shared values.

This interpretative critique on political imprisonment draws on research in the Republic of Ireland 
(also known as the South of Ireland) as well as Northern Ireland (also known as the North of Ireland). 
In Dublin (in the Republic of Ireland), the Kilmainham Gaol – a former Victorian prison turned 
heritage museum – serves as a site for the first portion of fieldwork. The next round, in Belfast (in 
Northern Ireland), takes us into a similar Victorian institution known as the Crumlin Road Prison, 
which also has opened its doors to tourists. Whereas those government landmarks maintain an official 
narrative about the ‘Troubles’, there are other – privately run – cultural sites that project an array of 
heritage semiotics. Taking full advantage of their offerings, this study explores the Irish Republican 
History Museum and Roddy McCorley’s Club in West Belfast. Further afield, murals in both Loyalist 
and Republican communities are considered for their rich heritage expressions. Although Durkeimian 
theory remains at the forefront of the analysis, the investigation also is enlightened by observations on 
heritage, particularly notions of performance in contested societies (Tunbridge and Ashworth 1996; 
Smith 2006, 2011; Graham and Whelan 2007).

Performance and surfing the tensions in heritage
While heritage is treated as something of value to be cherished and curated, Smith re-theorises that 
‘there is no such thing as heritage’ (2011, 69). Rather, heritage is a cultural performance that takes stage 
at various sites such as museums and exhibitions. The process of performance attaches certain cultural 
meaning to things and places; however, those expressions are subject to alternative interpretations, 
counter-arguments, and at times, blatant rejection. As we shall discover in this analysis, those cultural 
strains figure prominently in Irish history and campaigns to memorialise the sacrifice of political 
imprisonment. Those tensions remind us that claims of heritage evoke deep emotional states, both 
positive and negative. At a higher degree of abstraction, ‘all heritage is intangible, insofar that heritage 
is a moment or process of re/constructing cultural and social values and meanings’ (Smith 2011, 69, 
2006). Heritage is notoriously multivalent since it is not only a path for seeing and feeling but also a 
way of remembering and forgetting. In some instances heritage is presented as a theatre of memory 
(Samuel 1994), at times regressing into a contested arena of dispute and denial (Graham and Whelan 
2007). Toward that end, heritage is a double-edge sword that has the power to unite as well as to divide, 
to include as well as to exclude. Durkheimian scholars have long recognised that community solidarity 
can jump the tracks; thereby, activating destructive energies that lead to ostracising, scapegoating, and 
‘other-ing’ (Erikson 1966; Smith and Alexander 2005; Welch 2006).

 The aforementioned thoughts suggest that the performance of heritage is a process of negotiation 
to connect the past with the present while determining who counts and who doesn’t. As intangible 
as those activities are, they nonetheless occur at specific places, creating forms of sited-ness that are 
either sanctified or condemned, depending on one’s cultural and ethnic identity. In a word, heritage 
as it exists in Ireland is ‘Troubled’. Compounding that dissonance are tendencies to challenge the 
dominant narrative, or what Smith identifies as the ‘Authorised Heritage Discourse’ (AHD). The AHD 
seems to project a version of events and history as irrefutable since in large part it is assembled by 
‘experts’ who claim to possess a ‘special knowledge’ about what actually happened and how it should 
be projected to an audience (see Foucault 1980). The power to perform heritage acts to de-legimate 
competing narratives and perspectives. In concert, there is often a clash of performances that surf 
the tensions of heritage, sites, and symbols (Smith 2006, 2011; Waterton, Smith, and Campbell 2006; 
Waterton and Watson 2013).

666 

  M. WeLCH

The sanctity of death
With its socio-religious overtones, the notion of the sanctity of death seems almost self-evident; still, 
the construct can most certainly benefit from some sharper theoretical attention. In the realm of cul-
tural sociology, an important starting point is Emile Durkheim (2008 [1915]), especially since there 
is continued interest and rethinking of his work (Alexander 2005; Bellah 2005; Smith and Alexander 
2005; Smith 2008). Likewise, scholars have revisited the contributions of Durkheim and the Année 
sociologique group, which included the young pioneering theorists Marcel Mauss and Robert Hertz 
(Guyer 2014). Altogether, those luminaries of the early French sociological school set out to ‘discover 
the origin of social solidarity in a modern and secular way by departing from traditional, theological 
explanations’ (Kwon 2014, 123; see Durkheim and Mauss 1963 [1903]; Riley 1999). Despite their 
shared perspectives on socio-religious phenomena, they differ in key ways. For instance, Durkheim 
focused on the creation and maintenance of social solidarity. By contrast, Hertz assumed ‘the task of 
studying the responses of society to breaches in that solidarity’ (Hertz 1994 [1988], 18). In this ethno-
graphic project on ‘Troubled’ Ireland, it is important to bear in mind that violations of the sanctity of 
death not only create resistance but, in doing so, also perpetuate conflict. Before embarking on those 
developments, we offer a bit more detail on Hertz and his study of death.

As a promising scholar – and pupil of Durkheim – Hertz was among the casualties of the First 
World War. At the age of 33, he was killed leading his military unit in the attack on Marcheville. 
Hertz’s intellectual legacy survives through the translation of Death and The Right Hand (2009 [1960]). 
That volume consists of two separate works. For our purposes, focus remains on the first essay ‘A 
Contribution to the Study of the Collective Representation of Death’ (originally published in 1907). 
Hertz begins by reminding us that ‘we all believe we know what death is because it is a familiar event 
and one that arouses intense emotion’ (2009 [1960], 27). Perhaps hinting at the sanctity of death, he goes 
on to add that ‘the body of the deceased is not regarded like the carcass of some animal: specific care 
must be given to it and a correct burial; not merely for reasons of hygiene but out of moral obligation’ 
(2009 [1960], 27). Toward that end, Hertz observed that the final ceremony serves several social – and 
spiritual – purposes. It provides a proper burial to the remains of the deceased so as to grant peace to 
the soul. Moreover, the final ritual liberates the living from their obligations of mourning and allows 
them to rejoin ‘communion with society’ (2009 [1960], 62).

In the introduction to Death and The Right Hand, E.E. Evans-Pritchard commends Hertz’s essays for 
reaching beyond ethnographic findings and techniques. Indeed, they also generate conceptual interest, 
even in social anthropology in which theory resides on a relatively low level of abstraction. ‘Method 
and theory are not, of course, the same, but it can be said that a method of analysis is of value only if it 
produces some advance in theory’ (Evans-Pritchard quoted in Hertz 2009 [1960], 20). Approaching a 
series of case studies of ‘Troubled’ Ireland, we remain mindful of meaning of the sanctity of death along 
with community efforts to restore its violations. In tandem, those phenomena contribute to solidarity 
and collective identity: both of which are contested forms of heritage (Tunbridge and Ashworth 1996; 
Graham and Whelan 2007).

Dublin and the early ‘Troubles’
The famous Kilmainham Gaol in Dublin opened as a prison in 1796 and closed in 1924. After decades 
of complicated negotiation over how to preserve its history and heritage, the Kilmainham Gaol was 
finally transformed into as a museum (O’Dwyer 2010). The experience of touring this prison museum/
heritage site is worth noting from a Durkheimian perspective since visitors are organised into groups as 
they follow the guide, thereby adding to a moment of solidarity. Scholars remind us that locomotion is 
a key feature of the museum experience. With ‘mind on legs’, visitors move about the site in ways that 
will enrich their understanding of Irish political history (Bennett 1995; Casey 2003; Williams 2007). 
To be sure, the tone of the tour is not that of a cheap theme park. Surrounded by imposing Victorian 
architecture, visitors are likely to conform to the serious manner of the narrative, as dominant as that 

INTeRNATIoNAL JouRNAL oF HeRITAGe STuDIeS 

  667

discourse may be (Smith 2006, 2011). The tour guide makes clear that Kilmainham Gaol is a ‘national 
treasure’ – the Bastille of Ireland – and with the style of an academic he reiterates some of the main 
points of its chronology that suggest tension between political rivals.

From the 1790s onwards, freedom from British rule, as a republic, became the form of political independence 
favoured by radical Irish nationalists. More moderate nationalists aspired to ‘Home Rule’, or constitutional inde-
pendence for Ireland within the British Empire. A remarkable number of leading figures of Irish nationalism 
were imprisoned at Kilmainham Gaol, and some were executed here. (Visitor’s Guide n.d.; see O’Dwyer 2010; 
Cooke 2014)

Before delving into the political themes of Kilmainham, the guide reminds us of the significance of 
the Great Famine.1 What is commonly known among the Irish as the Hunger, the famine consumed 
over a million people between 1845 and 1850. The Gaol figured prominently during the famine since 
it saw a massive influx of prisoners, many of whom were confined to a small cell with four others. 
These were not menacing criminals; rather, most of these men, women, and children were charged 
with begging and stealing food. As we shall discuss later in this critique, the phenomenon of hunger 
re-emerges in resistance to political imprisonment in the form of hunger strikes.

The Kilmainham Gaol was closed in 1910 but from 1916 to 1924, it was re-commissioned to incar-
cerate political prisoners, another reminder of its painful heritage. During the War of Independence 
(1919–1921), political prisoners were held by British forces. Amid the Civil War (1922–1924), however, 
the Irish Free State Army took control of Kilmainham to imprisoned their rivals who opposed the 
Anglo-Irish Treaty (1921). Adding to that controversy, the Free State Government executed 77 Irish 
Republicans at the Gaol. Those bitter memories would persist and fester resentment between those 
political groups and their members, thereby prolonging plans to transform Kilmainham into a herit-
age site. To overcome those barriers, the 1916 Rising took on central importance as a unifying event. 
In the 1960s, a heritage committee comprised of disparate political backers ‘agreed on the notion of 
preserving the gaol as a monument to “Ireland’s heroic dead”’ (O’Dwyer 2010, 88).

On Easter Monday 1916, units of the Irish Volunteers and the Irish Citizens Army seized the 
General Post Office and other landmarks due in large part to their semiotic value within the British 
Empire. By strategic design, the Rising was a material and symbolic challenge to British rule. Greatly 
outmanned by British troops, the rebels held out for nearly one week before surrendering. Hundreds 
of Irish men and women were rounded-up and imprisoned at Kilmainham Gaol. From 3rd to 12th 
May (1916), fourteen of those men were executed by firing squad. Patrick Pearse, Commander-in-
Chief of the Volunteers was the first to be shot. The last execution was that of James Connolly of the 
Irish Citizens Army.

Setting the stage for a thick narrative on execution, tourists are funnelled into a dimly lit auditorium 
and seated on rows of benches. They quietly wait as the guide positions for a solemn moment. At that 
point, the Kilmainham Gaol becomes a performative space to narrate heritage (see Casey 2003; Smith 
2011). A slideshow is projected on a large screen as the speaker introduces the audience to some of 
the principle figures in the 1916 Rising. The drama of the presentation heightens when talking about 
Joseph Plunkett. A photograph of Plunkett shows him with his fiance, Grace Gifford. The audience 
is informed that as an act of mercy, Plunkett was granted permission to marry Gifford – hours later 
he faced the firing squad. Suddenly, the movie screen scrolls up revealing the altar where the couple 
exchanged wedding vows. All the time, the group had been sitting inside a Catholic chapel – a holy 
space. Such sited-ness greatly enhances the experience of heritage and memorialisation. At that junc-
ture, Kilmainham combines all the features of a performance museum, namely space (the chapel), 
images (photographs of the Plunkett and Grace), and objects (the altar decorated with ornate candle 
sticks and other Catholic artefacts) (see Williams 2007; Waterton, 2009).

Having been ‘moved’ emotionally by the story of Plunkett and Gifford, the audience is then ‘moved’ 
physically out of the chapel, another reminder of the role locomotion in the performance of heritage. 
In single file, visitors are escorted down a dark corridor and into the cellblocks where each of the 
condemned spent their last days before being executed. Of course, Plunkett was held in one of these 
cells. Having just heard about his marriage, the emotional register seems to move toward the pain of 

668 

  M. WeLCH

separation compounded by the fate of execution. The use of space also reinforces the experience of 
heritage as visitors are taken to the East Wing of the Gaol. So as to create a moment of suspense, the 
guide patiently pauses for all members of the group to gather at the entrance. The large door to the 
East Wing is kept shut as the guide says a few well-chosen words about the power of Victorian prison 
architecture. Then suddenly he flings open the door and visitors are immersed in the grandeur of an 
enormous atrium. It has been said:

Architecture matters because it lasts, of course. It matters because it is big, and it shapes the landscape of our 
everyday lives. But beyond that, it also matters because, more than any other cultural form, it is a means of setting 
the historical record straight. (Sudjic 2006, 23)

The East Wing does not disappoint. With Victorian authority, it delivers a feeling of power and awe (see 
McConville 1995). The guide does not interfere with visitor’s absorption of the architectural splendour, 
allowing them to practice space and mill around without any specific itinerary (see Alpers 1991).

The guide offers some commentary about the significance of visibility, surveillance, and panopti-
cism in Victorian penology (see Smith 2009). Then he resumes that narrative on executing the rebels. 
Attention is directed to one particular cell. Above the door, a sign reads ‘Mrs. Joseph Plunkett 1923, 
Nee Grace Gifford’. Upon recognising the name, tourists walk closer to make contact with this special 
space. Informed that this cell housed Grace entices visitors; paradoxically, they are kept at a physical – 
and emotional – distance since the heavy door is padlocked. Such tension is eased as visitors are drawn 
to a peephole in the door that allows them to peer into this ‘forbidden’ room. A religious insignia on 
the back wall of the cell reminds tourists that it is a sacred space.

The tour continues in lock-step cadence as the group scampers outside to catch up with the guide 
who waits at the (in)famous Stone Breaker’s Yard. Its vast empty space projects a sense of tragic absence 
(see Williams 2007). The narrative fills in the void. The guide points to a cross – a religious symbol of 
sacrifice – stabbed into the ground in the distance; he explains that it is in this very location, 14 soldiers 
were shot by a British firing squad. An antique metal plate riveted to a stonewall authenticates the site. 
To reinforce cultural heritage, a statement is written in Irish first, then in English: ‘Here, After Easter 
Week, 1916, The Following Leaders Were Executed’. Three names are quickly identified because they 
have been mentioned several times over the course of the tour: P.H. (Patrick) Pearse (executed on 3 
May), Joseph Plunkett (executed on 4 May), and finally James Connolly (executed on 12 May). With 
dramatic emphasis, the guide points his finger to the back of the yard where a wide double-breasted 
garage door occupies an otherwise vacant lot. The gate has special significance to James Connolly 
who was the last to be shot. His execution is among the more controversial since he was wounded in 
battle during the Rising. After being captured by the British, Connolly was taken to hospital. When 
his execution was ordered, he was placed in an ambulance and driven to Kilmainham Gaol and into 
the Stone Breaker’s Yard through the double doors. The wounded Connolly was unable able to stand 
before the firing squad so the British commander summoned a chair. When seated, Connolly met 
his fate. By virtue of being wounded in the Rising and later executed – while seated – Connolly is 
memorialised as an especially significant sacrifice.

A storyboard in the elaborate exhibition hall, explains the importance of these events that figure 
prominently in a heritage that all Irish can share. ‘All Changed Utterly’ is profound phrase in the poem 
‘Easter 1916’ by W.B. Yeats who reminds visitors that ‘a terrible beauty is born’. In didactic fashion 
the text explains that the initial response to the Rising was ‘one of anger at the destruction caused to 
the heart of Dublin, the executions quickly changed the mood’. Memorial masses and enthusiastic 
fund-raising rallied the Irish who began to reconsider their status in the Second City of the British 
Empire. The poetry and prose of Pearse, Plunkett, and Connolly were widely circulated. ‘From these 
writings emerged the impression not of reckless adventurers, but men who has sacrificed their lives 
patriotically for an independent Ireland’. Suddenly, the 1916 Proclamation that was announced at the 
onset of the Rising gained deeper resonance, leading to the War of Independence.

For continued commentary on Irish heritage, visitors are invited to spend time in the vast set of 
displays. With ‘mind-on-legs’ they are drawn into a particularly interesting gallery titled ‘Last Words 

INTeRNATIoNAL JouRNAL oF HeRITAGe STuDIeS 

  669

1916’ (see Mac Lochlainn 2006). At the doorway, a poster reiterates the ongoing narrative on the 
executions, which ‘rapidly transformed the popular perception of these men into heroes in the pan-
theon of rebel martyrs. At a more human level, they left behind wives, children, loved ones, proud of 
what they had done, but broken-hearted too’. Entering this shadowed room, heritage is performed 
through the cultural power of personal poetics, religious artefacts, and sacred space. Among the more 
compelling artefacts is a miniature replica of the altar where Plunkett and Gifford exchanged their 
wedding vows. The compact shrine features Gifford’s scrapbook opened to a page with a photograph of 
Plunkett and another of herself with a handwritten caption that reads ‘the dress worn at my wedding’. 
A copy of the 1916 Proclamation is attached to the parallel page, thereby underscoring the national 
context of their loving relationship. Even more poignantly, a handwritten-written marriage proposal 
conveys Plunkett’s deep emotions.

2 December 1915

Darling Grace,

You will marry me and nobody else. I have been a damned fool and a blind imbecile but thank God I see I love 
you and you only and will never love anyone else.

Your love,

Joe

The sincerity of the letter is given extra weight by Grace’s wedding band carefully placed to the left 
of the proposal. Another hand-written note continues to authenticate a series of events: it is a letter 
from Major W.J. Lennon to Grace asking that she return to the prison on the night of Joe’s execution. 
Nearby is a locket of Plunkett’s hair inscribed personally by Gifford (‘Joseph Plunkett’s hair cut off 
in Gaol may 4th’). While that statement seems to bring closure to the story of Plunkett, his memory 
survives – along with a locket of his hair (a seemingly sacred artefact).

Tourists interested in more Irish heritage can visit the Collins Barracks museum. A major instal-
lation, ‘Easter Rising: Understanding 1916’, does simply as the title suggests, it delivers a scholarly 
and dynamic lesson on the those events which altered the course of Irish history. In keeping with the 
theme of this analysis, we concentrate on a few items that convey the sanctity of death. ‘Executions’ 
headlines a poster that informs visitors that following their court-martial, the signatories of the 1916 
Proclamation were shot by firing squad, despite growing protests in Ireland, Britain, and America. 
Among the objects on display is a modest painting of a blindfolded rebel facing two rows of British 
soldiers. The ‘action shot’ shows the moment before the shooting as the commander still has his arm 
raised and the riflemen lean forward as they concentrate on their target. Nearby a priest is shown 
giving his last rites to the condemned, enhancing the sanctity of death. While the painting is an 
artist’s rendition of the firing squad, the actual death certificates of those executed serves to officially 
authenticate the executions. The last statement of James Connolly (9 May 1916) is accompanied by 
a pair of artefacts: his portrait and his bloodied undershirt shirt. A caption explains that presumably 
the ‘garment was removed when he was wounded in the leg’ during the Rising. The text continues to 
reiterate the dominant narrative at the Kilmainham Gaol tour, noting that the execution of Connolly 
(‘the last to die, shot propped up in a chair because of his leg wound’) and the others, ‘turned them 
into martyrs in the eyes of much of the Irish population, both at home and overseas’.

The sanctity of death is again examined in reference to the ‘Hunger Strikes’. Whereas the practice of 
hunger striking for political prisoner status is often associated with the ‘Troubles’ in Northern Ireland 
in 1980 and 1981, that form of resistance was practiced in the aftermath of the 1916 Rising. A placard 
commemorates Thomas Ashe who died on hunger strike in 1917, resulting in some concessions. But 
the protests continued: 60 Irish prisoners went on hunger strike in 1920. That year, Terence MacSwiney 
died at the Brixton gaol (England) after 74 days on hunger strike, attracting international attention to 
the plight of Irish prisoners of war. A vintage photograph documenting an act of solidarity with the 
hunger strikers at Mountjoy prison in 1921 joins the text. Among the four women protesting outside 
the prison gates is Charlotte Despard, suffragist, socialist, and republican activist.2 As we shall see 

670 

  M. WeLCH

in the segment on Belfast, hunger strikes – and the solidarity they create – figure prominently in the 
sanctity of death during the ‘Troubles’ (from c. 1969 to c. 1998).

A final landmark within walking distance of the Collins Barracks delivers extra lessons on Irish 
heritage. With a sense of pilgrimage, many visitors make their way to the ‘Old Cemetery’ (Arbour 
Hills) where the 14 rebels are laid to rest. Well-manicured grounds and the neighbouring church 
enhance the sacred quality of the space. The impressive monument built in 1956 pays tribute to sig-
natories of the Proclamation who were then executed in 1916. A curved wall of Ardbracan limestone 
features a gilded cross in the centre. The 1916 Proclamation of the Republic is inscribed both in Irish 
and English. As a reminder that this is a revered space, a placard shows a 1963 photograph of U.S. 
President John Fitzgerald Kennedy standing solemnly behind a wreath placed at the memorial. He is 
joined by other dignitaries and high-ranking soldiers who stand in formation. Ceremonies at Arbour 
Hill have not always been successful in promoting a unified Irish heritage. In 1924, the first ‘official 
1916 commemoration’ was marred by poor attendance due to ‘objections to the Free State authority’ 
(O’Dwyer 2010, 15).

Even today, tourists with a keen eye will detect some tension at the Arbour Hill heritage site. First, 
in addition to the 1916 memorial, the compound also includes an Anglican Church and a graveyard 
for British military personnel killed in the War of Independence. Second, a 30-foot containment wall 
borders the cemetery with a guard tower perched in the corner. Visitors might be ‘Troubled’ to learn 
that the sacred cemetery sits next to the Arbour Hill Prison. The prison is fully operating; moreover, 
it is known for housing paedophiles. Hence, the pilgrimage to commemorate the 1916 martyrs is a 
strained not only by the presence of the British military but also by the prison and its despised convicts. 
In a word, that cultural tension might be deemed a sacrilege, detracting from the overall sanctity of 
death (see Smith 2008). Despite those tensions, the events of 1916 still loom large. In 2016, the Irish 
government launched an ‘official commemoration’ of the 100-year anniversary of the 1916 Rising 
against British rule. Irish President, Michael Higgins, placed a wreath at the spot where rebels were 
executed in the Stonebreakers’ Yard in Kilmainham Gaol. While much of Ireland celebrated, Unionists 
in the North, however, remain hostile to the heritage performed in Dublin. All the major unionist 
parties boycotted the commemoration (McDonald 2016).

Belfast and the later ‘Troubles’
In Belfast, Black Taxi tours offer visitors a unique way to learn about the later ‘Troubles’ – a turbu-
lent period from the late 1960s until the 1990s. By way of introduction, the taxi driver provides a 
brief overview of the conflict that left more than 3500 people dead (McKittrick et al. 2001; Graham 
and Whelan  2007). Sorting out the rival paramilitaries, the driver outlines the complex symbols 
of political, ethnic, and religious identities. As the ‘Troubles’ intensified, two ideologically different 
communities became further polarised. While the subject requires a good deal of caution, the groups 
are commonly referred to as either Protestant, Unionist, Loyalist (who regard themselves British) 
or Catholic, Nationalist, Republican (who regard themselves Irish).3 Those sectarian groups – with 
varying degrees of commitment – continue to hold competing national aspirations. The Protestant, 
Unionist, Loyalist community, the majority in Northern Ireland, aspires to maintain its connection to 
British sovereignty. By contrast, the minority, the Catholic, Nationalist, Republican group, supports a 
united Ireland. Since 1998, Northern Ireland is a distinct political entity within the United Kingdom 
governed by a power-sharing deal enshrined in the Belfast Agreement (also known as the Good Friday 
Agreement) (see Hennessy 2005; Shirlow and Murtagh 2006). Before the Peace Process, however, par-
amilitaries representing those separate political/religious/ethnic communities engaged in ‘a low-level 
war’ (Green 1998; McEvoy 2001; McAtackney 2014). Indeed, ethnosectarian conflict has reinforced 
a contested heritage that largely persists today. Moreover, Graham and Whelan note that the Peace 
Process ‘was fashioned so as to avoid creating mechanisms for addressing the legacy of the past, not 
least the commemoration of the fatalities of the Troubles’ (2007, 476; see McEvoy and Conway 2004).

INTeRNATIoNAL JouRNAL oF HeRITAGe STuDIeS 

  671

The taxi tour begins in a working class Protestant, Unionist, Loyalist neighbourhood where murals 
proudly display their identity. Similarly, those murals memorialise paramilitary soldiers who died 
in the conflict, thereby stressing the sanctity of death. For example, the mural devoted to Lt. Col. 
William Bucky McCullough (1949–1981) shows him smiling with silhouettes of two paramilitary 
standing at attention. Surrounded by three wreaths, a statement reads: ‘In Loving Memory of All Our 
Fallen Comrades from A Coy [Company], B Coy, C Coy, 2n Batt UFF West Belfast Brigade Murdered 
by the Enemies of Ulster’. A comparable mural commemorates Stevie ‘Top Gun’ McKeag (Military 
Commander, 2nd Batt. C Coy, West Belfast Brigade). The Union Jack is joined by the flag of Ulster 
and the insignias of the UDA (Ulster Defence Association) and the UFF (Ulster Freedom Fighters). 
The image incorporates poetics with the solemn words ‘Sleeping Where No Shadows Fall’. ‘The dead’, 
as Graham and Whelan observe ‘remain a potent and emotive means of legitimating and perpetuating 
the enthonationalism and sectarianism characteristic of political debate in Northern Ireland’ (2007, 
480). Highlighting the controversy over political imprisonment (which included Loyalist as well as 
Republican paramilitaries), is a brightly coloured mural featuring an illustration of the H Blocks with 
two hands shackled. ‘Freedom 2000’ refers to the release of all political prisoners under the conditions 
of the Belfast Agreement.

The driver then takes visitors to the neighbouring area of West Belfast, a stronghold of Republicanism. 
To get there, one must travel the length of one of the ‘peace lines’ (30 foot walls that separate the 
Protestant and Catholic communities). The walls are covered by more murals as well as political and 
ethnic graffiti (e.g. ‘Loyalist Shankhill Rd. Supports Republican Feud’). Passing through one of the 
gates into the Republican side, the cultural landscape changes noticeably. Rather than Union Jacks, 
the Irish tricolour flag flies ubiquitously. The territory of heritage is also noticeable by street signs 
written in the Irish language. The neighbourhood is enhanced by memorial gardens where heritage is 
also performed. The memorial on Bombay Street (officially known as the Greater Clonard Memorial 
Garden) is especially meaningful since it is located at the actual site where some claim the ‘Troubles’ 
began.4 In 1969, Protestant rioters attacked and burned down the homes of Catholics residing on 
Bombay Street. Fresh flowers serve to underscore a sense of living history conveyed on a metal sign 
announcing:

This plaque is dedicated to the people of the Greater Clonard who have resisted and still resist the occupation 
of our country by Britain. We acknowledge with pride and sacrifices they made throughout every decade. Their 
names would be too numerous to mention, and their deeds of bravery and resistance are un-equalled. We, the 
Republican Ex-Prisoners of the Greater Clonard, salute you and your reward will only be a United Ireland.

The statement is accompanied by the coat of arms of each of the four provinces of Ireland, thereby 
reinforcing the Republican vision of a united nation. The wall above the plaque lists the names and 
faces of the Republican volunteers who perished in the struggle against British forces. Chief among 
them is Tom Williams whose story is threaded through a lengthy narrative on the sanctity of death. 
Standing in the memorial garden one experiences the power of sited-ness as the guide points to one 
of the homes on Bombay Street. It is the very house where Volunteer Williams lived in the 1940s. A 
plaque above the front door pronounces (in Irish and English) that Williams was executed at the age 
of 19 at the Belfast Gaol (later known as the Crumlin Road Prison located in a Protestant, Unionist, 
Loyalist section of Belfast). To be discussed later, the controversy over the execution of Williams (and 
his initial burial) represents a brazen violation of the sanctity of death.

While still in West Belfast, tourists often visit one of the most revered murals featuring Bobby Sands. 
His smiling face and long flowing hair exudes a radiant persona. Sands was the first of the ten hunger 
strikers to die in 1981. His funeral was one of the largest in the history of Ireland. With international 
dignitaries in attendance, the final ceremony served to uphold – even celebrate – the sanctity of death. 
Like the other hunger strikers who endured a long and agonising death, Sands is memorialised as 
a martyr who sacrificed himself for the Republican movement. Compared to murals in the Loyalist 
neighbourhoods, those in the Republican sections strike an optimistic chord, rather than a decidedly 
militant and intimidating one (see Rolston 1992; Economist 2014a, 2014b; McAtackney 2014). The 
mural of Sands (which adorns the side of the building housing the Sinn Fein political headquarters) is 

672 

  M. WeLCH

no exception to that theme. In addition to being listed as a Member of the British Parliament (elected 
while on hunger strike), he is remembered as a poet, a Gaeilgeoir (a speaker of the Irish language), a 
Revolutionary, and IRA Volunteer. The mural includes some of the legendary symbols that surround 
his memory, most notably the lark that has broken from the confines of shackles – flying to its freedom. 
A quote captures his almost ‘saint-like’ charisma and leadership: ‘Everyone. Republican or otherwise 
has their own particular role to play … Our revenge will be the laughter of our children’ (see Sands 
1981). Decades after his death, Sands still embodies the heritage of the Irish Republican movement.
An extensive row of murals has become a hugely popular tourist destination in West Belfast. The 
colourful and vibrant paintings rejoice the virtues of justice and equality, deliberately inscribing Irish 
Republicanism within other international struggles (e.g. the plight of African Americans, American 
Indians, Basques, Palestinians, and South Africans). Unsurprisingly, a recurring theme is the com-
memoration of the hunger strikers. One image, in particular, superimposes the 10 hunger strikers 
into the 1916 Rising with the Proclamation prominently displayed. That mural also honours hunger 
strikers of previous periods, most notably Frank Stagg who is quoted: ‘I want my Memorial to be Peace 
with Justice’. Other murals reflect on tragedy, such as those killed by Loyalist Michael Stone during an 
ambush at a Catholic funeral (of IRA members shot by British agents in Gibraltar). Indeed, the Stone 
incident remains a vivid example of the violation of the sanctity of death – and contested heritage – as 
the media captured his indiscriminate gunshots and grenade throwing. Other controversies add some 
edge to an otherwise upbeat series of paintings, including a ‘wanted poster’ of (then) British Prime 
Minister Margaret Thatcher (‘for murder and torture of Irish Prisoners’). Another image recognises 
political prisoner Kieran Nugent who defied the British penal regime by refusing to wear a prison 
uniform, thus becoming the first of the ‘Blanket Men’ (known for wearing only a blanket during their 
years of imprisonment) (see Feldman 1991; Campbell, McKeown, and O’Hagan 1994; McKeown 2001).
Amid the murals is a billboard boasting a large photograph of the interior of the Crumlin Road 
Gaol – ‘Belfast’s Infamous Prison’. The advertisement attracts visitors to an important site where they 
can witness more of the contested heritage of Northern Ireland as well as symbols expressing breaches 
of the sanctity of death. Much like Kilmainham, all tours at the ‘Crum’ are guided in groups. Unlike a 
shared sense of Irish solidarity in Dublin, however, visitors seem a bit guarded about their sympathies 
whether Loyalist or Republican. Perhaps due to that tension, the tour guide (barely) mentions that the 
‘Crum’ held both Loyalist and Republican political prisoners. Curiously, the ‘Troubles’ do not dominate 
the narrative; rather, its history as a Victorian prison becomes the prevailing story (or AHD, Smith 
2011). Dating back to 1841, Crumlin Road Gaol was designed by esteem architect Sir Charles Lanyon 
who based it on the radial plan of Pentonville Prison (London). Its past is dotted with hunger strikes, 
escapes, floggings, and riots, as a result the ‘Crumlin Road Gaol is a foreboding place with a dark and 
disturbing past’ (Souvenir Guidebook to Crumlin Road Gaol n.d., n.p.; Greg 2013). Of course, as the 
tour guide explains, high-profile executions add to the Gaol’s rugged reputation. A total 17 men were 
hanged to death; according to the Capital Punishment Amendment Act (1868), they ‘buried in an 
unmarked grave, in unconsecrated ground’ (Souvenir Guidebook to Crumlin Road Gaol n.d., n.p.).
Visitors are navigated to the actual site where the bodies remain. The only remnants are some 
initials etched into the stonewall. Those impersonal burials did not sit well with some of the commu-
nities in Belfast. Again, the story of Thomas Williams looms large. In 1942, the IRA commander was 
convicted of murdering a police officer; subsequently, he was executed and buried at the Gaol. For 
decades, Republicans intensely lobbied the government to recognise the Irish tradition and heritage. 
Eventually, the Royal Prerogative of Mercy was exercised for the case of Thomas Williams, thereby 
remitting the part of his sentence requiring the burial within the walls of prison. At the site of burials 
at the Gaol, a large pewter sign lists the name of Thomas Williams along with the others buried there. 
It informs visitors that the Royal Prerogative of Mercy was again exercised in 1999, allowing the 
bodies of Thomas Williams (and Michael Pratley) to be exhumed and reinterred elsewhere. Williams 
was finally given a proper (Catholic) reburial at Milltown Cemetery. The Williams case illuminates 
the power of persistent community organising aimed at correcting a breach in the sanctity of death. 

INTeRNATIoNAL JouRNAL oF HeRITAGe STuDIeS 

  673

Those efforts, in turn, served to build Republican solidarity as well as assist the healing process in the 
aftermath of the ‘Troubles’.5

Whereas the Black Taxi Tour and the ‘Crum’ allow visitors to investigate the history of Belfast 
through public landmarks, more complicated narratives on the ‘Troubles’ can be found in the privately 
run collections housed at the Irish Republican History Museum and Roddy McCorley’s Club in West 
Belfast.6 There, themes of the sanctity of death abound. The Irish Republican History Museum is ded-
icated to Eileen Hickey who served as the IRA O.C. (Officer Commander) for the women held at the 
Armagh Gaol during the ‘Troubles’. The museum serves as a place of remembrance for Hickey as well 
as those who were imprisoned or murdered during the conflict. The space has a ‘community centre’ 
atmosphere as (helpful) volunteers cut old newspaper clips to be added to the growing collection of 
artefacts and images. As the title of the Museum suggests, this exhibit focuses on the Irish Republican 
history dating back to previous rebellions against British rule. Still there are enough contemporary 
items to make visitors feel the emotional register of the ‘Troubles’, particularly from the point of view 
of Republicans, Nationalists, and Catholics. The exhibit stands apart from others due to its recognition 
of women in Irish history. ‘A significant feature of the commemorative landscapes that have evolved 
in Northern Ireland since the late 1960s relates to their highly gendered nature and, in particular, to 
the invisibility of women in the visual iconography of the Troubles’ (Graham and Whelan 2007, 480; 
see Dowler 1998; Scarlata 2014). Upon entering the Museum, visitors are greeted by the ‘Republican 
Women’s Role of Honour’. Nearly twenty names of women are listed in chronological order of their 
death (e.g. Maura Meehan – Shot dead by the British Army on the 23rd October 1971. Age 31). The 
honour roll is joined by a floral display similar to one from a funeral. ‘In Remembrance’, the sign reads:

We also remember with pride, those women from this and past generations, who died dedicating their lives 
to the cause of Irish Freedom. Most of these women endured a life of severe hardship, blatant discrimination 
and personal suffering and in many cases years of imprisonment for their Republican beliefs. (Si Eire mo Thir)

Visitors who have also toured Kilmainham Gaol in Dublin will recognise the obvious references to the 
executions in the aftermath of the 1916 Rising. A crudely drawn illustration shows James Connolly 
strapped to the chair with British soldiers pointing their rifles at close range. The meaning of the image 
is enhanced by poetics:

James Connolly.

For inside that grim prison

lay a brave Irish soldier

his life for his country

about to lay down.

He went to his death

like a true son of Ireland

and the firing party he

bravely did face.

When the order rang out

present arms and fire

James Connolly fell into a

ready made grave …7

As a another reminder of the importance of Tom Williams in Belfast history, a collection of objects are 
arranged as a shrine. Unlike other references to Williams, this display features extensive text describing 
key events. It explains that on Easter 1942, the government of Northern Ireland banned all parades 
commemorating the anniversary of the Easter Rising. An IRA unit staged a diversionary action that 

674 

  M. WeLCH

allowed three parades to flow through West Belfast. However, an armed skirmish between the IRA 
and the RUC (Royal Ulster Constabulary) ensued and a policeman was fatally shot. Although five 
members of the IRA were convicted and sentenced to death, their sentences were commuted. Without 
knowing precisely who fired the fatal shot, Williams took full responsibility for the actions of his men. 
As narrated at the ‘Crum’ he was hanged there and initially buried in an ‘unmarked’ and ‘unhallowed’ 
grave. To reiterate, his remains were released due to the campaign by the National Graves Association 
of Belfast, another reminder of the power of heritage groups.

Before Williams was put to death, he inscribed some messages on the back of playing cards. On one 
card he wrote, ‘To who ever who receives this to pray for me always & pray for the cause for which I 
am dying. God Save Ireland’. Fr. Alexis witnessed the execution and later addressed prisoners in the 
prison chapel.

I met the bravest of the brave this morning. Tom Williams walked to that scaffold without a tremor in his body. 
The only people who were shaking were us and the hangman. I’ve one other thing to say to you. Don’t pray for 
Tom Williams, pray to him, for at this moment Tom is a saint in heaven.

The national media weighed into the controversy over the execution of Williams. A large copy of The 
Irish News in 1942 connects the past with the present, thereby adding to the performance of heritage. 
The banner headline boldly states: ‘WILLIAMS WALKED STEADILY TO HIS DOOM: “Could Not 
Have Been Braver,” Says Priest’. The tribute to Williams inside the Museum contains an eclectic group 
of objects. A photograph of the executioner’s box stuffed with rope seems a bit grim. Pressed under a 
glass frame, is Williams’s shirt that was wore when he was wounded during the shoot-out. The shirt’s 
presence aspires to connect Williams to James Connolly; as mentioned previously, Connolly’s (blood-
ied) shirt is on display in Dublin. Next to the tricolour Irish flag is a certificate from the National 
Graves Association declaring Williams a ‘martyr’ at the age of 19 – a picture of his boyish demeanour 
confirms his youth. A family tombstone honours several generations of the Williams clan, concluding 
with a note of ‘proud memory’ of Thomas Williams. His re-burial took place on 19th January 2000. 
Thousands of admirers attended the funeral, including Sinn Fein President Gerry Adams (see Adams 
1990). Fr. Paddy O’Donnell from the Clonard monastery (near the home of Williams) delivered the 
final blessings. Adding a contemporary look to the exhibit is a coloured photograph of Fr. Kelly who 
heard the last confession of Williams. To the faithful, that final ritual allows the soul to be consecrated 
for the afterlife (see Hertz 2009 [1960]).

Unsurprisingly due to the enormous impact that the hunger strikers had on shaping the discourse 
of political imprisonment during the ‘Troubles’, the Irish Republican History Museum delivers a 
steady narrative on those events. Each of the dead hunger strikers are given considerable exposure 
and tribute. Photographs of them are noticeable for their cheerful demeanours that seem to defy any 
accusation that they were ‘dangerous terrorists’. Moreover, the political nature of the hunger strike is 
cast into deeper mythic proportions since they are consistently portrayed as martyrs who sacrificed 
their lives for a free Ireland. Many items on display demonstrate a high degree of solidarity among 
their supporters. Toward that end, a series of calendars are devoted to the Republican movement. 
Hanging such calendars in one’s home allows Republican and Nationalist families to ‘do time’ with 
the political prisoners and hunger strikers, thereby maintaining solidarity. That level of support is 
notable for its international reach. Stepping into the library of the Museum, visitors are welcome by 
the Irish tricolour flag joined by the American flag. Those national symbols, however, are situated into 
a religious context. Nearby is relatively recent group photograph of worshippers at the Holy Redeemer 
College in Washington, D.C. (2006) as they attend an annual mass to honour the 1981 hunger strikers. 
Also on display inside the church are the flags of Ireland and the USA, thereby connecting not only 
the secular with the sacred but the Irish with its larger diaspora.

Granted, there is much more to explore at the Irish Republican History Museum; however, for 
the sake of brevity, discussion turns to another private collection. On the far end of West Belfast 
sits a somewhat secluded Roddy McCorley’s Club. There, themes of the sanctity of death are deeply 
embedded in the performance of Irish Republican heritage. Curiously, Roddy’s is a ‘forbidden space’ 

INTeRNATIoNAL JouRNAL oF HeRITAGe STuDIeS 

  675

since to enter one must be a former political prisoner (see Foucault 1986). Nonetheless, the pub and 
second-floor museums are an open secret and tourists are given friendly access. Much like the Irish 
Republican History Museum, Roddy’s pays tribute to the Tom Williams, the 1916 Rising, and Michael 
Collins whose death in 1922 is remembered in a poster featuring an image of Jesus Christ. The caption 
reads: ‘Died for Ireland … Another Martyr for Old Ireland’.

Leading up to the hunger strikes of 1980 and 1981 were other forms of resistance, namely, the 
blanket protest and the no-wash (dirty) protest (1976–1980) The collection boasts several artistic 
renderings of prisoners wearing nothing but blankets as they demanded their status as political pris-
oners. In the next period of resistance, prisoners refused to bathe. That expression of self-imposed 
‘pollution’ was compounded by the smearing of their faeces on the cell walls (see Douglas 1966). An 
exhibit authenticates the dirty protest with an photograph of BBC journalist shown interviewing a 
prisoner in his polluted surroundings. Since the dirty protest was aimed at achieving political status, 
that noble cause seems to transfer an otherwise profane act to the realm of the sacred and sacrifice. As 
the Irish prisoners entered the phase of the hunger strike, the decision was reached to purify themselves 
by showering, shaving, and allowing their cells to be cleaned by high-powered hoses. The collection 
narrates these events by way of popular culture. A montage displays still shots from the ‘multi award 
winning film HUNGER’ in which Bobby Sands (played by Michael Fassbender) is given such hagi-
ographic treatment that even movie critics were moved by the performance. ‘Positively riveting, an 
artistic masterpiece … a harrowing, poetic film’ – Time Out New York. ‘… both horrifying and, strange 
to say, beautiful’, A.O. Scott, The New York Times. On the wall is a framed copy of The Irish News with 
the bold headline ‘Sands dies on Day 66 of fast in the Maze’. Those words seem to add a certain degree 
of Catholic reverence to Sands’s death since the term ‘fast’ implies a religious obligation. It should be 
noted that the movie photographs featured in the exhibit showing the half-naked (starved) bodies of 
Sands and the other hunger strikers reinforces ‘an overwhelmingly masculine’ image of the Troubles, 
skewing Republican heritage toward (militant) men and away from women (Graham and Whelan 
2007, 480; see Dowler 1998; Scarlata 2014).

As a visual backdrop, the gallery includes multiple pictures of the Long Kesh/Maze prison where 
those historic events unfolded. Known as the H Blocks due to their physical layout, the institution 
was closed in the wake of the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement. Initially, political leaders agreed to 
refurbish the compound for the development of the International Centre for Conflict Transformation 
as well as a space for remembrance (Graham and McDowell 2007). Over time, however, the prison was 
gradually (and quietly) demolished, leaving a ‘representative’ sample of its former life: one guard tower, 
one chapel, one H block, and the hospital (Wylie 2004). In her book, An Archaeology of the Troubles: 
The Dark Heritage of Long Kesh/Maze Prison, Laura McAtackney offers a rare study of the ruins of the 
prison, including various documents (e.g. secret prisoner communications), artefacts (e.g. a plastic cup 
holding a small incendiary device), and landscapes (e.g. murals), altogether mapping out the heritage 
of political imprisonment. Toward that end, her description of this ‘highly mythologized site’ provides 
a pathway for theorising about culture, identity, and power (see Welch 2015b). McAtackney shares 
her material – and conceptual – observations of the ‘death bed’ of Bobby Sands, whom sympathisers 
regard as a martyr. Unsurprisingly then, the bed, draws a degree of respect that is ‘palpable’, revealing 
‘how the emotive quality of place can transcend its physical structures’ (McAtackney 2014, 270). It 
is pointed out that in all probability, that particular bed is not the actual one where Sands died. But 
that doesn’t really matter since its mythic symbolism – and emblem of Irish Republican heritage – has 
already been established for those who wish to venerate it (Graham and McDowell 2007).

Conclusion
Sites of confinement inject deeper political and symbolic significance into social conflict. Indeed, such 
landmarks as Robben Island (South Africa) and Seodaemun Prison (South Korea) have become touch-
stones for honouring political prisoners victimised by apartheid and Japanese occupation, respectively 
(Welch 2015a; see Crooke 2005), (McAtackney 2013).

676 

  M. WeLCH

Kilmainham Gaol – the ‘Bastille of Ireland’ – has joined that pantheon of prison museums, opening 
its impressive interiors and famed storylines to the public (Cooke 2014; O’Dwyer 2010). Albeit rather 
understatedly, the ‘Crum’ recognises the controversy over political imprisonment. Still, it is the Long 
Kesh/Maze prison that is remembered for being built on the (false) notion that political prisoners could 
be ‘magically’ disappeared by British authorities. Like Robben Island, Seodaemun, and Kilmainham, 
Long Kesh/Maze lingers as a forbidden place, thereby complicating its role in heritage performance. 
Unlike other former prisons, their Northern Irish counterpart has yet to be officially transformed into a 
space of commemoration. With few exceptions, visitors are not permitted to enter the remaining build-
ings. As another sign of contested heritage, Unionist and Loyalist politicians are uneasy with the legacy 
of Long Kesh/Maze. Whereas the compound is shrouded with shame due to decades of systematic 
brutality, Nationalists and Republicans also recognise it as a site of noble resistance against the British 
regime. For that reason, Unionists and Loyalists fear that opening Long Kesh/Maze to tourists would 
convert the site into a shrine to the ten hunger strikers who died there in 1981. Hence, the cultural 
phenomena of memorialisation and pilgrimage are kept from materialising, thus pushing the sanctity 
of death to the periphery of certain sectors of institutional memory (see Graham and Whelan 2007).
Perhaps because the ‘iconic’ site of political imprisonment – Long Kesh/Maze – has been off-limits, 
its heritage is performed at elsewhere. With the courtesy of a Black Taxi tour, visitors can gaze at the 
seemingly endless display of both Loyalist and Republican murals inspired by political imprisonment. 
Tourists eager to discover other forms of (contested) heritage are likely to gravitate to the ‘museums 
of the Troubles’ (e.g. the Irish Republican History Museum, Roddy McCorley’s Club). As McAtackney 
(2014) convincingly explains, those private collections represent the ‘distributed self’ by which the 
cultural meaning of Long Kesh/Maze thrives beyond state control. The Peace Process in Northern 
Ireland is still a political work in progress, and correspondingly the performance of (official) heritage 
is carefully regulated (e.g. imposing limits on occasions for flying the Union Jack at Belfast City Hall). 
Arguably from a Durkheimian perspective, efforts to suppress – or ignore – the memorialisation of 
victims (on both sides of the conflict) tends to prolong emotional recovery. ‘In the final analysis’, 
according to Hertz, ‘death as a social phenomenon consists in a dual painful process of mental disin-
tegration and synthesis. It is only when this process is completed that society, its peace recovered, can 
triumph over death’ (2009 [1960], 86).

Notes
1. 

2. 
3. 

4. 
5. 

6. 

7. 

 Each of the tour guides prepares and recites his or her own scripts: some emphasise the Famine, others focus 
on gender and/or children, etc. (McAtackney 2015).
 Inspiration for hunger strikes in Ireland is often traced to protests by the suffragettes (Murphy 2014).
 Again, a level of nuance is needed when discussing identity in Northern Ireland so as to avoid essentialising 
political and religious affiliation. For instance, not all Catholics consider themselves Nationalist or Republican 
and not all Protestants regard themselves Unionist or Loyalist (McAtackney 2015).
 There is no real consensus when the ‘Troubles’ actually began (McAtackney 2015. see Hennessy (2005).
 In Australia, a similar case of the sanctity of death surrounded the hanging of legendary bushranger Ned 
Kelly who was buried on prison grounds in 1880. His Irish Catholic clan and devoted followers persistently 
campaigned – even until recently – to grant his body a proper Catholic burial (Welch 2015a, forthcoming).
 Curiously, there are no state-sponsored memorials to civilians who died in the course of the Troubles; hence, 
commemoration is expressed in community and privately supported gardens, exhibits, and collections. To 
reiterate Graham and Whelan (2007), that characteristic of Northern Ireland demonstrates the extent to which 
the government deliberately avoids the legacy of the past and its thousands of fatalities.
 James Connolly carries significant heritage weight in Belfast since he was the only 1916 Rising leader to have 
actually lived there. After his execution, his wife and family stayed in West Belfast (on Falls Road) (McAtackney 
2015).

Acknowledgement
Enormous thanks to Phil Smith, Jeffrey Alexander, and the students participating in the workshop. Support from the 
Rutgers sabbatical programme, Dean Fran Mascia-Lees, and Patrick Carr is greatly appreciated along with backing 

INTeRNATIoNAL JouRNAL oF HeRITAGe STuDIeS 

  677

from Tim Newburn and David Lewis (London School of Economics). Conor Gearty and Sean Boyle (LSE), as well as 
Kieran McEvoy and Shadd Maruna (Queens University, Belfast) also provided friendly guidance. Special gratitude goes 
to Laura McAtackney (University College Dublin) for explaining the nuances of Irish society. Finally, Laurajane Smith 
and the anonymous reviewers are mentioned for guiding my orientation into heritage studies.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

Notes on contributor
Michael Welch is a professor in the Programme in Criminal Justice at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, 
USA where his research interests includes punishment and human rights. He is author of several books, most recently 
Escape to Prison: Penal Tourism & the Pull of Punishment (2015, University of California Press). In 2014, he was a 
Visiting Professor at the Mannheim Centre for Criminology, Department of Social Policy, London School of Economics.

References
Adams, G. 1990. Cage Eleven. Dingle: Brandon Press.
Alexander, J. 2005. “The Inner Development of Durkheim’s Sociological Theory.” In The Cambridge Companion to 

Durkheim, edited by J. Alexander and P. Smith, 136–159. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Alpers, S. 1991. “The Museum as a Way of Seeing.” In Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and Politics of Museum Display, 

edited by I. Karp and S. Lavine, 25–32. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press.

Bellah, R. 2005. “Durkheim and Ritual.” In The Cambridge Companion to Durkheim, edited by J. Alexander and P. Smith, 

183–210. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Bennett, T. 1995. The Birth of the Museum: History, Theory, Politics. London: Routledge.
Campbell, B., L. McKeown, and F. O’Hagan. 1994. Nor Meekly Serve My Time: The H Block Struggle (1976–1981). Belfast: 

Beyond the Pale Publications.

Casey, V. 2003. “The Museum Effect: Gazing from Object to Performance in the Contemporary Cultural-Historical 
Museum.” In Archives and Museum Informatics, Europe: Cultural Institutions and Digital Technology (Conference 
Proceedings), 8–12. Paris: Ecole du Louvre.

Cooke, P. 2014. A History of Kilmainham Gaol: 1796–1924. Dublin: Office of Public Works.
Crooke, E. 2005. “Dealing with the Past: Museums and Heritage in Northern Ireland and Cape Town, South Africa.” 

International Journal of Heritage Studies 11: 131–142.

Douglas, M. 1966. Purity and Danger. London: Routledge, Kegan Paul.
Dowler, L. 1998. “‘And They Think I’m Just a Nice Old Lady’: Women and War in Belfast, Northern Ireland.” Gender, 

Durkheim, E. (2008) 1915. The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life. Translated by C. Cosman. New York: Oxford 

Durkheim, E., and M. Mauss. (1963) 1903. Primitive Classification. Translated by R. Needham. Chicago, IL: University 

Place and Culture 5: 159–176.

University Press.

of Chicago Press.

Economist. 2014a. “In the Trenches of a Language War.” March 29, 47–48.
Economist. 2014a. “Bagehot: History Trumps Democracy.” March 29, 39.
Erikson, K. 1966. Wayward Puritans. New York: Wiley.
Feldman, A. 1991. Formations of Violence: The Narrative of the Body and Political Terror in Northern Ireland. Chicago, 

IL: University of Chicago Press.

Foucault, M. 1980. Power/Knowledge. New York: Pantheon.
Foucault, M. 1986. “Of Other Spaces.” Diacritics 16 (1): 22–27.
Graham, B., and S. McDowell. 2007. “Meaning in the Maze: The Heritage of Long Kesh.” Cultural Geographies 14 (3): 

Graham, B., and Y. Whelan. 2007. “The Legacies of the Dead: Commemorating the Troubles in Northern Ireland.” 

Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 25: 476–495.

Green, M. 1998. The Prison Experience: A Loyalist Perspective. Belfast: EPIC.
Greg, P. 2013. The Crum: Inside the Crumlin Road Prison. Belfast: Glen Publishing.
Guyer, J. 2014. “The True Gift: Thoughts on L’Année Sociologique of 1925.” Journal of Classical Sociology 14 (1): 11–21.
Hennessy, T. 2005. Northern Ireland: The Origins of the Troubles. Dublin: Dublin Gill and Macmillan.
Hertz R. (1994) 1988. Sin and Expiation in Primitive Society. Translated and edited by R. Parkin. Occasional Paper No. 

2. Oxford: British Centre for Durkheimian Studies.

343–368.

678 

  M. WeLCH

Hertz R. (2009) 1960. Death and the Right Hand. Translated and edited by R. Needham and C. Needham. Introduction 

by E.E. Evans-Pritchard. London: Cohen & West.

Kwon, H. 2014. “Spirits in the Work of Durkheim, Hertz and Mauss: Reflections on Post-War Vietnam.” Journal of 

Mac Lochlainn, P. 2006. Last Words: Letters and Statements of the Leaders Executed after the Rising at Easter 1916. 

Classical Sociology 14 (1): 122–131.

Dublin: Department of Arts, Heritage.

McAtackney, L. 2013. “Dealing with Difficult Pasts: The Dark Heritage of Political Prisons in Transitional Northern 

Ireland and South Africa.” Prison Service Journal 210: 17–23.

McAtackney, L. 2014. An Archaeology of the Troubles: The Dark Heritage of Long Kesh/Maze Prison. Oxford: Oxford 

University Press.

McAtackney, L. 2015. Personal Correspondence. 20 March.
McConville, S. 1995. “The Victorian Prison: England, 1865–1965.” In The Oxford History of Prisons, edited by N. Morris 

and D. Rothman, 131–168. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

McDonald, H. 2016. “Easter Rising Commemoration Draws Thousands in Dublin.” The Guardian, March 27. http://www.
theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/27/easter-rising-centenary-to-be-marked-in-dublin-gpo-amid-heavy-security.
McEvoy, K. 2001. Paramilitary Imprisonment in Northern Ireland: Resistance, Management, and Release. Oxford: Oxford 

University Press.

McEvoy, K., and H. Conway. 2004. “The Dead, the Law and the Politics of the Past.” Journal of Law and Society 31: 359–362.
McKeown, L. 2001. Out of Time: Irish Republican Prisoners, 1972–2000. Dublin: Beyond the Pale Publications.
McKittrick, D., S. Kelters, B. Feeney, and C. Thornton. 2001. Lives Lost. 2nd ed. Belfast: Blackstaff Press.
Murphy, W. 2014. Political Imprisonment and the Irish, 1912–1921. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Dwyer, R. 2010. The Bastille of Ireland: Kilmainham Gaol, from Ruin to Restoration. Dublin: The History Press Ireland.
Riley, A. T. 1999. “Whence Durkheim’s Nietzschean Grandchildren? A Closer Look at Robert Hertz’s Place in the 

Durkheimian Genealogy.” European Journal of Sociology/Archives Européennes De Sociologie 40: 302–330.

Rolston, B. 1992. Drawing Support: Murals of War and Peace (2). Dublin: Beyond the Pale Publications.
Samuel, R. 1994. Theatres of Memory. London: Verso.
Sands, B. 1981. The Diary of Bobby Sands. Dublin: Sinn Fein Publicity Department.
Scarlata, J. 2014. Rethinking Occupied Ireland: Gender and Incarceration in Contemporary Irish Film. Syracuse, NY: 

Seaton, A. V. 1996. “Guided by the Dark: From Thanatopsis to Thanatourism.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 

Syracuse University Press.

2 (4): 234–244.

Shirlow, P., and B. Murtagh. 2006. Belfast: Segregation, Violence, and the City. London: Pluto.
Smith, L. 2006. Uses of Heritage. London: Routledge.
Smith, P. 2008. Punishment and Culture. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Smith, L. 2011. “The ‘Doing’ of Heritage: Heritage as Performance.” In Performing Heritage Research, Practice and 
Development in Museum Theatre and Live Interpretation, edited by A. Jackson and J. Kidd, 69–81. Manchester, NH: 
Manchester University Press.

Smith, P., and J. Alexander. 2005. “The New Durkheim.” In The Cambridge Companion to Durkheim, edited by J. Alexander 

and P. Smith, 1–37. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Souvenir Guidebook to Crumlin Road Gaol. n.d. Belfast: Crumlin Road Gaol.
Stone, P. 2006. “A Dark Tourism Spectrum: Towards a Typology of Death and Macabre Related Tourist Sites, Attractions, 

and Exhibitions.” Tourism 54 (2): 145–160.

Stone, P., and R. Sharpley. 2008. “Consuming Dark Tourism: A Thanatological Perspective.” Annals of Tourism Research 

35 (2): 574–595.

Chichester: Wiley.

Sudjic, D. 2006. “Engineering Conflict.” The New York Times Magazine, May 21, 23–33.
Tunbridge,  J.,  and  G.  Ashworth.  1996.  Dissonant  Heritage:  The  Management  of  the  Past  as  a  Resource  in  Conflict. 

Visitors’ Guide. n.d. Kilmainham Gaol. Dublin: Office of Public Works.
Waterton, E. 2009. “Sights of Sites: Picturing Heritage, Power and Exclusion.” Journal of Heritage Tourism 4 (1): 37–56.
Waterton, E., L. Smith, and G. Campbell. 2006. “The Utility of Discourse Analysis to Heritage Studies: The Burra Charter 

and Social Inclusion.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 12 (4): 339–355.

Waterton, E., and S. Watson. 2013. “Framing Theory: Towards a Critical Imagination in Heritage Studies.” International 

Journal of Heritage Studies 19 (6): 546–561.

Welch, M. 2006. Scapegoats of September 11th. New Brunswick & London: Rutgers University Press.
Welch, M. 2015a. Escape to Prison: Penal Tourism and the Pull of Punishment. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Welch, M. 2015b. Review of an Archaeology of the Troubles: The Dark Heritage of Long Kesh/Maze Prison by Laura 

McAtackney, 2014. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Irish Political Studies.

Welch, M. Forthcoming. The Bastille Effect: Sites and Symbols of Political Imprisonment.
Williams, P. 2007. Memorial Museums: The Global Rush to Commemorate Atrocities. Oxford: Berg.
Wylie, D. 2004. The Maze. London: Granta.


