The Treasure of  the Berlin State
Museums  and Its Allied  Capture:

Remarks  and  Questions

KLAUS  GOLDMANN*

Following  the disclosure of archives in the  former  Soviet  Union  detailing  art  works  taken
from  Germany  at the end of World War II, it is now possible to reconstruct more accurately
a  history of those objects  removed from  Germany  but  never returned.  Inconsistencies in  the
documentary  evidence concerning both the location of objects sent West from  Berlin  and other
repositories (particularly  in the last few  months  of the war)  and  the number  of objects  re-
turned  to Germany  indicate that the United  States may  have been involved  in an  unofficial
policy of claiming as war  booty art  treasures from 
the conquered German  nation. This ar-
ticle attempts  to detail some of those  inconsistencies by comparing what  is known  of the in-
ventories of German  museums  before  the war,  the movements  of art  objects and repositories
used during  the war,  and  the inventories of the German  museums  today, in  order to recon-
struct  some of this missing past.

THE  PUBLICATION IN September  1995 of  the book  Beautiful Loot,  by Kon-
stantin Akinsha and Grigorii Kozlov, gave us substantial information  about
the plans and operations  of  the Soviet Trophies  Commission  in the Soviet
occupation  zone  of  Germany  since  1945.1 The  authors  hinted  as  to  the
whereabouts  of  large portions  of  Germany's  cultural heritage  and, in  par-
ticular, reported information  about the Berlin museum collections found  in
pertinent  documents  in the Russian  archives.

Those  documents  serve as an important  aid in the task of  completing
an inventory of  German  art works.2 They make it possible for  the  officials
of  the  Berlin  State  Museums  to  determine  accurately  what  art  was  de-
stroyed in World War II and to identify  missing art work. Although  access
to  these  documents  remains  limited,  it  is now  possible,  for  the  first  time
since the end of World War II, to determine how many and which holdings
from  the  different  repositories  of  the  Berlin State  Museums  were shipped
to the Soviet Union, primarily in 1945 and 1946. Between  1955  and 1987, the
Soviet  Union  returned  much  of  this  material  seized  after  the  war to  East

Curator  of  the Museum fur Vor-  und Friihgeschichte (Museum  of  Pre- and Early History),
Berlin. The  author wishes to thank Judith F. Owgang for  her assistance in translating the text
of  this article.

International Journal of  Cultural Property, Vol 7, No. 2,1998, pp. 308—341
© 1998 International  Cultural Property  Society

308

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

1  HITLER  S
EVACUATION
OF  THE  BERLIN
MUSEUM
COLLECTIONS
AND  T H E IR
AMERICAN
CAPTURE

Germany (the  German  Democratic  Republic  or GDR). The  Soviets never
called it war booty, but later they referred  to the material  as "cultural valu-
ables of  the GDR  that  were temporarily  kept  in  the USSR." 3 A  compari-
son of  these two complete shipping lists, those from  1945 to 1946 (showing
items shipped  from  Germany to  the USSR)  and  from  1955 to  1987 (show-
ing  those  parts  of  the  collections  that  were  previously  returned  to  the
GDR),4 to  the  inventory  of  the  Berlin State  Museums  in  1939 and  the  in-
ventory  today  allows  a definitive  determination  of  which  objects  are still
missing. It  therefore  can  be deduced  how many  objects  remain  to  be dis-
covered  in  the  former  USSR.  Any  objects  that  were  not  brought  to  the
USSR, however, obviously did not  fall  into Russian  hands.

The  chapter in Beautiful Loot titled  "Thuringia: Impressionist  Masterpieces
in  a Cellar"5  gives  significant  details  about  what  happened  on  March  6,
1945, the day of  the Fiihrer's order6 to send  all cultural treasures  owned  by
the State of Prussia westward. It also tells of the U.S. Army's occupation  of
the potassium  mines  of  Hattorf  and  Merkers/Kaiseroda  during  the  first
days of  April 1945 and thereafter. What  was the destiny of  the treasures  of
the  Berlin  State  Museums  that  were shipped  to  this  area? The  Allies  had
agreed at the Yalta Conference  (February 4—11,1945) that Thuringia  would
be part  of  the Soviet occupation  zone.7 However, the  region  was taken  by
the U.S. Army and held until  the  end  of  June  1945. Early in July 1945, fol-
lowing  the  withdrawal  of  American  troops  to  western  Germany,  a Soviet
special commission  led by Col. Andrei Belokopitov,8 head  of  the Trophies
Brigades of  Berlin, came to  Merkers. The  colonel's men  researched  inten-
sively the location of  the different  German  art repositories in that area and
the subsequent history of  the objects  that had  been stored  there.

I.I  COLONEL  BELOKOPITOV'S  SEARCH

FOR  A  SECRET  REPOSITORY

The Russians interrogated numerous individuals in the attempt to learn the
location of  the German art works hidden toward the end of  the War. Dur-
ing the early days of  May 1945, Belokopitov interrogated the general direc-
tor of  the Berlin State Museums, Professor  Dr. Otto Kummel, 9 about what
the Berlin museums had sent to  the repositories  now under American  and
British control. Belokopitov thus had a list from  Professor  Kummel of  the
material  that  had  been  shipped  from  Berlin  to  Merkers. 10 At  Merkers,  in
July, the Russians  also interrogated  Professor  Dr. Paul Ortwin  Rave," who
most likely gave them  a copy of  the  reports  he had  written  in April 1945.
He was questioned  concerning his role as the officer  in charge of  the evac-
uation  of  art  works from  the Berlin State Museums  to  Merkers  and  Hat-
torf.12  Lincoln  Kirstein  and  Capt.  Robert  Posey had  questioned  Rave  on

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

309

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

FIGURE  I.

MAP  OF  POSTWAR

GERMANY  INDICATING

LOCATIONS  USED  DURING

THE  EVACUATION  OF

TREASURES  FROM  BERLIN

STATE  MUSEUMS

©  STAATLICHE  MUSEEN  ZU 

. „ ( = •'

BERLIN,  PREUBISCHER 

J 

\

KULTURBESITZ 

h/Mc-

April  8, 1945. At  that  time,  Rave  gave  them  all the  information  he had
about  the Berlin  objects  that  fell  within  his responsibility  in the Merkers
area; surely, he gave the same information  to Colonel  Belokopitov.

Comparing  the information  obtained  in May from  Kummel  and the
information  learned  from  Rave's report in July, Belokopitov found  serious
discrepancies.  He  became  convinced  that,  unknown  to  Professor  Rave,
there was a second undiscovered  repository of Berlin museum holdings in
the  same  area. He wanted  to find this  repository  by any means  necessary,
as he believed the Americans  had not yet discovered  it. Belokopitov was,
however, unable to identify  the location  of  this repository. He later  came

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

310

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

to believe that  those  "lost" works had  been stored  in  the potassium  mine
at Bernterode  in the Harz mountains, another repository used only for  art
objects of  the Prussian Castles and Gardens Administration,  including the
coffins  of  Prussian  kings  Friedrich  Wilhelm  I  and  Friedrich  II  ("the
Great")  and  the  Prussian  crown  jewels.13 During  the  war, the  entire  mine
had  been  used  by the  Germans  as an  ammunition  depot,  but  during  the
last moments  of  the  war, in March  1945, art  works had  been  stored  there
as an  emergency  measure. Early  in  July  1945, however,  just  several  hours
before  the  arrival  of  the  Red  Army, the  mine  was blown  up  by  "chance"
or  deliberately  for  Bernterode  was  part  of  the  Soviet  occupation  zone. 14
Belokopitov was deeply concerned about the possible loss of  the art works
at Bernterode because he was unaware that the U.S. Monuments, Fine Arts
& Archives  branch  (MFA&A)  had  already removed  the  art  works  early in
May 1945.

In  Beautiful Loot,  the  lists  of  Kummel  and  of  Professor  Gall,  chief  of

the Prussian Castles and Gardens Administration,13 are compared. The lists
seem to have been  confused  and  are irreconcilable.16 Authors Akinsha  and
Kozlov  could  not  have known  that  the  evacuation  lists  were top  secret  in
Germany, and the chief  of  one administration  would not have had the lists
of  another  administration.  Only  the  German  minister  of  culture had  the
complete  information.  We  can  conclude  that  the  lists  which  Colonel
Belokopitov  received  from  Kummel  in  early May  1945 included  all the  art
evacuated  to  Merkers. Kummel's  list showed  that  more  objects  were evac-
uated  from  Berlin than  were placed  into  Professor  Rave's responsibility. A
1945 German  document  written  by Willy  Gottschalk,17  the  importance  of
which  has  only  recently  been  recognized,  has  helped  to  fill  in  a  missing
piece of  the puzzle: the whereabouts of  the materials.18 The  German  trans-
port  firm  "Frachthenze," of  which Willy Gottschalk  was the general  man-
ager, was officially  responsible for most of  the Berlin State Museums' evac-
uations from  1944. This  document  states that Gottschalk brought  thirteen
trucks,  about  which  Professor  Rave  was  not  informed,  to  Merkers  in
March  of  1945. It  was  the  contents  of  these  trucks  for  which  Colonel
Belokopitov was searching.

The  potassium  mine  of  Merkers/Kaiseroda  held  secret  underground
repositories  of  the German  Reichsbank  and  the Berlin museums. The  vil-
lage  and  the  mine  were  occupied  by  Gen.  George  S.  Patton's Third  U.S.
Army  on  April  4,  1945. An  extensive  American  report  of  nearly  seventy
pages, dated  from  April 26, 1945, but  declassified  only in  1987, details  the
whole U.S. Operation  Merkers.19 In this operation,  all the Reichsbank  and
the Berlin museums  objects  were removed  and  shipped  to  the  Reichsbank
building in Frankfurt  on Main. A statement  of  Dr. Werner Veick, 20 a rank-
ing Reichsbank  official,  in  an  appendix  to  the  report  verifies  that  one  of

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

3 11

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

these  art  transports  arrived  with  Mr.  Gottschalk  and  was brought  to  the
Reichsbank repository  in the mine.21

This  is  one  transfer  about  which  Professor  Rave  did  not  know.  On
March 19,1945, the Berlin State Museums and German Minister of  Culture
Bernhard  Rust22 had ordered Professor  Rave to move with his family  from
Berlin to  Merkers, where he was to  be responsible  for  the museums' mine
repository. Rave wrote two reports, dated April 12,1945 and April 24,1945,
concerning the German  and American activities in March and April 1945.23
In these reports, he refers  to  a diary  that  he later used  to write articles  on
his Merkers  experience. The  manuscripts  were never published  and subse-
quently  disappeared;  the  diary  itself  was destroyed  when he burned  it  on
February  22, 1962.24

Some  specific  handwritten  notes  and  lists  support  the  quantities  of
material  he  cites  in  his  two  reports  as being  in  his  custody  at  Merkers.25
Rave  had  a reputation  as  a meticulous  person,  so  his figures seem  trust-
worthy. However, he himself  made  a single reservation: some trucks  came
from  Berlin without  detailed lists or  crate numbers, so he could note only
the  quantity  of  crates belonging  to  the  different  departments. 26 The  con-
tents of  the different  crates were registered on other lists in Berlin to which
Rave never had  access. This  procedure  is a method  typical  of  the  "top se-
cret" transportation  of  valuables  that  is used  even today. For  Rave, there
was one exception. He  had received lists  containing  the  artists' names  and
the  inventory  numbers  of  all paintings  belonging  to  the  Berlin  National
Gallery. All those paintings, without  crating, were simply sandwiched  be-
tween  blankets  and  brought  to  Merkers  in  a van.  Only  by giving  Rave a
complete loading list could control over this haphazard shipment have been
maintained. Even so, it was most unusual that Rave was told that  a March
27 truckload held, in crate number AG (Egyptian Department) Nr. 34, the
world famous  bust of  the Egyptian  Queen Nefertiti. 27 Thus  it becomes an
important  clue in further  analysis of  the  documents.

According  to  Rave's papers,28 the holdings  of  the  Berlin State  Muse-
ums from  various departments  came into his custody  at Merkers. A list of
these holdings appears in the Appendix of  this essay.29 Those  quantities or
amounts  correspond  to  the  official  U.S.  document,  the  so-called  "Rave
List,"30 with  almost no  discrepancies. On  April  12, 1945, American  officers
George Stout (MFA&A) and William A. Dunn (Finance Division) had or-
dered Rave to  turn  over to  them  all the  lists  in his possession  and  the de-
tails  of  his  operation,  as  well  as  to  relinquish  all  control  of  the  art  for
which  he  was  responsible  at  Merkers  and  Hattorf.31  Oddly  enough,  the
Office  of  Military Government-U.S. (OMGUS) files prepared with Rave's
help at Merkers and housed  at the National Archives in Washington, D.C.,
contain  only  a single  copy  of  the  "Rave  List," which  is  incomplete. The

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

312

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

HGURE  2.

FLOOR  PLAN  OF THE

REICHSBANK  VAULT AT

MERKERS. ART WORKS

WERE  STORED  IN THE

LOWER  RIGHT  CORNER

"MISC. BOXES."

©  STAATLICHE  MUSEEN ZU

BERLIN,  PREUfilSCHER

KULTURBESITZ

RtKhpbSrtknotes
. SHU KU  per.box

cover of  the  "Rave  List" gives Rave's complete  account  of  the  crate  num-
bers at Merkers but, in some cases, lists fewer crates than Rave stated in his
private report. The  "Rave  List" contains  only the crate numbers that were
known to Rave and does not  include the quantity of  crates whose numbers
were not given to Rave by his superiors  or  other German  officials.

The  discrepancies  in  the  number  of  holdings  of  the  Sculptures  De-
partment (Kaiser Friedrich Museum and Deutsches Museum) of  the Berlin
State  Museums  are  especially  remarkable.  First,  this  department  should

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

313

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

have shipped  441 crates to Rave's repository  in Merkers. Rave had  knowl-
edge of  only 412 numbered  crates, and  this  number  presumably  included
7  crates with Early Christian  and Byzantine Art,  a sub-department  of  the
Sculpture  Department. The  "Rave  List" page numbers  are written  in the
hand of someone other than Rave, apparently that of an American. The num-
bering format  consists of  a category number followed  by a page number, a
style usually  found  in  bureaucratic  offices  such  as the  U.S. Finance  Divi-
sion.32 Here, the numbering starts with  category  "2," but  there is no  refer-
ence to a section or category number  "i."The  "Rave List" cover page shows
that the Sculpture Department should be listed at page  "2.4," but that page
is missing in the  "Rave List" on file in Washington  today. It  is quite obvi-
ous that this section was removed after  the pages had been numbered. In all
department  lists preserved  in the  "Rave  List," the crate numbers  are given
in three columns. That means that each column should contain a maximum
of  60 entries, with 180 entries on each page. Thus, the 412 crates mentioned
on the cover should have required three pages. However, two pages seem to
have disappeared  before  the pagination  was added.

The  second  discrepancy  occurs  in the  lists of  tapestries belonging  to
the  Schloss  Museum  in  Berlin. This  information  was  also  apparently  re-
moved from  the  "Rave List" before  it was paginated. The list starts on page
number  "2.6" with  crate  numbers  from  the  Schloss  Museum.  At  the  top
of  this  page  is  a typewritten  note,  "Page  1 of  2." The  next  page  ("2.7"),
however, lists the  inventory  of  crates from  the  Gemalde  Galerie  (Painting
Gallery). So the page that lists the  130 rolls of  tapestries mentioned  on the
"Rave  List" cover must  have been  removed  at  an  early stage by  American
personnel.

All of  these inconsistencies can be traced in Thomas Carr Howe's 1946

book,  Salt Mines and  Castles.32  Howe,  a U.S. MFA&A  officer,  was in  charge
of  the  Berlin  State  Museums' holdings  while  they  were  under  the  super-
vision of  the U.S. Finance Division  at the Reichsbank  building,  Frankfurt
on  Main.  Most  of  the  art  objects  stored  there  had  been  brought  from
Merkers to Frankfurt  on Main by American troops in mid-April   1945. The
first order that Howe received was from  Capt. William A. Dunn,  the same
officer  who  interrogated  Rave  at Merkers. Howe  was told  to  make an  in-
ventory  of  all the  Berlin State  Museums' holdings  in the Reichsbank,  and
he  began  with  the  tapestries. When  he  completed  this  part  of  the  task,
Howe noted several discrepancies. From Howe's book, we know that  Cap-
tain  Dunn  must  have  had  a  complete  inventory  of  the  contents  of  the
crates deposited at the Reichsbank. Howe described Dunn's inventory as "a
thick stack  of  papers."34 Yet Howe  recorded  more tapestries  than  were in-
cluded in Captain Dunn's list. Officer  Howe's  inventory work was stopped
abruptly, when he was sent  to  Munich  to  supervise  the  Goring  collection

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

314

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

that had been found  in the Berchtesgaden  area. Strangely, the Dunn  inven-
tory was later completely unknown to the MFA&A officers  at the Wiesbaden
Central  Collecting  Point  (CCP)  where  from  August  1945 all (or  perhaps
only a part?) of  the Berlin State  Museums' property  was stored,  after  hav-
ing been brought  there  directly  from  the  Reichsbank,  Frankfurt  on  Main.
The MFA&A officers  in  charge of  the Wiesbaden  CCP had  to make  their
own inventory  by opening  all the  crates one by one. Dunn  had  possession
of  a complete  list of  the  crate  contents,  and  apparently  a second  list was
available in Washington, D.C.3;>

1.2  THE  REORGANIZATION  AND  REDISTRIBUTION

OF  THE  WORKS  IN  THE  REPOSITORIES

There are many more open  questions relating to the fate  of  the art  objects
that the Germans brought  to Merkers. There  are at least two facts that  can
now be substantiated. First, Rave had considerably more crates in Merkers
than  the number  that  came  into  the  custody  of  the  MFA&A  on June 22,
1945,36 which  were returned  to  the West  Berlin Sculpture  Gallery  between
1953 and  1958.37 At  least  80  crates  are  missing. Second,  Rave  had  only  37
crates from  the Egyptian  Department  of  the  Berlin State Museums  in his
custody  at  the  Merkers  repository.38 Yet,  some  161 crates  (including  the
"Nefertiti")  were transferred  to the MFA&A in Frankfurt  on Main  and re-
turned  to West  Berlin between  1956 and  1958 from  the  former  Wiesbaden
CCP.39 The  Nefertiti  was not  in  case  "Ag 34," as Rave had  been  informed,
but was in case  "Ag 28." Case  "Ag 34" was recorded  as  "half  empty" at the
Wiesbaden  CCP.40 The  Berlin  curators  were  informed  that  all  of  these
crates were found  by the U.S. Army in the Merkers mine. During his meet-
ings with Professor  Rudolf  Anthes, the  director  of  the Egyptian  Depart-
ment  of  the  Berlin State  Museums  from  September  1945, Professor  Rave
insisted  that  he never had  in his possession  such  a large number  of  crates
from  the  Egyptian  Department.41 This  is  also  documented  by  entries  in
Anthes' diary on November  19 and December  15,  1945.42

As  we  have  seen  before,  the  "Rave  List"  that  was  prepared  for  the
"Commanding General, European Theater Operations (ETO)" starts with
section  "2," not section  "1". Another  list with section  "1" therefore  should
exist. This  "first"  list  should  give the  property  record  of  the  Berlin  State
Museums found  not in Rave's repository  at Merkers but  in another repos-
itory  of  the same  mine  which,  as we have seen, was completely  unknown
to Professor  Rave. This list  "1" is still missing today. It most probably was
part  of  a  "Report  on Treasure  Located  at  Kaiseroda  Mine  Merkers  Ger-
many"43  dated  April  18, 1945 and  signed  by  B. Bernstein.44  "Appendix  2:
Tentative and Incomplete Inventory of  Crates Contained Works of Art" of
Bernstein's  report  could  not  be found  in  the National  Archives, Washing-

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

FIGURE  3.

RAPHAEL  (1483 — 1520),

THE  MIRACULOUS

DRAUGHT  OF FISHES.

GOBELIN  TAPESTRY

(ACCORDING  TO  THE

CARTOON  OF  1515/16

EXHIBITED  IN THE VICTO-

RIA  AND ALBERT  MUSEUM,

LONDON),  SILK AND

WOOL,  394  x  442  CM,

KAISER  FRIEDRICH-

MUSEUM, GEMAL-

DEGALEREI  NO. 1251.

©  STAATLICHE  MUSEEN  ZU

BERLIN,  PREUfllSCHER

KULTURBESITZ.

ton, D.C., and is still missing as of  1997.4'1 Presumably, it refers to art works
that officials  of the Berlin State Museums had placed in the custody of the
German  Reichsbank  in  1945, which  had been  shipped  to the Reichsbank
storage in the Merkers  mine.

How  was it possible  that  German  museum  officers  could  make use of
such top-level governmental  evacuation  facilities? Their  situation  was  simi-
lar to that which existed in Washington, D.C., during the 1930s, when direc-
tors of the National  Gallery of Art had close personal contacts with Presi-
dent Roosevelt's former treasury secretary, Andrew Mellon, one of America's
foremost  art  collectors,  and his  successor,  Henry  Morgenthau.4'1  In the
German  capital there were also strong personal  contacts between the high-
ranking  officials  of  the Berlin  State  Museums  and those  of  the Ministry
of  Finance  and the Deutsche  Reichsbank.47  At the beginning  of  World
War II, the Reichsbank gave part of its newly built strongroom at the Neue
Miinze (New Mint) to the Berlin State Museums, which served as their first
large (1,050 square meters) bunker. It was used for safe keeping until the end
of  the  war, particularly  by the  Egyptian  and  the Antique  Departments,
which had large storage facilities  there ,4S When the Reichsbank evacuated its
own gold and other valuables to Merkers, it surely kept its action top-secret.
Professor  Rave would not have had more than a general knowledge of such

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

316

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

transports, even if they contained art objects coming from  the New Mint  or
other repositories used by the Reichsbank  throughout  Berlin.

A  handwritten  report  by Willy  Gottschalk,  general  manager  of  the
"Frachthenze"  company,  dated  August  19, 1945,49 states  that  he  had  sent
forty-five  trucks from  Berlin to Merkers during March and April 1945. Pro-
fessor  Rave accounted  for  only thirty-two  trucks,10 and  this is the  number
officially  recorded  by  the  Berlin  State  Museums  as  well  as  to  the  Allied
Kommandatura  in  Berlin.11 The  appendix  to  Gottschalk's  document  gives
data concerning the evacuation of  objects from  other state agencies, such as
the Berlin State  Library,  the universities  of  Marburg  and  Diisseldorf,  and
the Berlin State Museums, which he supervised  between  October  1942 and
March  1945, before  leaving  for  his  family's  home  in  Saxony  at  the  end  of
April  1945 to  wait  for  the  war's  end.  Gottschalk's  document  refers  to  "an
announcement  which I gave to the  Biirgermeister  (Mayor)  of  Niederwiir-
schnitz  and  to  the  Landrat  (the  Landkreis  chief  administrator)  at  Stoll-
berg, Saxony, letztmalig am (for  the last time on) 9.7.45."-12 This means that
Gottschalk  was interrogated  no later than  on July 9, 1945. Because of  poor
travel and  communication  conditions  during  the months  after  the  end  of
the  war,  it  can  be  assumed  that  while  Gottschalk  remained  in  Saxony, he
had  no  contact  with  any official  of  the  Berlin  State  Museums. All the  in-
formation  in  the  document  of  August  19, 1945, must  be  the  same  as  that
which  Gottschalk  gave on July  9 and  possibly  earlier.  Presumably,  the  in-
terrogation  on July 9,  1945, was ordered  by Colonel  Belokopitov,  the  Red
Army's Trophy  officer  in Berlin. The  early date of  Gottschalk's  document
suggests that  it is as valid as Professor  Rave's reports  of  April  12 and April
24, 1945,1' because at that  time, so soon  after  the end  of World War II, the
Germans would have had no specific reason to camouflage  their  evacuation
operations.

On the other hand, there was at least one other  "top-secret" evacuation
transport  in March  1945, which brought  holdings  of  the  Berlin State  Mu-
seums to the western territories of  Germany. Gottschalk  was involved,  but
he  served  as  a minor  character.  In  mid-March  1945, the  Berlin  Museums
had tried  to ship a part of  their most  important  treasures, deposited up  to
the  war's final days  in  the  Flaktowers  of  the  Zoo  and  Friedrichshain,  by
barge to the Grasleben salt mine. After  the barge was loaded, it was learned
in Berlin that  there would  be no  fuel  available to  transfer  the  objects  from
the  harbor  of  Calvorde  to  Grasleben. The  barge,  on  its  way to  Calvorde,
was stopped near Potsdam and its load was brought to a special train armed
with anti-aircraft  artillery, which was under the command of  Goring's  Luft-
waffe.  This  train  left  Potsdam  about  March  26,  1945,  bound  west  for
Magdeburg on the Elbe River, where it met up with another armed train of
the Luftwaffe,  which  took  over seven railway carriages  containing  parts  of

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

V7

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

Berlin's top museum  treasures, presumably packed between more than  400
crated master paintings  of  the Kaiser Friedrich  Museum.'' 4

The  world  public  was told  that  these treasures  "burned  accidentally"
during  May  1945  in  the  Friedrichshain  bunker  in  Berlin's  Soviet  sector
shortly after  the end of  the war.55 Until recently, the transport was kept se-
cret and its journey from  Magdeburg to its last point of  destination was un-
known. Could the destination have been Goring's castle  "Veldenstein" near
Niirnberg? Was this possibly the material referred to in an article of  the New
York Times on May 2,1945, when the correspondent Gene Currivan wrote: "A
little more  than  two weeks ago Reich Marshal Hermann  Goering  emptied
his Bavarian Castle of  the priceless art collection he acquired in recent years,
supervised  loading  it in  armored,  air-conditioned  railroad  cars and  started
south toward the German redoubt area. He left behind parts of the Prussian
State Collection, probably as a basis for  a future  plea for  clemency."56 This
"find" must have fallen  into the hands  of  the U.S. Army  on April   21, 1945,
when the castle of Veldenstein was captured. Otherwise, this New York Times
article remains unclear  and  cannot  be understood. The  railroad  transport,
known  of  by a former  German  soldier, is not  documented  in official  Ger-
man  and U.S. files even today. So, the whereabouts  of  this material are un-
known, just as the whereabouts of the German-owned  art in the Reichsbank
depository  at the Merkers Mine are also unknown.

It  is interesting  to  note  Gottschalk's  misuse  of  the  word  "National-
galerie" (National  Gallery)  in his handwritten  document  and  appendix  of
August  19, 1945. Gottschalk  attributed  to Berlin's National  Gallery  all the
transport  goods  that  he had  handled  during  the  Berlin  evacuation.  How-
ever, numerous  documents  in the Berlin Archives that relate to the  specific
transports  which  Gottschalk  mentions  prove  that  "Nationalgalerie"  was
Gottschalk's personal code name for  all the departments of  the Berlin State
Museums.  Gottschalk's  misuse  of  the  name  "Nationalgalerie"  was  also
noted by an eyewitness, a former  German  airman who was assigned to one
of  the  evacuation  shipments. The  airman  related  that  a civilian  who gave
the  orders  to  the  soldiers  who  had  unloaded  the  previously  mentioned
barge always said,  "Be careful,  it's material  of  the Nationalgalerie.'"57 This
shipment  apparently  contained  material  from  the  Berlin  Gemaldegalerie
(Painting Gallery)  and various other  departments  of  the Berlin State  Mu-
seums, and not  exclusively from  the  "Berlin National  Gallery."

In his August  document,  Gottschalk  explicitly mentions  the  property
(and  ministerial records?) of  German  Minister  of  Culture  Bernhard  Rust,
who was responsible for the Berlin State Museums. This property consisted
of  "65 crates,  in  a truck  and  trailer  and  a truck  with  his  Persian  rugs." 58
This  information  can be compared  with  descriptions  from  other  sources.
Professor  Rave mentions  the  same ministerial  evacuation  in his report  of

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

318

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

April 12,1945; however, he notes seventy-nine crates with  "Rust's library."59
One must  recall that  Professor  Rave was never officially  informed  of  the
contents of  the crates which he had to supervise and oversee. He  could have
acquired such knowledge only from  personal communications by  informed
colleagues. On  April 24, 1945, Rave reports  that  the Americans  took  into
custody  the  twenty-three  rugs  of  Minister  Rust  for  the  art  transport  to
Frankfurt  on  Main  on  April  17 but  left  behind  the  seventy-nine  crates  of
Rust's library.60 In their book, Akinsha and Kozlov quote Soviet documents
as showing that the USSR  confiscated  only forty  crates of  Rust's  library. 61
Therefore,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  Americans  not  only  confiscated
Rust's  rugs but  also between  twenty-five  crates (according to  Gottschalk)
and thirty-nine  crates (according to Rave) belonging to  the former  minis-
ter. This  must  have occurred  between  April  17, 1945, and  the  end  of  June
1945, before  the  Russians  took  over  the  Merkers  mine  area,  absorbing  it
into their occupation  zone.

There are no reliable lists of the contents of  the minister's crates. Some
of  the crates may have contained archival material related to the evacuation
of  art  objects  as well as other  cultural  assets  from  throughout  Germany.
From the beginning of  the war, strict orders had  been given that  any relo-
cation  of  this  material  had  to  be  submitted  in  detailed  list  form  to  the
Ministry  of  Science,  Education,  and  Adult  Education  ("of  Culture,"  as
mentioned  before),  headed  by Minister  Rust. 62 Those  lists  would  be  ex-
tremely important for the Berlin State Museums, in particular, because they
alone would  allow a complete  inventory  of  the real losses from  the muse-
ums during World War II. The  lists of  the Reichsbank  surely would  allow
identification  of those parts of the Berlin State Museums' collections which
were brought  to  the Reichsbank  repository  at the  Merkers  mine  for  safe-
keeping in March  of  1945. At  this time, no  complete lists can be found  in
Germany.  It  seems  possible  that  those  lists  can  be  located  in  American
Archives, as the complete inventories of  the German Reichsbank were con-
fiscated by the Americans  in April  1945 at Merkers. This  property has  not
yet returned  to  Germany.63

The properties of  the Berlin State Museums held at the Merkers mine
were  brought  to  the  Reichsbank  building  in  Frankfurt  on  Main  by  the
Americans in two convoys on April 15 and April 17,1945. The convoy of April
15 had  three ten-ton  trucks  with fine arts that  were shipped  together  with
the Reichsbank gold and other valuables.64 Rave did not mention  the  con-
voy because he was unaware  of  it. Of  the Reichsbank  repository  invento-
ries available, the declassified  document of  the Supreme Headquarters, Al-
lied  Expeditionary  Forces,  dated  April  23, 1945, accounts  for  the  Berlin
collections  held  in  the  Reichsbank  building  at Frankfurt  on  Main  at  the
time of  the first inspection  on April 22 as including  3,838 items.65

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

According to  other documents, art objects  from  other German reposi-
tories arrived at Frankfurt  on Main shortly thereafter. Therefore, this Allied
document  accounts  exclusively for  the Berlin collections from  Merkers  and
Ransbach, another mine near Merkers, where forty-five  crates from the Berlin
Painting Gallery had  initially been stored  on March  13, 1945, by Rave.66 The
number of uncrated paintings belonging to the National Gallery, Berlin, and
the number of  textiles are identical with the  "Rave List."6

However,  there  are  further  discrepancies  in  the  number  of  boxes  of
prints  and  drawings  (2,091) and  the number  of  crates with  other  holdings
(1,214). I n  ms   report  of  April  12, Rave  testified  to  the  existence  of  1,384
boxes of  the  Prints  and  Drawings  Department  and  none  from  the  Berlin
Art  Library. In his report  of  April  24, Rave mentions such boxes from  the
Art  Library  and  indicates  that  they  were  taken  out  of  the  mine  by  the
Americans.68 The  1,387 boxes of  the  Department  of  Prints  and  Drawings
and  740  boxes of  the Art  Library  containing  around  67,000 sheets of  the
graphics  collection  came  back  to  the  Berlin  Museums  via the Wiesbaden
CCP. All together this was 700 boxes more than what Rave had  in his pos-
session  at  Merkers. Furthermore,  this  substantiates  the  fact  that  another
repository existed at Merkers about which Rave did not know, and this can
be no  other  than  the Reichsbank  storage  room  in the  mine. In total, Pro-
fessor  Rave  held  in  his  repositories  983  crates,  including  45  crates  with
about  500  paintings  of  the  Painting  Gallery  in  the  Hattorf/Ransbach
mine. Comparing  this account  with  the U.S. documents,  at least 231  crates
(1,214— 983 =  231) and  740  boxes  of  the  Art  Library,  as previously  men-
tioned,  had  been  in Merkers  in April  1945 but  not  in the  custody  of  Pro-
fessor  Rave.

All the  art  found  and  confiscated  by the  U.S. Army  in  the  Merkers  mine
came primarily into the custody of  the U.S. Treasury Department's  Finance
Division.69 As late as June 22, 1945, parts of  the Berlin State Museums' col-
lections  which had  been  confiscated  in April  1945 were transferred  with a
receipt  "from  the  custody  of  Capt. W.A.  Dunn,  Finance  Division,  U.S.
Group  CC, to the  Custody  of  Major  Mason  Hammond,  Reparation,  De-
liveries & Restitution  Division,  U.S. Group  CC." ° One  may note  that  the
MFA&A branch was part  of  this  division.

Several  facts  support  the  assumption  that  major  parts  of  the  Berlin
museum  collections  were  selectively  placed  into  a  cultural  pool.  First,
Belokopitov  played  out  his suspicious  hunch  and  searched  for  the  second
repository. Second, the original  "Rave List" had pages missing and resulted
in  an  altered  list. Third,  the  final  or  tampered  lists  can not  be  reconciled
with  the  crate contents. Fourth, Willy  Gottschalk's  statement  of  the  num-
ber of  truck loads which he transported  during evacuation shipments is not

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

320

2  THE  ALLIES
REPARATION
POLICY  AND
ITS  POSSIBLE
SECRET
INSTITUTION

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

FIGURE  4.

CHAPEL  CROSS  OF THE

TREASURE  OF THE BASEL

CATHEDRAL  (SECOND

QUARTER  OF THE

FOURTEENTH  CENTURY).

SILVER,  PART GOLD,  WITH

CLEAR  ENAMEL.

KUNSTGEWERBEMUSEUM

BERLIN  NO.  K3861.

©  STAATLICHE  MUSEEN

ZU  BERLIN,  PREUfilSCHER

KULTURBESITZ

consistent with the number recorded elsewhere. Fifth,  the Luftwaffe  armed
train  disappeared  with the  Berlin museums' holdings, and  sixth, the  trans-
fer  of  the art  objects  to the  MFA&A  from  the  U.S. Finance  Division  was
very late.

The  placement  of  these important  parts of  the Berlin collections  into
this special pool  occurred,  most  probably, under  the responsibility  of  the
U.S. Treasury Department's Finance Division in preparation for  a so-called
policy  of  "restitution-in-kind"  that  the  Allies  had  planned  since   1943.71
These  initial  Allied  plans  were, in  the  event  of  Germany's  unconditional
surrender,  to  take  art  and  other  cultural  objects  of  highest  quality  from

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

321

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

German  museums  and collections as reparations  for  the damaged  and lost
cultural  property  of  those  countries  that  had  been  occupied  by the  Ger-
mans during World War II.72

It  is  obvious  that  only  a  part  of  the  Berlin  collections  which  were
shipped  in mid-April  1945 by U.S. Forces  from  Merkers  to  Frankfurt  on
Main finally came into the Wiesbaden CCP in August   1945.73 It is assumed
by this author that there was, in truth, a "reparation pool," just as some Al-
lied documents  seem to  demonstrate74  and that  it was created  at that  early
time. The best objects were selectively withdrawn from  all the collections in
custody and placed in this property pool, surely as a top-secret  operation.
It  can  be  assumed  that  U.S. target-forces  ("T-forces"),  special  units  as-
signed to implement reparation  and restitution policies, were gathering in-
telligence  throughout  all of  Germany  as well as in the  Berlin  areas  during
March to June 1945.

Such a plan  would have been facilitated  by the postwar  chaos in  Ger-
many. In  an interview  with Akinsha  and  Kozlov, Colonel  Belokopitov  de-
scribed the Berlin Zoo  area during the month  of  May as:

The Zoo  was overcrowded with people of  all possible nations. All the
liberated displaced persons had organized  a camp there. Their  tents
were everywhere—ecstasy,  drinking, sex. Some soldiers, probably
Americans, organized trade there. God knows, what was going on.
You could count the days that remained until the Americans would
take over the territory. American journalists were running around  the
tower. They, and of  course American  intelligence, knew that the
Pergamon Altar was inside. They probably believed that all these
treasures would be left  for  them. What  to do? 75

Lending  further  support  to  the  theory  of  the  presence  of  "target-
forces,"  documentation  suggests  that  the  Baltimore  175th  Infantry  Regi-
ment, a national guard unit, appeared  in different  places  "simultaneously."
On  April  30, at  the  same  time  that  the  unit  was  "liberating"  seven  tons
of  Hohenzollern  royal  family  silverware  near  Lenzen  on  the  east  side  of
the  Elbe  River,  it was also  capturing  a rocket  facility.76 Therefore,  special
T-forces  came either before or after the American infantry  to carry out spe-
cial  missions,  such  as  the  targeting  of  a  vital  weapons  facility  and  the
confiscation  of  valuables. A report by Soviet Marshall Zhukov, recorded in
official  diplomatic  papers  during  the  Berlin (Potsdam)  Conference,  com-
plains  to Stalin  about  the removal of  entire factories,  laboratories, equip-
ment  and goods, in addition  to the removal of  all technical personnel, en-
gineers, and scientists along with their  families. 77

To cover the mentioned discrepancies in the already documented prop-
erty lists, the  "target-forces" tampered with the lists and scrambled to other

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

322

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

German repositories to make up the difference  with other material. For ex-
ample, let us return to the eighty additional crates that had belonged to the
Berlin Sculpture  Gallery, the  documentation  of  which  had  been  removed
from  the  "Rave  List" by the  Americans.78 Apparently  to fill this  gap, the
Americans sent a convoy to the Grasleben salt mine near Helmstedt,  which
was to be part  of  the British  occupation  zone  of  Germany,  and  took  over
all the  crates of  the Berlin Sculpture  Gallery which had been  stored  there.
Those twenty-two crates with art objects were again taken into the custody
of  Capt. W. A. Dunn  on  May  14, 1945, at  the  Reichsbank,  Frankfurt  on
Main.79 It  is documented  that  the Americans pulled  out many more  crates
from  Grasleben  and  other  mines which  at that  time  were also under  their
control. Perhaps  the motive for these movements was to fill in the  missing
material of  altered lists or to cover up  for  the previously documented  ma-
terial  which  the  Americans  had  confiscated. This  theory  seems  to  be  the
only  explanation  for  all  the  alterations  and  discrepancies  in  the  German
and Allied documents dated 1945 and 1946 which related to the holdings  of
the Berlin State  Museums.

If  one accepts this theory, the disappearance of  so many museum valu-
ables  and  their  continued  absence  up  until  today  could  only  have  been
arranged  by  a special  "U.S. Reparation  Unit"  in  cooperation  with  some
Berlin museum  officials  who had  the  complete  lists of  the holdings  of  all
departments and knew of their whereabouts. There were two complete files
of  those lists of  prewar museum inventories and their evacuation sites: one
at the General Director's Office  of  the Berlin State Museums and the other
in the ministry offices  of  Bernhard Rust.80 The Rust file most probably  fell
into U.S. hands at the Merkers mine. All the specific  documents in the two
master  files  that  could  give  relevant  information  had  to  be  removed,
changed, or destroyed. In Berlin, this happened within weeks after  the cap-
ture of  the city by the Red Army.

The motive of  the Berlin Museums' officials  surely was the knowledge
that  the  Russians  would  take  large  amounts  of  war  reparations  from  the
museums. It is interesting to note that one of the master files is said to have
burned  in the basement of  the Berlin Museums' Island during the last days
of fighting.81 The  only way to keep the holdings of  the Berlin State Muse-
ums as Germany's property seemed to be cooperation  with the Americans,
who were thought to be the best choice at the time. In the summer of 1945,
nearly  all Berlin museum  curators  feared  that  the  Russians  would  ask  the
Americans to return  to Berlin  all the  capital's  art, library, and  archival ma-
terial  so  that  it  could  then  be  taken  by  the  Russian Trophy  Commission
and shipped to the USSR. At the Potsdam Conference, July  17 to August 2,
1945, Stalin did  indeed ask for  the return  of  this material. 82 Driven by this
fear,  the Berlin Museums  officials  cooperated  with the Americans.

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

FIGURE  5.

BUDDHA  MANJUSN,

EASTERN  JAVA, CA.  1280

A.D. STONE,  109  X  84  X

60  CM. MUSEUM  FUR

INDISCHE  KUNST, BERLIN.

©  STAATLICHE  MUSEEN  ZU

BERLIN,  PREUfilSCHER

KULTURBESITZ

The Allies, after  Germany's unconditional surrender in May 1945, con-
fiscated and  took  into  custody  all art  objects  they  could  find  in  Germany,
both  German  and  foreign-owned/ 3  so as to establish  control  and to  deter-
mine  whether  some  of  this  material  might  be  German  war  booty. There
were many specific lists and protocols  concerning the types and quantity of
those  valuables confiscated  in Germany. The  Allies, counting  and  evaluat-
ing the  items, made  a great  number  of  lists  at  that  time. Those  lists, pri-
manly ones relating to fine arts, libraries  and archives, are still mostly  con-
sidered classified  in the archives of  the United States, Great Britain, and the
former  Soviet Union. Missing  are the files which were generated  primarily
by the finance divisions  of  these respective  countries  that  were part  of  the
military government.84 The  finance  divisions  were entirely  responsible  for
all the confiscated  German  art until the final fate  of  the items was decided
at higher government levels.S;<

Until  Germany's  reunification  in  1990, it  was impossible  for  political
reasons  to  exchange  property  lists  in  a divided  Berlin. However,  it  is now
possible  to make  a complete  inventory  of  the Berlin State  Museums,  item

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

324

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

by item, and thereby to pinpoint what has actually been missing since 1945.
The inventory process has begun in all of  the seventeen departments of  the
Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin,  Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  (The  Berlin  State
Museums,  Prussian  Heritage  Foundation)  and  now  holds  a  position  of
high-level priority. The  first  publications  documenting  the missing  objects
have now appeared.86 After  this inventory  is complete, possibly  in the year
2000, all the objects missing since World War II will be published  and doc-
umented  for  use  by  international  police  and  for  scrutiny  by  the  interna-
tional  public. It  will  be  difficult  for  those  objects  which  were taken  from
the Berlin State Museums  to  be sold  on  the  black market, grey market,  or
criminal underground  market.

One  preliminary  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  the  current  identi-
fication work  and  research  concerning  the present  location  of  the  missing
objects.  It  seems  that  fewer  irreplaceable  items  (assigned  to  Category  I)
were destroyed during the war than was previously believed. However, these
irreplaceable  valuables from  many departments  of  the  Berlin State  Muse-
ums have not yet been returned  to Berlin and presumably are located in  dif-
ferent  countries  and  different  places.

3  OBJECTS  N OT
The  following  sections  suggest  some  of  the  Category  I  properties  previ- 
ously listed  as missing  or  destroyed. We  can now conclude  that  some  sur-  R E T U R N ED  TO
vived  the  destruction  of  the  war  and  can  even  determine  their  current  GERMANY
location.

3.1  ANTIQUE  COLLECTION

This department held a world-famous  collection of  antique glass, valued in
1962 (according  to  an  official  statement)  at  22.4 million  Deutsch  Marks,
surpassing by far the appraised  value of  the Pergamon Altar. This  material
is said to have been lost  in two explosions  in the Friedrichshain  Flaktower
bunker  between  May  5 and  May  18, 1945, after  the  Red  Army  captured
Berlin on May 2. The Russians said that they found  no remnants of  the an-
tique glass in the ashes of  the Friedrichshain  bunker.

Professor  Robert  Zahn,  a  scholar  of  classical  archaeology,  wrote  a
complete  inventory  of  2,800  pieces  of  that  collection,  and  this  inventory
still exists in Berlin. According  to source  documents,  there  is some  indica-
tion  that  the  collection  survived  and  is somewhere  in  the Western  Hemi-
sphere. Zahn's archaeological library, which specialized in antique glass and
jewelry  of  the  ancient  world,  was  shipped  to  the  Schonebeck  mine  near
Magdeburg, west of  the Elbe River, in March  1945. This priceless  reference
collection  vanished  after  the mine  and  its contents  were turned  over  from
American,  and  later  British  control,  to  the  Soviet  military  government  in
July 1945. It is interesting to note that Willy Gottschalk, when called in the

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

325

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

autumn  of  1946 to Schonebeck  to transport  the repository's  contents back
to the Berlin State Museums  and other Berlin agencies, was ordered by the
Russian Kommandatura not to touch the Zahn library in the mine and that
it  was  placed  off  limits  to  him.  Gottschalk's  letters  document  that  the
Russian  Kommandatura  also  informed  him  that  the  Americans  had  for-
mally  requested  seizure  of  Dr.  Zahn's  manuscripts  because  they  believed
that the documents included an inventory of  the antique glass collection in
the  New  York  Metropolitan  Museum. 87  At  that  time,  the  Metropolitan
claimed that  Dr. Zahn  had  compiled  an inventory  of  its antique glass col-
lection  in the  1930s and  that  they had  no  copy of  the  inventory  list or  the
work that  Dr. Zahn  had done for  them.

According to documents now on hand, this was simply not true. There
is no evidence that Dr. Zahn made an inventory for New York's Metropol-
itan Museum. Was the Metropolitan  actually looking for the inventories of
the Berlin antique glass collection which is said to have been destroyed in the
Friedrichshain Flaktower  in May  1945? This entire scenario continues to re-
main a strange and inexplicable mystery. It is even more odd as the East Ger-
mans later published  the  story  that  the library was on  a barge that  sank in
the Elbe River. Why  did they do so—contrary  to the better evidence? This
author himself  has knowledge otherwise as, in 1992 while visiting a Moscow
antiquarian  bookstore, he purchased  a book  from  Dr. Zahn's library.

Crate  "A 66" contained  the largest selection  of  gold  and jewelry  from
the  Antique  Collection. This  crate  was opened  at  the British  Art  Reposi-
tory, Schloss  Celle  in  1947, and  it  was found  that  162 pieces  of  gold  were
missing. Possibly, these losses did not happen in the British Art  Repository
but  occurred before  the crate arrived there on January 23, 1946. What  hap-
pened between the time of  its departure  from  Berlin in April  1945 and this
date  can  not  be  reconstructed. To  this  very  day,  no  item  of  this  missing
gold has ever been offered  on  the world's art  market.88

One of  the most famous  collections of  the Antiques department is the
Hildesheimer  Silver Find—a  complete  set of  silver banquet  service  from
the  time  of  Caesar  Augustus  found  outside  the  Roman  borders  in  Ger-
many. Most  of  the  collection  was returned  to  Berlin  via the Schloss  Celle
except  for  the  most  important  piece,  a  large  silver  bowl  known  as  the
"Krater."89 This item is still missing. One document  in Berlin states that the
Krater  had  been  stored  at  the  Flaktower  Zoo  and  was taken  by the  Rus-
sians, while  another  document  maintains  that  the  bowl  was stored  in  the
New  Mint  strongroom  at the  Reichsbank.

3.2  PAINTING  GALLERY

A  cross-section  of  434 pieces  of  European  fine  art  paintings  of  the  thir-
teenth to eighteenth  centuries, many in large canvas format,  are said to have

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

3 26

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

FIGURE  6.

RITUAL VESSEL,  CHINA,

SHANG  DYNASTY,

ERLIGANG  PERIOD,  CA.

FIFTEENTH  CENTURY  B.C.

BRONZE,  HEIGHT:  31.7  CM.

©  STAATLICHE MUSEEN ZU

BERLIN,  PREUfilSCHER

KULTURBESITZ

been  destroyed  in  the  Friedrichshain  bunker  fire.  However,  there  are
significant  clues which indicate that  all the paintings were evacuated to  the
area  west  of  the  Elbe  River  with  the  help  of  a  military  train  in  March
1945-'0

Other  extremely  valuable  properties  of  the  Painting  Gallery  are  nine
Gobelin tapestries  of  gold, silver, and  wool which were produced  in Brus-
sels  between  1517—1520 based  on  original  sketches  by Raphael  (figure  3).
The Gobelins were purchased  in England in 1844. Some former  owners in-
clude  English  monarchs  Henry  VIII  (1500—1550)  and  Charles  I (1625—
1649). Those  tapestries  are also said to have been burned  at the  Friedrich-
shain Flaktower, but  a number  of  rolled Gobelins were transported  by the
military  train together  with the paintings.91

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

327

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

3.3  MUSEUM  OF  APPLIED  ARTS  (sCHLOfiMUSEUM)

A  large  quantity  of  prominent  pieces  of  European  applied  art  from  the
Medieval Age to the twentieth century is still missing, including the chapel
cross  of  the  treasure  of  Basel  Cathedral  (figure  4).  One  other  piece,  an
ivory  elephant  tusk  incorporated  into  silver  decoration,  part  of  the  so-
called Lixneburger Ratssilber collection, was also evacuated to western Ger-
many and  is still missing. AH the  other parts of  the  Lixneburger  Ratssilber
collection  were returned  to Berlin via Merkers  and  the Wiesbaden  CCP.

3.4  MUSEUM  FOR  THE  ART  OF  INDIA

Two hundred eighty-eight art works of  the greatest importance  originating
from  the subcontinent  of  India  and Southeast Asia, including sixty of  the
finest  Indian  stone  sculptures  (figure  5), are missing. The  missing  lot  in-
cludes some  1,350 objects  of  the  world  famous  "Turfan"  Collection.

3.5  MUSEUM  OF  EAST  ASIATIC  ART

The  collection of  this museum received its world importance from  its  for-
mer  director,  Otto  Kummel. 92  Only  10 percent  of  its  holdings  prior  to
World War II are now available in Berlin. Kummel  was not only the direc-
tor of  the Museum  of  East Asiatic Art  but  also director-in-general  of  the
Berlin State Museums. It  was he who, even at the beginning  of  1945, tried
to  convince  the  other  directors  to  evacuate  their  collections  to  the West.
Therefore,  it is not plausible to conclude that he left  90 percent of  the col-
lection  back in Berlin in the direct path  of  the Russians.

3.6  ETHNOLOGY  MUSEUM

Most of  the missing objects were the most valuable and irreplaceable in the
collection of  the Department of American Archaeology of  the Berlin State
Museums. Some  of  them had  not  been published  or  written  about  before
the  war. The  collection  included  several  capes  constructed  of  bright  bird
feathers,  mosaics  with  turquoise  incorporated  in mask  form,  and  the  un-
paralleled Aztec sundial of  serpentine stone with a relief  of  the God of  the
Sun,  known  as  the  famous  "Humboldt  Stone"  or  "Humboldt  Sundial"
(figure  7). A crate containing the entire gold collection has also been miss-
ing from  the India Department  since 1945.

3.7  PRE-  AND  EARLY  HISTORY  MUSEUM

Before the outbreak of World War II, this museum classified  about 3,500 ar-
chaeological  finds  as  irreplaceable.  More  than  1,500  objects  of  precious
metal  in  this  category  were  packed  in  three  crates  and  sealed. The  three
crates  were  seized  by  the  Russians  in  the  Flaktower  Zoo  and  flown  to
Moscow  in June  1945.93 Crate  number  MVF   1  held  the Treasure  of  Troy,

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

328

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

now  kept  in  the  Pushkin  Museum,  Moscow,  with  some  259 pieces  from
this  collection.94 The  other  objects  from  those  three  crates,  representing
more  than  80  percent  of  the  crate  contents,  remain  in  Russian  secrecy.
Among  all the  irreplaceable  objects  from  the  archaeological  finds  are  im-
portant  documents  of  European  prehistory,  of  which  only  33 percent  of
the material has been returned  to  Berlin.95

3.8  SCULPTURE  GALLERY

The  collections  of  this  gallery  came  from  the  famous  collections  of  the
former  Kaiser Friedrich Museum  and  the  Deutsches  Museum. These  col-
lections represented an excellent cross section of  European sculptures  from
the ninth  to the nineteenth  centuries, as well as representative  furnishings
of  the same time period. The most important pieces are still missing today.
Time  after  time,  we  are  told  that  they  were  lost  in  the  explosion  at  the
Friedrichshain Flaktower. Indeed, this department  did suffer  losses in  that
catastrophe,  and many pieces  damaged  by fire were returned  to  the  GDR
from  the USSR  in  1958. However,  another  part  of  these  collections  must
have been shipped to the Merkers mine in March 1945 where it disappeared
from  the relevant lists  and  in reality.96

The  objects  mentioned  above only give the particulars  of  some  outstand- 
ing examples of  property  owned by the Berlin State Museums  and missing
since 1945. Some Berlin curators today mistakenly or erroneously  maintain
that all the items lost during the war were actually destroyed. However, this
author has attempted  to show that this is highly unlikely.

During World War II the Germans  had  confiscated  many art  objects,
paintings,  and  furniture  as well  as libraries  and  archives. In  western  Eu-
rope, this confiscation  was restricted to private collections, especially those
which  were  owned  by  Jews.  Publicly  owned  collections,  museums,  and
church property  were generally protected  by an effective  military  "Kunst-
schutz," a German special unit, like the Allied MFA&A, that had first been
established  during World War I and  consisted  of  renowned  art historians,
archaeologists,  librarians,  and  archivists.97  In  the  occupied  countries  of
Eastern  Europe, however, the  Germans  established  a completely  opposite
policy concerning cultural heritage. Many private and publicly owned col-
lections, museum holdings, libraries, and archives were seized and  shipped
to  Germany.98

In  the  final  days  of  1939, the  Polish  government  in  exile had  already
compiled  details  of  these  expropriations  and  losses. Its  "Bureau  for  the
Revindication  of  Cultural  Losses" later also prepared  plans for  restitution
and reparations upon  the conclusion  of  the war. 99 At the close of  1941 and
in early 1942, one of  the  Polish  art  experts, Dr.  Charles  Estreicher,  visited

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

329

4.  CONCLUSION

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

FIGURE  7.

HUMBOLDT SUNDIAL,

MEXICO,  AZTEC, MID-

FOURTEENTH  CENTURY

A.D.  GREEN  STONE DISK

WITH  RELIEF  OF AZTEC

SUN  GOD TONATIUH.

PURCHASED BY

ALEXANDER  VON

HUMBOLDT  AND  BROUGHT

TO  BERLIN. MUSEUM  FUR

VOLKERUNDE,  BERLIN

CATALOGUE IV  CA 245.  ©

STAATUCHE  MUSEEN  ZU

BERLIN,  PREUfilSCHER

KULTURBESrrZ

the United  States  where he met many of  his American  colleagues, in par-
ticular Francis Henry Taylor of  the Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art in New
York  and  president  of  the  American  Association  of  Art  Museum  Direc-
tors.  Estreicher's  visit  was  very  influential  in  the  formation  of  a  special
committee  of  the  American  Council  of  Learned  Societies. 100 During  an-
other  stay  in  the  United  States  at  the  close  of  1942  and  in  early  1943,
Estreicher  submitted  a report  to  several  scientific  organizations  entitled
"The  Destruction  and  Plunder  by the  Germans  of Works  of  Art  and  the
Necessary Cultural Revindication Resulting from  It."101 The Poles had pre-
pared  a draft  proposal  of  a peace  treaty  with  Germany  that  listed  a large
quantity of  German museum collections which should be taken as cultural
compensation for Polish losses during the war. The annex of  this draft spe-
cifically listed the collections of the Berlin State Museums and the Dresden
State Museums. According to this list, the Berlin Kaiser Friedrich  Museum
would  give  "all  objects  save  for  the  German  school:  paintings"  and  the
Sculpture  Gallery  "all  save  the  German  school:  bronzes  and  sculpture."
Large parts of  the Egyptian  and Antique  departments, the  Schlofimuseum
and  the  world  famous  "16th century Brussels tapestry  series executed  after
the cartoons by Raphael, Apostolic Story" are also mentioned.102 What  de-
cisions  the  Allies  had  prepared  on  this  topic  for  the  armistice  were never
made  public,  but  the  Polish  Bureau  of  the  Revindication  of  Cultural
Losses  in London  later sent  a note stating  that  "the  demands  put  forth  in

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

33°

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

1941 are not  negotiable  on  the  international  arena. The  Allies  are ready  to
grant  us  far-reaching  cultural  reparations  but  are  not  inclined  to  remove
from  Germany  entire  museums  and  library  collections  found  in  Berlin,
Dresden  and Wroclaw."103

On December 8,1942, U.S. Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone,  "ex  officio"
chairman of the Board of Trustees of the National Gallery of Art  in Wash-
ington, proposed  to President  Roosevelt  the  establishment  of  an  "Ameri-
can Commission  for  the  Protection  and  Salvage of  Artistic  and  Historic
Monuments  in Europe." This  would later become  the so-called  "Roberts
Commission."104  In  an annex  to  this letter, Stone proposed  close  coopera-
tion with the British and (in a second letter, dated December 24,1942)  the
USSR  in order to  be prepared  after  the  armistice  with  Germany  for  repa-
ration  and  "restitution  in kind."

The American, British and Russian  Committees  for  the  Protection
and Salvage of  Artistic and Historic Monuments  should urge  that
the Armistice  terms  include the restitution  of  public  property
appropriated  by the Axis Powers. Where  it is not possible to  restore
such property, either because it has been destroyed  or  cannot  be
found,  restitution  in kind should be made by the Axis Powers to  the
countries  from  which the property  has been taken. In such cases,
the Subcommittees  of  Experts should recommend  to  the American,
British and Russian National  Committees  a list of  equivalent  works
of  art or historic documents  which should  be transferred  to  the
invaded countries  from  Axis museums  or from  the private  collections
of  Axis leaders.105

On June 23rd, 1943 the  establishment  of  the  "Roberts-

Commission" was approved by President Roosevelt  and  officially  it
was installed on August  20th, 1943.106

About the same time similar plans were developed in the Soviet Union.
On June  12, 1943, Igor Grabar,  an extremely  influential  art historian  in  the
USSR  and  a member  of  the  prestigious  Academie  of  Sciences,  proposed
the  establishment  of  a committee  to  list  all objects  that  should  be  taken
from  German  collections  after  the  war  for  "restitution  in  kind."107  This
proposal  coincides  completely  with  that  of  Chief  Justice  Stone  to  Presi-
dent Roosevelt on December  8, 1942:

Because the matter  of  collecting  equivalents  in certain  cases in  com-
pensation  for  artworks removed  or destroyed  by the GFO  (German-
fascist  occupiers)  was settled positively by the ESC  (Extraordinary
State Commission)  of  the CPC  (Council  of  People's  Commissars)
of  the USSR, I think  it is a timely measure to  establish now a special

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

331

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

Division  of  the ESC to make up  a list of  objects  in the museum
collections  of  Germany, Austria,  Italy, Hungary,  Romania,  and
Finland  that  could  be named  as eventual  equivalents.  Business
trips  abroad  wouldn't  be  necessary  for  the  conduct  of  this  work
because  complete  sets  of  the  catalogues  of  all European  museums
are in the  libraries  of  some Soviet  art  historians,  and  their  own
notes  contain  complete  information  about  these  museums. 108

Six months  earlier,  possibly  in  connection  with  Charles  Estreicher's  visit,
the American Council of  Learned Societies had decided to establish  "The
Committee  of  the American  Council  of  Learned  Societies on  the Protec-
tion  of  Cultural Treasures  in War Areas" at its annual meeting on January
29,  1943. William  Bell Dinsmoor,  Professor  of  Archaeology  at  Columbia
University, was named chairman of  the committee; Charles Rufus  Morey,109
vice  chairman;  and  Sumner  M.  Crosby  and  Rensselaer W.  Lee,  executive
secretaries. The  work  of  the  committee  was carried  out  by research assis-
tants, draftsmen,  and volunteer assistants for both Europe and the Far East.
Including  the  workers  classified  as volunteer  assistants, eighty-seven  mdi-
viduals participated  in the  activities of  the  committee.110

In  the months  following  Germany's  unconditional  surrender  on  May
7—9, 1945, an intensive  discussion  arose, especially in the United  States, as
to whether art, which was the undisputed property of  museums and private
individuals  in the  "Axis Powers," including  Germany, should  be taken  for
the purpose of  war reparations. Beginning in 1943, the Inter-Allied  "Euro-
pean  Advisory  Commission"  (EAC)  had  also  prepared  such  plans." 1 This
discussion  peaked  when,  on  November  6,  1945, a strict  order  came  from
Washington  for  the  director  of  the  Wiesbaden  CCP,  Capt. Walter  Ings
Farmer,  to  pack  immediately  in  bulk  some  202  Old  Master  paintings
owned  by the  Berlin State  Museums  and  stored  in the Wiesbaden  facility
and to  prepare this shipment  to  the United  States  "for  safekeeping."

Is it merely  a coincidence  that  exactly six months  after  Germany's de-
feat this order was given directing that objects of  German museums should
be  taken  for  "restitution  in  kind"  according  to  the  plans prepared  by the
EAC before  the war's end? Up  to  that  time  the EAC reparation  plans  had
not  been  approved,  but  the plan  clearly was put  into  effect. The  taking  of
objects for  "reparation" from  Germany's cultural heritage seemed to begin.
At that moment  in November  1945, all the MFA&A officers,  who met with
Walter  Farmer  at Wiesbaden  CCP  on  November  7, 1945, were  convinced
that this order from Washington really did not mean  "safekeeping" but was
the first step for  the taking of  German  art as war booty for American  mu-
seums. So nearly all the  MFA&A  officers  protested  by signing the  famous
"Wiesbaden  Manifesto,"  which  was  initiated  by Walter  Farmer.  In  their
protest  they wrote:

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

332

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

FIGURE  8.

HUMBOLDT  AXE. MEXICO,

OLMEC.  9OO—6OO B.C.

AXE  OF GREEN  STONE

AND  RELIEF  WITH

UNDECIPHERED  HIERO-

GLYPHS,  PURCHASED BY

ALEXANDER VON

HUMBOLDT  AND BROUGHT

TO  BERLIN. MUSEUM FUR

VOLKERKUNDE,  BERLIN

CATALOGUE  IV CA 4 0 3 4.

©  STAATLICHE MUSEEN

ZU  BERLIN,  PREUfllSCHER

KULTURBESITZ

We wish to state that from  our own knowledge, no historical grievance
will rankle so long, or be the cause of so much justified  bitterness,
as the removal, for any reason, of a part of the heritage of any nation,
even if that heritage may be interpreted as a prize of war... ."2

Nevertheless, all these 202 paintings were shipped to the United  States
in November  and December  1945. They  all finally returned to Germany in
1948 and 1949. Even as late as July 8, 1946, the question  of  restitution-in-
kind, which  clearly meant  the taking  of German-owned  art as compensa-
tion for war losses, remained on the agenda of the Allied Control  Council
in  Germany. There  was a recommendation  that  this  material  should  be
taken from five categories of  German  art113:

(1)  works of art by the masters of painting, engraving, and
sculpture;
(2)  important  works of masters of  applied  art, and outstanding
examples of national art;
(3)  historical relics;
(4)  manuscripts  and rare books;
(5)  objects of importance to the history of sciences.

This  restitution-in-kind  policy  was prepared  by all the Allies  in de-
tailed account  even before  the war's end, as well as after.  However, it never
became  official. The Allies  never  could  agree  on the definition  of  such a
policy.  After  all, it  is strikingly  obvious  to  this  author  that  most  of  the
"cultural targets," such as objects that had been listed before the end of the
war by all sides, disappeared  immediately  into various  "pools." These vari-
ous restitution  pools have remained  secret until  this day. The  questionable
disappearance  and fate  of  what  are, in many  cases, the most  unusual, the
most valuable, and the irreplaceable  works have remained a complete mys-
tery. But who holds the keys to the treasure houses filled to the brim at the
end of and after World War II?

TREASURE  OF THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

333

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

APPENDIX:
BERLIN  STATE
MUSEUMS
DEPARTMENT
LIST
(EVACUATIONS
TO  MERKERS,
J945)

Department
1) Egyptian
2) Antique
3) Sculpture

Symbol

Ag
ANT
SK

4)  Islamic

5) Schloss  Museum

IA

SM

6) Painting  Gallery

GG

NG
7) National  Gallery
8) Copper  Engraving Gallery  KK

MVF
9) Pre- and Early  History
10) Ethnographic Department  MV
OAK
AFR
EUR
TU
MVS
FL

East Asian Art
Africa
Eurasian
Indian  (Turfan)
South  Seas

11) Arsenal  ("Zeughaus")

Count
37 crates
91 crates
441 crates  (including
7  crates from  the Early
Christian and Byzantine
Department)
38 crates
10 rolls of  rugs
122 crates
2 baskets
25 packages
130 rolls of rugs
97 crates  (Merkers)
45 crates  (Ransbach)
393 paintings (not packed)
41  crates
1384  maps
6  crates

5 crates
57  crates
3 crates
22  crates
10 crates
37  crates

NOTES

1. See Konstantin Akinsha and Grigor
utiful Loot (Random  House, Ne
York  1995), for discussion of the plans and operation  of the Soviet Trophies Com-
mission in the Soviet occupation zone of Germany from  1945 and later.

ii Kozlov,  Bea

2. See Konstantin  Akinscha, Gngoni  Koslow, and Clemens Toussaint,  Operation Beute-
kunst 9—11 (Niirnberg  1995) (in German)  (listing  material  in the different  Russian
archives).

3. Akinsha and Kozlov, supra note 1 at 192.

4. Dokumente zur Aussenpolitik der Regierung der Deutschen  Demokratischen  Re-
publik, BandVTII, 504—507 (1961). Part of this protocol was a complete listing of cer-
tain pieces returned to the GDR. Those lists giving an exact accounting are not avail-
able and are considered missing in the now open GDR files of the German Bundesarchiv
[National archive].

5. Akinsha and Kozlov, supra note 1 at 139—43.

6. Klaus Goldmann  and Wolfgang  Schneider, Das Goli des Priamos 54 (1995) (photo of
document). See also Klaus Goldmann, The Trojan Treasures in Berlin: The  Disappear-

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

334

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

ance and Search for the Objects after World War II, in The Spoib of War:  World War Hand
its Aftermath: The  Loss,  Reappearance,  and Recovery  of Cultural  Property  200—203  (Elizabeth
Simpson  ed., Harry N. Abrams, New York 1997).

7.  Foreign  Relations  of  the  United  States; Diplomatic  Papers: The  Conferences  at
Malta  and Yalta 1945 (1955).

8. Akinsha  and Kozlov, supra note  1, at 261—62, describe  Col. Andrei Belokopitov as:
"Lieutenant colonel/colonel, head of  the trophy brigade active in Meseritz and Berlin.
His brigade discovered the collection of the Kaiser Friedrich Museum in Posen stored
in an underground shelter near Hohenwalde (actually, near Meseritz, east of  the Oder
River—author's  note),  the  first  important  depository  in  German  territory  to  be
cleaned  out  by  the  Arts  Committee  brigades.  Later  he removed  art  works  from  the
Zoo  Flakturm  in Berlin and sent the Trojan  gold and paintings  from  German  private
collections to Moscow. In  civilian life, (he was) manager  of  the Moscow Art Theater
(MKhAT)."

9. Otto  Kiimmel (1874—1952) first came to the  Berlin State Museums system in 1906
as an assistant  in  the  Ethnographic  Department,  where he specialized  in East  Asian
Art.  In  1924, he  was appointed  director  of  the  newly  founded  department  of  East
Asian  Art  and  in  1933 became the  general director  of  the  Berlin  State  Museums.  He
held this position until his dismissal by the Allies in July 1945. Kiimmel was a world-
renowned specialist  in classical Chinese and Japanese  art.

10. Akinsha and Kozlov, supra note  1, at  141.  "Andrei Belokopitov  was convinced  there
was another shelter somewhere. Otto  Kummel, the director of  the Berlin State Muse-
ums,  had given him a list of  objects  evacuated  from  Berlin, and it included many that
weren't on Rave's list of  artworks removed by the Allies."

11. Paul Ortwin Rave (1893—1962) was an art historian. A protege of  Ludwig Justi, the
famous  director of  the Berlin National  Gallery, Rave first became a staff  member  of
this museum  in  1922. He  was appointed  curator  in 1934 and became the first postwar
director  of  the National  Gallery  in  1945. After  1949, he published  the  notable  work
Kunstdiktatur  im Dritten  Reich,  in  which  he refers  to  his  own  bad  experiences  with  the
Nazi art  dictatorship.

12. Irene  Kiihnel-Kunze,  Bergung-Evakuierung-Riickfuhrung.  Die Berliner Museen  in den Jahren
l939~l959  33~37 (Mann,  Berlin 1984). See also the reports of  Paul Ortwin  Rave in Die
Bergung  von  Kunstwerken der Staatlichen  Museen zu Berlin im Kalibergwerk Kaiseroda zu Merkers
(The  Safe  Storage  of  the  Artworks  of  the  Berlin  State  Museums  in  the  Potassium
Mine  Kaiseroda  at Merkers), Part  1, April  12, 1945, and  Part  2, April  24,  1945.  These
documents can be found  in the Zentralarchiv, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin,  Preufiischer
Kulturbesitz, V4.3.1. GA-DOK 375.

13. Lynn H.  Nicholas,  The Rape ofEuropa: The Fate of Europe's  Treasures in the  Third Reich and
the Second  World  War 338-39 (Knopf, New York 1994).

14.  Geschichte des  VEB Kaliwerk "Karl Marx"  Sollstedt 83 (Herausgegeben  von der Betriebs-
parteiorganisation  der SED und von der Werkleitung  1970).

15. Ernst Gall (1888—1958) was an art historian and, during World War II, held the po-
sition of  director of the Prussian Castles and Gardens Administration, responsible for
the safekeeping of the coffins  of  the Prussian kings, the Prussian crown jewels, and art
works in Bernterode.

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

335

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

16. Akinsha  and Kozlov, supra note  1  at  141—42. "The  mine was on fire when the  com-
mittee arrived. The  village was shrouded  in black smoke, and the ground  shook as ex-
plosion  followed  explosion  deep  underground.  It  was impossible  to  get  near  the  en-
trance to  the mine."

17. Willy Gottschalk, general manager of  the freight  transport  company  "Henze AG"
during World War II and in the years after  the war, was the civilian in charge of evac-
uation  of  the Prussian State Museums  as well as the Prussian State Library, Academy
of  Sciences, etc.

18. Gottschalk  Report,  Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin, Preufiischer  Kul-
turbesitz  No. V4.3.2. GA-LN  79.

19. See Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary  Force, G-4  Division: Report  cov-
ering the  discovery, removal, transport  and  storage  of  gold, silver, platinum  and  cur-
rency, fine art treasures and German patent records from  salt mines in the Merkers and
Heringen area to the Frankfurt  area in Germany. National  Archives, Washington D.C.,
Record  Group RG  331, Records of  Allied Operational  and Occupation  Headquarters,
World War  II,  SHAEF,  G-5,  Monuments,  Fine  Arts  and  Archives  Section,  Subject
File, MFA&A Reports, AMG  290.  See also Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche Museen  zu  Berlin,
Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  No. V.4.3.2. GA-LN  79.

20. Werner Veick (born  1890) was treasury cashier for  the German Reichsbank, Berlin,
and  was captured  by American  forces  at the Merkers  mine.

21. See supra note  19: statement  of  Dr. Werner Veick,  Merkers,  Germany  on  April 10,
1945, Appendix  IV, at 4.  "In the meantime, Thorns, who was very anxious to leave, ar-
rived with a Mr. Gottschalk,  who was in charge of  the transportation  of  the paintings
and the art treasures of  Reimer. I was in charge of  the truck  to bring the art  treasures
from  Berlin. A concern  by the name  of  Hinze  brought  the art  treasures here." Albert
Thorns was in charge of  the Precious Metals Department  of  the German  Reichsbank.
Otto  Reimer  was chief  cashier  of  the  Currency  Department  of  the  German  Reichs-
bank. For Willy  Gottschalk,  see supra note 17.

22. Bernhard  Rust  (1883 — 1945) was German  and  Prussian  Minister  of  Culture  (Sci-
ence, Education  and Adult  Education)  from  1934 until his death  in 1945.

23. See supra note 12.

24. Rave's Diaries, Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche Museen  zu  Berlin, Preufiischer  Kulturbe-
sitz No. V4.3.

25.  "Personliche  Aufzeichnungen  P.O. Rave iiber  die Auslagerung  in  den  Bergwerken
Grube  Ransbach,  Grube  Kaiseroda,"  Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin,
Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  No. V4.3.1. GA-DOK-370.

26. See Rave Report,  supra note  12, Part I, at 4.  "Die  von Restaurator Tschirch  von der
National-Galerie  beigegebene Liste mit den Namen  der Kunstwerke  ist die einzige die
ich  erhielt;  die  anderen  fuhren  nur  die  Nummern  der  Kisten  an  oder  geben  nur  die
Anzahl  der  Gepackstticke."

27. Id. "Agypten: 1  Kiste Nr.  34 mit  der Nefretete.  . . ."

28. See supra notes  12 and 25.

29. This  list  mentions  only  the  departments  that  evacuated  part  of  their  collections
to  Rave's art repository  in Merkers.

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

336

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

30. See  "List  of  the  Commanding  General,  European Theater  Operation,  Record  of
Property  in Custody, Key to  Check  List,  Loading  and  Unloading,  Art Works  of  the
Municipal  Museums  of  Berlin  in  Kaiseroda  Salt Works  at  Merkers."  Zentralarchiv,
Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin, Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  No.  V4.3.1. GA-DOK-305.  See
also National  Archives, Washington,  D.C.,  File  OMGUS,  Box 74, MFA&A  (Micro-
fiche in German  Bundesarchiv, Koblenz).

31. See Rave Report,  supra note  12, Part  II, at  2.  "Zugleich  stellten  sich  mir  zwei  Her-
ren vor, die Loutenents Stout und Dunn, denen die Uberfuhrung  der Kunstwerke nach
Frankfurt  aufgetragen  war. Auf  Grund  der  in  meinen  Handen  befindlichen  Geleits-
listen  der  einzelnen  Transporte  wurden  nunmehr  neue  Listen  nach  besonderem
Schema aufgestellt,  die fur jede Abteilung der Museen die Bergungsstiicke nach  Num-
mern geordnet aufzahlten,  die der Nationalgalerie  alphabetisch nach  Kiinstlernamen."

32. See supra note 30.

33. Thomas  Carr  Howe  Jr., Salt Mines and Castles (Bobbs-Merrill,  Indianapolis and N ew
York  1946).

34. Id. at 48—53.

35. Walter Ings Farmer,  The Safekeepers, A Memoir of the Arts at the End of World War II131 (un-
published  manuscript,  as told  to Ruth  K. Meyer, July 1994, Cincinnati, Ohio,  USA).
"In his book Howe says that he and Lamont  Moore  spent an evening together  study-
ing a list of  the pictures stored at Wiesbaden. He typed out a tentative selection.' What
list did  they study? My  staff  had  not yet  opened  all the crates while doing their  con-
servation  inspections  so an itemized  crate list simply did  not  exist."

36. See Headquarters  US Group  CC, Finance  Division. Subject: Receipt  for  Arts  Ob-
jects Transferred  from  the Custody of  Capt. W. A. Dunn, Finance Division, US Group
CC, to the Custody of  Major  Mason Hammond, Reparation, Deliveries & Restitution
Division,  US Group  CC  this   22nd day of  June  1945. Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen
zu  Berlin,  Preuflischer  Kulturbesitz  No.  V4.3.1.  GA-DOK  286.  See also National
Archives, Washington  D.C. File  OMGUS,  Box 160, MFA&A (Microfiche  in  German
Bundesarchiv, Koblenz).

37. See supra notes  12, 25, and 30.

38. Id.

39. See supra note  36 at  1 — 2.  "Agyptische  Abteilung:  113 wooden  boxes,  contents  un-
known  . ..  40  metal  boxes,  contents  unknown  . ..  8 large  wooden  crates,  contents
unknown."

40. Klaus Goldmann  andGunterWermusch,  Vernichtet,  Verschollen,  Vermarktet: Kunstschdtze
itn Visier von Politik und Geschaft 91 (MUT-Verlag, Asendorf  1992).

41. Rudolf  Anthes  (1896—1985) joined  the scientific  staff  of  the Berlin Egyptian  De-
partment  in 1929. From  1945 to  1950, he served as the director  of  the  department.

42. Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Agyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung, Archiv.

43. See National Archives, Record Group  331, SHAEF G-5, Financial Branch; for a copy,
see Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin,  Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  No.  V4.3.1.
GA-LN 79.

44. Bernard  Bernstein,  a graduate of  Columbia  Law School, headed  the Finance  Di-

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

337

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

vision  in  occupied  Germany,  Finance  and  Property  Control  Office,  G-5,  Supreme
Headquarters  Allied  Expeditionary  Forces  and  was  in  charge  of  the  capture  of  all
gold,  foreign  currency,  and  art  treasures  to  be  found  in  German  repositories. See
Nicholas, supra note  13 at 333—36.

45.  Letter  of  National  Archives  (Archives II Textual  Reference  Branch) of  March  n,
1997,  to the  author.

46.  See  Philip  Kopper,  America's National  Gallery  of Art:  A  Gift  to the  Nation  (Harry  N.
Abrams,  New York  1991).

47.  Kiihnel-Kunze,  supra note  12 at  18.

48.  Id. at 20—25.

49.  Gottschalk  Report,  supra note  18.  "Wintershall  A.G. Werk  Kaiseroda,  Merkers/
Thiiringen  Schachtanlage  II/III,   ca.  45  Lastziige  bezw.  Omnibusse  wertvollster,
Gemalde  ec. der Nationalgalerie  Berlin  eingelagert."

50. Rave  Report,   supra note  12, Part I.

51.  Staatliche  Museen   zu  Berlin,  Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz,  Dokumentation   der
Verluste,  Band  IV, Museum   fur Vor-  und Friihgeschichte  15—16 (1996).

52. Gottschalk  Report,   supra note 18.

53. Rave  Report,  supra note  12, Parts  I and II.

54.  Letter  to  Klaus  Goldmann  from   the eyewitness,  a former  German  airman,  July  12,
1992.

55. Kiihnel-Kunze,  supra note  12 at 61.

56. New York Times,  May 2, 1945, at 4, col. 7  (copy  in Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen
zu  Berlin,  Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  N o. V.4.3.2. GA-LN  76).

57.  See  Letter  to  Goldmann,  supra note   54. Personal  interviews  of  the  former  airman
with  the author,  1992—1994.

58. See Gottschalk  Report,   supra note 18.

59. Rave  Report,  supra note  12, Part  I. "Am 24. Marz   kam ein Lastzug  mit 79 Biicher-
kisten  der Bibliothek  Rust.  . . ."

60.  Rave  Report,  supra note   12, Part  II. "Bei Dunkelwerden  war alles  emgeladen,  . . .
die  23 Rustschen Teppiche,  nicht  aber  sein  Koffer   und die 79  Kisten  seiner  Privatbib-
liothek.  . . ."

61. See Akinsha  and Kozlov,  supra note  1  at 141.

62. See supra note  51 at 11.

63.  Letter  of  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  November   5, 1985: "Da wir  nicht  im Besitze des
Archivs  der Deutschen  Reichsbank  sind,  konnen   wir Ihnen  weitergehende  Auskiinfte
leider nicht geben. Wir  stellen anheim, iiber die Botschaft  derVereinigten  Staaten  in Bonn
weitere Auskiinfte  iiber den Verbleib  von Akten  in US-Besitz  einzuholen."  Zentralarchiv,
Staatliche Museen  zu Berlin, Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  No.  V4.3.1. GA-DOK  437.

64. See supra note  19, at 10: "15 April  1945:12. (a) Convoy  completed  loading  of gold and
currency  at 0745, including  three  truckloads   of  fine  arts  which  were  available, since  all
10-ton  trucks  were  overloaded  approximately  10%."

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

338

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

65. The Berlin  collections  are listed  as  follows:

Paintings, uncrated 
Boxes of  prints  & drawings 
Cases  of  miscellaneous  objects,including  some  paintings  
Textiles 

TOTAL 

393
2,091
1,214
140

3,838

See  document,  Supreme  Headquarters,  Allied  Expeditionary  Force,   G-5 Internal  Af-
fairs  Branch,  Monuments,  Fine  Arts   and Archives,  23 April  1945. Subject:  Storage   of
Works  of  Art at  Frankfurt.  National  Archives, Washington,   D.C. Record  Group 331,
SHAEF,  G-5 Monuments  Fine  Arts   and Archives  Sect  A MG 220   Correspondence
Frankfurt.  Copy  in Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen   zu Berlin, Preufiischer  Kulturbe-
sitz  N o. V4.3.2. GA-LN  79.

66. See Rave  Report,  supra note  12, Part  I. " . ..   konnten  die 45 Kisten  der  Gemaldega-
lene  am anderen  Morgen,  Dienstag   13. Marz,  in dem etwa 2 km von  Hattorf  entfern-
ten  Schacht  Ransbach  eingefahren   und in   einem  der Staatsbibliothek  zugewiesenen
Stollen  gestapelt  werden.  .. ."

67. See Rave  List,  supra note  29, Cover.

68. See Rave  Report,  supra  note  12, Part  II. "Am Sonntag  15. April  begann  man  damit,
einenTeil  des Bergungsgutes mit beiden  Schachten  aus der Grube  herauszufahren,  und
zwar  die Mappenkasten  [boxes]  des Kupferstichkabinettes  und der  Staatl.  Kunstbib-
liothek.  . . ."

69. See supra  note 44.

70.  See supra note  30, Cover.

71. Michael J. Kurtz,  Nazi  Contraband: American Policy on the Return of European  Cultural  Trea-
sures, >945—l9jj  84—99  (Garland,  New York  1985);  Klaus  Goldmann,  Patrimoine,
Oeuvres  d'art  et prises  de guerre:  1945—1995, in Encyclopaedia  Universalis  272—75  (Paris
1996); Archdologisches Nachrichtenblatt,  Band  1, 219—24  (especially  at 220) (Berlin  1996).

72. Memorandum  on Principles for the Restitution  of Works   of Art, Books, Archives,
and  other  Cultural  Property,  Washington,  October  11,  1944, in  Foreign  Relations  of the
United States—Diplomatic Papers  J944, Vol. II, 1041—44.

73.  See  document,  Movement  of  works  of  art.  Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen  zu
Berlin, Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  No. V4.3.1. GA-DOK  315 (National  Archives, Wash-
ington, D.C,  OMGUS  Box 74, MFA&A).

74.  Correspondence  between Headquarters  U.S. Group CC and Control  Commission
for  Germany  (British  Element), between  November  8, 1945, and  November  30, 1945:
"With  reference  to  recommendations  contained  in  the  attached  memorandum  of  8
November,  General Clay has stated that he is not  in agreement  with the return  of  the
art objects captured by SHAEF now in American possession to the British at this time.
He states that the art objects now in American possession were captured by the Amer-
ican Army; that  those  art  objects  which were captured  by the  21st Army  Group  (Bri-
tish) were retained by the British and none of  then turned in to the common  SHAEF
pool. He, therefore,  intends to retain possession of  all art objects now in the hands of
the American  Army, sending  such  of  those  as he sees fit to  America  for  safekeeping.
(signed)  O.P. Echols, Major  General,  U.S. Army, Assistant  Deputy  Military  Gover-

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

339

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

nor."  National  Archives  RG  260,  OMGUS  Decimal  File  1945/46,  Box  9,  AG  007
(copy  in  Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin,  Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  No.
V4.3.2. GA-LN  67).

75. See Akinsha and  Kozlov, supra note  1  at 79.

76.  News  clippings  from  two unknown  U.S. newspapers,  March  28, 1946, in  private
Berlin mayoral files (copy  in Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin,  Preufiischer
Kulturbesitz  No. V.4.3.2. GA-LN  17).

77.  Document  No.  951, The  Conference  of  Berlin  (The  Potsdam  Conference)  1945,
Vol. I, 906—12 (Government  Printing  Office, Washington  i960).

78.  See supra notes  12, 25, and 30.

79.  See Shipment  List  of  Lt. Lamont  Moore  received on  May  14, 1945 by Capt. Wm.
Dunn,  (copy  in Zentralarchiv, Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin, Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz
No.  V4.3.2. GA-LN  160).

80. See supra note 51.

81. Kiihnel-Kunze, supra note  12 at 44.

82. Cay Friemuth, Diegeraubte Kunst 70 (Westermann,  Braunschweig 1989).

83. U.S. Military  Law 52, Blocking and  Control  of  Property.

84.  For the United  States, see supra note 44; for  the British, see Friemuth, supra note 82,
at  189; for  the Soviets, see Akinsha  and Kozlov, supra note  1  at 19—29.

85. Document  No. 964, supra note 77 at 923—25.

86.  Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin, Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz,  Dokumentation  der Ver-
luste, Band I, Gemaldegalerie  (1995), Band IV-Museum  fur Vor- und  Friihgeschichte
(1996). Volumes  II  and  III  (Nationalgalerie  and  Skulpturengalerie)  are not  yet  pub-
lished. The  manuscripts  for  thirteen  other  departments  of  the Berlin State  Museums
are in progress.

87.  See Zentralarchiv,  Staatliche  Museen  zu  Berlin,  Preufiischer  Kulturbesitz  No.
V4.3.2. GA-LN 1.

88.  Lothar  Pretzell, Das Kunstgutlager Schlofi Cells 194.J  bis 195&  6 4 - 66  (Pohl-Druckerei
und  Verlagsunstalt,  Celle   1958).  See  also  Adolf  Greifenhagen,  Goldschmuck   aus dem
Berliner  Antiquarium,  in Archaologischer Anzeiger  1961,  81—130.

89. Ulrich  Gehrig,  Hildesheimer Silberfund in der Antikenabteilung Berlin (Gebr.  Mann,  Berlin
1967).

90.  Cf. supra note  54 and  accompanying  text.  Letters  from  the restorer Tschirch,  who
was responsible for the paintings, to his wife in April 1945 indicate that the room in the
Flatktower  Friedrichshain  where the paintings  were deposited  was empty. See Giinter
Wermusch,  Tatumstande unbeVannt: Kunstraub unter den Augen der Alliierten 166—74  (Wester-
mann,  Braunschweig 1991).

91. Statement  of  the eyewitness {supra note  54) to  the author  in 1993.

92.  See supra note  9.

93. See Klaus  Goldmann,  Schliemanns  Gold and die Schatze Alteuropas aus dem Museum fir Vor-
und Friihgeschichte (von Zabern,  Mainz   1993).

KLAUS  GOLDMANN

340

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377

94-  See Der  Schatz  aus Troja,   Schliemann  und  der Mythos des Priamos-CoUes, Katalogbuch
Ausstellung  in  Moskau  1996/97  (Belser-Verlag,  Stuttgart  and  Zurich  1996).

95. See supra note 51.

96.  Cf. discussion  supra  note  30.

97.  Paul  A. Methuen,  Normandy Diary  xxi (R.  Hale,  London  1952).

98.  Lynn  H.  Nicholas, World War  II and  the Displacement  of  Art  and  Cultural  Prop-
erty,  in Simpson,  supra  note  6 at 39—45.

99. Wojciech  Kowalski, Liquidation  of the Effects of World War II  in the Area of Culture 7  (In-
stitute  of  Culture, Warsaw  1994).

100.  Id. at  19. "An  indirect  result  of  Charles  Estreicher's  visit  to  the  United  States  was
the  establishment  of  the  Committee  for  the  Protection  of  Cultural Treasures  in  War
Areas, set up  by the American  Council  of  Learned  Societies. It  devoted  itself  to  draw-
ing  up  detailed  maps  of  the  distribution  of  historic  objects  and  museums  in  the  ter-
ritories  of  the  countries  of  Europe,  found  in  the  territory  of  the  area  of  operations
of  the  American  Army."  Id. at  50.

101. Id. at  44.

102.  Id. at  42. Compare   supra  section  3.2, Painting  Gallery.

103. Id. at 32.

104.  Interest  of  the  United  States in Measures  for  the  Protection  and  Salvage of  Artis-
tic  and  Historic  Monuments  in War  Areas, in   Foreign Relations of the  United States,  Diplo-
matic  Papers  1943, Vol. I,  469—70.

105. Id. at  471—72. Cf.  Lynn  Nicholas,   supra note  13, at 212.

106.  Id. at  475—80.

107.  Akmscha  and  Koslow,   supra note  2 at 13.

108.  Akmsha  and  Kozlov,   supra note  1 at 21—22.

109.  Professor  Charles  Rufus  Morey, head  of  the  Department  of  Art  and  Archaeology
of  Princeton  University.

110.  Leslie  I. Poste,  The Development of U.S.  Protection of Libraries and Archives in Europe during
World War II80  (U.S. Army  Civil  Affairs  School,  Fort  Gordon,  Georgia,  1958, rev.  ed.
1964).

111. See Kurtz,  supra note  71 at 75jff.

112. See Walter  I. Farmer,  Custody  and  Controversy  at the Wiesbaden  Collecting  Point,
in Simpson,  supra note  6 at 131—34.

113. Kurtz,  supra  note  71 at  149—51.  "This  July  8,  1946  U.S.  counter-proposal  was  de-
signed  to  meet  French  demands  for  compliance  with  the  Allied  Control  Council  de-
cision  to  issue  instruction  on  restitution-in-kind  and  at  the  same  time,  limit  the  pro-
gram. General  Harper  presented  this paper  on July 9 and plainly told  his colleagues  the
United  States  would  consider  claims  only  for  items  of  great  rarity  and  would  decide
each  case  on  its  own  merits."  From  the  Minutes  of  the  Sixty-Third  Coordinating
Committee  of  the  Allied  Control  Council,  Germany  ( C O R C)  meeting,  8 July  1946,
File  C O R C / M 46  (50—67), Records  of  the  Allied  Control  Council,  Germany, 1941—
1950,  RG 43.

TREASURE  OF  THE  BERLIN  STATE  MUSEUMS

341

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770377


