International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Interpreting umeewarra mission

Jane James

To cite this article: Jane James (1999) Interpreting umeewarra mission, International Journal of
Heritage Studies, 5:3-4, 203-212, DOI: 10.1080/13527259908722268
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527259908722268

Published online: 18 Apr 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 140

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

Interpreting  Umeewarra Mission

Jane James

Abstract
Indigenous occupation of Australia for  at least the last 60,000  years, was followed by
European settlers in  1788.  Christian missions and government reserves established at
this  time,  often  removed Aboriginal children from  their parents, families  and land.
These children are 'the Stolen Generation'. One such mission was  Umeewarra Mission
at Port Augusta in South Australia,  which  was established by  the Brethren church in
the  1930s  and operated until  recently. Some  of the former  children who  were raised
at  the  Mission  have  established a  committee,  the  Umeewarra Nguraritja  (meaning
'place' or  'home'),  to  oversee the  Mission  site.  The  Umeewarra Nguraritja  wants  to
establish an  Interpretive Centre to  tell  the  Aboriginal and missionary  history  of  the
Mission.  It  needs  to  preserve  and  interpret  the  mission  culture  in  a  way  which
maintains  the  integrity  of  that  history  and presents  the  material  culture,  the oral
histories and stories from  former  children of  the  mission, sensitively  to  visitors. This
paper  reports  on  the  research process  being  used  for  strategic  planning  of  site
management  and  interpretation.  The paper  addresses in  particular  the  need for  the
researchers  to be sympathetic to both indigenous and missionary cultures, playing both
supportive  and  leadership  roles  in  order  to  give  something  back  to  the  'stolen
generation'.

Aboriginal people have lived in Australia, acting as custodians of the land, for at
least the last  60,000 years.1 Following the initial  'discovery' of Australia by the
Dutch in the  1600s, and ultimately  by the English in the  1700s, settlement by
Europeans, predominantly  the English, followed  in  1788.

Matthew  Flinders  was  the  first  European  known  to  have  explored  Spencer
Gulf, including the site of Port Augusta, in  1802,2 and he was followed  later by
other  sea-borne  parties,  mainly  in  the  1830s  when  South  Australia  was
established  as  a  free  state  and  British  colony  in  1836,  and  by  the  explorer
Edward John Eyre in  1839.3 By 1842, the Port Augusta  area was one that was
frequented  by  trading  ships  and  drovers  servicing  the  grazing  lands  of  the
Flinders  Ranges.  Settlement  in  the  area  followed  soon  after  so  that  supplies
could  be  brought  by  sea  for  the  pastoral  properties  developing  in  the  Flinders
Ranges  and for the export of wool. At this time South Australia  was the home
of as many as 50 distinct Aboriginal groups* and the area  around Port Augusta
had long been used as a meeting place for local Aboriginal people.

Early  settlement  in  Australia  was  accompanied  by  a  lack  of  understanding
and appreciation of Aboriginal culture, land confiscation  and introduced disease,
resulting in  a negative impact  on many Aboriginal groups. What  also  followed
was  a  process  of  persecution,  rejection  and  destruction  of  much  of  the
Aboriginal people of Australia  and  their  culture. Their  culture  and beliefs were
largely  ignored,  and  their  needs  and  rights,  as  the  indigenous  people  of
Australia,  were  forgotten.  Over  the  200  years  of white  settlement,  Aboriginal
people  have  experienced  rejection,  a  process  of  assimilation  and,  currently,
moves towards reconciliation.5

IJHS 5 (3 & 4)  203-212  © Intellect  Ltd  1999

203

Key  Words
Aboriginal
Australia
'Stolen  Generation'
Christian  mission
Cultural  interpretation
Cultural  tourism
Heritage
Authenticity

1 

Ibid,  and  J.  Mulvaney
& J.  Kamminga,
Prehistory of Australia,
Allen  & Unwin,  1999.

2  M. Flinders, A Voyage
to Terra Australis, Lon-
don,  1814.

3  R.J. Anderson,  Solid
Town,  The History of
Port Augusta, pub. R.
J. Anderson,  1988.

4  S.J. Hemming  & P.A.
Clark, Aboriginal Peo-
ple of South Australia,
Commonwealth  of
Australia,  1992.

5  C. Mattingly  & K.

Hampton,  Survival In
Our Own Land,  Wake-
field Press,  1988.

6  C. Bird,  (ed) The Stolen

Generation:  their
stories, Milsons  Point,
NSW: Random  House,
Australia, 1998.

Anderson,  op.cit.,  note
4.

Christian missions were established in the early part of the 20th  century on
the grounds that the children of Aborigines would have a better, more Christian
upbringing,  if they  were  taken  into  the care  of European  settlers. Missionaries
often  removed  Aboriginal  children  from  their  parents,  families  and land and
placed  them  in missions or homes. This programme,  involving  the removal of
children,  was carried  out with  the  approval,  knowledge  and  support  of the
government  of the day. These  Aboriginal  children  are known  as  'the Stolen
Generation'.6

One  such  mission  was Umeewarra  in  South  Australia.  This  mission was
established  in the  1930s  by missionaries  from the Open  Brethren  Assemblies
church, at Port Augusta in South Australia. It catered generally for three groups
of Aboriginal children, those removed from their families and land, wards of the
State, and children placed at the mission by Aboriginal families on a temporary
basis.  The site  of the  mission  now forms  part  of  the  Davenport  Aboriginal
Community  in  Port  Augusta,  with  many  of  the  original  mission  children
growing  up  to  live  in  the  Davenport  Community.  These  people  came  from
Arabana,  Gugada, Pitjantjatjara  and Adynyamathanha  lands and other areas.

The  challenge  for the Umeewarra  Mission  people  is to uncover  a way to
preserve,  conserve  and  interpret  the  mission  culture,  which  is  part  of  their
history, in an interpretive  centre  which  maintains the integrity  of that  history.
The  mission  people  will  need  to  decide  how to preserve  the material  culture
from  this time, how to record the oral histories and stories from former  children
of the mission, and, importantly, how to decide what to display and interpret for
the visitor.

A  key  issue  is  that  of  site  management  and  interpretation  which  is
sympathetic to both Aboriginal and missionary cultures, which  gives something
back  to the 'stolen  generation'  and which  develops  an interpretive  centre  that
recognises  their  treatment  and  loss  of  cultural  and  family  ties  and  their
subsequent upbringing by the Brethren  church.

Background  - Umeewarra  Mission
Umeewarra  Mission  was located  on the outskirts  of Port  Augusta,  in  South
Australia.  Port  Augusta  lies  at the head  of the Spencer  Gulf, in the southern
foothills of the Flinders Ranges, 500 km north of Adelaide, the State capital. The
mission was established in the 1930s, and ran, in the same location, for about
60  years. The site was deliberately  selected as close to a traditional  Aboriginal
camping and meeting  area, in the hinterland  of the tidal flats of Port  Augusta.
The  site  affords  a  view  of the Flinders  Ranges  to  the  east  and  north.  Port
Augusta  currently  acts  as- the  gateway  to  the  Flinders  Ranges,  and has
traditionally, in both Aboriginal and European  times, been at the crossroads for
travellers  moving from both  east  to west  and north  to south  through  South
Australia.

The  name  'Umeewarra',  from  an  Aboriginal  word  amewara,  which  means
'road  of the stars', was derived from the position of the mission, located in the
outback  of South  Australia,  beneath  the Milky Way. The name  was suggested
by Jimmy  Captain, an ex-police tracker from Oodnadatta, who suggested to the
missionaries  that  'Umeewarra'  meant  that  the Mission  was 'the road  to the
stars'  and 'that  God has his people (the missionaries)  here now to tell us right
across our country' that the Mission is 'the way to heaven'.7 The Mission site or

204

Jane James

reserve  included  houses  for  some  Aboriginal  families,  a  house  for  the
missionaries,  and  eventually  dormitories  for  the  children,  a  kitchen  and  dining
room  and the chapel.

Umeewarra  Mission  Community
The  Umeewarra  Mission  was  established  by  missionaries  from  the  Brethren
church. The  earliest  missionaries  would  appear  to  have been  two women  who
worked  amongst  the Aboriginal people, notably  with  the  mothers  and  children
who periodically camped on the shores of the salt lake adjacent  to the  eventual
mission  site. The  missionary  women  were  concerned  about  the  welfare  of the
Aboriginal  people  who  passed  through  this  area,  and  did  what  they  could  to
assist them.

When the Umeewarra  Mission was established  it catered  generally for  three
groups  of  children.  Firstly  were  the  children  removed  from  their  families  and
land,  from  areas  throughout  central  Australia,  including  South  Australia  and
southern  Queensland.  Children  taken  from  these  areas  belong  to  a  number  of
different  Aboriginal groups, each with  its own  culture, beliefs  and identity,  and
each  with  its  own  language,  for  example  the  Pitjanjatjara  people  of  Central
Australia.

8  Mattingly  & Hampton

op.cit.  note  6.

9  Report  to  the  National
Inquiry  into  the  Sepa-
ration  of  Aboriginal
and  Torres  Strait
Islander  Children  from
their  Families,
Bringing Them Home,
Commonwealth  of
Australia,  Human
Rights  and  Equal
Opportunity  Commis-
sion,  1997.

10 J. Carter,  (ed) A Sense

Secondly,  Aboriginal  children  who  were  wards  of  the  State  from  the
surrounding  area  were  also  accommodated  at  Umeewarra  Mission.  Thirdly,
children  were  sometimes  placed,  or  left,  at  the  mission  by  Aboriginal  families,
usually mothers, who were unable to look  after  them, for  a number  of reasons,
including temporary respite care, or for  schooling from  the missionaries.8 Up to
45 Aboriginal children were accommodated  at the mission  at any one time and
ranged 
teenagers.  Both  boys  and  girls  were
accommodated, in  separate dormitories.

in  age  from  babies 

to 

The concept of developing an Interpretive Centre for the Umeewarra Mission
has come from people at the Davenport Aboriginal Community, who were once
the  Mission  children.  Their  approach  has  been  strongly  supported  by  the
missionaries  of the  Brethren  church  who  have  been  custodians  of much  of the
material culture dating from  the days of the Mission. Both groups see the value
in  not  only  preserving  the  Mission  heritage,  but  also  in  interpreting  that-
heritage to the broader community, and  to visitors, as a reflection  of part of the
history of South Australia.

Umeewarra  Mission  Culture  and  Site
The Umeewarra  Mission,  unlike many  others  established  throughout  Australia,
encouraged  children  to keep in  contact  with their families, including the Stolen
Generation  children.  Elsewhere  most  Stolen  Generation  children  were  actively
discouraged from  any contact with their families or homeland.9 Umeewarra also
permitted some restricted retention of Aboriginal culture  and beliefs, but did not
permit  any  indigenous  ceremonies  to  take  place.  Children  in  the  care  of  the
Brethren  missionaries  were  given  a  Christian  upbringing,  with  school  work,
sport and religious instruction. Their lives were ordered  and relatively restricted,
and Christian teachings were part of their daily routine.

The Mission closed in 1996, with some of the Mission children staying at the
site which now houses the Davenport Aboriginal Community. For some of these
people, Umeewarra is the only home that  they have known, and many see it as

Interpreting  Umeewarra  Mission

205

of Place - an
Interpretive Planning
Handbook,  Tourism
and  Environment Ini-
tiative, UK,  1997.

11 T. Janke, Our  Culture,
Our Future:  Proposals
for  the Recognition and
Protection of Indigenous
Cultural and Intellectual
Property, Canberra:
Australian  Institute of
Aboriginals and
Torres  Strait  Islander
Studies, 1997.

a  caring  and supportive  environment.  The Mission  which  housed  the children
was  built  to accommodate  them in dormitories,  with  a communal  dining  area
serviced  by a large  kitchen. The children's  play  activities  were  supervised  in a
semi-enclosed quadrangle, and the chapel was used for regular prayer meetings
and  church  services.  Much  of the structure  of the  original  Mission  site  still
remains, although  some of it is in a state of disrepair.

One of the issues to be addressed by the researchers, is the location of such
an interpretive centre and whether it should be housed, at least in part, in some
of the old Mission buildings. This will be considered  as part of the development
of the strategic plan, but in terms of offering  an insight  into life at the Mission,
there is an argument  that  supports  development  at the original  site which will
create an authentic  'sense of place'.10

Umeewarra Mission Interpretive  Centre
The Aboriginal community in the area has set up a committee, the Umeewarra
Nguraritja  committee,  composed  largely  of former  Mission  children,  to oversee
both  the site, culture  and people from  the Umeewarra  Mission. This committee
wants to establish a museum or Interpretive  Centre to tell the story, the history
and the ramifications  of the Umeewarra Mission times. The story, in part, is one
of sorrow and hardship: the sorrow of children removed from  their homes, of a
destruction  of  Aboriginal  communities,  Aboriginal  culture  and  beliefs. The
hardship is linked to the loss of family, loss of identity and loss of culture linked
to  a  sense  of  place,  although  not  necessarily  their  own.  There  is  some
celebration, however, in efforts  that  were made to keep children  at the Mission
in  touch  with  their  families.  There  is also  an  acknowledgment  of the support
that  was forthcoming  from  the Brethren  church  at the time,  towards  children
who were in the care of the missionaries. Many of those children maintain  their
contacts with the last missionaries who were based at Umeewarra.

A  process  is  currently  under  way developing  a  strategic  plan  that  will
outline  the necessary  steps  required  to  establish  an  interpretive  centre  at the
site,  and it  is  critical  that  the. researchers'  role  in  this  process  be  culturally
sensitive. The stories from  the Mission form  part of the Aboriginal  community's
cultural  and intellectual  heritage,  as does  the documentation  relating  to the
running  of  the  Mission.  Such  materials  could 
include  archives,  film,
photographs,  videos,  oral  histories,  letters,  diaries  etc. Currently  some  of this
material  is stored  by the missionaries  of the Brethren  church,  some is held by
the Umeewarra Nguraritja  and some is at the Mission site. It is important in the
development  of the interpretive  centre  that  the rights of the Aboriginal  people
with  regard  to  these  materials  is  recognised.11  The 
indigenous  community
should  also  have  some  say  in  the  preservation  and  care,  protection,
management  and control  of materials  from  the mission  days. A code of ethics
will be negotiated  and adopted in all areas that  relate to relevant materials and
the site.

The  committee  has imposed  strict  guidelines  for the project  which  aim to
protect  both  the authenticity  and integrity  of the site and the people involved,
both  Aboriginal  and missionary.  The role  of the researchers  is clearly  one of
collecting,  collating  and analysing  information  on how to go about  preserving
the  material  culture  and  heritage  from  the  Mission  times,  and  to  make
recommendations regarding the possible structure and methods of interpretation

206

Jane James

12 E-I. Daes, Study  on the

Protection of the
Cultural and Intellectual
Property of Indigenous
Peoples.  Report  on  the
Prevention  of Discrim-
ination  and  Protection
of Minorities, E/CN,
1993.

13 H. Fourmile,  Aborigi-

nal  Heritage
Legislation  and  Self
Determination,
Australian-Canadian
Studies, vol,7, no. 1-2,
Special Issue,  1989.

that could be utilised at the interpretive centre. They do not see it as appropriate
for the researchers to collect individual stories from their people; rather they will
do  that  themselves.  They  welcome  suggestions  as  to  how  this  might  be done
most  sympathetically  and  effectively,  and  appreciate  the  significance  of  the
possible  inclusion  of  these  stories  to  the  interpretation  included  in  the  centre.
The inclusion of these stories, or parts of them, in the interpretation  programme
will not be discussed until this process is complete. Such stories will remain the
intellectual property  of Umeewarra  Nguraritja.

It  is  acknowledged  that,  as  suggested  by  Daes,  'all  elements  of  heritage
should  be  managed  and  protected  as  a  single,  interrelated  and  integrated
whole.'12

Authenticity  and  cultural  integrity  are  also  issues  that  will  need  to  be
addressed.  Much  of  the  material—missionaries'  diaries,  official  documentation
and records—will be material over which Aboriginal people have no control, as
the  Copyright  Act  (1968)  recognises  individual  rights  rather  than  the
communal  ownership  notion  favoured  by  Aboriginal  people.  The  Umeewarra
Nguraritja  are  in  line  with  Fourmile  who  proposes  that  indigenous  cultural
heritage  and  property  be  vested  in  the  local  community,  that  management  of
that  heritage  be  exercised  by  the  local  community  and  that  there  be  local
autonomy  over  cultural  matters.  Her  definition  of  cultural  heritage  includes,
amongst  other  things  land,  sites,  objects,  cultural  knowledge  and  history
relating to both pre- and post-European  contact.13

This idea  of cultural  heritage  is certainly  applicable  to Umeewarra,  and  the
Umeewarra  Nguraritja  aims  to  create  a  high  quality,  educational  and
informative  interpretive centre that satisfies both  customer needs, but also those
of the Aboriginal community, with the anticipation  that local people will benefit
from  job  opportunities,  cultural  maintenance,  financial  security  and  self
determination.

The committee recognises that the community needs Aboriginal people to be
trained  and  employed  directly  and  indirectly  in  the  centre;  that  the  cultural
centre  will  raise  awareness  both  of  mission  culture  as  it  was  experienced  at
Umeewarra Mission, and of the nature  of Aboriginal culture generally,  and that
it  is  important  for  the  Aboriginal  people  to  have  both  economic  and  cultural
control  over  tourism  at  the  Mission  site.  Umeewarra  Nguraritja  will  also  seek
planning permission  and investigate possible funding  sources.

Their  concerns  are  also  related  to  maintaining  the  confidentiality  and
therefore the integrity of the Mission culture. The culture of Umeewarra Mission
is  related  to  various  factors,  which  include  the  people  who  lived  there,  the
missionaries  that  ran  it  and  the  site  itself.  The  children  who  were  raised  at
Umeewarra have their own personal stories to tell, and it is especially important
to  the  Umeewarra  Mission  people  that  the  stories  of  the  older  people  are
recorded  before  they  die. They  have concerns  about  the  way  that  such  stories
are  recorded  and  by  whom,  and  feel  that  such  oral  histories  are  most
appropriately recorded by Aboriginal people. They are eager for advice as to the
best  way  such  stories  might  be recorded  and  preserved,  but  are  not  willing  to
allow non-Aboriginal people to record them.

The- Brethren  missionaries  are  also  supportive  of  the  desire  to  tell  the
Umeewarra  story.  They  are  happy  to  make  available  materials  that  date from
the Mission days that  were part  of the record keeping whilst the Mission was in

Interpreting  Umeewarra  Mission

207

14 ATSIC,  Tourism Indus-

try  Strategy,
Commonwealth of
Australia, 1997.

15 H. Zeppel, 'New meet-

ing  grounds:
Aboriginal  cultural
centres  in Australia'
in J. Kandampully
(ed) Proceedings of the
3rd  Biennial New
Zealand Tourism  and
Hospitality  Research
Conference,
Canterbury,  Lincoln
University, 1998.

16 C. Morris,

'MovieWorld and
dreamworld: the
Dreaming'  Culture  and
Policy, Vol.7,  no.3,
pp.69-79, 1996;
Janke,  op.cit. note 12.

17 Commonwealth of
Australia, Bringing
Them Home, Report of
the Human Rights and
Equal  Opportunity
Commission. Sterling
Press, 1997.

operation.  It  is  important  that  the  photos  and  documents  dating  from  the
Mission  days  are retrieved  from  the last  missionaries  who have  stored  them
since the Mission closed. The missionaries  also have a role to play in the telling
of  the  Umeewarra  story.  Their  oral  histories  will  be  unique  and  their
explanations  and interpretation  of the documents, diaries and photographs  that
have been  kept, are invaluable. They have encouraged  the Umeewarra Mission
people  to reclaim  this  heritage,  and will  actively  assist  in  the  collation and
analysis of the many and varied materials.

The issue for the Umeewarra Mission people is to uncover a way to preserve,
conserve and interpret the mission culture, that is part of their history from the
past  50 years, in a centre that  maintains the integrity of that  history, and in a
manner  that  contributes  to the peace  and reconciliation  process  into  the next
millennium. The people will need to decide how to preserve the material culture
from  that  time,  how to  record  the  oral  histories  and  stories  from  former
inhabitants  at  the  mission,  and  from  the  surviving  missionaries,  and,
importantly,  how to decide  what  to display  and interpret  for the visitor. They
acknowledge that it is crucial that  the original  collection of materials—written,
photographic  and verbal—be  kept  safe  and intact  at  all costs,  as there  is no
point in having a new interpretive centre if the original material is destroyed in
the process.

In summary the researchers must contribute to this process, without stealing
the  culture  of the Stolen  Generation.  The ATSIC Cultural  Policy  Framework14
suggests  that  the  'Keeping  Place'  or  'Cultural  Centre'  has  the  potential  to
become  a  primary  focus  or  resource  for  activities  concerning  culture  and
identity. The researchers,  through  their  involvement in the development  of the
Umeewarra 
to  the
maintenance  of culture  and identity  of Aboriginal  people  in the region, and
towards the national process of reconciliation.

Interpretive  Centre,  could  contribute  significantly 

Strategic  Plan  Development
Aboriginal  communities  around  Australia  are  constructing  an  increasing
number of Cultural Centres, mainly as an attraction for tourists.15 These centres
have  included  the National  Aboriginal  Cultural  Centre  (NACC) in  Sydney, the
Dreamtime  Cultural  Centre  in  Rockhampton,  the History  Theatre  at  Tjapukai
Aboriginal Park in Cairns, and one of the most recent, the Daiwal Gidja Cultural
Centre in the eastern  Kimberley which  opened in 1998. Many of these  centres
aim to be major  tourist  attractions and are often  located in high profile  tourism
centres,  for  example  the Indigenous  Australians  exhibition  at  the Australian
Museum  in  Sydney,  which  offers  visitors  traditional  perspectives  of Aboriginal
culture.

The  majority  of  Aboriginal  Cultural  Centres  have  had to  address  issues
related to intellectual and cultural property rights, building location  and design,
and funding  for the development and running  of such centres.16 There are also
issues regarding the interpretation  of Indigenous culture, including the sensitive
issues  involved  in  'bringing  home'  the children  who were  part  of the Stolen
Generation.17 The Museum of Civilisation in Canada has addressed much of this,
and  their means  of interpretation  will be investigated,  in the light  of the needs
of Umeewarra.

The  strategic  plan  for  Umeewarra  Mission  is  investigating  these  and a

208

Jane James

18 J. Davidson, Brambuk,

capital of Gariwerd,
Australian  Society,
Literature Board of
the  Australia  Council,
1991.

number  of other  issues.  Comparisons  are being  drawn  with  Brambuk  Living
Cultural  Centre in the Victorian  Grampians, where the researchers  are involved
in  an investigation  of the structure  and organisation  of the centre, with  a view
to possibly incorporating  appropriate designs and practices into the proposals for
the  Umeewarra Mission Interpretive  Centre. Members of the research  team  have
spent  time  working  alongside  the management  team  at  Brambuk  to  identify
possible  visitor  centre  strategies  that  could  be appropriate  for Umeewarra. The
strategic  plan  for  Umeewarra  is  being  developed  in  cooperation  with  the
Umeewarra  Nguraritja,  and  includes  the  identification  of  possible  funding
sources,  recommendations  regarding  the preservation  and display  of materials
and  suggestions  about  the methods  of securing  oral  histories  and interpretive
techniques  to best  tell the stories of the history of Umeewarra.

Site ownership and the location of the Interpretive  Centre is being  addressed,
as  is  the  design  of  the  proposed  building.  Whilst  there  is  already  some
suggestion that part or all of the original mission buildings will be used to house
the  Interpretive  Centre, so maintaining  a 'sense of place',  there is also the view
that  'good  buildings are rare  and often  potent  symbols' and there  could  well be
a convincing argument that  supports the idea of a custom built centre.18 Further
to  the buildings'  location  and design  is the issue  of the collation,  preservation
and  conservation  of the material  culture  that  has remained  since the days  that
the  Mission  first  started.  Appropriate  conservation  methods  are  being
investigated  and recommended. The documentary  evidence  that  remains  largely
in  the care  of the Brethren  missionaries,  including  diaries,  photographs and
documentary  evidence  that  was part  of the organisation  of the mission, are
being collated and correctly stored so that the heritage of the  site and its history
remains  intact.  Recommendations  will be made  regarding  necessary  training of
Umeewarra  Aboriginal  people  and/or  expertise  that  is required  for the storage
and  display of this  memorabilia.

Investigations  are  also  underway  to  document  relevant  methodologies
required  for the accurate, but non-intimidating,  recording  of oral  histories  from
both  the  former  mission  children  and  also  from  the  Brethren  missionaries.
Again, training recommendations may be required as the Umeewarra  committee
has  already  identified  the need  to have  Aboriginal  people  record  the histories
and  stories  of the former  Mission  children,  and have  acknowledged  that the
sensitivity and confidentiality  of this process is one that  requires compassion and
respect.

The  strategic plan  will  address  potential  funding  sources for the centre, and
will  also  make  recommendations  regarding  the possible  staffing  and training
needs that  would be required for the site to be run as an Interpretive  Centre. At
all  stages  in the project  the researchers  are liaising  closely  with  the people of
Umeewarra.

Interpretation
The  role of interpretation  in telling the story of the Umeewarra  Mission  will be
crucial  in establishing the centre  as an authentic  Aboriginal  cultural  enterprise
and in maintaining  both the integrity  of the site and its people. Themes will be
identified  with a view to representing both the Indigenous and European  aspects
of the heritage of the site. These  themes  will encompass both  the historical and
cultural  aspects  of the place,  but will  also  need  to  include  the concepts of

Interpreting  Umeewarra  Mission

209

19 Zeppel, op.cit  note

16.

20 South  Australian

Tourism  Commission,
Corporate  Plan 1998  -
2005,  Adelaide,
SA.1998;  South Aus-
tralian  Tourism
Commission,  South
Australian  Aboriginal
Tourism Strategy, Ade-
laide, SA,  1995;
ATSICop.cit.  note 15.

21 J. Spring, International
Visitors and Aboriginal
Arts,  Research  Paper
No.  10, Australian
Council  for the Arts,
Sydney, 1993.

Aboriginal  culture  as  a  living  and  contemporary  culture,  which  has moved
forward from the days of European  decision  making  that  impacted  so strongly
on the lives of many Aboriginal people.

Interpretive  programmes  that  are relevant  for different  visitor  groups,  such
as  schools  or international  visitors,  will  be drafted.  Training  programmes  for
potential  guides  will  be outlined  and a development  and updating  programme
established  so that  the interpretation  does not remain  static and passive. Some
sensitivity will need to be employed in the choice and telling of the oral histories
of the mission children and their guardians, the missionaries, but it is likely that
much of the mood  of the place  will be captured  by the recounting  of some of
these oral histories. The Umeewarra Nguraritja  will oversee the recording of oral
histories from  the former mission children and the missionaries. The methods of
recording and documenting  these histories is yet to be finalised, apart from an
agreement that  they are to be recorded by Aboriginal people.

Interpretative  media and techniques will be employed most  appropriately to
record  and display  the stories  of Umeewarra.  Something  of the atmosphere of
the  place  needs  to be captured,  as the imagination  at  times  makes  the visitor
feel, rather  than  hear, the presence of those Umeewarra  children playing at the
mission,  as  their  spirit  lingers  in  the  buildings  that  remain.  A  variety  of
interpretive methods may be used to capture this spirit of the children, possibly
utilising photographs,  artefacts from the days when the Mission was running or
taped stories from the Mission children. Obviously, none of these programmes or
interpretation  techniques will be employed without the knowledge, consent and
ownership  of the Umeewarra  community,  nor can they  be discussed  in detail
here until those decisions are taken.

The Umeewarra  committee has already  acknowledged  that  the Interpretive
Centre  may well  have  a  significant  role  to  play  in  the  on-going  process of
reconciliation  between  Aboriginal  and non-Aboriginal  people in Australia. The
strategic planning process represents an early stage in this reconciliation.

Cultural Tourism potential  of an Umeewarra  Mission
Interpretive  Centre
It  is  acknowledged  that  there  is  cultural  tourism  potential  for  the proposed
Umeewarra  Mission  Interpretive  Centre.  As  well  as  their  supportive  and
facilitating role in the interpretive planning process, the researchers need to play
a  role  in  the  integration  of  the  interpretive  centre  into  the  larger  cultural
tourism picture in South Australia.

Indigenous culture has long been recognised as a draw card for international
visitors  to  Australia.19  The Australian  Tourist  Commission  uses  Indigenous
imagery  in its promotional  campaigns  overseas  (e.g. 1998 Brand Australia  and
1999  Australia into the new millennium)  and these aspects of Australia's  culture
are  reinforced  by marketing  campaigns from State  tourism  offices,  as with the
South  Australian  Tourism  Commission  corporate  plan  1998 -  2005  (SATC,
1998), the South Australian Aboriginal Tourism Strategy (SATC, 1995) and the
ATSIC Tourism Industry Strategy (1997).20

The International  Visitors  and Aboriginal  Arts  Survey21  found  for instance
that  half  of Australia's  visitors  expressed  an interest  in an Aboriginal  tourism
experience. The same survey also found  that in 1992 AU$40 million was spent
on Aboriginal arts, crafts and souvenirs by international visitors; 16% wanted to

210

Jane James

22 Australian  Tourist

Commission, Australia
into the new
millennium, (video).
Sydney:  Australian
Tourist  Commission,
1999.

23 L. Leader-Elliott,  Cul-

tural Tourism
Opportunities for  South
Australia, South  Aus-
tralian  Tourism
Commission,  Adelaide,
SA,  1996.

24 South  Australian

Tourism  Commission,
op.dt.

25 Market  Equity  SA Pty

Ltd  and  Economic
Research  Consultants,
1996  Adelaide  Festival:
An  Economic  Impact
Study.  Prepared  for
the  South  Australian
Tourism  Commission,
Department  for  the
Arts  and  Cultural
Development  and  the
Australia  Council,
SATC, DACD and AC,
Adelaide, SA.  1996:
and  T. Bennett  &  J.
Frow,  Art  Galleries:
Who  Goes?  -  The Sum-
mary,  Sydney:
Australia  Council,
1991,  pp.13-15.

26 J. James, Opera  In  The

Outback  Survey:
Analysis  and  Review,
Unpublished  report,
1997.

visit an Aboriginal  art gallery or museum while  5% wanted to participate in  an
Aboriginal  tour.  Visitor  statistics  gathered  since  1992  supports  the  perception
that  interest  in Aboriginal culture, history and  art has  increased.22

The  experiential  visitor,  identified  often  as  the  'cultural  tourist',23  has been
targeted  by  both  State  and  Federal  tourism  campaigns.  The  current  SATC
corporate  plan  identifies  'Indigenous  culture,  art  and  history'  and  'heritage
interpretation'  as sectors to be developed within  South Australia. The plan also
identifies  the  cultural  tourist  as  a  high  priority  visitor  for  the  State  to  target,
citing  the  interest,  especially  with  international  visitors,  in  Aboriginal  culture
and the State's history.24

Demographic  studies  undertaken  in  South  Australia  reveal  that  the  client
profile of likely visitors to the proposed Umeewarra Mission Interpretive Centre is
in  line with  traditional  visitors to the  State  for  cultural  events, such  as for  the
Adelaide  Festival  and  is  in  line  with  Bennett  &  Frow,  who  identified  the
predominantly  female,  middle  age  cohort  of  'art  enthusiast'  as  having  a
consistently high involvement with  art  and cultural  activities and institutions.25

Visitor  surveys  undertaken  during  the  1997  Opera  In  The Outback  in  the

Flinders  Ranges  of  South  Australia,  adjacent  to  Port  Augusta,  confirmed  that
the  cultural  tourist  profile  was  consistent  with  visitors  who  had  an  interest  in
both  natural  and cultural heritage.26

Analysis  of  the  Opera  In  The Outback survey  in  1997  revealed  that  the
majority  of  the  visitors  to  the  region  (77%)  associated  it  with  (natural)
environmental  activities  and  only  a  small  percentage  (6%)  with  cultural
activities. Despite this, significant  numbers of respondents claimed to have some
knowledge  of both Aboriginal  (57%) and European  (67%) history  of the region,
although this awareness was significantly  higher with South Australian visitors.
Perhaps  more  noticeably  though,  was  the  overwhelming  majority  (86%)  who
indicated  that  they  would  return  to  the  Flinders  Ranges  to  learn  about  the
history and  culture in the future.  Visitors to the region,  across all age and both
gender categories, expressed a specific interest in learning more about Aboriginal
culture.

Of those  interviewed  74% did  not  believe  that  there  was  a  high  degree of
awareness  among  visitors  of  cultural  activities  in  the  Flinders  Ranges  and
significant  numbers  (88%)  felt  that  better  promotion  of  these,  and  related
activities, were likely to increase the probability of them returning to the region.
Overall  survey  results  indicated  a  remarkable  interest  in  indigenous  culture,
which  in  part  is serviced  by existing  attractions  such  as  the  Wadlata  Outback
Centre  in  Port  Augusta  and  numerous  Aboriginal  sites,  such  as  Chambers
Gorge,  Arkaroo  Rock  and  Sacred  Canyon  throughout  the  Flinders  Ranges.
Likewise,  activities  and  attractions  based  on  the  regions  European  settlement
history  and  heritage, which  was  also identified  as  an  area  of interest  amongst
visitors  in  the  Opera In  The Outback survey,  could  be  further  developed  to
enhance the tourism potential of the Flinders Ranges.

Heritage  tours,  visitor  centres  and  interpretation  of  both  Aboriginal  and
European  culture  would  prove  a  draw  card  with  a  strong  appeal  to  a  broad
range  of both  domestic and  international  visitors. As a  consequence, it is likely
that  a Visitor Interpretive Centre, like that proposed for the Umeewarra Mission,
could meet the identified  demand for interpretation  of part of Australia's cultural
heritage in  this  area  of South Australia. There is also in principle support  from

Interpreting  Umeewarra  Mission

211

27 L.  Leader-Elliott,

'Tourism  with
Integrity  - Best
Practice  for  Cultural
and  Heritage  Organi-
sations  in  the  Tourism
Industry'  (Draft).
Commissioned  by  the
Department  of Indus-
try,  Science  and
Tourism  and  the
Department  of
Communications,
Information  Technol-
ogy  and  the Arts,
1999.

local  government  and  from  other  tourism  ventures  in  the  region,  notably
Wadlata  Outback Centre, for the Umeewarra concept.

Finally  the  researchers  will  endeavour  to  incorporate  the  'best  practice'
principles into the Umeewarra project, including those in the national project on
best  practice  in  cultural  tourism  currently  commissioned  by the  Department of
Industry,  Science  and  Tourism  and  the  Department  of  Communications,
Information  Technology  and the Arts.27

Conclusion
The  proposed  Umeewarra  Mission  Interpretive  Centre  could  contribute
significantly  to  the  development  of  cultural  tourism  in  South  Australia,  but,
perhaps more importantly,  to the increased awareness of both past  and present
indigenous  culture.  It  is  hoped  that  such  a  centre,  sympathetic  to  both
indigenous  and  missionary  cultures,  could  give  something  back  to  the  'stolen
generation'  and develop, perhaps, a greater awareness of the lives of Aboriginal
children  on missions. The roles  and responsibilities of the researchers  in such  a
project  are  wide-ranging,  from  supporting  and  facilitating  the  efforts  of  the
Umeewarra  community,  to  taking  a  pro-active  and  leadership  position  in  its
integration  into cultural  tourism in South Australia.

212

Jane James


