International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

?Theorising a Realm of Practice?: introducing
archaeological heritage management as a
research field

John Carman

To cite this article: John Carman (2000) ?Theorising a Realm of Practice?: introducing
archaeological heritage management as a research field, International Journal of Heritage Studies,
6:4, 303-308, DOI: 10.1080/13527250020017726
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250020017726

Published online: 12 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 284

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 303± 308

`Theorising a Realm of Practice’:
introducing archaeological heritage
management as a research field
John Carman

Abstract
The paper introduces the field of archaeological heritage management, and the four papers
on  this  subject  here  presented.  Comparisons are  made  with Cultural  Resource  Manage-
ment,  Cultural  Heritage  Management  and  Archaeological Heritage  Management. The
research  discussed  here  examines  the management  of  archaeology in  practical situations,
including those involving indigeneity, to develop a body of theory that will help to illuminate
such practice in terms of our own contemporary culture.

Key Words: Archaeology; Cultural Resource Management; Heritage; Indigeneity;
Public Archaeology

In  general, archaeologists do  not consider themselves to  be part  of  a  field  called
`heritage’   or  `heritage  studies’ .  Instead,  most  archaeologists  consider themselves
equivalent to historians ±  that  is, as students of the past, who may operate in the
present but are not students of present society. Even those of us who are directly
concerned with the status and fate of archaeological remains in the present do not,
in general, consider ourselves as connected to a field called `heritage studies’ . For
us, rightly or wrongly, the field of heritage is most closely connected to fields such
as museology, tourism and leisure studies. While we have links ±  sometimes close
ones ±  with museums, our connections with tourism and the leisure industry are far
weaker. Where we do engage with the major concerns of heritage studies, we prefer
a different term, and one such name for what we do is coming into quite regular use,
having originated in the USA: it is `public archaeology’  (Merriman & Schadla-Hall
forthcoming ), designating all those areas where archaeologists have to deal with the
lay population and the wider world.

Public archaeology  as  understood in  the  USA, and  increasingly  in  the  UK,  is
primarily  concerned  with  archaeological  outreach  ±   that  is,  with  presenting
interpretations of the past and, sometimes, how archaeologists access that past to a
lay audience. This can be considered public archaeology `proper’ . The other aspects
of public archaeology ±  the conduct of archaeology in the service of the public and
as  a  public  service,  as  part  of  environmental  conservation,  the  preservation  of
ancient remains, their care and maintenance ±  are given a different name. This may

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/00/040303-06   2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/13527250020017726

be  cultural  resource  management  (especially  in  the  USA),  cultural  heritage
management (especially in Australia), archaeological resource management (espe-
cially  in  the  UK)  or  archaeological  heritage  management  (the  term  commonly
applied across Europe since it can be conveniently and meaningfully translated into
most European languages). All these various terms are deemed to cover much the
same areas of practice and only occasionally do the  practitioners of these various
fields argue over nomenclature. Where we do, it is in order to clarify for ourselves
and others what  we do, how  we  do it,  and what  kinds of things  we  do it  to. The
concerns of this branch of public archaeology ±  as the terminology implies ±  are with
material remains as  expressions of culture in the  anthropological sense; with their
contemporary use, often as some kind of resource; and with the management of that
resource. Public outreach and interpretation ±  the concern of `public archaeology
proper’  ±   is  what  follows  from  these  efforts  at  investigation,  preservation  and
management, as well as giving them a purpose and justification.

Despite differences in terminology, the fundamental principles upon which these
fields are based are rarely challenged and are generally not the subject of hot debate.
In the same way that museums and other heritage institutions are taken for granted
as legitimate and proper things for a civilised society to have, public archaeology ±
whichever part we are engaged in and whatever we choose to call it ±  is deemed to
be a proper and normal thing to do, and the care and preservation of ancient things
and places is seen as an inevitable and natural part of that endeavour. Accordingly,
in  the  same  way  that  students  of  heritage  are  generally  concerned  with  the
methodology of heritage practices, and with finding new ways  of `doing’  heritage,
including incorporating new kinds of material into the heritage as understood, most
archaeological heritage managers are concerned with their field as one of practice.
Indeed, it is tempting to say `mere practice’ , since the concern of archaeologists in
this  area  is  very  much  with  improving  performance  where  the  purposes  and
structures of  heritage  underpinning those  practices  remain  a  set  of  unexamined
taken-for-granteds.

Some  archaeologists,  however  ±   such  as  those  represented  here  in  this  short
collection  of  papers  ±   are  interested  in  archaeological  heritage  management
practices in their own right, and as  cultural forms in their own right,  that  tell us
something about  ourselves. For us, heritage ±   and particularly the archaeological
heritage  ±   is  always  a  cultural construct, and  the  creation and  reproduction of  a
phenomenon called `the heritage’  is always a cultural activity. We therefore study the
contemporary  practices  of  archaeologists  in  their  public  role  in  an  effort  to
understand what  doing archaeology  does ±   borrowing in particular an  idea  from
Michel  Foucault  who  once  commented  that  `people  know  what  they  do;  they
frequently know why they do what they do; but what they don’t know is what they
do does’ (quoted in Dreyfus & Rabinow 1983, 187). In doing so, we recognise the
importance of the field in that it employs more archaeologists worldwide than any
other branch of the discipline, and is the branch of archaeology that interacts most
closely with the rest of the world: especially politics, economic development, and the
media. It  is also the  field that  decides what  archaeology  shall be in the  future by

304

John Carman

engaging with the question of what material shall be retained for the future to be the
object of archaeological attention; and also, thereby, what research frameworks shall
be possible in the future. Our field is thus central to archaeology itself, as indeed
`heritage’   is  to any study of the past.  It  is  accordingly too important to be left to
those  who  wish  to  limit  heritage  studies  to  an  agenda  concerned  only  with
presentation  or  tourism or  development, and  should be  one that  attracts  a  wide
interest.  In  taking  such  a  stance  and  developing  research  to  reflect  it,  we  are
sometimes  deliberately  perverse  and  awkward,  taking  nothing  in  the  field  for
granted and nothing as simply `normal’ .

We  justify  our  research  and  the  approach  we  take  on  the  grounds  that  it  is
essential for those of us who care about the material remains of the past to be aware
of what it is that we actually do. One of the things that our own historical period may
be remembered for is its focus on preserving old things (Fairclough forthcoming).
As such, historic and archaeological preservation is not a `natural’  activity but one
our culture deems to be ±  for whatever reason ±   important. It  therefore becomes
available to us as a phenomenon for study and understanding, and we choose to do
it in three ways: historically, contextually and comparatively. This is the approach I
have taken in my own work (Carman 1996), looking at what having laws in England
concerning archaeological  remains `does’   to  those  remains. The  answer  I  found,
after  examining  how  those  laws  came  to  be  in  place  and  how  they  work  on  the
material that  is  their object,  is that  laws  change things  conceptually.  In England,
passing laws to protect ancient remains made those remains important in a way they
had  not  been  before.  In  being  made  subject  to  those  laws,  individual  sites  and
monuments gain values they previously did not have, and these are particular kinds
of values defined by the laws we have created. Over time, it is the values created by
law  that  have  come to  dominate thinking about  the  historic environment so that
passing and applying law has become the `normal’  way of ensuring the survival of
ancient material. In the  course of  this  process, the  original purpose behind such
laws  and  the  values  they  were  intended  to  represent  and  allow  to  operate  have
become  masked:  instead  of  being  a  `cultural’   matter  (in  the  everyday  sense),
preservation of the material past has a become a bureaucratic process (Carman et
al. 1999; Carman forthcoming). It is the study of that bureaucratic process which
lies at the heart of the work presented here.

As  students  of  archaeological  heritage  management,  what  we  study  is  what
archaeologists do  in  the  process of  managing  the  material  left  to  us  by  previous
generations. We look at  the structures and institutions established to manage that
heritage ±  laws and other regulations, and organisations ±  and follow the practices
of  archaeologists in going  about that  work. Throughout, our concern is not with
justifying existing practices nor yet with finding fault, but with establishing a firm
body  of  knowledge  about  what  constitute  the  actual  practices  of  heritage
management in archaeology. From there, we can go on to understand the unseen
and sometimes unconsidered consequences of those practices for archaeology as a
discipline and the material remains for which we are responsible. This is the ultimate
purpose of such research. We call what we do `theorising a realm of practice’ , where

`Theorising a Realm of Practice’

305

the realm of (mere) practice is the field of archaeological heritage management, and
our task is to examine the practices of the field in order to develop a body of theory
that  will  help  us  understand  what  that  field  means  in  terms  of  our  own
contemporary culture.

This  is  one  thing  the  four  papers  offered  here  share  in  common:  a  focus  on
theorising archaeological  practice.  Laurajane  Smith  engages  with  the  connection
between theories applied in academic research archaeology and Australian cultural
heritage management, Darrin Lee Long examines practices elsewhere in Australia
and  in  Zimbabwe  drawing  upon  ideas  about  how  the  global  and  local  spheres
interact,  while  Koji  Mizoguchi  draws  upon  ideas  from  social  theory  to  look  at
archaeological practices in Japan. All three also share a concern for the categories so
often taken for granted in heritage practice. In particular, Lee Long is concerned to
identify what  makes something `indigenous’  heritage, and finds his answer in the
construction of a `world’  heritage against which this can be set and of which this can
become  a  part.  Mizoguchi  is  concerned  to  see  how  the  management  of
archaeological sites relates to people’s construction of themselves. Laurajane Smith
chooses  to  take  a  leaf  from  Foucault  and  consider Australian  archaeology  as  a
branch of `governmentality’   in relation to  the  creation of  an `Aboriginal’  heritage
that can be managed. This shared emphasis on theorising practice makes heritage
for us ±  perhaps paradoxically for archaeologists ±  a realm not of concrete action but
ideology, not of things but of ideas: and this is reflected in the lack of supporting
images  for  the  papers,  which  we  feel  are  unnecessary  and  potentially  distracting
from the ideas presented.

If forced to decide, we would all choose to consider ourselves part of the `post-
processual’  or `interpretive’  turn in archaeology. So-called `processual’  approaches
were adopted in Anglo-American archaeology in the 1960s and 1970s at the same
time as cultural resource management archaeology was emerging in the USA, and
the  link between them is emphasised in Laurajane Smith’s paper.  In an  effort to
move beyond culture-history and descriptive approaches in archaeology, processu-
alists  allied  archaeology  with  a `scientific’   anthropology  rather  than  with  history,
valued  explanation  over  description,  incorporated  cross-cultural  generalisations
about  natural  and  social  processes  into  archaeological  discourse  and  sought  to
establish explicit interpretive methodologies. All of this was intended to provide a
framework within which firm inferences could be made from archaeological data. In
the  1980s,  especially  in  Britain,  a  reaction  set  in  against  this  `hard  science’
approach,  drawing  on  ideas  from  other  fields.  In particular, interpretive  archae-
ologies  seek  to  realign  archaeology  with  history,  assert  the  pre-eminence of  the
interpreter  and  the  process  of  interpretation  as  a  contemporary  practice,  and
thereby recognise the inevitably contextual and contingent nature of any attempt to
understand the  past (Hodder et  al.  1995,  pp.  3± 5). A focus on archaeology  as  a
contemporary practice has obvious affinities with our work as presented here.

The papers have a strong focus on the Pacific rim, which serves to emphasise the
international  ±   indeed  global  ±   nature  of  archaeological  heritage  management.
Every nation in the world has in place laws and procedures for the protection and

306

John Carman

preservation  of  at  least  some  part  of  its  material  cultural  heritage.  While
practitioners  look  to  Europe  and  North  America  for  guidance  on  how  to  meet
internationally  set  standards,  it  is  at  the  boundaries  and  on  the  fringe  of  these
metropolitan areas that  many interesting developments are taking place: in Africa
(Ardouin et al. 1997), in Latin America (sadly unrepresented here), and among the
peoples of the southern ocean. It is here that issues such as `indigeneity’  (the quality
of being indigenous) come to the fore. In terms of the management of so much of
the world’s archaeological heritage, and especially in former European colonies, this
is  an  important  concept  underlying much  heritage  practice.  It  is  a  term  usually
taken to mean the material and cultural heritage of an original, extant but perhaps
now  dwindling  and  subordinate  population.  As  Smith  emphasises  here,  such
heritages  are  managed  under  regulations  and  structures  put  in  place  by  the
dominant  population  which  then  become  tools  for  the  `management’   of  the
subordinate peoples, but as Lee Long points out, such structures can be subverted
by the appropriation of that construction of heritage by the subordinate population
for their own purposes. This makes the realm of heritage an important one for the
construction of identities, not merely their reflection. To understand how heritages
can be built and used contributes to a broader understanding of how human society
works. Taking a different approach to different circumstances, but on a parallel path,
Mizoguchi argues for an understanding of heritage categorisation processes as part
of a wider process of social discourse. In thus looking beyond our own particular
circumstances, we  have  a  chance to  see  how  heritage `works’ . We  believe  that  by
looking elsewhere we can enrich our understanding of how our own heritage also
works, and especially how it works upon ourselves in our own particular context.
Despite  the  non-European  focus  of  these  papers,  however,  the  impetus  to
research these phenomena in the ways presented here does have a European core,
of a kind, since each of us has a connection with the Department of Archaeology at
the University of Cambridge, UK. I, Darrin Lee Long and Koji Mizoguchi gained
archaeological  education  and  qualifications  there,  and  Laurajane  Smith  was  a
Visiting  Scholar for  a  while,  giving  us  all  the  opportunity to  meet and  exchange
ideas. At that time, Laurajane and I each thought we were the only people pursuing
such research: I had started and was to finish before her, but it has turned out that
we were both right. Since then, others have joined us to create this particular body
of  `heritage’   research  which  comes  out  of  archaeology  and,  in  particular,
archaeology in Cambridge.

In doing our work, we deliberately avoid making concrete suggestions about how
archaeological heritage management should be done in favour of finding out what
the  effects  of  doing  it  are  on  the  world. While  we  would  all  accept  that  we  are
`theorisers’   this  does not  mean that  we  bring  a  priori ideas  to  bear  on  an  object
which we have already decided we understand; in fact, the opposite. What we do is
look at heritage management practices in particular places and circumstances, try to
make some sense of what they represent and achieve, and then seek out a suitable
theoretical  framework  which  helps  us  to  contextualise  and  interpret  that  under-
standing. This  is  why  we  call  what  we  do `theorising  a  realm  of  practice’   ±   it  is

`Theorising a Realm of Practice’

307

literally not theorising about archaeological heritage management but researching
into the  specifics of practices and turning the  results into a theoretical statement
about what those practices actually do in the world. While so much of the current
discourse  of  heritage  is  about  the  simplification  of  complexity  and  attempts  to
overcome diversity, this work is concerned to restore that complexity and to explore
that diversity.

Acknowledgements
The papers presented here first saw life as contributions to the session `Theorising
a  Realm of  Practice: research agendas in archaeological heritage  management’   at
the  Fourth World  Archaeological  Congress  held  in  Capetown,  South  Africa,  in
January  1999. Thanks  are  due to  Patricia  Carman and  Carol  McDavid  for  their
assistance  at  that  event  and  to  the  conference  organisers  for  providing  the
opportunity. I am grateful also to Clare Hall, Cambridge, for a travel grant which
allowed me to attend. Particular thanks go to Peter Howard and the editors of this
journal  for  providing  the  opportunity  to  present  these  papers  to  a  wider
audience.

References
Ardouin, C.D. et al. (ed.) (1997) Museums and archaeology in West Africa, Oxford and Washington DC:

James Currey and Smithsonian  Institution Press.

Carman,  J. (1996) Valuing ancient  things: archaeology and law, London: Cassell.
Carman, J. (forthcoming ) `Good citizens and sound economics: the trajectory of archaeology in Britain
from ª heritageº  to ª resourceº ’, in C. Mathers, T. Darvill, & B. Little (eds) Archaeological Assessment
and  Significance, Westport CT: Greenwood Press.

Carman, J., G.D. Carnegie & P.W. Wolnizer (1999) `Is archaeological valuation an accounting matter?’ ,

Antiquity, Vol. 73, pp.  143± 148

Dreyfus, H.L. & P. Rabinow (1983) Beyond  Structuralism and  Hermeneutics, Chicago,  IL: University of

Chicago  Press.

Fairclough,  G.  (forthcoming)  `N.d.  ±   ª Good  conditionº   ±   conservation:  a  20th  century  defining
mo(ve)ment’ ,  in  J.  Schofield  (ed.)  Defining  moments;  material  records:  the  20th  century  in  retrospect,
London: Routledge.

Hodder, I., M. Shanks, A. Alexandri, V. Buchli, J. Carman, J. Last & G. Lucas (eds) (1995) Interpreting

archaeology: finding  meaning in the past, London: Routledge.

Merriman, N. & T. Schadla-Hall (forthcoming) Public archaeology, London: Routledge.

308

John Carman


