International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

What is Aught, but as 'tis Valued? An analysis of
strategies for the assessment of cultural heritage
significance in New Zealand

Sara Donaghey

To cite this article: Sara Donaghey (2001) What is Aught, but as 'tis Valued? An analysis of
strategies for the assessment of cultural heritage significance in New Zealand, International Journal
of Heritage Studies, 7:4, 365-380, DOI: 10.1080/13581650120105561
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13581650120105561

Published online: 09 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 228

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 7, No. 4, 2001, pp. 365± 380

What is Aught, but as ’tis Valued?1 An
analysis of strategies for the assessment
of cultural heritage significance in New
Zealand
Sara Donaghey

Abstract
A clear strategy for assessing the significance of historic places is a prerequisite for effective
cultural resource management. This paper reviews the context for significance assessment,
examines  the  criteria  and  framework  for  its  operation  and  identifies  specific  areas  of
imbalance and under-performance relating to the classification, assessment and evaluation
of historic places in New Zealand. A comparative analysis of the Monuments Protection
Programme  (England)  indicates  considerable  potential  for  the  introduction  of  selective
elements  of  the  English  system  to  New  Zealand.  This  report  makes  a  number  of
recommendations  to improve  the  system  for  assessing  the  significance  of  historic  heritage
and  then  considers  the  wider  implications  of  its  impact  on  management  priorities  and
operating systems. The issues raised unequivocally demonstrate the need for a comprehensive
review of the strategic options for cultural resource management in New Zealand, together
with an explicit statement of commitment to historic heritage.

Key Words:  Heritage Significance; Assessment; Cultural Resource Management;
New Zealand; Monuments Protection Programme; Maori

Today,  the  accelerating  pace  of  societal  development  demands  the  inclusion  of
cultural heritage as part of a national policy of sustainable resource development. In
New Zealand there has been widespread concern for a number of years that cultural
heritage is viewed as a luxury item; insufficient public awareness of cultural heritage
issues and the accompanying scale of loss of sites, buildings and landscape elements
has been well documented since McFadgen’s observations in the 1960s2 and more

1. Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida.

2. B. McFadgen, `Legislative problems in the protection of New Zealand prehistoric sites’, New
Zealand Archaeological Association  Newsletter, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1966, pp. 92± 102.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/01/040365-16   2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/13581650120105561

recently, the arguments neatly summarised by McLean.3 Political apathy, bicultural
complexities, inadequate resources and a hotchpotch of methodological approaches
have  bedevilled  the  management  of  cultural  heritage.  Major  differences  in
interpretation and application caused by ill-conceived legislative reform have led to
inconsistent and reactionary behaviour by heritage practitioners.

The  identification  and  assessment  of  historic  places  is  the  crucial  first  step  in
the  creation  of  any  cultural  heritage  landscape. Thorough  surveys  and  consistent
assessment  criteria  to  determine  the  nature  and  extent  of  all  types  of  heritage
placesÐ built  heritage,  archaeological  and  traditional  sites  and  areasÐ
are  essen-
tial  components  of  this  process.  Precisely  how  this  is  done,  whether  it  is  done
effectively  and  to  what  ends,  forms  a  major  theme  linking  the  contents  of  this
article.

This  paper outlines the management strategies  for  assessing  the  significance of
the historic  heritage  resource  of  New  Zealand  and  considers  the  extent  to  which
these  management  objectives  are  fully  integrated  into  the  heritage  environment.
Where deficiencies are identified, it suggests improvements for increased effective-
ness  drawing  on  international  best  practice  in  general  and  the  Monument
Protection Programme in particular.

Register of the Historic Places Trust
The  Historic  Places Act  1993 (HPA)  specified  the  registration  of  historic  places,
historic  areas,  wahi  tapu  (Maori  sacred  sites)  and  wahi  tapu  areas,  outlined
assessment  criteria,  detailed  two  categories  of  historic  place,  specified  a  broad
identification  and  listing  process  and  designated  the  Historic  Places Trust  as  the
lead body for the identification and assessment of heritage.

Figure 1. Registered items by type.

3. G. McLean, `The lie of the land? The politics and practice of national level identification and
assessment in New Zealand 1955± 95’ , in The politics of inheritance: architectural heritage conference,
Auckland: UNITEC, 1997.

366

Sara Donaghey

Figure  2. Distribution of registered places in New Zealand.

An analysis was performed on data from the paper file of the Auckland Register

of the New Zealand Historic Places Trust to determine its effectiveness.

Figure  1  shows the  total number  of  registered  items  recorded. The  majority  of
buildings are of European origin, historic places outnumber archaeological sites by
4:1 and there are no marae (meeting places) on the Register, arguably amongst the
finest examples of New Zealand’s indigenous heritage. The overall impression is of
a disproportionate representation of historic places.

Figure 2 shows the distribution of registered places countrywide. The majority of
registrations occur within the two territorial authorities of Otago and Canterbury on
the  South  Island,  which  suggests  a  lack  of  standardised  criteria  in  the  selection
process and an uneven distribution across the country.

Figure  3,  registered  places  1975± 1999  in  New  Zealand,  shows  that  the  peak
period  of  registrations  occurred  in  the  1980s;  the  rate  of  registration  has  since
declined dramatically and now averages less than forty per year.

What is Aught, but as ’tis Valued?

367

Figure 3. Registrations, 1975± 1999.

At  present,  the  Register  is  designed  to  identify  and  protect  only  a  minority  of
places whose importance is determined according to inadequate and biased criteria.
The  analysis  of  the  Register of the Historic Places Trust brings into question  the
overall adequacy of the data for analysis, suggesting that the first 800 years of New
Zealand’s  human  history  are  inadequately  represented  by  surviving  historic
heritage. The Register is a poor reflection of the richness and diversity of historic
heritage  in  view  of  the  serious  imbalances  identified  in  all  categories.  Equally
significant is the fact that it is not possible to estimate the proportion of registered
items to the total historic heritage resource because no such quantification exercise
has  ever  been  undertaken. A  comprehensive  review  and  evaluation  of  all  historic
places is long overdue.

The Monuments Protection Programme: England
The  Monuments  Protection  Programme (MPP) was  set  up in  1986. Fairclough4
described the Programme as `a comprehensive review and evaluation of England’s
archaeological  resource,  designed  to  collect  information  which  will  enhance  the
conservation,  management  and  public  appreciation  of  the  archaeological
heritage’.

The Programme has the following principal objectives:

to  review  and  evaluate  existing  information  about  sites  of  archaeological  and
historical interest in order to identify sites of national importance;
to  recommend  to  the  Secretary  of  State  which  monuments  of  national
importance should be protected by law, notably by scheduling;
to  collate  information  on  the  condition  of  nationally  important  monuments  to
provide  a  guide  to  resource  requirements  for  their  conservation  and  future
preservation;

4. G. Fairclough, The monuments protection  programme 1986± 96 in retrospect, London: English Heritage,
p. 1.

368

Sara Donaghey

d
d
d
to use the MPP’s national perspective to help frame an improved response to the
problems of managing inadequately documented and poorly understood areas of
the archaeological record.5

A  combination  of  the  detailed  and  comprehensive  local  database,  the  Sites  and
Monuments  Records  (SMR),  together  with  the  National  Archaeological  Record
maintained  by  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Historical  Monuments  of  England,
provides  baseline  information  for  the  MPPÐ
the  most  systematic  and  extensive
evaluation of England’s archaeological resource ever undertaken.

Eight  non-statutory  criteria  govern  the  selection  of  monuments  of  national
importance.  The  eight  criteria  are:  survival/condition,  period,  rarity  and  repre-
sentivity, diversity of feature, documentation, group value, potential, and diversity
of form.

The programme of national evaluation is substantially complete. A total of 18,500
monuments  have  been  scheduled  and  47%  of  the  Schedule  has  been  revised;  a
tremendous achievement.

Discussion
Table  1  provides  a  comparison  of  measures  in  New  Zealand  and  England  and  a
guide to the order of this discussion.

Legislation
Legislation forms the essential framework for strategic planning within the context
of  resource management. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act
containing  the  Register  of  Scheduled  Monuments  is  the  cornerstone  of  heritage
legislation in  England; scheduled monuments receive automatic statutory protec-
tion from which there are limited grounds for appeal. The system is tightly managed
and endorsed from the highest government level. In New Zealand, registered sites
do  not  receive  automatic  protection,  as  there  is  generous  provision  for  appeal
through the Resource Management Act 1991 (RMA) The Historic Places Trust has
a role similar to its counterpart English Heritage but lacks the equivalent level of
government resourcing and appreciation of its function as a key heritage protection
agency.  Moreover,  the Trust  is  a  non-governmental  organisation  (unlike  English
Heritage)  and,  despite  its  statutory  functions,  lacks  influence.  The  Register  is
primarily a source of information that can be used to identify and assess heritage
items  and  advocate  their  protection.  Contrary  to  popular  belief,  however,  the
registration process was not designed to provide permanent physical protection for
any historic site or place.

5. Ibid., p. 2.

What is Aught, but as ’tis Valued?

369

d
Table 1 Comparison of measures

New Zealand

Topic

England

Historic Places Act

Legislation

Register of the Historic
Places Trust

Buildings and objects;
archaeological sites;
historic areas; wahi tapu;
wahi tapu areas

System

Classification

Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Areas Act
1979

Schedule of ancient
monuments

Single monuments; urban
areas; landscapes

Included

Historic buildings

Excluded if in use

Varied statutory criteria

Assessment

Selective, based on the
nomination of a small
number of places

NZAA Site Recording
Scheme

National importance

Representative selection

Evaluation

Archaeological site types

Typological descriptions

Eight non-statutory
criteria

Comprehensive, systematic
criteria cover all periods
and styles

Sites and Monuments
Record; National
Monuments Record

Monument class
descriptions

None

National evaluations

For specific projects

Ranked, categories I and
II

Evaluation procedure

Single, ranked and scored
list

Poor

Local authority integration

Good

Poor; uncoordinated

Heritage database

Good; co-ordinated

Inadequate
77 (1996± 1997); 8
(1999± 2000)

Resourcing
Registration rate

Adequate
1,800 p.a.

In principle, the two major pieces of heritage legislation, the HPA and RMA, were
each  designed  with  a  separate  purpose:  identification  and  assessment  of  historic
places  was  to  be  covered  by  the  HPA  and  protection  by  the  RMA. Accordingly,
regional councils and territorial authorities were intended to have important roles in

370

Sara Donaghey

providing for historic and cultural heritage protection and management under the
RMA.  However,  integration  between  identification  and  protection  measures  was
never endorsed and remains fragile.

This paper recommends the following actions:

establish  a  national  agency  to  ensure  consistency  and  co-ordination  across  the
heritage arena;
establish the Trust as the national lead body for the care and protection of historic
heritage;
strengthen the provisions of the HPA whereby historic places receive automatic
statutory protection with only limited grounds for appeal;
clarify the conditions under which authorities for any activity affecting a site may
be granted;
develop guidelines for interpreting the criteria for registration in a non-statutory
format.

Classification
Both New Zealand and England share similarities in their respective classification
systems, as shown in Table 2.

Despite the introduction of the broader concept of `historic place’  in 1993, the
Register  continues  to  be  divided  inappropriately  into  historic  buildings  and
archaeological sites. Since 1993, no archaeological sites, gardens or other cultural
landscapes  have  been  registered.  Is  the  concept  of  historic  place  workable  in
practice? The  suggestion  of  separate  registers  for different  types of historic place,
including Maori heritage, with separate assessment criteria would, one feels, only
add to the confusion.

The process of classification must also be considered. The MPP has developed a
separate methodology for each of the three categories of `monument’. By contrast,
in New Zealand, all categories are assessed to the same criteria, whilst Maori sites
require  no  assessment  at  all.  In  New  Zealand,  historic  buildings  are  included

Table 2 Classification of historic places/ancient monuments

New Zealand

Buildings and objects
Archaeological sites
Historic areas
Wahi tapu
Wahi tapu areas

England

Single monuments
Single monuments
Urban areas/landscapes
Single monuments
Landscapes

What is Aught, but as ’tis Valued?

371

d
d
d
d
d
regardless  of  whether  they  are  in  use  or  not;  in  England,  buildings  still  suited  to
active use are excluded but protected in other legislation.

Archaeological issues. The practical difficulties involved in assessing and protecting
more  than  50,000  sites  currently  listed  on  the  New  Zealand  Archaeological
Association (NZAA) Site  Record  File have forced  archaeologists to  favour  action
only when a site is threatened. The protection afforded to all archaeological sites in
HPA provisions is largely illusory. Notwithstanding this, no site has been registered
since 1991.

Another reason for the slow pace of registration is that little of the archaeological
field survey work of the past fifteen years, other than the location of new sites, has
been  fed  into  the  site  recording  scheme  and  thence  been  available  to  inform
registration  decision.6 There  is  also  the  issue  of  the  unspectacularÐ
the  pits  and
middens resulting from everyday, predominantly Maori activities in the past that fit
poorly  into  register-type  formats.  Allen7 has  commented  that  such  places  are
unlikely  to  qualify  for  listing  in  a  selective  system  of  registration  based  on
`importance’ or to have an application to destroy them refused, as under the existing
registration criteria only the most spectacular individual historic sites are likely to
gain registration.

Recommendations:

substitute a single category of historic place comprising buildings, artefacts and
archaeological sites all subject to the same assessment criteria;
consider  the  application  of  MPP  methodology  to  the  existing  categories  of
historic areas, wahi tapu and wahi tapu areas;
remove from the Act the category of buildings in use as historic places; these are
best managed by planning legislation and local authority processes;
establish  a  national  programme  of  archaeological  site  recording,  upgrade,
assessment and monitoring;
establish procedures to ensure all site information is fed into the Site Record File
of the NZAA;
consider  defining  more  historic  areas  comprising  interrelated  sites  and  their
settings;
clarify the distinction between registered and recorded sites;
establish  a  pilot  project  to  investigate  pits,  middens  and  other  site  types  not
qualifying for registration;
promote registration as a protection measure.

6. A. Challis, `Registration of archaeological sites under the Historic Places Act 1980’, Archaeology in
New Zealand, Vol. 35, No. 4, 1992, pp. 228± 242.

7. H. Allen, Protecting  historic places in New Zealand, Auckland: Department of Anthropology,
University of Auckland, 1998.

372

Sara Donaghey

d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
Assessment
Comprehensive criteria and methodology with clear guidelines for defining national
importance  and  representativeness  must  be  established  as  an  integral  part  of  the
registration process. The Register must be seen as a dynamic document subject to
an ongoing process of review in accordance with sound criteria applied consistently
throughout the country.

The key issue is whether the national Register should include a limited number
of `nationally significant’ registered items, which a national agency would attempt to
protect, or whether the Register should be a `nationally representative’ list of places
meeting the HPA 1993 criteria.

National importance. The New Zealand scheme is confusing in its assumptions and
unsystematic in application. Both relative and essential components are mixed with
criteria  ranging  from  unique,  through  regional  to  community  values  in  a
bewildering diversity of approaches. The term `importance’ is commonly used in the
groupings of historic places and assessment approaches found in the HPA, but its
relevance to the assessment process is largely illusory. National importance is almost
exclusively  conveyed  by  the  designation  of  places  as  category  I  or  II;  other
approaches are relegated to minor weighting. Moreover, historic areas,  wahi tapu
and wahi tapu areas are not subject to any system of classification or ranking.

A  representative  selection. Archaeologists  have  begun  to  question  the  merits  of
systems (such as scheduling and registering) that give precedence to the individual
site over a representative area. Cleere8 argued that a valid selection should consist
of a representative sample drawn from the known totality of the national heritage.
Fowler’s artistic metaphor makes this clear: `the whole canvas of the archaeological
environment,  not  just  the  blobs  of  brightest  paint  upon  it,  is  what  makes  the
picture’ .9

Allen10 believes  the  problem  is  caused  by  basing  the  selection  on  historical
assumptions  that  are  too  narrow  and  favours  the  preservation  of  a  sample  of  all
(archaeological)  sites  to  avoid  the  bias  towards  the  unique  and  spectacular  that
some  ranking  systems  create. The  alternative  to  large-scale  land  management  to
protect  historic  values  is  the  creation  of  conservation  zones  in  district  plans.
However,  placing  such  a  responsibility  entirely  with  local  authorities  is  also
contentious.

In  England,  comprehensive,  systematic  criteria  cover  all  periods,  styles  and
monument types to ensure that a representative selection of sites and monuments is
chosen for protection. As is apparent in New Zealand, a selective system, based on
the  nomination  of  a  small  number  of  places,  does  not  result  in  a  selection

8. H. Cleere, Archaeological heritage management in the modern world, London: Unwin Hyman, 1989.

9. P. Fowler, `What price the man-made heritage?’, Antiquity, Vol. 61, 1987, pp. 409± 415 (p. 413).

10. Allen, op. cit.

What is Aught, but as ’tis Valued?

373

demonstrating  the  variety  and  cultural  diversity  of  the  nation’s  heritage.  Historic
buildings  are  vastly  over-represented,  whilst  archaeological  sites  and  places  of
significance  to  Maori  form  an  unrepresentative  minority.  There  is  nothing
intrinsically wrong with preserving the unique for the very reason of its singularity;
the difficulty lies in establishing an equitable balance between what is extraordinary
and a representative selection of the ordinary.

This suggests the following recommendations:

remove all of section 23 of the HPA detailing the criteria for registration. Replace
it  with  a  transparent  assessment  procedure  based  on  the  eight  non-statutory
criteria  for  determining  national  importance  used  by  the  MPP  supplemented,
where  necessary,  with  provisions  to  satisfy  the  protection  of  places  of  spiritual
value to Maori;
periodically review all entries on the Register;
clarify and simplify interpretive information regarding assessment;
ensure that a representative selection of historic places is selected for protection
by  comparison  to  the  known  resource,  following  a  national  quantification
exercise;
develop clear guidelines to assist the implementation of registration policy.

Evaluation
Successful  decision  making  depends  ultimately  on  our  knowledge  and  under-
standing of what we are trying to preserve. Research and inquiry that enables this
are  essential  components  in  managing  the  resource. The  NZAA  Site  Recording
Scheme is the national database for New Zealand. However, the system of national
evaluation  at  present  suffers  from  a  number  of  inadequacies  that  have  been
documented by the author, as described below.11

The Site Recording Scheme Upgrade Project. A programme of national evaluation is
essential to establish what is nationally important, even if it is not necessarily going
to be registered. This will enable strategic responses to conservation management at
local authority and national level. A recent national initiative by the NZAA, the Site
Recording Scheme Upgrade Project, should help address some of these issues, as it
aims to upgrade the information contained in the 52,422 recorded archaeological
sites in the country district by district.12

This  innovative  project  deserves  to  succeed;  however,  its  long-term  future  can
only be secured by connection to a government heritage agency to ensure adequate
resources.

11. S. Donaghey, `A fading landscape: strategies for managing the cultural heritage resource’, in
Management and Inter national Business, Auckland: Massey University, 2000.

12. L. Bowers, `Annual Report 2000. The NZAA Site Recording Scheme Upgrade Project’,
Archaeology in New Zealand, Vol. 43, No. 2, 2000, pp. 95± 97.

374

Sara Donaghey

d
d
d
d
d
Typological descriptions. The monument class descriptions are a key component of
MPP evaluation procedures supporting the identification and classification of major
site  types  identified  in  the  SMRs  on  a  thematic  basis  in  New  Zealand.  The
handbook  of  archaeological  site  recording13 provides  a  taxonomy  of  twenty-six
major  site  types  and  has  the  potential  to  provide  an  excellent  starting  point  for
devising a typological inventory of historic places similar to the MPP. Projects need
to be specially commissioned to gather information on inadequately researched and
documented areas of the archaeological resource to be instigated in New Zealand,
as occurs in England.

Evaluation  procedures. At  present,  there  is  both  community  and  professional
involvement in site identification and processing of registrations in  New Zealand,
but  it  is  apparent  that  the  process  lacks  strategic  direction,  and  any  meaningful
public involvement in the final decision-making process. Inconsistencies within the
current  procedures  for  evaluation  include  a  lack  of  consistency  in  determining
significance,  confusion  over  the  categorisation  of  historic  places  and  the  role  of
stakeholder groups.

There is also a wide variation in the criteria and processes used for registration
and  differences  in  the  amount  and  quality  of  information  held  about  individual
places.

Ranking. There  are  marked  differences  in  ranking  procedures  between  the  two
countries. In New Zealand, historic places are designated category I and II by HPA
93  in  an  attempt  to  rank  places  in  terms  of  their  `special’   or  `outstanding’
significance or value but, in reality, do little more than represent a spurious degree
of  ranking.  In  these  circumstances,  the  term  `national  importance’  is  rendered
meaningless. By contrast, a single ranked list based on a transparent scoring system
defines monuments of national importance in England.

Ranking  systems  have  received  a  mixed  press  in  New  Zealand  archaeological
practice.  Both  Walton  and  Allen14 have  been  highly  critical  of  ranking
methodology.

However,  the  advantage  of  a  ranking  system  is  its  rigour,  transparency  and
consistency,  and  thus  its  defensibility  under  challenge;  proposals  for  listing  new
items can also be assessed against the same criteria as existing listed items. Provided
the  advice  of  Startin15 is  followed  and  scoring  is  seen  explicitly  as  an  aid  to

13. New Zealand Archaeological Association, Archaeological site recording in New Zealand, Auckland:
New Zealand Archaeological Association, 1999, pp. 1± 138.

14. ICOMOS and NZHP Trust, `Register workshop’ , in The crucial first step, Wellington: New Zealand
Historic Places Trust, 1997; H. Allen, `Protection for archaeological sites and the NZ HPT Register
of Historic Places, Historic Areas, Wahi Tapu and Wahi Tapu Areas’, Archaeology in New Zealand, Vol.
37, No. 3, 1994, pp. 205± 207.

15. B. Startin, `Assessment of field remains’ , in Hunter and Ralston (eds) Archaeological resource
management in the UK: an introduction, Stroud: Alan Sutton Publishing, 1993, pp. 184± 196.

What is Aught, but as ’tis Valued?

375

judgement,  not  a  replacement  for  it,  supported  by  continual  reassessment  and
revision,  then  the  validity  of  the system  as  confirmed by the  success  of  the  MPP
must speak for itself.

A  thematic  framework. A  carefully  constructed  register  should  be  capable  of
reflecting and shaping a broad perception of history and heritage. One of the ways
in  which  this  can  be  achieved  is  by  classifying  or  grouping  similar  heritage  items
according  to  chronological,  cultural,  or  functional  characteristics.  A  thematic
framework  such  as  that  proposed  by  McLean16 would  undoubtedly  tighten  the
focus of the Register. The existence of a set of national standards and a consistent
approach  to  registration  would  provide  a  benchmark  for  the  assessment  of
significance and legitimise the registration process.

Historic areas. The concept that the context of historic places and the grouping of
places and buildings has equal importance to individual places and buildings is well
established  in  cultural  heritage  studies.  In  New  Zealand,  the  hypothesis  that `the
whole  may  be  more  than  the  sum  of  its  parts’   applied  to  historic  heritage,  is
recognised  in  those  sections  of  the  HPA  relating  to  historic  areas  and  wahi  tapu
areas.  Indeed,  nowhere  is  this  better  expressed  than  in  the  holistic  view  of  a
culturally meaningful landscape posited by Maori in which ecological and cultural
relationships  are  tied  into  a  single  web.  Unfortunately,  the  number  of  registered
items in each category is not great, and there has been no comprehensive, systematic
approach towards historic area registration in New Zealand.

New  Zealand lags  behind in  its  recognition and development of archaeological
conservation  zones,  environmentally  sensitive  areas  and  cultural  landscapes
compared with England. Recent MPP initiatives such as the Historic Landscapes
Project  show  that  an  inclusive  approach  to  landscape  evaluation  used  in  tandem
with  other  conservation  developments  in  countryside  management  can  be  used
successfully to promote a common national framework for conservation decisions
within the larger context of planning and agricultural policies.17 There is no reason
why  the  adoption  of  a  similar  broad-brush  approach  should  not  be  successful  in
New Zealand.

Recommendations:

remove categories I and II historic places from the HPA and substitute a single
category consistent with the remaining unranked elementsÐ historic areas, wahi
tapu and wahi tapu areas.

16. G. McLean, Meanings to an end: a draft national thematic framework for historic  places in New
Zealand, Wellington: New Zealand Historic Places Trust, 1996, pp. 1± 67.

17. English Heritage, Archaeology review 1996± 97, London: English Heritage, 1997.

376

Sara Donaghey

d
develop the Register as an indicative reference to places of significance to Maori
rather than a `list’  of places of significance, as suggested by Richardson;18
introduce  a  ranked,  scored  methodology  for  historic  places  and  historic  areas
based on a single list;
ensure  consistency  in  the  application  of  evaluation  criteria  throughout  the
registration process;
devise  a  comprehensive  classification  for  all  known  site  types  as  working
documents based on the system and taxonomy of the NZAA;
reintroduce area/regional programming to increase the volume of registered sites
and improve the accuracy of site record details;
charge a national heritage agency with the task of co-ordinating site upgrade and
assessment projects;
ensure  that  industrial  heritage  and  buildings  in  an  urban  environment  are
protected  through  the  statutory  planning  process  by  listing  in  district  plans,
through zoning or the creation of `Environmentally Sensitive Areas’.

Maori Heritage
The  Maori  ancestral  landscape  is  essential  to  any  discussion  of  cultural  heritage
values; however, many issues concerning the identification and selection of Maori
sites of outstanding significance and value have yet to be resolved. Also, the rate of
registration of sites of significance to Maori has been unacceptably slow.

Recommendations:

clarify and strengthen the protection of sites of Maori.
establish  clear  criteria  to  determine  sites  of  national  significance  to  Maori
consistent with principles of indigenous cultural ownership.

Local Authority Issues
A  persistent  and  major  anomaly  has  been  the  lack  of  any  explicit  allocation  of
heritage protection  and management functions between central and local govern-
ment and the Trust, on the one hand, and between the HPA and RMA, on the other.
This  has  led  to  uneven  and  inconsistent  application  and  interpretation  of  the
purposes and principles of the RMA with regard to cultural heritage management
through statutory provisions in district plans both by local and regional authorities.
The RMA does not indicate how cultural heritage should be managed in terms of
district plan scheduling, whilst links to the HPA and the registration process remain
unclear.

18. B. McFadgen, `Legislative problems in the protection of New Zealand prehistoric sites’ , New
Zealand Archaeological Association  Newsletter, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1966, pp. 92± 102; P. Richardson, Review of
the Historic Places and Historic Areas Sections  of the Historic Places Trust’s National Register, Wellington:
New Zealand Historic Places Trust, 2000.

What is Aught, but as ’tis Valued?

377

d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
Identification at territorial authority level is often unsystematic, based on a variety
of  uncoordinated  assessment  methods  and  rarely  comprehensive,  leading  to  an
aesthetic or elitist view of the role of heritage management in which only the `crÁeme
de la crÁeme’ is protected.

In  England,  local  authority  involvement  in  heritage  protection  is  firmly
established;  sites  and  monuments  are  considered  in  regulatory  and  planning
processes  whilst  the  SMR  database  is  a  management  responsibility  of  the  local
authority. In New Zealand, the performance of territorial authorities in the field of
heritage protection is highly variable, ranging from proactive authorities with their
own cultural heritage strategies to those having scant regard for heritage items and
who are content to leave heritage management to the Trust.

Recommendations:

clarify and  strengthen the  links between the  HPA  and the RMA; in  particular,
ensure the identification and assessment function of the Trust is complemented
by the protection mechanisms of local government;
clarify national standards for heritage assessment at local authority level;
establish  nationally  agreed  methodology  for  identifying  cultural  heritage  in
district plans and integrating registered places in district plans;
include local historic heritage schedules in district plans; all nominations to be
considered against national assessment criteria.

The Heritage Database
Decision  making  to  inform  effective  significance  assessment  strategies  requires
quality information to be readily available. Richardson19 has called into question the
adequacy  of  the Trust’s  information  database  on  registered  items.  He  viewed  the
Register within the broader context of other databases and schedules of land-based
heritage  in  New  Zealand,  and  concluded  that  it  provided  only  a  partial  listing  of
places of recognised heritage value.

Recommendations:

set up a comprehensive and retrievable heritage database that records all relevant
information  in  a  standardised  format.  Such  a  database  would  operate  as  the
primary  information  source  for  management  decisions  about  the  heritage
resource;
establish quality standards incorporating clear policy guidelines.

Resourcing
Improved levels of funding are a sine qua non for effective heritage management.

19. Richardson, op. cit.

378

Sara Donaghey

d
d
d
d
d
d
Recommendations:

direct  resources  to  support  the  development  of  assessment  frameworks,  the
gathering of information and the maintenance and development of expertise and
information  systems  and  to  implement  management  decisions  affecting  the
resource;
increase  current  levels  of  funding  to  permit  efficient  management  of  the
assessment and registration process.

Rate of Registration
The rate at which the MPP schedules sites has been a crucial factor in the success
of the Programme. A `headline’ target of 1,200 ± 1,800 scheduling recommendations
each  year  has  been  achieved  since  inception.  By  contrast,  the  registration  rate  in
New Zealand has been extremely slow in recent years. Moreover, the registration
process remains almost entirely reactive; registrations are put forward on an ad hoc
basis rather than as part of a systematic programme of identification, selection and
protection.

Recommendation:

set a target rate of 500 registrations each year for the next ten years.

At this point, international comparisons serve a useful comparative purpose. Let us
look  briefly  at  procedures  in  two  other  countries,  the  USA  and Australia.  In  the
USA, the National Parks Service (NPS) co-ordinates the identification, evaluation
and  protection  of  historic  and  archaeological  resources,  the  most  significant  of
which are listed on the National Register of Historic Places maintained by the NPS.
The list includes districts, buildings, sites, structures and objects of local, regional
or  national  significance.  However,  listing  on  the  Register  does  not  guarantee
protection  of  items  or  areas,  which  occurs  most  effectively  at  state  or  local
government level.20

In Australia,  the Australian  Heritage  Commission  manages  the  Register  of  the
National  Estate  comprising  in  excess  of  11,000  places  of  national  significance,
mainly  historic  buildings  and  places,  although  registration  does  not  ensure
protection. Organisation and administration at state level is the preferred and more
effective means of managing the heritage.21

20. Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, Historic and cultural heritage management in
New Zealand, Wellington: Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, 1996.

21. Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, Historic and cultural heritage management in
New Zealand. Background report: case studies, Wellington: Parliamentary Commissioner for the
Environment, 1996.

What is Aught, but as ’tis Valued?

379

d
d
d
Conclusion
Few  would  deny  that  the  present  New  Zealand  Register  requires  a  thorough
overhaul. In its current format it is a poor reflection of the diversity of the country’s
historic heritage both in terms of the selection of places of national importance and
those  places chosen  as representative  of  the  nation’s heritage.  Far more  attention
must be paid to the place of heritage in the  wider cultural  landscape; the holistic
panorama of historic areas and relict landscapes as perceived by Maori. National co-
ordination must ensure consistency across common assessment mechanisms and a
standardised  evaluation  and  methodology  at  all  levels  of  governmentÐ national,
regional  and  localÐ
set  in  place.  Moreover,  the  current  criteria  must  be  flexible
enough  to  accommodate  changing  perceptions  of  value  and  international  guide-
lines.  Registration  must  become  a  political  priority;  the  Register  must  embody  a
sense of national collective identity inclusive of all heritage values.

The MPP is an example of an overseas system with proven success in  heritage
resource  management. This  comparative  analysis  has  identified  significant  differ-
ences between management systems in England and New Zealand. However, it has
also identified a congruence that signalled a degree of fit sufficiently close to enable
a transfer of principle and methodology. A formative comparative evaluation of the
two systems suggests that there is considerable potential, as yet unrecognised, for
the application of the MPP to improve existing systems of heritage management in
New Zealand.

The recommendations put forward would substantially improve the performance
and  effectiveness  of  the  heritage  management  system,  particularly  in  the  areas  of
statutory  provision,  classification,  assessment,  evaluation  and  protection  of  the
heritage  resource.  Other  significant  improvements  would  accrue  over  sensitive
issues of Maori heritage, strengthened integration with local authority procedures,
the RMA  and  the  planning  process,  and  to  the  community,  business  and private
sectors.

It is not feasible to attempt to explore and conserve the entire heritage resource
but rather to set in place procedures for its effective management, with the proviso
that registration is only one aspect of modern heritage regulation. Today, this must
include  research-driven  conservation,  environmental  land  management  schemes
and new approaches to landscape conservation and sustainability.

These proposals must be underpinned by raising the profile of historic heritage as
a national asset for succeeding generations to enjoy. A prevailing climate of under-
investment  and  reduced  funding  for  public-sector  projects  has  made  successive
governments unwilling or unable to consider historic heritage as a worthy recipient
of  Treasury  largesse.  Such  a  cavalier  attitude  towards  a  finite,  non-renewable
resource  can  no  longer  be  tolerated;  the  conservation  of  New  Zealand’s  heritage
places is non-negotiable. A shift in public awareness and attitudes is required; one
that  will  transform  the  profile  of  historic  heritage  to  ensure  it  becomes  truly
expressive of New Zealand’s national and cultural identity.

380

Sara Donaghey


