International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Integrating natural and cultural heritage: the
advantage of feng shui landscape resources

Lawal Marafa

To cite this article: Lawal Marafa (2003) Integrating natural and cultural heritage: the advantage
of feng￿shui landscape resources, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 9:4, 307-323, DOI:
10.1080/1352725022000155054
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/1352725022000155054

Published online: 24 Jun 2010.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 579

Citing articles: 12 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies,
Vol. 9, No. 4, 2003, pp. 307–323

Integrating Natural and Cultural
Heritage: the advantage of feng shui
landscape resources
Lawal M. Marafa

Abstract
Human  activities  interact  with  natural  processes  to  produce  landscapes.  Cultural  and
natural  phenomena  sit  side  by  side  in  the feng  shui  woods  beside  villages  in  the  New
Territories,  but  their  continued  existence  is  threatened  by  urbanisation. To  highlight  the
value of these natural resources, three feng shui woods and villages located in the New
Territories of Hong Kong were selected for investigation. The study examined their socio-
cultural, ecological and botanical characteristics. Investigations and interviews with local
residents confirmed that the feng shui woods are: (1) regarded as cultural heritage because
they bear testimony to a cultural tradition being revered by local people along the principles
of  geomancy;  (2)  an  example  of  traditional  human  settlement  that  dates  back  several
hundred  years;  and  (3)  characterised  by  historical  continuity  devoid  of  accelerated
development. Similarly, they represent a natural heritage as they: (1) represent ongoing
ecological processes in the evolution and development of terrestrial ecosystem communities;
and (2) contain important and significant natural habitats that can be used for education,
environmental  awareness,  conservation  of  biological  diversity  as  well  as  serve  as
destinations for ecotourists and nature appreciation.

Key Words: Conservation; Ancient Woodlands; Feng Shui; Hong Kong; Landscape;
Natural Heritage; Sacred Groves

Cultural Landscape Resources
In  contemporary  discussions  concerning  development,  tourism,  conservation  and
even sustainable development, questions of heritage are being asked around the world.
With the growing importance of heritage resources (as evidenced by the citations of
the World Heritage Convention1) to various communities, scholars and stakeholders
have  emphasised  management,  interpretation  and  conservation.2 Indeed,  Peter

1. The UNESCO World Heritage Centre, ‘Defining our heritage’,
< http://www.unesco.org/whc/intro-en.htm > , accessed 15 April 2003.

2. R.V. Bianchi, ‘The contested landscapes of World Heritage on a tourist island: the case of
Garajonay National Park, La Gomera’, International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 8, No. 2, 2002,
pp. 81–97.

ISSN 1352-7258 print; ISSN 1470-3610 online/03/040307-17 © 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/1352725022000155054

Howard3 and others have indicated that a group of scholars, policy makers and lay
people see heritage as largely a tourist enterprise and part of tourism studies.

No  matter  how  it  is  viewed,  there  are  certain  issues  that  connect  aspects  of
heritage  together. As  a  result  of  perceptions,  values  and  philosophies,  people  are
committed and prepared to preserve and conserve, manage and interpret heritage
for the common good. Heritage is indeed important and can represent a holistic
view of the physical and cultural environment of a society or community.

Generally divided into cultural and natural aspects, what is included as heritage
(particularly  natural)  is  often  contested4 by  various  groups  of  people. With  an
evolving  understanding  of  heritage  studies,  and  some  degree  of  fluidity  in
perceptions, there is a need for integration and to some extent a multidisciplinary
approach to facilitate further understanding—a theme akin to the discussions that
characterised the sustainable development debate.

While heritage studies have historically been the terrain of a few scholars with
backgrounds in the arts and social sciences (an issue tersely indicated by scholars
like Peter Howard5 and John Porter6), it is now becoming evident that heritage—
both  natural  and  cultural—can  also  be  studied  by  natural  scientists.  Indeed,
scholars have earlier advocated the need for integrating natural and social sciences
in order to comprehend and appreciate contemporary resource management issues7
and environmental impacts.8 As a testimony to this need, Coccossis & Nijkamp9
have  similarly  argued  that  the  separation  of  landscape  into  natural  and  cultural
heritage has hampered interdisciplinary syntheses and understandings of complex
ecological  relationships.  These  relationships  and  processes  have  modified  land-
scapes, making some natural landscapes important heritage resources as a result of
unique and ongoing ecological processes.

While accepting that heritage is simply linked to values bequeathed to us by past
civilisations, it is crucial to reiterate the impossibility, in most cases, of separating
natural heritage from cultural heritage. Quite often, the concept of natural heritage
cannot  be  separated  from  community  beliefs  and  perceptions  about  a  particular
landscape.

In  most  cases  natural  and  cultural  heritage  focuses  on  landscapes  where
relationships  with  the  natural  environment  over  time  define  their  essential

3. P. Howard, Editorial: ‘New moves in Britain’, International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 6, No.
3, 2000, pp. 199–200.

4. Bianchi, op. cit. (note 2).

5. P. Howard, Heritage: management, interpretation, identity, London: Continuum, 2003, p. 14ff.

6. J.F. Porter, ‘World Heritage Sites—what are they?’, The Environmentalist, Vol. 23, 2003, pp. 7–8.

7. B. Mitchell, Resource and environmental management, Malaysia: Longman, 1997.

8. L.M. Marafa, ‘Socio-ecological impact and risk assessments in the urban environment: a
multidisciplinary concept from Hong Kong’, The Environmentalist, Vol. 22, 2002, pp. 373–381.

9. H. Coccossis & P. Nijkamp, Planning for our cultural heritage, Aldershot: Avebury, 1995.

308

Lawal M. Marafa

character.10 While the emphasis in cultural landscapes has been on human history,
continuity of cultural traditions, and social values and aspirations, some rural areas
of outstanding beauty, unique geomorphology, or great diversity of plant and animal
species have also become part of our cultural heritage.

Despite  their  apparent  juxtaposition  and  strong  dichotomous  tradition,  recent
experience  has  demonstrated  that  in  many  landscapes  the  natural  heritage  and
cultural  heritage  are  inextricably  bound  together  and  that  the  conservation
approach  could  benefit  from  integration11 in  order  to  interpret,  understand  and
manage  them  for  the  community. The  lack  of  understanding  of  landscape  as  a
holistic  term  that  encompasses  both  types  of  heritage  has  hindered  sustainable
solutions of conservation, interpretation and overall environmental management of
a  given  landscape.  Scholars  have  reported  that  cultural  landscapes  are  created
through  the  interrelationship  of  culture  and  nature.12 Cultural  landscapes  often
reflect specific techniques of sustainable land use. As a result, protection of such
landscapes can contribute to modern techniques of sustainable land use and can
also maintain or enhance natural values in the landscape, with due consideration for
the characteristics and limitations of the natural environment they are established
in, and a specific spiritual relation to nature.

However,  dichotomies  are  evident  between  different  ways  of  thought  and
scientific  backgrounds,  and  between  the  socio-cultural  and  nature  protection
aspects  of  landscapes.  Natural  scientists  now  increasingly  recognise  the  immense
cultural influences on nature. The interaction between humans and their environ-
ment  spans  centuries,  and  continues  to  shape  the  earth’s  surface. Where  such
interactions  are  unique  and  constitute  a  way  of  life,  they  become  treasures  and
heritage worthy of understanding, interpretation, preservation and conservation. It
is not clear whether the feng shui woodlands—patches of native forests in the New
Territories  of  Hong  Kong—will  provide  such  opportunities. The  importance  of
these  landscapes  as  heritage  and  the  need  to  maintain  the  heritage  resource  for
future generations calls for a refocusing of conservation thinking.

Some of these settlements are located near natural landscapes characterised by
different  natural  and  ecological  processes.  As  they  are  also  home  to  human
settlement and activities, the key factors that continue to modify these landscapes
include economic conditions, culture, society, and—recently—land-use planning.
Although  people  were  attracted  to  the  natural  landscapes  in  the  first  place,  the
discernible spatial variability has been enhanced by people themselves. The natural
and cultural landscape has been modified by new structures and related vegetation

10. N. Mitchell & S. Buggey, ‘Protected landscapes and cultural landscapes: taking advantage of
diverse approaches’, The George Wright Forum, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2000, pp. 35–46.

11. D.A. Posey, ‘Introduction: culture and nature—the inextricable link’, in D.A. Posey (ed.) Cultural
and spiritual values of biodiversity, London: Intermediate Technology for the United Nations
Environment Programme, 1999.

12. Mitchell & Buggey, op. cit. (note 10).

Integrating Natural and Cultural Heritage

309

types. One of the major components of a spatial feng shui layout is the availability of
dense vegetation at the back and a water body in the front of the settlement. These
forests  are  important  and  can  be  examples  of  successful  in  situ conservation  of
otherwise locally extinct tree species.

As a background to this study, I have highlighted a general perspective of cultural
and natural landscapes as they constitute heritage. This background has formed an
important base for the understanding of the intricate nature of cultural and natural
heritage. Studying feng shui from the ecological perspective, and indeed from the
point of view of natural sciences, depicts it as an ecosystem-management science.
The objective is not to portray feng shui as a cultural phenomenon but to use the feng
shui backdrop as a placement science, to signify the seemingly important natural
vegetation planted on these landscapes as an ecological concept. Furthermore, in
the  course  of  this  research,  emphasis  was  laid  on  the  ecological  aspects  of  these
resources  as  their  unique  and  spectacular  landscape  stems  from  centuries  of
interaction between geology, climatic conditions and the extent of human activity as
it affects, in particular, the forests adjacent to these human settlements.

Having  said  that,  the  conservation  and  interpretation  of  heritage  cannot  be
undertaken by looking at culture and nature in isolation, particularly where they are
juxtaposed.  It  is  with  this  perspective,  rather  than  that  of  sociology  or  cultural
studies, that this paper is conceived. In this regard, the present work investigates and
reports the viability of the feng shui phenomenon as a cultural way of life that has
continued to shape the physical environment of South Chinese settlements. Finally,
it  is  the  significance  of  the  forest  patches  and  their  importance  to  biodiversity
conservation, cultural beliefs and the tendency to preserve what is inherited that
initiated this study.

The Feng Shui Grove as a Sacred Forest
Globally, the practice of nature conservation goes back in human experience beyond
historical horizons. The historical transformation of the forest has been historically
defined  by  the  struggle  over  competing  uses  and  contrasting  discourse  of  place,
through  which  its  geographical  and  cultural  features  have  been  shaped.  As  the
Chinese civilisation grew, feng shui developed into an environmental system that was
both an art and a science.13 The fact that it is still practised now in the same vein
constitutes a heritage that should be treasured and preserved.

As civilisation evolved, feng shui grew to meet new concerns and the concept was
translated  into  smaller  places  both  outdoors  and  indoors.  Feng  shui experts  were
then seen as specialists who became landscape designers seeking to enhance nature
and not disturb it. These concerns are now in tandem and have metamorphosed
into contemporary environmental awareness campaigns seeking to maintain these
resources as heritage. Consequently, the local inhabitants have made a significant
historic contribution to forest and landscape preservation.

13. S. Rossbach & L. Yun, Feng shui design: from history and landscape to modern gardens and interiors,
London: Viking, 1998.

310

Lawal M. Marafa

Feng  shui has  endured  as  an  art  of  site  selection  in  East  Asia  for  more  than
3,000 years and still remains popular in Chinese society.14 Although it may have
positive values for human welfare, Han argues that feng shui has evolutionary and
ecological values for selecting optimal human habitations. The importance of this
phenomenon  as  an  ecological  value  and  the  need  to  conserve  and  interpret  the
feng  shui
resources  as  a  heritage  further  reflects  the  significance  of  this
discourse.

Forests  and  culture  have  intertwined  throughout  human  history.  Forest  land-
scapes are formed and are strongly characterised by cultural belief and management
systems, and cultures are materially and spiritually built upon the physical world of
the  natural  environment.  Just  as  people  have  acted  upon  and  altered  forests
throughout history, so too have forests profoundly influenced human consciousness
and culture.15 In landscapes, nature and culture are complementary, and cultural
identity  is  strongly  related  to  the  natural  environment  in  which  it  undoubtedly
develops.16

In  South  China,  numerous  natural  landscapes  and  vegetation  communities,
formed as a result of feng shui beliefs, simultaneously represent habitations depicting
past  civilisations,  some  of  which  have  since  been  abandoned. These  cultural  and
natural sites constitute a common heritage to be treasured as unique testimonies to an
enduring past. The cultural and natural landscape in South China has been modified
as a result of the adherence to feng shui belief in spatial placement and geomancy.

Feng shui is often referred to as geomancy—more popularly known in the West as
‘earth  magic’—but  feng  shui in  fact  embraces  more  than Western  geomancy.  As
indicated by Man-ho and O’Brien, feng shui is now becoming increasingly popular,
even in the West, as a development of traditional Western geomantic practices; and
is  considered  to  add  a  more  sympathetic  dimension  to  the  relationship  between
people, structures and their environment.17

In the principle of geomancy and placement science, feng shui location is a closed
space  surrounded  by  mountainous  areas  with  a  clearly  defined  spatial  configura-
tion.18 Han further asserts that feng shui locations represent a semi-enclosed space
surrounded by mountains at the back, on the left, and on the right, and open at the
front (see figure 1). Since this description can easily fit into the description of most
native village settlements of the New Territories of Hong Kong (see figure 2), the
vegetation  groves  that  surround  such  villages,  in  the  form  of  crescent,  can  be
referred to as feng shui woodlands.

14. K.T. Han, ‘Traditional Chinese site selection—feng shui: an evolutionary/ecological perspective’,
Journal of Cultural Geography, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2001, pp. 75–96.

15. Posey, op. cit. (note 11).

16. O. Bruun, ‘Fengshui and the Chinese perception of nature’, in O. Bruun & A. Kalland (eds)
Asian perceptions of nature: a critical approach, London: Curzon Press, 1995, pp. 173–188.

17. K. Man-ho & J. O’Brien, The elements of feng shui. Shaftesbury: Elements, 1991, p. 3.

18. K.T. Han, op. cit. (note 14).

Integrating Natural and Cultural Heritage

311

Figure  1.  Schematic  expression  of  a  feng  shui landscape  depicting  mountains,  vegetation  and

settlements (modified from Han, 2001).

Figure 2. An example of a feng shui landscape, analogous to figure 1. The village of Luk Keng.

312

Lawal M. Marafa

Figure  1  is  a  modification  of  what  Han  reported  in  2001;  it  is  a  schematic
representation of an ideal feng shui landscape location. This is characterised by a
high mountain labelled (1) in the background and a plethora of lower mountains on
both sides of the axis. The position identified as (2) is the relatively flat area at the
edge of which (towards the hills) human settlements are located. To many masters
knowledgeable in the texts of feng shui philosophy, the various hills are identified by
function. However, identifying the various functions of such features is beyond the
scope of this study.

When  figure  1  is  compared  with  figure  2,  by  analogy,  the  background  high
mountain is clearly identified. In this case, the lower mountains are covered by (feng
shui) forests, which can range from 0.1 ha to a little more than 4 ha. Such forests can
be rich in biodiversity. While the houses are clearly shown located in the foothills of
the  mountain  range,  the  flat  land  in  front  of  the  village  represents  patches  of
abandoned  farmland,  bodies  of  water  and  perennial  grassland  fields,  used  for
grazing.  Currently,  feral  cattle  can  still  be  seen  roaming  and  grazing  in  the
vicinity.

Although the feng shui woodlands are an integral part of most native settlements
in the New Territories of Hong Kong and South China, there has been a dearth of
information  on  the  significance  of  these  rural  settlements  and  cultural  relics  as
valuable  resources.  In  Chinese  philosophy,  feng  shui operates  on  the  borderline
between society and nature. The ancient feng shui masters of China understood that
human destiny is enhanced if we live in harmony with nature, thereby tapping into
its  auspicious  influences.19 Bruun,  in  a  thesis  of  feng  shui and  the  Chinese
perception of nature, observed that human and landscape are linked together in a
system  of  imminent  order,  according  to  feng  shui belief.  Nature,  consisting  of
balanced  forces,  reacts  to  any  interference  imposed  on  it,  and  this  reaction
immediately resounds in humans.

Indeed, feng shui has shaped much of the human landscape of the New Territories
of Hong Kong to the extent that an understanding of its aspects is essential to the
interpretation  of  the  local  landscape  (cultural  or  natural),  particularly  in  the
countryside environment. Elsewhere, Laird has observed that forests are home to
ancestors,  the  origins  of  life,  threatening  and  powerful,  but  living  and  sacred.20
There  is  no  attempt  here  to  provide  a  definition  of  sacred  groves  or  cultural
landscapes, as these are defined through reflexive practice. Rather, this work sets
out to underline their importance and attempts to justify the significance of their
conservation for a myriad of uses. Laird further asserts that sacred groves are one of
the most common types of cultural landscape. Because sacred woods are culturally
distinct landscape features, they must be imbued with a type of symbolic form in
order to ensure their continued survival. Moreover, it appears that, in the past, the
assignation of sacred values to natural objects, particularly to trees and groves, was

19. L. Too, The complete guide to Feng Shui. Shaftesbury: Elements, 1998.

20. S.A. Laird, ‘Forest, culture and conservation’, in Posey, op. cit. (note 11).

Integrating Natural and Cultural Heritage

313

common  to  most  cultures.21 As  a  result,  certain  forest  communities  became
culturally protected. Indeed, in Hong Kong, for example, certain tree species such
as  Ficus spp.  have  become  culturally  revered  (see  figure  3)  where  people  visit
annually, preferably at the start of the Chinese New Year, to make a wish.

Culturally protected forests are those that have been traditionally protected by the
belief system of the local people, rather than by a decree or law imposed by a higher
secular  authority.  Culturally  protected  forests  may  be  remnant  woods  of  great
antiquity,  such  as  those  of  India,  Kenya,  Nepal,  Japan,  China  and  even  Hong
Kong.22 Culturally  protected  forests  or  sacred  groves  share  one  or  all  of  the
following  common  features:  (1)  they  are  mostly  protected  by  local  tradition  or
beliefs and are replete with oral traditions; (2) they contain large trees, temples and
shrines; (3) they may have species that are uncommon in the surrounding area; (4)
they  may  have  distinctive  boundaries;  and  (5)  they  may  have  restriction  on  the
cutting and felling of trees and vegetation.23 Sacred forests and trees, in particular,
are  important  symbols. They  express  life  in  the  vicinity  of  a  settlement.  In  some
societies they can symbolise historical continuity, replete with folklore tales.

However, the tradition in forest conservation of late has been one that discounts
culture and marginalises values.24 According to Laird, integral to traditional forest
management  is  the  use  of  elaborate  taboos,  myths,  folklore  and  other  culturally
controlled systems that bring coherence and shared community values to resource
use and management. Today, under pressure from urbanisation, cash economies and
other  socio-economic,  political  and  cultural  changes,  many  of  these  systems  are
breaking down, to the immediate detriment of forests and valuable species, some of
which are culturally significant landscapes. In addition, as cultures become polarised,
the importance of sacred native vegetation becomes increasingly apocryphal. As a
result, the conservation and preservation of both cultural and natural landscapes of
heritage value are being threatened. But in many areas these forms of management
and control remain strong, even without official legislation.

Traditional management and knowledge of sacred groves and cultural landscapes
often help conserve, and in some cases enhance, biodiversity protection as well as
prudent  management  of  natural  resources. These  natural  resources  and  relics  of
cultural  heritage  are,  therefore,  valuable  to  the  community  as  they  provide  good
resources for environmental and ethical education while simultaneously promoting
the  virtues  of  conservation.  Communities  that  are  closely  entwined  with  forests
tend  to  regard  them  with  a  healthy  respect  and  awe  at  their  splendour  and
majesty, sometimes dread and fear of the powerful spirits that lurk within them.25

21. D. Sopher, Geography of religions, Foundations of Cultural Geography Series, Englewood Cliffs:
Prentice Hall, 1967.

22. P.S. Sochaczewski, ‘Pieces of paradise’, Discovery, Vol. 21, No. 6, 1993, pp. 44–54.

23. Laird, op. cit. (note 20).

24. Posey, op. cit. (note 11).

25. Laird, op. cit. (note 20).

314

Lawal M. Marafa

In  whatever  form,  the  patches  that  remain  often  constitute  a  heritage,  a
destination  for  nature  lovers  and  even  a  rallying  point  for  environmentalists  and
conservationists.

Sacred  groves  have  survived  in  many  regions  despite  tremendous  economic
pressure on forest resources. Although such groves undoubtedly contribute to the
conservation  of  biodiversity,  it  is  questionable  whether  the  complex  history  and
traditions that have created and maintained these areas can be operationalised as a
tool  or  model  for  further  conservation  efforts.  As  trees  can  symbolise  historical
continuity and human society, in forest culture we find common threads of human
experience. Throughout the world we see a shared focus on the origin, force and
power of life expressed in sacred groves and in forests.

Figure 3. The wish tree along Lam Kan Road in Tai Po (Ficus spp.).

Integrating Natural and Cultural Heritage

315

The Nature of Feng Shui Wood Landscape as a ‘Heritage’
Although Sochaczewski has indicated the common factors of culturally protected
forest groves, not all the factors are relevant and applicable to the feng shui woodland
community. However, the circumstances relating to the feng shui vegetation justify
its being classified as both a cultural and natural heritage phenomenon. To many
people in Hong Kong the crescent-shaped forest patches surrounding some of the
native  rural  settlements,  referred  to  as  feng  shui,  provide  the  aura  of  a  bucolic
salubrious environment.

The crescent-shaped feng shui woods represent a cultural heritage because they:
(1) bear unique testimony to a cultural tradition, as they are revered by local people
along the principles of geomancy; and (2) are an outstanding example of traditional
human settlement representative of a culture that dates back several hundred years.
Furthermore, I refer to the feng shui woods of the New Territories as part of the
cultural heritage because they are characterised by historical continuity devoid of
the accelerated development seen in other areas of Hong Kong, and in most cases
also occupy ancestral lands.26 They acquire sacred status because of these factors.
These forest groves represent natural heritage because they: (1) represent ongoing
ecological and biological processes in the evolution and development of terrestrial
ecosystem communities; and (2) contain important significant natural habitats that
are useful for in situ conservation of biological diversity in this ecological region, as
will be discussed in more detail below.

Due  to  the  scope  of  the  study,  and  in  an  effort  to  point  out  the  ecological
significance of these landscapes, many approaches have been employed including
some  tangible  resource  investigations.  Initial  investigation  methods  included
preliminary surveys of some selected feng shui villages where feng shui woods were
observed by studying topographic maps (1:20,000), aerial photographs and recent
satellite images. Further work on the selected sites included intensive fieldwork to
investigate ecological and botanical aspects of the feng shui woods and their floral
values. In addition, interviews were simultaneously carried out to gain information
on the socio-cultural aspects of the feng shui groves. The results of this and further
work  along  these  lines  is  being  collated  for  subsequent  publication.  In  the  initial
stage of the study it was found that about 335 traditional villages have a recognisable
feng shui wood grove. Examples of such groves can be seen in figures 2 and 4. Of the
over 300 locations of feng shui woods about 209 are located in the New Territories
of Hong Kong, representing more than 60% of the total feng shui groves found in the
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR).27

From the location of the villages and the position of the feng shui woods, the feng
shui woods are concentrated in those areas most favourable to farming activities in

26. S.C.H. Cheung, ‘Land use and fung-shui: negotiation in the New Territories, Hong Kong’,
Cultural Survival Quarterly, Summer 2001, pp. 70–17.

27. R. Webb, ‘The fung shui woods of Hong Kong: a study of culturally protected woodlands in the
New Territories of Hong Kong’, unpublished PhD thesis, University of Wales, 1996.

316

Lawal M. Marafa

Figure 4. The Tai Om village partially crescented by feng shui woodland.

the  past,  a  phenomenon  mentioned  by  Han  and  represented  by  the  flat  land
depicted in figure 1. However, the position of the feng shui groves is also determined
largely by local topography and environmental factors. Observations in this study
have  corresponded  with  those  in  Slikkerveer’s28 study,  who  observed  that  many
culturally protected groves are intertwined with the environment, often reflect some
similarity  in  settings,  and  are  sometimes  related  to  the  agrarian  vocation  of  the
indigenous  population.  As  these  (consumptive)  activities  are  no  longer  actively
pursued, these resources, which constitute a heritage, can be managed, conserved
and interpreted for the understanding of the general public.

There  are  many  reasons  why  those  villages  located  mostly  in  the  foothills  are
surrounded by these crescent-shaped feng shui groves. Feng shui has been defined by
Skinner & Lambert29 as ‘the art of living in harmony with the land and deriving the
greatest  benefit,  peace,  and  prosperity  from  being  in  the  right  place  at  the  right
time’. As feng shui similarly represents an ecological system of site planning,30 the
villages  in  the  foothills  are  protected  from  landslides  because  landslides  are  a
frequent natural disaster that often occurs in some parts of Hong Kong, particularly
in  the  summer  when  heavy  monsoon  rainfall  is  abundant. The  feng  shui woods
similarly  protect  the  settlements  from  hill  fires  that  devastate  the  countryside  of

28. L.J. Slikkerveer, ‘Ethonoscience, “TEK” and its application to conservation’, in Posey op. cit.
(note 11).

29. Slikkerveer, op. cit. (note 28).

30. Man-ho & O’Brien, op. cit. (note 17).

Integrating Natural and Cultural Heritage

317

Hong Kong for six months in a normal fire season.31 The dense vegetation often
serves as a firebreak.

In  addition  to  the  ecological  benefit  derived  from  the  feng  shui woods,  a
generation of village inhabitants still believes that the protected groves influence the
geomancy of the village. They further believe that the woodlands bring prosperity
and good health to the village. This cultural benefit, however, was not accepted by
one interviewee in the village of Tai Om (see figure 4). While acknowledging the
existence of historical and cultural ideals of the feng shui principle of geomancy, the
sceptical interviewee expressed reservations about the actual spiritual functions of
the feng shui wood. The respondent, however, lamented the fact that the economic
opportunities attracting youngsters away from the villages are thwarting the belief in
the  feng  shui principle,  thus  making  it  more  difficult  to  justify  any  attempt  at
conservation as a heritage resource.

For the purpose of in-depth investigations, three native villages surrounded by
feng shui woods were selected. The locations selected were Luk Keng (see figure 2),
Mui Tsz Lam and Tai Om (see figure 4). The extent of the villages includes the area
covered by the feng shui wood groves. The village elders of Tai Om claim that the age
of the village is about 350 years. They consider the vegetation to represent feng shui
woodland  based  on  the  protective  beliefs  relating  to  the  principles  of  geomancy,
which include the elemental forces that shape a landscape and possess the hidden
power affecting human fortune. However, one of the interviewees belonging to the
younger generation was dismissive about one principle of feng shui, which likens the
position of the mountains, vegetation and villages to the continuous prosperity of
the residents. This was an indication that the traditional beliefs of the feng shui are
actually waning with the younger generation. In contrast, in Luk Keng, they revere
and respect the feng shui tradition. Although the cutting and felling of trees is at odds
with the tenets of these forest groves, some do cut down the trees closer to their
homes to avoid possible damage from strong winds or a typhoon.

In  Tai  Om,  Mui  Tsz  Lam  and  Luk  Keng  the  feng  shui wood  has  no  clear
boundaries  with  regard  to  the  village  settlements.  Indeed,  the  discernible
boundaries  are  natural,  often  geomorphological.  However,  boundaries  resulting
from human impact similarly also exist in the form of planted vegetation. At the
boundaries or places where the grove has been exposed to disturbance, numerous
fern  and  bamboo  species  (e.g.  Dicronapteris  linearis and  Bambusa  vulgaris)  are
common.  Although  the  bamboo  plants  were  not  observed  within  the  feng  shui
groves, they are located mostly at the edges of the woodland having been planted by
the inhabitants for agricultural purposes.

The Vegetation and Ecological Structure in the Feng Shui Woods
As the oldest forests in Hong Kong, the feng shui woods act as the main natural
habitat for biodiversity and, therefore, they are important in terms of environmental

31. Hong Kong Government Information Services Publication, 1993–1996, Country Parks, Hong
Kong: Government Printer.

318

Lawal M. Marafa

Table 1. Some selected villages surrounded by crescent-shaped feng shui woods

Village

Luk Keng
Mui Tsz Lam
Tai Om

Area of village

(ha)

> 10
5
8

Location

grid

KV134034
KV158788
KV052838

Aspect

SW
SW
SW

Age

(years)

> 1,000
> 300
> 300

and biodiversity conservation. In a society where the populace is highly urbanised
and conscious of the natural environment, these semi-natural patches of vegetation,
having partially been modified by past civilisations, can constitute a backdrop for
investigating natural heritage. They are indeed an outdoor environmental laboratory
representing  the  unique  features  of  the  South  China  ecological  region  and  they
maintain a floral richness and maturity that is unmatched by any of the secondary
woodlands.32 In a survey conducted by Chu & Xing,33 they estimated that the feng
shui woods contain some 600 species representing one-fifth of the total species listed
in  the  Hong  Kong  SAR. They  also  contain  large  numbers  of  faunal  species  that
come to the feng shui woods in search of species that are fruit producing and hence
attractive to birds and other wildlife. As a result of this species richness and diversity,
the feng shui wood is also endowed with frugivorous opportunities in the landscape
and the vicinity of village settlements. These activities can continue to support the
landscape and its natural ecological processes.

In terms of ecology, the feng shui groves are unique in the community in that they
are  the  only  woodlands  that  date  back  more  than  100  years.  In  addition  to  the
different facets of the landscape, within the feng shui environment there are different
strata of vegetation that reflect the age of the grove. The canopies of most of the feng
shui woods  are  often  dominated  by  large  tree  species  comprising  Cinnamomum
camphora, Ficus microcarpa, Bischofia javanica, and Givonniera nitida among others.
These species are the oldest species in this ecological region (see table 1). Within
such  communities,  shade-tolerant  species  such  as  Sarcosperma  laurinum and
Aquilaria sinensis are now commonly found.

Because of the accessibility of some of the feng shui woodlands, some of them were
cut during the Japanese occupation in the Second World War. Over the past fifty
years, however, some tree species have regenerated and are once again revered as
culturally  protected  forests. The  canopy  of  such  groves  is  dominated  by  Persea

32. D. Dudgeon & R.T. Corlett, Hills and streams: an ecology of Hong Kong, Hong Kong: Hong Kong
University Press, 1994.

33. W.H. Chu & F.W. Xing, ‘A checklist of vascular plants found in feng shui woods in Hong Kong’,
in I.J. Hodgkiss (ed.) Memoirs of the Hong Kong Natural History Society, Hong Kong: The Hong Kong
Natural Society, 1997, pp. 151–172.

Integrating Natural and Cultural Heritage

319

Table 2. The general botanical strata of the feng shui woods

Status

Age (years) Dominant species

Remarks

1st Generation

⬃300

2nd Generation

⬃50

3rd Generation

< 50

Cinnamomun camphora,
Bischofia javanica, Ficus
microcarpa, Gironniera nitida,
etc.

Persea thumbergii, Psychotria
rubra, Sarcosperma laurinum,
Aquilaria sinensis, Ardisia
quinquegona, etc.

Prunus arborea, Schima
superba, Endospermum
chinensis, Persea oreophila, etc.

Early succession stage
Culturally revered species

Rejuvenated after the
Japanese invasion

Late-succession stage

thumbergii, Psychotria rubra, and Ardisia quinquegon among others. The last group of
tree species is dominated by the canopy of Endospermum chinensis, Prunus arborea,
Persea  oreophila,  Schima  superba,  etc. These  species  represent  the  late-succession
woods that were similarly identified by Zhuang.34

Furthermore, the crown of the feng shui wood is usually dominated by large old
trees, some of which are believed to date back to ancestral times. These are the species
(e.g. Cinnamomum camphora, Ficus microcarpa, etc.) that are significant in relation to
feng shui beliefs, as they serve as locations for some of the annual rituals at specific
times of the year as depicted in figure 1. In addition to vegetation structure, initial
vegetation species investigations have shown a common set of vegetation species often
found within the borders of the studied feng shui woods. The list presented in table 2 is
significant and highlights a set of vegetation that is capable of helping to maintain a
healthy community of biodiversity and provide frugivorous opportunities, a situation
and process that can continue to enhance this type of ecosystem as a natural heritage
at the fringes of the urban environment.

In the feng shui woods that were investigated there is a relatively high number of
tree species per unit area. This frequency of species is indicative of high biodiversity.
While  high  biodiversity  can  result  in  efficient  nutrient  cycling  in  this  humid
subtropical ecosystem, some of the tree species identified and commonly found in
sites are fruit bearing, as indicated in table 3. Corlett35 had earlier observed that the

34. X. Zhuang, ‘Forest succession in Hong Kong’, unpublished PhD thesis, Hong Kong: Department
of Ecology and Biodiversity, University of Hong Kong, 1993.

35. R.T. Corlett, ‘Frugivory and seed dispersal by birds in Hong Kong shrubland’, Forktail, Vol. 13,
1998, pp. 23–27.

320

Lawal M. Marafa

Table 3. Some vegetation species common in all the sites with known cultural and ecological

significance

Species

Family name

Common name

Possible usea

Cleistocalyx operculatus Myrtaceae

Water banyan

Hibiscus tiliaceus
Itea chinensis
Elaeocarpus chinensis
Mallotus paniculatus
Pyrus calleryana
Scolopia chinensis
Diospyras morrisiana
Reevesia thyrsoidea
Scolopia saeva
Zanthoxylum avicennae
Ligustrum sinense
Bischoflia trifoliata
Machilus grijsii

Malvaceae
Escalloniaceae
Tiliaceae
Euphorbiaceae Turn-in-the-wind
Rosaceae
Flacourtiaceae
Ebenaceae
Sterculiaceae
Flacourtisceae
Rutaceae
Oleaceae
Euphorbiaceae
Lauraceae

Wild pear
Chinese scolopia
Morris’s persimmon
Reevesia
Scolopia
Prickly ash
Chinese privet

Cuban bast
Itea
Elaocarpus

Machilus

Landscape gardening,
juicy edible fruit,
medicinal use
Medicinal, ropes, shade
Juicy edible fruit
Juicy edible fruit
Juicy edible fruit
Juicy edible fruit

Juicy edible fruit
Juicy edible fruit
Juicy edible fruit
Juicy edible fruit
Juicy edible fruit
Juicy edible fruit
Juicy edible fruit

Note:
aThese are fruits that attract faunal biodiversity.

woody component of secondary forests consists of around 200 widespread species,
of which 86% have fleshy fruits known to attract wildlife. This situation can similarly
attract visitors and ecotourists.

Conclusions: alternative contemporary uses
At the periphery of the Hong Kong urban area, the feng shui wood locations are
unique natural resource areas that also accommodate cultural heritage and relics
bequeathed  by  past  generations. The  landscape  pattern  is  unique  and  suggests
geomorphological, hydrological, forestry and settlement patterns in harmony with
the overall environment. Because of environmental and conservation concerns, the
vegetation and ecological components of the land use of these feng shui woodlands
deserve  further  attention.  Given  contemporary  trends  in  heritage  preservation,
ecotourism  and  nature-appreciation,  they  constitute  natural  resources  worthy  of
conservation and interpretation. As an example of a natural heritage, they must be
maintained  if  future  generations  are  to  thrive  spiritually,  culturally  and  with
environmental appreciation and awareness—a view partially echoed by Conserva-
tion International, a global non-profit organisation.

Integrating Natural and Cultural Heritage

321

This  study  has  attempted  to  investigate  and  unravel  the  importance  of  these
landscapes  that  are  often  juxtaposed  behind  some  native  villages  located  at  the
periphery of urban Hong Kong. I have also attempted to interpret them as sacred,
cultural  and  natural  heritage  landscapes. The  results  of  this  investigation  suggest
that feng shui is still revered, especially by the older villagers who would be upset by
any intentional cutting of the trees. Some of the villagers questioned in this study
believed that by protecting the feng shui wood around the village area the woodland
gave prosperity and stability to the whole village—a cultural belief characteristic of
most sacred groves. Their answers and attitude mean that the feng shui woodlands in
Hong Kong, as with other sacred woods or culturally protected forests elsewhere in
the world, are still cherished as cultural phenomena. However, if younger people do
not share these feng shui principles of living in harmony with nature, the future of
this  cultural  phenomenon  may  not  be  good.  However,  efforts  in  further  inter-
pretation can help alleviate this fear.

In  an  effort  to  unravel  the  importance  of  these  sites,  the  techniques  of
observation,  inventory  and  integrative  study  at  this  stage  largely  quantify  and
qualitatively describe the resources as natural and cultural heritage. Cultural and
natural heritage are intricate aspects of the tourism business from which a society
stands to benefit, when appropriately and adequately managed and marketed. With
the preponderance of ecotourism and the advent of sustainable tourism, cultural
and  natural  heritage  has  assumed  particular  importance  in  complementing
alternative  and  growing  forms  of  tourism.  Indeed,  there  is  a  potential  for
transforming  these  natural  and  cultural  resources  as  alternative  tourism  destina-
tions. It is generally accepted that tourism activities can be dependent on natural
and cultural resources. Concurrently, eco-museums (a concept largely developed in
France)  can  be  established  to  stabilise  the  culture  of  a  remote  rural  area,  as  put
succinctly by Howard.36 When well implemented, they can attract visitors to the
area by way of outdoor exhibitions of relics, nature and landscape trails, appropriate
events depicting the cultural history of the area; even bird-watching may flourish in
such areas.

For these resources (natural and cultural) to be relevant and used as ecotourism
resources, there is a need to apply methodologies that will seek and derive perceived
values and create indices of importance and significance. Carter & Bramley37 have
indicated that heritage resources can be divided into categories such as biological,
cultural, aesthetic, etc. Not only do these categories resonate with this study but the
resources in the New Territories and the categorisation in the outline zoning plans
by the Hong Kong SAR Planning Department also do so. When this classification
is completed and indices have been created, the interaction of tourism and resources

36. P. Howard, ‘The eco-museum: innovation that risks the future’, International Journal of Heritage
Studies, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2002, pp. 63–72.

37. R.W. Carter & R. Bramley, ‘Defining heritage values and significance for improved resource
management: an application to Australian tourism’, International Journal of Heritage Studies, Vol. 8,
No. 3, 2002, pp. 175–199.

322

Lawal M. Marafa

will vary according to choice and values. This variation will be based on the relative
significance of each valued element of the resource perceived as heritage.

Lastly,  this  study  has  shown  that  there  is  a  need  to  devise  better  ways  of
determining  what  (cultural  and  or  natural  heritage)  is  significant,  why  it  is
significant and to whom. In a society where living conditions are changing at an
accelerated pace, it is essential for people to remain in contact with nature and the
evidence of civilisation bequeathed by past generations. To this end, it is appropriate
to give the cultural and natural heritage an active function in community life and to
integrate into policy the achievements of our time, the values of the past and the
beauty of nature. This will enhance environmental awareness, promote environmen-
tal ethics and accelerate the promotion of ecotourism.

Acknowledgements
The critical comments of two anonymous reviewers were very valuable and inspired
this  revision  of  an  earlier  draft. The  author  wishes  to  express  gratitude  to  the
residents of Luk Keng, Tai Om and Mui Tsz Lam for their help and patience during
numerous  visits.  The  student  helpers  whose  assistance  was  invaluable  are  also
acknowledged. The research was sponsored by a Chinese University of Hong Kong
direct grant allocation (2020610).

Integrating Natural and Cultural Heritage

323


