International Journal of Cultural Property (2006) 13:285–309. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2006 International Cultural Property Society
DOI: 10.1017/S094073910606019X

Artwork, Cultural Heritage Property, and
the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act
Charlene A. Caprio*

INTRODUCTION

Recent developments in U.S. case law have strengthened the power of private in-
dividuals to sue foreign sovereigns in U.S. courts over claims for artwork and cul-
tural heritage property. Traditionally, however, the U.S. government granted a large
amount of deference to foreign sovereigns regarding ownership rights in such prop-
erty. Principles such as grace and comity with other nations, respect for cultural
heritage property ownership, and increasing public access to art are reflected in
U.S. legislation. For example, the adoption of the Convention on Cultural Prop-
erty Implementation Act (CPIA), the Archaeological Resources Protection Act
(ARPA), and the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAG-
PRA) all demonstrate a strong position held by the United States to recognize and
protect ownership rights in cultural heritage property.

Specific to art and cultural heritage property, Congress enacted the Immunity
From Seizure Act, 22 U.S.C. § 2459 (IFSA).1 The purpose of the IFSA is to “permit
organizations and institutions engaged in nonprofit activities to import, on a tem-
porary basis, works of art and objects of cultural significance from foreign coun-
tries for exhibit and display, without the risk of the seizure or attachment of the
said objects by judicial process.”2 Under the IFSA, a foreign lender makes a re-
quest for IFSA immunity to the State Department. If immunity is granted, a for-
eign sovereign or museum making a loan will not have to fear seizure or attachment
of the said objects by judicial process.3 Under the IFSA program, grants of im-
munity grew from 125 in number in the first 15 years to 69 in just 1 year.4 Our
museums and universities, as well as the American public, have profited tremen-
dously from the IFSA immunity program.

However, U.S. protections given to cultural heritage property have met an
unexpected challenge. In three recent court cases, two concerning Nazi-looted

*Columbia Law School. Email: cac2145@columbia.edu

285

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

286

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

artwork and a third involving ancient Persian artifacts loaned to an American uni-
versity for study, individuals have invoked the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act,
28 U.S.C. § 1601 et seq. (FSIA) to assert ownership rights over other nations’ cul-
tural property. The FSIA is the starting point for suing a foreign sovereign in the
United States. It sets out the exclusive standards to be used to deny foreign
sovereign immunity. The list of immunity exceptions is limited and contained in
§§ 1605–1611. The granting of immunity is generally restricted to acts of a for-
eign sovereign and their agents, which are sovereign or governmental in nature.
One exception to immunity under the FSIA is the commercial activity excep-
tion of §1605(a)(2), whereby a foreign sovereign can be sued as far as its com-
mercial activities are concerned. In the adopting House Report, Congress gave
examples of commercial activity: the carrying on of a commercial enterprise such
as an airline or state trading corporation, an activity customarily carried on for
profit or even a single contract if the contract could be entered into by a private
person.5 Another exception to immunity is the expropriation clause, §1605(a)(3)
concerning property taken in violation of international law. A third exception, found
in §§ 1609–1610, is based on attachment of property and lists when the property
of a foreign sovereign is and is not immune from judicial attachment. All three
exceptions can require a commercial activity nexus to the foreign sovereign’s ac-
tivities or property in the United States, and the latter two exceptions have been
invoked in art and cultural heritage property cases.

While giving justice to individual plaintiffs, the rulings in FSIA art-related cases
have extended the U.S. judiciary’s arm to reach into art and cultural heritage col-
lections owned by foreign sovereigns and their agents. Because foreign sovereigns
may very well react by keeping their collections far away from U.S. litigation, and
therefore U.S. soil, the rulings have the potential of chilling future U.S. cultural art
exchanges. In turn, they can gravely restrict the amount of art and archaeological
research being conducted by U.S. scholars, thus hampering important activities
that further knowledge about world histories and cultures.

The focus of this paper is on three cases that have invoked the FSIA and its
commercial activity nexus to sue foreign sovereigns for artwork or cultural prop-
erty. The first case, Altmann v. Republic of Austria (Altmann),6 which made its way
up to the U.S. Supreme Court, was a seminal case for declaring the FSIA retroac-
tive to cover events that occurred before the 1978 enactment of the FSIA. This
meant that World War II and Nazi-era art looting cases, as well as any other past
looting, could be tried in U.S. courts. Altmann also stirred awareness about how a
foreign sovereign’s state-run museum related activities can be considered com-
mercial activities under the FSIA. Its outcome, which ended in settlement after the
U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling on the FSIA’s retroactive power, was indeed praise-
worthy and sparked a new movement in Austria to actively return Nazi-looted
artworks to their rightful owners. But Altmann’s legacy also led to further plaintiff
friendly interpretations of the FSIA’s commercial activity definition at the expense
of international art exchanges, as seen in the next case.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

287

Malewicz v. City of Amsterdam (Malewicz)7 extended the FSIA’s commercial ac-
tivity nexus to cover cross-border museum loans in attempt to retrieve Nazi-
looted art from the city of Amsterdam. The Malewicz court also stripped the IFSA
of its ability to provide any sort of meaningful immunity to art loans coming into
the United States, by holding that immunity under the IFSA prohibits seizure but
does not bar judicial proceedings against the property under immunity. Malewicz
is still pending in part. Although justice may be achieved for the plaintiffs, nulli-
fying the IFSA may very well stunt the future of international educational and
cultural exchanges of artwork where state-owned museums are involved. Further-
more, the U.S. court may override Dutch jurisdiction on the case, and this may
dampen international relationships concerning the protection of cross-border art
loans. It can also put in danger U.S. art loans abroad.

The FSIA sword did not stop swinging with Nazi-looting cases. The last case I
discuss is also ongoing, Rubin v. The Islamic Republic of Iran (Rubin).8 Rubin is
using the precedents of Altmann and Malewicz to invoke the FSIA against Iran
and attach Persian antiquities owned by Iran, but currently present in the United
States, in satisfaction for a 2003 private judgment against Iran for Iran’s support
of a deadly Hamas bombing.9 The plaintiffs in Rubin are arguing that they can
attach the ancient Persian artifacts under §§ 1609–1610 and use them to either
persuade Iran to pay the 2003 judgment or forfeit the artifacts.

Rubin appears to be reaching into dangerous waters because of the nature of
the property attached. First, the Rubin court seems to ignore any special, inalien-
able ownership rights that Iran may have in its cultural heritage property. Second,
the Rubin court does not address any public policy issues for respecting Iran’s cul-
tural heritage property rights in the artifacts. Third, the United States’ tradition of
respecting cultural heritage ownership rights of source countries and native cul-
tures has not been considered.

Rubin also raises complex debates that have been stirring in the art and archae-
ological communities concerning national versus international, and private versus
public ownership of cultural heritage objects. Does Iran have a greater claim over
the Persian artifacts than the bombing victims harmed by Iran’s actions? Should
we assume that Persian culture carries a direct lineage to modern Iranian culture?
Do we need to do so to give Iran a higher cultural heritage claim in the artifacts?
Should cultural property never be attached under the FSIA? And are all these merely
academic debates that have no place in the courts?

Although cultural internationalists may argue that Iran should not have super-
priority rights over the Persian artifacts, transference of the artifacts from public
ownership to private hands raises additional concerns of preservation, protection
from partial or total loss and destruction. Furthermore, if Rubin succeeds, all uni-
versities in the United States will be put on notice that their research loan collec-
tions are not protected from U.S. judicial interference and seizure. This has the
potential of gravely detracting U.S. and international archaeological studies, cul-
tural exchanges and the furthering of knowledge about world histories and cultures.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

288

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FOREIGN SOVEREIGN IMMUNITIES ACT

Power in the United States to grant foreign sovereign immunity at first, and for
many years, rested in the executive branch and the standard was absolute immu-
nity. “For more than a century and a half, the United States generally granted for-
eign sovereigns complete immunity from suit in the courts of this country.”10 Then,
in 1952, in what is now known as the Tate Letter, the State Department created a
restrictive theory of foreign sovereign immunity and recognized immunity “with
regard to sovereign or public acts ( jure imperii ) of a state but not with respect to
private acts ( jure gestionis).11 The question then arose, who (the executive or ju-
dicial branch) should determine immunity on a case-by-case basis? The executive
branch continued to make most decisions by acting through the State Depart-
ment.12 However, the courts also made some immunity decisions on claims that
came before them; and as a result, “governing standards were neither clear nor
uniformly applied.”13

In 1976, Congress enacted the FSIA. U.S. courts were granted jurisdiction to
hear all civil nonjury claims brought against foreign sovereigns and to decide
issues of immunity.14 Following the FSIA’s enactment, in 1983 the U.S. Supreme
Court, in Verlinden B.V. v. Central Bank of Nigeria (Verlinden), stressed that
“sovereign immunity is a matter of grace and comity on the part of the United
States,” and that the U.S. Supreme Court “consistently has deferred to the deci-
sions . . . of the Executive Branch—on whether to take jurisdiction over actions
against foreign sovereigns and their instrumentalities.”15 Despite the U.S.
Supreme Court’s early showing of deference to the executive branch, however,
federal courts in recent FSIA cases, including Altmann, Malewicz, and Rubin,
have gone against State Department recommendations for granting FSIA
immunity.16

In the FSIA, Congress gave the courts a limited number of exceptions for when
foreign sovereign immunity can be denied. One condition that appears in many
of the FSIA immunity exceptions is that the foreign sovereign or property at issue
must be connected to a commercial activity in the United States. The term com-
mercial activity is defined in §1603(d):

A “commercial activity” means either a regular course of commercial
conduct or a particular commercial transaction or act. The commercial
character of an activity shall be determined by reference to the nature of
the course of conduct or particular transaction or act, rather than by
reference to its purpose.17

The art and cultural heritage related cases discussed in the following text, Alt-
mann, Malewicz, and Rubin, give broad interpretations to the FSIA’s notion of
what constitutes a commercial activity. In doing so, the cases have swept state-
run museum activities, art, and cultural heritage loans under FSIA immunity
exceptions.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

289

THE FOREIGN SOVEREIGN IMMUNITIES ACT

AND NAZI-LOOTED ART

The Altmann Case

The first case to apply the FSIA to a claim of Nazi-looted artwork was Altmann.
Altmann involved a collection of six Gustav Klimt paintings that had a worth of
approximately $150 million and had been stolen by the Nazis in the 1940s, ending
up in the collection of the state-run Austrian Gallery. The plaintiff, Maria Alt-
mann, is the niece and heir of a Jewish woman, Adele Bloch-Bauer, who as an arts
patron, sat for Gustav Klimt and owned many of Klimt’s paintings. Adele died in
1925, and by her will the paintings became the rightful possession of her hus-
band, Ferdinand. Adele had expressed in her will that her husband consider do-
nating the paintings to the Austrian Gallery. However, Ferdinand did not donate
the paintings; and when he fled Austria in 1938 to escape Nazi persecution, the
Nazis confiscated all of his artwork. When the will was probated, it was found that
Ferdinand, not Adele, was the rightful owner of the paintings. The paintings,
through different ownership paths, ended up in the collection of the Austrian
Gallery.18

In 1946 it looked like Altmann would be able to recover the paintings, because
the Republic of Austria declared that all transactions that were motivated by dis-
criminatory Nazi ideology were to be deemed null and void. However, a counter-
vailing Austrian law prohibited the export of artworks that were deemed important
to Austria’s cultural heritage. Altmann, living in the United States at the time, was
coerced by a lawyer into donating some of the Klimt paintings to the Austrian
Gallery in exchange for export permits for other items in her heir’s collection.
Then, in 1998, a new restitution law was enacted in Austria, designed to return
artworks that had been donated to federal museums under duress in exchange for
export permits. However, the Austrian Gallery voted not to return to Altmann the
Klimt paintings, claiming (falsely) that Adele’s will made the gallery the rightful
owner. Because the costs for bringing a lawsuit in Austria are determined by the
amount in controversy, Maria Altmann did not have the necessary 2 million Aus-
trian Schillings to sue the Austrian Gallery for the paintings.19

Then, in 2001, Altmann found an affordable way to sue the Austrian Gallery in
U.S. federal court when the Austrian Gallery advertised in the United States an
exhibition of the paintings taking place at the Gallery in Austria.20 Although both
the defendant (the Austrian Gallery) and the property in controversy remained in
Austria, Altmann brought her claim in U.S. court by invoking §1605(a)(3):

[I]n which rights in property taken in violation of international law are
in issue and that property or any property exchanged for such property
is present in the United States in connection with a commercial activity
carried on in the United States by the foreign sovereign; or that the prop-
erty or any property exchanged for such property is owned or operated

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

290

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

by an agency or instrumentality of the foreign state and that agency or
instrumentality is engaged in a commercial activity in the United States.21
(emphasis added)

The Altmann court analyzed §1605(a)(3), which is commonly known as the

expropriation exception as having three required elements:

1. There must be property taken in violation of international law, (i.e. an

expropriation).

2. The property must be owned or operated by an agency or instrumentality of

a foreign state.

3. The agency or instrumentality must be engaged in commercial activity in

the United States.

For the first element, the court determined that an expropriation had occurred
because the paintings were stolen from Altmann’s heirs by the Nazis, the Austrian
government had not yet returned the paintings to Altmann and her family, and
the Austrian government did not justly compensate the heirs for the value of the
paintings.22 The court found that the second element was met because the state-
owned Austrian Galley was an “agency or instrumentality of the foreign state” in
accordance with the definition given in §1603(b).23

The third element involved the last clause of §1605(a)(3): “property or any such
property exchanged for such property is owned or operated by an agency or in-
strumentality of the foreign state and that agency or instrumentality is engaged in
a commercial activity in the United States” (emphasis added). To determine what
constituted commercial activity under this clause, the court looked to the plain
text of the FSIA definition of commercial activity in §1603(d) and asserted that it
was the nature of the activity and not the purpose that counts. The court found
further guidance in a prior U.S. Supreme Court case, Republic of Argentina v. Wel-
tover, Inc., which had ruled that activities of the foreign sovereign are commercial
with respect to the FSIA when the foreign sovereign acts in a manner of a private
player in the market. Furthermore, what is important is not the motive (or profit
motive) of the foreign sovereign, but “the type of actions by which a private party
engages in trade and traffic or commerce.”24

Using the previous criteria, the court assessed the Austrian government’s activ-
ities in the United States in relation to the Klimt paintings: publishing a museum
guidebook, publishing photographs of the Klimt paintings in controversy, and ad-
vertising Austrian Gallery exhibitions relating to the Klimt paintings. Also, the gal-
lery loaned one of the Klimt paintings to the United States in the past. The court
concluded that these activities were the types of actions private parties readily en-
gaged in; and through them the Austrian Gallery was acting as a private player in
the market and conducting commercial activities in the United States as defined
in the FSIA. More generally, the court asserted that operating a museum is an
activity in which private parties engage.25 The Ninth Circuit Court upheld the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

291

ruling, noting further that Austria’s commercial activities in this case were all cen-
tered around the paintings in controversy and even went as far as attracting Amer-
ican tourists to Austria to view the looted artwork.26

The Altmann case went up (in part) to the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled
that the FSIA could be applied retroactively to cover events that occurred before
the 1976 enactment of the FSIA, and thus Nazi-era looting.27 After this ruling,
the plaintiffs and the Austrian Gallery engaged in binding arbitration; and in
early 2006 the Altmann heirs recovered five of the Klimt paintings.28 In Novem-
ber of 2006, the Altmann heirs auctioned four of the five Klimt paintings at
Christie’s in New York and received over 190 million dollars for them.29

A critical part of the lower-court Altmann decision involved awarding juris-
diction over the Republic of Austria. The court asserted that, when the second
clause of §1605(a)(3) was invoked, which starts after the semicolon (“or that
the property or any property exchanged for such property is owned or operated
by an agency or instrumentality of the foreign state and that agency or instru-
mentality is engaged in a commercial activity in the United States”), the clause
is to be read “in the disjunctive” so that the requirement that the property be
present in the United States, as required in the first clause before the semicolon,
did not apply to the second clause.30 This meant that under the FSIA, the paint-
ings and the defendant could both stay in Austria while the claim was being
brought in the United States against an agency or instrumentality of the foreign
sovereign.

It is also interesting to note that the Altmann court dismissed the Austrian Gal-
lery’s forum non conveniens claim because it did not consider Austria to be an
adequate alternative forum for this lawsuit. First, the filing fee that Altmann would
have to pay to bring the suit in Austria would be oppressively burdensome; sec-
ond, a statute of limitations law in Austria might bar her from bringing the suit
there altogether.31

The Altmann ruling alerted the international art community that state-run mu-
seums and galleries can be subject to U.S. lawsuits when their activities extend
over to U.S. soil. Moreover, what were formerly viewed as educational and cultural
promotions for international art exhibitions now can take the form of commer-
cial activities capable of stripping foreign sovereigns of their immunity.

The blow to international cultural and art exchanges made by Altmann is ar-
guably outweighed by the justice served. After Altmann, the Austrian Government
announced it would restitute a total of 6,292 works of art stolen by the Nazis.32
The Austrian Government will also set up a web site “to help owners track down
works they claim were confiscated by the Nazi regime.”33 As Nazi-looted art con-
tinues to be tracked and restituted, cases such as Altmann may diminish.

However, the Altmann ruling cast a wide net to deny immunity under the FSIA
and set in motion a string of U.S. court decisions that are further chiseling away at
foreign sovereign immunity when it comes to state-run museums and educational
exchanges of artwork and cultural property. The Malewicz case went beyond Alt-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

292

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

mann and attacked foreign sovereign immunity in the context of a cross-border
museum loan.

The Malewicz Case

A second art case using the FSIA §1605(a)(3) expropriation exception for a Nazi-
looting claim is Malewicz. In this case the Russian abstract artist Kazimir Malewicz
entrusted some of his paintings before World War II to a Dr. Dorner in Berlin for
safekeeping against Stalinist condemnation. In 1935 Dr. Dorner shipped some of
the paintings on loan to the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York, and
kept the rest in Berlin. In 1937 when Dr. Dorner fled Germany in fear of Nazi
persecution he took two of the Malewicz paintings with him, which ended up by
bequest at the Busch-Reisinger Museum at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, to be held on loan and for the benefit of “the rightful owners.” Dr.
Dorner passed the rest of the paintings on to a Mr. Häring in Berlin for safekeep-
ing. To date, MoMA has returned one, and the Busch-Reisinger Museum returned
both of its Malewicz paintings to the rightful heirs.34

During the years 1951 through 1956, Mr. Häring was approached by the Stedelijk
Museum in Amsterdam to lend the paintings to the Stedelijk for restoration and
exhibition. Mr. Häring refused, insisting that he did not own the paintings and
therefore did not possess the right to lend the paintings to the Stedelijk. On his
deathbed, Mr. Häring repeated that he did not own the paintings and could not
sell them, but after much goading he agreed to give temporary possession of the
works to the Stedelijk. Suspiciously, a letter signed on behalf of Mr. Häring later
appeared, which asserted his rightful ownership of the paintings. It also explained
how the Stedelijk loan agreement was really an option to purchase the paintings,
which the Stedelijk exercised.35

After the fall of the Soviet Union, heirs of Malewicz collectively sought restitu-
tion of the paintings from the Stedelijk, arguing that the letter was a fabrication.
Their request was denied by the Stedelijk in 2001, because the Museum claimed it
rightfully owned the paintings. Then, in 2003, 14 of the Malewicz paintings were
sent on loan to the United States for exhibition at the Guggenheim in New York
and the Menil Collection in Houston. Two days before the paintings were sent
back to Amsterdam, the plaintiffs commenced an action in U.S. federal court.36
The plaintiffs commenced the action without seizing the paintings, because Am-
sterdam had received immunity from seizure protection for the paintings by the
State Department under the IFSA. Amsterdam argued that this immunity un-
doubtedly meant that the paintings could not be subject to lawsuit. The State De-
partment in amicus curiae supported Amsterdam, arguing that the IFSA immunity
was meant to ensure protection against cases like this being brought against the
foreign sovereign. The State Department also reminded the court that the pur-
pose of 22 U.S.C. §2459 [the IFSA] was “to encourage the exhibition in the United
States of objects of cultural significance, which in the absence of such assurances

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

293

. . . would not be made available.” Amsterdam also asserted that had it known the
paintings could be subject to a lawsuit, it would have never loaned them to the
U.S. museums.37

Nevertheless, the court allowed the claim without seizure. Referring to House
Report 94-1487 on the FSIA, the court stated that the “FSIA intentionally over-
rode the common-law requirement that a plaintiff obtain in rem jurisdiction over
property before suit could be filed against a foreign sovereign.” The Malewicz court
held that the paintings only had to be present in the United States at the moment
when the suit was filed, not during the proceedings. Thus, a filing two days before
the paintings were returned to Amsterdam was in fact timely.38

This part of the Malewicz ruling stripped the IFSA of its power to promote
international cultural loans to U.S. museums and institutions. Previously, there
was the assumption that IFSA immunity kept the objects away from all judicial
interference. Malewicz has put foreign sovereigns on alert that the IFSA only pro-
tects the property from being seized; a U.S. lawsuit is still a possibility.

Having established the legality of the claim, the Malewicz court considered the
elements of §1605(a)(3) and invoked its first commercial activity clause, which
requires property “present in the United States in connection with a commercial
activity carried on in the United States by the foreign sovereign” (emphasis added).
Thus, unlike in Altmann, the property had to be present in the United States.
However, as discussed earlier, the Malewicz court read this requirement loosely
by requiring that the property be present in the United States only at the very
commencement of the lawsuit.

To define commercial, the court repeated Altmann that profit motive or pur-
pose should not be considered, but rather, the type of actions. The court also added,
“Commercial means only ‘not sovereign,’ as long as there is some example of pri-
vate action of a similar type connected with ‘trade and traffic or commerce.’” The
court found that a museum loan fit the bill, because public and private museum
loans occur around the world and are connected with commerce regularly.39

In its findings, the court did not take into account how museum loans are gen-
erally perceived in society as noncommercial activities that allow for cultural and
educational exchanges. Although this point was recognized by Congress in adopt-
ing the IFSA, it held no weight against the court’s textual interpretation of the
FSIA’s commercial activity nexus.

However, Malewicz stopped short of ruling for the plaintiffs, and showed some
deference to the State Department. In its brief the State Department warned, “For-
eign states are unlikely to expect that this [commercial activity] standard is satis-
fied by a loan of artwork for a U.S. Government-immunized exhibit that must be
carried out by a borrowing on a non-profit basis.” Furthermore, “The possibility
that such a minimum level of contact will necessarily suffice to provide jurisdic-
tion threatens to chill the willingness of sovereign leaders to participate in the
section 2459 [IFSA] program.” The Malewicz court reserved judgment to consider
whether the City of Amsterdam’s commercial activities and contacts with the United

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

294

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

States were sufficient enough to satisfy the §1603(3)(e) substantial contacts re-
quirement. Under §1603(3)(e), “A ‘commercial activity carried on in the United
States by a foreign state’ means commercial activity carried on by such state and
having substantial contact with the United States.” The City of Amsterdam’s lim-
ited museum-related activities might force a ruling that Amsterdam lacked sub-
stantial contact with the United States and thus cannot support the required
§1603(3)(e) substantial contact requirement in the FSIA definition of commer-
cial activity.40

But even if the Malewicz court ultimately dismisses this claim, the lasting signal
is not positive for foreign states who must decide in the future whether to loan
artwork to U.S. museums and galleries, especially when the artwork is priced in
the millions of dollars. Art loans that provide educational and cultural opportu-
nities to the U.S. population may be significantly decreased because of Malewicz.
In addition, foreign countries in response to the lack of comity offered to Dutch
laws regarding this claim may expose U.S. art loans to burdensome overseas liti-
gation risks.41 A detraction in cross-cultural art exchanges is not hard to imagine.

THE FOREIGN SOVEREIGN IMMUNITIES ACT AND THE

ATTACHMENT OF PERSIAN ARTIFACTS

The Rubin Case

The plaintiffs in Rubin have invoked the FSIA to assert a private claim against
cultural property owned by a foreign sovereign. The facts of Rubin are distinct
from the Nazi-era looting cases, Altmann and Malewicz, and the FSIA provisions
relied upon are §§ 1609 and 1610, which concern attachment of a foreign sovereign’s
property located in the United States. Also, Rubin, in dealing with antiquities rather
than artwork, poses separate issues pertaining to the nature and ownership of cul-
tural heritage property.

In Rubin, the plaintiffs are seeking execution of a judgment that they were
awarded in a prior U.S. lawsuit against Iran for Iran’s support of a Hamas-organized
1997 suicide bombing in Jerusalem, Israel. The Rubin plaintiffs brought the prior
lawsuit under FSIA §1605(a)(7), which allows money damages to be awarded
against a foreign sovereign for personal injury or death caused by, inter alia, the
foreign sovereign supporting an ‘extrajudicial killing’ whose definition includes a
deadly terrorist attack. The plaintiffs are either the actual victims of the bombing
or their family members. The monetary judgment against Iran, totaling more than
$71.5 million in compensatory damages, was entered in default in 2003, because
Iran did not make an appearance in the lawsuit.42

After winning the lawsuit, the plaintiffs faced the challenge of getting Iran to
pay the default judgment. If the FSIA allowed a monetary award without provid-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

295

ing a way to actually collect against the foreign sovereign, it essentially was creat-
ing a right without a remedy. But the FSIA solves this problem (for the issues
relevant to this case) by allowing plaintiffs under §1610(a) to attach property that
is both owned by the foreign sovereign and being used for a commercial activity
in the United States. Such an attachment forces the foreign sovereign to either pay
the default judgment or forfeit its ownership of the attached property.

In searching for property owned by Iran and located in the United States, the
plaintiffs discovered that the University of Chicago has in its possession Persian
antiquities belonging to Iran, namely, “two collections of ancient Persian seal im-
pressions and cuneiform writings found on clay tablets and table fragments that
were recovered in excavations in Iran in the 1930s and 1960s.” The collections are
known as the Persepolis Fortification Texts and the Chogha Mish collection, both
dating to antiquity. The first collection includes tablets and tablet fragments from
the reign of Darius I (500 b.c.). They provide information on the language and
daily life in the Persian Empire.43

The collections were loaned to the University of Chicago in the 1930s and 1960s
following their excavations by the university “for philological and archaeological
purposes with the understanding that the collections would be returned to Iran
when [the University of Chicago’s] studies were complete.” Over the ensuing de-
cades, much research and publication was generated by the collections. Many stud-
ies are complete and most of the collection is due to be returned to Iran.44

The plaintiffs invoked §§ 1609 and 1610(a) to try to attach the artifacts. The
FSIA §1609 grants immunity from attachment of property, except when an ex-
ception applies such as §1610(a): “The property in the United States of a foreign
state, as defined in section 1603(a) of this chapter, used for a commercial activity in
the United States, shall not be immune from attachment in aid of execution, or
from execution” (emphasis added). The plaintiffs argued that the Persian artifacts
fall under §1610(a) because they have been used for publishing and selling books
in the United States. (This claim bears a striking resemblance to Altmann.) To
investigate their claim, the plaintiffs demanded from the university “information
on the printing costs and sales of any scholarly publications concerning the Ira-
nian collection.” However, the university refused to surrender this information and
sought a protective order. The court granted the protective order on grounds that
in accordance with §1610(a) only the actions of the foreign sovereign and not the
university matter when determining whether immunity should be waived. The
university’s activities, whether commercial or not, were beyond the purview of
discovery in this case.45

After the protective order ruling, the plaintiffs moved for partial summary judg-
ment to declare that the university did not have standing to assert an exemption
from immunity §1609 claim on behalf of Iran. The magistrate judge agreed and
held, “an exemption from attachment must be affirmatively raised by the judg-
ment debtor, and it is the judgment debtor who bears the burden of proof.” The
magistrate judge also asserted that a threshold presumption of immunity is not

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

296

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

given to the foreign sovereign; rather, the foreign sovereign must appear in court
and argue an affirmative defense under §§ 1609 and 1610 to establish immunity
and prevent the attachment from occurring.46

The State Department aggressively opposed the magistrate judge’s ruling, argu-
ing, “the baseline presumption adopted by the FSIA is that the sovereign is im-
mune.” Second, the State Department argued that §1610 is not an affirmative
defense of the sort claimed by the magistrate judge, and the plaintiffs should have
the burden to demonstrate “that one of the statutory exemptions to that presump-
tion applies, regardless of the presence of the foreign sovereign in this litigation.”
Furthermore, the court can raise any affirmative defense sua sponte for the defen-
dant. The State Department also reminded the court that foreign sovereign im-
munity is a matter of “grace and comity” and “reflects the practical knowledge
that U.S. property located abroad will be subject to reciprocal treatment.”47

The plaintiffs argued, in response, that prior case law shows “qualified immu-
nity is an affirmative defense that can be asserted only by the defendant govern-
ment official” and only after it is properly invoked by the foreign sovereign does it
create a “presumption of immunity.”48

One June 22, 2006, a federal judge surprisingly affirmed the magistrate judge’s
ruling that foreign sovereign immunity under §1609 is an affirmative defense that
must be asserted by the foreign sovereign.49 This ruling appears to flip the FSIA
over onto its backside. For, although the FSIA was initially created to carve out
exceptions to foreign sovereign immunity, its practical application after Rubin is
to provide an affirmative defense, which demands a court appearance by the for-
eign sovereign before the elements of an immunity exception are even shown to
exist.

The judge’s opinion in Rubin is a good pedagogical example of statutory and
legislative interpretation. The judge looked at the plain wording of §1609, “the
property in the United States of a foreign sovereign shall be immune from attach-
ment arrest and execution except as provided in sections 1610 and 1611 of this
chapter” (emphasis added) and did not to believe that that the phrase shall be
immune means that a foreign sovereign is necessarily granted immunity unless an
exception is found to apply. The judge based his analysis on how Congress used
the verb shall in other parts of the FSIA, and also in other places in the United
States Code, arguing that shall was used in other places to create affirmative
defenses.50

The judge based his analysis heavily on House Report 94-1487, which stated
that foreign sovereign immunity was an affirmative defense under §1604 and, ac-
cording to the judge, used language to imply that it was also an affirmative de-
fense under §1610.51 The judge further held that Iran would not face any undue
burden in representing itself in U.S. court and thus the University of Chicago was
not able to raise the affirmative defense for Iran.52

In response to the ruling, Iran has appeared in court and asserted an affirma-
tive defense of foreign sovereign immunity to the plaintiffs’ claims. We should

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

297

remember that the magistrate judge in Rubin stated, “Iran has not been shown to
have engaged in commercial activity as to the items in question.”53 On July 14,
2006, the district court judge also reminded the plaintiffs that the June 26 ruling
“did not order the citation respondents to turn over the Persian artifacts, nor did
it address whether the plaintiffs are even entitled to the artifacts.”54 Thus, with
Iran’s appearance the plaintiffs still have to prove their case under the FSIA to win
attachment over the Persian artifacts.

Assuming for a moment that the special nature of the artifacts will not bar an
attachment, the plaintiffs must show, in accordance with §1610(a), that the arti-
facts owned by Iran were “used for a commercial activity in the United States.”
The phrase “used for” in the statute is intended to narrow the type of property
owned by the foreign sovereign that can be attached. This is in contrast to §1610(b),
which does not have a “used for commercial activity” requirement when the prop-
erty in issue is owned by an agency or instrumentality of the foreign sovereign.
A good example of the §1610(a) “used for” distinction was made in the 2002

case, Connecticut Bank of Commerce v. Republic of Congo:

Consider an airplane owned by a foreign government and used solely to
shuttle a foreign head-of-state back and forth for official visits. If the
plane lands in the United States, it would not be subject to attachment
or execution. The plane is not “used for” any commercial activity, in the
U.S. or elsewhere.55

Thus, the Persian artifacts, whether or not they theoretically can be used for com-
mercial trade or a commercial publication, must have served such a commercial
purpose while in the United States. Such a determination may depend on how
deeply the plaintiffs are allowed to dig into the records of the University of Chi-
cago and if any proceeds given to Iran for the research publications can prove
“used for a commercial activity.” In Altmann, art publications and advertisements
of the property in dispute rose to the level of commercial activity, but in Altmann
the foreign sovereign was clearly actively involved in the publications for the Aus-
trian Gallery. In Malewicz the museum loans constituted commercial activity, but
again, the activities of the foreign sovereign were the ones under scrutiny. Another
question to ask is what level of commercial activity does there need to be? For
example, if Iran were to receive only $100 in total from the publications, is this
amount sufficient to prove commercial activity and attach the artifacts?

Nevertheless, a ruling adverse to Iran may spark a shopping spree around the
country. The Rubin plaintiffs already “are attempting to take custody of a number
of antiquities held in Harvard University’s museums.”56 Also, they are “eying an-
tiquities at other institutions as well, including The Museum of Fine Arts in Bos-
ton, the University of Pennsylvania Museum, the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the
Detroit Institute of Arts, the University of Michigan, and the University of Chi-
cago.”57 Antiquities actually owned by the museums are probably beyond the scope
of the plaintiffs’ claims, because they are no longer the property of Iran. But ar-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

298

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

tifacts and artwork that are on loan to museums, and not part of a museum’s
permanent collections, may fall into the plaintiffs’ shopping cart.

Even if commercial activity is found under §1610(a), the question of §1603(3)(e)
substantial contact still must be addressed, as in Malewicz. Although the tablets
have been on loan to the University for decades, the interaction between the Ira-
nian government and the University throughout the years should be found insuf-
ficient to satisfy the substantial contact requirement of commercial activity in
accordance with §1603(3)(e).

Can the Persian Artifacts Ever Be Attachable?

A critical issue in this case, which did not reach the attention of the courts, is
whether the Persian artifacts could, given their inherent nature, ever be attached
under §§ 1609 and 1610. The very nature and character of the Persian artifacts,
Iran’s ownership rights over them, and the United States’ public policy concerns
for the protection of cultural heritage property should all preclude an attachment.
These issues are discussed in detail in the following text.
The Nature and Character of the Persian Artifacts

Quite alarmingly, the magistrate judge in Rubin failed to address the special na-
ture and character of the Persian artifacts. Their classification as property that can
satisfy a FSIA claim is grossly presumed. The Persian artifacts should not be con-
sidered available for the commercial market. They are too rare to be likened to
antiquities available in tremendous abundance (such as ancient Greek pottery)
that can serve the needs of a commercial market alongside those of the research
and educational communities. The Persian artifacts are irreplaceable tablets offer-
ing unique insights into ancient Persian cultures. Although it is likely that the bomb-
ing victims would sell the tablets for money, a buyer is not prechosen or prescreened
and in the event of an auction, a wealthy private bidder may very well outbid a
museum or educational institution. Gil Stein, director of the Oriental Institute at
the University of Chicago, provided a useful comparison to The Washington Post:
“You’d have to imagine how we would feel if we loaned the Liberty Bell to Russia
and a Russian court put it up for auction.”58

The Persian collections, if attached, may permanently be removed from the re-
search and educational communities or be altered, mismanaged, inadvertently de-
faced or destroyed if private owners seek to display or store the artifacts in ways
that compromise their preservation. The Persian collections also represent a sum
that is greater than their individual parts, which are “clay tablets smaller than a
deck of playing cards.”59 Mathew Stolper, an Oriental Institute assyriologist, ex-
plained in an article in Archaeology, “It’s a large collection of individually banal
pieces that together are an extraordinary snapshot of an administrative system. Its
value is as a whole collection, and that would be lost, if it was sold off.”60 Dividing
the collections up among the victims of the bombings can cause the collection to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

299

become permanently severed, with important historical and cultural information
forever lost.
Iran’s Ownership Rights Over the Persian Artifacts

The court should consider whether an attachment over the Persian collections is
possible given the nature of Iran’s property rights in them. The court should begin
with the most basic question asked in a property law class: What is the bundle of
rights granted with respect to the property in question and who owns the rights?
The Iranian collections in Rubin are cultural artifacts that have never changed own-
ership hands since being excavated. Iran may in fact not own transfer rights in the
artifacts. The artifacts may be inalienable; consequently, an attachment would not
work to satisfy a monetary judgment against Iran because Iran may have no mon-
etary interest in them!

The Persian artifacts may be inalienable by law under Article 83 of the Iranian

Constitution:

Article 83 [Property of National Heritage]
Government buildings and properties forming part of the national her-
itage cannot be transferred except with the approval of the Islamic Con-
sultative Assembly; that, too, is not applicable in the case of irreplaceable
treasures.61

The spirit of this article in Iran’s Constitution indicates that Iran considers cer-
tain national heritage property to be inalienable absent necessary authorizations.
Furthermore, pieces considered irreplaceable treasures to the country are never
transferable. It is not surprising, given the rich cultural history buried in Iranian
soil, that Iran would place constitutional restrictions on the transfer of its na-
tional heritage property. Thus, the bundle of rights that Iran possesses over the
Persian antiquities may not include transferability. If this is the case, it should fol-
low that Iran holds no monetary interest in the collections. An attachment thus
would only result in an unlawful taking.

Putting the Iranian Constitution aside, it could also be the case that Iran’s own-
ership is in the form of a trust, and Iran as trustee oversees the property for the
Iranian population. In fact, the University of Chicago lawyers have argued, “The
antiquities are the unique property, not just of the government of Iran, but of
the people of Iran.”62 Furthermore, as reported in The New York Times, “Both the
Oriental Institute [University of Chicago] and the State Department took the po-
sition that the antiquities were part of Iran’s national patrimony and therefore did
not fit the definition of a commercial ‘asset’ that could be seized to satisfy judg-
ment.”63 These positions support the argument that Iran holds the collections in
the form of a trust and does not possess transfer rights in them.

The idea of a government holding cultural property in trust for a population is
not foreign to the United States. The federal Indian Trust Doctrine “imposes du-
ties on the federal government to manage Native American property and other
affairs in the best interest of Native Americans.”64 Also, ARPA grants the federal

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

300

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

government ownership of all archaeological resources found on federally owned
or controlled land. The Archaeological Resources Protection Act takes the posi-
tion that “archaeological resources found on public lands and Indian lands are an
accessible and irreplaceable part of the Nation’s heritage.” Furthermore, ARPA notes
that “these resources are increasingly endangered because of their commercial at-
tractiveness” and thus removes them from the private commercial sector.65

Patty Gerstenblith’s explanation of the public trust doctrine elucidates the role
of the government acting as trustee: “When the government possesses cultural prop-
erty, it acts as trustee on behalf of the relevant cultural group for protecting and
utilizing the object for the benefit of the group.”66 In the trust, alienation can be
subject to “such restrictions as maintenance of public access for study or display
purposes or to a requirement to remain in a particular geographic area.”67 The
structure of a trust fits well with Iran’s ownership of the Persian artifacts. The U.S.
court should consider that the Iranian people’s interests in the collections control
the alienation rights and do not permit an FSIA attachment.

Public Policy Issues

The court should also protect Iran’s ownership of the Persian artifacts for the in-
terests of the public, the study of archeology, and the international preservation of
cultural heritage. The preamble of the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means
of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Owner-
ship of Cultural Property put forward as an important consideration:

[T]he interchange of cultural property among nations for scientific, cul-
tural and educational purposes increases the knowledge of the civiliza-
tion of Man, enriches the cultural life of all people and inspires mutual
respect and appreciation among nations.68

An attachment of the Iranian collections seriously contravenes the spirit of the
UNESCO Convention. For, although the University of Chicago’s research termi-
nates soon, the university has had the tablets in its possession since excavation
and no other archaeological groups have had access to them to conduct further
observations or research on them. Iran may wish to use the tablets in further ac-
ademic publications and research, or hold them as important research displays, in
situ, at their excavated sites. Also, the science of archeology is far from stagnant;
new techniques may develop to further the research done on the tablets.

To consider on a public policy level how a U.S. courts should treat the Persian
artifacts in question, we can also take a brief look into how the United States has
protected cultural heritage ownership of certain groups within its own borders.
Take NAGPRA as an example. Congress adopted NAGPRA to ensure respect for
Native American cultural heritage property and to facilitate repatriations for Na-
tive American tribes of their funeral objects and cultural heritage property that
either fell into the collections of state or federal museums or have not yet been

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

301

excavated, possessed or sold off. The United States National Parks web site boasts,
“NAGPRA has a place within the global movement towards recognition of the
cultural property rights of indigenous peoples.”69

Among the objects protected under NAGPRA (and most relevant to this dis-

cussion) are those of “cultural patrimony” defined as:

an object having ongoing historical, traditional, or cultural importance cen-
tral to the Native American group or culture itself, rather than property
owned by an individual Native American, and which, therefore, cannot
be alienated, appropriated, or conveyed by any individual regardless of
whether or not the individual is a member of the Indian tribe or Native
Hawaiian organization and such object shall have been considered in-
alienable by such Native American group at the time the object was sep-
arated from such group. (emphasis added)

Under NAGPRA, cultural patrimony objects linked to a Native American tribe
are considered inalienable. The Native American Graves Protection and Repatria-
tion Act has sparked repatriations of cultural patrimony objects to Native Amer-
ican tribes on a wide scale. To give just one example, “In 1999, the Robert S. Peabody
Museum at Phillips-Andover in 1999 returned the bones of two thousand Pecos
Indians and more than five hundred funerary items to the pueblo of Jamez, New
Mexico.”70

However, the recent controversy over Kennewick Man has shown that what is
in the ground is not necessarily part of the cultural heritage of a later population
that occupies the same land. Kennewick Man is a well-preserved skeleton discov-
ered on July 28, 1996, in the Columbia River in Kennewick, Washington. The skel-
eton dates to about 9,000 years old. The Ninth Circuit Court held that “human
remains must bear some relationship to a presently existing tribe, people, or cul-
ture to be ‘Native American’ within meaning of NAGPRA.”71 In the case of Ken-
newick Man, the court agreed with scientists and found, “Scant or no evidence of
cultural similarities between Kennewick Man and modern Indians exists.”72 Thus,
the skeleton was not given to Native American tribes who had inhabited the re-
gion where the skeleton was discovered. Cultural internationalists applauded the
decision because it placed Kennewick Man as part of the cultural heritage of all
mankind and allowed scientists to conduct research on the skeleton. The decision
also challenged the view that whoever inherits the land can own and hoard all the
cultural objects found buried in that land.

Should we apply Kennewick Man to the case of the Persian artifacts and argue
that Iran owns the tablets not with any special inalienable rights based on its cul-
tural heritage lineage? That is, does Iran only possess the same ownership rights
over the Persian artifacts as any other non-Iranian entity would because the arti-
facts are not just part of Iran’s cultural heritage, but part of the world’s cultural
heritage? I do not believe that this argument holds water. For, in contrast to Ken-
newick Man, the Persian artifacts date to a much more recent period in history
and Iran has continually treated Persian culture as part of its direct cultural lineage.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

302

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

Moreover, the United States has on many occasions recognized the patrimony
rights of modern cultures over early periods of antiquity buried in their lands.
Such examples include the bilateral agreements in the CPIA, which prohibit the
import of cultural property that is considered stolen according to a foreign country’s
patrimony laws, as long as that foreign country is a signatory of CPIA. Going fur-
ther, U.S. courts have recognized patrimony laws of non-CPIA signatory coun-
tries as well. U.S. v. Schultz (Schultz) is a well-known example.73

In Schultz, a federal court convicted a reputable New York art dealer, Frederick
Schultz, under the National Stolen Property Act for his involvement in an inter-
national ring dealing in Egyptian antiquities. The Schultz decision demonstrated
that the U.S. could look to a foreign patrimony law to determine if an object should
be considered stolen.74 The court did not dismiss Egypt’s claim because the arti-
facts dated way back to antiquity. Likewise, Iran should be deemed to possess cul-
tural heritage property rights over Persian artifacts.

On an international scale, the U.S. has engaged in what has been a global trend
of voluntary repatriations to return cultural heritage objects to their countries of
origin. Examples of U.S. involvement include the National Museum of the Amer-
ican Indian returning objects to Peru, Cuba, and Canada; The Metropolitan Mu-
seum of Art returning the Euphronios krater to Italy; the Museum of Fine Arts,
Boston also returning ancient works to Italy; and the Getty Museum returning
Greek and Italian artifacts to their origin countries. The nature of these issues
relate to the common understanding that present-day source countries possess an
important right over the cultural heritage property associated with their lands. An
attachment of the Persian artifacts in Rubin grossly denies this relationship and
goes against the spirit of all the U.S. legislation that endeavors to respect and pro-
mote national ownership of cultural heritage property.

The interests of archeology and anthropology should also be considered. The
U.S. archaeological field will most likely contract if the Rubin court allows an at-
tachment of the Persian artifacts. Foreign state-run institutions are likely to refuse
lending valuable and often irreplaceable cultural items to U.S. institutions for re-
search. Yet, the studies of archeology and anthropology in our universities depend
on such loans. Mr. Stein expressed this concern: “Scholarship depends on the abil-
ity to trust each other to work above the level of politics and infighting. The whole
structure of scholarly collaboration would fall apart, and the whole world would
be very much the poorer for it.”75 If archaeologists cannot work on the pieces
they excavate and produce publications from them, funding for excavations may
be drastically reduced, and educational advancements in the international archae-
ological field will undoubtedly suffer. International respect for the research and
preservation of cultural heritage will also be terribly compromised with the dan-
ger of retaliations.76

Rubin is still being tried to see if an FSIA attachment over the Persian artifacts
will be granted. But the irreparable harms that an attachment will cause should
outweigh the justice that the individuals are seeking in this case.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

303

CONCLUSION

The Altmann court found a powerful litigation sword in the FSIA to retrieve Nazi-
era looted artwork. This led to U.S. courts opening their doors to claims against
foreign sovereigns for artwork based on state-run museum sponsored activities
and cultural exchanges in the United States. While Malewicz placed cross-border
museum loans at risk to U.S. litigation, it also stripped the IFSA of its important
cross-border art and antiquities loan protections. Rubin is taking the FSIA com-
mercial activity definition to the extreme by treating irreplaceable Persian arti-
facts as property that might be used for commercial activity. If this is allowed,
the protections and preservations of important cultural heritage property may
be rendered void. In the following text, I suggest solutions to overcome the
developments arising out of the three cases so as to restore the United States’ ef-
forts to promote and protect cross-border art exchanges and cultural heritage
property.

First, in looking back at Altmann and Malewicz, we should ask if the U.S. courts
were really the proper place to bring these lawsuits. Although the retrieval of sto-
len property is no doubt an important judicial purpose, in Altmann and poten-
tially in Malewicz, foreign sovereigns were forcefully denied jurisdiction over the
claims even though both the foreign sovereigns and the property at issue were
located (for most of the time, if not all of the time) not on U.S. soil. A museum
promotion or art loan into the United States is not the best mechanism to trap
foreign sovereigns into U.S. courts. It mixes together two separate interests: pro-
moting (by protecting) cross-cultural art and cultural heritage exchanges, and pro-
viding a forum for wronged individuals to seek justice for their private claims.

Rather than mixing and therefore compromising the two interests, they should
be made separate. An international commitment should be established (rather than
a U.S. legal one) to restitute art and cultural property stolen in the international
context to rightful owners. The international community can be better served, and
a friendlier international commitment will be fostered, by bringing such inter-
national stolen art claims in an international arbitration arena, or an international
court system. This would allow the cases to be heard without any particular na-
tion asserting too much control over the process, and the U.S. laws will not have
to be strained to create jurisdiction over events that primarily occur overseas.

Importantly, the U.S. can then continue to respect art and cultural heritage ex-
changes within its borders without having to compromise the purpose and pow-
ers of the IFSA. Removing such cases to an international arena can also allow the
U.S. to exclude from the FSIA’s reach certain pieces of artwork and cultural her-
itage property that constitute part of a foreign sovereign’s national heritage and
cultural lineage, as discussed in the following text.

The main issue to address on a policy level that arises out of Rubin is whether
certain types of cultural heritage property should always be excluded from FSIA
claims. To think about how to create a definition for such a cultural heritage

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

304

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

property exclusion, we can place the analysis in the context of the cultural
internationalists/nationalists debate.

To begin, cultural nationalists and internationalists both agree that a certain class
of cultural heritage objects should not be taken or transferred from source coun-
tries. In John Merryman’s article,“Cultural Property Internationalism,” he gave some
examples: fragile objects that are likely to be damaged or destroyed by movement,
complex objects prone to dismemberment like the panels of an alter piece or the
components of a sculptural group, and objects of ritual and religious importance.77
In addition, inhabitants of every nation should have access to a fully representative
collection of objects that represent their history and culture. Although cultural na-
tionalists would broaden the basket of objects that source nations alone should own,
cultural internationalists would keep it limited to support the concept of world her-
itage ownership and a restricted but conducive trade in cultural objects.

So if we take the narrow basket of cultural property that cultural internation-
alists agree should be protected from entering into the stream of trade, would the
Persian artifacts be placed in it? Arguable yes, because the artifacts do constitute a
collection analogous to a collection of a sculptural group. Once divided, valuable
information regarding the artifacts will be lost.

But assuming the Persian artifacts do not fall into a narrow basket of special
and fragile cultural heritage property, the next question to ask is whether the ar-
tifacts should be considered property alienable and available for trade. Merryman
argues that many cultural objects should be traded to be appreciated as part of a
world heritage. However, they should be trade in a restricted trade environment,
as Merryman has emphatically stressed, “No thinking person argues for free trade
of cultural property.”78 Participants of a restricted trade circle include dealers, col-
lectors, and museums. This is because these groups usually act under well-developed
guidelines of professional codes of ethics when dealing in cultural objects.

But the Rubin court does not propose to keep the artifacts within a restricted trade
environment. Rather, an attachment would open the gates to free trade in cultural
property and place national or world heritage property in private hands and be-
yond internationally developed guidelines and protections for cultural property. The
receivers of the Persian artifacts, the bombing victims, are not bound by any code of
ethics regarding how to handle the artifacts. For example, selling the Persian arti-
facts to the individual victims would do nothing to uphold the UNESCO Inter-
national Code of Ethics for Dealers in Cultural Property and other such guidelines
for the protection of cultural heritage property.

Thus, whether the artifacts fall within the narrow basket of special cultural prop-
erty or without, the Persian artifacts still should be protected from entering a free
trade stream of commerce, because the private individuals receiving the artifacts
are not under any obligations to give the artifacts special protections and preser-
vation as should be given to national or world heritage property.

Therefore, the FSIA should incorporate a cultural property exception to uphold
a comparable level of protection for cultural heritage property currently reflected

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

305

in international laws, national laws, and the art trade community as a whole. At
the same time, the FSIA must allow stolen property, which may in some instances
be cultural property, to be retrieved by their rightful owners. How to achieve the
balance?

The World Trade Organization’s General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
can provide some starting guidance. Article XX of the GATT gives the following
qualification to free trade: “the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic
or archaeological value.” Although a good starting point, this provision is proba-
bly too broad because both Austria and the city of Amsterdam could have claimed
their rights to Nazi-looted art under it. But we can build on the provision with the
following:

in instances where the property 1) has never entered the stream of com-
merce or been sold or traded; or 2) is not currently fit to enter the
stream of commerce due to its condition(s) of fragility, uniqueness,
irreplaceability, religious, ritual or public educational importance; and
3) is not found to be the rightful possession of another through a claim
of ownership.

Adding to this exception, a protection for objects that have been granted immu-
nity under the IFSA, the FSIA cultural property exception could read as follows:

Property which is considered cultural heritage property and not in-
cluded as the kind of property that can be attached, seized or form the
basis of a lawsuit under the FSIA includes both property which has re-
ceived immunity under the Immunity From Seizure Act and national
treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value in instances where
the property 1) has never entered the stream of commerce or been sold
or traded; or 3) is not currently fit to enter the stream of commerce due
to its condition(s) of fragility, uniqueness, irreplaceability, religious, rit-
ual or public educational importance; and 3) is not found to be the right-
ful possession of another through a claim of ownership.

This definition can allow for stolen art cases to proceed, while upholding the United
States’ interests in promoting cross-cultural exchanges. It would also protect the
Persian artifacts and other similar national treasures from being destroyed, altered
or removed from source countries. At the same time, the proposed FSIA cultural
heritage property exception would not extend so far as to blindly uphold cultural
patrimony laws that can be overreaching in trying to protect every object that can
fall under a wide and ambiguous definition of art.

As it stands, the FSIA already precludes certain types of property from attach-
ment. A list is given in §1611 and includes property owned by certain organiza-
tions designated by the U.S. President, and property used in connection with a
military activity. Adding a cultural heritage property exception to §1611 will not
affect such a large number of claims so as to produce a remedy without a right
under the FSIA.

In the case of Rubin, a new FSIA art and cultural heritage property exception
would make the plaintiff attorneys look harder to find suitable property to attach,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

306

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

or wait for other property to come into the United States; but, if an important
piece of our cultural heritage were attacked on similar grounds in another coun-
try, we would expect the same approach. The proposed FSIA cultural heritage prop-
erty exception allows for a balance to be struck between facilitating access to justice
for wronged individuals and preserving the United State’s commitment to respect-
ing and preserving cultural heritage property, whether it be for the enjoyment and
education of people located within source nations or for the enjoyment and ed-
ucation of the world population as a whole.

ENDNOTES

1. 22 U.S.C.A. § 2459.
2. 22 U.S.C.A. § 2459.
3. H.R. Rep. 89-1070, H.R. Rep No. 1070, 89th Cong., 1st Sess. 1965, 1965 U.S.C.C.A.N. 3576.
4. Noonan, “Immunity from Seizure,” 45.
5. H.R. REP. 94-1487, H.R. Rep. No. 1487, 94th Cong. 2nd Sess. 1976, ’976 WL 14078.
6. Altmann v. Republic of Austria, 142 F.Supp. 2d 1187 (C.D. Cal. 2001); aff ’d and remanded by
317 F.3d 954, (9th Cir. 2002); amended by 327 F.3d 1246, (9th Cir. 2003); cert. granted in part by 539
U.S. 987 (2003); aff ’d on other grounds by 541 U.S. 677, (2004); on remand to Altmann v. Republic
of Austria, 335 F.Supp. 2d 1066 (C.D.Cal. 2004).

7. Malewicz v. City of Amsterdam, 362 F.Supp. 2d 298 (D.D.C. 2005).
8. Rubin v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, 408 F. Supp. 2d 549 (N.D. Ill. 2005); aff ’d by 436 F.Supp.
2d 938 (N.D.Ill. 2006); motion to amend denied by 2006 WL 2024247 (N.D.Ill. Jul 14, 2006) (NO. 03
CV 9370).

9. See Campuzano, et al. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, et al., 281 F.Supp. 2d 258 (D.D.C.2003).
10. Verlinden B.V. v. Central Bank of Nigeria, 461 U.S. 480, 486 (1983).
11. Letter from Jack B. Tate, Acting Legal Adviser, Department of State, Acting Attorney General
Philip B. Perlman (May 19, 1952), reprinted in Alfred Dunhill of London, Inc. v. Cuba, 425 U.S. 682,
711 (Appendix 2 to opinion of White, J.).

12. Verlinden, 478.
13. Verlinden, 488.
14. See 28 U.S.C. §§ 1330 and 1602.
15. Verlinden, 486.
16. See for example, Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae Supporting Petitioners, Republic of
Austria v. Altmann, 124 S.Ct 2240 (No. 03-13); Statement of Interest of the United States, Malewicz
v. City of Amsterdam at 7, 362 F.Supp. 2d 298 (D.D.C. 2005). (No 04-00024), Second Statement of
Interest of the United States, Rubin v. The Islamic Public of Iran, 408 F.Supp. 2d 549 (N.D. Ill. 2005)(No
03-cv-9370).

17. 28 U.S.C.A. § 1603(d).
18. Altmann, 1192; see footnote 5. The six paintings in controversy to this action are Adele Block-
Bauer I, Adele Block-Bauer II, Beechwood, Apple Tree I, Houses in Unterach am Attersee, and the
portrait of Amalie Zuckerkandl. For information on each painting, see the following pages in Alt-
mann, 1191 1192; 1192; 1192; 1193; 1193; 1193, respectively.

19. Altmann, 1193, 1195, 1196.
20. Altmann, 1196.
21. 28 U.S.C. §1605(a)(3).
22. Altmann, 1203.
23. Altmann, 1204. See also 28 U.S.C.A. § 1603(b) (“An ‘agency or instrumentality of a foreign
state’ means any entity—(1) which is a separate legal person, corporate or otherwise, and (2) which
is an organ of a foreign state or political subdivision thereof, or a majority of whose shares or other
ownership interest is owned by a foreign state or political subdivision thereof, and (3) which is nei-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

307

ther a citizen of a State of the United States as defined in Section 1332 (c) and (d) of this title, nor
created under the laws of any third country.”)

24. Altmann, 1204, quoting from Republic of Argentina v. Weltover, Inc. 504 U.S. 607,614 (1992).
25. Altmann, 1204–1205.
26. Altmann v. Republic of Austria, 317 F.3d 954, 969 (9th Cir. 2002).
27. Republic of Austria v. Altmann, 541 U.S. 677 (2004).
28. Waxman, “A Homecoming, in Los Angeles, for Looted Klimts.”
29. Kimmelman, “Klimt sale: The roads not taken by heirs,” Vogel, “$491 Million Sale at Christie’s

Shatters Art Auction Record.”

30. Altmann, 1205.
31. Altmann, 1209–1210.
32. See “Austria ‘May Return Looted Art.’”
33. See “Austria ‘May Return Looted Art.’”
34. Malewicz, 301.
35. Malewicz, 301, 302, 302–303.
36. Malewicz, 301–303.
37. Malewicz, 309; Statement of Interest of the United States, Malewicz v. City of Amsterdam, 362

F.Supp. 2d 298 (D.D.C. 2005) (No 04-00024), 5.

38. Malewicz, 309. See also H.R. Rep. No. 1487, 94th Cong., 2nd Sess. 1976, 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N.
6604: “Claimants will clearly benefit from the expanded methods under the bill for service on a
foreign state (sec. 1608), as well as from the certainty that section 1330(b) of the bill confers per-
sonal jurisdiction over a foreign state in Federal and State courts as to every claim for which the
foreign state is not entitled to immunity. The elimination of attachment as a vehicle for commenc-
ing a lawsuit will ease the conduct of foreign relations by the United States and help eliminate the
necessity for determinations of claims of sovereign immunity by the State Department.” Malewicz,
312.

39. Malewicz, 313, 314.
40. Statement of Interest of the United States, Malewicz v. City of Amsterdam at 7, 362 F.Supp. 2d
298 (D.D.C. 2005). (No 04–00024); Malewicz, 313–315. To determine whether Amsterdam estab-
lished significant contacts in the U.S., the court stated that it wanted to know more about the extent
of the nominal loan handling fees and the Stedelijk’s alleged loss of money on the loans.

41. Malewicz, 316. The Malewicz court states that if the City of Amsterdam will not waive its
State of Limitations defenses as are allowable in a Dutch court, the Malewicz court will render this
claim ripe under U.S. jurisdiction.

42. Rubin, 1108, 1110; Campuzano, et al. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, et al., 281 F.Supp. 2d 258

(D.D.C. 2003).

43. Rubin, 1110; “Terror Victims Claim U. of C. Relics: Group Wants Valuable Iranian Artifacts to

Cover $71 Million Suit,” 6.

44. Rubin, 1110.
45. Rubin, 1110–1113.
46. Rubin v. The Islamic Public of Iran, 408 F.Supp. 2d 549 (N.D. Ill. 2005); Rubin, 555.
47. Second Statement of Interest of the United States at 5, Rubin v. The Islamic Public of Iran, 408
F.Supp. 2d 549 (N.D. Ill. 2005) (No 03-cv-9370); Rubin, 5, 13 (quoting from Acosta v. Artuz, 221 F.3d
117, 121 [2d Cir. 2000]); Rubin, 5, 7.

48. Plaintiff’s Memorandum in Response to The Second Statement of Interest of the United States,

Rubin v. The Islamic Public of Iran, 408 F.Supp. 2d 549 (N.D. Ill. 2005) (No 03-cv-9370).

49. Islamic Republic of Iran vs. University of Chicago, 436 F.Supp. 2d 938 (N.D. Ill. Jun 22, 2006).
50. Rubin, 436 F.Supp. 2d at 941.
51. H.R.Rep. No. 94-1487, 9th Cong., 2d Sess., at 17 (1976).
52. Rubin, 436 F.Supp. 2d at 944–945.
53. Rubin, 551.
54. Islamic Republic of Iran vs. University of Chicago, 2006 WL 2024247 (N.D.Ill. Jul 14, 2006)

(NO. 03 CV 9370).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

308

CHARLENE A. CAPRIO

55. 309 F.3d 240 (2d Cir. 2002).
56. Ciarelli, “Bombing Victims Seek Iranian Artifacts From Harvard Museums.”
57. Ciarelli, “Bombing Victims Seek Iranian Artifacts.”
58. Slevin, “U.S., Iran Form Unlikely Alliance.”
59. “Embattled Tablets.”
60. “Embattled Tablets.”
61. Iran Constitution, article 83.
62. “Terror Victims claim U. of C. relics: Group wants valuable Iranian Artifacts to cover $71

million suit,” 6.

63. Meier, Barry. “Antiquities and Politics Intersect in a Lawsuit.”
64. Gerstenblith, “Identity and Cultural Property,” 651–652.
65. 16 U.S.C. §470aa. The term archaeological resource is defined in ARPA as: “any material remains
of past human life or activities which are of archaeological interest, as determined under uniform
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter. Such regulations containing such determination
shall include, but not be limited to: pottery, basketry, bottles, weapons, weapon projectiles, tools,
structures or portions of structures, pit houses, rock paintings, rock carvings, intaglios, graves, human
skeletal materials, or any portion or piece of any of the foregoing items. Nonfossilized and fossilized
paleontological specimens, or any portion or piece thereof, shall not be considered archaeological
resources, under the regulations under this paragraph, unless found in an archaeological context. No
item shall be treated as an archaeological resource under regulations under this paragraph unless
such item is at least 100 years of age.”; See also Gerstenblith, “Identity and Cultural Property,” 651–652.

66. Gerstenblith, “Identity and Cultural Property,” 655.
67. Gerstenblith, “Identity and Cultural Property,” 655.
68. 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (823 U.N.T.S. 231). The United States has
ratified the 1970 Convention in a somewhat restrictive format, adopting articles 7 and 9 as the Con-
vention on Cultural Property Implementation Act (CPIA).

69. Web site for National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
70. Vincent, “Indian Givers.”
71. Bonnischen v. United States, 217 F. Supp 2d 1116 at (D. Org. 2002); aff ’d and remanded by 367

F.3d 864 (9th Cir. 2004).

72. Bonnischen v. United States, 217 F. Supp 2d 1116 at (D. Org. 2002).
73. 333 F.3d 393 (2d Cir. 2003).
74. U.S. v. Schultz. The court respected Egypt’s 1983 patrimony law, which declares all antiquities
discovered in Egypt after 1983 to be the property of the Egyptian government and makes private
ownership or possession of them illegal.

75. Slevin, “U.S., Iran Form Unlikely Alliance.”
76. Slevin, “U.S., Iran.” “Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki described the case on June 30 as
an ‘indecent cultural move by the United States.’ He said if federal courts approved the sale, Iran
could make retaliatory legal claims against the United States for supporting the 1953 coup in Tehran
and backing Iraq during the deadly 1980s Iran-Iraq war.”

77. Merryman, “Cultural Property Internationalism.”
78. Merryman, “Cultural Property Internationalism,” 12, 28.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

“Austria ‘May Return Looted Art.’” BBC News, April 7, 2006. 具http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
entertainment/4883488.stm典 accessed November 15, 2006.
“Embattled Tablets.” Archaeology, September/October (2006): 12.

Gerstenblith, Patty. “Identity and Cultural Property: The Protection of Cultural Property in the United
States.” Boston University Law Review 75 (1995): 559–688.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X

ART, CULTURAL PROPERTY, AND THE FSIA

309

Herrmann, Andrew; Warmbir, Steve. “Terror Victims claim U. of C. relics: Group wants valuable
Iranian Artifacts to cover $71 million suit.” Chicago Sun-Times, December 13, 2005.

Kimmelman, Michael. “Klimt Sale: The Roads Not Taken by Heirs.” International Herald Tribune,
Sept. 20, 2006.

Meier, Barry. “Antiquities and Politics Intersect in a Lawsuit.” The New York Times, March 29, 2006.

Merryman, John H. “Cultural Property Internationalism.” International Journal of Cultural Property
12 (2005) 11–39.
National Park Service, Department of the Interior, 具http://www.cr.nps.gov/nagpra/SPECIAL/
International.htm典 accessed November 15, 2006.

Noonan, Rebecca. “Immunity from Seizure.” In Who Owns the Past, edited by Kate Fitz, New Bruns-
wick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2005.

Slevin, Peter. “U.S., Iran Form Unlikely Alliance to Protect Artifacts From Seizure in Bombing Law-
suit.” Washington Post, July 18, 2006.

Vincent, Steven. “Indian Givers.” In Who Owns the Past, edited by Kate Fitz, New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 2005.

Vogel, Carol, “$491 Million Sale at Christie’s Art Auction Record.” The New York Times, November 9,
2006.

Waxman, Sharon. “A Homecoming, in Los Angeles, for Looted Klimts.” The New York Times, April 6,
2006.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910606019X


