International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Does Adaptive Reuse Pay? A Study of the Business
of Building Renovation in Ontario, Canada

Robert Shipley , Steve Utz & Michael Parsons

To cite this article: Robert Shipley , Steve Utz & Michael Parsons (2006) Does Adaptive Reuse
Pay? A Study of the Business of Building Renovation in Ontario, Canada, International Journal of
Heritage Studies, 12:6, 505-520, DOI: 10.1080/13527250600940181
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250600940181

Published online: 24 Nov 2006.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 2217

Citing articles: 39 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 12, No. 6, November 2006, pp. 505–520

Does Adaptive Reuse Pay? A Study of 
the Business of Building Renovation in 
Ontario, Canada
Robert Shipley, Steve Utz & Michael Parsons

126000000November 2006
RobertShipley
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_193934.sgm
10.1080/13527250600940181
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2006Taylor & Francis

rshipley@fes.uwaterloo.caOlder  buildings  are  important  aesthetic,  cultural  and  economic  resources  but  in  many
jurisdictions hundreds of historic buildings have been demolished because developers and
bankers argued that the cost of adapting them for new uses is too high. Still, a growing
number  of  reputable  developers  are  completing  exciting  projects  featuring  innovative
building  renovation.  However,  when  particular  development  projects  are  presented  to
decision  makers,  generally  only  the  developer/lender’s  cost  analyses  are  presented  and,
therefore, they are unable to make truly informed judgments. This study examines the busi-
ness of heritage development, which consists of building renovation or adaptive reuse, in
order to determine the characteristics of success. In Ontario, Canada, there exists a group
of dynamic and creative investors with a passion for older buildings. Some reuse projects
are more costly than new building but not all and the return on investment for heritage
development is almost always higher. This has important implications in Ontario where
recent  legislative  changes  have  finally  given  local  councils  the  authority  to  prevent  the
demolition of listed buildings, but the lessons for other jurisdictions are also important.

Keywords: Heritage; Historic Buildings; Economics; Adaptive Reuse; Conservation; 
Ontario

Older buildings represent an important aesthetic, cultural and economic resource—as
well as a non-renewable one. Yet dozens, and perhaps hundreds, of historic buildings
have  been  demolished  in  the  Canadian  province  of  Ontario  and  other  jurisdictions
over the past decades largely because owners, bankers and developers have argued that
the  costs  of  renovating  and  adapting  these  buildings  for  new  uses  is  too  high.1

Robert  Shipley,  Steve  Utz  &  Michael  Parsons,  University  of  Waterloo.  Correspondence 
rshipley@fes.uwaterloo.ca

to:

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2006 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250600940181

506 R. Shipley et al.

Demolition of the existing buildings and replacement with new structures, the story
goes, is the only way for investors to make a reasonable profit from the use of the land.
Some even go as far as asserting that new-build is always more economical, renovation
universally  more  expensive.2  At  the  same  time  reputable  developers,  architects  and
investors seem to be able to complete exciting and profitable projects which feature
innovative building renovation.3 Many older buildings are not only suitable for new
uses  but  often  become  key  sites  in  renewal  schemes.4  Some  developers  argue  that
reusing older buildings always represents a financial advantage.

This is an important debate for a number of reasons. Researchers and policy makers
have recognised the desirability of having more residents in downtowns as a catalyst for
central  business  district  revitalisation.5  Similarly,  the  recently  adopted  concept  of
Smart Growth has done much to spur the redevelopment of brownfield sites.6 Never-
theless, it is difficult to balance the desire to preserve older buildings for historical and
aesthetic reasons, the need for regeneration, and the legitimate expectation of owners
to make their properties profitable. Further complicating the matter is the fact that
sometimes  these  aims  are  incompatible  while  sometimes  they  are  complementary.
Local councils and other decision makers are generally presented only with the owner/
developer/lender’s  cost  analysis  and  are,  therefore,  unable  to  make  truly  informed
judgments.  While  this  problem  has  been  less  prevalent  in  Europe,  where  there  is
stronger regulation regarding historic conservation, it may become more pronounced,
especially with more international investors.

In  order  to  shed  light  on  the  debate  this  study  examined  the  costs  of  heritage
development, which consists of building renovation or adaptive reuse, in Ontario. The
intent  was  (a)  to  determine  as  far  as  possible  what  the  characteristics  of  successful
renovation  projects  are  in  terms  of  factors  such  as  building  type,  architectural  and
marketing  approach,  financing  and  the  regulatory  environment,  and  (b)  to  make
recommendations on public policy and effective citizen involvement. While this study
looks  at  one  Canadian  province  the  lessons  may  well  be  applicable  in  many  other
places.

Methods

The Heritage Resources Centre at the University of Waterloo undertook this project
with  funding  assistance  from  the  Ontario  Trillium  Foundation.  In  order  better  to
understand the business of adaptive reuse, people from across the province were asked
to  identify  successful  projects  that  could  be  examined.  This  network  of  informants
came primarily from the membership of the Architectural Conservancy, a well-estab-
lished public interest group, and from local planning departments. They provide lists
of adaptive reuse projects with contact information for developers or owners. A total
of  132  projects  were  identified.  Building  characteristics  were  available  for  75  and
financial information for 23 (see Table 1).

It was easy to find examples of heritage development projects but difficult to find
people  willing  to  share  the  detailed  financial  information  needed  to  compare  these
projects with other property investments. Like most entrepreneurs, those working in

Table 1 Projects identiﬁed

International Journal of Heritage Studies

507

Small

(<18,000 ft2)

Medium

(18,000–50,000 ft2)

Large

(>50,000 ft2)

Residential
Commercial
Institutional

Note: 1 ft2 is 0.0929 m2.

8
10

17
19
8

9
4

the heritage development field are fairly hard-nosed business people and even when
they  did  share  financial  information  they  generally  asked  that  the  specifics  remain
confidential. We are not alone in facing such problems. In his recent analysis of 272
studies  relating  to  the  economics  of  historic  preservation,  Mason  found  that  ‘the
methods  of  determining  the  value  of  historic  preservation  vary  widely,  and  several
challenges  persist  in  applying  economic  methods  to  the  field’.7  Notwithstanding
these limitations this study has undertaken to gather as much hard data as possible
and  present  it  in  a  standard  form  in  order  to  facilitate  comparison.  Because  each
project surveyed is unique we have concentrated much of our interpretation on the
16  interviews  with  developers  which  were  rich  in  opinion  and  informed  by  a  great
deal of experience.

For the purposes of analysing the data, projects were categorised by size in square
feet and building type. The information was then placed in a nine-cell matrix indi-
cating residential-, commercial- and institutional-type properties in each of the three
size  categories,  namely  small,  medium  and  large  (see  Table  2).  The  difference
between small and medium size categories was determined by applying aspects of the
Ontario Building Code. The large category was arrived at in consultation with archi-
tects. Two of the cells, small residential and large institutional, remain blank since in
the first case most projects were private and too numerous while in the latter there
was  insufficient  data  to  report.  To  the  best  of  our  ability  we  have  expressed  the
financial data provided in a common form representing the total cost per square foot
to complete a project and bring it to market. That includes purchase as well as hard
and soft costs and takes into account any incentives, such as the waiving of fees. For
comparison,  the  average  costs  per  square  foot  for  new  development  are  shown  in
Table 3.8

Table 2 Cost per square foot of renovation reported in this survey

Small

(<18,000 ft2)

Too numerous

$111
$212

Medium

(18,000–50,000 ft2)

Large

(>50,000 ft2)

$144
$169
$200

$231
$102

Insufficient data

Residential
Commercial
Institutional

508 R. Shipley et al.

Table 3 Cost of new construction

Small

(<18,000 ft2)

Medium

(18,000–50,000 ft2)

Large

(>50,000 ft2)

Residential
Commercial
Institutional

$95
$195

$155
$155
$195

$130
$165

Interview and Survey Findings—Benefits of Older Buildings

Comments from the developers involved in adapting and renovating older buildings
tended to fall into four categories when it came to identifying the reasons for success:
the  special  qualities  of  particular  buildings,  building  location  and  site  advantages,
return on investment, and government assistance. We outline the responses here and
provide summaries of the data gathered.

Special Character

One interviewee said that ‘fundamentally, builders love buildings’. Developers told us
that it is the building itself that usually catches their interest first. While conventional
real-estate development usually involves a use in search of a site, heritage development
almost always features a site in search of a use. Another investor emphasised that ‘you
have to have the vision, the ability to see the opportunity where others do not’. Often
this  potential  comes  from  some  unique  quality  in  the  style  or  construction  of  the
structure itself. When a developer had the chance to purchase a relatively small site near
the centre of downtown Toronto, but one that provided the opportunity for a multi-
storey tower, he looked at what was next door. The former Dominion Bank headquar-
ters not only had room for about 200 suites itself but the grand old banking halls on the
ground floors would provide a spectacular entrance to a luxury hotel (see Figure 1).

Figure 1

1 King St. W.Not all unique heritage features that might provide character, sales appeal or conve-
nience  need  to  be  so  spectacular.  Many  existing  warehouse-type  buildings  simply
provide big open, flexible spaces that can be used in a variety of ways. This is the case
with the old Carpet Factory buildings in the east end of Toronto (see Figure 2). It has
been  easy  and  relatively  inexpensive  for  the  owners  to  accommodate  new  uses  by
simply moving a partition here and replacing an entrance there. A particular advantage
of renovating existing buildings is sequential redevelopment. Tenants can be accom-
modated in one part of a building, providing ongoing income, while other parts of the
structure are being remodelled. There can also be a sequential upgrading of facilities
and consequently increases in rent. An open space suitable for tenants such as a dance
studio or gym, for example, might subsequently be divided into separate offices.

Figure 2 The Carpet Factory in Toronto.

Principally, those we interviewed suggested that they took great pride in achieving
sound  heritage  development  projects.  As  the  developer  of  the  Bridgeport  Lofts  in
Waterloo explained, ‘Pride is an important factor—to think of what it looked like then

International Journal of Heritage Studies

509

Figure 1

1 King St. W.

and what it looks like now. We assist with the municipal vision by taking an eyesore and
turning it into gold.’ Other developers and architects noted that heritage development
provided a special opportunity to make a statement and also to employ a set of skills
that  are  far  from  universal.  Their  personal  drive  and  commitment  to  achieve  their
vision trumped other considerations.

Figure 2 The Carpet Factory in Toronto.

510 R. Shipley et al.

Building Location and Site Advantages

As  is  the  case  with  other  real  estate  ventures,  the  old  adage  of  ‘location,  location,
location’ often applies to heritage development. The former Merritton Cotton Mill in
St. Catharines, is an example (see Figure 3). In spite of its apparent advanced state of
decay,  the  building  featured  an  old  chimney  that  was  in  clear  view  of  the  major
highway. An investor with restaurant experience saw the marketing potential of the
site.  The  chimney  now  sports  the  characteristic  illuminated  red  sign  of  the  KEG
restaurant chain.

Figure 3 The Old Merritton Cotton Mill in St. Catharines, Ontario, as it was in 2000 and as it appears today.

Marketing  is  not  the  only  location  advantage  of  potential  heritage  development
sites.  Often  an  existing  building,  which  pre-dated  current  land-use  regulations,
might  present  a  density  opportunity.  The  Lofts  on  Mansion  building  in  Kitchener
has  four  floors,  but  is  located  in  a  neighbourhood  of  single  family  residences  with
good access to transport and amenities. The building offered the chance to create an
exciting project where a floor was added and 30 new units created without disrupt-
ing  the  surrounding  neighbourhood  as  the  building,  along  with  on-site  parking,
already  existed.  In  fact,  the  neighbourhood  itself  can  be  a  key  component  in  the

Figure 3 The Old Merritton Cotton Mill in St. Catharines, Ontario, as it was in 2000 and
as it appears today.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

511

decision to redevelop an older building. The architect for the condominium conver-
sions of the Loretto College and Tip Top Tailor buildings in Toronto said of the new
units: ‘because they are in established, desirable neighbourhoods, they pre-sold in a
week’.

Other respondents echoed these points, citing location, historical façades and the
right combination of market and demand as equating to success. However, each older
building is unique. There are very few rules and very few easy answers when it comes
either to refurbishing them for continued use or adapting them for new purposes.

Return on Investment

While it was not easy to get developers to share the financial details it appears that a
central  motivating  factor  in  heritage  development  is  the  potentially  high  return  on
investment (ROI). One interviewee told us that ‘within ten minutes, I can figure out if
the project will make sense financially’. However, it proved difficult to reach a precise
conclusion  on  the  return  anticipated  by  developers.  Some  suggested  that  a  20–30%
ROI  is  the  industry  standard  but  others  suggested  that  10–15%  is  the  expectation.
There is, of course, a continuum that ranges from loss to bonanza. One developer inter-
viewed forecast an ROI of 60% at the beginning of the project which was reduced to
20% as the project progressed. In the end, he claims to have made only 10%. Running
three  years  over  the  original  time  projection  was  cited  as  the  reason  for  the  lower
return. At the other end of the scale, a developer told us of earning 22% over an eight-
month period. Overall, the figures we gathered indicate that the business of adaptive
reuse seems to be very lucrative, if not always immediately. One developer discussed
the risks involved in adaptive reuse: ‘Our pro forma indicated that the property would
have made more money as a parking lot. We had to believe that the use for the building
was there.’

Comparing the costs of heritage development to new-build represented one of the
most interesting aspects of this investigation. The range of responses from those inter-
viewed  varied  greatly.  While  some  developers  focus  only  on  heritage  development,
others make comparisons constantly when approaching lenders for project backing.
Some claim that ROI is enhanced because of the savings involved in reusing existing
buildings. A developer who works primarily in the medium-sized cities of Kitchener,
Waterloo and Brantford claims that reusing existing buildings generally represents a
saving of between 10% and 12% over building new. Carlos Ventin, one of Canada’s
leading restoration architects, was quoted as saying that ‘using existing buildings can
cut construction costs by as much as 22% because you already have walls and a roof and
floors’.9 If any of the existing building systems (hot water heating, plumbing, etc.) can
be reused, that can also result in considerable savings.

On the other hand it was reported that some conversions can cost as much as twice
that  of  new  buildings.  The  estimated  total  cost  to  convert  an  industrial  building  in
Kitchener was $7.9 million, as compared to approximately $4 million for a new build-
ing of the same size. However, as the project manager stated, ‘the retail value of loft
units is already higher than conventional units and rising further still’.10 Referring to

512 R. Shipley et al.

Table 4 Cost difference between renovation and new building

Small

(<18,000 ft2)

Medium

(18,000–50,000 ft2)

Residential
Commercial
Institutional

Plus 15%
Plus 8%

Minus 8%
Plus 8%
Plus 2%

Large

(>50,000 ft2)

Plus 44%
Minus 38%

another project, an interviewee said: ‘we found out as time went by that the market
value was higher than expected’. A Toronto developer said: ‘heritage buildings are less
efficient, but not so much so as to prevent the business plan from working’.

The numbers we collected echo this comment (see Tables 3 and 4). Even in the cases
where the conversion costs and therefore the price to the purchaser are higher, there is
not much difference and all of those we interviewed had confidence that the market
would bear the elevated costs. The top end of this market is found in Toronto where in
one project the developer spent up to $300 per square foot to complete condominium
units but sold most of them for over $500 per square foot. At the other end we might
find lofts in the university town of Waterloo where students pay less than $400 a month
rent. The point is that both projects are profitable. This is not to conclude that profits
from heritage development are automatic. Heritage development projects in Ontario
range dramatically in scope. Our survey identified projects where investment ranged
from as little as $12,000 to $25 million.

Government Incentives

Municipalities can be very helpful in providing financial and other encouragement for
heritage development. Incentives can act as a kind of loss-leader by encouraging devel-
opment that has been shown to more than recoup its value for the local government
through increased property values and corresponding tax revenues.11 Cities faced with
the challenges of intensification, downtown improvement, and brownfield redevelop-
ments are those that benefit most from assisting potential investors. There are several
legislative  provisions  in  Ontario  for  assisting  development.12  The  City  of  Waterloo
waived development charges for the Seagram Lofts which would have amounted to
approximately $700,000. Prior to the adaptive reuse, the site was taxed as a vacant lot.
The  site  now  contains  approximately  $24  million  of  real  estate  and  is  generating
approximately  $270,000  a  year  in  tax  revenue  (see  Figure  4).  This  is  a  significant
increase over prior income and the city will recover its investment in about four years.
The  City  of  Brantford  granted  the  developer  25%  of  total  development  costs  for
Lawyer’s  Hall  under  the  Downtown  Business  Performance  Grants  Program.  Along
with  that  direct  grant  of  $317,000,  the  City  of  Brantford  also  waived  development
charges.

Figure 4 Seagram Lofts in the City of Waterloo.

Incentive  programmes  are  not  offered  in  every  municipality.  We  found  that
incentives are offered mainly in secondary markets such as Brantford, Hamilton, and

International Journal of Heritage Studies

513

Figure 4

Seagram Lofts in the City of Waterloo.

Kitchener. In Toronto we were told that ‘tax or grant incentives are insignificant for
projects of the magnitude of 1 King West’ (see Figure 1). In such a major market the
city must look to other means to assist developers. Height and density ‘bonusing’ is an
option. In that arrangement a developer is allowed to build a taller building on some
other site in return for saving an existing building. Another way that governments can
become involved in reuse projects is as tenants. When this works, such as the case of
the old Waterloo County Gaol in Kitchener where the provincial court is the long-term
tenant, it can ensure success.

Interview and Survey Findings—Constraints of Older Building Reuse

Comments  on  the  constraints  of  heritage  development  mostly  fell  into  the  four
categories of uncertainty, building code problems, heritage design requirements and
the  scarcity  of  people  with  the  required  skills.  We  summarise  developers’  responses
here.

Uncertainty and Site Remediation

Any development project has to show the promise of making money. Our interviewees
indicated that there is a range of profitability attached to adaptive reuse but usually
there is a greater degree of uncertainty. There are a number of reasons for this, includ-
ing unforeseen costs and site contamination, but the result is often difficulty in secur-
ing financial backing. Three sources for financing heritage development were identified
by  the  interviewees:  personal  equity,  private  investment,  and  bank  loans.  A  fourth
source, government incentives, was noted by about a third of those surveyed. Banks are
particularly hesitant to finance adaptive reuse projects because they believe the level of
risk is higher than other real estate investments. Often, banks will place conditions on

514 R. Shipley et al.

the financing. ‘Before the Bank would approve the loan’, one developer told us, ‘65%
of the units had to be pre-sold.’ To reduce their level of risk, banks will often issue
demand loans, a type of loan with no established maturity period that can be repayable
on demand at any time. At the very least banks usually require the developer to have
available a minimum of 25% of the total project cost.

Developers indicated that there are almost always unexpected costs. In some cases,
these additional expenses arise from the inefficiencies of the building shape. The chief
architect for a building conversion in Niagara Falls said: ‘Heritage buildings are not
purpose built.’ Costs can rise by 10% or more in these cases for hallways and wash-
rooms. Among our 24 questionnaire respondents, we learned that the adaptive reuse
of buildings required a complete interior gutting in eight cases and major interior work
in another four. While exterior work was less frequently required, where applicable it
involved one or more of: brick cleaning, structural repairs, foundation improvements
and landscaping.

One  of  the  largest  costs  that  can  loom  over  many  adaptive  reuse  projects  is  site
contamination.13 In the case of the KEG restaurant, the developer was faced with an
unforeseen site remediation problem (see Figure 3). The site was formerly home to a
cotton  mill  and  then  a  rubber  boot  manufacturer.  The  factory  was  surrounded  by
reservoir ponds for the locks system of a former canal. The plant discharged effluent
into  the  ponds  during  its  operation  and  when  the  canal  was  diverted,  the  reservoir
ponds were filled with debris. Contaminated material was discovered buried in the soil
during construction and the cleanup of these ponds cost nearly $200,000. A Toronto
developer who had seen his share of site remediation costs in three major projects said:
‘environmental issues are the most common, PCBs and asbestos, or lead-based paint
on the walls. You have to budget for this type of stuff.’

Because of the difficulties in securing bank loans, developers sometimes seek private
financing  for  their  projects  to  avoid  restrictions  and  time  limitations  on  project
management. We found this to be the case more often in the smaller and medium-sized
markets but even in Toronto there were projects where the financing was primarily
private.

Building Code and Parking

Ontario’s Building Code is a set of construction regulations that is meant to create stan-
dards for safety but also to be sufficiently flexible to permit the adaptive reuse of build-
ings. It contains a section critical to heritage developers that allows inspectors to accept
alternative standards in existing structures. Along with the Building Code there are also
separate fire regulations and planning considerations such as site-plan approval and
zoning.  In  the  opinion  of  many  developers  complying  with  all  these  regulations
frequently  results  in  major  expenditures  that  could  not  have  been  foreseen  and
prevented. In the case of Waterloo’s Seagram Lofts, the original plan called for using
timber from the building’s original interior to support mezzanine floors (see Figure 4).
Unfortunately, the Code was interpreted as requiring steel beams in spite of research
that shows timber beams are just as fire resistant. The same inspector then required that

International Journal of Heritage Studies

515

the mezzanines be fire separated, the same as continuous floors, even though they were
open at one end and could not have stopped a fire going from level to level. In other
cases, fire exits proved to be the greatest problem. For the Ontario Power Generation
building in Niagara Falls, the exceptionally small building footprint made it difficult to
provide  the  requisite  number  of  emergency  exits  while  for  the  KEG  restaurant  in
St. Catharines,  not  only  was  fire  separation  between  the  floors  required  for  Code
compliance  but  it  was  also  necessary  to  add  fire-rated  windows  adjacent  to  the  fire
escapes (see Figure 3).

While  questionable  requirements  and  the  timing  of  inspection  were  mentioned,
nothing was touched upon more frequently than the lack of coordination among inspec-
tors from various enforcement agencies. It was also suggested that in some respects
developers  found  the  inspectors  to  be  too  lax  in  not  requiring  structural  and  safety
aspects that were installed anyway. One interviewee said: ‘the code is problematic, it
should be handled case by case and not by fitting the project in to a very general category’.
Another commented that ‘building development agencies need to be a friendly partner’.
Over  and  over  again  we  heard  developers  talk  about  the  matter  of  parking.  Even
when people want to live, work and shop in the middle of cities, they seem to be unable
to  free  themselves  from  car  dependence.  This  means  that  even  if  municipalities  are
willing  to  waive  parking  requirements,  many  potential  buyers  or  renters  insist  on
parking spaces. People in Toronto, where there is extensive public transit, are begin-
ning to see they can survive without cars but, except for student accommodation, this
is not the case in most places. Creative solutions need to be found for this dilemma.
Municipal  parking  structures,  in  which  developers  can  buy  spaces  to  meet  their
requirements, are one alternative.

Handicap accessibility is a further barrier to the success of many potential renova-
tion projects. If a space is going to be rented or leased to a public agency then wheel-
chair accessibility is usually a requirement. That can impact on a building in at least
two  ways.  There  are  aesthetic  considerations  regarding  how  ramps  alter  the
appearance of a structure and there are cost implications if, for example, an elevator
is mandatory. However, like other challenges, these considerations can be accounted
for  through  a  combination  of  innovative  design  and  flexible  interpretation  of
regulations.

Heritage Design Requirement

Generally speaking, investors and architects working on heritage developments do not
have to contend with any heritage requirements. Only a few of the buildings in our
survey  are  designated  under  Ontario’s  heritage  legislation.  However,  developers  are
loath adversely to affect a building’s appearance and/or structure. It is in their interest
to preserve the aesthetic quality of their buildings since it is those details and character
elements that attracted them in the first place and which will be integral to the market
value of the finished product.

In  cases  where  the  buildings  being  refurbished  are  designated  there  are  few
problems. The transformation of the Old Waterloo County Gaol in Kitchener, owned

516 R. Shipley et al.

by the regional government, was marked by cooperation and good will between the
government acting as developer and local heritage advocates. The process is not always
as smooth. In our interviews we found that many developers were antagonistic toward
local  heritage  committees  and  preservationists.  At  the  same  time  it  is  common  for
members of the heritage groups to be suspicious of the development industry. Many
developers related bad experiences and one investor said: ‘It can be a challenge to deal
with the heritage preservation people. Sometimes they are very inflexible and our expe-
rience is that flexibility is design.’ Confrontations over design elements can seriously
jeopardise  entire  projects.  More  alarmingly,  a  Toronto  investor  recounted  a  debate
with the Toronto Historical Board. His plan was to reconstruct the façade of a down-
town  storefront,  set  back  from  the  street  and  enclosed  in  a  glass  atrium.  Historical
Board members, whom he called ‘tweedy academics’, argued for a year with him and
amongst  themselves  about  the  proper  way  to  proceed.  Not  only  did  this  cost  him
money in lost time but in the end the outcome was to demolish the building, dump the
broken fabric into Lake Ontario and put up a plaque. The Historical Board may have a
different story but no common ground was found between those who see themselves
as  defenders  of  heritage  and  someone  who  was  prepared  to  spend  his  money  to
accomplish a degree of conservation.

Part of the problem was Ontario’s legislation. In the past it provided for recognition
of historic buildings but did not prevent their demolition. This led to uncertainty that
was  not  conducive  either  to  architectural  conservation  or  good  business.  Toronto
architect and heritage activist Catherine Nasmith said: ‘The old Ontario Heritage Act
led to a culture of compromise.’ Proposed changes to officially designated buildings
had to be reviewed by Municipal Heritage Committees and approved by Municipal
Councils. However, when owners became frustrated, municipalities could only post-
pone demolition. Developers did not want to face delays and heritage experts knew that
in the end the loss of the structures could not be prevented. In fact, a 2003 study found
that over 400 listed buildings in 22 Ontario communities had been demolished over a
15-year period.14 That meant that compromises about renovation were often made in
ways which pleased no one. With the passage of important amendments to the Ontario
Heritage Act in April 2005 a much greater degree of clarity around recognised heritage
buildings will go a long way to stabilising the situation and providing the certainty that
heritage developers need in making business decisions. While this still impacts only on
some heritage developments where properties are designated, these buildings serve as
demonstration projects in the industry.

Professional Experience and Skills

Challenges can surface in any profession, but, in the opinion of those with whom we
spoke, the obstacles to be overcome for heritage development projects are more acute.
As a consequence it is often difficult to find adequately skilled and experienced people.
This  includes  architects,  engineers  and  appropriate  tradespersons.  One  architect
recalled  a  project  he  had  taken  over  part  way  through  completion.  Due  to  lack  of
knowledge about heritage buildings the previous architect had advised the owner to

International Journal of Heritage Studies

517

replace all 102 wooden window frames in the building with metal ones costing $600
each. Our interviewee was able to repair the existing windows at a cost of $200 each.
Adapting buildings for new uses is a very challenging and complex process. Compared
to new development where construction begins from the ground up, adaptive reuse
projects are unique and therefore require a creative process in overcoming building
challenges. In the case of the Seagram Lofts, the façades of the two warehouses were to
be left intact (see Figure 4). The conventional method for reinforcing façades during
construction is to shore them with steel support beams, while completely gutting the
interior  prior  to  construction.  The  development  team  here  created  a  process  of
demolition followed by construction in a series of phases, which eliminated the need
for shoring. This creative process saved the developers $500,000.

Just  as  important  as  architects,  engineers  and  project  supervisors  are  the  skilled
trades that undertake the carpentry, brickwork, plastering and other work. There is
such a critical shortage of these workers—the average age of bricklayers in Canada is
58—that a special task force has been organised by the federal government’s Human
Resources Development department. Developers valued their skilled craftsmen highly
and were anxious to find, and if necessary train, more skilled workers. The analogy was
made  that  building  a  successful  heritage  development  team  is  like  creating  a  good
sports franchise. As one developer put it: ‘we have a pretty good group and everyone
has a specific role’. With daily challenges and unanticipated problems, experience is
gained through the transference of skills and knowledge. This leads to an unavoidable
conundrum. It is impossible to have the experienced professionals and trade workers
necessary for success without at some point employing those who do not have such
familiarity. To continue the sports metaphor—everyone has to start as a rookie.

It was not just the skill and experience of people working within the development
industry that was addressed in our interviews. The most significant comments that we
heard  regarding  the  value  of  experience  came  with  respect  to  the  banking  industry.
Here experience seemed to matter little because the banks’ set ideas did not allow them
to see the advantages of heritage development, even for projects directly parallel with
those successfully (and profitably) completed.

Conclusion

The  existence  of  dynamic,  risk-taking  and  creative  investors,  with  a  passion  for
beautiful older buildings, is probably the most important single element in the heri-
tage  development  industry.  We  found  most  of  these  entrepreneurs  to  be  a  volatile
mix  of  vision,  hard-nosed  business  practice  and  bravado.  Vision  is  the  ability  and
inclination to see what a project will look like when it is completed. Many people are
impressed  with  renovated  older  buildings  when  they  visit  them  in  other  cities  or
other countries, but will see derelict premises in their own city and think they should
be torn down. The heritage developer sees past the current state of a building and can
imagine its potential. Heritage advocates tend to see what the building used to look
like and they value that. The heritage developer sees what the place might look like in
the future.

518 R. Shipley et al.

The  hard-nosed  business  sense  required  of  successful  developers  can  be  a  bit
frightening. One interviewee told about asking two roofing contractors to show up at
a  building  site.  When  they  were  both  there  with  their  crews,  he  negotiated  the  best
price. Is this business practice at the edge of ethics? Perhaps so, but in some cases it may
be what is required to get the job done. Part of the reason it proved difficult for us to
collect  actual  costs  of  development  projects  was  that  our  interviewees  often  gave
contradictory information. Lamenting the high price of labour, complaining about the
length of time for approvals and scolding municipal governments about taxes and fees
are all part of the marketplace haggling behaviour that occupies much of developers’
time and energy. These habits are hard to abandon when being interviewed.

What is clear, however, is that there is a healthy and growing business in heritage
development  and  the  people  we  talked  to  are  in  the  vanguard.  According  to  the
numbers  of  projects  identified  in  different  building  type  categories,  the  bulk  of  the
action seems to be in medium and large residential projects, medium-sized commercial
and small institutional (see Table 1). Cost comparison with new-build proved interest-
ing (see Table 5). In the medium residential category, reuse was actually lower than the
cost of building new. To some extent that reflects projects such as the student housing
developed in Waterloo and Brantford. In the case of large residential, the cost in our
sample  is  considerably  higher  on  average  for  reuse  projects  but  included  here  were
many  condominium  lofts  in  Toronto  where  much  higher  rates  of  return  are  being
realised in spite of (or perhaps because of) the larger investment. The same seems to be
true  in  medium-sized  commercial  projects  where  a  slightly  higher  cost  is  generally
rewarded by high rent, lease or sale prices. The number for large commercial is some-
what skewed by the small sample size, while for large institutional projects there was
only one example and so no calculation of average cost was possible.

The majority of buildings that are being given new life in Ontario are private-sector
projects. In addition, many of the buildings are not formally recognised as heritage
properties through designation under the Ontario Heritage Act. This is not particularly
surprising, since the great majority of designated properties are private homes which
have been left out of this study while many of the adaptive reuse projects involve former
industrial buildings which have often been left out of the designation process. Where

Table 5 Findings

Building type

New residential

Reuse residential
New commercial
Reuse commercial
New institutional
Reuse institutional

Small

Medium

Projects often private 

and too numerous

$95
$111
$195
$212

$155

$144
$155
$169
$195
$200

Large

$130

$231
$165
$102

Insufficient data

Note: CAN$1 is approximately 0.70.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

519

listed buildings are the subject of heritage development a number of developers have
had bad experiences that ranged from delays to squabbles over design. Developers also
complain not about the Building Code as such but about applications of the Code and
other regulations that are inflexible and unresponsive.

Many  planners  and  political  leaders  see  heritage—the  valuing  of  existing  struc-
tures—as  an  impediment  but  those  who  want  to  promote  re-urbanisation,  smart
growth, intensification and dynamic place making should appreciate the role that can
be played by heritage development. Municipalities should make the rules for heritage
development clear. Some buildings should be preserved. Some neighbourhoods and
districts should be subject to design guidelines that protect the character of the area and
therefore protect the investment of those who have maintained or renovated proper-
ties. Building inspection should be timely and coordinated in a way that encourages
safe and functional structures and should be performance based rather than rule based.
We concluded that heritage advocates should recognise that they have very dynamic
and creative allies in the development world. They should find and support the devel-
opers who love older buildings as they do and are prepared to find new uses for them,
bring their development skills to bear on them and spend money on them. Heritage
developers do not pretend to be cultural experts. Their interest in older buildings is
more instinctive, but they see value in these structures as much as the heritage commu-
nity.  We  would  not  advocate  that  developers  always  have  their  way  in  the  realm  of
urban planning and city building. But what they do they do well, and they are awesome
to watch when in full flight.

Notes

Shipley and Reyburn, ‘Lost Heritage’.

1 [1]
2 [2] Blackburn, ‘What Developers Think of Historic Preservation’.
3 [3] Kincaid, Adapting Buildings for Changing Uses.
4 [4] Walljes and Ball, ‘Exploring the Realities of the Sustainable City through the Use and Reuse of

Vacant Industrial Buildings’.

5 [5] Bunting, ‘Housing Strategies for Downtown Revitalization in Mid-size Cities’.
6 [6] Ontario  Government,  Places  to  Grow  Act  (Bill  136)  (2005),  available  from  http://
www.pir.gov.on.ca/userfiles/HTML/cma_4_40890_1.html2005. These new policies are based
on a range of research which concludes that more intensive, compact development of cities
makes economic sense: CMHC, Conventional and Alternative Development Patterns—Phases 1
and 2; De Sousa, ‘Measuring the Public Costs and Benefits of Brownfield versus Greenfield
Development in the Greater Toronto Area’; Persky and Wiewel, Brownfields, Greenfields.

7 [7] Mason,  ‘Economics  and  Historic  Preservation’,  i.  Some  specific  examples  of  work  on
evaluating  the  economics  of  heritage  development  can  be  found  in:  National  Trust  for
Historic  Preservation,  Appraising  Historic  Properties;  Rypkema,  The  Economics  of  Historic
Preservation.; Rypkema and Wiehagen, Dollars and Sense of Historic Preservation; Wood, The
Economics of Rehabilitation.

8 [8] New  construction  cost  estimates  were  provided  by  Mark  Ravelle,  a  Quantity  Surveyor

working in St. Catharines, Ontario, and are estimates for the whole province.

9 [9] The London Free Press (31 June 2004).
10[10] Loft  units  are  open-concept  flats  or  apartments  and  are  a  style  typically  created  in  reused,

older buildings.

520 R. Shipley et al.

11[11] Barber,  ‘Municipal  Tax  Incentives  in  Victoria,  British  Columbia’;  National  Trust  for
Historic  Preservation,  http://www.preservationbooks.org/;  Mason,  ‘Economics  and  Historic
Preservation’.

12[12] The Ontario Planning Act, the Municipal Act and the Development Charges Act all provide

for incentives including the Heritage Property Tax Rebates.

13[13] De Sousa, ‘Contaminated Sites’.
14[14]

Shipley and Reyburn, ‘Lost Heritage’.

References

Barber, S. ‘Municipal Tax Incentives in Victoria, British Columbia—A Case Study’. Plan Canada 43,

no. 2 (2003): 20–22.

Blackburn,  L.  ‘What  Developers  Think  of  Historic  Preservation’.  Urban  Land  (November  1983):

8–11.

Bunting,  T.  E.  ‘Housing  Strategies  for  Downtown  Revitalization  in  Mid-size  Cities:  A  City  of

Kitchener Feasibility Study’. Canadian Journal of Urban Research 9, no. 2 (2000): 45–175.

CMHC.  Conventional  and  Alternative  Development  Patterns—Phase  1:  Infrastructure  Costs  Report.

Prepared by Essiambre-Phillips-Desjardins Associates, 1997a.

———.  Conventional  and  Alternative  Development  Patterns—Phase  2:  Municipal  Revenues  Report.

Prepared by Hemson Consulting, 1997b.

De Sousa, C. ‘Contaminated Sites: The Canadian Situation in an International Context’. Journal of

Environmental Management 62 (2001): 131–54.

———. ‘Measuring the Public Costs and Benefits of Brownfield versus Greenfield Development in

the Greater Toronto Area’. Environment and Planning B 29 (2002): 251–80.

Kincaid,  D.  Adapting  Buildings  for  Changing  Uses:  Guidelines  for  Change  of  Use  Refurbishment.

London: Spon Press, 2002.

Mason, R. ‘Economics and Historic Preservation: A Guide and Review of the Literature’. Discussion
paper prepared for the Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Program. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution, 2005.

National Trust for Historic Preservation. Appraising Historic Properties. Report by Judith Reynolds.

Washington, DC: National Trust for Historic Preservation, 2002.

Persky, J. and W. Wiewel. Brownfields, Greenfields: The Costs and Benefits of Metropolitan Employ-
ment Decentralization. Chicago: Great Cities Institute, University of Illinois at Chicago, 1995.

Powell, K. Architecture Reborn: Converting Old Buildings for New Uses. New York: Rizzoli, 1999.
Rypkema, D. The Economics of Historic Preservation: A Community Leader Guide. Washington, DC:

National Trust for Historic Preservation, 1994.

Rypkema, D. and K. Wiehagen. Dollars and Sense of Historic Preservation. The Economic Benefits of
Preserving  Philadelphia’s  Past.  Washington,  DC:  National  Trust  for  Historic  Preservation,
2000.

Shipley, R. and K. Reyburn. ‘Lost Heritage: A Survey of Historic Building Demolitions in Ontario,

Canada’. International Journal of Heritage Studies 9, no. 2 (2003): 151–68.

Walljes, I. and R. Ball. ‘Exploring the Realities of the Sustainable City through the Use and Reuse of

Vacant Industrial Buildings’. European Environment 7 (1997): 194–202.

Wood,  E.  B.  The  Economics  of  Rehabilitation.  Preservation.  Washington,  DC:  National  Trust  for

Historic Preservation, 1997.


