International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

World Heritage Cultural Landscapes

Graeme Aplin

To cite this article: Graeme Aplin (2007) World Heritage Cultural Landscapes, International
Journal of Heritage Studies, 13:6, 427-446, DOI: 10.1080/13527250701570515
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250701570515

Published online: 28 Sep 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 3460

Citing articles: 40 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 13, No. 6, November 2007, pp. 427–446

World Heritage Cultural Landscapes
Graeme Aplin

GraemeAplin
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS_A_256908.sgm
10.1080/13527250701570515
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2007Taylor & Francis
136000000November 2007

gaplin@els.mq.edu.auThe concept of cultural landscapes has a long and varied lineage, including antecedents in
geography  and  ecomuseums,  and  can  be  applied  at  all  scales.  In  the  1990s,  the  World
Heritage Committee adopted cultural landscapes as an additional category of property as
part of its strategy to broaden the scope of World Heritage listings. By July 2006, there
were 53 properties inscribed on the World Heritage List and officially recognised as being
cultural landscapes. Such recognition is an acknowledgement of the importance of human–
environment  interactions,  especially  those  of  a  more  traditional  type.  Not  surprisingly,
cultural landscapes have their own particular management issues, as well as sharing others
with World Heritage properties in general. These properties, however, also present many
opportunities to increase people’s understanding of both cultural and environmental values
important to the future of humankind on a global level.

Keywords: World Heritage; Cultural Landscapes; Human-environment Interactions; 
Management; Biodiversity; Intercultural Understanding

Introduction

…  it  is  impossible  to  select  all  existing  representative  landscapes  so,  in  cherishing
some landscapes we must endeavour to treat them not as the only ones worth conserv-
ing, but as tokens representative of the rich diversity of the entire globe. A sense of
connection with all these people and storied places enriches and humanises life the
world over. For just as all the peoples of the world depend for their physical survival
on the shared management of the global environment, so does their spiritual well-
being require responsible stewardship of landscapes everywhere.

David  Lowenthal,  writing  for  the  World  Heritage  Centre  website,  emphasises  the
importance of recognising Cultural Landscapes as one type of site worthy of World
Heritage status.1 However, the concept of a cultural landscape first arose by name in the
record of the World Heritage Committee (WHC) only in 1987, the Bureau (WHB)

Graeme Aplin, Macquarie University. Correspondence to: gaplin@els.mq.edu.au

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2007 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250701570515

428 G. Aplin

meeting earlier that year having referred to the same nominated site as a ‘protected
landscape’ and as a ‘rural landscape’.2 However, there had been considerable debate
over preceding years as to the interrelatedness of natural and cultural heritage, and the
way in which the two are frequently inextricably linked. Even so, the concept has a much
longer history than that again, including within the discipline of geography, as well as
displaying close similarities with the currently popular concept of the ecomuseum.3

Cultural Landscapes in Geography

The concept of a cultural landscape had long been used by geographers, in particular,
even though the terminology was not always the same; the French school of geography
led by Vidal de la Blache wrote of pays, while German geographers led by Richthofen
spoke of Landschaften. In his 1899 professorial inaugural address, Vidal de la Blache saw
geography  as  studying  small  homogeneous  areas,  popularly  recognised  in  France  as
pays.4  In  addition,  while  refuting  environmental  determinism,  he  formulated  the
concept of possibilism, arguing that within limits set by nature, humans act within the
range of possibilities according to a traditional way of living, something the French have
termed a genre de vie, and which is conceptually closely related to the anthropological
concept of culture. The genre de vie of any group of people is basic in determining how
that group lives within, and interacts with, a landscape; in other words, which possibil-
ities they select. In addition, the French pays are normally characterised in large part by
particular suites of natural and cultural attributes and processes that differentiate one
pays from another. Such a holistic definition bears a remarkably close resemblance to
the  cultural  landscape  concept  of  the  World  Heritage  regime  described  below.  In
Germany, von Richthofen, from 1883 onwards, was promoting the study of chorology,
or regional studies, which started from the physical landscape but extended to human
interaction with it.5 One part of this endeavour was the study of Landschaften, or land-
scapes, which, when the human as well as the natural aspects were included, were by
definition cultural landscapes. Ratzel later studied the ways in which human reactions
to landscapes could differ as a result of cultural differences, while Hettner elaborated
on the concept of chorology, particularly in a 1927 book. Hartshorne summarises Hett-
ner’s concept of chorology thus: ‘The goal of the chorological point of view is to know
the character of regions and places through comprehension of the existence together
and interrelations among the different realms of reality and their varied manifestations
…’.6 This particularly refers to the interactions between natural and cultural aspects of
an area, once again pointing clearly to the idea of cultural landscapes.

A little later, in the USA, another key inaugural lecture was delivered by Sauer at
Berkeley in the early 1920s, and he explicitly used the term cultural landscape there and
in subsequent published work. According to Sauer, ‘man [sic], behaving in accordance
with the norms of his culture, performs work on the physical and biotic features of his
natural  surroundings  and  transforms  them  into  the  cultural  landscape’.7  Sauer
expressed this at greater length in his 1925 paper: 

Our naïvely given section of reality, the landscape, is undergoing manifold change.
This  contact  of  man  with  his  changeful  home,  as  expressed  through  the  cultural

International Journal of Heritage Studies

429

landscape, is our field of work. We are concerned with the importance of site to man,
and also with his transformation of the site. Altogether we deal with the interrelation
of group, or culture, and site, as expressed in the various landscapes of the world.

Again,  this  is  clearly  a  direct  antecedent  of  the  World  Heritage  concept,  containing
many  of  the  nuances  present  in  World  Heritage  deliberations  and  publications.
Unfortunately, a study of cultural landscapes has gone out of fashion in geography in
an era of postmodernism, cultural studies, and a fragmented discipline.

Ecomuseums

On the other hand, the cultural landscape has much in common with the ecomuseum, a
concept that became popular in certain museology circles in the late 20th century, just
as geographers were abandoning the former as an object of study and pedagogical value.
Davis writes at length of the concept of place, which also has long had a central role in
geography, of local distinctiveness, and of the interactions between culture and place to
give that distinctiveness.8 He also discusses the history of the concept of the ecomuseum
as a means of celebrating a place, preserving its unique character, and presenting it to,
and interpreting it for, a wider population, emphasising that, if all or even most existing
ecomuseums are to be included, the concept needs to be interpreted more broadly than
it was when it first arose in its French form of écomusée in 1971. Rivière was an early
exponent of the approach, and his final 1980 definition stressed the importance of local
identity, territory, landscape, community, history, and continuity. Together, these are
central to the concept of cultural landscape as used by the World Heritage community.
In an earlier work, Rivière defines the ecomuseum at length, stating, among other things: 

… it seeks an explanation of the territory … and of the populations … It is an expres-
sion of man [sic] and nature. It situates man in his natural environment. It portrays
nature in its wilderness, but also as adapted by traditional and industrial society in
their own image. It is an expression of time, when the explanations it offers reach back
before  the  appearance  of  man,  ascend  the  course  of  the  prehistoric  and  historical
times in which he lived and arrive finally at man’s present … It is a laboratory, insofar
as it contributes to the study of the past and present of the population concerned and
of its total environment …9

While the reasons for listing World Heritage Cultural Landscapes have not always been
couched in such holistic terms, they are all deemed worthy of preservation because of
the human–environment interactions they demonstrate. Their essence thus has much
in  common  with  the  essence  of  successful  ecomuseums;  World  Heritage  Cultural
Landscapes could, indeed, operate in part as ecomuseums, or at least contain ecomu-
seums as part of the interpretation process.10

Cultural Landscapes as Heritage

Landscapes have long been seen as forming a key component of our heritage at many
scales, recognised more locally as landscape conservation areas and the like. Such inter-
est is largely fuelled by the fact that ‘landscape itself is replaced ever sooner’ and that

430 G. Aplin

‘beleaguered by loss and change, we keep our bearings only by clinging to remnants of
stability’.11 Recognisable and enduring landscapes give us our ‘sense of place’. Almost
anywhere in the world, these landscapes are inevitably cultural landscapes, as they are
formed  through  the  interactions  between  people,  expressed  through  their  cultural,
economic, and spiritual systems, and nature, though the strength of the human imprint
varies markedly. Nowhere, perhaps, is it stronger than in Europe, which is why consid-
erable  attention  is  paid  to  landscapes  in  Ashworth  and  Howard,  who  go  as  far  as
suggesting that ‘landscape’ may have originated as a peculiarly European concept.12

Landscapes  are  valued  for  both  ‘their  aesthetic  appeal  and  their  cultural
evidence’,13  the  latter  needing  in-depth  archaeological  and  historical  studies  to
establish  significance,  understand  content,  and  interpret  meaning  to  the  public.
Many  landscapes  have,  indeed,  evolved  over  centuries  or  even  millennia,  and  their
present character is a palimpsest of elements from the past and present. Archaeology
and history will be particularly important in the case of the category of ‘fossil/relict
landscapes’,  while  ethnography  and  anthropology  will  be  relatively  more  important
when  it  comes  to  ‘associative  landscapes’,  and  economics  and  studies  of  human
activity  patterns  for  ‘continuing  landscapes’.  A  full  interpretation  and  understand-
ing, however, also requires studies of the natural elements of the landscape and the
impact  of  humans  on  it,  thus  potentially  introducing  a  wide  range  of  other  disci-
plines,  too.  Indeed,  it  is  suggested  in  a  report  to  the  WHC  that  ‘historical  and
ecological understanding converge in the definition and recognition of cultural land-
scapes’.14

Adoption of the Concept by the World Heritage Committee

There  exist[s]  a  great  variety  of  landscapes  that  are  representative  of  the  different
regions of the world. Combined works of nature and humankind, they express a long
and  intimate  relationship  between  peoples  and  their  natural  environment.  Certain
sites reflect specific techniques that guarantee and sustain biological diversity. Others,
associated  in  the  minds  of  the  communities  with  powerful  beliefs  and  artistic  and
traditional  customs,  embody  an  exceptional  spiritual  relationship  of  people  with
nature. To reveal and sustain the great diversity of the interactions between humans
and their environment, to protect living traditional cultures and preserve the traces of
those  which  have  disappeared,  these  sites,  called  cultural  landscapes,  have  been
inscribed on the World Heritage List.15

As noted above, the concept of cultural landscapes first arose by name in official World
Heritage records in 1987. The WHC discussed mixed cultural–natural properties and
rural landscapes at its 1984 meeting, and a Task Force was set up to examine the issue
of inscribing such sites, including three specific identified problems: ‘the identification
of exceptionally harmonious, beautiful, man-made landscapes’; ‘the evolution of such
living landscapes’; and ‘the integrity of such landscapes which are seldom protected by
national  legislation’.16  However,  the  Committee  had  difficulties  accepting  the  Task
Force’s report at the 1985 WHC meeting and the issue drifted for some years. One
outcome, however, was the UK’s proposal to prepare a draft nomination for a rural
landscape nomination by the 1987 meeting.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

431

The  specific  context  in  which  the  term  ‘cultural  landscape’  arose  officially  was
consideration of a nomination of the Lake District National Park in the UK, a prime
candidate for any Cultural Landscape designation, as the park contains a large resident
population and a great deal of agricultural and other economic activity, not to mention
large-scale  tourism.  When  this  deferred  nomination  was  again  considered  by  the
Committee in 1990, it was noted that ‘the lack of appropriate criteria for the examina-
tion of cultural landscapes had been a concern of the Committee for several years’, even
though the term had only been recorded in the official record on that one occasion in
1987.17 At any rate, the Committee asked the Secretariat to develop a criterion or set of
criteria to accommodate this ‘new’ category of nomination. The Secretariat presented
its paper to the 1991 WHC meeting, provoking keen debate.18 Proposed amendments
to the criteria for inscription on the World Heritage List (WHL), based on discussions
at the 1991 WHB session included: 

[Each property nominated should therefore] be an outstanding example of a cultural
landscape  resulting  from  associations  of  cultural  and  natural  elements  significant
from  the  historical,  aesthetic,  ethnological  or  anthropological  points  of  view  and
evidencing a harmonious balance between nature and human activity over a very long
period of time which is rare and vulnerable under the impact of irreversible change …
(Paragraph (a)(vi))

[and] in the case of cultural landscapes, have the potential to maintain their integrity
(the Committee stresses that there should be a sufficient representation of distinctive
landforms, land-uses and patterns of traditional life-style which are necessary for the
maintenance of its essential values) … (Paragraph (b)(ii))

With  respect  to  cultural  landscapes,  the  Committee  has  adopted  the  following
guidelines concerning their inclusion on the World Heritage List:

(i)

the existing balance between nature and human activity may only be modified
in a way which ensures the continuation of this special relationship and will
exclude any major alterations to the appearance and function of the area …;

(ii) legislative protection must exist as well as practicable mechanisms for bringing
the relevant institutions together to ensure the preservation of the significant
harmonious  balance  between  nature  and  human  activity  in  an  evolving
context;

(iii) the area nominated should be of such a size that these protective measures can

seriously be expected to be effective.19

It should be noted that these suggested criteria and guidelines have two key implica-
tions,  the  second  of  which  could  be  seen  by  some  commentators  as  negative  in  its
impact. Firstly, the wording virtually restricts inscription as Cultural Landscape sites to
those with ‘traditional’ forms of land use and little change over many decades or, more
often, centuries. This has the advantage, particularly in the context of this paper, of
limiting the sites to those with a well-established balance between human activities and
the  biophysical  landscape,  implying  a  large  degree  of  sustainability  with  potential
lessons for people elsewhere. Secondly, that relationship is expected to remain largely
unchanging  into  the  future,  something  that  may  not  be  ‘natural’,  but,  rather,  an
artificial or bureaucratic restriction on cultural evolution and development, something
that became particularly contentious in the case of the Philippine Rice Terraces (see

432 G. Aplin

below).  Furthermore,  it  may  not  be  acceptable  in  that  it  is  constraining  the  people
involved to a way of life that may be one or more of arduous, economically precarious,
and missing out on advantages of modern developments. Landscapes, like cultures and
societies, do, after all, tend to evolve over time. As the geographer David Lowenthal
expresses it: 

Heritage is held to fossilize, to preclude ambivalence, to tolerate no doubts. ‘The true
product  of  the  heritage-industry  is  entropy;  history  is  over,  nothing  more  is  to  be
done.’ Robert Hewison echoes Nietzsche in warning that fevered nostalgia precludes
present  action.  Turning  a  blind  eye  to  past  turmoil,  leaching  out  past  distress  and
bewilderment, heritage is blamed for stifling enterprise. The penchant for patrimony
litters the world with legacies of outworn junk.20

While the effects of recognition of heritage values and active management to maintain
those  values  need  not  be  that  extreme,  the  dangers  are  always  present,  especially  if
narrow  and  pedantic  approaches  are  taken.  On  the  other  hand,  some  traditional
peoples may appreciate protection of their culture and lifestyle, and be positive about
the limitations on intrusion by the modern, ‘Western’ world.

In the event, such radical revisions of the Operational Guidelines were not under-
taken. Following a meeting of an Expert Group on Cultural Landscapes in France in
October 1992, the WHC decided that ‘only slight changes of the six cultural criteria
were  needed  to  accommodate  the  inclusion  of  cultural  landscapes  on  the  World
Heritage  List’.21  While  that  decision  was  obviously  administratively  neat,  it  did
entail a loss of the statement of the essence of cultural landscapes given in the 1991
suggestions for change quoted above, although some of the essence of this is caught
in later clauses. The most relevant criterion, after amendment, read ‘be an outstand-
ing example of traditional human settlement or land use which is representative of a
culture (or cultures), especially when it has become vulnerable under the impact of
irreversible change’. This wording seems to clearly emphasise the cultural side of the
cultural–natural  partnership,  downplaying  the  interdependence  so  evident  in  the
1991 formulation. This 1992 document does, though, introduce for the first time of
which  I  am  aware  a  categorisation  of  World  Heritage  Cultural  Landscapes  that
would  continue  into  the  future;  these  categories,  derived  directly  from  the  1992
document,  are  included  in  the  1995  version  of  the  Operational  Guidelines,  the  key
sections of which are reproduced in Table 1.22 Following the adoption of means of
including  Cultural  Landscapes  on  the  WHL,  a  series  of  general  and  regional  meet-
ings took place to aid implementation, including ones in Germany (1993), Australia
(1995),  Austria  (1996),  Peru  (1998),  Poland  (1999),  Kenya  (1999),  Slovakia  (1999),
Italy  (2000),  Costa  Rica  (2000),  and  Hungary  (2001).23  A  series  of  workshops  in
Ferrara,  Italy,  in  2002  focused,  in  particular,  on  the  conservation  of  Cultural
Landscapes.24

The  2005  version  of  the  Operational  Guidelines  contains  rather  more  than  earlier
versions when it comes to Cultural Landscapes.25 According to paragraph 47, Cultural
Landscapes ‘are illustrative of the evolution of human society and settlement over time,
under the influence of the physical constraints and/or opportunities presented by their
natural  environment  and  of  successive  social,  economic  and  cultural  forces,  both

International Journal of Heritage Studies

433

Table 1 Key sections of the WHC 1995 Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of
the World Heritage Convention

37.  The term ‘cultural landscape’ embraces a diversity of manifestations of the interaction between

humankind and its natural environment.

38.  Cultural landscapes often reflect specific techniques of sustainable land-use, considering the
characteristics and limits of the natural environment they are established in, and a specific
spiritual relation to nature. Protection of cultural landscapes can contribute to modern
techniques of sustainable land-use and can maintain or enhance natural values in the landscape.
The continued existence of traditional forms of land-use supports biological diversity in many
regions of the world. The protection of traditional cultural landscapes is therefore helpful in
maintaining biological diversity.

39. Cultural landscapes fall into three main categories, namely: 

(i)

The most easily identifiable is the clearly defined landscape designed and created 
intentionally by man. This embraces garden and parkland landscapes constructed for 
aesthetic reasons which are often (but not always) associated with religious or other 
monumental buildings and ensembles.

(ii) The second category is the organically evolved landscape. This results from an initial social, 
economic, administrative, and/or religious imperative and has developed its present form 
by association with and in response to its natural environment. Such landscapes reflect that 
process of evolution in their form and component features. They fall into two sub-
categories: 
— a relict (or fossil) landscape is one in which an evolutionary process came to an end at 
some time in the past, either abruptly or over a period. Its significant distinguishing 
features are, however, still visible in material form.

— a continuing landscape is one which retains an active social role in contemporary 

society closely associated with the traditional way of life, and in which the evolutionary 
process is still in progress. At the same time it exhibits significant material evidence of 
its evolution over time.

(iii) The final category is the associative cultural landscape. The inclusion of such landscapes on 
the World Heritage List is justifiable by virtue of the powerful religious, artistic or cultural 
associations of the natural element rather than material cultural evidence, which may be 
insignificant or even absent.

40.  The extent of a cultural landscape for inclusion on the World Heritage List is relative to its

 functionality and intelligibility. In any case, the sample selected must be substantial enough to
 adequately represent the totality of the cultural landscape that it illustrates. The possibility of
 designating long linear areas which represent culturally significant transport and communication
 networks should not be excluded.

41.  The general criteria for conservation and management … are equally applicable to cultural

 landscapes. It is important that due attention be paid to the full range of values represented in the
 landscape, both cultural and natural. The nominations should be prepared in collaboration with
 and with the full approval of local communities.

42.  The existence of a category of ‘cultural landscape’, included on the World Heritage List on the

 basis of the criteria … does not exclude the possibility of sites of exceptional importance in
 relation to both cultural and natural criteria continuing to be included. In such cases, their
 outstanding universal significance must be justified under both sets of criteria.

external and internal’. As far as site integrity goes, paragraph 89 states that: the physical
fabric of the property and/or its significant features should be in good condition; the
impact of deterioration processes should be controlled; a significant proportion of the
elements necessary to show the totality of the value conveyed by the property should be
included;  and  relationships  and  dynamic  functions  present  in  Cultural  Landscapes
should also be maintained.

434 G. Aplin

By the end of 2005, the WHL included 51 Cultural Landscapes (see Table 2) and 24
mixed  sites  (see  Table  3),  with  three  sites  common  to  the  two  groups.  The  latter
category is included because they satisfy at least one each of the natural and cultural
criteria and thus have a degree of similarity with Cultural Landscapes, although this
varies between sites, as there is sometimes less obvious interaction between the cultur-
ally  significant  factors  and  the  naturally  significant  ones.  While  all  but  four  of  the
Cultural Landscapes are inscribed under cultural criteria alone, by their very nature
they all highlight human–environment interactions. Fowler provides a detailed review
of the process of nominating and listing World Heritage Cultural Landscapes up to
2002, along with a brief analysis of all such sites added to the WHL, and lists of possible
future additions from sites already on the WHL (Annex C), or on national tentative
lists (Annex E).26

Table 2 Cultural landscapes inscribed on the World Heritage List, July 2006

Afghanistan

2003

Andorra
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Austria
Austria/Hungary
Cuba
Cuba

Czech Republic
France
France
France/Spain
Germany
Germany
Germany
Germany/Poland
Hungary
Hungary
Iceland
India
Israel
Italy

Italy
Italy

Italy

2004
2003
1987–1994
1997
2000
2001
1999
2000

1996
1999
2000
1997–1999
2000
2002
2004
2004
1999
2002
2004
2003
2005
1997

1997
1998

2003

Cultural Landscape and Archaeological Remains of the 
Bamiyan Valley
Madriu–Claror–Perafita Valley
Quebrada de Humahuaca
Uluru–Kata Tjuta National Park (M)
Hallstatt–Dachstein Salzkammergut Cultural Landscape
Wachau Cultural Landscape
Fertö–Neusiedlersee Cultural Landscape
Viñales Valley
Archaeological Landscape of the First Coffee Plantations in 
the Southeast of Cuba
Lednice–Valtice Cultural Landscape
Jurisdiction of Saint-Emilion
The Loire Valley between Sully-sur-Loire and Chalonnes
Pyrénées–Mont Perdu (M)
Garden Kingdom of Dessau–Wörlitz
Upper Middle Rhine Valley
Dresden Elbe Valley
Muskauer Park/Park Muzakowski
Hortobágy National Park—the Puszta
Tokaj Wine Region Historic Cultural Landscape
þingvellir National Park
Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka
Incense Route—Desert Cities in the Negev
Portovenere, Cinque Terre, and the Islands (Palmaria, 
Tino and Tinetto)
Costiera Amalfitana
Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park with the 
Archaeological Sites of Paestum and Velia, and the Certosa 
di Padula
Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy

Table 2

(Continued)

Italy
Japan

Kazakhstan

Lao People’s Dem. 
Rep.
Lebanon

Lithuania/Russian 
Fed.
Madagascar
Mexico

2004
2004

2004

2001

1998

2000

2001
2006

Mongolia
New Zealand
Nigeria
Nigeria
Norway
Philippines
Poland

Portugal
Portugal
Portugal
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Togo
UK
UK
UK
UK
Zimbabwe

2004
1990–1993
1999
2005
2004
1995
1999

1995
2001
2004
2003
2001
2000
2004
2000
2003
1986–2005
2006
2003

International Journal of Heritage Studies

435

Val d’Orcia
Sacred Sites and Pilgrimage Routes in the Kii Mountain 
Range
Petroglyphs within the Archaeological Landscape of 
Tamgaly
Vat Phou and Associated Ancient Settlements within the 
Champasak Cultural Landscape
Ouadi Qadisha (the Holy Valley) and the Forest of the 
Cedars of God (Horsh Arz el-Rab)
Curonian Spit

Royal Hill of Ambohimanga
Agave Landscape and Ancient Industrial Facilities of 
Tequila
Orkhon Valley Cultural Landscape
Tongariro National Park (M)
Sukur Cultural Landscape
Osun–Osogbo Sacred Grove
Vegaøyan—the Vega Archipelago
Rice Terraces of the Philippine Cordilleras
Kalwaria Zebrzydowska: the Mannerist Architectural and 
Park Landscape Complex and Pilgrimage Park
Cultural Landscape of Sintra
Alto Douro Wine Region
Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture
Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape
Aranjuez Cultural Landscape
Agricultural Landscape of Southern Öland
Koutammakou, the Land of the Batammariba
Blaenavon Industrial Landscape
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
St Kilda
Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape
Matobo Hills

Note: (M) = also a Mixed Site.
Source: http://whc.unesco.org/, various ﬁles.

World Heritage Cultural Landscapes, 2006

Existing  World  Heritage  Cultural  Landscape  properties  are  varied  in  nature.  While
there are some groups with commonalities, other properties are different enough from
any others to be termed unique.27 Groupings discussed in this section are in no sense
official ones, but are used purely for convenience.

A  number  of  World  Heritage  Cultural  Landscapes  consist  of  traditional  agricul-
tural  districts  where  there  is  a  long-established  and  intimate  relationship  between

436 G. Aplin

Table 3 Mixed sites inscribed on the World Heritage List for both cultural and natural
signiﬁcance, 2005

Algeria
Australia
Australia
Australia
Australia
China
China
China

China
France/Spain
Greece
Greece
Guatemala
Macedonia, FYR

Mali
New Zealand
Peru
Peru
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
Turkey
UK

1982
1981–1987–1992
1981
1982–1989
1987–1994
1987
1990
1996

1999
1997–1999
1988
1988
1979
1979–1980

1989
1990–1993
1983
1990–1992
2000
1999
1996
1985
1988
1986–2005

Tassili n’Ajjer
Kakadu National Park
Willandra Lakes Region
Tasmanian Wilderness
Uluru–Kata Tjuta National Park (CL)
Mount Taishan
Mount Huangshan
Mount Emei Scenic Area, including Leshan Giant 
Buddha Scenic Area
Mount Wuyi
Pyrénées–Mont Perdu (CL)
Mount Athos
Meteora
Tikal National Park
Ohrid Region with its Cultural and Historical Aspect and 
its Natural Environment
Cliff of Bandiagara (Land of the Dogons)
Tongariro National Park (CL)
Historic Sanctuary of Machu Picchu
Río Abiseo National Park
uKhahlamba–Drakensberg Park
Ibiza, Biodiversity and Culture
Laponian Area
Göreme National Park and the Rock Sites of Cappadocia
Hierapolis–Pamukkale
St Kilda (CL)

Note: (CL) = also a Cultural Landscape.
Source: http://whc.unesco.org/, various ﬁles.

human  activities  and  artefacts  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  natural  landscape  on  the
other. In fact, the landscape has been so comprehensively altered by human activities
over long periods that the distinction between cultural and natural is largely mean-
ingless.  In  particular,  a  number  of  European  listings  involve  wine-producing
districts, as wine production is the form of land use in more-developed nations that
has proved most resistant to change, at least to change that produces a visible effect
on  the  landscape.28  The  earliest  Cultural  Landscapes  to  be  inscribed  on  the  WHL
included  several  of  this  type.  Other  basically  agricultural  sites  involve  tobacco  and
coffee (both in Cuba), rice (the Philippines), and pastoralism (Hungary), while there
is also a Norwegian fishing-based Cultural Landscape inscribed. On the other hand,
a  number  of  sites,  again  predominantly  European,  involve  distinctive  architectural
forms  set  in  their  landscape,  which  often  also  involves  traditional  forms  of  agricul-
ture. Two Italian sites more specifically involve traditional urban forms set in spec-
tacular coastal environments, while two in the Pyrenees highlight human adaptation

International Journal of Heritage Studies

437

to  mountain  environments.  Finally,  in  this  broad  grouping,  are  several  more
inscribed,  at  least  in  large  part,  as  obviously  intentionally  created  (indeed,  land-
scaped) landscapes.

The remaining Cultural Landscapes inscribed on the WHL are much more varied,
and  hence  much  harder  to  categorise.  In  addition,  a  much  higher  proportion  are
located outside Europe, and many have been inscribed in recent years.29 Four inscrip-
tions relate to routes of cultural importance: an Incan route in Argentina, the Incense
Route through the Negev Desert in Israel, the Cilento region of Italy, and pilgrimage
routes in Japan. Non-European assemblages of various mixtures of architecture, sacred
or religious sites, traditional land use, and spiritually important landscapes include: the
Bamiyan Valley (Afghanistan, inscribed rather hastily after the Taliban dynamited one
of the giant statues of the Buddha), Bhimbetka (India), Tamgaly (Kazakhstan), Vat
Phou (Laos), the Qadisha Valley (Lebanon), Ambohimanga (Madagascar), the Orkhon
Valley  (Mongolia),  Sukur  and  Osun–Osogbo  (both  Nigeria),  Mapungubwe  (South
Africa), Koutammakou (Togo), and the Matobo Hills (Zimbabwe). Almost all of these
have been inscribed since 2000, an indication of a degree of success on the part of the
WHC in applying its Global Strategy to redress imbalances in the WHL. Two other
properties  involve  important  cultural  presences  of  Indigenous  peoples  in  predomi-
nantly  European  nations—the  Australian  Aborigines  in  Uluru-Kata  Tjuta,  and  the
New Zealand M[amacr ] ori in Tongariro.

a¯

Three of the most recently inscribed sites (2000–2005) were, before the 2006 addi-
tions, unique, and illustrate the ever more inclusive compass of the World Heritage
Cultural  Landscape  definition.30  Iceland’s þingvellir  National  Park  is  the  site  where
the nation’s ‘parliament’, the Althing, met from 930 until 1798; this was one of the
earliest democratic bodies in the world. Remains of about 50 booths built of turf and
stone remain, while remains from the 10th century may be buried underground. The
site also contains remains of agricultural use from the 18th and 19th centuries. The
UK’s  Blaenavon  district  in  South  Wales  was  (before  2006)  the  only  industrial
Cultural Landscape, although certainly not the only industrial property on the WHL.
This  property  contains  the  complete  suite  of  elements  involved  in  the  19th-century
coal  and  iron  industries.  Also  in  the  UK,  the  Royal  Botanic  Gardens  at  Kew
(London)  were  inscribed  both  because  of  their  landscape  design  significance,  and
also  because  of  their  great  importance  in  the  history  of  botanical  collecting  and
research. Most recently, in July 2006, two properties were added: a second, but very
different, mining-industrial landscape in the UK, and a Mexican district historically
associated with the production of tequila, rather than the more traditional vineyard
landscape.31

Management Issues Arising

As with any group of World Heritage properties, the Cultural Landscapes have come
to the attention of the WHB and WHC when management problems have occurred.
Because of the complex nature of these properties, particular kinds of problems have
been perceived and addressed.

438 G. Aplin

Rice Terraces of the Philippine Cordilleras

In terms of ongoing management, the most controversial and troublesome World Heri-
tage  Cultural  Landscape  has  undoubtedly  been  the  Rice  Terraces  of  the  Philippine
Cordilleras.  When  inscribed  in  1995,  this  property  was  said  to  contain  outstanding
examples  of  living  cultural  landscapes  that  ‘illustrate  traditional  techniques  and  a
remarkable harmony between humankind and the natural environment’.32 However,
by 1998 the WHB and WHC had begun to express concern over management problems
with this property, with the WHC approving assistance from the World Heritage Fund
to help with mapping and enhancing the management capabilities of the Philippine
authorities. By 1999, ICOMOS was claiming that the property was ‘fragile’ and that, like
many Cultural Landscapes, ‘was extremely vulnerable to the changes in the socio-ecolog-
ical system.’ ICOMOS stated that the ‘closely interlinking characteristics at the site are
essential  in  maintaining  the  integrity  of  its  World  Heritage  values’.  The  problems,
reduced to the basics, revolved around desires of local people to change from rice farming
to vegetable growing, as the latter was both physically easier and economically more
advantageous, or to move out of the area, probably to the cities. Such changes, however,
were having a dramatic effect on the Cultural Landscape, especially as many rice terraces
were becoming derelict. The general question thus arose: should local people be kept
in a traditional lifestyle that they did not necessarily wish to maintain so that the broader
global community could benefit from protection of World Heritage values?33 Concern
was expressed over the impact of increasing tourism, but then tourism might be the
saviour if visitors came to see the traditional rice terraces and contributed income to
local communities. A comprehensive management plan, including a tourism develop-
ment plan, was still being called for at the 2000 WHB and WHC meetings.

At the following year’s Bureau meeting, the Philippines asked that the property be
inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger (LWHD), and that international
assistance be provided to assist in addressing the pressing conservation issues. Follow-
ing  a  joint  IUCN/ICOMOS  monitoring  mission,  the  Philippines  government  was
addressing recommendations to: develop sustainable tourism; establish a permanent
management authority; and involve all stakeholders in the site’s management. The rice
terraces were rapidly deteriorating, largely as a result of the continuing evolution of
human–environment  relationships  in  ways  that  made  difficult  conservation  of  the
values  for  which  the  property  was  inscribed  on  the  WHL.  The  WHB  requested  the
World Heritage Centre and UNESCO’s Bangkok Office to continue providing assis-
tance, and did inscribe the property on the LWHD as requested by the State Party.
These decisions were subsequently endorsed by the WHC. The Committee’s reactions
to progress in 2004 and 2005 were generally positive. However, a 2005 UNESCO moni-
toring mission recommended changes to recently constructed flood-control walls both
to  make  them  more  robust  and  to  mitigate  negative  impacts  on  the  site;  the  WHC
endorsed  these  recommendations.  It  also  called  for  rapid  implementation,  with
adequate resourcing, of the Master Plan for the property, and for a further joint World
Heritage Centre, ICOMOS and IUCN monitoring mission to report to the 2006 WHC
session. The property was retained on the LWHD.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

439

Other Issues

In a number of cases, the WHC deferred inscription until greater guarantees of legal
protection were forthcoming, and in others debated whether or not the Cultural Land-
scape designation was appropriate. In other cases, it was suggested that a State Party
consider nominating (or renominating) a property as a Cultural Landscape when that
had not been done initially. The most controversial nomination, however, was that of
the Loire Valley by France. The WHB meeting in 1999 recommended it be so inscribed,
but at the WHC meeting later that year it was pointed out that the property included a
nuclear power station—not exactly in keeping with the historic nature of the site. After
long  debate  and  a  vote  (consensus  decisions  are  far  more  common),  the  issue  was
deferred.  In  2000,  the  Bureau  expressed  some  concern  about  the  potential  negative
impact of planned strengthening of 60 km of dikes along the riverbanks, even though
they might be deemed essential for non-heritage reasons. This is another example of a
conflict between heritage conservation and other values, and brings into question the
extent to which cultural landscapes listed at any scale can be expected to be non-chang-
ing.  The  Bureau,  ICOMOS  and  IUCN  jointly  recommended  that  the  property  be
renominated  with  altered  boundaries  that  excluded  the  nuclear  power  plant,  a  neat
sidestep  of  a  controversial  situation.  The  property  was  inscribed,  with  the  revised
boundary, at the 2000 WHC meeting.

A serious spillage of cyanide and heavy metals from a mine site in Romania compro-
mised the Cultural Landscape property of the Hortobágy National Park—the Puszta in
neighbouring Hungary. Reaction to the emergency had been rapid, and Hungary was
commended for this. Another property, the Curonian Spit, was felt to be endangered
from  natural  forces  impacting  on  its  fragile  sand-dune  environment,  and  the  2000
Bureau  meeting  called  for  management  cooperation  between  the  two  State  Parties
(Lithuania  and  the  Russian  Federation)  to  be  strengthened.  As  this  appears  to  have
happened  before  the  WHC  meeting  later  in  2000,  it  is  a  very  good  example  of  the
positive impact advice and recommendations from the WHB and/or WHC can have
on the management and conservation not only of Cultural Landscapes but also of all
World Heritage properties. Subsequently, however, oil exploration off the Spit rang
alarm bells with the WHB in 2001, and an environmental impact assessment was asked
to be carried out jointly by the two State Parties. Again, the outcome appears to have
been  positive.  Finally,  the  Lao  Democratic  People’s  Republic  was  asked  in  2003  to
ensure that infrastructure works did not negatively impact on the values of the Vat
Phou property, and to report back to the WHC. In this case, the results are again posi-
tive  as  the  WHC,  at  its  2004  session,  congratulated  the  State  Party  on  its  response,
although also asking that the responsibilities of the various agencies be clarified.

Values of Cultural Landscape Listings

Cultural landscapes, including those listed as World Heritage Sites, ‘represent a rich
and almost infinitely varied part of human heritage’.34 They illustrate the interactions
between human activities and natural attributes and processes, while, purely from a

440 G. Aplin

biodiversity  conservation  point  of  view,  ‘as  large  areas  of  undisturbed  land  become
more scarce … the value of these places as repositories of biological richness seems
bound  to  increase’.35  Perhaps  the  most  important  lesson  that  can  be  learnt  from
cultural  landscapes  is  that  myriad  aspects  of  any  situation  are  interrelated,  as  the
complexity and interdependent nature of our environment—including both social and
biophysical aspects—is thrown into sharp relief. Passmore sees as an essential plank in
any satisfactory philosophy of nature, recognition that: 

When men [sic] act on nature, they do not simply modify a particular quality of a
particular substance. What they do, rather, is to interact with a system of interactions,
setting in process new interactions. Just for that reason, there is always a risk that their
actions will have consequences which they did not predict.36

Cultural landscapes can thus help reinforce understanding of the effects of humans on
the biophysical environment, and highlight both successes and failures in environmen-
tal and landscape management.

In addition, ‘cultural landscapes often reflect living models of sustainable use of land
and natural resources’, while ‘Many forms of traditional resource management, often
supported by customary law, have been recognised in cultural landscapes and found
relevant for the management of other types of properties and other contexts’, and they
also mark ‘a milestone for indigenous people’ as they recognise ‘the powerful religious
and  cultural  connections  between  indigenous  peoples  and  their  natural  environ-
ment’.37 Head expresses one ultimate desired outcome of studies of cultural landscapes
as being progress in ‘the profound and difficult task’ of ‘rethink[ing] people into nature
in such a way that we can better manage the Earth’.38 In a more immediately practical
sense,  ‘World  Heritage  cultural  landscapes  provide  models  of  stewardship  for  land-
scapes as a whole’.39

Thirdly, cultural landscape studies can throw light on differences between cultures
and the undeniable fact that no culture or religious or ethnic group has a monopoly on
wisdom. In addition, and at least of equal importance in the contemporary world, we
desperately need tolerance and understanding to avoid wars and civil strife, perhaps
even  to  prevent  major  global  catastrophe.  Much  of  the  uncertainty  in  the  world,
including threats of terrorism, can be largely traced back to a lack of understanding of
each other’s cultures and belief systems. Indeed, the Ferrara 2002 workshops concluded
that  their  vision  for  the  following  10  years  lay  in  part  in  ‘using  cultural  landscape
conservation to promote new approaches in international co-operation among nations
and peoples’.40

World Heritage Cultural Landscape sites may well prove to be a more positive face
of globalisation, as contrasted with some of the other aspects that are rapidly homoge-
nising  cultures  and  belief  systems  (or  at  least  attempting  to  do  so),  and  frequently
disadvantaging  the  poorer  countries,  groups  and  individuals.  An  increasing  public
awareness and appreciation of them might contribute in some small way to reversing
the trend in many wealthy nations, notably Australia and the USA, of becoming more
suspicious  of  differences.  The  sooner  the  positive  face  of  globalisation—the
acknowledgement that we are all part of the one human race, and that we have a moral

obligation to be tolerant and compassionate towards each other—comes to dominate
over other aspects, the better for the future of humankind.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

441

Conclusions

World Heritage Cultural Landscapes do not form a unique typological category, but
are merely the highest rung on the ‘scale-ladder’, the global manifestation of a phenom-
enon that occurs at all scales in terms of heritage significance.41 Whether or not recog-
nised at the global level, many European national and regional parks are essentially
cultural  landscapes  with  long-established  human  occupance,  often  of  a  fairly  tradi-
tional  kind.  Management  usually  includes  measures  to  ensure  that  traditional
approaches to, for example, agriculture are maintained, and that modern intrusions are
minimised,  the  very  same  approach  as  taken  in  managing  World  Heritage  Cultural
Landscapes.42 National parks in nations such as Australia and the USA that have been
relatively recently settled by Europeans tend to have much lower levels of human occu-
pance, but where there is significant Indigenous occupance with living cultures and
traditional  uses  of  the  landscape,  the  parks  are  often  administered  as  cultural  land-
scapes.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  Indigenous  peoples  are  actively  involved  in
those management processes.43 At even more local levels, many heritage authorities, as
well  as  non-governmental  organisations  such  as  the  various  National  Trusts,  also
recognise  the  importance  of  landscapes  that  incorporate  cultural  as  well  as  natural
features.  The  terminology  varies,  but  includes  Landscape  Conservation  Areas,  and
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, among many others.44 It can thus be seen that
cultural landscapes that encapsulate the same values as World Heritage Cultural Land-
scapes can be, and have been, recognised as significant at many different scales.

The values of cultural landscapes, as outlined in the previous section, apply to vary-
ing degrees at all these scales. Apart from aesthetic and cultural-conservation values,
cultural  landscapes  at  all  scales  can  hold  lessons  in  environmental  management.  In
particular,  agricultural  and  resource  management  practices  conserved  in  the  tradi-
tional land-use patterns of a cultural landscape may have relevance for future improve-
ments to less-sensitive, modern practices. Acquaintance with cultural landscapes can at
times lead to increased majority public tolerance and understanding of Indigenous and
other minority groups within a nation, as well as globally, as mentioned above. Cultural
and natural phenomena frequently occur together in intimately bound and complex
systems. While the commonly used categories of cultural heritage and natural heritage
have value in bureaucratic, legislative and management contexts, that use is limited. It
is crucial that all involved in heritage, including the public who define and consume it,
recognise the common interdependence of cultural and natural aspects, evident above
all in cultural landscapes.

Finally, inscription of a property as a Cultural Landscape on the WHL does send
clear messages as to its perceived importance at the global level. State Parties to the
World Heritage Convention do generally take such inscription of sites situated within
their  territories  seriously,  as  the  brief  discussion  of  WHB  and  WHC  concerns  in
relation to management issues shows. In the most serious circumstances, a property

442 G. Aplin

can be added to the LWHD, thus increasing the availability of international assistance
if  appropriate.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  listing  at  other  scales  also  similarly  enhances
protection of this valuable type of heritage site.

Notes

1 [1] Lowenthal, Cultural Landscapes.
2 [2] WHC (1987) and WHB (1987); the nominated site was the Lake District National Park in the

UK.

3 [3] A brief discussion of the early uses of related concepts in geography follows, while a discussion

of the concept of the ecomuseum comes after that.

4 [4] Martin, All Possible Worlds, 198, outlines the most relevant aspects of the French school of
geography. See also Vidal de la Blache, ‘Leçon d’ouverture du cours de géographie’. Buttimer,
Society and Milieu, 52–57, discusses the matter of choice from possible human–environment
interactions in the context of genre de vie.

5 [5] Martin, All Possible Worlds, 166–69, discusses the German school of geography in relation to

this section.

6 [6] For chorology, see Hettner, Die Geographie. The quotation is from Hartshorne, Perspective on

the Nature of Geography, 13.

7 [7] Martin,  All  Possible  Worlds,  386.  The  Sauer  quotation  is  from  Sauer,  ‘The  Morphology  of
Landscape’, 53; see also idem, ‘Recent Developments in Cultural Geography’. For a current
view on the value of cultural landscape studies in education, see Aplin, ‘Heritage as Exem-
plar’.

8 [8] For the ecomuseum concept, see Davis, ‘Places, “Cultural Touchstones” and the Ecomuseum’,

and Rivière, ‘L’écomusée, un modèle évolutif’.

9 [9] Rivière,  ‘The  Ecomuseum’,  quoted  in  Davis,  ‘Places,  “Cultural  Touchstones”  and  the

Ecomuseum’, note 1, 375.

10[10] Ashworth and Howard, European Heritage, 96–107.
11[11] Lowenthal, The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History, 6.
12[12] Ashworth  and  Howard,  European  Heritage,  9.  See  also  Howard,  Heritage  Management,
Interpretation,  Identity.  The  notion  that  ‘landscape’  is  a  strongly  European  concept  is
reinforced by the opening for signature in 2000 of the European Landscape Convention—see
Council of Europe, Landscape and Sustainable Development.

13[13] Ashworth and Howard, European Heritage, 12.
14[14] The categories quoted have been used in much of the World Heritage Committee discussion
of  cultural  landscapes;  for  example,  in  WHC  (1993).  The  quotation  is  from  Workshop  5,
paragraph 2(b) of that document.

15[15] WHC (2004); as all of the WHC and WHB reports and similar material have been accessed via
the World Heritage Centre’s website, it is not possible to give meaningful page numbers, but
section or paragraph numbers are given where these are helpful.

16[16] WHC (1991).
17[17] WHC (1990).
18[18] WHC (1991).
19[19]
Ibid., Annex.
20[20] Lowenthal, The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History, 88; the quotation is from Hewison,

The Heritage Industry.

21[21] WHC (1992, paragraph 5).
22[22] WHC (1992, 1995a).
23[23] For  these  documents,  see,  respectively:  WHC  (1993);  Australia  ICOMOS  (1995);  WHB

(1996); WHC (1998, 1999a, 1999b); WHB (1999, 2000); WHC (2000, 2001).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

443

24[24] UNESCO World Heritage Centre, Cultural Landscapes.
25[25] References and quotations in this paragraph relate to UNESCO World Heritage Centre, Oper-

ational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention 2005.

26[26] Fowler, World Heritage Cultural Landscapes 1992–2002; the analysis of sites is at 27–39, the list
of  possible  additions  from  sites  on  the  WHL  is  Annex  C,  and  the  list  of  possible  additions
from national tentative lists is Annex E.

28[28]

27[27] Material  for  this  section  is  derived  from  the  short  descriptions  of  properties  given  on  the
World  Heritage  Centre  website  (http://whc.unesco.org),  augmented  where  necessary  by
reports of WHB and WHC meetings. Fowler (World Heritage Cultural Landscapes 1992–2002)
also gives brief descriptions of all cultural landscapes inscribed to 2002, according to the year
in which each was listed. It is not intended to include all 51 sites in this discussion, although
almost all are mentioned. Where appropriate, reference is made in the notes that follow to
material in the World Heritage Review, published from 1996 to mid-2006.
(Some  property  names  in  this  and  the  following  note  have  been  shortened;  CL  =  Cultural
Landscape.  See  Table  2  for  more  information  on  individual  properties.)  Wine-producing
districts inscribed include: the Wachau CL (Austria), Jurisdiction of Saint-Emilion (France,
WHR 21, 36–49), Upper Middle Rhine Valley (Germany), Tokaj Wine Region Historic CL
(Hungary), Alto Duro Wine Region (Portugal), and Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard
Culture (Portugal, in the Azores). Some of these are, of course, inscribed for more than just
the vineyard landscape. Vineyard-based cultural landscapes are discussed as a group in WHR
35,  4–19.  The  other  agricultural  sites  specifically  mentioned  are  (in  order):  Viñales  Valley
(Cuba),  Archaeological  Landscape  of  the  First  Coffee  Plantations  in  the  Southeast  of  Cuba
(Cuba), the Rice Terraces of the Philippine Cordilleras (Philippines, WHR 2, 34–36; 38, 38–
39; see also Phillips, ‘Cultural Landscapes: IUCN’s Changing Vision of Protected Areas’, 43),
Hortobágy  National  Park—the  Puszta  (Hungary),  and  Vegaøyan  —the  Vega  Archipelago
(Norway, WHR 39, 49). More general rural landscapes inscribed for architectural values as
much  as  land-use  values  include:  the  Hallstatt–Dachstein  Salzkammergut  CL  (Austria),
Fertö–Neusiedlersee CL (Austria and Hungary), Lednice–Valtice CL (Czech Republic, WHR
9, 24–35), The Loire Valley … (France, WHR 26, 52–65), Dresden Elbe Valley (Germany),
and Val d’Orcia (Italy). The coastal sites are Portovenere, Cinque Terre and the Islands …
(Italy, WHR 33, 54–65), and Costiera Amalfitana (Italy), while the mountain sites mentioned
are Pyrénées–Mont Perdu (France and Spain, WHR 20, 30–43), and Madriu–Perafita–Claror
Valley (Andorra). The sites demonstrating more purposefully created landscapes are: Garden
Kingdom of Dessau–Wörlitz (Germany, WHR 25, 68–79), Muskauer Park/Park Muzakowski
(Germany/Poland), Sacra Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy (Italy), Kalwaria Zebrzydowska
… (Poland), CL of Sintra (Portugal, WHR 8, 46–49), and Aranjuez CL (Spain).

29[29] Properties referred to in this paragraph are, in order of discussion: Quebrada de Humahuaca
(Argentina,  WHR  35,  68–79;  see  also  Mujica,  ‘Cultural  Landscapes  and  the  Challenges  of
Conservation in Latin America and the Caribbean’, 85), Incense Route—Desert Cities in the
Negev (Israel), Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park … (Italy, WHR 13, 49), Sacred Sites
and Pilgrimage Routes in the Kii Mountain Range (Japan, WHR 41, 56–65), CL and Archaeo-
logical  Remains  of  the  Bamiyan  Valley  (Afghanistan,  WHR  20,  4–13),  Rock  Shelters  of
Bhimbetka  (India),  Petroglyphs  …  of  Tamgaly  (Kazakhstan),  Vat  Phou  and  Associated
Ancient  Settlements  …  (Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic),  Ouadi  Qadisha  Valley  …  and
the Forest of the Cedars of God … (Lebanon, WHR 20, 48–55), Royal Hill of Ambohimanga
(Madagascar,  WHR  39,  50–61),  Orkhon  Valley  CL  (Mongolia),  Sukur  CL  (Nigeria,  see
Eboreime,  ‘Sukur  Cultural  Landscape  in  Nigeria’),  Osun–Osogbo  Sacred  Grove  (Nigeria),
Mapungubwe CL (South Africa, WHR 40, 22–29), Koutammakou, the Land of the Batam-
mariba (Togo), Matobo Hills (Zimbabwe), Uluru–Kata Tjuta National Park (Australia, WHR
2, 38–39; 13, 42–43; 23, 18–20; see also Calma and Liddle, ‘Uluru–Kata Tjuta National Park’),
and Tongariro National Park (New Zealand, WHR 2, 36–38; 11, 68–79; 23, 20–21; see also
Phillips, ‘Cultural Landscapes: IUCN’s Changing Vision of Protected Areas’, 44–45).

444 G. Aplin
30[30] The  three  sites  are:  þingvellir  National  Park  (Iceland,  WHR  39,  48),  Blaenavon  Industrial

Landscape (UK, WHR 28, 10–15), and Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (UK, WHR 34, 54–65).

31[31] At the WHC meeting in July 2006, the following new Cultural Landscapes were inscribed on
the WHL: Agave Landscape and Ancient Industrial Facilities of Tequila (Mexico), and Corn-
wall and West Devon Mining Landscape (UK). The latter was referred back to the UK by the
Bureau, but subsequently accepted by the Committee. Consideration of three further sites was
deferred  to  seek  further  information  from  the  relevant  State  Parties:  the  Causses and  the
Cévennes (France); Ecosystem and Relict Cultural Landscape of Lopé–Okanda (Gabon); and
River Island of Maquti in Midstream Brahmaputra River in Assam (India).

32[32] WHC  (1995b).  Subsequent  WHB  and  WHC  reports  have  been  used  in  preparing  this
summary  of  concerns  and  actions,  and  all  quotations  are  from  these  reports.  The  two  key
advisory bodies that assist the WHC in its deliberations are the World Conservation Union—
IUCN (IUCN) and the International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS). See also
Phillips, ‘Cultural Landscapes: IUCN’s Changing Vision of Protected Areas’, 34.

33[33] The earlier discussion of the 1991 criteria and guidelines and the subsequent quotation from

Lowenthal (see also note 17) are relevant here.

34[34] Phillips, ‘Cultural Landscapes: an IUCN Perspective’, 380.
35[35] Phillips, ‘Cultural Landscapes: an IUCN Perspective’, 380.
36[36] Passmore, ‘Attitudes to Nature’, 137.
37[37] The  three  quotations  are  from:  Phillips,  ‘Cultural  Landscapes:  an  IUCN  Perspective’,  380.;
UNESCO World Heritage Centre, Cultural Landscapes, 160; Rössler and Cleere, ‘Connecting
Nature and Nature’, 17.

38[38] Head, Cultural Landscapes and Environmental Change, 156.
39[39] UNESCO World Heritage Centre, Cultural Landscapes, 160.
40[40] UNESCO World Heritage Centre, Cultural Landscapes, 162.
41[41]

42[42]

43[43]

See  Aplin,  Heritage,  chap.  1,  for  a  detailed  discussion  of  scale  and  other  heritage-related
definitional issues.
See Aplin, Heritage, 10–11, 246 and 259, for discussions of the Lake District and Yorkshire
Dales  National  Parks,  both  in  the  UK,  and  the  Parc  naturel  régional  de  Camargue,  in
France.
In  Australia,  for  example,  Indigenous  Traditional  Owners  are  frequently  involved  in  both
day-to-day  management  and  longer-term  policy  matters  in  national  parks  administered  by
federal  agencies  in  the  Northern  Territory  (Uluru–Kata  Tjuta  and  Kakadu  National  Parks)
and by the various state agencies. In many Australian reserves, the Traditional Owners have
maintained an intimate and deeply spiritual relationship with the landscape, their ‘country’.
Both  Uluru–Kata  Tjuta  and  Kakadu  are  World  Heritage  properties,  the  former  listed  as  a
cultural landscape, and the latter possibly to be renominated as one in the future.

44[44] Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty in the UK normally incorporate agricultural and resi-
dential land uses, among others, and the human occupance is more often than not an essential
component in the ‘outstanding beauty’. Intrusive modern developments, and even relatively
minor  alterations  to  buildings  and  other  artefacts,  are  strictly  controlled  to  maintain  the
values of what are in effect cultural landscapes.

References

Aplin,  G.  Heritage:  Identification,  Conservation  and  Management.  Melbourne:  Oxford  University

Press, 2002.

———. ‘Heritage as Exemplar: A Pedagogical Role for Heritage Studies in Values Education.’ The

Environmentalist 27 (2007): 375–83.

Ashworth, G. and P. Howard. European Heritage: Planning and Management. Exeter: Intellect Books,

1999.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

445

Australia  ICOMOS.  ‘The  Asia–Pacific  Regional  Workshop  on  Associative  Cultural  Landscapes:  A
Report  by  Australia  ICOMOS  to  the  World  Heritage  Committee’,  1995  [accessed  February
2006]. Available from http://whc.unesco.org/archive/cullan95.htm

Buttimer,  A.  Society  and  Milieu  in  the  French  Geographic  Tradition.  AAAG  Monograph  no.  6.

Chicago: Rand McNally, 1971.

Calma, G. and L. Liddle. ‘Uluru–Kata Tjuta National Park: Sustainable Management and Develop-
ment’. In UNESCO World Heritage Centre, Cultural Landscapes: The Challenges of Conserva-
tion. World Heritage Papers no. 7. Paris: UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 2003: 104–19.

Council  of  Europe.  Landscape  and  Sustainable  Development:  Challenges  of  the  European  Landscape

Convention. Strasbourg, Council of Europe Publishing, 2006.

Davis, P. ‘Places, “Cultural Touchstones” and the Ecomuseum’. In Heritage, Museums and Galleries,

edited by G. Corsane. Abingdon: Routledge, 2005.

Eboreime, J. ‘Sukur Cultural Landscape in Nigeria: A Challenge to Conservation Management’. In
UNESCO World Heritage Centre, Cultural Landscapes: The Challenges of Conservation. World
Heritage Papers no. 7. Paris: UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 2003: 144–46.

Fowler,  P.  J.  World  Heritage  Cultural  Landscapes  1992–2002.  World  Heritage  Papers  no.  6.  Paris:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 2003.

Hartshorne, R. Perspective on the Nature of Geography. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1959.
Head, L. Cultural Landscapes and Environmental Change. London: Arnold, 2000.
Hettner, A. Die Geographie—ihre Geschichte, ihr Wesen, und ihre Methoden. Breslau: Ferdinand Hirt,

1927.

Hewison, R. The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline. London: Methuen, 1987.
Howard, P. Heritage Management, Interpretation, Identity. London: Continuum, 2003.
Lowenthal,  D.  Cultural  Landscapes,  WHSITES  NEWS/[nw_p4a3],  n.d.  [accessed  October  2001].

Available from http://www.unesco.org/whc/nwhc/pages/news/nw_p4a3.htm

———.  The  Heritage  Crusade  and  the  Spoils  of  History.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press,

1998.

Martin, G. J. All Possible Worlds: A History of Geographical Ideas. 4th ed. New York: Oxford Univer-

sity Press, 2005.

Mujica,  E.  J.  ‘Cultural  Landscapes  and  the  Challenges  of  Conservation  in  Latin  America  and  the
Caribbean’.  In  UNESCO  World  Heritage  Centre,  Cultural  Landscapes:  The  Challenges  of
Conservation.  World  Heritage  Papers  no.  7.  Paris:  UNESCO  World  Heritage  Centre,  2003:
82–88.

Passmore,  J.  ‘Attitudes  to  Nature’.  In  Environmental  Ethics,  edited  by  R.  Elliot.  Oxford:  Oxford

University Press, 1995.

Phillips, A. ‘Cultural Landscapes: An IUCN Perspective’. In Cultural Landscapes of Universal Value:
Components of a Global Strategy, edited by B. von Droste, H. Plachter and M. Rössler. New
York: Fischer, 1995.

———.  ‘Cultural  Landscapes:  IUCN’s  Changing  Vision  of  Protected  Areas’.  In  UNESCO  World
Heritage Centre, Cultural Landscapes: The Challenges of Conservation. World Heritage Papers
no. 7. Paris: UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 2003, 40–49.

Rivière, G. H. ‘The Ecomuseum—An Evolutive Definition’. Museum 37, no. 4 (1985): 182–83.
———.  ‘L’écomusée,  un  modèle  évolutif’.  In  Vagues—une  anthologie  de  la  nouvelle  muséologie,

edited by A. Desvallées. Lusigny sur Ouche: Editions W. Macon, 1992.

Rössler,  M.  and  H.  Cleere.  ‘Connecting  Nature  and  Culture’.  World  Conservation  (The  IUCN

Bulletin), no. 2 (2001): 17.

Sauer, C. ‘The Morphology of Landscape’. University of California Publications in Geography, no. 2

(1925): 19–53.

———. ‘Recent Developments in Cultural Geography’. In Recent Developments in the Social Sciences,

edited by E. C. Hayes. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1927.

UNESCO  World  Heritage  Centre.  Cultural  Landscapes:  The  Challenges  of  Conservation.  World

Heritage Papers no. 7. Paris: UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 2003.

446 G. Aplin

———. Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention 2005. Paris:

UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 2005.

Vidal  de  la  Blache,  P.  ‘Leçon  d’ouverture  du  cours  de  géographie’.  Annales  de  Géographie,  no.  8

(1899): 97–109.

WHB.  Bureau  of  the  World  Heritage  Committee,  Eleventh  Session,  UNESCO  Headquarters,  23–26

June 1987, Item 6(B) (1987).

———.  Information  Document:  Report  of  the  Expert  Meeting  on  European  Cultural  Landscapes  of
Outstanding  Universal  Value,  Vienna,  Austria,  21  April  1996.  WHC  Document  WHC-96/
CONF.202/INF.10 (1996).

———. Information Document: Synthesis Report of the Expert Meeting on Management Guidelines for
Cultural Landscapes, Banská Stiavnica, Slovakia, 1–4 June 1999. WHB Document WHC-99/
CONF.204/INF.16 (1999).

———. Item 6.2 of the Provisional Agenda: Synthesis Report of the Meeting on ‘Cultural Landscapes:
Concept and Implementation’, Catania, Italy, 8–11 March 2000. WHB Document WHC-2000/
CONF.202/INF.10 (2000).

WHC.  World  Heritage  Committee,  Eleventh  Session,  UNESCO  Headquarters,  7–11  December  1987,

Item 9(B)(b) (1987).

———.  Report  of  the  World  Heritage  Committee,  Fourteenth  Session,  Banff,  Alberta,  Canada,  7–12

December 1990, Item 18(D) (1990).

———. Item 13 of the Provisional Agenda: Revision of the Operational Guidelines for the Implementa-
tion  of  the  World  Heritage  Convention—‘Elaboration  of  Criterion  or  Criteria  for  Cultural
Landscapes’. WHC Document SC-91/CONF.002/11 (1991).

———. Report of the Expert Group on Cultural Landscapes, La Petite Pierre (France), 24–26 October
from  http://whc.unesco.org/archive/

1992,  1992  [accessed  January  2006].  Available 
pierre92.htm

———. Report of the International Expert Meeting on ‘Cultural Landscapes of Outstanding Universal

Value’, Templin, Germany, 12 to 17 October 1993. WHC Document WHC-93/INF.4 (1993).

———. Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage Convention 1995, 1995a

[accessed January 2006]. Available from http://whc.unesco.org/

———.  World  Heritage  Committee,  Nineteenth  Session—Berlin,  Germany,  4–9  December  1995:

Report (1995b).

———. Information Document: Report of the Regional Thematic Meeting on Cultural Landscapes in
the Andes, Arequipa/Chivay, Peru, 17–22 May 1998. WHC Document WHC-98/CONF.203/
INF.8 (1998).

———. Report on the Regional Thematic Expert Meeting on Cultural Landscapes in Eastern Europe,
Bialystok,  Poland,  29  September–3  October  1999.  WHC  Document  WHC.99/CONF.209/
INF.14 (1999a).

———. Synthetic Report of the Expert Meeting on Cultural Landscape in Africa, 10–14 March 1999,

Kenya. WHB Document WHC.99/CONF.204/INF.04 (1999b).

———. Information Document: Synthesis Report of the Regional Meeting on ‘Cultural Landscapes in

Central America’. WHC Document WHC-2000/CONF.204/WEB.4 (2000).

———. Report of the Thematic Meeting on Vineyard Cultural Landscapes, Tokai, Hungary, 11–14 July

2001. WHC Document WHC.2001/CONF.208/INF.7 (2001).

———. Cultural Landscapes, 2004 [accessed February 2006]. Available from http://whc.unesco.org/

exhibits/cultland/landscape.htm

World  Heritage  Review.  UNESCO  World  Heritage  Centre  with  Ediciones  San  Marcos  (Madrid)
1996–2005,  or  Pressgroup  Holdings  Europe  (Valencia)  from  2006  (individual  numbers  are
frequently undated).


