International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Be Interested and Beware: Joining Economic
Valuation and Heritage Conservation

Randall Mason

To cite this article: Randall Mason (2008) Be Interested and Beware: Joining Economic Valuation
and Heritage Conservation, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 14:4, 303-318, DOI:
10.1080/13527250802155810
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250802155810

Published online: 27 Jun 2008.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 881

Citing articles: 23 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 14, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 303–318

Be Interested and Beware:
Joining Economic Valuation and 
Heritage Conservation
Randall Mason

144000000July 2008
RandallMason
rfmason@design.upenn.edu
Taylor and Francis
RJHS_A_315747.sgm
10.1080/13527250802155810
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2008Taylor & Francis

Economic thinking can provide great insight into heritage conservation. The cause of inte-
grating heritage conservation into broader social agendas could be well served by engaging
with economic discourse. Written from the perspective of the conservation field, this essay
draws out distinctions between economic and conservation discourses, examines why and
how economic arguments are made about conservation, and advocates serious engagement
of  cultural  economics  by  the  heritage  conservation  field.  Strategic  and  epistemological
barriers to the inclusion of economic discourse in conservation are surveyed, and several
arguments for including economic discourse as a more integral part of conservation practice
are  weighed.  The  essay  concludes  that  thoughtful,  critical  engagement  with  economics
discourse  will  lead  to  a  dynamic  new  research  agenda  and  strengthen  the  conservation
field’s hand in policy discussions and decisions.

Keywords: Conservation Discourse; Economics; Economic Development; Research; Values

Conservation Discourse and Economics Discourse

Heritage  conservation  has  transformed  in  the  last  generation,  from  a  fairly  closeted
practice pursued as an end in itself, to a field increasingly viewed as the means to other
social ends (greater sense of place, sustainable development, cultural diversity, tourism
income, and so on). As part of this transformation, economic concepts, values, goals,
and  discourse  applied  to  heritage  have  grown  in  prominence.  These  changes  are
welcomed by some, are unwelcome to others, but they are congruent with longer-brew-
ing changes in conservation which have brought real-world conservation activity into
partnership  with  forces  for  economic  development  and  community  improvement.1

Randall Mason, University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: rfmason@design.upenn.edu

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13527250802155810

304 R. Mason

Given these changes, it is urgent for conservation professionals and advocates to have
some  fluency  with  economic  discourse,  as  it  has  become  a  lingua  franca  of  public
discourse (as well as public policy) in contemporary society.

Two distinct ways of thinking about heritage have emerged in contemporary soci-
ety—termed here ‘economic discourse’ and ‘conservation discourse’. These are not the
only discourses about heritage, but represent important impulses within professional
circles. Both are complex, have long histories, and are distinctly different. Conservation
discourse employs historical narratives, connoisseurial judgements, materials science
and visual media in making its arguments; economic discourse relies on mathematics
and  quantitative  expressions.  Conservation  discourse  takes  as  given  the  benefits  of
heritage conservation; economic discourse questions the benefits of heritage conserva-
tion sceptically, deferring to the judgement of markets as efficient means of making
decisions and allocating resources.

Economists regard preservation first as a market phenomenon, a set of goods and
services best appraised in terms of prices. But conservation discourse regards heritage
as priceless, and therefore beyond economic analysis. Both conservation and economic
discourses about heritage have an air of fundamentalism about them, yet seeing the
alternatives as a zero-sum game is a mistake. It is a fact ‘on the ground’ that economic
concerns are very important to the operation of heritage conservation. Many heritage
policy  and  management  decisions  are  dominated  by  economic  considerations.  Yet
from  the  perspective  of  heritage  professionals,  economics  is  regarded  as  an  alien,
threatening  discourse.  It  is  untenable,  living  in  a  market-dominated  world,  not  to
include  economic  values  from  our  planning,  management  and  decision-making
frameworks. The question should be how.

* * *

The focus of this article is strategic discourse about economics and conservation—how
economic concepts and analytics are used—as opposed to the technical discourse of
actually  performing  econometric  analyses  measuring  the  monetary  value  of  specific
heritage  conservation  goods.2  Two  strategic  topics  will  structure  the  balance  of  this
article.

First, values theory is introduced as a broad and integrated way to frame thinking
about the role of conservation in contemporary society, and a way to organise conser-
vation  decision  making.  While  values-centred  theory  may  seem  to  complicate  the
motives, goals, and means of conservation professionals, it clarifies the reasons why a
broader  understanding  of  heritage  places’  values—including  economic  values—is
essential.

Second, several arguments are offered to explain conservation professionals’ need to
be  interested  in—and  beware  of—cultural  economics.3  These  begin  with  the  often
confused distinction between economic thinking and business thinking, then elaborate
on ways that economics as a social science can illuminate heritage conservation prac-
tice. In turning to economics, conservation professionals should not simply look for
new or different justifications for conservation. One should step back and study how
and why conservation is a benefit to society. The crux of many conservation issues is

International Journal of Heritage Studies

305

judging the trade-offs made between conservation and its alternatives—just the sort of
complex social question of greatest concern to the economics field. There is a strong
intellectual base to build upon. A long line of brilliant economists have shed light on
the relationship between economics and culture and bridged moral and mathematical
calculuses: Adam Smith, Thorstein Veblen, John Kenneth Galbraith, and Amartya Sen.
An  extensive  literature  has  evolved  to  deal  with  similar  issues  in  the  environmental
fields.  And  the  field  of  cultural  economics  has  focused  attention  on  the  points  of
contact between economics discourse, methods, and the cultural sphere.

The Central Place of ‘Values’ in Conservation

Values-centred theory is a powerful way to describe the variety of meanings, uses and
functions  ascribed  to  heritage  places  in  contemporary  society.  The  significance  and
scope  of  values-centred  conservation  theory  has  been  outlined  elsewhere,  in  the
context  of  archaeological  resources  and  heritage  more  generally.4  Of  particular
relevance to this article, a values-centred approach to conservation demonstrates why
an understanding of economic value is essential.

The two main points of values-centred theory are that buildings and places have a
number  of  different  kinds  of  value,5  which  is  regarded  differently  by  the  various
stakeholders involved with the site; and reckoning with a broader range of a place’s
values will result in better conservation decisions and outcomes.

A place has heritage value owing to its age, or association with an historic event or
person; it may have cultural or symbolic value stemming from its significance in the
identity of a cultural group; it may have aesthetic value if it is regarded as beautiful,
sublime, or artistic. While several, distinct kinds of value can be identified, they also
overlap and are interrelated. These cultural values are the traditional core of conserva-
tion  interest.6  Heritage  places  have  a  number  of  other,  more  contemporary  values,
including economic values, social values, and environmental values. These values are
legitimate concerns of recognised stakeholding parties, and shape public attitudes and
decisions very strongly, but traditionally have been underemphasised in conservation
because  they  seem  independent  of  the  place’s  meaning  as  ‘heritage’.  Each  category
warrants a more nuanced breakdown.

Economic values are interpreted in several different ways. The scheme proposed here
highlights the distinction between use value and non-use value: use values are defined
as those readily tradable on markets and translatable into prices (for instance, the value
of a building on the real-estate market); non-use values are defined as those for which
markets do not exist (e.g. the aesthetic value of a building because it is perceived as
beautiful).7 Social value stems from the collective use of a heritage place for other than
heritage  reasons,  for  instance  as  a  gathering  place  for  music  concerts  or  a  place  to
picnic. Environmental value stems from a place’s role in natural landscapes or ecolog-
ical systems, comprising, for instance, part of a stream valley or the edge of a forest
stand.  Taken  together,  these  contemporary  values  figure  prominently  in  decisions
about  conservation  and  development,  and  they  are  often  (though  not  necessarily)
related directly to the place’s core historical and cultural values.

306 R. Mason

Historical  and  contemporary  values  represent  two  distinct  perspectives  on  the
value  of  heritage  places—akin  to  looking  at  the  same  place  through  the  different
ends  of  a  telescope.  These  perspectives  co-exist  and  often  compete—think  of  an
urban  neighbourhood  under  threat  of  redevelopment,  or  an  archaeological  site
where  agricultural  or  urban  land  uses  threaten  resources.  At  the  level  of  discourse,
two complications arise out of this very real cleavage between historical and contem-
porary values.

First, value is an essential concept in economics, though used in a distinctly differ-
ent way from that of conservation discourse. In economics, value is an overarching
proxy for the real and potential benefits attached to a place, and it is reducible to a
price; as opposed to the plural sense of ‘values’ foundational to the idea of cultural
value,  in  which  each  different  expression  of  value  is  idiosyncratic  and  irreducible.
Economic  values  are  expressed  in  price,  whereas  cultural  values  are  classified  as
significant  or  not.  Further,  economic  values  derive  from  individualised  benefits
tradable  in  markets;  cultural  values  are  by  definition  held  collectively  as  well  as
individually.

The  lens  of  cultural  value  multiplies  the  aspects  of  a  place’s  value,  celebrating
them  as  idiosyncratic,  contingent,  and  ‘constructed’  by  the  person  or  group
valorising the object. The lens of economic value tends to discipline and reduce the
place’s  complexity.  Vis-à-vis  heritage  conservation  (and  culture  in  general),  econo-
mists tend to present market/use values not as one fraction of the total collection of
values  ascribed  to  a  particular  place  but  rather  as  a  totalising  system  encompassing
all  types  of  values.8  The  logic  behind  this  system  of  economic  valuation  is  a  clear
product  of  neoclassical  economics,  standardising  value  to  enable  its  quantification
and universal application. This kind of valuation discourse runs at cross-purposes to
the  elusive,  ‘priceless’  aspects  of  cultural  value.  Economic  values  are  but  one  aspect
of  a  site’s  values,  it  is  argued  here,  not  to  be  studied  in  isolation  from  the  other
values of heritage.

The  second  complication  around  the  concept  of  value  stems  from  the  idea  that
heritage conservation yields both private benefits and public benefits, which is to say
use  (market)  values  and  non-use  (beyond-market)  values.  If  conservation  yielded
mostly  private  benefits,  economic  logic  would  suffice  as  a  discourse  about  heritage
value, relying on market prices (as with the real estate markets for historic houses). But
heritage conservation also creates value outside of market processes which cannot be
priced—for instance, the value of heritage in forming national pride or community
feeling—and  these  public  goods  cannot  be  measured  directly.9  The  leads  to  the
difficulties  of  quantification,  and  to  the  whole  range  of  methodological  approaches
economists have devised to account for both kinds of value.

Extensive literatures in the subfields of environmental and cultural economics test
ways  of  measuring  flows  of  both  economic  and  cultural  benefits.10  Economic  (use)
values are easy to measure, based on price data from markets where such values are
traded (admission to heritage sites, for instance); cultural values are more difficult, and
there are no standard metrics. Since economic and cultural values of heritage cannot
both  be  ranked  on  a  shared  scale  (dollars)—this  would  be  comparing  apples  to

oranges—some  more  sophisticated  way  of  characterising  the  trade-offs  between
cultural and economic values (heritage and contemporary values) must be sought.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

307

Decision Making versus Problem Solving as Professional Traditions within Conservation

Within conservation discourse there is a rather important distinction between decision
making  and  problem  solving  and  the  roles  each  plays  in  conservation  practice.  They
represent two quite different modes in conservation work, with correspondingly differ-
ent traditions, discourses and methods. Highlighting this distinction helps understand
the barriers to including economic discourse in heritage conservation discourse.

Problem solving is the traditional focus of conservation (fixing a wall, matching the
correct mortar, determining the history of a building, determining the chronology of
an archaeological site, etc.). Such clearly defined technical issues are best tackled by
experts, whose knowledge and skills are applied according to scientific method or craft
traditions,  and  the  result  sought  is  an  optimal  solution.  The  mentality  of  ‘fixing’  is
perfectly attuned to many problems of material preservation, architectural conserva-
tion,  and  archaeological  site  conservation,  but  poorly  suited  to  issues  arising  from
social phenomena.11

Problem  solving  is  the  province  of  the  technician,  scientist,  or  crafts  worker.
Decision making is the province of the manager or planner. These do not represent
alternative approaches to all conservation issues; rather, they identify two distinct and
different  kinds  of  issues—and  ways  of  thinking—faced  by  conservation  profession-
als.12  Intellectual  and  professional  traditions  of  the  field  predispose  conservation
professionals to look askance at economics discourse to the extent that it goes beyond
the solution of conservation problems and ventures into the less-comfortable sphere of
politics and decision making. This is not a criticism of the conservation field so much
as an observation that the fabric-centred discourse in Western conservation has (until
fairly recently) had the field far more concerned with fixing heritage places than with
probing how and why societies use heritage.13

Conservation has traditionally been dominated by problem solving—and remains
the core—but decision making has become an equally important focus of conservation
work.  Matters  of  public  policy,  cooperation  among  professions,  garnering  popular
support, consulting stakeholders, integrating conservation with development or other
social agendas—all emphasise decision making far more than problem solving. Train-
ing and attitudes in conservation remain firmly rooted in problem solving, and the
confidence and restricted set of analytics associated with it, while decision making is
barely acknowledged to be a core part of conservation practice. Economic discourse, as
a result, is not accepted as core to conservation in practice. Disdain for, or ignorance
of, economic discourses are evidence of the conservation field’s failure (as of yet) to
embrace  fully  the  importance  of  decision  making.  But  conservation  professionals
should be interested in economic discourse for the pragmatic reason that economic
values strongly influence decision making. However reluctant one might be to admit it,
many  decisions  about  conservation  are  made  by  politicians,  bureaucrats,  investors,
owners, and other outsiders to conservation discourse.

308 R. Mason

Be Interested and Beware

The narratives of cultural value and its ‘pricelessness’ create, as argued above, resistance
to  dealing  fully  with  economics  in  conservation,  let  alone  adopting  the  methods  of
academic  economists.  Because  ‘pricing  the  priceless’  is  anathema  in  the  traditional
discourse of heritage, economics, quantitative measurement and financial justification
are  deemed  secondary  to  cultivating  historical  memory,  repairing  fabric,  and  safe-
guarding  culture  on  behalf  of  future  generations.  Intellectually,  this  distinction  has
long been tenuous—there have long been markets for art, after all—sustained in the
interest of creating conservationists’ disciplinary hegemony over heritage. Practically,
this  distinction  is  no  longer  defensible,  though  it  remains  a  durable  part  of  the
conservation field’s culture.14

If the conservation field has kept its distance from economics, how has the econom-
ics field regarded heritage conservation? Heritage conservation is a marginal concern
in  most  economic,  business  and  economic  development  discourses.  Conservation
rarely figures as a significant part of regional or national economies, though contrary
arguments  are  made,15  and  growth  in  such  heritage-reliant  sectors  as  tourism  and
renovation/DIY suggest conservation’s growing importance as an economic phenom-
enon.  For  the  relatively  small  cadre  of  economists  who  study  cultural  activities  as
economic phenomena (‘cultural economists’), however, heritage presents an interest-
ing case. Heritage conservation raises issues of market failure, public-good provision
and  the  measurement  challenges  posed  elsewhere  in  the  cultural  sector  (museums,
plastic  and  performing  arts),16  and  relates  well  to  the  concepts  and  analytics  that
environmental  economists  have  created  to  deal  with  environmental  conservation.
Adopting  the  perspective  of  the  heritage  conservation  field,  this  section  draws  on
insights  from  cultural  economics  to  offer  arguments  for  and  against  conservation
professionals’ engagement with economics discourse and tools.

Why Should those in the Conservation Field be Interested in Economics?

There are many political, philosophical, and practical reasons for those in the conser-
vation field to be interested in economics and economic arguments. Five overarching
points are outlined here.

First, economics is more than markets and profit seeking; it is a social science in the
broadest sense, concerned with a wide range of philosophical and social topics centred
on material well-being and how it is produced, distributed and consumed. Economic
thinking in this sense is exciting, eye-opening, and powerful.17 It can illuminate the
whole range of human and social phenomena. For conservation, economics opens up
another lens on how and why society needs heritage and its conservation and how these
demands can be met.

Second, a matter of conservation philosophy: the core argument draws on values-
based  conservation  theory  and  practice  as  represented,  for  instance,  in  the  Burra
Charter: accounting for more of the values of a heritage site leads to better, more sustain-
able conservation decisions. This should be extended to encompass economic values.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

309

Why? Economic motives and values are among the reasons that societies are willing
and even eager to undertake heritage conservation—the cultural values of heritage are
key for conservation advocates, but are not the most important ones for everybody.
This  is  not  simply  a  case  of  deciding  whether  cultural  or  economic  value  is  more
important—it’s not a zero-sum game. Economic and cultural values of heritage sites
are intimately linked. Tourism development, for instance, promotes cultural values but
in the process also converts them to economic values (and there is something lost in the
translation). Owners of historic homes are interested, in some measure, in sustaining
the  economic  value  of  their  investments  as  well  as  the  aesthetic,  cultural  or  other
personal values that are embodied in the place.

Third, political support and financial support go hand in hand. Among the ‘practi-
cal’ problems faced in conservation is how to build political support (and therefore
financial support) for conservation. Making this argument is a very comfortable arena
for economics. Cost–benefit analysis, for instance, directly addresses the problem.18

Politically, legitimating heritage conservation as a market phenomenon could not be
more important in our market-centred world. Because of the market-oriented turn of
contemporary culture, individuals and institutions from all parts of the political spec-
trum are interested in knowing about the economic dimensions of cultural activities
like conservation. In effect, we in the conservation field are interested in economics
because society (global, national) demands that we be interested. It is not tenable to
ignore economic values, nor is it tenable to study them in isolation from cultural values
(which happens all the time, in the guise of economic impact studies). Quantitative
analyses of the economic aspects of these uses of heritage can be politically influential,
as evidenced by wide use of economic impact studies.

So economic values must be taken seriously if conservation work and decisions are
to be seen as credible by larger society. We cannot act on belief and faith in the impor-
tance of cultural heritage to social well-being on the basis of unquantifiable cultural
values alone—though such feelings are, of course, important in the intellectual and
social history of conservation and remain an important asset in political discourse. We
also need to make rigorous, transparent decisions that consider the many uses society
makes of heritage, including economic and business uses.

Does this work for or against the interests of conservation? There is broad agreement
among  cultural  economists  and  preservation  advocates  that  the  benefits  of  historic
preservation outweigh the costs. More specifically, the economic costs of preservation
are  outweighed  by  the  benefits—both  economic  and  cultural—of  a  robust  historic
preservation sector. Much of the economics literature related to heritage conservation
is concerned either with articulating these benefits, often in quantitative, monetised
terms, or finding those points on the imaginary cost–benefit curve at which the best
marginal improvements to benefit can be made. Scepticism about these conclusions is
healthy (especially with regard to the uneven distribution of preservation benefits), and
adding  critical  voices  to  conservation  discourse  would  strengthen  the  preservation
field’s ability to make the historic built environment a broadly beneficial public good.
Fourth, decentralisation of control over heritage and its conservation (it is not just
the  rich  or  central  governments)  makes  individual  and  group  preferences  more

310 R. Mason

prominent  in  decision  making.  Neoclassical  economics’  focus  on  preferences  of
individuals parallels the recognised need to elicit community views on conservation
priorities. The point of economic studies of heritage conservation need not be calculat-
ing accurate prices, writing sophisticated utility functions, or marshalling large sets of
market  data.  Such  mathematical  precision  and  rigour  is  rarely  necessary  and  often
beside the point when it comes to analysing cultural phenomena (though understand-
ably of keen intellectual interest to some academics and economists). Economic meth-
ods are very useful as a lens on preferences. Such methods are heavily biased towards
the values that are most easily quantified, leaving aside the core, but difficult to quan-
tify, values of heritage places—their cultural significance. So mathematical analyses of
economic value are useful but must be accompanied by other methods, in order that
the full range of values is taken into consideration.

Fifth, economic methods for valuing heritage, used strategically, can give conserva-
tion professionals another set of tools for understanding the social relevance of conser-
vation,  on  which  one  can  build  a  more  socially  beneficial  conservation  practice.
Practically, what can economic methods tell us? There are no universal truths to be
found  in  economic  studies  of  heritage  conservation,  so  one  cannot  overstress  the
importance of studying the particular, situational questions. Economic research can be
very effective in helping answer specific questions about conservation, its efficiency,
and its behaviour vis-à-vis markets. Economic studies can yield better information with
which to make our conservation decisions, since economic values clearly do matter in
many instances. Economics discourse and analytics are less effective at revealing sweep-
ing truths about conservation and its role in society, so we should learn not to demand
such answers. It is difficult to transfer the results of one economic study to another,
different  situation19  or  to  make  grand  generalisations;  but  some  conservation
questions submit well to situational economic analysis, such as: 

characterising the relative benefits of different plans for conserving and developing
a particular heritage site, such as alternative schemes for conserving an archaeolog-
ical site located in an agricultural or urban setting;
understanding  the  economic  and  other  social  effects  of  changing  preservation
policies, such as creating an historic district in a particular neighbourhood;
financing conservation work: whether in the private sector, public sector, or third/
NGO sector, finding the financial resources is often a key issue. Since many projects
depend  on  a  mix  of  financing  from  all  three  sectors,  being  able  to  project  and
appraise  the  needs  of  a  project  require  some  articulation  (and  quantification)  or
financial needs;
protecting  property  rights  and  investments:  measuring  the  effect  of  conservation
actions on property values, for instance, is particularly important in the USA;
debating the effectiveness of public policies: this often involves cost–benefit analysis,
the usefulness of which is vigorously debated.

Politically,  conservation  interests  must  be  willing  to  accept  the  possibility  that
conservation is not always the best decision—trade-offs, being likely and realistic, will
sometimes  require  negotiations  that  result  in  destruction  instead  of  conservation.

●
●
●
●
●
International Journal of Heritage Studies

311

Philosophically, conservation discourse regards this as anathema, and an ideological
opposition to compromise co-exists uneasily with the political reality that imperfect
results are likely. Instead of handling values as a quasi-religious matter, conservation
discourse would benefit by embracing critically the sort of deliberate, rigorous study of
costs, benefits and trade-offs economic discourse can provide.

The way forward, practically, is balancing economic methods with other assessments
of heritage value. Economic values should not be excluded altogether from decision
making; having been included they cannot be allowed to trump all other values. There
are  means  of  achieving  this,  it  is  argued—combining  stated-preference  studies  with
ethnographic analysis; evolving cost–benefit analysis to account for cultural factors—
though  research  to  develop  cost-effective  methods  remains  to  be  done.  This  would
bring a fuller spectrum of a heritage place’s values into the decision-making frame.

Why Should those in the Heritage Conservation Fields Beware of Economics?

Contemporary market-centred society has already put economic values ‘on the table’
with  cultural  values,  whether  one  likes  it  or  not.  This  raises  legitimate  fears  among
conservation advocates. Economic discourse threatens the philosophical and ethical
bases of conservation primarily in two ways.

First,  philosophically,  market-centred  economic  discourse  discounts  the  extra-
market  (cultural)  values  of  heritage  places  and  marginalises  cultural  experts  behind
cultural  valuation.  Second,  business  thinking,  the  main  application  of  economic
discourse, often threatens conservation goals directly because it narrowly frames the
value of conservation in terms of market value. When use values (profits) are allowed
to be part of the discussion, they tend to trump all other considerations—especially
cultural values, which are regarded as ‘soft’ and less influential because they cannot be
measured as easily. The very centrality of markets as a valuation tool limits the applica-
bility of business-driven economic thinking to heritage conservation.

Business thinking, as distinct from economic thinking, presents a more acute threat
to conservation. Business thinking is concerned, more narrowly, with making profits.20
By applying economic thinking to the specific end of profit making, business thinking
seeks  to  accumulate,  not  illuminate.  Clearly,  business  thinking,  when  applied  to
conservation decisions, risks ignoring many important cultural values. Economic and
business thinking are too often conflated, and this paper distinguishes between them
so the conservation field can use both, as appropriate.

A  second  tension  between  business  thinking  and  conservation  stems  from  time-
frame. Business thinking tends to be short term: about the timeframe of the fiscal year,
the financial quarter, or the next election. Conservation policies, actions, and projects,
therefore,  are  fundamentally  concerned  with  long-term  effects.  So  to  proffer  argu-
ments within a short timeframe runs against the grain of conservation discourse.

Economic  thinking  is  a  powerful  way  of  examining  the  relationships  between
conservation and broader society, and if it is painted with the same brush as business
thinking (often regarded as an enemy of conservation) we lose an important tool in the
research  toolbox.  Still,  economic  thinking  incurs  risk  for  conservation.  The  idea  of

312 R. Mason

value  being  determined  by  markets  is  problematic  to  conservation  discourse.  Why?
The reliance of economics on market prices as the lingua franca for value runs contrary
to connoisseurs’ and scholars’ traditional, subjective judgements about heritage value
on aesthetic and historic grounds. The influence of cultural authorities is undermined
by using the market to determine value. Further, neoclassical economics makes too
many assumptions to be a useful lens on heritage on its own. The analytical conve-
niences built into the discourse—rational maximisation of individual utility; the indi-
vidual  actor  as  the  primary  unit  of  study;  the  perfect  information  available  to
individuals;  market  prices  as  the  lingua  franca  of  value—preclude  consideration  of
important cultural values that are difficult to express in market terms. Doubt has been
cast  on  these  assumptions  by  many  scholars,  from  pioneering  anthropologists  to
Nobel-winning behavioural economists.21 Giving economic logic too much influence
undermines the most fundamental, foundational discourse in conservation—the rela-
tivity of cultural values and the reliance on cultural experts in assessing them. Cultural
economists’  sensitive  responses  to  these  dyed-in-the-wool  risks  posed  by  economic
discourse  for  the  cultural  sphere  hold  promise  that  future  research  will  result  in  a
discourse embracing both economic and cultural values.22

Heritage conservation exhibits two kinds of public-good aspects: tangible goods that
are  not  traded  on  markets  (memorials,  for  instance);  and  the  political  public  good
stemming  from  the  conservation  process  (contributing,  for  instance,  to  democratic
debate or collective identity). Since these, by definition, are not priced, market-based
discourse  will  inaccurately  value  it  (i.e.  undervalue  it).  For  cultural  economists  and
conservation  advocates  alike,  these  public-good  aspects  of  heritage  are  the  central
concern. Economists have worked out some elegant, if limited, ways of estimating the
prices  of  these  non-tradable  aspects  of  cultural  goods  (more  about  these  methods
below). For conservation advocates, these public-good aspects are synonymous with
the historical and cultural values at the ethical core of conservation. Through the lens
of  ‘public  goods’  or  ‘public  value’,  economic  and  cultural  discourses  have  a  strong
common basis.

For those outside the conservation fold, economic concerns are often focused on
broad, bottom-line questions like ‘Does preservation pay [generate profits]?’ or ‘Does
government conservation policy or direct investment in conservation yield sufficient
returns?’ These are bad and even foolish questions. They are at once too narrow (focus-
ing  only  on  market  values)  and  too  broad  (it  is  impossible  to  generalise  across  all
conservation projects because the kinds of benefits are so varied). Such questions are
matters of ethical and political belief, open mostly to provide ideologically determined
answers, and it misleads to offer objective answers to them.

Arguments for economic gains tend to be a zero-sum game: a project will be profit-
able or not profitable; the answer is either yes or no; benefits exceed the costs or vice
versa. Weighing conservation against alternative investments on a strictly economic
(market)  basis,  conservation  will  rarely  win.  Further,  pro-market  arguments  of
economic  discourse  are  risky  for  heritage  conservation  to  the  extent  that  they  are
confined to the sphere of market values.23 By fully adopting the market logic of the
bottom line, conservation advocates risk giving up on their strongest, cultural-value

International Journal of Heritage Studies

313

arguments. Values-centred conservation theory protects against this by promoting the
principle that one value should not a priori trump all others.

The insights of the economics field are powerful and promising but they are limited.
Leading cultural economist David Throsby warns of the ‘intellectual imperialism’ of
economics.24  The  totalising  mindset  often  ascribed  to  economists—expressed  most
vividly in the work of Chicago School economists, such as Gary Becker, suggesting that
everything can be priced—is rendered more subtly by many cultural economists, who
regard their work as modifying an economic axiology to fit the complexities of cultural
goods  and  processes  as  opposed  to  swapping  their  axiology  for  the  traditional
Rieglesque axiology of heritage values centred on the multiplicity of cultural values. As
markets become more influential in societies around the globe, economic discourse
becomes more influential.25 The power and limitations of economics are congruent
with the power and limitations of markets as a way of social decision making—they are
great for some things, poor for others. Understanding these limits is central to the task
of using economic discourse to advance heritage conservation.

Conclusions and Directions

Is heritage priceless, or can it reasonably be priced? The answer is: both. Heritage places
bear many kinds of value, and conservation yields diverse benefits—we can describe
these benefits as economic and cultural, or public and private. Taking the lead of econ-
omists, markets play the decisive role in these distinctions. While private values are easy
to price, public values resist quantification and are undermined by expression only in
terms of price. Economic and cultural value regimes express many of the same qualities
of  heritage  places  in  epistemologically  different  ways.  The  difficulties  arising  from
economists’ and culturalists’ different conceptions of value26 have led to some innova-
tive thinking by economists about estimating prices for the full spectrum of heritage
goods,  providing  a  foundation  for  future  research  based  on  collaborations  between
economists, other social scientists, humanities scholars, and conservation experts.

Considering the potentials and limitations of economic discourse, the state of the
cultural  economics  literature,  and  the  particular  challenges  facing  the  conservation
field operating in a market-dominated world, there is cause for enthusiasm and caution
in equal measure about economists’ work on heritage conservation.

While  conclusive,  generalised,  scientifically  verifiable  answers  to  economic  ques-
tions about heritage conservation are elusive, a number of reasonable conclusions can
be drawn about economic aspects of heritage conservation. Conservation has impor-
tant economic dimensions and produces certain economic benefits for both private
actors and the public at large. Preservation projects can be profitable; and preservation
policies can make sound fiscal sense. However, the economic costs and benefits of heri-
tage conservation are too situational to be generalised or extrapolated widely. Making
conclusive, generalised statements about the economics of preservation on the basis of
a great variety of empirical studies is a future goal—especially in the sphere of political
advocacy—but  not  a  current  reality.27  More  germane  to  the  everyday  practice  of
conservation would be a greater ability to compare trade-offs between conservation

314 R. Mason

and  other  development/investment  options  in  particular  situations,  employing
economic methodologies among others.

In light of the broad challenges of values-centred conservation, and the promise of
economics and other social-science research to shed new light on conservation, several
promising research directions can be identified: 

Economic values can also be viewed as a kind of social value spanning heritage and
non-heritage  uses  of  a  site.  As  with  other  non-heritage  values  (environmental,
social), the economic values of a site can be characterized qualitatively. Narrative
description of economic values can be captured readily by commonly used stake-
holder outreach methods and incorporated into conservation-planning models.

● Hybrid methodologies can be devised to gauge both economic and cultural values
of preservation in more sophisticated ways. By combining or layering economic and
cultural  methods,  their  particular  shortcomings  or  blind-spots  can  offset  one
another.  How  do  economic  and  cultural  considerations  interact  when  residents,
owners  or  social  groups  make  specific  decisions  and  trade-offs  about  heritage
conservation activities? Contingent valuation methods address this challenge, and
while their shortcomings are well documented there is room for further innovation
by combining them with the work of other disciplines—for instance coordinating
choice-modelling studies with ethnographic study of cultural and social values to
inform the planning/management of particular sites. Such research, incorporated
into case studies documenting community-level impacts of conservation projects or
policies in both quantitative and qualitative terms, could present a more robust way
of  advocating  the  benefits  of  conservation  to  decision  makers.  A  marriage  of
economic data and ethnographic methods would help understand how heritage and
other cultural factors were weighed against economic considerations. For instance,
many  residents  displaced  from  New  Orleans  by  hurricane  Katrina  have  had  to
decide whether or not to resettle, and these decisions were doubtless influenced by
both economic and cultural factors.

● Can culture be measured? This is an abiding question. The ‘pricelessness’ narrative
in cultural fields suggests not. Despite the perils of quantifying cultural values, some
scholars have created proxies derived from market data or other available sources
(such as participation in arts and cultural activities). Another sensible approach is
creating indicators of cultural change designed to reveal the direction and pace of
change rather than measuring it absolutely.28

● More attention should be focused on the relative value of conservation versus other
kinds of investment. How does one rationalize an investment in preservation as a
better trade-off than an investment, say, in a shopping mall, big-box retail develop-
ment, gambling casino, or a new sports stadium? Anecdotally, such decisions seem
to be debated and made on the basis of one kind of value or another. But reframing
costs and benefits, accounting for environmental and cultural as well as economic
values,  could  change  the  calculus.  Rethinking  cost–benefit  analyses—as  well  as
rigorous  study  of  the  political  frameworks  in  which  these  decisions  are  made—
would help illuminate the politics surrounding conservation decisions.

●
International Journal of Heritage Studies

315

Conservation professionals need to engage heritage as a social phenomenon—includ-
ing its economic dimensions—and be conversant with the methods, theories and logics
of economics. Incorporating economic values into conservation will draw more stake-
holders into conservation discourse and yield more sustainable decisions about heri-
tage conservation (conservation, after all, is a public enterprise aiming to protect values
as  seen  by  the  many,  not  the  few).  Developing  the  economic  discourse  on  heritage
could  make  the  difference  between  conservation  practised  as  a  zero-sum  game  and
conservation and development as a politically engaged kind of planning and design.
Heritage conservation should not remove itself from market logic, the roiling world of
political economy, or the precision (at once illusory and persuasive) of economic valu-
ation methods. Cultural economics makes available to us a range of new methodologies
and insights. Pursuing the types of questions, methods, and research areas elaborated
in  this  article  will  inform  heritage  conservation  decision  making  at  all  levels  and
contribute to the success of conservation as a positive force in contemporary society.

The conservation field suffers, in general, from a lack of intellectual and research
infrastructure  to  take  on  social  dimensions  of  the  contemporary  conservation  field.
Economics is part of this, but by no means the only neglected research area in conser-
vation. While excellent research infrastructure supports the work of physical science
and material conservation, and the historical and cultural aspects of the field, there is
almost none in the realm of social sciences. Economics illuminates more than market
values, and we should use economics as another tool for making good conservation
decisions and understanding the role of heritage in contemporary society.

Acknowledgements

This essay is based on a lecture given in December 2005 at the ‘Built Heritage—Value
Adding Sector’ conference in Helsinki, organised by the National Board of Antiquities
(Finland),  the  National  Heritage  Board  (Sweden)  and  the  Directorate  for  Cultural
Heritage (Norway). I wish to thank the organisers and participants in this event, in
particular  Panu  Lehtovuori,  Maire  Mattinen  and  Sinikka  Joutsalmi.  Erica  Avrami,
Michael  Holleran  and  Greg  Donofrio  kindly  commented  on  an  earlier  version,  and
anonymous  reviewers  offered  a  number  of  constructive  comments  for  which  I  am
grateful. Any errors of omission or commission are solely mine.

Notes

2 [1] This is particularly true in the USA. This article is based mostly on experience with the historic
preservation field in the USA, but draws on the international literature in cultural economics,
environmental economics, and heritage conservation. In US terminology, preservation refers
to the heritage field in its broadest sense, while conservation refers narrowly to material work
to arrest decay of buildings. In this article, the broader, international meaning of ‘conserva-
tion’ is used to stand for heritage conservation or conservation of built heritage, applying to
buildings, districts, sites, towns, and landscapes.

3 [2] There is a growing literature on the economics of conservation, mirroring a growing interest
in  many  quarters  of  the  conservation  field,  its  allied  fields,  and  societies  at  large  in  the
economic dimensions of conservation and heritage. The economic literature on conservation

316 R. Mason

is  substantial  and  diverse.  Reviews  of  the  literature  can  be  found  in  Mason, Economics  and
Heritage Conservation; and idem, Economics and Historic Preservation. Many of the basic issues
of heritage conservation economics have been established, based largely on work in the paral-
lel  field  of  environmental  economics  and  benefiting  from  advances  in  cultural  economics
focused on the performing and visual arts. Not surprisingly, the existing literature is weighted
towards advocacy studies—those with an underlying commitment to advocating the cause of
heritage conservation. This is changing. As yet, there are few analyses with enough critically
distant but sympathetic questioning of conservation’s role in society. This literature is embed-
ded in a larger debate about valuing culture, which in turn relates to the cultural dynamics of
globalisation and the dominance (in most societies) of market discourse and business think-
ing in relation to the public and private spheres of life. Ackerman and Heinzerling, Priceless;
Harrison and Huntington, Culture Matters; Hutter and Throsby, Beyond Price; and Slater and
Tonkiss, Market Society, provide different perspectives on this.

4 [3] The use of ‘beware’ is intended to convey ‘be aware of’ and also ‘be wary of’.
5 [4] Darvill  in  Cooper  et  al.,  Managing  Archaeology;  de  la  Torre,  Assessing  Values  in  Heritage
Conservation;  Walker  and  Marquis-Kyle, The  Illustrated  Burra  Charter;  Mason,  ‘Theoretical
and Practical Arguments for Values-centered Preservation’; Mathers et al., Heritage of Value,
Archaeology  of  Renown  (essays  by  Darvill  and  Clark,  in  particular);  Pearson  and  Sullivan,
Looking after Heritage Places.
‘Value’ is used here in the sense of ‘characteristic’ or ‘quality’; not as a synonym of ‘ethic’ or
‘principle’.

6 [5]

7 [6] Research value—the capacity of a place to yield future information—is another. The literature
on a plural understanding of values as the basis of conservation began with the art historian Alois
Riegl (see ‘The Modern Cult of Monuments’), and discussion of one or another particular heri-
tage values has long been part of conservation discourse. See the Venice Charter, for instance.
8 [7] This terminology is not to be confused with the Marxian framework of use and exchange value,
central to the seminal works of Harvey, The Urbanization of Capital, and Logan and Molotch,
Urban  Fortunes.  Though  these  authors  share  an  interest  in  describing  the  different  values
ascribed to a particular place, they differentiate the two types of values by their social uses under
capitalism: use values are consumed, exchange values are traded. In this paper, ‘use’ and ‘non-
use’ distinguish those values priceable in markets (use values) from those for which markets do
not  exist  (non-use  values).  Note  that  this  usage  differs  from  other  works  dealing  with  the
centrality of ‘value’ and ‘valuation’ in heritage conservation, notably Darvill’s (in Cooper et al.,
Managing Archaeology; and in Mathers et al., Heritage of Value, Archaeology of Renown).

9 [8] Typologies of the value of heritage sites in economics are not monolithic. They break down
the  overall  value  of  a  place  into  different  fractions,  though  according  to  a  different  set  of
distinctions  from  those  of  cultural  values,  and  creating  categories  that  ultimately  will  be
expressed  in  terms  of  price.  Economists’  main  distinction,  discussed  below,  is  between  use
and  non-use  values;  distinctions  within  non-use  values  are  common,  such  as  bequest  and
option values. See Frey, ‘The Evaluation of Cultural Heritage’; Mason, Economics and Heritage
Conservation; and Throsby, Economics and Culture.

10 [9] By definition there is no market for a public good, although prices can be estimated by creat-
ing  hypothetical  markets.  These  economic  concepts  of  public  and  private  are  yet  more
complex—cf. discussions about the mixed-good or merit-good nature of heritage conserva-
tion. See Mazzanti, ‘Cultural Heritage as Multi-dimensional, Multi-value and Multi-attribute
Economic Good’.

11[10] Economist David Throsby explains the connection between the two sides of this epistemolog-
ical cleavage around value by describing conservation as resulting in flows of both economic
and cultural benefits. Throsby, Economics and Culture.

12[11] Mason, ‘Fixing Historic Preservation’.
13[12] A third domain would be interpretation, which is more purely in the realm of cultural values

and not taken up here in order to limit the length of the paper.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

317

14[13] This  characterisation  is  overly  general—some  conservation  professionals  indeed  have  been
quite concerned with broad economic and political dynamics—but the exceptions prove the
rule,  and  conservation  discourse  remains  quite  focused  on  matters  of  fabric  and  technical
problem solving. Surveys of the history of conservation reveal our field’s original and abiding
interest in historic fabric (Choay, The Invention of the Historic Monument; Hosmer, Presence of
the Past; idem, Preservation Comes of Age; Jokilehto, A History of Architectural Conservation);
many of the field’s efforts to engage in broader social processes (such as political decisions and
cultural  crises)  have  been  animated  by  proselytising  the  need  for  conservation  rather  than
analysing its place in society.

15[14] Consider  the  Burra  Charter,  for  example,  the  laudable  and  progressive  effort  of  Australia
ICOMOS advocating conservation planning that takes account of a broader range of heritage
values  than  traditionally  admitted:  economic  values  are  still  excluded,  defined  a  priori  as
secondary to the values making up cultural significance.

16[15] Listokin  et  al.,  ‘The  Contributions  of  Historic  Preservation  to  Housing  and  Economic

Development’.

17[16] McCarthy et al., Gifts of the Muse.
17[17] This idea has been popularised by the recent bestsellers Freakanomics (Levitt and Dubner) and

The Economic Naturalist (Frank).

18[18] Applying cost–benefit analysis to conservation remains controversial, for the same reasons it
has  engendered  so  much  debate  in  application  to  environmental  issues:  cultural  values  are
resistant to pricing, and introduce methodological problems into CBA frameworks.
See eftec [Economics for the Environment Consultancy Ltd], 2005, Valuation of the Historic
Environment, available from www.eftec.co.uk [accessed 2 June 2008].

19[19]

20[20] Thanks to Michael Hutter for driving this point home to me.
21[21] Mauss,  The  Gift;  D.  Kahneman,  ‘Maps  of  Bounded  Rationality:  A  Perspective  on  Intuitive

Judgment and Choice’, Nobel Prize lecture, 8 December 2002.

22[22] de la Torre, Assessing Values in Heritage Conservation.
23[23] This risk can be managed, however. Some economic methodologies, outlined below, include
provisions for measuring extra-market values. And as Donovan Rypkema has demonstrated,
preservation can be a profit-making venture. Rypkema, The Economics of Historic Preservation.

Slater and Tonkiss, Market Society.

24[24] Throsby, Economics and Culture.
25[25]
26[26] Klamer and Zuidhof, ‘The Values of Cultural Heritage’.
27[27] For an extended discussion of benefits transfer, see Navrud and Ready, Environmental Value

Transfer.

28[28] D.  Kahneman,  ‘Maps  of  Bounded  Rationality:  A  Perspective  on  Intuitive  Judgment  and

Choice’, Nobel Prize lecture, 8 December 2002.

References

Ackerman,  F.  and  L.  Heinzerling.  Priceless:  On  Knowing  the  Price  of  Everything  and  the  Value  of

Nothing. New York: New Press, 2004.

Choay,  F.  The  Invention  of  the  Historic  Monument  (Allégorie  du  patrimoine,  1992).  Translated  by

Lauren M. O’Connell. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Cooper,  M.  A.,  A.  Firth,  J.  Carman  and  D.  Wheatley,  eds.  Managing  Archaeology.  London:

Routledge, 1995.

de  la  Torre,  M.,  ed.  Assessing  Values  in  Heritage  Conservation.  Los  Angeles:  Getty  Conservation

Institute, 2002.

Frank, R. H. The Economic Naturalist: In Search of Explanations for Everyday Enigmas. New York:

Basic Books, 2007.

Frey, B. S. ‘The Evaluation of Cultural Heritage: Some Critical Issues’. In Economic Perspectives on

Cultural Heritage, edited by M. Hutter and I. Rizzo. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997.

318 R. Mason

Harrison, L. E. and S. P. Huntington, eds. Culture Matters: How Values Shape Human Progress. 1st

ed. New York: Basic Books, 2000.

Harvey, D. The Urbanization of Capital. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985.
Hosmer, C. B. Jr. Presence of the Past: A History of the Preservation Movement before Williamsburg.

New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1965.

———.  Preservation  Comes  of  Age:  From  Williamsburg  to  the  National  Trust,  1926–1949.  2  vols.
Charlottesville:  University  Press  of  Virginia/Preservation  Press,  National  Trust  for  Historic
Preservation, 1981.

Hutter, M. and D. Throsby, eds. Beyond Price: Value in Culture, Economics, and the Arts. New York:

Cambridge University Press, 2007.

Jokilehto, J. A History of Architectural Conservation. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999.
Klamer, A. and P.-W. Zuidhof. ‘The Values of Cultural Heritage: Merging Cultural and Economic
Appraisals’.  In  Economics  and  Heritage  Conservation:  A  Meeting  Organized  by  the  Getty
Conservation Institute, December 1998, edited by R. Mason. Los Angeles: Getty Conservation
Institute, 1999.

Levitt, S. and S. Dubner. Freakanomics: A Rogue Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything.

New York: William Morrow, 2005.

Listokin, D., B. Listokin and M. Lahr. ‘The Contributions of Historic Preservation to Housing and

Economic Development’. Housing Policy Debate 9, no. 3 (1998): 431–78.

Logan, J. R. and H. L. Molotch. Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy of Place. Berkeley: University

of California Press, 1987.

Mason, R., ed. Economics and Heritage Conservation: A Meeting Organized by the Getty Conservation

Institute, December 1998. Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 1999.

———. ‘Fixing Historic Preservation: A Constructive Critique of “Significance”’. Places, a Forum of

Environmental Design 9, no. 3 (1998): 64–71.

———. Economics and Historic Preservation: A Guide and Review of the Literature. Washington, DC:

Brookings Institution, Metropolitan Policy Program, 2005.

———. ‘Theoretical and Practical Arguments for Values-centered Preservation’. CRM: The Journal

of Heritage Stewardship 9, no. 3 (1998): 21–48.

Mathers,  C.,  T.  Darvill  and  B.  Little,  eds.  Heritage  of  Value,  Archaeology  of  Renown:  Reshaping

Archaeological Assessment and Significance. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2004.

Mauss,  M.  The  Gift;  Forms  and  Functions  of  Exchange  in  Archaic  Societies.  Translated  by  Ian

Cunnison, with an introduction by E. E. Evans-Pritchard. London: Cohen & West, 1966.

Mazzanti, M. ‘Cultural Heritage as Multi-dimensional, Multi-value and Multi-attribute Economic
Good:  Toward  a  New  Framework  for  Economic  Analysis  and  Valuation’.  Journal  of  Socio-
Economics 31 (2002): 529–58.

McCarthy, K. F. et al. Gifts of the Muse: Reframing the Debate about the Benefits of the Arts. Santa

Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2004.

Navrud,  S.  and  R.  Ready,  eds.  Environmental  Value  Transfer:  Issues  and  Methods.  Dordrecht:

Springer/Kluwer, 2007.

Pearson, M. and S. Sullivan. Looking after Heritage Places: The Basics of Heritage Planning for Managers,

Landowners and Administrators. Carlton, Victoria: Melbourne University Press, 1995.

Riegl, A. ‘The Modern Cult of Monuments: Its Character and its Origin’. Translated by K. W. Forster

and D. Ghirardo. Oppositions 25 (1982): 21–51.

Rypkema, D. The Economics of Historic Preservation: A Community Leader’s Guide. Washington, DC:

National Trust for Historic Preservation, 2005.

Slater, D. and F. Tonkiss. Market Society: Markets and Modern Social Theory. Malden, MA: Blackwell,

2001.

Throsby, D. Economics and Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Walker, M. and P. Marquis-Kyle. The Illustrated Burra Charter: Good Practices for Heritage Places.

Burwood, Victoria: Australia ICOMOS, 2004.


