International Journal of Cultural Property (2009) 16:25–48. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2009 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739109090055

Presenting Past Landscapes: An Approach
to Visual Landscape Integrity as a Tool
for Archeological Heritage Management
Saruhan Mosler*

Abstract: Archaeological sites are composed of unique, complex landscape
settings including architectural remains, visually and spatially interrelated
spaces, and ecologies with topographical features and landforms framing them.
Today, they are subject to many pressures caused by developmental changes as
well as improper conservation and planning strategies. One reason is that
heritage conservation is still heavily focused on architectural features and
less on the landscape setting. Wider landscape components set an authentic
backdrop for cultural heritage and make the setting vivid and legible.
Concentrating on this trend, this article explores the visual values of
archaeological sites from the tripartite conceptualization view of visual
landscape integrity, namely considering the archaeological landscape setting as
an artifact, three-dimensional space, and scenery. Using the archaeological site
complex of Bergama in Western Turkey as a case study, I propose a visual
landscape–oriented approach as a tool for the sustainable conservation and
presentation of heritage sites in the process of cultural resource management.

INTRODUCTION

Archaeological sites and monuments, embedded and scattered along the coun-
tryside, peri-urban or urban spaces, have dominated Mediterranean cultural land-
scapes for thousands of years. Cultural landscapes in these regions have sustained
intensive human activity for 10,000 years; it is difficult to find any place which
epitomizes untouched nature in these regions.1 Yet, with its rich biodiversity,
the Mediterranean region of Turkey still encompasses unspoiled coastal regions

*Writtle School of Design, Writtle College, Essex. Email: saruhan.mosler@writtle.ac.uk

25

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

26

SARUHAN MOSLER

with seascapes, lakes and wetlands, mountainous zones with various ecologies,
endemic plants and wildlife, and, above all, many unexcavated archaeological
sites.

In Turkey, conservation and presentation of archaeological sites and monu-
ments began with the development of modern archaeology in the late nineteenth
century. From that time on, archaeological techniques and subjects of conserva-
tion have been gradually changing and developing at archaeological sites. Famous
ancient cities have been unearthed, and axes of ancient towns and important mon-
uments have been identified, and in some cases impressively restored.2 Neverthe-
less, institutional archaeological activities have mostly focused on architectural
heritage conservation, with the landscape setting with its visual and ecological au-
thenticity receiving little attention. However, archaeological sites are located in
unique complex landscape settings composed of architectural remains, visually and
spatially interrelated spaces, and ecologies with topographical features, framed by
landforms. Their built environments are always connected to a particular urban
or rural landscape with a spatial and visual dependence. Anagnostopoulos3 states
that the relationship between any true work of architecture and the environment
in which it will be placed is not merely a matter of scenery; it is a complex and
deeply organic relationship stemming from the overall visual, functional, and struc-
tural dependence of the building on its site, a dependence that is ecological in
character.

Historic landscapes are one major element of cultural landscapes: They exhibit
enormous variety, depth, and sensitivity; they are places where people live, work,
or take part in recreational activities.4 These landscapes, in their broadest and most
useful sense, include aspects of historic features that are not archaeological; they
include topographical formations, patterns of land use systems, settlements, fauna
and flora, as well as sociocultural values, traditions, and identities. In this sense,
the complexity of historic landscapes cannot be reduced to artifacts and the land-
scape is more than its historic elements.5 Conversely, cultural and natural re-
sources in cultural landscapes are faced with many developmental pressures caused
by changes in land use such as agriculture, industrialization, urbanization, ex-
panded areas of buildup areas, and mass tourism. Today, the cultural heritage of
the countryside appears to be packed into urban peripheries, agricultural lands,
new settlements, and tourist regions. Although cultural heritage is protected in a
site-specific manner where the built items they contain are displayed, places of
natural significance are preserved traditionally as nature zones and national parks
on a regional scale. However, archaeological landscapes as a whole are virtually
unprotected by designations. Demarcating visual boundaries, in turn, produces
spatial and visual fragmentations in the physical environment of cultural land-
scapes where new developments in land use and tourism compete for space. This
leads to the loss of material and immaterial information about the setting and its
culture as well as to the loss of visual and spatial relationships between sites and
landscapes. This recognition forces specialists including archaeologists, conserva-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

27

tionists, planners, designers, and resource managers to rethink integrated ap-
proaches to natural and cultural heritage and land use developments on urban
and rural scales. The result has been an evolving process that spurs new scientific
know-how for preserving and using landscapes.6

Landscapes should be considered in terms of forms, functions, processes, and
context.7 Salter refers to the forms in landscapes and defines cultural landscape as
“that segment of earth space which lies between the viewer’s eye and his/her ho-
rizon.”8 It is essential to emphasize all forms and structures among the various
components of landscapes to define the spatial and visual interfaces of the con-
served heritage. Although site-specific heritage presentation contains forms and
functions, archaeological landscapes possess context and processes which make
them vivid and extremely intersighted. Therefore, the optimal approach unites the
attributes of past and present in an integrative landscape conception, amalgam-
ating historical, visual, and spatial features. To set the strategies for a coherent
management plan, we should understand these changing spaces with their dy-
namic natures, defining their character within their environments. Focusing on
these objectives, this article explores the visual qualities and place values of ar-
chaeological heritage with a tripartite conceptualization of landscape integrity, con-
sidering the archaeological landscape setting as artifact, architectonic space, and
scenery. The cultural heritage complex of Bergama in Western Aegean Turkey is
used as a case study.

VISUAL LANDSCAPE INTEGRITY

After two decades of focused investigations into the phenomenon of heritage, the
field of heritage studies is firmly established in academics and now has a recog-
nized and solid theoretical foundation,9 as indicated by the broad spectrum of
scholarly heritage research in historical, social, cultural, and architectural fields.
However, heritage sites as a contemporary visual space assessed within their phys-
ical environments have remained underexplored. In particular, research into the
visual aspects of heritage landscape and site presentation from a landscape ap-
proach is still lacking today.

From a landscape approach, heritage sites are considered within their wider land-
scape settings where they directly or indirectly interrelate and affect other cultural
resources, ecologies, settlements, and people through visual attributes. Jakle refers
to particular places that are intended to be picturesque.10 This creates distinctness
in a wider setting, which is the critical factor distinguishing heritage landscapes
from single monuments, constructed parks, galleries, and museums, making them
unique, vivid, and evocative. Regarding this point, Garden points out the problem
of analyzing heritage sites without sites and the consequential effects of sameness
and homogeneity.11 When a sense of place evokes a feeling of homogeneity, where
one seems to see “the same old stones in every archaeological site,” the place lacks

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

28

SARUHAN MOSLER

its own quality of character and identity. Creating memorable physical settings to
engender space quality is also often debated by landscape designers.

Tripartite conceptualization of visual landscape integrity including artifacts, three-
dimensional space and scenery is a useful way of grasping the interplay and inte-
gration of landscape values in heritage landscapes. These three factors make up the
main visual characteristics of a heritage site and allow for an integrating landscape
approach. On one hand, this approach helps viewers (visitors, tourists, and lay-
people) perceive the sense of place and comprehend the significance of the site,
providing for a better visual and spatial orientation in the site. On the other hand,
it makes it possible for researchers, planners, stakeholders, and site managers as well
as locals and authorities interested in heritage sites to understand the character of
the sites, values, potential, and possibilities for sustainable conservation. In this re-
spect, it is essential to point out two aspects to comprehend the framework of this
approach. First, a landscape approach compromises visual and tangible compo-
nents of the landscapes, focusing on the physical and spatial interrelations of spaces
linked with cultural heritage sites. Second, it provides a framework for spatial plan-
ning and can be applied to every heritage landscape where sufficient archaeological
material exists which is accessible to the public.

In fact, landscape is subject to change, because of its highly evolutionary na-
ture as well as the changes that human beings have forced and continue to force
on it to create a livable world.12 A place retains its meaning to the extent that
people continue to expect certain satisfactions (or dissatisfactions) implicit in
behaviors contained.13 The sense of place from spatial, architectural, social, and
psychological viewpoints has been researched by different authors.14 Lynch writes:
“Sense depends on spatial form and quality, but also on the culture, tempera-
ment, status, experience, and current purpose of the observer.”15 Lambrick ar-
gues that perceived importance can be closely related to the quantity and quality
of detailed information, but is above all connected to its current appearance; in
fact, it is more connected to the perceived environment than to its authentic
character.16

Today, apart from the scientific and didactic values of archaeological sites, pub-
lic use and recreation (in other words, access and tourism) dominate Aegean ar-
chaeological sites. The activity of archaeological site visitation has created an
ancillary tourism sector, which tends to appear as an obligatory component of
holiday packages. Visitors are fascinated by ensembles from ancient times that are
visible, touchable, and legible.17 To create an authentic staging for visitors, it is
necessary to identify the scenic and archaeological values, define the boundaries
of the space, and emphasize the selected characteristics. To improve the quality of
the visitor experience, however, minor urban design interventions that accentuate
the physical landscape setting are necessary. Such beneficial settings can offer choices
of routes, offer diversity of experience, and encourage exploration. This increases
modes of mobility and can contribute to engaging the interest and attention of
the visitors.18 Above all, it can achieve sustainable conservation of archaeological

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

29

sites and landscapes as an essential part of archaeological resource management.
The planning objectives encompass a wide range of aspects including landscap-
ing, preservation, nature protection, local prosperity, and land use.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL LANDSCAPES AS ARTIFACT

Considering the landscapes as artifacts points to the physical aging of heritage
sites, which display historically and archeologically significant tangible and intan-
gible features modified by human action. It refers to both constant (past) features
that have been conserved as well as changing (contemporary) values that are per-
fectly integrated into the landscapes. On one level, the concept of artifact signifies
the substantial and historical values of the heritage landscape that should be pre-
served. On another level, it refers to the esteemed values of heritage appreciated as
objects of art. This concept helps us grasp how heritage sites work and what they
do over time (the evolution process), to understand how both heritage and heri-
tage sites change and grow over time.19 Archaeological sites combine different con-
cepts and elements beneath their aged and weathered surface. They are made,
reshaped, or modified by human culture and historical circumstances; each one
adapts itself to its local physical setting. In this sense, it is clear that earlier com-
munities also had their own perception of landscapes that occupied the same space
as the landscapes of today.

Landscapes provide essential information about all vestiges of human exis-
tence. Archaeological remains of cities, ancient quarries, burial mounds, and routes
as well as human-induced topographical formations such as river basins and veg-
etation formations including maquis, forests, and olive groves are all indicators of
the evolutionary character of the landscape. In nature particular natural forms are
found that have inspired human creation since the beginning of time and have
thus become the loci of meanings projected by the human mind.20 Landscapes
have been reorganized either consciously or subconsciously for a variety of reli-
gious, economic, social, political, environmental, or symbolic purposes. Land-
scape elements such as mountains, rocks, springs, rivers, and lakes were assumed
to be sacred in the ancient Hellenistic and Roman cultures. They were associated
with particular divinities and allowed the population to come into contact with
the supernatural.21 Some features have hardly changed over the centuries. Many
still dominate the Mediterranean terrain where monuments make explicit refer-
ence to features in the wider landscape. They possess material and immaterial in-
formation about the past and present, which interweave in real, perceived, and
symbolic ways.22 How landscapes are perceived and interpreted has defined the
structure of landscapes and changed land use patterns.23

Integrated heritage conservation is strongly linked to the artifact concept. Here,
conservation is aimed at raising the interest in sustainable cultural landscape pres-
ervation, reducing the developmental pressures on heritage sites and landscapes.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

30

SARUHAN MOSLER

This should refer to past and present aspects. Additionally, this is aimed at under-
scoring the historical and natural values and enhancing the authenticity of the
space within its landscape that makes it attractive and interesting for visitors.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL LANDSCAPES AS THREE-DIMENSIONAL SPACE

Three-dimensional space refers to the spatial distribution of objects (sites) and
locational qualities. Higuchi calls this depth, which is an effect of a continuous
change in the surface and of atmospheric perspective or the overlapping of ob-
jects viewed.24 This is created with the help of a continuous background, which
assists in defining boundaries and enclosures in a space. In a visual sequence, space
generates modes of movements. There are different ways in which these forms
take shape in landscapes. Principally, architectonic forms occur, mostly as human
creation, throughout the evolution of places and landscapes over time. Because of
the complexity of the landscapes and the nature of the archaeological remains,
some of these forms can be better perceived than viewed in the wider setting. The
so-called landscape room25 is a perceptual unit bounded by a floor, walls, and a
ceiling. This constitutes the interior space of the site. In the wider landscape, it
appears where topographical features such as mountains and rocks, vegetation,
and sky frame the heritage site, providing a monumental backdrop. The local set-
tlements, their vernacular architecture, traditional land use and contemporary so-
ciocultural aspects shape the image of the space. Additionally, a heritage site is a
complex social space constructed by the interaction and perceptions of individu-
als who visit the site.26 Without a sociocultural framework, space has no qualities
of its own; the interaction between nature and culture reveals the cognitive, ma-
terial, and functional aspects.27

Spatially, integral spaces constitute exterior and interior divisions. In consider-
ing the architectonic space, two types of ordering systems can be identified: One
is characterized by the horizontal and another by vertical forms in the landscape.
This shapes our perception of depth in space. Spatial separations such as barriers
or boundaries between these divisions can vary in form, and the structure of the
material determines the character of the space. It could be a wall, a gate, a mon-
ument, or even a hedge or groups of trees. The visual definitions can be intensi-
fied by differentiating interior from exterior spaces or by delineating rooms with
a structure though the use of materials different from those found on the site.28
Ideally, exterior space should be consonant with interior space to provide fluxes,
spatial and structural sequences among the spaces in heritage landscapes. This cre-
ates space experience and generates amazement. Barriers and shelters for protec-
tion, planned routes for visitation of the site, and design of infrastructural units
such as parking lots, entrances/exits, visitor information centers, and refreshment
utilities enhance the place quality, help orient the visitor, and imply the connec-
tions between components of the heritage landscape. In a broader sense, organiz-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

31

ing appropriate space for visitation in a visual sequence allows people to move
freely in archaeological sites.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL LANDSCAPES AS SCENERY

The concept of scenery simply refers to the visible form and quality, and the dual-
istic relationship between the physical state of a heritage site and the viewer’s per-
ception. A view is a powerful stimulus; it comforts and inspires. Views generate
emotions, and expand the spectrum of imagination with their aesthetic values.Views
and panoramas contribute immeasurably to the character of the site where the viewer
stands and, in turn, bestow those same characteristics on the viewer. In a similar man-
ner, views represent all that the place and landscapes represents. Landscape consists
of visible and perceived environments constructed both materially and perceptu-
ally.29 Tuan writes that landscape is an image, a construct of the mind and feeling.30
It is critical to address the physical landscape in its visual fashion to achieve ade-
quate and in-depth coverage of its complexity. The visual contact of heritage mon-
uments within their landscape setting is of essence; it enables the viewer to grasp,
perceive and interact with the tangible and intangible values. Even if inaccessible, his-
toric landscape features may constitute a very valuable visual amenity in the wider
landscape or for the setting of historic buildings. Initial eye contact begins at the en-
trance of the site. Jakle describes it as a sense of announcement that makes it excit-
ing.31 Sometimes, a view comes into sight unexpectedly in the panorama exposed.
Heritage sites have strong visual identities as a whole variety of present and past
visions are encapsulated in the physical place. They are reflected as panoramic views,
landmarks, viewpoints, and visual units. Archaeological sites within their landscapes
present contradictory readings, including ideas of permanence and decay, domina-
tion and resistance, stability, and mobility. Additionally, the areas of visibility are con-
nected to the topographical features and distances between viewer and object.

The term “visual envelope”32 refers to a complex web of visibility that encloses
the area of a site within its landscape. Significant views enter the psyche of a place
to be remembered long after other details are forgotten. In a way, views represent
all that the place itself represents. Archaeological sites are also mostly perceived in
relation to their scenic qualities. In this sense, contemporary views of archaeolog-
ical sites within their landscapes are strictly connected to the presentation of the
heritage, which is in fact a delicate issue. The picturesque quality of the landscape
and its aesthetic values obtain a subjective approach that is mostly dependent on
current aesthetic values.33 They constitute a unity with rich visual qualities, de-
spite the selective power of the eye. Visual continuity during perception can be
broken by visual barriers such as cultural elements, topographical features, and
plant cover. Every archaeological ensemble has a unique shape, color, or arrange-
ment that facilitates making vividly identified, powerfully structured, highly use-
ful images of the environment. Hence they uphold a constantly evolving and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

32

SARUHAN MOSLER

complex unity of perceptions.34 Higuchi focuses on the visual elements of land-
scape that grasp the nature of the setting as a visible spectacle and spatial structure.35

THE CASE STUDY: THE CULTURAL HERITAGE

COMPLEX OF BERGAMA

The cultural heritage complex of Bergama is located in the northwest of the Ae-
gean region of Turkey where the Madra Mountains in the north and the Yunt
Mountains in the south expand into the Bakırçay Plain (Figure 1). The town of
Bergama, located 110 km north of ^Izmir and 30 km from the coast, has a popu-

FIGURE 1. The location of the town of Bergama.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

33

lation of 60,000 that increases to 120,000 when including the surrounding dis-
tricts. It lies in an area surrounded by agricultural land with pine forests on the
high Kozak Yaylası (plateau) and the Pergamon archaeological site to the northeast.
The region has a richly diverse natural and cultural resource record created
through the long-term interaction between humans and their landscape on urban
and rural scales.36 Bergama and its environs epitomize unique living cultural-
archaeological landscapes shaped by constant human intervention. For thousands
of years, these landscapes have been used and reshaped for their resources and
appreciated for hallowed and picturesque values in their changing forms. Today
cultural heritage, as remnants of these past cultures, affects the image and func-
tion of the region in the dynamic tourism industry.

Visible archaeological sites and monuments of Bergama’s cultural heritage com-
plex are scattered around different locations in the town (Figure 2).37 The archae-
ological site of Pergamon with the Acropolis and the steep Hellenistic theatre,
landmarks of the modern urban landscape of Bergama, loom over the city; the
Roman Temple, the so-called Red Hall named after the red brick building mate-
rial, formerly located in the lower part of ancient Pergamon, is today found in a
congested urban district of Bergama. The Sanctuary of Asklepion is situated in
the southwest part of town, adjacent to the military zone.

The ancient thermal spa settlement of Allianoi is situated approximately 20 km
to the northeast of Bergama, surrounded by forest, agricultural land, and the soon-
to-be activated water reservoir of Yortanlı Dam. Additionally, according to recent
research done around the Pergamon, the existence of other ancient settlements
related to the Pergamon including Perperene, Atarneus, and Elaia (the harbor city
of Pergamon) has been identified.38 What makes these cultural landscapes remark-
able is the spatial and visual interrelations between nature and culture. Apart from
rich ancient remains dispersed throughout the rural and urban landscapes, the
region is famous for its thermal water springs, gold quarries, and the biggest pine
nut forest (Pinus pinea) in the Aegean region, which has been exploited for its
edible pine nuts since ancient times. (Figure 3).

When we speak of living cultural landscapes, we can think of Bergama and its
environs, with their natural and cultural resources as the outcome of constant
human interaction in all parts of different landscape settings. Uses of land as well
as cultural and natural resources have been part of this culture for thousands of
years. Treatment in thermal water springs has been a long-standing tradition in
Western Anatolian cultures. Water springs of three well-known ancient healing
complexes—the Sanctuaries of Asklepion, the spa settlement of Allianoi, and the
so-called Cleopatra’s Thermal Bath—can still be visited and partially used today.
Every year, the ancient Theatre of Asklepion hosts thousands of people in for fes-
tivals and concerts. In Basilica, in the so-called Red Hall, annual religious ceremo-
nies including pilgrimages take place. How are these sites perceived in the landscape
and what are the visual aspects that make these particular places interesting? How
can recreation and visual amenity be supported by underpinning the key ele-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

34

SARUHAN MOSLER

FIGURE 2. The town of Bergama and the archaeological sites of the Pergamon, Acropolis
and Asklepion.

ments of the region? With the help of a tripartite conceptualization of visual land-
scape integrity, values and characteristics of the sites can be identified to propose
an integrated management plan.

URBAN LANDSCAPE OF BERGAMA AND THE

ANCIENT CITY OF PERGAMON

Historically, the area occupied by the ancient city has been significant. The fa-
mous city of Pergamon was founded on the hills of Kale Mountain in 281 bc and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

35

FIGURE 3. Pine nut forest Pinus pinea in the surroundings of Bergama.

became the capital city of the Attalid Kingdom in the Hellenistic era. In the Roman
period, under the rule of Trajan and Hadrian (the first half of the second century
ad), with the removal of fortifications, Pergamon stretched down to the lower
level of the Bakırçay Plain, where the town of Bergama is located today.39 It be-
came one of the most important cities of Roman Empire in Asia Minor. Various
ancient monuments and remains, embedded in the urban landscape, have been
traced back to this period.

Today, the Acropolis is visible from every point in the town. At the main square,
the impression of depth that the archaeological landscape evokes is even stronger.
Nevertheless, because of uncontrolled urbanization and inadequate preservation
strategies, they face pressures on different levels. The ruins of the theater in the
lower part of Pergamon has been threatened for years by outskirt areas that have
been built up overnight without proper permission, whereas the Roman Sta-
dium has already been partly demolished to build residential districts. The Red
Hall lies in between a commercial district congested with buildings and a bus
and car parking lot on one side and old Ottoman district on the other (Fig-
ure 4). Thus there is a rich legacy of natural and built heritage in urban Ber-
gama, but unfortunately only the latter receives any institutional and municipal
protection. Apart from the archaeological heritage, old districts with vernacular
houses, mosques, and other buildings from the Ottoman Period that could have

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

36

SARUHAN MOSLER

FIGURE 4. The Red Hall between modern buildings in the background and old Ottoman
houses in the foreground.

been overwhelmed by decay and demolition contribute to the visual historical
features of Bergama.

The Red Hall is located between a congested modern area and the old Ottoman
town. Although the three-dimensional space of the temple site has a strong visual
depth with the Acropolis in the background, it has been isolated and fenced off
rather than integrated as part of the larger urban landscape (Figure 5). The
exterior spaces of the site did not contribute to a qualitative and harmonious vis-
ibility. Tourists who visit the site perceive the remains, but at the same time con-
ceptualize the location visually in its wider landscape. In this respect, exterior spaces
are also interrelated within the site; they create the three-dimensional space whose
presence attracts visitors. They should therefore be displayed in the context of the
urban setting.

Recently, these spaces were renewed and enhanced in an integrated streetscape;
commercially used historical buildings along the site were restored; pavements and
streets were paved with brick and granite, underlining the archaeological site
and historical urban landscape (Figure 6). Additionally, by paving, illuminating,
and planting trees and bushes to frame the Red Hall, the entrance of the site was
laid out as a park with places to sit and rest. The temple building attracts the eye,
whereas the streetscape directs and contains the view. To integrate an urban her-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

37

FIGURE 5. The Red Hall.

itage context, a visual tie should be developed for the visitor to experience while
moving in search of scenery. This can engender a strong feeling of visual conti-
nuity and depth in the historical urban texture.

In the urban context of Bergama, it would be possible to create urban tourism
in which visitors could saunter along the streets, combining the images of open
spaces with heritage sites, squares, and parks. An alternative path providing full
engagement with the past and present spaces, passing along the heritage settings,
commercial streets and bazaars, the Red Hall, and the old Ottoman district, could
ultimately lead to the Acropolis. Traffic could be regulated by declaring the heri-
tage districts a pedestrian zone with limited vehicular access; in particular, the bus
and car parking lot should be moved to another area. Through the streets of the
old town, the beautiful façades of the houses could be observed in a visual se-
quence. While walking through the streets, the panoramic sight of the modern
town could be viewed in its wider landscape.

In the existing parking lot adjacent to the Red Hall, an information center could
be of use to gather and welcome visitors and to introduce historical and archae-
ological information about the cultural heritage complex by means of media, three-
dimensional models, books, and photos. Additionally, one spot of the park could
be displayed in the form of an ancient herb garden, with didactic and recreational
facilities which would reinforce interest in and perceptions of likely past land-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

38

SARUHAN MOSLER

FIGURE 6.

Shops in front of the Red Hall.

scapes. The information center could be the starting point for the individual or
groups of visitors, offering guided tours and shuttle bus services. Here, visitors
could obtain entrance tickets and brochures; finally, they could be directed to the
cultural heritage complex including the museum. Such a place could generate new
potential for the economic and cultural well-being of locals—including public
awareness, engagement, and place identity—and the conservation of urban heri-
tage and enhancement of the development of the town.

THE ACROPOLIS OF PERGAMON

The landmark of the town and region, the Acropolis of Pergamon with the Trajan
Temple, which ascends the Kale (Castle) Mountain, punctuates the skyline of Ber-
gama (Figure 7). The perception of the Acropolis begins far away when one enters
the town of Bergama. This generates a powerful sense of announcement and phys-
ical identity. The remains of the ancient city of Pergamon are preserved as an acrop-
olis city40 above the modern city. Therefore, its artifact character was protected
from being demolished by any modern urban developments. Settled in the sev-
enth century bc, structures on the Acropolis lie in an area enclosed by two forti-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

39

FIGURE 7. The Theater and Trajan Temple at the Acropolis.

fication walls.41 The architectonic topography of the site provides a visual and
spatial enclosure and background for the urban landscape of Bergama. Today, it is
still possible to observe how the steep slopes of Pergamon were shaped and inte-
grated into the urban landscape. This landscape is best experienced while ascend-
ing the summit of the Acropolis by circumambulating the old streets of Bergama.
Topographical and archaeological features interwoven in an outsized space con-
stitute the texture of this cultural landscape. Entering the interior spaces of the
site, the vast archaeological area creates a strong sense of open space and seeing
into the past.

The path from the entrance with a ticket booth directs visitors to the stairs which
are followed by the open spaces where the areas of visibility are laden with recon-
structed monuments including the Trajan Temple, theater, vista terraces, and in-
formation boards. This gives visitors a clear account of the most important elements
in this archaeological landscape. Above all, there is a precise sculptural relationship
which creates exact visual control and great spatial effects. The famous Pergamon
Altar, whose remains are displayed in Berlin, was also located in the Acropolis, on
the terrace between the upper Agora and the Temple of Athena. Although one can
hardly sense the spatial boundaries of the Pergamon Altar, it is possible to perceive
the visual architectonic space within its landscape and comprehend the holy char-
acter of this place. Here, this sense of three-dimensional space could be emphasized
by arranging the space by planting sacred trees in a symbolic way, reviving the
temple’s form and significance. From a physical point here or behind the area of the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

40

SARUHAN MOSLER

restored monuments, other visible remains are sparsely dotted among the vast ar-
chaeological space, causing the architectonic space to blur. It is common for large
spaces of archaeological sites to lead to problems for visitors perceiving the whole
site; the visual limits are difficult to discern. Here, the sense of place should be stressed
by encouraging visitors to wander around the whole archaeological landscape on de-
signed paths, keeping the visual sequence of the wider setting in movement. Be-
cause these are the areas of less visitation, an alternative for tourists might be an
attractive path that passes through natural and cultural settings, allowing panoramic
views of the hill and modern town. The entrance of the alternative path would be
located at the end of the old town district where the boundaries of the archaeolog-
ical site begin. Along this path, shady sitting facilities could be provided where vis-
itors would have the opportunity to perceive the archaeological three-dimensional
space in its wider landscape. The archaeological space would then be in constant flux
as one moves along the route. This would create a cohesive sense of place and layout.

THE SANCTUARY OF ASKLEPION

Asklepieion served as an important healing and pilgrimage center for worshiping As-
clepius, the God of healing in ancient times (Figure 8). Located on a low rock, the
Asklepion was initially surrounded by three water springs. Water and mud were two
important natural elements for medical treatment processes. A temple, cult and heal-

FIGURE 8. The archaeological site of Asklepion.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

41

ing rooms, houses and sleeping quarters, library, fountains, pools, and a theater were
built. In contrast to the archaeological site of the Acropolis where the remains are
outstretched in the inclined archaeological area, the architectonic space in Askle-
pion lies on a flat area enclosed by various remains and monuments which form
smaller interior spaces. This creates a cozy and familiar sense of place offering inner
tranquility and security. From the first instant, the visitor is captivated by the high
visibility of ancient components in this enclosed space, which prevents the depth of
exterior spaces from being perceived. Here, the sense of place is legible; the high vis-
ibility of the remains stresses their artifact character. The three-dimensional space
is composed of visible boundaries made from pavement, walls, and columns and is
extremely coherent and well perceived. This helps provide easy access and orienta-
tion on site. Because the most effective vantage points are elevated locations, the the-
ater offers a clear sense of vertical dimension. From this perspective, the eye captures
a diversity of objects. This site conveys a strong sense of past place through the vis-
ible remains as well as through its mythical and historical aspects as an ancient heal-
ing center. However, a visual sequence should be provided by a marked and signed
path that runs throughout the site. In ancient times Asklepion was connected by a
partly colonnaded sacred street, Via Tecta, to the center of Pergamon.42 The signif-
icance of this spatial connection with Pergamon’s urban context could be stressed
by three-dimensional information boards. The ancient connection of the Askle-
pion with Pergamon via the modern town of Bergama through the sacred street
could be partly reconstructed as another focal panoramic route that would imply
visual landscape integrity between past and modern spaces. In this case, vegetation,
especially trees and shrubs, could be used to mark the boundaries of the sacred street,
framing the view in the rural landscape.

THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE OF ALLIANOI

Located 18 km to the northeast of Bergama, on the road to the town of ^Ivrindi, the
archaeological site of Allianoi was established during the Hellenistic Age and reached
its peak during the reign of Roman emperor Hadrian. Allianoi was famed for its ther-
mal spring center and was known as the most important healing complex during
Hadrian’s rule (ad 117–138). The visible remains on site, which date back to the
Roman period, the second century ad (Figure 9), are preserved in extraordinary con-
dition. The site is located just inside the reservoir of the Yortanlı Dam, the con-
struction of which was recently completed. The dam has not yet been activated
because of the ongoing discussion in Turkey of preserving Allianoi, which would be
in danger of being submerged and lost forever to the waters of the Yortanlı Dam.
The thermal baths and the Nympheum remained in use for a long time, with some
alterations.43 Although the excavations in the archaeological site do not have a long
history and the site has been partly opened for the public, the outstanding beauty
of the natural environment and cultural resources has begun to attract many visitors.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

42

SARUHAN MOSLER

FIGURE 9. The archaeological site of Allianoi.

The archaeological site of Allianoi lies in an alluvial land enclosed by agricul-
tural land and woodlands to the west. The site is separated into two parts by the
^Ilya stream; in the north is the thermal spa center with thermal spring water baths
in the therapeutic range of 458C to 558C, and to the south of the stream the re-
mains of the civil settlement are located. Two sides were connected by a Roman
bridge, which was used continuously until 1992, when it was demolished because
of disinterest by authorities and experts. This site differs from the other archaeo-
logical sites in the region in which the natural resources—streams, woodlands,
agricultural areas, hot water springs, and rich vegetation—enclose the archaeolog-
ical sites and shape their landscapes. Here, the nature–culture interplay is evident.
In Allianoi, the visual landscape changes constantly because of ongoing excava-
tions if the site is not submerged under water. Yet, the openness of the space on
the plain gives the impression of a coherent landscape where the visibility of the
space creates panoramas which sweep to far-away horizons across one’s field of
vision. This site has great potential for a vivid and tangible public presentation
combining thermal water baths, natural beauty, and cultural heritage to create vi-
sual amenity and recreation (Figure 10). The visual harmonization of existing re-
mains engenders a strong feeling of continuity and place identity.

Jameson writes that for an effective interpretation we need to reach out to our
communication partners, in this case locals and authorities, and arm them with

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

43

FIGURE 10. Allianoi.

knowledge and understanding of how cultural heritage can contribute to people’s
sense of identity and ultimately improve their lives.44 Hence, deliberate research
and sensitive design measures should be required in laying out conservation con-
cepts to prevent the complete extinction of its context.

CONCLUSION

Today, the visible elements of landscapes are becoming more important as visual
attractiveness and recreation play a distinct role in shaping cultural landscapes.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

44

SARUHAN MOSLER

Tourism and leisure activities in historic landscapes are gaining ground as they
influence and benefit the appearance of historical elements, making them remark-
able and visible in landscapes. Archaeological sites produce strong visual qualities
and create spatial qualities resulting from topographical variations. These land-
scapes reflect different impressions of the past on the multidimensional spaces of
cultural and natural resources. This lends distinctiveness, meaning, and quality to
the archaeological landscapes people visit or live in, providing a sense of continu-
ity and a source of identity.

Generally, archaeological heritage contributes to the everyday lives of local
communities on urban and rural scales, improving the quality of life. In Turkey,
archaeological site visitation appears to be an ancillary tourist attraction to the
sea-sand-sun factor in coastal tourism. However, ongoing developments in coastal
regions compromise the qualities of the natural and cultural heritage to a great
extent. This makes preservation and development rather complicated for heritage
sites when they are subject to rapid change caused by urban pressure or agricul-
tural demands. The outstanding characters of these places must be incorporated
into people’s lives in a creative fashion with sophisticated physical planning. In-
habitants and tourists need pleasant and integrated environments with distinct
characters to engage optimally with their surroundings. Integrated planning should
enhance the visual quality of the sites and their landscapes, underlining the im-
portant merits of cultural and natural components. This could be achieved if, on
the one hand, the conservation of archaeological landscapes could be incorpo-
rated into a larger context, both in the field of archaeological preservation and
natural resource conservation where archaeological sites are recognized as com-
ponents of their larger landscape context. Additionally, fragmentations of land-
scape patterns and serious conflicts with natural interests would have to be avoided.
On the other hand, archaeological sites could be identified as places with distinct
spatial and visual assets on the landscape level, in addition to the material value
that should also be strictly conserved. Garden refers to the opportunity of locating
sites in the context of their larger environment and draws attention to the impor-
tance of the setting.45 This could also emphasize the importance of the present
layout of the site. By means of the visual landscape integrity approach outlined
earlier, the interplay and integration of different landscape values can be brought
to light, exposing new potential for heritage presentation. This could also help
create new perspectives in terms of conservation and resource use for the process
of sustainable management. Creative land use planning and site interpretation can
increase public awareness of heritage protection on a socially, economically, and
culturally sustainable basis. Unfortunately, the integration of visual consider-
ations in the process of landscape planning and development has hardly been in-
vestigated because of a deficiency in the theoretical basis, academic involvement,
and collaboration in spatial planning and heritage conservation within local com-
munal planning systems. Nevertheless, when an efficient spatial organization that
harmonizes with the visual relationship and structural fabric of cultural elements

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

45

and natural resources is established in a heritage setting, the heritage and land-
scape is protected against the effects of development such as uncontrolled use and
unplanned actions.

In conclusion, the challenge is developing a more forward-looking viewpoint
and holistic approach to handling the heritage sites in their present landscapes.
Every planning and management decision should be based on an understanding
of its wider landscape, which will likely affect the significance of the visual values
and should aim at creating distinct and visible spaces with locational qualities.

ENDNOTES

1. Catsadorakis, G. The Conservation of Natural and Cultural Heritage, 308–20.
2. Parrish, Urbanism in Western Asia Minor, 9.
3. Anagnostopoulos, Kulturdenkmälern eine entsprechende Umgebung sichern, 147.
4. Thackray, “Considering the Significance in the Landscape,” 19.
5. Schofield, “Now We Know,” 86.
6. Taylor, “Fragmentation and Cultural Landscapes,” 93–99.
7. Palang and Fry, Landscape Interfaces, 2.
8. Jones, “The Concept of Cultural Landscape,” 34.
9. Garden, “The Heritagescape,” 394.
10. Jakle, “The Visual Elements of Landscape.”
11. Garden, “The Heritagescape,” 396.
12. Dailoo and Pannekoek, Culture and Nature, 25–47.
13. Jakle, “The Visual Elements of Landscape,” 4.
14. See Lynch, Site Planning; Jakle, “The Visual Elements of Landscape”; Higuchi, The Visual and

Spatial Structure of Landscapes; Ashihara, The Aesthetic Townscape.

15. Lynch, A Theory of Good City Form, 131.
16. Lambrick, “The Importance of the Cultural Heritage in a Green World.”
17. Schmidt, Archäologische Denkmäler in Deutschland, 9.
18. Thwaites and Simkins, Experiential Landscape, 42.
19. Garden, The Heritagescape, 394—411.
20. Raghunathan and Sinha, “Rockfort Temple at Tiruchirapalli, India,” 489–504.
21. Bradley, An Archaeology of Natural Places, 28.
22. Terkenli, “Towards a Theory of the Landscape,” 197–208.
23. Fry, “From Objects to Landscapes,” 240.
24. Higuchi, “The Visual and Spatial Structure of Landscape,” 62.
25. Fry, Skar, Jerpasen, and Bakkestuen, “Locating Archaeological Sites in the Landscape,” 6.
26. Garden, The Heritagescape: Looking at Landscapes of the Past, 394–411.
27. Georgiadis, The South-Eastern Aegean in the Mycenaean Period,” 27.
28. Sivan, “The Presentation of Archaeological Sites,” 54.
29. See Jakle, The Visual Elements of Landscape, 20; Bourassa, The Aesthetics of Landscape, 8; Terkenli,

“Towards a Theory of the Landscape,” 202–03.

30. Tuan, Thoughts and Landscape, 89.
31. Jakle, “The Visual Elements of Landscape,” 73.
32. Cleal et al., “The Visual Envelope,”34–40.
33. See Schmidt, “Archäologische Denkmäler in Deutschland.”
34. Loulanski, “Revising the Concept for Cultural Heritage,” 227.
35. Higuchi, “The Visual and Spatial Structure of Landscapes.”
36. Athanassopoulus and Wandsnider, Mediterranean Archaeological Landscapes.
37. Pirson, “Bericht über die Arbeiten,” Abb. 17.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

46

SARUHAN MOSLER

38. Pergamon: Stadt und Landschaft, available at http://www.dainst.org/index_650_de.html (ac-

cessed March 25, 2008).

39. Radt, “The Urban Development of Pergamon,” 49.
40. Ashworth and Tunbridge, Tourist-historic City, 79.
41. Sahin, “Pergamon in the History of Anatolia“, 48.
42. Parrish, “Urbanism in Western Asia Minor,” 31.
43. Allianoi, available at http://www.allianoi.org (accessed April 18, 2008).
44. Jameson, “The Reconstructed Past,” 13.
45. Garden, The Heritagescape: Looking at Landscapes of the Past, 394–411.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anagnostopoulos, George. “Archaeological Landscapes versus Archaeological Sites.” Garten und Land-
schaft 3 (1975): 145–49.

Ashihara, Yoshinobu. The Aesthetic Townscape. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1983.

Ashworth, G.J., and J.E. Tunbridge. Tourist-historic City. London: Belhaven Press, 1990.

Athanassopoulos, Effie and LuAnn Wandsnider. Mediterranean Archaeological Landscapes: Current
Issues. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, 2004.

Bourassa, S.C. The Aesthetics of Landscape, London: Belhaven Press, 1991.

Bradley, Richard. An Archaeology of Natural Places. London: Routledge, 2000.

Catsadorakis, G. “The Conservation of Natural and Cultural Heritage in Europe and the Mediter-
ranean: A Gordian Knot?” International Journal of Heritage Studies 13 (2007): 308–20.

Cleal, Rosamund, and Michael Allen. “The Visual Envelope.” In Stonehenge in Its Landscape, edited
by Julie Gardiner, 34–40. London: Snoeck-Ducaju & Zoon, 1995.

Dailoo, Shabnam Inanloo, and Frits Pannekoek. “Nature and Culture: A New World Heritage Con-
text.” International Journal of Cultural Property 15 (2008): 25–47.

Fry, Gary. “From Objects to Landscapes in Natural and Cultural Heritage Management: A Role for
Landscape Interfaces.” In Landscape Interfaces. Cultural Heritage in Changing Landscapes, edited by
Hannes Palang and Gray Fry, 237–55. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003.

Fry, Gary, B. Skar, G. Jerpasen, and V. Bakkestuen. “Locating Archaeological Sites in the Landscape.
A Hierarchical Approach Based on Landscape Indicators.” Landscape and Urban Planning 67 (2004):
97–107.

Garden, Mary-Catherine E. “The Heritagescape: Looking at Landscapes of the Past,” International
Journal of Heritage Studies 12 no. 5 (2006): 394–411.

Georgiadis, Mercourios. The South-Eastern Aegean in the Mycenaean Period. Islands, Landscape, Death
and Ancestors. Oxford: Archaeopress, 2003.

Higuchi, Tadahiko. The Visual and Spatial Structure of Landscapes. Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1983.

Jakle, John. The Visual Elements of Landscape. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1987.

Jameson, John H., Jr. The Reconstructed Past. Reconstructions in the Public Interpretation of Archae-
ology and History. New York: Altamira Press, 2004.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

PRESENTING PAST LANDSCAPES

47

Jones, Michael. “The Concept of Cultural Landscape Discourse and Narratives.” In Landscape Inter-
faces. Cultural Heritage in Changing Landscapes, edited by Hannes Palang and Gray Fry, 21–53. Dor-
drecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 2003.

Lambrick, George. “The Importance of the Cultural Heritage in a Green World: Towards the Devel-
opment of Landscape Integrity Assessment.” In All Natural Things. Archaeology and Green Debate,
edited by Lesley Macinnes and Caroline Wickham-Jones, 105–26. Oxford: Oxbow Books, 1992.

Larkham, Peter. “Heritage as Planned and Conserved.” In Heritage, Tourism and Society, edited by
David Herbert, 85–116. London: Mansell Publishing Limited, 1995.

Loulanski, Tolina. “Revising the Concept for Cultural Heritage: The Argument for a Functional Ap-
proach.” International Journal of Cultural Property 13 (2006): 207–33.

Lynch, Kevin. Site Planning. Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1971.

———. A Theory of Good City Form. Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1981.

Newby, Peter. “Tourism. Support or Threat to Heritage?” In Building a New Heritage, edited by Wendy
Ashmore and Peter Larkham, 206–28. London: Routledge, 1994.

Palang, Hannes, and Gray Fry. Landscape Interfaces. Cultural Heritage in Changing Landscapes. Dor-
drecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003.

Parrish, D. Urbanism in Western Asia Minor. New Studies on Aphrodisias, Ephesos, Hierapolis, Perga-
mon, Perge and Xanthos. Porthsmouth: JRA, 2001.

Pirson, Pergamon. “Bericht über die Arbeiten in der Kampagne 2006.” Archäologischer Anzeiger 2
(2007): Abb. 17.

Radt, Wolfgang. “The Urban Development of Pergamon.” In Urbanism in Western Asia Minor, edited
by D. Parrish, 43–56. Thomson-Shore, Portsmouth, 2001.

Raghunathan, Aparna, and Amita Sinha. “Rockfort Temple at Tiruchirapalli, India: Conservation of
a Sacred Landscape.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 12 (2006), 489–504.

Ruijgrok, E.C.M. “The Three Economic Values of Cultural Heritage: A Case Study in the Nether-
lands.” Journal of Cultural Heritage 7 (2006): 206–13.

,Sahin, B. Anadolu Tarihinde Bergama. Pergamon in the History of Anatolia. Bergama: Çagˇda,s Mat-
baacılık, 2004.

Schmidt, Hartwig. Archäologische Denkmäler in Deutschland, Rekonstruiert und Wieder Aufgebaut.
Stuttgart: Konrad Theiss Verlag, 2000.

Schofield, A.J. “Now We Know: The Role of Research in Archaeological Conservation Practices in
England.” In Cultural Resource Management in Contemporary Society, edited by Francies McManna-
mon and Alf Hatton, 76–93. London and New York: Routledge, 2000.

Sivan, R. “The Presentation of Archaeological Sites.” In The Conservation of Archaeological Sites in
the Mediterranean Region, edited by M. de la Torre, 51–59. Los Angeles: The Getty Conservation
Institute, 1997.

Taylor, Pat D. “Fragmentation and Cultural Landscapes: Tightening the Relationship Between Human
Beings and the Environment.” Landscape and Urban Planning 58 (2002): 93–99.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055

48

SARUHAN MOSLER

Terkenli, T.S. “Towards a Theory of the Landscape: The Aegean Landscape as a Cultural Image.”
Landscape and Urban Planning 57 (2001): 197–208.

Thackray, D. “Considering Significance in the Landscape: Developing Priorities Through Conserva-
tion Planning.” In Managing the Historic Rural Landscape, edited by J. Grenville, 19–27. London:
Routledge, 1999.

Thwaites, Kevin, and Ian Simkins. Experiential Landscape. An Approach to People, Place and Space.
London and New York: Routledge, 2007.

Tuan, Yi-Fu. Thoughts and Landscape. The Interpretation of Ordinary Landscapes. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1979.
Turkey Map, available at http://harita.turkcebilgi.com (accessed January 5, 2009).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:16:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090055


