International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

‘Fifty-two doors’: identifying cultural significance
through narrative and nostalgia in Lakhnu village

John Stephens

To cite this article: John Stephens (2014) ‘Fifty-two doors’: identifying cultural significance through
narrative and nostalgia in Lakhnu village, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 20:4, 415-431,
DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2012.758651
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.758651

Published online: 16 Jan 2013.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 436

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2014
Vol. 20, No. 4, 415–431, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.758651

‘Fifty-two doors’: identifying cultural signiﬁcance through
narrative and nostalgia in Lakhnu village

John Stephens*

Department of Architecture and Interior Architecture, Curtin University of Technology,
Perth, Australia
(Received 9 October 2012; ﬁnal version received 11 December 2012)

This paper proposes an alternative way of evaluating heritage values in the
assessment of an abandoned school building in Lakhnu, a small rural Indian vil-
lage in the state of Uttar Pradesh. Its aim is to re-think the appropriateness of
professionally assessed methodologies, such as the Australian ICOMOS Burra
Charter, and ﬁnd others which are more inclusive and sensitive of community
views and aspirations. Villagers claim this building as a key part to their cultural
heritage, and view its desertion and disintegration with frustration. As part of a
larger scheme to improve village infrastructure and to enable its empowerment,
the aim is to assess the signiﬁcance of this place to the villagers, facilitate its
conservation and investigate possible outcomes for its use through community
participation. In this context, the concept of narrative is offered as means to
establish the community meaning of a place. Narratives are powerful ways in
which people understand their environment and structure a view of the world.
Using stories told by villagers about their relationship with the building, this
paper argues that narrative can offer an alternative method of understanding her-
itage signiﬁcance.
Keywords: narrative; nostalgia; heritage signiﬁcance; Lakhnu

Introduction
This paper emerges from a search for an appropriate way to determine the heritage
signiﬁcance and meaning of a derelict building in Lakhnu, a small Indian rural
village in Uttar Pradesh.

Lakhnu village is located 9 km south-east of the town of Hathras, 40 km west of
Mathura, important as the birthplace of the Hindu deity Krishna (see Figure 1).
Surrounded by ﬁelds of chillies, the place has little public infrastructure beyond dirt
roads, open drains and electricity supply to some houses. There is no sewerage, no
public toilets and very few private ones. Waste of all types is conveyed in open
earthen drains and garbage collection is rudimentary – the street being the primary
repository for rubbish of all kinds. Villagers must visit Hathras for medical attention
and the only public transport is a bus service, which runs a few times a day. The
poverty level (under $1.00 US per day) applies to 40% of the population. However,
there is a palpable sense of community; although the villagers are intensely aware of
their plight, they have few resources to improve their situation beyond the superﬁcial.

*Email: j.stephens@curtin.edu.au

Ó 2013 Taylor & Francis

416

J. Stephens

Figure 1. Map of Uttar Pradesh showing location of Lakhnu (source author).

In November 2011, students and academics from Curtin University in Western
Australia travelled to Lakhnu as the ﬁrst stage of a project to ﬁnd ways to help the
villagers with the development of village housing and to work with villagers to
empower them in the broader issues of education, employment and infrastructure.
Part of this project involves assistance in the conservation of a derelict building.
Built in the late nineteenth century and long used as a school and abandoned in the
1990s, this rendered brick building with a ﬁnely carved stone façade is slowly
disintegrating. Nicknamed ‘ﬁfty-two doors’ – apparently following a custom of
naming buildings after the number of doors they contain – the villagers claim it as
a key part of their cultural heritage and view its disintegration with frustration.

A long-term object of the Lakhnu Village Community Development Project is
to assess the heritage signiﬁcance of the abandoned school building, facilitate its
conservation and investigate possible outcomes for its use. However, it was clear
from the start of the project that ofﬁcial methodologies might not be appropriate,
and that a method that was more inclusive and sensitive of community views and
aspirations was needed.

This paper suggests that alternative ways of thinking about heritage may be more
appropriate when dealing with some communities. In Australia, the ICOMOS Burra
Charter offers a method of practice for the assessment, conservation and management

International Journal of Heritage Studies

417

of heritage places. It essentially follows the philosophy of the ICOMOS Venice
Charter but has been adapted and developed for Australian conditions. While its use is
widespread and ofﬁcially sanctioned by state and federal governments,
it does
have detractors and, in the view of this paper, would be an inappropriate method to
negotiate the complex and sensitive nature of heritage and identity in a poor rural
community. Perceived problems with the current implementation of the Charter and
its effect on heritage assessment are discussed later in this paper.

As an alternative to the Burra Charter, this paper proposes the concept of ‘narra-
tive’ as an approach to garner signiﬁcance and meaning in heritage places, using
the old school building at Lakhnu as a pilot study. Narratives are powerful ways in
which people understand and know their environment and a fundamental ‘means by
which human beings structure and represent the world’ (Mitchell 1981, iiiv). As a
cultural tool, narratives have potential to convey meaning, albeit mediated by the
contexts in which they arise. In many ways,
the abandonment and ruin of the
school building symbolises the powerlessness and dispossession of the villagers and
its possible futures are of keen interest to them. The narratives that surround the
place are complex, contested and are inscribed by the cultural practices that haunt
its past and present uses.

However, given the limited resources of the project, how best can an assessment
of the Lakhnu school be made? How can a case be made for a narrative that places
the citizens of the village at its centre, and the school as a physical manifestation of
that narrative? As the place deteriorates and remains largely unused, few new narra-
tives are possible except, perhaps, ones associated with its decline. The present
condition of the building generates a traumatic image that is at once nostalgic and
uncanny. Revitalising the building will rejuvenate the narratives that surround it and
provide a meaningful vehicle for empowerment, and the future of the village.

To answer the questions posed above, this paper examines the place of the
school building within the scope of the overall project. Following is a discussion of
the concept of narrative and how it has been applied in the context of the village
and the school building. The paper then explores the questions of what meanings
are speciﬁc to ‘this’ community and how a community constructs ‘their’ meaning
rather than relying on an assessment by a heritage professional elite through estab-
lished values and as determined by methods of practice, such as the Australian
Burra Charter. The paper concludes that narrative is not an element that is ‘added’
to a place but is ‘implicit’, integral and a powerful alternative way of determining
heritage signiﬁcance.

From the outset, it should be declared that the resources of this project are limited
in both time and funding, and that it is very much a work in progress. Our visits to
the village were conducted over ﬁve days with 35 students from Australia and India
available for the surveys. There are speciﬁc problems in conducting surveys in a poor
rural village where literacy rates are uneven and – while families were generally wel-
coming – there is a limit to the numbers of people willing to participate and the types
of question that can be asked. We were invited to survey dwellings and interview
people through the agency of the children at the school, which appeared to be the
only practical way to conduct such an invasive programme.

It should also be made clear that this paper is not about Indian heritage as such –
nor does it engage in argument about Indian methods of conservation or assessing
cultural signiﬁcance. It is about using a building in India as a vehicle to explore how
signiﬁcance may be determined through the concept of narrative.

418

J. Stephens

The project
The Lakhnu Rural Community Development Project is conducted in association
with the Indian non-government organisation India Rural Education and Develop-
ment Inc. (IREAD), which is primarily based in Western Australia. It has initiated
education programmes and provides support to the local government-run primary
school and proposes to extend its philanthropic work into improving infrastructure
and living conditions in the village.

Lakhnu consists of about 500 dwellings, which house approximately 4000 peo-
ple – of which 1000 are children (see Figure 2). The main industry is farming and
mostly chilli is grown. The average literacy level is around 55% but lower for
women at 43%. However, ‘literacy’ may only mean that a person is able to sign
his/her name. The predominant religion is Hindu although there are also Muslims.
The Indian caste system is very much evident with the lowest caste – the Scheduled
Castes or Dalit – living in an isolated part of the village.

The main concern of the project was the living conditions endured by the villag-
ers and ﬁnding practical ways of dealing with them. Among a range of matters
impacting on health, indoor air pollution is of concern. Here, burning biomass fuel in
badly designed ﬁreplaces produces smoke and gases that cause serious health prob-
lems. Electricity is also an issue, as wiring and electrical connections are typically
unauthorised and electrocutions – mostly of women – are common. As most dwell-
ings do not possess a toilet and there are no public ones, the ﬁelds on the outskirts of
the village serve for that purpose. There is also the issue of women’s safety. To avoid
the real threat of being attacked and raped when they relieve themselves outside of
the home, women generally go in large groups in the early morning. To ascertain the
extent of the above problems, the project conducted a comprehensive dwelling survey
to ascertain the design of dwellings, their lifestyles and household practices. The

Figure 2. Lakhnu main street (source author).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

419

streets were also surveyed because no maps of the village existed. Curtin researchers
could only survey villagers by invitation though the local school. This proved reason-
ably successful with 53 households willing to be interviewed using an interpreter,
and their dwellings surveyed and documented in preparation for drawing plans and
an analysis of ventilation, light, privacy, waste disposal, capacity and skills. This
stage of the project is seen as a ‘reconnaissance’ of living conditions and standards
and also as a basis in developing relationships between the researchers and the villag-
ers. The envisioned conservation of the derelict school building is located within this
overall plan of assisting the village, and is conceived as part of the strategy to
improve education and vocational training – particularly of the women.

The school is located approximately 200 m from the village on its own large
rectangular plot of land and includes the old school building and three new brick
classrooms and toilets (see Figure 3). The school has about 74 students ranging
from 6 to 14 years of age. Education at the school is nominally free, but many chil-
dren do not attend.

Twenty-ﬁve villagers were asked questions that focused on their relationship
with the place. They were encouraged to tell stories about their association with the
old school building: how often they visited; how they used it; how they felt about
it; what future they would like for the place; and any ‘stories’ they knew about it.
Questions were simple, conversational and open-ended. While some answers were
short, they collectively comprised a narrative of that person’s engagement with the
place. Hindi-speaking students from Curtin University and the Malaviya National
Institute of Technology at Jaipur translated questions and responses. No resident
spoke English and many had never seen westerners – except on television. It is pos-
sible that meaning might have been lost in translations that depended on Indian and
Australian students who were socially and culturally quite different to villagers.

Figure 3. Front of old school building (source author).

420

J. Stephens

Other problems may be seen in the gap between the villagers and the researcher
who interprets their stories. There is no easy answer to these potential problems
except that the questions were as direct and open as possible, and that the inter-
viewers were diligent in transcribing villagers’ stories. It should be recognised that
interpretation of villagers’ stories, and the way that they are presented in this paper,
remains an ‘interpretation’.

Survey monkey was used to organise the material, and initial results indicated
that 95% of those surveyed had a positive attitude and relationship with the place
and 75% related stories they associated with the building (Curtin University 2011a).
To augment this information, 20 school children were surveyed about the building
in class (Curtin University 2011b). Children drew maps of their daily activities
which included how the school building ﬁtted into this routine and what stories
they knew of the place. Most children knew it as a ‘beautiful place’ and used it as
a fantasy playground.

Three elderly men with associations to the building’s past life came forward and
were willing to share what they knew of the place and show us how it had been
used. Narratives were supplemented with a survey of the building fabric, and this
corroborated many of the stories and added a physical context to the analysis.

Figure 4. Plan of old school building (source author).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

421

Workshops were held with villagers on the ﬁnal day of the visit, discussing with
them the project ﬁndings and validating and reﬁning these through workshops with
separate groups of men and women – a culturally necessary separation. These work-
shops also validated and reﬁned the stories of the old school building, attitudes to it
and its possible futures (Curtin University 2011c).

It is recognised that the term ‘community’, as used in heritage and in this paper
to describe the Lakhnu villagers, is contested. It is a complex word usually deﬁned
in terms of a homogeneity and cohesiveness that cannot exist. In heritage, its use to
‘make sense of others’ reinforces a professional stewardship over the heritage pro-
cess (Waterton and Smith 2010, 5). It has also been argued that community-based
projects, ‘tend to involve things that are done for communities rather than with
them’ (Waterton and Smith 2010, 7). The Lakhnu ‘community’ is not homogeneous
and is composed of various castes, religions,
income and education level. This
paper consciously entertains no romantic notion of community although there were
observable networks of attachments and identity between the villagers who partici-
pated. This project – at least initially – is not community-driven although it aims,
eventually, to forge enough trust in the community to work alongside them as much
as possible. It is recognised that this narrative analysis is not free of the professional
gaze. However, it is hoped that by focusing on narrative, a more direct understand-
ing of the meaning of the place to the community might be achieved than with cur-
rent Australian practice.

Narratives
Smith (2006, 87) asserts that privileging the physical fabric and the aesthetic and
technical aspects of heritage by the current ‘authorised heritage discourse’, ‘masks
the real cultural and political work that the heritage process does’. She argues that
heritage should be perceived as, ‘a cultural process about meaning making’, and as
a way that various social and cultural groups use ‘to create and deﬁne identity and
social and cultural meaning in and about the present’. Cultural meaning is embed-
ded in experience of both the past and the present.

Waterton, Smith, and Campbell (2006, 349) outline a number of problems with
current heritage practice in Australia and,
in a discursive analysis of the Burra
Charter, argue that reliance on expert knowledge in the form of heritage profession-
als ensures an elitist control of the heritage assessment process. This conﬁrms,
generally, that community meaning is mediated through professional interpretation
and that signiﬁcance is immutable through a token evaluation of community partici-
pation. While there have been attempts to incorporate more community inclusion in
the heritage assessment process, ‘it remains largely unsuccessful’ (Waterton, Smith,
and Campbell 2006, 342).

This project concentrates on the voices in the narratives that surround the
Lakhnu school building to determine its community meaning. It does not use the
frame of categories such as aesthetic, historic, scientiﬁc or spiritual as advocated by
the Burra Charter – or other expert assessment of heritage by professionals.

Humans are proliﬁc storytellers and we are psychologically compelled to create
narratives, which are necessary for our physical and mental well-being (Hunt 2010,
115). Stories and language are ways in which people make meaningful sense of
their experiences and how they fashion identities – there are secure relationships
between narratives, self and identity (Hunt 2010, 115). As systems of personal

422

J. Stephens

knowledge, narratives are not necessarily constant, and in an attempt to develop a
coherent past (linked to identity), there is often confabulation and selective remem-
bering and forgetting. Mitchell (1981, viii) argues that it is not a question of telling
true narratives from false but importance is in the ‘very value of narrativity as a
mode of making sense of reality (whether the factual reality of actual events, or the
moral, symbolic reality of ﬁctions)’. Of course, historical reality in heritage does
matter. However, what is at stake here is not historical veracity, but that narrative is
a means to construct meaning or signiﬁcance.

White (1981, 1) suggests that narratives are more easily transported transnation-
ally than other aspects of culture. We may have problems understanding the thought
patterns and motivations of different cultures but have ‘less difﬁculty in understand-
ing a story coming from another culture’. Echoing Roland Barthes, White argues
that narrative can be translated across cultures without fundamental damage and
there are transcultural aspects of narrative containing ‘messages about the nature of
a shared reality’ (White 1981, 2). Stewart (2007, 13) observes that through narrative
and language, ‘we articulate the world behind and beyond the immediate context at
hand’. In narrative, past, present and future time is conﬂated.

Narratives differ from community to community in complex and dynamic ways.
There is no set pattern for particular relationships between people and cultural tools
like narrative (Wertsch and Billingsley 2011, 34). However, there are patterns and
processes that appear to be common to most storytelling. Narratives need to be
cohesive, contextualised and temporal, and have agency (Hunt 2010, 115). The for-
mat of the narrative is also important be it oral, written or visual. Narratives can
also be spatial. Both landscape and architecture have the capacity to convey narra-
tives, and when combined with stories about place, they provide powerful ways of
storytelling (Potteiger and Purinton 1998, 7 and 10; Hollis 2011, 62).

Narratives are mediated by their social and physical environment in which they
emerge and, in turn, people make sense of their environment by drawing on collec-
tive memory or narrative as cultural tools. In this context, narrative frameworks
‘mediate our understanding of the past and their effects on our present identities’
(Wertsch and Billingsley 2011, 29). The idea of narrative as a ‘mediated action’ can
provide a fruitful vehicle for the analysis of stories that villagers tell about the old
school. Wertsch and Billingsley (2011, 31) use this concept to argue that ‘remem-
bering occurs with the help of various cultural tools’ and that narrative is by far the
most inﬂuential of these mnemonic tools. They suggest that there are underlying
codes or ‘narrative templates’ which frame the narrative and are particular to any
‘mnemonic community’. While they use this concept
identity
narratives, it also points to the possibility that there are underlying social and envi-
ronment frameworks that mediate the stories told by a particular community. These
codes or ‘abstract frameworks’ provide an agency for narratives and give it mean-
there would be many such ‘agencies’ involved in the narratives
ing. Typically,
surrounding the old school building. However, there are some that are strongly
suggested in the narratives that this project gathered. For example, ‘governmental
corruption’, ‘nostalgia’ and ‘loss’ are a few of the frames that emerge in the inter-
views that may mediate these narratives. While these are probably generic to many
Indian communities, they mediate ‘this’ village’s narratives in a particular way. In
this context,
the building, as told by villagers and
others, are presented below, and then analysed in terms of frames, which emerge
from those narratives.

the various narratives about

to frame national

International Journal of Heritage Studies

423

School narratives
The old Lakhnu school is a symmetrical building in a local version of the Indo-
Sarencenic Revival style favoured by British architects in India in the late nine-
teenth century (see Figures 3, 5 and 6). Organised around a large central space, it
has several rooms on each side (see Figures 4 and 7). Side porches service these
side rooms. An ornate colonnaded bow-shaped verandah shades the rear. The front
porch is intricately carved from red sandstone and has ﬁnely carved ‘chattri’ or
pavilions either side. Windows on the front elevation of the building are protected
with ‘jharokha’ or projecting balconies enhancing the rich appearance of the build-
ing. The roof is concrete over arched brickwork between steel beams. A staircase at
the rear of the building was used to ﬁll a cistern, on the roof. At the rear of the
building are the remnants of a mango tree orchard and a small ornate pool. The
building is in disrepair with disintegrating render and the rear verandah partially
collapsed (see Figure 6). All the joinery has been removed and the roof is over-
grown with grasses that choke drainage (see Figure 8). Most of the original stone
ﬂoor has been removed and the place has been mined for bricks and stone. How-
ever, the names of rooms and other signage from its time as a school are still very
clear (see Figure 5).

Three key members of the local community were interviewed on site, which
was useful in establishing the history and operations of the place throughout its life.
Mr S, a former magistrate, Mr B, a former student at the school and Mr K, also a
former student at the school were interviewed.1

Mr S’s story was that the building begun life around 1900 as a magistrates’
court. He was one of the magistrates who used the building. It was built by Raja
Man Singh,
landowner. To the villagers and children surveyed, he is
known by a number of folk names including ‘the king’ and Raja Sahib. Mr S

the local

Figure 5. Old school building detail (source author).

424

J. Stephens

Figure 6. Rear of old school building (source author).

Figure 7.

Interior of the central room of old school building (source author).

described him as a very ﬁerce man with absolute power. The large central room in
the building operated as a court of law and the rooms on either side had utility
functions or acted as bedrooms for guests. The two chattris either side of the porch

International Journal of Heritage Studies

425

Figure 8. Roof of old school building (source author).

were occupied by sentries guarding the main entrance to the building (Mr S 2011).
Mr S’s story is contradicted somewhat by a more recent interview with the grand-
son of Raja Man Singh (Mr A) who constructed the building. He insists that the
building was built as a guesthouse, which acted as a court when the magistrate
came to stay on his circuit (Mr A 2012).2

When the court was in session, the magistrate (Mr S) sat at the south eastern
end near the entry porch and those approaching the court were escorted to the rear
of the building and entered the court room via the rear verandah. The court handled
petty crimes and other civil matters. Mr S said that he was ﬁrst employed by the
landowner who owned the building, and later by the British. Nobody was allowed
to approach within 15 m of the building unless they were on ofﬁcial court business
or had other dealings with the court. The magistrate had sweeping powers and
could prevent the entry of police if he thought ﬁt. At this time, the building was
approached via a driveway that looped around a tree in front of the building and
the imprint of this drive and the stump of the tree are still visible. The front of the
building was neatly gardened and grassed and the backyard had an orchard and
vegetable gardens. There was a ‘lake’ at the rear that was used for bathing and as a
water supply. He was sad that the place had deteriorated and felt it should have its
life back as a library (Mr S 2011).

Mr B’s story was that he was a student at the school in its ﬁrst days of opera-
tion after 1947 and studied geography, history, politics, Hindi, Sanskrit and English.
The pond at the back of the school was used for bathing and was fed by limestone-
lined canal, which came across the back of the block. There were statues nearby of
the father and grandfather of Raja Man Singh and the garden was replete with
mango trees, guavas, dates and betel trees. Mango trees lined the boundary (and
still do). The school ran 24 hours a day and, in the evening, he went home for food

426

J. Stephens

and came back for more lessons. The students slept at the school. Although retired,
he still visits regularly as he is ‘too attached’ to the old building and is disappointed
with its condition. He said, ‘no matter what happens I would never forget this
place’ (Mr B 2011).

Mr K is from the Scheduled Castes and was at the school on a government
scholarship for Dalit people. He became an engineer, but since retirement, he is
now the village matchmaker. He relates that when India achieved independence in
1947, the court building passed from the control of the landowner to the new Indian
Government. It was sold for a reported 10,000 Rupees and was to be used as a
school. Half the funds were raised by the village and the other half by the govern-
ment. Funding was set aside for maintenance and the construction of a boundary
fence. Apparently, this was in the hands of a development ofﬁcer who used the
money for ‘other projects’. Mr K is angry that
the maintenance money was
syphoned off. This part of the story is also a matter of local lore and disappoint-
ment. He and Mr S are cynical that somewhere in the dark recesses of the bureau-
cracy, there are papers that falsely say that a boundary fence was constructed at the
school when it was not. At night, the teachers slept in the front rooms and the chil-
dren on the verandahs. They went outside for toileting. He also describes the pool
at the backyard as a ‘lake’ surrounded by fruit trees. Mr K says that the building is
an important landmark and should be kept as a library (Mr K 2011).

Nine of the 25 villagers surveyed described themselves as ‘grihani’, or ‘house-
wife’, and the rest were men – mostly farmers, although two were construction work-
ers, one was a teacher in a private school and there were two students. Everybody
knew the building and only one said that they never visited and did not know much
about it because she was from another village. Fifteen people related a version of the
story of its past life as a court of law built by the Raja or king and then sold by him
to the government and the village as a school. Some told romantic stories of the place
as a palace built by the king for his queen who bathed in a pool in its grounds. In
one story, the king’s elephants drank from the pool (Curtin University 2011d). Most
knew the place as the old school although some had other descriptions including, pal-
ace, havalli (mansion or house) and the previously mentioned ‘ﬁfty-two dwar’ or 52
doors. Some remembered it as a beautiful place with a lavish garden where they
played as children. The majority reported that they still visited the place occasionally
– most usually every one or two months. One woman had stories of how villagers
used to gather at the pond when it was a school, dangle their feet in the water, eat the
mangoes and solve village problems – carrying on its tradition as a place of resolu-
tion (Curtin University 2011e). Another liked to walk to the building and sit on the
roof with friends (Curtin University 2011f). One villager related how he liked to go
to the school when he was upset because the peaceful surroundings helped him sort
out his feelings (Curtin University 2011g). Only one person did not respond to a
question about its future use (Curtin University 2011h). The rest were in no doubt
that the place deserved to be reused as a place associated with education. The general
feeling of sadness and frustration at its condition and the view that it should be re-
used for women’s education was endorsed by both male and female workshops held
on the last day of the visit (Curtin University 2011c).

Of the 20 children surveyed, thirteen were female and all were below the age of
eight. Obviously, since the building was in the school grounds, all played there and
knew it intimately. Some knew the building as ‘ﬁfty-two doors’ and most thought it
beautiful, liked its ‘design’ and carvings and used it as a place for playing games

International Journal of Heritage Studies

427

such as hide and seek and dreaming about kings and queens. One child related how
peacocks danced on its roof and left feathers that they collected. In their narratives,
children wanted it to be re-used as a school – some suggesting that it should teach
sewing and cooking (Curtin University 2011b).

As foreshadowed earlier, these narratives suggest that there are a number of
underlying frames, which help to mediate them and through which they may be
understood. One of these is ofﬁcial corruption – something quite blatant in Indian
life and a thorny political problem. The money earmarked for building maintenance
and the boundary fence of the old school building disappeared and this has contrib-
uted to the decline of the place. Narratives about this aspect are told as a matter of
fact and are ironically related – although the sentiment of loss is palpable. Loss is
also tangible in many narratives that appear to be ‘nostalgic’ about the building’s
history, the condition of the place and its use as a place of memory. However, it
can be argued that nostalgia is much more complicated than a simple wistful
remembrance of the past. Moreover, the agency of nostalgia may be a useful frame
through which to discuss the narratives about the place and understand its cultural
signiﬁcance. If narratives are the means by which people structure their understand-
ing of the world, then abstract frames such as nostalgia may mediate those narra-
tives and give them a particular and local meaning.

Nostalgia
Nostalgia is often viewed as an emotive form of remembering where people pine
for past things as a salve to the rapid pace of change in the world – an element that
also drives heritage (Lowenthal 1998, 6). Hewison (1987, 47) famously argued that
nostalgia for the past was a generator of the heritage industry and its action was to
muddy history and act as a break to the future. The backward-looking inﬂuence of
nostalgia was seen as a signal of national decline. While generally scathing of nos-
talgia as showing contempt for the present and suspicion of the future, Lowenthal
did admit that it had a positive side as a ‘buffer for social upheaval’ after catastro-
phes, helping to re-build identities (Lowenthal 1985, 13). Stewart
(2007, 23)
reinforces nostalgia’s relationship to narrative and positions it as a loss – a form of
repetitive narrative that has an origin that is ‘always absent’. A utopia and ideal that
has a lack of ‘ﬁxity and closure: nostalgia is the desire for desire’.

A recent critique by Boym (2007, 12) characterises modern nostalgia as ‘mourn-
ing for the impossibility of mythical return’, and of the loss of ‘an enchanted world
with clear borders and values’. For Boym, ‘nostalgia is a sentiment of loss and
displacement’ and she links this to its use for displaced people to cope with the
impossibility of homecoming (Boym 2001, xvii). However, she argues that, while
nostalgia is linked to identity, it need not always be about the past – nostalgia can be
both retrospective and prospective. It is more complex than a naive longing and can
be characterised by two strands – restorative and reﬂective nostalgia (Boym 2001,
xviii). Both share similar ‘triggers of memory and symbols’ but offer different inter-
pretations. Restorative nostalgia is immersed in an emotive longing for the past that
preserves truth and tradition. It attempts to restore the lost world of the past through
national mythology and ritual, which re-tells legendary pasts and through the recon-
struction of lost artefacts – such as destroyed buildings. Restorative nostalgia can be
linked to nationalist movements and the re-establishment of lost origins or the mirage
of homeland. In this nostalgic category, there is little distinction allowed between
national and individual memory (Boym 2001, 43).

428

J. Stephens

On the other hand, reﬂective nostalgia ‘suggests a new ﬂexibility – not the re-
establishment of stasis’ (Boym 2001, 49). It recognises the distance to the past and
its elusiveness in the present, and resists the temptation to re-build. It is more inter-
ested in creatively using ‘ruins’ as a narrative between past, present and future.
Boym is clear that these categories are not absolute, but are tendencies that may
overlap. Her thesis diverges from Nora’s view that national narratives spawn social
memory through memorialisation, and she sees reﬂective nostalgia as a narrative of
identity that offers a more reﬂective interplay between the collective and the per-
sonal – ‘nostalgic memories exist independently of a state that attempts to harness
them’ (Legg 2004, 100). The upshot of this is that nostalgia may have a more
positive role in brokering an intimate interplay between the individual, the shared
experience of community and a prospective role for nostalgia. While restorative
nostalgia has the tendency to restore places to their original glory, reﬂective nostal-
gia is more interested in adapting and recycling ‘modern ruins’ for the future
(Boym 2007, 17).

In light of the above, it can be argued that reﬂective nostalgia is a vehicle that
mediates many of the narratives ﬂowing around and through the school building.
As previously discussed, villagers’ stories narrate experience of the place in the past
and the present. However, what emerges most strongly is a regard for the future of
the place – mostly as a place of learning. While there are diverse opinions on its
present value to the community and as a place of memory, there is an overwhelm-
ing agreement that it should be re-used. Loss is still a narrative frame for under-
standing the place but this is strongly tempered by its prospect as a vehicle for
salvation. In other words, a reﬂective strand of nostalgia negotiates villagers’ narra-
tives, and mediates them in terms of a potential for the place to, once again, offer a
way out of poverty. In this understanding, the past, present and future are – in their
view – united. There are strong strands of identity and memory weaving through
the narrative experience of the place but they are intimately fused with its future
use. Here, the experience of loss and frustration is tempered through its potential to
become a positive force for the community.

Conclusion
While the project has only reached a fraction of the village and there were difﬁcul-
ties in obtaining the survey sample, it is still an indication of the meaning that the
old school building may hold. It is well regarded and they feel loss and frustration
at its condition. Most were cognisant of its past history and most held intimate con-
netions with the place. Though the authorities have abandoned it, the building is
regularly used as a playground for children. People visit it as an outing or to remi-
nisce in a quiet space. The remaining mango trees in the yard still bear fruit and
are harvested. It is strongly suggested that these narratives are integral with the
place and form part of its life and being – they are not additives. Moreover, in nar-
rative, we get a type of ‘meaning making’, which is allied to the stories that people
tell about places. These are stories from people who are intimate with the place – it
is not a history. As previously discussed, it is not the veracity of the historical
account that is at stake here but that the meaning of this place comes from the
stories that ﬂow through its spaces. In Stewart’s terms, narrative takes the villagers’
relationship with the building ‘behind’ and ‘beyond’ its immediate presence into a
world both nostalgic and future.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

429

It could be expected that the diversity of class and culture in the village would
have resulted in diverse views on the future role of the building. However, while
views were divergent on the exact nature of re-use (community centre,
library,
women’s education, children’s education or technical education,), the primary theme
was education. Although one villager suggested it should ‘go back to being a court’
and the king should return to ‘make decisions for the area’ (Curtin University
2011h), in both men and women’s workshops it was a common theme that educa-
tion was a priority and that any future purpose should give women a chance to
become employable (Curtin University 2011c).3

Although there was a strong sentiment that the place should be re-used for the
beneﬁt of the people, any notion of an accurate heritage reconstruction did not
colour this suggestion. Conversations with villagers indicated that, while there were
romantic attachments to the place,
there were no sentimental attachments to a
‘restoration’ of the place. There was a tendency to be more concerned with its value
as a re-used building, which would become a meaningful place that would provide
them with the tools to break from the cycle of poverty (Curtin University 2011c).

It should be reiterated that the above ﬁndings are contingent on the vagaries of
language translation and interpretation. As previously mentioned, this analysis must
be approached in the light of possible inaccuracy in language translation and a
perceived social and cultural gap between the researchers and the villagers.

As this paper argues,

their narratives of memory and loss can be seen as
arbitrated by its potential future. Those narratives may be understood as mediated
by a reﬂective nostalgia of the place – as proposed by Boym. This understanding
of narrative, as a reﬂective critique of nostalgia – a nostalgia that proposes a future
– is valuable to understand stories as an interpenetration of their memories of the
the present and its future. The notion of reﬂective nostalgia also paves
place,
the way for an adaptive use of places rather than reconstruction – a regard for the
nostalgia of a ruin – but one that serves the future.

Narrative has the power to make visible imagined action and to ‘shape the way
we perceive our relations to the landscape’ (Stewart 2007, 25). Through an exami-
nation of the stories surrounding the old school building, as told by villagers, there
is the possibility of narrative as an alternative route to understanding the cultural
signiﬁcance of a place.

Notes
1. Actual names of those interviewed have been suppressed to observe Curtin ethics

approval conditions for this project.

2. Mr A conﬁrmed that his grandfather’s name was Raja Man Singh and that he built a
number of buildings in and around the village including the guesthouse. It is interesting
that some villagers interviewed remembered the place as a court of law and not as a
guesthouse. This may be because its function as a place of power is remembered over
its more mundane function as a dwelling. The conﬂict between the stories also high-
lights possible problems with translation and interpretation where according to Mr S the
building was a courthouse where guests stayed and for Mr A it was a guesthouse which
occasionally became a court.

3. The predominant theme of education in the villagers survey and workshops may be
because they perceive the current school to be inadequate. The women’s workshop cited a
lack of teachers, books and facilities at the existing school. Also, IRead have championed
education in the village. The women’s workshop suggested that the building could be a
‘community facility for teaching trade skills such as sewing, embroidery, computing, as a

430

J. Stephens

possible refuge during monsoon and as accommodation for wedding parties’. The men’s
workshop suggested that the building could be a ‘place of learning for the women, since it
was a safe place for them to travel to and from their houses’ (Curtin University 2011c).

Notes on contributor
John Stephens is a teacher and researcher in the Department of Architecture and Interior
Architecture at Curtin University in Western Australia. He is active in heritage matters in
Western Australia holding a number of statutory appointments in this ﬁeld. His current
research explores the links between the symbolic and material characteristics of memory,
memorialisation and heritage practice.

References
Boym, S. 2001. The Future of Nostalgia. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Boym, S. 2007. “Nostalgia and its Discontents.” Hedgehog Review: Critical Reﬂections on

Contemporary Culture 9 (2): 7–18.

Curtin University. 2011a. Lakhnu Community Development Project, Conducted during
November 19–26, 2011 by Reena Tiwari, John Stephens, Dianne Smith, Jake Schapper,
and Priya Metcalfe. Unpublished data held by the School of Built Environment, Curtin
University, Perth Western Australia.

Curtin University. 2011b. Lakhnu Community Development Project, Children’s Workshop,
Conducted by Pryia Metcalfe, John Stephens and Reena Tiwari at Lakhnu Village, India
on 22 November 2011, Translated by Reena Tiwari, Neha Patani. Unpublished data held
at the School of Built Environment, Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia.

Curtin University. 2011c. Lakhnu Community Development Project, Community Workshops,
Conducted on 26 November 2011 by Jake Schapper and Reena Tiwari, Translated by
Chirag Vasani, Neha Patani, Sandeep Sharma, Surabhi Sharma. Unpublished data held
by the School of Built Environment, Curtin University, Perth Western Australia.

Curtin University. 2011d. Lakhnu Community Development Project, Data Collected by
Group 4 – Rami Akila, Ruben Wills, Abigail Bolt on November 24, 2011 from female/
housewife villager. Unpublished data held by the School of Built Environment, Curtin
University, Perth Western Australia.

Curtin University. 2011e. Lakhnu Community Development Project, Data Collected by
Group 10 – Michael Scott, Rebecca Lewis, Shabnam Bozorgzadearbab on November 24,
2011, from male/farmer villager. Unpublished data held by the School of Built Environ-
ment, Curtin University, Perth Western Australia.

Curtin University. 2011f. Lakhnu Community Development Project, Data Collected by
Group 8 – Mark Cocks, Tamara Palme, Ashleigh Newcombe, on November 24, 2011,
from male/student villager. Unpublished data held by the School of Built Environment,
Curtin University, Perth Western Australia.

Curtin University. 2011g. Lakhnu Community Development Project, Data Collected by
Group 6 – Noreye Khalaf, Sheran Dempster, Loren Dyer on November 24, 2011, from
male/farmer villager. Unpublished data held by the School of Built Environment, Curtin
University, Perth Western Australia.

Curtin University. 2011h. Lakhnu Community Development Project, Data Collected by
Group 8 – Mark Cocks, Tamara Palme, Ashleigh Newcombe on November 24, 2011,
from male/student villager. Unpublished data held by the School of Built Environment,
Curtin University, Perth Western Australia.

Hewison, R. 1987. The Heritage Industry: Britain in a Climate of Decline. London:

Hollis, E. 2011. “The Secret Lives of Buildings: An Exercise in Building Stories.” In Nar-
rative and the Built Heritage: Papers in Tourism Research, edited by C. Mansﬁeld
and S. Seligman, 62–78. Saarbrücken: VDM.

Hunt, N. C. 2010. Memory, War and Truama. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Legg, S. 2004. “Memory and Nostalgia.” Cultural Geographies 11: 99–107.
Lowenthal, D. 1985. The Past

is a Foreign Country. Cambridge: Cambridge University

Methuen.

Press.

Lowenthal, D. 1998. The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History. Cambridge: Cam-

International Journal of Heritage Studies

431

bridge University Press.

Mitchell, W. J. T. 1981. “Foreword.” In On Narrative, edited by W. J. T. Mitchell, vii–x.

Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Mr A. 2012. Interview at Mathura, India with Mr A on November 4, 2012 by John Ste-
phens. (no translation needed). Unpublished data held by the School of Built Environ-
ment, Curtin University, Perth Western Australia.

Mr B. 2011. Interview with Mr B on November 21, 2011 by Priya Metcalfe and John Ste-
phens, Translated by Neha Patani. Unpublished data held by the School of Built Envi-
ronment, Curtin University, Perth Western Australia.

Mr K. 2011. Interview with Mr K on November 19, 2011 by Priya Metcalfe, Translated by
Sandeep Sharma. Unpublished data held by the School of Built Environment, Curtin
University, Perth Western Australia.

Mr S. 2011. Interview with Mr S on November 19, 2011 by John Stephens, Translated by
Sandeep Sharma and Chirag Vasani. Unpublished data held by the School of Built Envi-
ronment, Curtin University, Perth Western Australia.

Potteiger, M., and J. Purinton. 1998. Landscape Narratives: Design Practices for Telling

Stories. New York, NY: John Wiley.

Smith, L. 2006. Uses of Heritage. London: Routledge.
Stewart, S. 2007. On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the

Collection. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Waterton, E., and L. Smith. 2010. “The Recognition and Misrecognition of Community Her-

itage.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 16 (1): 4–15.

Waterton, E., L. Smith, and G. Campbell. 2006. “The Utility of Discourse Analysis to Heri-
tage Studies: The Burra Charter and Social Inclusion.” International Journal of Heritage
Studies 12 (4): 339–355.

Wertsch, J., and D. Billingsley. 2011. “The Role of Narratives in Commemoration: Remem-
bering as Mediated Action.” In Heritage, Memory and Identity, edited by H. Anheier
and Y. Isar Raj, 25–38. London: Sage.

White, H. 1981. “The Value of Narrativity in the Representation of Reality.” In On Narra-

tive, edited by W. J. T. Mitchell, 1–23. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


