 International Journal of Cultural Property   (2014)   21:  1– 21 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2014 International Cultural Property Society 
 doi:10.1017/S0940739113000295 

                   Pondering Dysfunctions in Heritage 
Protection: Lessons from the Theft of 
the  Codex Calixtinus  
       Michael A.     Vargas   *    

            Abstract: The  Codex Calixtinus , the 12th-century manuscript at the heart 
of Spain’s Camino de Santiago, was stolen, hidden for a year, and then 
found in a trash can wrapped in newsprint and plastic. The extraordinary 
theft highlights some dysfunctions in cultural heritage thought and practice. 
Explored here are questions about exemplars and copies, ambiguities in 
heritage protection law, problems of proprietorship and commercialization 
of heritage goods, and administrative negligence in the management of 
heritage assets. The focus is on Spain, but the questions have broad relevance. 
This article concludes that one way to better protect movable heritage assets 
like the codex is to recognize them as part of a broad heritage landscape in 
which their loss or mismanagement means damage to an entire ecosystem of 
culture and history.      

  The theft of the  Codex Calixtinus  from the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain, in July 2011 was a sad but true whodunit. Only a few people had access to 
the beautifully illustrated 12th-century manuscript, which, with the exception of 
the cherished bones of the saint to whom it witnessed, was by far the cathedral’s 
most valuable asset. News outlets immediately recognized the depth of the loss: 
 Medievalists.net  called the event “the robbery of the century”; Galicia’s  La Gaceta  
said it was “as if they stole the Declaration of Independence”;  Reuters  reported it as 
“a major loss for Spain’s cultural and religious heritage.”  1   

 Nearly a year to the day after the commission of this extraordinary crime, local 
police found the codex. They had been tracking the activities of a former workman 
at the cathedral, a man who came to mass faithfully every morning even though he 

 *  Department of History ,  JFT 910 ,  State University of New York at New Paltz ,  1 Hawk Drive , 
 New Paltz ,  NY 12561-2440 . Email:  vargasm@newpaltz.edu .

1

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 2   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

was known to hold a grudge against his former employers. The codex turned up in 
his garage, along with several other important manuscripts and manuscript copies, 
and over 1.2 million euros in cash apparently pilfered from the cathedral’s cash 
boxes. The crime took on elements of a soap opera when, at trial proceedings, the 
accused asserted that he sought vengeance against the sex mongering and thievery 
of the cathedral’s dean, the very man responsible for the care of the codex.  2   

 The recovery of the manuscript and the court proceedings that put an end to its 
recent ordeal should not prevent us from gathering meaning from the very serious 
threat that befell it. The theft offers an unfortunate opportunity to ponder the 
place of medieval manuscripts and other “movable” heritage objects in cultural 
heritage policy, law, and practice. The ramifications of the theft illuminate several 
conceptual and procedural dysfunctions in the policy, administrative procedure, 
and law established to protect objects that are the foci of cultural memory. Beyond 
the disciplinary interests of a specialist in medieval Spanish religious history, whose 
personal affection for Iberian travel literature led to this enquiry, the theft raises 
questions  for  geographers,  sociologists,  and  others  about  the  preservation  of 
heritage resources and the construction of cultural memory. Experts in the law of 
historic preservation, cultural heritage managers, archivists, economists of travel, 
and practitioners in tourism industries will all see that they have stakes in the 
discussion. I begin this essay by considering the bond between the 12th-century 
codex and present-day tourist travel across northern Spain’s  Camino de Santiago  
(called simply “ el camino ” or “the way”). A difficult question of valuation is then 
considered: How can we adequately assess, and then protect, the value of price-
less objects like the codex, which are repositories of real and symbolic historical 
meaning? This will lead us to questions at the point where proprietary law and 
public good compete. Finally, I suggest that the concept of cultural landscape can 
help to negotiate law and administrative strategies for more effective protection 
of historical assets as well as greater recollection of and participation in cultural 
memory.  

 LEGEND, CODEX, AND THE ECONOMICS OF “EL CAMINO” HERITAGE 

 The  Codex Calixtinus  survived into our time as the earliest and most complete of 
a group of rare manuscript compilations honoring Saint James “the greater,” or 
 Santiago , one of the apostles closest to Jesus. Among its contents is a “pilgrim’s 
guide,” which nowadays is the best known and, in translation, the most widely 
read of the five books that constitute the codex. The terminus of the journey is the 
supposed resting place of St. James in the crypt of the Cathedral of Santiago. The 
pilgrim’s guide remains one of the earliest extant records of travel across northern 
Iberia. It is rightly called the first true guidebook for European travelers, since it 
recommends sites to see as well as people and places to avoid. More than a record 
of travels taken (indeed, like modern travel guides, its author did not visit all 
of the specified sites), it takes as its explicit purposes advertising Santiago’s cult, 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  3 

estimating the several values of pilgrimage to the site, and conjuring up for readers 
positive images of the trek.  3       

 The curious interweaving of history and legend that brought Santiago to Spain—
his beheading on order of King Herod in 42  ce , the purported translation of the 
bodily remains by sea, and their later discovery in a tomb in Galicia—is rightly 
described as “a puzzle-work of quite incredible complexity.”  4   A hodgepodge of 
sources offered two bits of instrumental legend that initiated the search leading to 
the discovery of the saintly remains: first, that James served as the first apostolic 
missionary to Hispania, at the western extremity of the Roman Empire; and second, 
that since, according to Jerome and other Church fathers, the bodies of all of the 
early disciples ultimately came to be buried in the centers of their mission activities, 
James’s remains were to be found in Spain. The  Codex Calixtinus  tells us that some 
eight centuries after the saint’s death, Theodomir, Bishop of Iria Flavia, sought to 
find the remains. The timing of Theodomir’s search is significant to historians in 
its correspondence to the early stirrings of a Christian Reconquest of Muslim Al-
Andalus. Following stars and other signs, the search party discovered an unusual 
tomb, which Theodomir recognized as the one he sought. He immediately built a 
shrine at the site to house the apostle’s relics and thereafter produced an account 
of the tomb’s discovery to publicize his find. The hagiographical details proffered 
by Theodomir along with other accounts of the  translatio  take their place alongside 
the pilgrim’s guide as one of the five books that would eventually be gathered into 
the  Codex Calixtinus . 

 Some readers may find dubious the burial of one of Jesus’ disciples in Galicia, 
but the story has carried great weight for millions of Christian believers for many 
centuries, with profound consequences. In the years after the discovery around 
840, Christians across Europe took great delight in the news of Santiago’s where-
abouts, and pilgrims began to travel to the site. By the decades after 950, several 
important bishops and secular lords left accounts of their having undertaken the 
difficult journey to seek the saint’s favor. Diego Galmírez, who served as Bishop 
of Compostela for four decades beginning in 1101, played the most instrumental 
role in promoting James’s cult. He completed transfer of his Episcopal see from 
Iria Flavia to Compostela, he gained the approval of Pope Calixtus II to raise its 
status to an archbishopric, and he effected plans initiated by his predecessor to 
build a cathedral at a scale worthy of James’s prominence. In the same years, 
perhaps under Diego’s direction, one or more clerics, perhaps of Gallic origin, 
produced the pilgrim’s guide.  5   In total, the  Codex Calixtinus  comprises the two 
parts mentioned thus far—the book recording the transfer of James’s remains and 
the guide for pilgrim travelers—and three other books: a book of miracles credited 
to St. James, a book of liturgical material for celebrating the cult, and the oldest 
version  of  the  Pseudo-Turpin  retelling  Charlemagne’s  fabled  (and  fictitious) 
exploits against Spanish Muslims under James’s inspiration. An appended letter 
attributed to Calixtus II lent that pope’s authority to the collection; also attached 
are songs celebrating the cult that count among the earliest extant examples of 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 4   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

 

 

  St. James as illustrated in the  Codex Calixtinus . (photo credit: Corbis images)    

polyphonic music in Europe. After its compilation, by 1170, the codex became 
the exemplar from which copies were made for dissemination. 

 The appearance of the  Codex Calixtinus  coincided with a dramatic expansion of 
Santiago’s cult as a cultural heritage phenomenon. Travel to Santiago grew, making 
his tomb the third most valued pilgrimage site in Christianity after Jerusalem and 
Rome. This physically demanding and spiritually meaningful journey was an 
expensive one for pilgrims and a lucrative one for those who offered accommoda-
tions, entertainment, and libation. In the middle ages, the way to St. James meant 
big business.  6   Pilgrimage waned in the early modern period after James’s bones 
disappeared—hidden, it is said, to keep them from falling prey to 16th-century 
English attackers. The pilgrimage revived when excavations after 1878 uncovered 
the crypt.  7   For its part, the codex was dismembered, with various parts taking their 
separate journeys until rejoined in the 20th century. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  5 

 The route to St. James has become big business once again. According to records 
kept by the cathedral, the number of sanctioned pilgrims traveling annually to visit 
the shrine of St. James in 2010 exceeded 150,000, although roughly 10 times that 
many el camino trekkers do not receive the requisite stamps in an official  credencial  
issued by cathedral authorities.  8   We might imagine that energetic Catholics, hearty 
Hispanophiles, and bicycling college-age adventurers make up the bulk of con-
temporary el camino travelers, but the demographic makeup remains very broad, 
as it was in the medieval period.  9   Nowadays, travelers come from within Spain 
and from far beyond Europe’s borders, not only by foot but also by horse, plane, 
car, and bike. They stop at inns and hotels, they indulge along the way in Spain’s 
gustatory delights, and they drink lots of wine. By some estimates, Santiago’s story 
has a direct hold upon some 4.5 million annual visitors to northern Spain who do 
not even set foot upon the pilgrims’ path. On the modern camino, and for Spain’s 
tourism-heavy economy more generally, the money spent and earned, by whichever 
of many current estimates one accepts, is huge.  10   And the spiritual rewards, for 
those who seek them, are incalculable. Certainly, walking el camino, as medieval 
pilgrims once did, signifies the consumption of a heritage product and perpetuates 
the pilgrimage in our secular age as “a living growing phenomenon.”  11     

 VALUING VELLUM AND BONE 

 The Council of Europe declared the pilgrimage route to Santiago its first European 
cultural itinerary in 1987, and the cathedral that houses the  Codex Calixtinus  
became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1993. UNESCO asserts that some 1800 
buildings along the route are of significant historic interest, which, beyond mere 
quantitative fact, is a measure of the quality of historic experience on offer along 
el camino and an indicator of the depth of imagination through which one can 
travel.  12   It is also an indicator of the high risk of theft borne by religious objects 
encountered along the way.  13   

 The tourist industry that has grown up to serve the annual migration to Santiago 
is connected directly to the valuable  Codex Calixtinus , since it is that manuscript 
that embodies the story of how a holy man who lived in the closest possible prox-
imity to divinity became the focus of Spain’s spiritual geography. The codex is the 
textual foundation of Santiago’s place as Spain’s patron saint. From an economic 
perspective,  it  is  an  invaluable  asset.  In  1990  an  insurance  broker  sought  six 
million euros to insure the manuscript. Cathedral administrators decided not to 
pay the sum since insuring the one-of-a-kind, irreplaceable item seemed irrelevant. 
Despite its rarity, or indeed because of it, the codex serves as one tangible measure 
of the value of an experience in time and place, of continuity and change over a 
significant expanse of time, and also of a perennial journey linked to notions of 
perpetuity. But consideration of “value” raises difficult questions with respect to 
the codex and other “goods of cultural interest,” as Spanish law puts it. Measures 
of cultural heritage value are imprecise, reasonably so if the useful tension is to be 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 6   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

maintained between “heritage” (centered on the past) and “culture” (about rele-
vance to the present). In particular, persistent questions include how to measure 
the value of exemplary heritage relative to accessible, credible copies; how to assess 
the relative heritage value of movable assets in comparison to fixed architectural 
heritage; and how best to simultaneously promote and protect the “intangible” 
value of heritage assets like the codex. How policymakers answer these questions 
will have real impacts upon the safeguarding of treasures like the codex and the 
means by which the public can come to know and appreciate cultural properties. 
 The interesting and difficult question of the relative value of originals and exem-
plars was given special poignancy during the period of the stolen codex’s disap-
pearance. The cathedral’s administrators rarely brought their prize out into public 
view; instead, they made available in a viewing case a facsimile of very high quality, 
nearly indistinguishable from the original, complete with wormholes, weathering 
stains, and brilliant illustrations. Given that enterprising archivists and booksellers 
have produced digital and print editions and translations—some exceedingly 
handsome and pricey—perhaps it could be argued that the absence of the original 
is no great loss.  14   

 Walter Benjamin considered this modern devaluation of exemplars when he 
argued in the 1930s that copies made by mass-production technologies reduced the 
value of originals. He meant to conceive a communistic theory of art, one that made 
important objects broadly accessible by valuing their copies. The token copies car-
ried nearly all of the properties of the originals. On the other hand, he recognized 
that “the uniqueness of a work of art is inseparable from its being imbedded in the 
fabric of tradition.” From his perspective, tradition meant the suspect structures of 
religion and ritual supporting concentrations of status and wealth. Nonetheless, he 
recognized that “even the most perfect reproduction of a work of art is lacking in 
one element: its presence in time and space, its unique existence at the place where 
it happens to be.” Moreover, “the presence of the original is the prerequisite to the 
concept of authenticity.”  15   Preservationists and cultural heritage proponents may 
disagree with Benjamin’s motives and premises, but they nearly all agree with him 
that what holds for artist-sanctioned multiples, photographs of important places 
or things, or facsimiles of manuscripts does not hold for premodern artifacts like 
the  Codex Calixtinus . We value the copied images we see of certain objects like the 
Lindesfarne Gospels or the Mona Lisa or the  Codex Calixtinus  because they serve as 
pointers or placeholders in the absence of a wished-for direct relationship between 
the viewer and the original. Originals and authentic artifacts are different in kind. 
The weight of history and cultural memory resides in them. That is why we work 
so hard to preserve them. 

 Skeptical readers of my effort to restore an appreciation for exemplars may 
find the evidence weak. The tautology—that we ought to protect one-of-a-kind 
manuscripts because they are unique—becomes especially problematic when we 
consider that what counts as singularly significant takes a cultural turn. Asian 
cultures do not share contemporary Western notions of authenticity. Japan’s Ise 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  7 

Grand Shrine is from one perspective a historically significant cultural landmark, 
having remained the focus of a rich landscape of Shinto architecture linked to the 
imperial family since at least the seventh century. However, UNESCO has not put 
the shrine on its list of World Heritage sites. The reason is simple, if abstruse: The 
shrine is demolished and rebuilt every 20 years. The centuries-old practice makes 
the site perpetually old and perennially new in local conception, but disqualifies it 
according to Western standards of authentic antiquity. In China,  Fu Zhipin  imitations 
of ancient vases take their authentic place in a cyclical world view in which the 
past is perpetuated through its active recreation.  16   Some observers assert that the 
Western proclivity for authenticity is of recent provenance, dating to the Renais-
sance or later, although medievalists like myself can see evidence for it in the early 
Christian theft of relics. Indeed, it may be the peculiar Western practice of making 
old objects a focus of devotional fetish that not only contributes to a market for 
fakes but that also encourages sensational thefts like that of the  Codex Calixtinus . 

 The foregoing reflection on the problem of copy and exemplar reminds us that 
large architectural artifacts, such as China’s Great Wall, the Roman Coliseum, the 
Panama Canal, and the 1800 examples of heritage architecture along the Camino 
de Santiago, do not suffer the burden that texts do. While nothing is forever, 
architecture seems more substantially rooted in a tangible past and more easily 
substantiated in a signified future than ink on sheepskin hidden away in an archive. 
Still, it should not be inevitable that UNESCO fails at the promise it made in its 
Constitution to protect book heritage.  17   

 In one sense, what is valuable about the  Codex Calixtinus  and manuscripts like 
it is the information it carried between the lines of text. The codex carried valuable 
information about people and places in 12th-century Europe. In recording his 
impressions of an extended network of pilgrimage paths through 12th-century 
France and then across northern Spain, pointing out the sites and saints to be visited 
along the way, the author marked a crucial moment in European history. A period 
of population growth and economic expansion culminated in the revitalization of 
Christian Spain consequent with its reintegration into a European society that was 
beginning its geo-political ascendance. Presumptions aside about the rise of “the 
West,” there is no doubt that monastic expansion and pilgrimage travel along el 
camino contributed to an increasingly tenacious conception of European Chris-
tendom, which gave impetus to a militarized Christian rejection of Muslim dom-
inance on Iberian soil in a so-called Reconquest. 

 The pilgrim’s guide offers a unique lens through which readers and el camino 
travelers can view Spain’s historic cultural diversity. The sensational prejudices 
recorded in the guide count for so much of the strange fun in reading it. Its writer 
shows Basques and the Navarrese in a pretty bad light, indicating that travelers may 
suffer the consequences of passing through a land where ferrymen overturn their 
own boats in order to drown their clients, butchers sharpen their knives aside 
poisoned streams where horses die after a drink, and peasants guard personal interests 
in their own animals’ affections with chastity belts. The writer’s exuberance for 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 8   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

French saints, French churches, and French wine evinces his origins while of-
fering curious confirmatory evidence of common enough prejudices about the 
self-absorbed Frenchman. 

 The pilgrim’s guide connects to a broad range of spin-off traditions, histories, 
and legends. The iconography of St. James includes the scallop shell, now a ubiq-
uitous sign of Christian pilgrimage even beyond the pilgrimage trail. And James 
himself has taken on more than one persona. He is the missionary apostle of Jesus 
with gospel in hand and the Christian pilgrim clutching a walking staff. Monks at 
the Abbey of Reading venerated the saint as a  divinus medicus , a holy healer.  18   In 
a sequel tradition, outside the contents of the codex but a result of its capacity to 
instigate myth and legend, James becomes the  Matamoros , the moor-slayer, who, 
for example, at Clavijo in 844 and Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212, mounts his ghostly 
white charger to lead Christian troops into spiritual combat against Muslim foes. 
The Cathedral dedicated to Santa María in Burgos, the seat of Castilian royal 
power, the seat of Castilian royal power during the High Middle Ages and a major 
stop along el camino, houses a mannequin of St. James with a movable arm holding a 
sword that is still used to confirm new entrants into the military Order of Santiago. 
 The   Codex  Calixtinus ,  then,  is  an  exquisite  repository  of  a  complex  cul-
tural heritage about which we still have much to learn. Scholar-academics and 
tourism managers could enhance tourism in Spain by putting the stories and 
histories  it  contains  to  better  use.  We  might  say  that  this  is  an  opportunity 
accorded as a second chance, since, while the codex went missing, it could be 
exploited only via the substitute copies. Of course, there are bones in Compos-
tela that may be the bones of the apostle James, but those bones could not tell 
their own story in its entirety. Nor, arguably, could they by themselves initiate 
a thousand years of pilgrimage history.  19   On its first folio the  Codex Calixtinus  
calls itself “the Jacobus.” It is, in some respects, as much a part of St. James as 
his  physical  remains.  The  real  value  of  the  codex  is  the  way  it  has  generated 
memory,  the  way  it  lives  like  a  dream  not  only  in  the  minds  of  travelers  to 
Santiago but more broadly in the popular imagination about Spain and about 
the medieval. 

 Proponents of religious and cultural tourism should be cautioned here. Over 
the centuries, interest in the codex has waxed and waned with interest in the pil-
grimage, and vice versa. In the period from the Reformation through the break-
down of the Spanish Empire, the body of St. James went into hiding, the codex was 
dismembered,  and  the  Cathedral  at  Compostela  became  just  another  façade 
for baroque experiments. In that period the pilgrims stayed home. Present-day 
observers may doubt that the current enthusiasm can diminish, but history suggests 
that Santiago-related tourism is fragile. We are fortunate that the  Codex Calixtinus  
is no longer lost to us. We are equally fortunate that we do not need to test the 
cultural carrying capacity of the facsimiles, that we do not need to test whether 
a dream would fail to recur because the talismanic dream-inducing object went 
missing.   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  9 

 CODEX IN THE GAP: COMPETING TENDENCIES IN PRINCIPLE, 

LAW, AND ADMINISTRATION 

 What counts as valuable in cultural heritage policy and law varies with the social 
and economic priorities of whatever place and time one examines. International, 
national, intra- or subnational, and local interests are in play. Contests between 
proprietary and public interests arise, and advocates of tourism and other market 
potentials vie with proponents of conservation and preventive limited access. Prin-
ciples, laws, administrative activities, and public action do not all move in single-
direction lockstep. 

 Spaniards have been unfortunate heirs to a legacy of spectacular destruction of 
their cultural assets; especially often cited are the destruction of historic infrastruc-
ture caused by Napoleon’s armies during the Peninsular War (1808–1814) and 
the abandonment and disrepair caused to church property by the  Desamortización  
carried out through the 19th century. Nonetheless, Spain still enjoys an embar-
rassment of historical riches. As historiographical studies of the evolution of Spanish 
heritage law point out, Spaniards have long recognized and honored the great 
wealth of artifacts left to them by their ancestors.  20   

 When efforts to define and protect cultural heritage began in earnest early in the 
20th century, Spanish authorities took an early lead. The nation has done extremely 
well at positing law based upon some laudable principles not only for the protec-
tion of its heritage but also for promoting public access. The Law of Excavations 
and Antiquities of 1911 and the Law of Monuments of 1915 count among early 
efforts in the modern era to safeguard important heritage markers. The Spanish 
Constitution of 1978, ushering in a democratic constitutional monarchy following 
years of Franco dictatorship, made explicit in Article 46 the state’s responsibility 
for preserving and enhancing access to its cultural heritage assets. Beyond Article 
46, commentators have asserted that heritage protections identified in that article 
are in principle related to environmental protections defended by Articles 41 and 
45, and thus, as constitutional principle, Spanish land and the heritage artifacts 
found upon it are part and parcel of Spaniards’ national trust, making up a single 
“indispensable collective solidarity.”  21   The Spanish Parliament passed a Historical 
Heritage Act in 1985 that explicated various means of compliance with the prin-
ciples of the 1978 Constitution. Importantly, while the Heritage Act safeguards 
fixed heritage resources like important archeological sites and exemplary historic 
architecture, it also specifically mentions and seeks to defend movable heritage.  22   
 The Spanish state has been precocious in its role as a promoter and agent of 
culture, and its efforts, for the most part, have been commendable. However, to 
turn principle into action, the 1985 Heritage Act and later legislative accretions 
to it give broad scope to Spain’s autonomous regions over the design of legisla-
tion governing the administration of cultural affairs in their local communities. 
In practice, the state defers much of its active, positive role in heritage protection 
to its autonomous regional governments, with the result that, in Sanz Salla’s 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 10   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

assessment, what now exists is a “complex mix of state and regional law” built 
upon definitions of heritage that remain “intentionally vague,” “ambiguous and 
indeterminate.” Quirosa García calls national law in its application to regional and 
local situations “confused and insufficient.” Administrative directives passed by 
local communities, by the autonomous regions, and at the national level can end 
up working at cross purposes, serving competing ends, and UNESCO’s deference 
to states also offers occasion for nurturing legal inefficacies.  23       

 The   Codex  Calixtinus   is  a  Spanish  national  treasure,  perhaps  even  a  world 
heritage resource, but you would not know it by reading the law because, in law, 
the codex belongs to the bishop of the Cathedral of Compostela. Taking note of 
this leads us to consider questions about state’s rights vis-à-vis proprietary inter-
ests. At issue in practical terms are the administrative responsibilities on public 
behalf  of  nongovernmental  owners  of  patrimony.  The  Heritage  Act  of  1985 
attempts to safeguard privately owned and Church-owned movable heritage by, 
for example, preventing sale without notification to the state or penalizing those 
found guilty of causing imprudent damage to heritage goods in their possession. 
Moreover, Spanish law conceives of a “social function,” as Sanz Salla puts it, 
applicable to heritage assets like the  Codex Calixtinus  that recognizes public right 
of access to privately held heritage properties.  24   Nonetheless, ambiguities in the 
law generally work to the benefit of proprietary over public interests.  25   The inter-
vention of international bodies like UNESCO seem in some respects only to add a 
fuzzily defined supranational tier to confirmations of ownership interests.  26   

 Proprietary interests in law and practice have become intimately situated within 
a commodification mentality. The most valuable cultural heritage assets, the ones 
that garner the most attention in the application of heritage law, are the ones that 
can be “sold” to tourists either as specific tourism destinations, like the Alhambra, 
or as objects removed from their original settings for presentation in museums, 
such as the Burgos Cathedral’s façade sculptures. Heritage researchers regard the 
emphasis on proprietors’ rights and commodification as a universal concern.  27   

 A  related  concern  is  incompetence,  neglect,  or  mismanagement  by  public 
or private administrators of heritage assets. The case of the  Codex Calixtinus  illus-
trates a range of occasions for negligence. The admitted thief exploited the cathe-
dral’s weak security systems and lax oversight, thus demonstrating that currently 
available policies and practices meant to protect cultural assets do not suffice. The 
Archbishop of the Cathedral of Santiago ultimately dismissed José María Díaz, the 
cathedral’s dean and, for 35 years, its chief archivist charged with responsibility 
for the codex. Díaz’s firing from his post was in no way swift, he will not leave the 
archbishop’s employ, and he asserts that he is a victim rather than a lax defender 
of an important piece of Spain’s patrimony.  28   In general, as in this case, few toothy 
sanctions fall upon local proprietors who screw up. 

 Of course, the theft of the codex is not the only recent cultural catastrophe. 
The looting of the National Museum of Iraq that followed the U.S. bombing of 
Baghdad in 2003 is a sufficient reminder that international decisions can have 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  11 

 

 

  Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy hands over the recovered  Codex Calixtinus  to 

Archbishop Julián Barrio. (photo credit: Corbis images)    

devastating national and local consequences, all of which might be characterized as 
accidental fallout. Nonetheless, the theft in Compostela takes its place among egre-
gious criminal appropriations of relics and religious objects that could have easily been 
prevented.  29   In truth, some cultural assets presumed to have universal value, especially 
texts, are provided too little oversight, and improving the situation will require making 
extremely difficult decisions about who manages those assets and how. 

 Better protection of heritage artifacts, and enhanced access to them, will mean 
creating legal and policy mechanisms that take us beyond the current limitations 
of proprietary responsibility. Perhaps these should include strengthened enforce-
ment of specific provisions for payment by proprietors of the costs of safeguarding 
a public interest in a privately held asset under penalty of confiscation. Perhaps the 
notion of a tragedy of the commons, so much in vogue at present, must be turned 
on its heads so that private ownership becomes the tragedy. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 12   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

 Underlying the shifting emphases in various and vague definitions of heritage 
is the distinction, broad and thinly elaborated, between movable and immovable 
heritage, a distinction that is not helpful to movable cultural heritage.  30   Despite 
Spain’s period of  Desamortización,  through which much of the property of the 
Catholic Church was confiscated by state authority, the Church is still the single 
largest property owner in Spain. We tend to think of the Church’s holdings in real 
property terms despite the fact that very significant movable resources, like the 
codex, are held in monastic and Episcopal archives. My own personal experience 
examining manuscripts in several monastic archives has taught me that these resources 
are often not well accounted for and are not controlled in keeping with best prac-
tices for their preservation. Some scholars have pleaded for stronger controls and 
even urged continued confiscations of Church property.  31   Spain’s Catholic insti-
tutions can draw upon huge reserves of political clout and legal precedent to block 
such action. Nonetheless, movable heritage resources like the  Codex Calixtinus  
could benefit from more thought about decoupling proprietorship and adminis-
trative responsibility.   

 A LANDSCAPE FOR SANTIAGO’S MEMORY 

 The defense of heritage is an especially messy business at sites where cultural inter-
ests collide. Santiago himself offers a poignant example of past and present contests 
of cultures. The saint developed a reputation as the Matamoros, a killer of Muslims 
(Moors), whose pugnacity good Christians deemed worthy of the greatest honor. 
Numerous paintings and sculptures along el camino depict him on horseback with 
sword raised, trampling beheaded Muslim enemies. One of these sculptures was 
prominently displayed in the Cathedral at Compostela until, in our current age of 
political correctness, the cathedral staff responded to protests and removed it. The 
removal brought counter-protests, which inspired several years of fierce debate 
that ultimately gave way to a compromise. The sculpture has been restored to its 
place of importance in public view inside the cathedral, but it is decorated with 
foliage that hides from view James’s hoof-beaten enemies.  32   This is a compromise 
that covers up an important, if tendentious, legacy. 

 The Cathedral of Cordoba/ La Mesquita , also a UNESCO World Heritage Site, 
has a similarly contested history. Fernando III, the Catholic King of Castile, found 
this famously beautiful mosque so exquisite that when he captured it in 1236, 
he had it consecrated as a Catholic Church rather than destroying it. Fernando’s 
son, Alfonso the Wise, began a building campaign that eventuated in the creative 
reconstruction we see today—a cathedral of Gothic exterior and Renaissance inte-
rior built into the very heart of the mosque.  33   In recent decades, Cordoba’s Muslims 
have petitioned for permission to pray in the space (as Christians routinely do), 
but their pleas have been rebuffed. In 2010 a group of European Muslim tourists 
visited the site, and several knelt to pray, apparently spontaneously. Security 
guards sought to prevent their prayers, starting a fight that left the guards seriously 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  13 

injured.  34   Granada’s Alhambra Palace has been the locus of incidents of deface-
ment, some of them apparently motivated by religious sentiments.  35   

 While the  Codex Calixtinus  has not itself suffered from controversies of this 
kind, the dissemination of its contents played an instrumental, if indirect, part 
in the promotion of Santiago as the Matamoros, and thus, it was an instigator 
of cultural contests, as texts often are.  36   The question of contested heritage is a 
live one for manuscripts. Although we may want to wish away inquisitional book-
burning and book-banning malice as a thing of the past, evidence from within the 
United States, in Afghanistan, and elsewhere demonstrates that culture wars are 
often fought through and about books. Manuscripts often become the collateral 
damage when cultures clash, as was the case at the start of the Iraq war. More 
instrumentally, texts are often the talismans that provoke or aggravate cultural 
wars. This latter point is not easily rectified since it is one of the essential features of 
heritage texts that their contested reinterpretation makes them prominent vehicles 
for moving a living history into the present. Such is the case with respect to the 
cultural heritage associated with Spain’s Civil War.  37   

 Despite these cultural contests, and perhaps because of them, efforts to preserve 
heritage while simultaneously animating its public appreciation should be encour-
aged. And yet, extolling the virtues and benefits of individual historic resources has 
its limits. Certainly it is better than not to place important sites on various heritage 
lists and to enter movables onto inventories, although, even here, administration 
of such lists continues an incomplete experiment, a process of “constantly trying 
out new methods.”  38   

 At the extreme, recent examples of administrative efforts to make lists of cul-
tural heritage assets lead one to wonder whether the preservation discourse will 
be drained of significance. UNESCO’s recent willingness to count falconry and 
the Mediterranean diet among Spain’s “intangible” cultural heritage seems short-
sighted. Such efforts at identifying individual pieces of culture, ever tinier bits 
of history relevant to some constituency somewhere, like panning for ever smaller 
nuggets of gold, will garner decreasing returns on investment and, along with the 
incessant push to draw maximum tourist dollars out of every heritage asset, may 
bring our contemporary heritage boom to a bust. To use another metaphor, we 
should avoid wearing out the whole fabric of heritage concept and practice by 
patching it up with ever thinner threads. Surely, we must particularize the tour-
istic appeal of major sites like the Alhambra, Cordoba’s Cathedral Mosque, and, 
indeed, the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela. But overdoing such atomizing 
attention may backfire. We might find it a more beneficial approach in the long 
run to attempt to nurture public sentiment for a range of heritage resources taken 
as a collective, composite whole. Instead of exhorting tourists to order tapas as a 
way of consuming culture or to attend human-castle-building events to participate 
in some vague “intangible” referent to the past, we may find it a worthier and more 
workable goal to link the full array of heritage resources to broad landscapes of 
historic riches.  39   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 14   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

 Just as stone walls inscribe memory upon a landscape, we need to learn to appre-
ciate the ways in which individual heritage assets, movable and immovable, con-
tribute to broad geographies of memory and meaning.  40   The concept of cultural 
landscapes has its own recent history. Cultural landscapes were added to the oper-
ational guidelines of the World Heritage Convention in 1992. Since then, parties 
to the convention have asserted the place of cultural landscapes “at the heart of 
the notion of World Heritage,” although, in practice, identifying, promoting, and 
preserving landscape heritage continues to entail “numerous challenges.” One 
challenge is that while cultural memory studies have become so numerous that 
students can now receive specialized master’s degrees in the subject, the literature 
often focuses on discrete islands of commodified heritage assets when it might 
instead envision an expanse of memory resources. It is a significant challenge as 
well that movable heritage has not found its place in discussions of cultural or her-
itage landscapes or environments that emphasize “well-established, long-occupied 
places.”  41   One compensating suggestion is to learn to see various individual her-
itage assets as participants in a whole network of cultural assets that make, store, 
consume, and employ cultural memories.  42   This complementary ecological under-
standing of cultural property could more easily accommodate movable heritage, 
giving it a firmer place within heritage environments. 

 Attending to cultural landscapes and ecologies rather than to individual artifacts 
will require deliberate examination. In the case of Spain, such an examination is 
made easier than it might be elsewhere because of the well-understood fit of an 
enormous array of heritage assets to a diversified and powerful Iberian geography. 
It seems truer for Spain than almost anywhere else that varied physical terrain and 
a multitude of historically potent sites and objects operate together as part of a 
network  of  linked  places  and  resources  that  operate  together  in  the  making 
of collective memory. Romanesque reliquaries, Reconquest castles, Umayyad 
mosques, and Nasrid palaces—and the Cathedral of Santiago, too—are in them-
selves lifeless relics. These sites in stone become resplendent historic landmarks 
through their linkages to the numerous resources that together infer, resonate, 
and resound. Textual resources are part of this landscape, and they play a very 
necessary part in telling histories and recounting past deeds. The histories in these 
texts help bring the stones to life. 

 Some of the difficulty of defining and defending heritage, of selecting sites and 
items to declare worthy of protection, might be remedied by putting more energy 
into understanding how essential the connection might be among textual heritage, 
physical artifacts, and performative histories. To draw on two Catalan examples: 
The Drassanes Maritime Museum in Barcelona is not just a space for exhibiting 
old boats, it is a complex of 14th- and 15th-century warehouses used to build the 
merchant ships by which the Catalan count-kings and their merchants controlled 
Mediterranean ports from Sicily to Greece. Four of the greatest medieval European 
royal chronicles, the Catalan  Quatre Grans Cròniques , tell the story of the building 
and use of the shipyard facility. As an architectural treasure, the set of buildings that 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  15 

make up the Drassanes has its own varied history of use and adaptive reuse. Its 
present use is an active performance, retelling Barcelona’s past as the center of a 
late-medieval Mediterranean empire in a way that creates new value in the present. 
Human-castle-building events provide another example. They offer great entertain-
ment value to tourists, but their bolder function is to build community and Catalan 
identity by performing a lived memorializing ritual (in a substantially medieval way) 
that recalls for Catalan observers their history in a land of castles and castellans. 

 Several medieval Spanish, American, and other travel texts have a place in our 
mental landscapes. In addition to the  Codex Calixtinus  these include the  Poema 
de Mio Cid , the  Cantigas de Santa Maria , the  Llibre dels Fets  and others. Each of 
these grounds Spain’s famously rich supply of exemplary archeological, architec-
tural, and artistic treasures in the evidence of real people whose actions brought 
to life the spaces and places they inhabited. Each is part of the field of imagination 
one encounters when thinking about Spain, either as a construct of the past or 
the present, whether as an academic exercise or as a tourist experience. For many 
American readers the mere mention of Washington Irving’s  Tales of the Alhambra  
conjures land and heritage associations. 

 Cultural landscapes—sites and physical resources, texts and other artifacts—can 
be drawn into memory in myriad ways, including through film and other arts, 
which give life to cultural memory by performing it in and for our own time. Many 
of the novelistic, documentary, and feature film treatments of the  Camino de Santi-
ago  have drawn explicitly upon the contents of the  Codex Calixtinus . Brian Sewell’s 
BBC documentary,  The Naked Pilgrim , begins as a prim critique of Romanesque 
and Gothic architecture along el camino, but over its course it gets under the skin, 
becoming a metaphor for pilgrimage by inviting self-reflection. Emilio Estevez’s 
film,  The Way , about a father’s quest to complete his dead son’s journey to Santiago 
de Compostela, might offer characters that are a little flat, but the film evokes the 
scenery experienced by el camino travelers in a way that is very inviting for would-
be travelers. Among the events in 2011 celebrating the 800 years since the dedica-
tion of the Cathedral of Compostela was an impressive light show projection onto 
the cathedral façade, which, in equal parts architectural fantasy game and history 
lesson, generated emotional responses clearly audible even on observers’ web post-
ings of the event.  43   These are a few of the newest pieces of the whole substance of 
historic  imagination  St.  James  has  engendered.  No  matter  that  memories  of 
the past change with each new interpretation (and, as in the case of Santiago de 
Compostela, they can open themselves to metahistorical, mystical-esoteric fictions 
only loosely tied to any sense of authentic historical truth).  44   Historians know that 
without this malleable aspect of the historical process, and without concerted efforts 
to recollect the past as a fabric of stories and physical objects, both of which can be 
talismanic, our heritage would become either so rigid or so vacuous that recalling 
the past would have little merit for the present and future.  45   

 As William Melczer rightly said in opening his study of the 12th-century pilgrim’s 
guide: “The future is mortgaged on present expectations.”  46   The codex has been 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 16   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

found and restored to the Archbishopric of Compostela, and hopefully its owner 
will keep it safe, under better conditions, from theft or physical damage while also 
putting it into public view rather than hiding it away in a cupboard. It is my hope 
that the manuscript will be more broadly cherished, dreamed about, and imagined 
as part of a heritage landscape in which we draw upon the past to create a present 
that envisions a future rich in historical resonances. This is where the loss of 
the   Codex  Calixtinus ,  while  it  was  missing,  really  hurt,  since  the  prospect  that 
it would not reappear meant the loss of an important piece of Spain’s cultural 
landscape. No doubt some see its rediscovery as a miracle attributed to St. James; 
at least we should agree to recognize it as a sign of remarkable and sweet good 
fortune. Let us now take the opportunity to limit particularizing notions of her-
itage, turning our thoughts and actions instead toward holistic pursuits that will 
call many and varied bits of heritage into a mutually beneficial defense of their 
landscape and memory.    

  ENDNOTES 

  
 1  .     La  Gaceta ,  “Otro  Robo  del  Siglo,”  7  July  2011,   http://www.intereconomia.com/noticias-
gaceta/cultura/cultura/robo-siglo-20110707 , accessed 13 July 2013; Giles Tremlett, “Codex Calixtinus 
Manuscript  Stolen  from  Santiago  de  Compostela:  Priceless  12th-Century  Manuscript,  Which 
Contains  Europe’s  First  Travel  Guide,  Went  Missing  from  a  Safe  in  Spanish  Cathedral,”   The 
Guardian , 7 July 2011,  http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/jul/07/codex-calixtinus-manuscript-
stolen-santiago-compostela , accessed 13 July 2013;  Medievalists.Net , “Codex Calixtinus Stolen from 
Santiago de Compostela,” 7 July 2011,  http://www.medievalists.net/2011/07/07/codex-calixtinus-
stolen-from-santiago-de-compostela , accessed 13 July 2013; Lisa Abend, “Codex Caper: Medieval 
Guidebook Stolen from a Spanish Church,”  Time , 11 July 11,  http://www.time.com/time/world/
article/0,8599,2082071 ,00.html, accessed 13 July 2013; “Un mes sin el Códice Calixtino, muchas 
palabras  y  algunas  novedades,”  8  August  2011,   http://conscriptio.blogspot.com/2011/08/un-
mes-sin-el-codice-calixtino-muchas.html , accessed 13 July 2013. On a recent fictionalization of the theft, 
Manuel Morales, “Lo más lógico es que el ‘Códex Calixtino’ esté en manos de un fetichista del arte,” 
 El País , 11 January 2012,  http://cultura.elpais.com/cultura/2012/01/11/actualidad/1326236410_850215.
html , accessed 13 July 2013.  
  
 2  .    El Ladrón del Códice Calixtino pone en aprietos al Arzobispado de Santiago,”  La Gaceta , 
19  February  2013,   http://www.intereconomia.com/noticias-gaceta/sociedad/ladron-codice-calixtino-
pone-aprietos-arzobispado-20130219 ; “La Catedral de Santiago se querellará contra el ladrón del 
Códice Caixtino,”  La Gaceta , 8 March 2013,  http://www.intereconomia.com/noticias-gaceta/sociedad/
catedral-santiago-se-querellara-ladron-codice-calixtino-20130308 , accessed 1 July 2013.  
  
 3  .    The  Codex Calixtinus  and the  Pilgrim’s Guide  of which it is a part have been subjects of intense 
study and debate. For orientation, see Williams and Stones,  The Codex Calixtinus and the Shrine of 
Saint James , and Gerson,  The Pilgrim’s Guide to Santiago de Compostela .  
  
  
Fletcher,  St. James’s Catapult  and Cité de l’architecture et du patrimonie,  Compostela and Europe .  
  
 6  .    Among the many specialist studies of the medieval pilgrimage to Santiago are Ashley and 
Deegan,  Being a Pilgrim ; Dunn and Davidson,  The Pilgrimage to Compostela in the Middle Ages ; 
Candy,  The Archeology of Pilgrimage on the Camino de Santiago de Compostela ; Péricard-Méa,  Com-
postelle et cultes de saint Jacques au Moyen âge .  
  
 7  .    Societe des Bollandists,  Acta Sanctorum .  

 4  .    Melczer,  The Pilgrim’s Guide to Santiago de Compostela , 7.  
 5  .    On the important role of Bishop Diego Galmírez in the making of the Santiago legend, see 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  17 

 8  .    Pilgrim’s Office, Archdiocese of Santiago de Compostela, “Statistics,”  http://peregrinossantiago.

 15  .    Benjamin, “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,” 120, 123.  
 16  .    Stille,  The Future of the Past , 41–46.  
 17  .    UNESCO,  Protection of Mankind’s Cultural Heritage , 5.  
 18  .    Herbers, “The Miracles of St. James,” 18.  
 19  .    Fletcher,  St. James’s Catapult , which demonstrates the veracity of the assertion.  
 20  .    For example, Quirosa García,  Evolución de la Tutela de los Bienes Culturales Muebles en España, 

  
es/eng/pilgrims-office/statistics/ , accessed 1 July 2013.  
  
 9  .    Those  who  undertake  the  journey  appear  to  differ  from  heritage  consumers  identified  as 
typical by Light and Prentice, “Who Consumes the Heritage Product?” The film by José Alvarez,  El 
Camino de Santiago: No un camino de rosas,  offers several examples of atypical travelers.  
  
 10  .    The World Tourism Association in 2007 estimated that faith-based and pilgrimage tourism 
accounted for $18 billion in tourism revenues annually; Santiago’s portion of which is, by any 
measure, substantial.  Christian Examiner , March 2007,  http://www.christianexaminer.com/Articles/
Articles%20Mar07/Art_Mar07_04.html , accessed 1 July 2013. Recent symposia and conferences 
have explored the tourism success of el camino as a model for pilgrimage sites in Ireland, Italy, and 
elsewhere.  
 11  .    Ashley and Deegan,  Being a Pilgrim , 7. Nieves, “Reaching ‘Land’s End.’”  
  
 12  .    UNESCO,  Route of Santiago .  
  
  
 13  .    Amineddoleh,  “The  Protection  of  Abandoned  Cultural  Heritage  in  Spain,”  reports  that 
in 2011, the year the codex went missing, 50 other religious artifacts were reported stolen from area 
churches.  
 14  .    Ciaran Giles, “Priceless Manuscript Stolen from Spanish Cathedral in Santiago de Compostela,” 
  
 Artdaily.org ,  http://www.artdaily.org/index.asp?int_sec=2&int_new=48950 , accessed 1 July 2013, 
offers a photograph of the Dean of the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, José María Díaz, 
viewing the facsimile. For broader orientation, see Mallan, “Is Digitization Sufficient for Collective 
Remembering?”  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Siglos XVIII–XXI , 11.  
  
  
  
  
  
Histórico Mueble,” 24.  
 26  .    Grabow, “The Santiago de Compostela Pilgrim Routes.”  
  
  
 27  .    Gillespie,  “Protecting  World  Heritage”;  Phillips,  “Australia’s  Heritage  Protection  Act”; 
Prott, “Individual or Collective Rights for Cultural Heritage in the Information Society”; Nicholas 
and Bannister, “Copywriting the Past?”; Yu, “Cultural Relics, Intellectual Property, and Intangible 
Heritage.”  
  
 28  .    Sílvia Pontevedra, “Demite el Deán que custodiaba el ‘Codex Calixtinus,’”  El Pais , 20 December 
2012,  http://ccaa.elpais.com/ccaa/2012/12/19/galicia/1355914927_975944.html  accessed 1 July 2013.  
  
 29  .    Several significant religious objects have gone missing in recent years. These include the heart 
of St. Lawrence O’Toole, Archbishop of Dublin from 1162–1180, stolen from its reliquary box in 
Dublin Cathedral on 3 March 2012; a purported fragment of the True Cross taken from its reliquary 
crucifix hanging on a chapel wall in Boston’s Holy Cross Cathedral in July 2010; and a Byzantine cross 
reliquary from Tournai Cathedral in 2008.  
  
la Tutela , 111–18.  
  
  
  
contested in the medieval period, see Dodds et al.,  The Arts of Intimacy .  

 21  .    Sanz Salla,  The Protection of Historic Properties , 146–47.  
 22  .    Ley 16/1985, de 25 de Julio, Tit. III. In  Ley del Patrimonio Historíco Español,  15–18.  
 23  .    Sanz Salla,  The Protection of Historic Properties , 141, 153; Quirosa García,  Evolución de la Tutela , 120.  
 24  .    Sanz Salla,  The Protection of Historic Properties , 150.  
 25  .    Quirosa  García,   Evolución  de  la  Tutela ,  13;  Calderón,  “La  Protección  Penal  del  Patrimonio 

 30  .    Santa Olalla, “Bienes Muebles frente a Bienes Inmuebles,” 73–86; Quirosa García,  Evolución de 

 31  .    Amineddoleh, “The Protection of Abandoned Cultural Heritage in Spain.”  
 32  .    Domínguez García, “St. James the Moor-Slayer.”  
 33  .    Ruggles, “The Stratigraphy of Forgetting.” For additional examples of architectural heritage 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 18   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

 38  .    Quirosa García,  Evolución de Tutela , 233, and for an extended discussion of the rich but still 

 35  .    Meritxell Mir, “Swiss Tourist Arrested for Alhambra Wall Graffiti,”  The Local: Switzerland’s 

 36  .    Jones,  Santiago Matamoros and the Codex Calixtinus ; although, on interpretive problems, see 

 37  .    Useful for comparison, Viejo-Rose,  Reconstructing Spain , examines political and legal contests 

  
 34  .    Giles  Tremlett,  “Two  Arrested  After  Fight  in  Cordoba’s  Former  Mosque,”   The  Guardian , 
1  April  2010,   http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/apr/01/muslim-catholic-mosque-fight?
INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487 ; Atika Shubert, “Muslims in Spain Campaign to Worship Alongside 
Christians,”  CNN.com , 20 August 2010,  http://edition.cnn.com/2010/WORLD/europe/08/17/cordoba.
mosque.spain/index.html , accessed 23 June 2012.  
  
News in English , 10 January 2012,  http://www.thelocal.ch/2248/20120110 , accessed 23 June 2012.  
  
Fletcher,  St. James’s Catapult , 293–300.  
  
in the making and remaking of Civil War memorials.  
  
problematic practice of making and using heritage lists, 176–80 and 206–37.  
  
 39  .    For examples of thinly disguised tourism marketing, see Margalida Armengual and Sarah 
Garrahan, “Catalan Human Castles Declared UNESCO Element of Intangible Cultural Heritage of 
Humanity,”  CNA (Catalan News Agency) , 16 November 2010,  http://www.catalannewsagency.com/
news/culture/catalan-human-castles-declared-unesco-element-intangible-cultural-heritage-humanity , 
accessed 3 July 2013; Giles Tremlett, “Spanish Cathedral Says ‘Amen’ to Internet Pilgrimages,”  The 
Guardian , 2 May 2010,  http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/may/03/spanish-cathedral-internet-
pilgrimages , accessed 3 July 2013; “Hunting Added to Cultural Heritage List,”  Prague Daily Monitor , 
February  2012,   http://praguemonitor.com/2012/02/14/hunting-added-cultural-heritage-list ,  accessed 
3 July 2013; Hubbard and Lilley, “Selling the Past”; Duedahl, “Selling Mankind”; “Patrimony for 
Sale: The French Government Is Selling Off Some Historic Buildings,”  The Economist , 19 December 
2006,  http://www.economist.com/node/8450095 , accessed 23 June 2012.  
  
 40  .    Fernandes Alves, “Deliberate Landscapes.”  
  
 41  .    Luengo and Rössler,  World Heritage Cultural Landscapes , 39.  
  
 42  .    Bal et al.,  Acts of Memory ; Connerton,  How Societies Remember ; Halbwachs,  On Collective 
Memory ; Kansteinher, “Finding Meaning in Memory”; Lowenthal,  The Past is a Foreign Country ; 
Samuel,  Theatres of Memory .  
  
 43  .    Sewell,  The Naked Pilgrim ; Estevez,  The Way ; “Santiago de Compostela Cathedral 800th 
Anniversary  Projection  Mapping  Show,  Spain,”   Electric  TV ,  8  August  2011,   http://www.electrictv.
com/?p=7730 , accessed 25 June 2012, offers one of many video records of the event produced by 
GPD, General de Producciones y Diseño.  
  
Santiago”; Harvey, “Heritage Pasts and Heritage Presents.”  
  
that purposeful remaking of memory and history is not a modern invention.  
  

 44  .    Torres Feijó, “Interesses culturais e âmbitos receptivos em dous romances sobre o Caminho de 

 45  .    Le Goff,  History and Memory ; and Geary,  Phantoms of Remembrance , among others, remind us 

 46  .    Melczer,  Pilgrim’s Guide , 1.   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Alvarez  ,   José   (director).  El Camino de Santiago: No un camino de rosas .  Freehighway Productions ,  2006 .  

    Amineddoleh  ,   Leila  .   The Protection of Abandoned Cultural Heritage in Spain . Aedon: Rivista di arti 
e  diritto  on  line  3 .   http://www.aedon.mulino.it/archivio/2012/3/amineddoleh.htm#inizio   (2012; 
accessed on 22 June  2013 ).  

    Ashley  ,   Kathleen M.  , and   Marilyn     Deegan  .  Being a Pilgrim: Art and Ritual on the Medieval Routes to 
Santiago .  Burlington, VT :  Lund Humphries ,  2009 .  

    Bal  ,    Mieke  ,    Jonathan      Crewe  ,  and    Leo      Spitzer  ,  eds.   Acts  of  Memory:  Cultural  Recall  in  the  Present . 
 Hanover, NH :  University Press of New England ,  1999 .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  19 

    Benjamin  ,   Walter  . “ The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction .” in   Illuminations  , 
edited by   Hannah     Arendt   and translated by   Harry     Zohn  ,  217 –51.  New York :  Schoken Books ,  2007 .  

    Candy  ,   Julie M  .  The Archeology of Pilgrimage on the Camino de Santiago de Compostela: A Landscape 
Perspective .  Oxford :  Archaeopress ,  2009 .  

   Cité de l’architecture et du patrimonie ,  Braccio di Carlo Magno Museum ,  Monasterio San Martin 
Pinario .  Compostela and Europe: The Story of Diego Galmirez .  Milan :  Skira Editore ,  2010 .  

   Compendium :  Cultural Policies and Trends in Europe,  Spain/ 5.3. Sector Specific Legislation  .  http://www.
culturalpolicies.net/web/spain.php?aid=533  (updated November 2011; accessed 21 June  2012 ).  

    Connerton  ,   Paul  .  How Societies Remember .  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press ,  1989 .  

    Dodds  ,   Jerrilynn Denise  ,   María Rosa     Menocal  , and   Abigail Krasner     Balbale  .  The Arts of Intimacy: Chris-
tians, Jews, and Muslims in the Making of Castilian Culture .  New Haven, CT :  Yale University Press ,  2008 .  

    Domínguez García  ,   Javier  . “ St. James the Moor-Slayer, a New Challenge to Spanish National Discourse 
in the Twenty-First Century .”  International Journal of Iberian Studies   22  ( 2009 ):  68 – 78 .  

    Duedahl  ,   Poul  . “ Selling Mankind: UNESCO and the Invention of Global History, 1945–1976 .”  Journal 
of World History   22  ( 2011 ): 101 –33.  

    Dunn  ,   Maryjane  , and   Linda Kay     Davidson  .  The Pilgrimage to Compostela in the Middle Ages .  New 
York :  Routledge ,  2000 .  

    Estevez  ,   Emilio   (director).  The Way .  Santa Monica, CA :  Arc Entertainment ,  2011 .  

    Fernandes Alves  ,   Isabel  . “ Deliberate Landscapes: Stone Walls of the Design of Memory in Nature .” In 
 Paisajes Culturales: Herencia y Conversavación / Cultural Landscapes: Heritage and Conservation , 
edited by   Carmen Flys     Junquera  ,   Irene Sanz     Alonso  ,   Montserrat López     Mujica  , and   Esther Laso     y 
León  ,  173 –81.  Alcalá :  Universidad de Alcalá ,  2012 .  

    Fletcher  ,   Richard  .  St. James’s Catapult: The Life and Times of Diego Galmírez of Santiago de Compostela . 
 Oxford :  Clarendon Press ,  1984 .  

    Calderón  ,   Jésus María García  . “ La Protección Penal del Patrimonio Histórico Mueble .” In  La Policia 
Del Patrimonio Histórico: Prevención, Persecución y Sanción de las Infracciones Contra el Patrimonio 
Histórico Mueble en España , edited by   Mercedes García     Pazos   and   Luis Miguel     Arroyo Yanes  ,  7 – 38 . 
 El Puerto de Santa María :  Ayuntamiento de El Puerto de Santa María ,  2001 .  

    Geary  ,   Patrick  .  Phantoms of Remembrance: Memory and Oblivion at the End of the First Millennium . 
 Princeton, NJ :  Princeton University Press ,  1994 .  

    Gerson  ,    Paula  ,  ed.   The  Pilgrim’s  Guide  to  Santiago  de  Compostela.  The  Pilgrim’s  Guide:  A  Critical 
Edition, 1: The Manuscripts: Their Creation, Production, and Reception by Alison Stones, Jeanne Kro-
chalis, Paula Gerson, and Annie Shaver-Crandell; Volume II: The Text, by Paula Gerson, Annie Shaver-
Crandell, Alison Stones, and Jeanne Krochalis .  London :  Harvey Miller ,  1998 .  

    Gillespie  ,   Josephine  . “ Protecting World Heritage: Regulating Ownership and Land Use at Angkor 
Archaeological Park, Cambodia .”  International Journal of Heritage Studies   15  ( 2009 ):  338 –54.  

    Grabow  ,   Sven  . “ The Santiago de Compostela Pilgrim Routes: The Development of European Cul-
tural Heritage Policy and Practice from a Critical Perspective .”  European Journal of Archaeology   13  
( 2010 ):  90 – 116 .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

 20   

 MICHAEL A. VARGAS

    Halbwachs  ,   Maurice  .  On Collective Memory . Translated and edited by   Lewis A     Coser  .  Chicago : 
 University of Chicago Press ,  1992 .  

    Harvey  ,   David  . “ Heritage Pasts and Heritage Presents: Temporality, Meaning and the Scope of Heritage 
Studies .”  International Journal of Heritage Studies   7  ( 2001 ):  319 –38.  

    Herbers  ,   Klaus  . “ The Miracles of St. James .” In  The Codex Calixtinus and the Shrine of Saint James , 
edited by   John     Williams   and   Alison     Stones  ,  11 – 36 .  Tübingen :  Gunter Narr Verlag ,  1992 .  

    Hubbard  ,   Phil  , and   Leith     Lilley  . “ Selling the Past: Heritage-Tourism and Place Identity in Stratford-
upon-Avon .”  Geography   85  ( 2000 ):  221 –33.  

    Jones  ,   Linda G  .  Santiago Matamoros and the Codex Calixtinus: Anti-Islamic Apocalypticism in Medieval 
Christian Spain . Master’s thesis,  University of California Santa Barbara ,  1997 .  

    Kansteinher  ,   Wulf  . “ Finding Meaning in Memory: A Methodological Critique of Collective Memory 
Studies .”  History and Theory   41  ( 2002 ):  179 –97.  

    Kusumadara  ,   Afifah  . “ Protection and Sustainability of Indonesian Traditional Knowledge and Folklore: 
Legal and Non-Legal Measures .”  US-China Law Review   8  ( 2011 ):  548 –65.  

    Le Goff  ,   Jacques  .  History and Memory .  New York :  Columbia University Press ,  1992 .  

    Ley del Patrimonio Historíco Español y Reales Decretos de Desarrollo Parcial de la Ley . Madrid: Ministerio 
de Cultura ,  1992 .  

    Light  ,    Donald  ,  and    Richard  C.      Prentice  ,  “ Who  Consumes  the  Heritage  Product?  Implications  for 
European Heritage Tourism .” In  Building a New Heritage: Tourism, Culture and Identity in New 
Europe , edited by   Gregory J.     Ashworth   and   Peter J.     Larkham  ,  90 – 116 .  New York :  Routledge ,  1994 .  

    Lowenthal  ,   David  .  The Past Is a Foreign Country .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ,  1985 .  

    Luengo  ,   Ana  , and   Mechtild     Rössler  , eds.  World Heritage Cultural Landscapes .  Elche :  Ayuntamiento 
de Elche ,  2012 .  

    Mallan  ,   Katrine  . “ Is Digitization Sufficient for Collective Remembering? Access to and Use of Cultural 
Heritage Collections .”  Canadian Journal of Information & Library Sciences   30  ( 2006 ),  201 –20.  

    Melczer  ,   William  .  The Pilgrim’s Guide to Santiago de Compostela .  New York :  Italica Press ,  1993 .  

    Nicholas  ,   George P.  , and   Kelly P.     Bannister  , “ Copywriting the Past? ”  Current Anthropology   45  ( 2004 ): 
 327 –50.  

    Nieves  ,   Herrero  . “ Reaching ‘Land’s End’: New Social Practices in the Pilgrimage to Santiago de 
Compostela .”  International Journal of Iberian Studies   21  ( 2008 ):  131 –49.  

    Péricard-Méa  ,   Denise  .  Compostelle et cultes de saint Jacques au Moyen âge .  Paris :  Presses Universitaires 
de France ,  2000 .  

    Phillips  ,   Jake  . “ Australia’s Heritage Protection Act: An Alternative to Copyright in the Struggle to 
Protect Communal Interests in Authored Works of Folklore .”  Pacific Rim Law & Policy Journal   18  
( 2009 ):  547 –73.  

    Prott  ,   L  . “ Individual or Collective Rights for Cultural Heritage in the Information Society .”  Museum 
International   54  ( 2002 ):  7 – 12 .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295

CODEX – DYSFUNCTIONS IN HERITAGE PROTECTION  

  21 

    Quirosa  García  ,    Victoria  .   Evolución  de  la  Tutela  de  los  Bienes  Culturales  Muebles  en  España,  Siglos 
XVIII–XXI .  Granada :  Editorial Universidad de Granada ,  2008 .  

    Ruggles  ,   D. Fairchild  . “ The Stratigraphy of Forgetting: The Great Cathedral of Cordoba and Its 
Contested Legacy .” In  Contested Cultural Heritage , edited by   Helaine     Silverman  ,  51 – 67 .  New York : 
 Springer ,  2011 .  

    Samuel  ,   Raphael  .  Theatres of Memory, Vol. 1: Past and Present in Contemporary Culture .  New York : 
 Verso ,  1994 .  

    Santa  Olalla  ,    Bergoña  Bernal  .  “ Bienes  Muebles  frente  a  Bienes  Inmuebles:  Un  Peligo  Para  la 
Conservación  del  Patrimonio .”  In   La  Policia  Del  Patrimonio  Histórico:  Prevención,  Persecución 
y Sanción de las Infracciones Contra el Patrimonio Histórico Mueble en España , edited by   Mercedes 
García     Pazos   and   Luis Miguel     Arroyo Yanes  ,  73 – 86 .  El Puerto de Santa María :  Ayuntamiento de El 
Puerto de Santa María ,  2001 .  

    Sanz Salla  ,   Consuelo Olimpia  .  The Protection of Historic Properties: A Comparative Study of Administrative 
Policies .  Boston :  WIT Press ,  2009 .  

    Schwartz  ,    Hillel  .   The  Culture  of  the  Copy:  Striking  Likenesses,  Unreasonable  Facsimiles .   New  York : 
 Zone Books ,  1996 .  

    Sewell  ,   Brian   (director).  The Naked Pilgrim: The Road to Santiago .  London :  WAGTV ,  2004 .  

    Societe des  ,   Bollandists  .  Acta Sanctorum, VI. julii 25, De S. Jacobo Majori .  Paris :  Victorem Palme ,  1863 .  

    Stille  ,   Alexander  .  The Future of the Past .  New York :  Farrar, Straus and Giroux ,  2002 .  

    Torres Feijó  ,   Elias J  . “ Interesses culturais e âmbitos receptivos em dous romances sobre o Caminho 
de Santiago: Frechas de Ouro e O Enigma de Compostela .”  Romance Notes   52  ( 2012 ):  135 –49.  

   United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) .  Protection of Mankind’s 
Cultural Heritage: Sites and Monuments .  Paris :  UNESCO ,  1970 .  

   United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) .   Route of Santiago de 
Compostela  .  http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/669  (accessed 21 June  2012 ).  

    Viejo-Rose  ,    Dacia  .   Reconstructing  Spain:  Cultural  Heritage  and  Memory  After  Civil  War .   Toronto : 
 Sussex Academic Press ,  2011 .  

    Williams  ,   John  , and   Alison     Stones  , ed.  The Codex Calixtinus and the Shrine of Saint James .  Tübingen : 
 Gunter Narr Verlag ,  1992 .  

    Yu  ,   Peter K  . “ Cultural Relics, Intellectual Property, and Intangible Heritage .”  Temple Law Review   81  
( 2008 ):  433 – 506 .    

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:47:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000295


