International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Sustaining popular music’s material culture in
community archives and museums

Sarah Baker & Jez Collins

To cite this article: Sarah Baker & Jez Collins (2015) Sustaining popular music’s material culture
in community archives and museums, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 21:10, 983-996,
DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2015.1041414
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2015.1041414

Published online: 13 May 2015.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 984

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 10 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2015
Published with license by Taylor & Francis.
Vol. 21, No. 10, 983–996, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2015.1041414

Sustaining popular music’s material culture in community
archives and museums
Sarah Bakera* and Jez Collinsb

aSchool of Humanities, Grifﬁth University, Queensland, Australia; bCentre for Media and
Cultural Research, Birmingham City University, Birmingham, UK
(Received 25 February 2015; ﬁnal version received 12 April 2015)

This article examines the challenges of sustainability faced by community
archives and museums that are concerned with the preservation and display of
the material culture of popular music’s recent past. The sustainability of grass-
roots sites of popular music heritage is of great concern due to their role in mak-
ing accessible cultural artefacts that have limited representation in the collections
of more prestigious institutions. Drawing on three sites that have ceased opera-
tion – Jazz Museum Bix Eiben Hamburg, Mutant Sounds and Holy Warbles –
the article highlights difﬁculties faced by the founders and volunteers of physical
and online archives in sustaining their ‘do-it-yourself’ heritage practices in the
medium- to long-term.

Keywords: popular music; cultural heritage; community archives and museums;
sustainability

Introduction
The proliferation of sites dedicated to the preservation of popular music’s histories
in physical and online environments points to an increasing interest in the cultural
value of popular music’s material past by a broad array of individuals, communities
and the heritage industries. This growth in popular music heritage is now being
reﬂected in scholarly considerations of the collection, preservation, display and pub-
lic access to the artefacts of its material culture (see for example Baker et al. 2015;
Cohen et al. 2015). The archiving of popular music is generally concerned with
musical genres and forms in which production, distribution and consumption are
underpinned by, or in relationship to, the commercial logic of the music and record-
ing industries (Frith 1983). The commercial logic behind popular music’s material
culture has posed a challenge to a mainstream heritage sector not equipped to deal
with the mass-produced ephemera of the cultural industries.

A major challenge for the archiving and exhibiting of popular music is the vast
array of artefacts that make up this cultural form. Leonard (2007) identiﬁes the full
range of material that can constitute a popular music collection, incorporating pub-
lished and unpublished sound recordings in all formats as well as other items that
are part of the broader commodity logic of popular music production and consump-
tion such as promotional concert ﬂyers, ticket stubs, stage costumes, instruments,
and every possible form of merchandise and ephemera. The enormity of available

*Corresponding author. Email: s.baker@grifﬁth.edu.au

© 2015 Sarah Baker and Jez Collins

984

S. Baker and J. Collins

material poses a range of collection-related challenges for archives and museums
that specialise in popular music, as well as for those which seek to include popular
music artefacts in a broader collection. In many prestigious institutions, acquisition
policies necessarily emphasise a representative collection rather than a comprehen-
sive one. The endless problem of selection and deselection is becoming increasingly
acute as national and regional governments ask cultural institutions to hone their
proﬁles and relevance, often with accompanying budgetary constraints (Baker,
Doyle, and Homan 2015). The development of representative collections tends to
result in the selection of popular music sounds and artefacts that follow established
narratives in written and oral histories, reinforcing existing canons (Baker and Huber
2013b; Baker, Doyle, and Homan 2015).

Concerns over gaps in the representative collections of national archives and
other prestigious cultural institutions have led to the establishment of a burgeoning
number of grassroots popular music archives and museums run by enthusiasts who
have no experience as archivists, curators or heritage managers. These community-
based archives are important epistemologically because the parameters of their col-
lections are determined by volunteers and enthusiasts and based on their vernacular
knowledge and expertise. This enables a diverse archival record of popular music’s
material past to be created that ultimately ‘contribut[es] to a national archive that
exists beyond the National Archives’ (Flinn 2010, n.p.). These grassroots archives
and museums of popular music emphasise the need for comprehensive collection
policies that are inclusive, tasteless and based on an indiscriminate desire to retain a
full material record of popular music’s historical past.

Whilst the existence of most formal ‘representative’ collections have assured
long-term futures given their role as national institutions (for example, the National
Film and Sound Archive of Australia is a statutory authority covered by an act of
government), the continued existence of grassroots institutions is fragile in the short-
to medium-term. The sustainability of these grassroots sites of popular music her-
itage is of great concern because of the important role they undertake in preserving
and making accessible the material cultures of popular music that would otherwise
be lost or remain hidden. This is not simply in regard to archival holdings. As
Leonard (2015) argues, the content of community archives is sometimes ‘secondary to
what the existence of the archive itself represented’ in that these archives and muse-
ums have ‘produced each respective music culture in a way that made it (within the
bounds of the archive) knowable and quantiﬁable’. The objects contained within these
archives are what Leonard (2015) calls the ‘material anchor’ for the diverse practices,
processes and networks that constitute popular music culture. The endeavours of
community archives of popular music therefore uncover rich research materials for
scholars, cultural and popular music historians and those with an interest in popular
music in general. Moreover, it is not only the physical and digital objects in these col-
lections that we should be concerned about. Also at risk is the accumulated vernacular
knowledge and expertise held within the communities that form and are sustained by
these practices (see Baker and Huber 2012; Collins 2015).

The focus of this article is on the challenge of sustainability for do-it-yourself
(DIY) physical and online communities of popular music preservation. In the con-
text of this article, sustainability of archives refers to the continued ability to exist in
a way that meets the aims and objectives originally set out by the institution, organ-
isation or community. The three archives we draw on in this article – Jazz Museum

International Journal of Heritage Studies

985

Bix Eiben Hamburg, Mutant Sounds and Holy Warbles – all proved to be unsustain-
able in the long term and have now ceased operation.

It is important to note that grassroots institutions and sites of popular music her-
itage may not be considered as, or consider themselves to be, ‘archives’ in the tradi-
tional sense. By traditional archives, we mean local and national record ofﬁces,
museums and libraries that have a statutory, regulatory and systematic approach to
the collection, preservation and exhibition of their materials. Although organised
along the same principles of traditional archives and museums, grassroots institu-
tions are often created by individuals or small groups who share a particular interest
or hold personal collections. Without recourse to funds or expertise across a range
of professional archival and curatorial duties, these practices often develop in an ad
hoc manner. Yet many also seek to operate according to professional archival and
museum standards, and so, there is a blurring of the boundaries between ‘traditional’
and ‘grassroots’ archive practices and processes in these places. Whilst we focus on
popular music archives in this article, the issues and challenges we describe here
will be applicable to a wider set of popular cultural forms and will resonate with the
vast number of community archive, history and heritage practitioners and groups
that have emerged since the late twentieth century.

A framework of popular music preservation sites
This article draws together two discrete though related projects focussing on popular
music heritage, speciﬁcally, the grass roots archiving of popular music’s material
culture. In Baker’s research,
the sites under investigation are physical archives,
museums and halls of fame (see Baker and Huber 2013a), whilst in Collins’s study,
the heritage sites are online (see Collins and Long 2015). In both projects, under
investigation were the ways in which enthusiasts play a role in how popular music
and its culture are remembered and the contribution they make to the preservation of
the artefacts of popular music’s material past. As part of their research, the authors
have brought together their interests in physical and online community archives of
popular music to develop a database that logs popular music archives and museums
from around the world. This database acts as a shared resource for the two indepen-
dent projects and, at the time of writing, the 350 entries it contained highlight the
extent of popular music preservation and related heritage activities taking place
globally. The database aims to capture all levels of popular music heritage, docu-
menting preservation activities in the broadest sense, but roughly encompassing two
distinct types of practice – physical collections housed in physical locations (which
we further divide into the categories of ‘physical – authorised’ and ‘physical – do-it-
yourself’) and digital and online collections (characterised as ‘online – institutional’
and ‘online – community’).

Physical – authorised
In terms of the physical collections, some archives and museums in the database are
classed as ‘authorised’ collections in line with the critical and analytical framework
for music heritage practice put forward by Roberts and Cohen (2014). This frame-
work seeks to avoid the ofﬁcial/unofﬁcial binary by highlighting three types of
interrelated discourse about popular music heritage: ofﬁcially authorised, self-autho-
rised and unauthorised. Authorised popular music heritage tends to be that which is

986

S. Baker and J. Collins

sanctioned by and/or substantially sponsored by government bodies. Physical –
authorised archives and museums are those housed in purpose built or adapted
buildings, staffed through a paid workforce and with multiple income streams that
aid revenue generation.

Physical – do-it-yourself (DIY)
Other physical sites are categorised as do-it-yourself (DIY) collections, housed in
physical locations that are often ‘make do and mend’ buildings which are run by
volunteers. Such archives are often in a continual struggle for their ongoing exis-
tence, with issues of sustainability relating to ﬁnancial, spatial and/or human
resources. These are ‘self-authorised’ archives and museums in Roberts and Cohen’s
(2014, 248) terminology in that
they have limited government support and an
absence of the ‘gilt-edged symbolic capital’ that is attached to more prominent
institutions. They do, however, often make claims regarding their signiﬁcance and
status, and many seek to achieve professional standards. Archives and museums in
this category are ‘DIY institutions’, a term coined by Baker and Huber (2013a) in
order to identify collectively a group of popular music archives, museums and halls
of fame that were founded by enthusiasts, run largely by volunteers, and existed out-
side the frame of authorised projects of national collecting and display. The founders
of these heritage sites did, quite literally, ‘do it themselves,’ by establishing their
own self-managed archival and museum facilities after identifying the need for a
repository for the vast collections of popular music artefacts in their communities.

Online – institutional
The digital and online collections in the database include institutional collections
and archive holdings that can be understood as authorised practices as we have
described above. As such, they can also be conceptualised as ‘intentional’ archives
in that they have a systematic and ordered approach to the preservation, cataloguing
and exhibiting of their digitised artefacts. These organisations will often develop for-
mal policies speciﬁcally around their physical holdings that they seek to digitise in
order to make them more accessible to their users and also to attract new audiences.
Others are linked to the economic activities of record labels or, particularly in the
United States, are housed in the archives or special collections of universities. Core
challenges for online institutional collections concern sustaining and justifying
appropriate levels of funding for digitisation, copyright compliance and increasing
accessibility and interaction for users with their archive materials. A further key con-
cern facing such archives is that of ‘future’ archiving, that is, ensuring the availabil-
ity of appropriate hardware and software to read digital material and contending
with rapid advances in technology and platforms.

Online – community
In contrast to online – institutional sites, online – community archives are driven by
activist archivists who seek to preserve and share popular music culture. These are
often ad hoc and either seek to digitise and make available material they collect or
come across, or they deal only in digital items. They are also characterised by issues
of sustainability through lack of ﬁnance and human resources and issues of

International Journal of Heritage Studies

987

ownership and copyright. These sites often fall into the third category in Roberts
and Cohen’s (2014) framework – unauthorised. This is a variant of heritage practice
that does not seek authorisation and in which the emphasis is on everyday practice,
cultural bricolage, anti-heritage, and individual and collective memory. As such,
many sites in this category might be considered to be unintentional archives, in that
they are run by individuals or collectives who do not conceive of their practice as
archiving. This is particularly true in the case of the thousands of Facebook group
pages that exist which harvest hundreds of digitised photographs, ﬂyers, posters,
fanzines and memories from group members (Long 2015).

It is important to emphasise that we do not conceive of these four categories –
physical – authorised, physical – DIY, online – institutional, online – community –
as being rigid in character, and there are a multitude of examples of physical
archives which have an online component and vice versa. Rather, the categories are
suggestive of a wide spectrum of collecting and preservation activity. The purpose
of such a framework is to move beyond understandings of heritage activity that rest
on familiar binaries such as ofﬁcial/unofﬁcial, expert/amateur, professional/unprofes-
sional and even physical/online. Rather, we seek to recognise that the practice of
archiving and curating popular music’s material past in archives and museums can
be located on a continuum that registers levels of intentionality and professionalism,
that recognises the role of vernacular knowledge and skills in the preservation of
popular music heritage, and that accounts for important acts of collection and dis-
play that occurs outside the realm of mainstream heritage institutions.

The ﬂuidity of the four categories we propose here can be seen in the movement
of archives and museums along the continuum. Archives which were initially
characterised as physical – do-it-yourself, for example, may overtime amass a level
of authority and broader public acceptance which would reclassify them as physical
– authorised. Our interest here, however, is in the capacity of community archives
and museums, that is, those sites that are characterised as physical – do-it-yourself
and online – community, to remain sustainable as community archives without being
subsumed into already existing prestigious institutions.

Succession planning: the case of Jazz Museum Bix Eiben Hamburg
Jazz Museum Bix Eiben Hamburg, a non-proﬁt organisation housed in a converted
factory owned by the Eiben family, was devoted to the collection of ‘Old Jazz’.
Baker had anticipated visiting the museum in the second half of 2013 as part of her
study of DIY Institutions, however on contacting the museum in July 2013 she
learned of the museum’s closure. As the website explained on a page titled ‘What
you should know’ (July 2013), the museum was run by volunteers who ‘work for
the museum as a hobby’ and who were motivated by ‘the love for all the musicians
whose music should be conserved in order not to be forgotten’. The website reported
the museum’s collections to be substantial and in November 2011 included 95,000
Shellac 78s, 75,000 33 rpm records, 7000 Jazz-CDs, 6500 Tapes, 1000 big radio
vinyl records, 1000 45s, several hundred old thick Edison records from 1910 to
1920, a complete collection of 1600 magnetic tapes and CDs of 30 years of the
American radio show ‘Jazz-Revisited’, 500 obscure, bootleg recordings from a US
donator recorded without the knowledge of the musicians or hosts, in addition to
other materials related to old jazz such as follows: piano rolls, books, framed pic-
tures, photos, brochures, magazines, movies, old phonographs, announcements,

988

S. Baker and J. Collins

notiﬁcations, sheet music and letters. In July 2013, the museum’s website included a
list of future plans for Jazz Museum Bix Eiben Hamburg, including ‘consolidation
and conﬁrming our position as a museum’ and ‘planning a new building’. However,
the sustainability of the museum was clearly on the volunteers’ minds as ‘future
plans’ also involved ‘thinking about a success[or] in case the founder might suffer
under severe health problems’.

According to Flinn, Stevens, and Shepherd (2009, 79–80) a challenge for
community archives is sustaining the archive ‘beyond the participation of the key
founding individuals’, given that the running of these endeavours depends on ‘im-
mense dedication, enthusiasm and personal energy’ which volunteers may not be
able to sustain once the ‘original driving force moves away or passes on’. Succes-
sion planning is a common concern for the archives in Baker’s research. Many of
the 125 founders and volunteers she interviewed in twenty-four archives, museums
and halls of fame between 2010 and 2015 are over the age of 65 and in their inter-
views they speak of the ‘ageing workforce’ being an issue to be addressed if these
community archives are to have long-term futures. The advancing age of founders
and volunteers make succession planning a real challenge. In the case of the Victo-
rian Jazz Archive (VJA), for example, a volunteer explained during an interview in
2011:

I guess the challenge – because there are a lot of elderly folk here – their health’s not
going to continue for the next ten, twenty years, so I’m thinking the challenge is, how
do we get younger folk, like a 62 year old, or more 50 year olds in, and maybe some
musicians in, who will want to be interested enough to keep it proceeding in the right
way, and to be able to earn enough money to keep it viable. (personal communication,
July 2011)

But, as another VJA volunteer suggested, a DIY archive’s founder(s) can only ‘lay
the groundwork’ and it is then up to younger generations to ‘step up when the time
comes’ and make these archives ongoing concerns (personal communication, June
2012). Places like the VJA run a range of outreach activities for young people
which, it is hoped, will generate interest in jazz and subsequently the archiving of
jazz. ‘We’re hoping that the youth that are coming through the place will be the
archivists of tomorrow’, explained another volunteer at the VJA before observing
that the succession question ‘is a real worry, and we’d be kidding ourselves if we
didn’t acknowledge it’ (personal communication, July 2011). Interviewees from the
VJA express great anxiety about achieving the generational change that will be
necessary to ensure the continuing success of this archival enterprise (see Baker and
Huber 2012, 276–279).

In regard to Jazz Museum Bix Eiben Hamburg, the founder, Wilke-Jan Eiben,
had been collecting old jazz for over 60 years having ‘inherited his love of jazz from
his father, who managed to listen to the quintessentially American music even when
it was forbidden in Nazi Germany’ (Ann Arbour Observer, June 2009). The foun-
der’s retirement was dedicated to developing the museum as a leading repository of
early jazz recordings and artefacts and for scholars of jazz it proved an ‘invaluable’
resource (see for example Tackley 2012). At the time of writing, it was unclear what
exactly led to the closure of the museum, but correspondence with volunteers indi-
cates that, other than the shellacs which have been retained by the founder, the
museum’s various collections have now been distributed to a range of interested
parties. In line with the VJA’s emphasis on a need for generational change, one

International Journal of Heritage Studies

989

volunteer from Jazz Museum Bix Eiben Hamburg indicated in response to the
museum’s closure, ‘Now it’s time for a younger generation to take on the collec-
tions’ (personal communication, 13 July 2013). It will be interesting to see what
becomes of those collections, and whether they will again be made publicly accessi-
ble in the future.

Online – community archives and the spectre of sustainability
The impact of digital technologies on the music industries has been well docu-
mented (Wikstrom 2009). However, and in spite of the much-vaunted promise of
the ‘Long-Tail’ model for making available for sale the entirety of digitised music
catalogues (Anderson 2006), an enormous amount of recordings still remain unavail-
able in this or any form. Much of this material does not look likely ever to become
available. As Lawrence Lessig noted on his blog in 2003, signiﬁcant amounts of
works in copyright are likely to disappear before they ever enter the public domain.
In response to this situation, unauthorised archive sites that make recordings avail-
able without permission have become legion. Despite the proliferation of online sites
dealing with music histories and heritages, as with their physical counterparts, such
sites face challenges to their long-term futures; the spectre of sustainability looms
large. The closure of the sites Mutant Sounds and Holy Warble serve to demonstrate
this.

Mutant sounds – http://mutant-sounds.blogspot.co.uk
Mutant Sounds, cofounded by Eric and Jim, was a collaborative blog that launched
on 13 January 2007 and was ‘dedicated to the obscure, unknown and underrated
musiK’.1 The closure of the blog on 29 May 2013 was announced by the following
post from Eric:

ENDINGS AND BEGINNINGS
Due to some very serious personal and family-related issues that I’ve been confronting,
Mutant Sounds will now be placed on hold for the time being. All the older texts and
all links attached to the new and authorized ﬁles from the last few months’ posts will
remain, but Mutant in its current incarnation will cease operations …

Until then, thanks to all of you for all the years of support and patronage.

During its six years of publication, Mutant Sounds posted and made available a
prodigious amount of rips of obscure and out of print experimental and avant garde
music, psychedelic prog rock, Japanese erotica and all manner of music drawn from
the very outer fringes of popular music culture. Alongside the rips, Mutant Sounds
posted high-resolution pictures of the album sleeves accompanied by an informed
analysis of the music and artist.

In a post dated January 2013, it was revealed that blog cofounder Jim had under-
gone surgery and, whilst it was hoped he would recover, he was having to take an
extended absence from the site. It was in May of the same year that Eric announced
the closure of the blog via the Endings and Beginnings post. Both announcements
were met with get well wishes and appreciations of their work in preserving and
making available the music they sought out and posted. Typical of these comments
was this post on the blog from strzgr:

990

S. Baker and J. Collins

Mutant Sounds is not just a blog, it’s music library that should have been supported
(not only by its visitors if u know what i mean) and presented as a cultural offering, an
archive of the deleted the rare and the obscure, i feel grateful for all the great posts and
the things i’ve learned here, i sincerely thank u very much and i wish u all the best!

The example of Mutant Sounds highlights that online – community archives face
similar challenges to their physical counterparts regarding a reliance on the contin-
ued health of enthusiastic founders in keeping sites open. Despite an avid following,
as indicated by the comments posted in response to the rips provided on the site, this
did not translate into other enthusiasts taking over the blog once it became clear that
Eric and Jim were unable to continue.

Holy warbles – http://holywarbles.blogspot.com
Holy Warbles is another example of a music blog archive site that has ceased to
exist. Caught up in the slipstream of the United States Department of Justice
enforced closure of the online ﬁle hosting company Megaupload in 2012, scores of
sites were also closed as servers were taken down or links to downloads of material
were broken and rendered unusable. Holy Warbles was a site set up by blogger
øשlqæda to post out of print eccentric and ethnographic albums. There were a sub-
stantial number of albums ripped and made available for download on the site as
well as scans of sleeves, liner notes and reviews of the music and a celebrated series
of mixes produced by øשlqæda. Alongside this, the community formed around the
site posted comments giving thanks for øשlqæda’s work; entering into discussion,
critique and analysis about the music.

Following Holy Warbles’ closure in 2012, there was considerable reaction posted

across a wide range of music sites, such as this by Flash on the site Flash Strap:

These blogs are libraries of cultural treasures. ‘Piracy’ doesn’t even apply, really- blogs
like Holy Warbles aren’t black ships on the rogue sea, carrying stolen items- they’re
wizard archives tucked away in the wasteland, preserving the priceless and forgotten,
the hard or impossible to ﬁnd (for no proﬁt). They make it possible to exist outside the
horror of cultural homogeny, to ﬁnd enlightenment in music, in art, beyond the popular
mandate or the rigorously selected histories of previous generations.

In the post, Flash references another blog, Bodega Pop, whose founder Gary had
posted a response to the loss of Holy Warble under the title ‘Guilty until proven
innocent?’ In this post, Gary is highly critical of the actions leading to the closure of
Megaupload and the knock-on effect this had on ‘the loss of countless music blogs,
the loss of the communities they fostered, the loss of the evidence of otherwise for-
gotten expressive culture(s) that they brought to the surface and shared’. These sites,
Gary argued, are akin to libraries – repositories of knowledge holding rare, obscure,
out of print music that in his words are ‘expressive cultural artefacts’. But it is, he
says, ‘not just the music, mind you, which is lovely. But artefacts that are now once
again unavailable for, say, anyone studying the region and period’.

Efforts to track the Holy Warbles site on the Internet Archive Wayback Machine
failed to produce any cached pages of the blog. However, members of the commu-
nity, for whom the music has primarily personal and collective meaning as a cul-
tural, rather than an economic object, have sought to keep the spirit of Holy Warble
alive despite its complete disappearance from the World Wide Web. The blog site
Melómano Variopinto, for example, has uploaded all the mixes created on Holy

International Journal of Heritage Studies

991

Warble and has been proactive in advertising their availability on a wide range of
music archive sites.

The challenge of sustainability
There is considerable investment of labour involved in populating and curating
physical – DIY and online – community archives, manifest in the collections them-
selves and the creation and sustaining of community. The issues of continuation and
sustainability of online archives like Holy Warbles and Mutant Sounds is a major
concern for founders and the community that forms around them, as it is for those
involved in physical – DIY archives. In their endeavours, online – community archi-
vists share the same concerns as practitioners in physical – DIY archives, like Jazz
Museum Bix Eiben Hamburg and the VJA.

The closure of Jazz Museum Bix Eiben Hamburg raises questions about the sus-
tainability of physical – do-it-yourself popular music archives and museums once
those involved with their founding are unable to continue (due to ill health, for
example), move on or pass away. Some places, like the South Australian Jazz
Archive (SAJA), have established contingency plans that involve depositing the col-
lection in ‘authorised’ heritage institutions like the State Library of South Australia
in the event that there is no one to continue running the archive as a DIY concern.
However, this too has its problems with the SAJA President indicating that such
prestigious institutions are notorious for breaking up collections (personal commu-
nication, July 2013) or, as the founder of Vienna’s SR-Archiv österreichischer Popu-
larmusik noted, burying collections in basements never to be seen again (personal
communication, 12 August 2010). These are concerns held in the community
archive sector more broadly, where it is feared collections will be ‘subsumed under
larger institutional repositories, where they could be undervalued, get lost in the
shufﬂe or misinterpreted’ (Caswell and Mallick 2014, 75). Given that the impetus
for the establishment of so many DIY archives, both physical and online, is to save
popular musics material culture from this very fate (see Baker and Huber 2015),
what happens to collections is of genuine concern to those working in such archives
and some volunteers describe a sense of ‘urgency’ in ﬁnding real, lasting, sustain-
able solutions.

The sustainability of popular music heritage institutions is not just a concern of
community-based, do-it-yourself practitioners. Even authorised sites of popular
music heritage face pressing issues around such things as funding cuts, stafﬁng, lim-
ited space, public outreach, impacts of evolving digital technologies, and copyright
law. Whilst most manage to navigate these issues, or their existence is more secure
due to their connections with (or being housed within) institutions of national sig-
niﬁcance like a national library, archive or museum, other large scale initiatives have
failed to survive. In the United Kingdom, the National Centre for Popular Music in
Shefﬁeld which operated from March 1999 to June 2000 and the British Music
Experience which opened in March 2009, closing in March 2014, are high proﬁle
examples of such places. The closure of the National Centre was arguably due to ‘a
lack of public support, both local and national, an inability of bureaucratic infras-
tructure to construct a facility that captured popular music’s function in the commu-
nity and incorporate appropriate long term strategies to combat short
term
recalcitrance’ and a location not conducive to sustained visitor numbers (Brabazon
and Mallinder 2006, 102). According to the Museums Association blog, the British

992

S. Baker and J. Collins

Music Experience was forced to close after a funding agreement with the owners of
the building in which it was housed, the O2 Centre in London, came to an end, leav-
ing its collection of artefacts in the care of trustees until a new home can be found
in the future. Challenging political and economic climates also place public funded,
government supported institutions under threat, as was the case with Muziek Cen-
trum Nederlands. Funding for this Dutch archive and information centre ceased at
the end of 2012, with the archive now housed in the Special Collections of the
University of Amsterdam (Brandellero and Janssen 2014).

Whilst we therefore recognise sustainability is of concern to all popular music
heritage institutions, we argue it is felt particularly acutely by practitioners in both
physical – DIY and online – community archives and museums. These are amateurs
in archiving and curating who are learning about running a heritage institution ‘on
the job’. That a number of community archives of popular music have survived for
so long under difﬁcult conditions is testament to the hard work of these volunteer
conservationists and their dedication to the role they have undertaken as custodians
of popular music heritage against all odds. The VJA, for example, will celebrate its
20th year in 2016. Yet now, more perhaps than ever, sustainability is at the forefront
of the VJA’s future planning. The VJA has identiﬁed a series of key challenges that
will need to be addressed as they move forward, with these challenges relating to
continued relevance to the jazz fraternity; recognition that the current location is iso-
lated and a presence in the centre of Melbourne is required to increase public access;
provision of more ﬂexible opening hours; upskilling of volunteers; managing
technological advances; and expanding funding opportunities (Sutton 2015). Meet-
ing these challenges is part of the implementation of a strategy and associated busi-
ness plan that seeks to ‘respect the past’, ‘enjoy the present’ but also to ‘plan and
take action for the future to ensure the long-term viability’ of the VJA (Sutton
2015). The development of such a strategy will assist greatly in future-prooﬁng this
DIY institution, yet a central challenge to its sustainability still remains – that of the
gradual loss of the founding members and volunteers with vernacular knowledge
whose commitment to their role of ‘custodians of Australian jazz’ currently sustains
the operation in the face of ongoing concerns around limited resources (Baker and
Huber 2012). For now at least, the VJA is defying Newman’s (2011, 41) ﬁndings
that ‘fully voluntary archives may be essentially unsustainable’. However, for the
majority of physical – DIY archives, museums and halls of fame in Baker’s research
it is evident that without clear succession plans, broad community support, and col-
laboration with public institutions there is a real danger that the materials these
community archives have saved from being discarded as rubbish in the short term
will end up on the tip in the longer term.

In the case of online archives, there is a lot to unpick in the activities of indi-
viduals and communities who post historical musical resources on social media sites.
Questions of access and sustainability will be critical in developing more robust
online music archive sites along with a better appreciation of the motives of these
citizen and community archivists. Social media platforms have expanded opportuni-
ties for enthusiasts to engage in heritage practices around popular music and have
assisted greatly in the formation of communities of interest not bound by geographic
location (an issue for some physical – DIY archives). However, the examples of
Mutant Sounds and Holy Warbles highlight that the World Wide Web, whilst highly
effective as a site for the ‘dissemination of community memories’ (Flinn 2007, 158–
159) around the cultural practices of popular music production and consumption,

International Journal of Heritage Studies

993

struggles to provide a secure site for long term, effective archiving of music’s mate-
rial past. As Seamus Ross pointed out some years ago, ‘after years of research into
digital curation and preservation, we still face theoretical, methodological, and
technological challenges to sustaining material held in digital libraries’ (cited in
Manoff 2010, 395). With the rapid evolution of technology and new platforms and
services appearing, there is a real risk of current popular music archiving practices
becoming redundant, placing hundreds of thousands of popular music artefacts and
the communities that sustain them in danger of being lost forever.

One aspect of the challenge to sustainability highlighted in this article is the
ways in which online – community archives deal with copyright of the material in
their collections. As demonstrated in the case of Holy Warbles, copyright law is not
only a major barrier to the dissemination of the materials of popular music’s
recorded past but also to its associated materials and the vernacular knowledge of
the communities that form around such sites. The community outcry over the
enforced closure of Holy Warbles underscores the extent to which the materials
posted on that site were valued by the online community for their rarity, cultural sig-
niﬁcance and historical interest. There is clearly a need for online – community
archives to be aware of the legalities of posting copyright protected material online,
given the veracity of the music industry to pursue infringements, if these sites are to
establish themselves as a more stable presence for the archiving of popular music
heritage online. This is no easy task given that although at the point of their closure
these online sites are referred to by community members as being ‘music libraries’
(Holy Warbles) and ‘repositories of knowledge’
(Mutant Sounds),
(Bodega Pop), at the time of their founding their status as archive is largely uninten-
tional. This has implications for the types of resources and support that might other-
wise be accessed to ensure the long-term digital preservation of materials that are
posted on these sites.

‘archives’

Concluding thoughts
Our research has revealed that although they take different approaches to the collec-
tion, archiving and preservation of popular music heritage, physical – DIY and
online – community archives share, and are affected by, similar issues of sustainabil-
ity in the medium- to long-term. These issues, we would argue, are not unique to
collections relating to popular music. Flinn (2011) and colleagues (Flinn, Stevens,
and Shepherd 2009) have observed that community archives concerned with a broad
range of topics are equally challenged by the issue of sustainability. As Flinn (2011,
13–14) argues ‘At
the heart of these challenges lies the question of access to
resources (ﬁnancial, human, physical, skills, and expertise) and how a lack of
resources hinders the archive’s growth and ability to develop in the future’. In physi-
cal – DIY archives, for example, this is manifested in lack of funding, not enough
volunteers to carry out the jobs of cataloguing and preservation, a lack of space to
house the sheer quantity of artefacts donated and insufﬁcient training in archival
practices and processes.

Achieving medium- to long-term sustainability for community archives and
museums in ways that are positive, equitable and non-prescriptive will be important
if there is to be a comprehensive record of popular music’s material past as it was
lived and experienced. These institutions are of great value because they ‘set out to
collect and document popular music culture in Williams’s (1989) sense of its

994

S. Baker and J. Collins

ordinariness’ (Baker and Huber 2013a, 518). Whereas mainstream heritage institu-
tions create memorial canons of great works and artists, the community archives of
our study have holdings that arise from within communities of consumption and
which materialise the cultural memory of popular music for those communities. As
such, these are sites that encompass much more than the archiving of remnants of
popular music’s commodity economy for the future. They are equally concerned
with memory practices of the present. It is in their provision of a space for the
community to enact memory that the medium- to long-term sustainability of physi-
cal – DIY and online – community archives and museums may lie as the community
supports, replenishes and sustains popular music’s material past for the present as
much as for the future.

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This research has been supported by the Australian Research Council grants [DP1092910]
(2010–2012), [DP1300100317] (2013-2015).

Note
1. Quotes are reproduced verbatim from source with all errors intact.

Notes on contributors
Sarah Baker, PhD, is an Associate Professor of Cultural Sociology at Grifﬁth University,
Australia. Her books include Creative Labour: Media Work in Three Cultural Industries
(Routledge 2011) and Teaching Youth Studies Through Popular Culture (ACYS 2014) and
edited collections Redeﬁning Mainstream Popular Music (Routledge 2013), Youth Cultures
and Subcultures: Australian Perspectives (Ashgate 2015), and Preserving Popular Music
Heritage: Do-it-yourself, Do-it-together (Routledge 2015).

Jez Collins is a researcher and research developer in the Centre for Media and Cultural
Research at Birmingham City University, where his research interests are the music industries
and popular music as heritage. He is currently studying for his PhD at the University of
Liverpool. Jez is the founder of the Birmingham Music Archive and the executive co-pro-
ducer for the award-winning documentary Made in Birmingham: Reggae Punk Bhangra.

References
Anderson, Chris. 2006. The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business is Selling Less of More.

New York: Hyperion.

77–90. New York: Routledge.

Baker, Sarah, ed. 2015. Preserving Popular Music Heritage: Do-it-yourself, Do-it-together,

Baker, Sarah, and Alison Huber. 2012. “Masters of our own Destiny: Cultures of Preserva-
tion at the Victorian Jazz Archive in Melbourne, Australia.” Popular Music History 7 (3):
263–282. doi:10.1558/pomh.v7i3.263.

Baker, Sarah, and Alison Huber. 2013a. “Notes towards a Typology of the DIY Institution:
Identifying Do-it-yourself Places of Popular Music Preservation.” European Journal of
Cultural Studies 16 (5): 513–530. doi:10.1177/1367549413491721.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

995

Baker, Sarah, and Alison Huber. 2013b. “Locating the Canon in Tamworth: Historical Narra-
tives, Cultural Memory and Australia’s ‘Country Music Capital’.” Popular Music 32 (2):
223–240. doi:10.1017/S0261143013000081.

Baker, Sarah, and Alison Huber. 2015. “Saving ‘Rubbish’: Preserving Popular Music’s Mate-
rial Culture in Amateur Archives and Museums.” In Sites of Popular Music Heritage:
Memories, Histories, Places, edited by Sara Cohen, Robert Knifton, Marion Leonard,
and Les Roberts, 112–124. New York: Routledge.

Baker, Sarah, P. Doyle, and Shane Homan. 2015. “Historical Records, National Construc-

tions: The Contemporary Popular Music Archive.” Popular Music and Society.

Brabazon, Tara, and Stephen Mallinder. 2006. “Popping the Museum: The Case of Shefﬁeld

and Preston.” Museum and Society 4 (2): 96–112.

Brandellero, Amanda, and S. Janssen. 2014. “Popular Music as Cultural Heritage: Scoping
Out the Field of Practice.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 20 (3): 224–240.
doi:10.1080/13527258.2013.779294.

Caswell, Michelle, and Samip Mallick. 2014. “Collecting the Easily Missed Stories: Digital
Participatory Microhistory and the South Asian American Digital Archive.” Archives and
Manuscripts 42 (1): 73–86. doi:10.1080/01576895.2014.880931.

Cohen, Sara, Robert Knifton, Marion Leonard, and Les Roberts, eds. 2015. Sites of Popular

Music Heritage: Memories, Histories, Places. New York: Routledge.

Collins, Jez. 2015. “Doing-it-together: Public-history Making and Activist Archiving in
Online Popular Music Community Archives.” In Preserving Popular Music Heritage:
Do-it-yourself, Do-it-together, edited by Sarah Baker, 77–90. New York: Routledge.

Collins, Jez, and Paul Long. 2015. “‘ﬁllin’ in any blanks I can’: Online Archival Practice and
Virtual Sites of Musical Memory.” In Sites of Popular Music Heritage: Memories, Histo-
ries, Places, edited by Sara Cohen, Robert Knifton, Marion Leonard, and Les Roberts,
81–96. New York: Routledge.

Flinn, Andrew. 2007. “Community Histories, Community Archives: Some Opportunities and
the Society of Archivists 28 (2): 151–176. doi:10.1080/

Challenges.” Journal of
00379810701611936.

Flinn, Andrew. 2010. “‘An Attack on Professionalism and Scholarship’?: Democratising
Archives and the Production of Knowledge.” Ariadne 62. http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/is
sue62/ﬂinn.

Flinn, Andrew. 2011. “Archival Activism: Independent and Community-led Archives, Radi-
cal public History and the Heritage Professions.” InterActions: UCLA Journal of Educa-
tion and Information Studies 7 (2): 1–20.

Flinn, Andrew, Mary Stevens, and Elizabeth Shepherd. 2009. “Whose Memories, Whose
Archives? Independent Community Archives, Autonomy and the Mainstream.” Archival
Science 9: 71–86. doi:10.1007/s10502-009-9105-2.

Frith, Simon. 1983. Sound Effects: Youth, Leisure and the Politics of Rock’n’Roll. London:

Constable.

Leonard, Marion. 2007. “Constructing Histories through Material Culture: Popular Music,
Museums and Collecting.” Popular Music History 2 (2): 147–167. doi:10.1558/
pomh.v2i2.147.

Leonard, Marion. 2015. “The Shaping of Heritage: Collaborations between Independent
Popular Music Heritage Practitioners and the Museum Sector.” In Preserving Popular
Music Heritage: Do-it-yourself, Do-it-together, edited by Sarah Baker, 19–30. New York:
Routledge.

Long, Paul. 2015. “‘Really Saying Something?’ What do we Talk About When we Talk
About Popular Music Heritage, Memory, Archives, and the Digital?” In Preserving Popu-
lar Music Heritage: Do-it-yourself, Do-it-together, edited by Sarah Baker, 62–76. New
York: Routledge.

Manoff, Marlene. 2010. “Archive and Database as Metaphor: Theorizing the Historical

Record.” Portal: Libraries and the Academy 10 (4): 385–398.

Newman,

Joanna. 2011. “Sustaining Community Archives.” Aplis 24 (1): 37–45.

doi:10.3828/comma.2011.1.08.

Roberts, Les, and Sara Cohen. 2014. “Unauthorising Popular Music Heritage: Outline of a
Critical Framework.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 20 (3): 241–261.
doi:10.1080/13527258.2012.750619.

996

S. Baker and J. Collins

Sutton, Ray. 2015. “The Australian Jazz Museum: All that Aussie jazz – A Potted History of
the Victorian Jazz Archive, 1996–2014.” In Preserving Popular Music Heritage: Do-it-
yourself, Do-it-together, edited by Sarah Baker, 196–206. New York: Routledge.

Tackley, Catherine. 2012. Benny Goodman’s Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert. New

York: Oxford University Press.

Wikstrom, Patrik. 2009. The Music Industry – Music in the Cloud. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Williams, Raymond. 1989. Resources of Hope: Culture, Democracy, Socialism, R. Gale, ed.

London: Verso.


