 International Journal of Cultural Property   (2015)   22:  279– 299 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2015 International Cultural Property Society 
 doi:10.1017/S0940739115000211 

              

    State Immunity, Property Rights, and 
Cultural Objects on Loan 
       Alessandro     Chechi   *   

   

         Abstract:     In the art field the centuries-old concepts of property and state 
immunity are interwoven in an ambivalent relationship. Immunity rules may 
constitute a shield for the works of art that have been temporarily sent abroad 
for exhibition purposes. The obverse of the same coin is that the same rules 
may thwart the legal actions filed by individuals against foreign states to retrieve 
art objects lost in the past as a result or in connection with grave violations of 
human rights and humanitarian law. This article examines this conundrum 
and argues that the relationship between property rights and immunity rules 
should be reconceptualised and aligned with the values and priorities of the 
international community, such as the protection of human rights, the reparation 
of massive and violent crimes and the respect for cultural heritage.      

   INTRODUCTION 

 The painting Christ Carrying the Cross was painted in 1538 by Renaissance master 
Girolamo  Romanino.  It  depicts  Christ,  crowned  with  thorns,  carrying  the  cross 
while being dragged along by a rope. In 1998, the Italian Government bought this 
painting  from  a  private  owner  and  hung  it  in  the  famed  Pinacoteca  di  Brera,  a 
government-run museum in Milan. A few years later this work of art was caught 
up in a curious struggle that originated from its turbulent past. In effect, in 1941 
the painting was confiscated by Nazi-controlled French authorities from Federico 
Gentili di Giuseppe—an Italian of Jewish descent living in Paris—and then sold 
at auction together with other works. Seemingly unaware of the work’s history and 
of the Gentili heirs’ attempts to recover the family collection, in 2011 the Pinacoteca 
sent the Romanino painting to the Mary Brogan Museum of Tallahassee in the 

  *  Art-Law Centre ,  Faculty of Law ,  University of Geneva ,  Switzerland ; Email:  alessandro.chechi@unige.ch  

279

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 280   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

United States (US) for an exhibition. Having been informed of the loan of the 
Romanino, the Gentili heirs triggered an investigation that involved Interpol, the 
US Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the Attorney’s offices. This inves-
tigation led to the seizure of the painting and to its return to the Gentilis in 2012.  1   
Three reasons lie behind the smooth resolution of the case. The first is that the 
1941  auction  was  annulled  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  of  Paris  2  —which  thus  con-
firmed that Federico Gentili di Giuseppe remained the true owner of the painting. 
Second, Italian authorities did not subject the loan of the work to the release 
of an immunity guarantee under the US Immunity from Judicial Seizure Act.  3   
This act, which was adopted in 1965 to promote international cultural exchanges, 
gives immunity from seizure to foreign-owned artworks while on loan in the 
US for non-profit exhibitions. Third, no action was taken either by the Italian 
Government or the Pinacoteca when they were alerted of their right to challenge 
the seizure of the painting. 

 While the case of Christ Carrying the Cross inspired this article, it is not about 
the restitution of art stolen by the Nazis. Rather, this article examines the interface 
between two legal concepts that have had a central importance in this case: property 
and  state  immunity.  The  notion  of  property  denotes  the  idea  of  private  owner-
ship, that is, legal entitlement to exclusive possession of an object. Additionally, the 
same concept can be used to refer to the assets—such as land, ships, companies, 
goods, rights, and interests—that are owned by states (or by their agencies or 
instrumentalities). On the other hand, the doctrine of state immunity provides that a 
state is entitled, as a matter of international law, to immunity from the jurisdiction of 
foreign domestic courts in respect of acts of an inherently sovereign nature (immunity 
from jurisdiction). By the same token, it provides that state-owned property located 
in a foreign country cannot be subject to measures of constraint—such as attach-
ment, arrest or execution—unless that property is in use or is intended for use for 
an activity pursuing commercial purposes (immunity from execution). 

 This article examines the relationship between property and state immunity 
with respect to a specific category of cultural assets—state-owned artworks on loan 
to foreign museums for exhibition purposes—and in connection to a particular 
type  of  claim—restitution  grounded  on  the  removal  of  such  cultural  objects 
as  a  result  of  or  in  connection  with  grave  violations  of  international  law.  This 
analysis is carried out by focusing on the doctrine, the practice of states, the treaties 
adopted under the auspices of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cul-
tural Organization (UNESCO), and the recent developments concerning the law 
on state immunity—including the adoption of the United Nations Convention on 
Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property (UNCSI),  4   and the judg-
ment of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in the  Jurisdictional Immunities of 
the State  case.  5   This article points out that in the context of international art loans 
the concepts of property and state immunity are interwoven in an ambivalent 
relationship. More particularly, it emphasizes that the prerogatives that sovereign 
states enjoy under the rules on immunity may be at odds with existing human 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  281 

rights and cultural heritage norms. Then, the focus of this article moves to con-
sider the arguments that have been put forward by advocates and commentators 
in relation to the restitution proceedings under consideration to assert either that 
domestic courts should sidestep the procedural plea of immunity, or to berate a 
state’s legislature for declining to abrogate the norms that require domestic courts 
to grant immunity to foreign states. It will be demonstrated, however, that various 
obstacles militate against the success of restitution claims over disputed artifacts 
on loan. Under these circumstances, the final part of this paper sketches possible 
culture-sensitive courses of action for claimants of wrongfully removed art objects.   

 LOOKING AT PROPERTY  

 Definitions 

 As a legal term, property includes private and public property. The former notion 
refers  to  the  entitlement  of  natural  and  legal  persons  to  an  object—whether 
movable or immovable, tangible or intangible—and to the fact that they have 
substantial domination over such an object. Indeed, domestic property law confers 
rights  to  proprietors  in  the  form  of  an  ability  to  acquire,  possess,  use,  alienate, 
destroy, and dispose of an object. As such, property can be viewed as a bundle of 
rights. However, the concept of private property is not to be identified only with 
physical possession. Further reflection shows that an ownership right entails a 
relation not between an owner and a thing, but rather between the owner and other 
individuals in reference to that thing. In effect, the essence of private property is 
the right to exclude others.  6   These arguments allow the recollection that the right 
to property is one of the fundamental human rights that can be invoked by indi-
viduals, firms, and other private actors against states’ interference. On the other 
hand, the term public property refers to state-owned assets and originates from the 
virtually unlimited and exclusive state’s power to legislate on the distribution and 
management of resources that are situated on the national territory. Thus, public 
property is equal to control and is closely linked with sovereignty and the construc-
tion and regulation of social structures.  7   

 Having illustrated the dual dimension of the core idea of property, it is worth 
pausing to look at the notion of “cultural property.” But what is it? National heri-
tage legislation employs a wide variety of definitions, ranging from the use of very 
general language to the specific designation of what is protected according to cri-
teria that relate to historical, scientific, or artistic values or interests, to the age, or 
certain periods, or styles. Likewise, international treaties do not rely on a unique 
definition. The 1954 UNESCO Convention for the Protection of Cultural Prop-
erty in the Event of Armed Conflict (1954 UNESCO Convention) defines cultural 
property to include immovable as well as movable property “of great importance to 
the cultural heritage of every people.” It then goes on to provide a non-exhaustive 
list of categories including religious and secular monuments and archaeological sites. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 282   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

For the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing 
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (1970 
UNESCO Convention) the term cultural property means “property which, on reli-
gious or secular grounds, is specifically designated by each State as being of impor-
tance for archaeology, prehistory, history, literature, art or science.” In addition, 
that property must fall within one of the categories listed in Article 1.  8   

 Various  scholars  have  criticized  the  use  of  the  concept  of  “property”  with 
regard to art objects. Patty Gerstenblith pointed out that the terms “culture” and 
“property” are “potentially conflicting elements.” The reason is that the former term 
“describes the relationship between a group and the objects it holds important,” 
while the latter centers “on legal rights of individuals to possession of objects.”  9   
Likewise, others scholars have emphasized that property “focuses on the utility of 
markets […] and commodities,” whereas the term culture refers to “interests that 
are sometimes inexplicable in market terms.”  10   Furthermore, the use of the term 
property with regard to art objects has been criticized as it emphasizes private own-
ership as well as the exclusive sovereign interests of the territorial state at the 
expenses of the cultural—intangible—aspects of art objects. In other words, the 
term property carries an implicit choice and ordering of the importance of values.  11   
In the words of Edward Rothstein, “the very notion of cultural property is narrow 
and flawed” because it “illuminates neither the particular culture involved nor its 
relationship to a current political entity. It may be useful as a metaphor, but it has 
been more commonly used to consolidate […] state control.”  12   

 The  expression  “cultural  property”  has  been  “corrected”  by  the  concept  of 
“cultural heritage.”  13   In effect, the latter notion was introduced to transcend the 
limits of the former. The objective was to transform cultural manifestations into 
a collective interest with a view of heightening legal protection and reflecting the 
sentiment that everybody is affected if great works of art are locked away from 
public  display,  stolen,  smuggled,  destroyed,  or  vandalized.  Hence,  the  term 
“heritage” symbolizes different characteristics and relationships between objects 
and peoples than the term “property” does. It also reminds us of ancient civili-
zations as well as traditions, customs, and achievements that have been inherited 
from the past.  14   In sum, the shift from “property” to “heritage” indicates that the 
legal  framework  governing  property  was  insufficient  to  preserve  and  take  full 
account of the interests and values associated with monuments and art objects.  15   
Nevertheless, the term “cultural heritage” should be regarded as including—rather 
than replacing—the term “cultural property.”  16     

 Domestic Law and the Ownership of Art Objects 

 Property rights are created and defined by domestic law—albeit not exclusively, as 
we shall see. In effect, the constitution of virtually every state recognizes the right 
of natural and legal persons to own property, although the precise formulation of 
the right varies to some extent.  17   Moreover, almost all states have enacted specific 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  283 

legislation  providing  more  protective  and  less  trade-oriented  rules  for  art  objects 
than the regimes normally applied to ordinary goods. These laws may pursue various 
functions such as: (i) defining the limits and extent of state property; (ii) controlling the 
alienation of materials through provisions regulating the right of state pre-emption; 
(iii) regulating the exportation or the location within the state of artifacts belonging 
to the national heritage through their registration with one or more inventories; and 
(iv) imposing limits on the use of privately-owned cultural assets. Hence, state 
authorities have the power to circumscribe (or expropriate) individual property 
rights. The aim underlying this interventionist policy is to preserve the national pat-
rimony, this being an essential value, the protection and promotion of which are 
incumbent on the public authorities. 

 It is worth taking a closer look to the state legislation adopted to fight against illicit 
trafficking of movable cultural materials. Although these national laws vary between 
countries,  they  tend  to  take  two  forms.  First,  there  are  the  patrimony  laws  that 
provide that ownership of certain categories of cultural objects is vested  ipso iure  
in  the  state.  Consequently,  the  role  of  the  state  is  not  that  of  the  guardian  or 
custodian on behalf of the real owners, but that of exclusive owner. This means 
that the person removing an antiquity without permission is a thief and that such 
antiquity is stolen property. Second, there are the norms prohibiting or restricting 
the export of cultural materials. In contrast to patrimony laws, export controls do 
not affect the title to objects because their fundamental purpose is to prevent the 
outflow of artworks and antiquities that are important to the national patrimony. 
Export controls apply not only to artifacts inscribed in the state patrimony, but 
also to objects that are in private ownership. The distinction between patrimony 
laws and export regulations is critical because only the former category enjoys 
extraterritorial effect. As posited by John Merryman, “[i]t is an established prin-
ciple of private international law that nations will judicially enforce foreign private 
law right.”  18   Such rights include the ownership rights conferred to the state by 
domestic laws.  19   This is due to the fact that theft is universally recognized as a 
crime.  20   On the contrary, a state is not obliged to recognize and enforce the export 
regulations of another state. In other words, although a country can legitimately 
enact export control laws, it cannot create an international obligation for other 
nations to recognize and enforce those measures.  21   

 These law-based property rights are routinely relied on in proceedings con-
cerning the recovery of art objects: (i) stolen from a private or public collection; 
(ii) expropriated by government authorities in breach of existing rules; (iii) exported 
from the country of origin in contravention of export rules; or (iv) pillaged during 
armed conflicts or occupation.   

 International Law and the Ownership of Art Objects 

 Due to the pervasive nature of international law and the advent of treaties in the 
fields  of  human  rights,  foreign  investment  and  cultural  heritage,  today  national 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 284   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

property regimes—and hence the property rights of private actors—are increas-
ingly affected by international law.  22   These regional and international instruments 
include: (i) the human rights conventions that recognize the right to property,  23   
and the rights that allow individuals to act in the protection of such a right, such 
as the right of access to justice (which is encompassed by the international human 
right to fair trial)  24   and the right to an effective remedy;  25   (ii) the bilateral invest-
ment treaties stipulated under the ICSID system,  26   which aim at reducing the 
uncertainty for foreign investors about the destiny of their assets and entitlements 
in the host state; and (iii) the cultural heritage treaties adopted under the auspices 
of UNESCO that deal with the issue of illicit trafficking. More specifically, these 
latter treaties call on states to cooperate with a view to: (i) respecting the owner-
ship rights created by the domestic law of the states from which cultural objects 
have been wrongfully removed;  27   (ii) preventing and fighting against theft, pillage, 
misappropriation, or illicit exportation of art materials owned by states or pri-
vate actors;  28   (iii) preserving the integrity of every country’s national patrimony, 
including the archaeological heritage, whether situated on land  29   or underwater;  30   
and  (iv)  securing  the  restitution  of  stolen  or  illicitly  exported  cultural  objects.  31   
Various domestic courts and international bodies have (re-)interpreted the nature 
and scope of the right to property contained in cultural heritage and human rights 
treaties.  32   

 It  follows  that  the  historical  impenetrability  of  national  property  regimes  has 
come to an end.  33   Today the domestic laws regulating the property rights of indi-
viduals, business, and other private actors are affected by international law in that 
it: (i) creates property rights;  34   (ii) protects property rights stemming from munic-
ipal law; (iii) establishes uniform standards to coordinate or harmonize property 
rights created under national law; and (iv) restricts or prohibits property rights 
authorized under municipal law.  35      

 LOOKING AT STATE IMMUNITY  

 Definitions and Legal Bases 

 The principle of state immunity is a basic precept of customary international law 
that grows out of the doctrines of sovereignty and equality of states.  36   It can be 
regarded  as  a  legally  binding  organizational  principle  developed  to  prevent  for-
eign  courts  from  interfering  with  the  exclusive  state  authority  as  recognized  by 
international  law.  37    At  one  time,  immunity  was  absolute  as  proceedings  against 
foreign states were inadmissible without their consent.  38   Yet, the judicial activism 
of some national courts marked a gradual shift from an absolute theory of immu-
nity to a narrower rule providing for a restrictive (or relative) immunity. Under 
this restrictive theory, a state is immune from the jurisdiction of foreign domestic 
courts in respect of claims arising out of governmental activities ( jure imperii ); 
it  is  not  immune,  however,  from  the  exercise  of  such  jurisdiction  in  respect  of 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  285 

claims arising out of activities of a kind carried on by private persons ( jure gestionis ). 
Immunity from enforcement is granted on the basis of the same rationale: state 
property located in the territory of another state can be subject to measures of 
constraint where the property in question is in use for an activity not pursuing 
government  non-commercial  purposes.  Moreover,  it  must  be  emphasized  that 
states can waive at any time the defense of sovereign immunity and that the rules 
governing immunity from jurisdiction and immunity from execution are dissim-
ilar: immunity from suit aims to shield states from being sued by impeding the 
initiation of legal proceedings in the forum state, whereas immunity from execu-
tion is meant to protect state property from pre- or post-measures of constraint. 
Furthermore, immunity rules must be applied separately: even if a state is not 
immune from the jurisdiction of a foreign court, it does not mean  ipso facto  that 
its property can be the subject of measures of constraint on the territory of the 
forum state or on that of a third state.  39   The reason of this difference is that the “[e]
nforcement against State property constitutes a greater interference with a State’s 
freedom to manage its own affairs and to pursue its public purposes that does the 
pronouncement of a judgment by a national court of another State”.  40   

 Besides international customary law, the rules on state immunity have been cod-
ified in the UNCSI. This treaty lays down a general rule—that a state has immu-
nity, for itself and its property, from the jurisdiction of other states’ courts—and 
provides a number of (exhaustive) exceptions to it, thereby drawing a line between 
those situations in which a state may properly claim immunity and those in which 
immunity cannot be granted. 

 As for immunity from execution, the UNCSI provides that neither pre-judgment 
(Article 18) nor post-judgment (Article 19) measures of constraint can be taken 
against  state  property.  Specifically,  Article  19  provides  that  no  measures  can  be 
taken “against property of a State unless […] (a) the State has expressly consented 
to the taking of such measures […]; or (b) the State has allocated or earmarked 
property for the satisfaction of the claim […]; or (c) it has been established that 
the property is specifically in use or intended for use by the State for other than 
government non-commercial purposes and is in the territory of the State of the 
forum […]”.  41   In contrast to Article 19, Article 18 contains no “commercial use” 
exception. Thus, pre-judgment measures of constraints are prohibited against state 
property  unless  and  to  the  extent  that  the  state  “has  expressly  consented  to  the 
taking of such measures” or “has allocated or earmarked property for the satisfac-
tion of the claim […].”  42   

 UNCSI Article 21(1) lists five categories of state-owned property that by their 
very nature should be taken to be in use or intended for use for governmental pur-
poses within the meaning of Article 19(c). Thus Article 21(1) prohibits the taking 
of  post-judgment  measures  of  constraint  against  specific  categories  of  property, 
unless the state has expressly consented to the taking of such measures in accor-
dance with Article 19(a) or has allocated or earmarked the property in accordance 
with Article 19(b). The following two categories are relevant for the purposes of the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 286   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

present study: “property forming part of the cultural heritage of the State or part 
of its archives and not placed or intended to be placed on sale,”  43   and “property 
forming part of an exhibition of objects of scientific, cultural or historical interest 
and not placed or intended to be placed on sale.”  44   Apart from the obvious fact that 
Article 21(1)(e) has a greater practical import in relation to movable—rather than 
immovable—artworks  on  loan,  it  must  be  stressed  that  these  norms  apply  only 
provided that these categories of cultural materials form part of the cultural her-
itage of a State and are “not placed or intended to be placed on sale.” This means 
that Article 21(1)(e) applies to the items sent abroad on loan for inclusion in 
exhibitions even if the public pays to view and notwithstanding the fact that the 
loan itself entails a profit or compensation for the lending state. On the contrary, 
this provision does not apply to the objects exhibited at art fairs designed to pro-
mote sales.  45   In sum, Article 21(1)(e) ensures that states involved in art restitution 
cases in foreign countries do not risk to lose their sovereign powers over a funda-
mental component of their history and identity.  46   

 The follow-up question is how to determine which property forms part of the 
cultural patrimony of a state. The obvious answer is that this should be deter-
mined by the relevant legislation of that state. However, it has been pointed out 
that the term “property of a State’ as used in Article 21(1)(e) should be inter-
preted broadly, so as to encompass property merely possessed or controlled by 
a state. The reason is that many items in public collections are held by the state 
even though they are owned by private owners. However, it can be argued that 
art objects on loan can be immune from enforcement measures under UNCSI 
provided  that  the  lending  state  proves  that  it  has  a  valid  legal  title  to  lend  an 
object under domestic legislation.  47   

 In  the  judgment   Jurisdictional  Immunities  of  the  State ,  the  ICJ  held  that  the 
commercial use exception of Article 19(c) reflects customary international law. 
Instead,  the  court  did  not  dwell  on  the  status  of  Article  21.  It  has  been  sub-
mitted, however, that the rule embodied in Articles 21(1)(d) and 21(1)(e) does 
not belong to customary international law because it is quite “novel”—even if 
state practice with respect to the legal protection of cultural exhibits on loan has 
developed in the past years.  48     

 Domestic Anti-Seizure Statutes 

 Various states have passed legislation granting immunity from seizure to objects 
temporarily on loan from foreign states or state museums for exhibition purposes. 
These anti-seizure laws ensure that art objects will be returned to the lender with-
out legal hindrance when the loan period expires.  49   As such, these statutes have a 
twofold effect: (i) preventing the seizure of loaned artworks by the courts of the 
borrowing state for reasons extraneous to the loan agreement; and (ii) facilitating 
inter-state cultural exchanges by defeating the reluctance of museums and collec-
tors to loan their artworks to foreign jurisdictions. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  287 

 Noticeably, states have passed anti-seizure laws mainly in response to court cases 
triggered  by  attempted  seizures.  50    In  practice,  there  appear  to  be  two  main  sce-
narios. The first occurs when individuals bring ownership action in the borrowing 
state based on the theft of artworks from their ancestors and on the inability of 
any later alienation to extinguish the original title. When claimants are states, the 
action is based on the breach of domestic patrimony laws. The second scenario—
which  will  not  be  examined  here—arises  where  a  creditor  of  the  lender,  having 
obtained a judgment against him, seeks to seize the lender’s assets situated in the 
borrowing state to secure satisfaction of the judgment.  51   In both scenarios, claims 
are filed in the borrowing state because action or enforcement are not available in 
the lender state. For instance, this is the case when the laws of lending states favor 
the good faith purchaser of stolen artworks over the victims of theft.  52   

 The  enactment  of  anti-seizure  statutes  demonstrates  that  states  are  not  per-
suaded that the courts of other states will unconditionally afford immunity to their 
cultural heritage items on loan on the grounds of their  jure imperii  character. In 
other  words,  the  customary  law  principle  of  state  immunity  is  considered  as  an 
insufficient  doctrine  to  assure  that  art  objects  protected  under  state  patrimony 
legislation will not be subject to enforcement measures while on loan in the bor-
rower’s jurisdiction.  53   One reason for this mistrust has to do with the fact that leg-
islation can be more easily ascertained and enforced than customary international 
law. Another reason is that it is not clear whether a loan of state-owned art can be 
considered as an act  jure imperii  or  jure gestionis . At one level, it can be argued that 
the loan of art objects constitutes a non-commercial transaction. The main reason 
is that art loans can be seen as state acts aimed at fostering cultural exchange and 
hence the mutual understanding between states. Under this approach artworks on 
loan would be immune from seizure. At another level, it cannot be denied that art 
loans also have the earmarks of commercial acts. These can be performed by states 
and private entities alike and habitually entail compensation by direct monetary 
payment and the sale of tickets and souvenirs.  54   Consequently, from this point of 
view state-owned artifacts on loan would not be immune from seizure by virtue of 
the doctrine of sovereign immunity.  55   

 In this respect, the UNCSI is a breakthrough. As said, this Convention singles 
out art objects on loan as a category of property to be considered in use for non-
commercial  transactions  (Article  21(1)(e)).  However,  it  must  be  noted  that 
Article 2(1)(c) UNCSI provides a broad definition of “commercial transaction”,  56   
whereas Article 2(2) states that in determining whether a contract or transaction 
is a “commercial transaction” under Article 2(1)(c) “reference should be made 
primarily to the nature of the contract or transaction, but its purpose should also 
be taken into account if the parties to the contract or transaction have so agreed, 
or if, in the practice of the State of the forum, that purpose is relevant to deter-
mining the non-commercial character of the contract or transaction.” Obviously, 
the application of either the nature criterion or the purpose criterion can lead 
to different results. Indeed, it can be submitted that an art loan is by nature an 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 288   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

act  jure gestionis , whereas the purpose of the loan of state-owned art objects is one 
 jure imperii . Therefore, application of the purpose criterion will result in a much 
more extensive immunity for a state than the application of the nature criterion.    

 THE AMBIVALENT RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PROPERTY AND 

IMMUNITY RULES 

 Against the background of the analysis set out in the preceding sections it becomes 
clear  that,  when  it  comes  to  restitution  claims  over  artifacts  on  loan  abroad  for 
temporary exhibitions, the concepts of property and immunity are interwoven in 
an ambivalent relationship. On the one hand, international law (whether custom 
or treaty) and anti-seizure domestic statutes may constitute a shield for publicly-
owned works of art.  57   On the other hand, the application of immunity rules may 
have the effect of thwarting legal actions filed by individual claimants to recover 
artifacts lost as a result of theft or other forms of dispossession that are in the hands 
of foreign states.  58   

 This  dual  effect  derives  from  the  functioning  of  immunity  rules.  As  a  plea 
preceding  the  commencement  of  merits  proceedings,  jurisdictional  immunity 
bars legal action against a state if the court concerned establishes that this would 
impinge upon  jure imperii  activities. Immunity from seizure ensures that state-
owned artworks in use or intended for use in governmental transactions or for 
non-commercial  purposes  located  in  a  foreign  state  are  spared  from  measures 
of constraint. In both cases immunity is granted by the courts of the forum state 
regardless of whether the objects concerned were taken from the original owners 
through unlawful means. 

 Such  an  ambivalent  relationship  may  engender  clashes  between  individual 
property rights and immunity rules, which in turn can give rise to three obvious 
and  upsetting  consequences.  First,  the  property  rights  of  individual  claimants 
remain unprotected when disputed artifacts in the hands of a foreign state are 
privileged under the doctrine of sovereign immunity or anti-seizure statutes. Second, 
the granting of jurisdictional immunity to a foreign state deprives petitioners of 
their rights of access to justice and to an effective remedy. Third, immunity rules 
can conflict with the international legal instruments deployed to curb the illicit art 
trade. By way of examples, domestic anti-seizure statutes can clash with the obliga-
tions requiring states to return wrongfully removed art objects contained in the First 
Protocol to the 1954 UNESCO Convention or the 1970 UNESCO Convention.  59   
These consequences are particularly painful for the claimants seeking to recover 
property lost in situations of persecution and victimization, such as the removal 
of treasures from indigenous peoples during colonial times,  60   the expropriations 
ordered by the Soviet Government in the aftermath of the Russian Revolution, 
the mass looting of Jewish art collections orchestrated by the Nazi regime in the 
years 1933–1945, and the Russian takings during the Second World War. In par-
ticular, the Nazi looting was unprecedented not only for its magnitude, but also 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  289 

for the infliction of death, torture, and forced labor that accompanied the dis-
placement of artworks.   

 HIGH HOPES AND DISMAYING REALITY 

 The opponents of the grant of sovereign immunity in restitution cases concerning 
state-owned artifacts on loan that were allegedly removed in connection with situ-
ations of persecution and victimization have resorted to various arguments in sup-
port of their contention: (i) that there is evidence that the requested objects were 
removed illegitimately from the patrimony of the claimant; (ii) that the conduct 
that led to the removal cannot be considered a sovereign act and, as such, it con-
stitutes an exception to the obligation on the judges of the forum state to accord 
immunity to the defendant state; (iii) that the forum state’s grant of immunity to a 
foreign state constitutes a violation by the forum state of the internationally guar-
anteed rights of access to a court and to an effective remedy; (iv) that there is 
a “cultural context” where the disputed objects can meaningfully return—such as 
the patrimony of a natural or legal person—which testify to the intimate connec-
tion between the underlying claim, the spoliation, and the art object at stake; 
(v)  that  the  forum  state’s  grant  of  immunity  in  the  cases  under  consideration 
weakens the enforcement of the international legal instruments deployed to curb 
the illicit art trade; and (vi) that it is morally undesirable to employ the procedural 
plea of state immunity as a means of safeguarding the commitment to art mobility 
because  this  results  in  preventing  the  victims  of  wrongful  taking  of  property  by 
state actors from having their day in court. 

 All  in  all,  these  arguments  point  to  the  necessity  to  understand  the  circum-
stances  under  which  cultural  objects  have  been  lost  and  are  being  claimed  back 
as well as to differentiate the interest in redressing past injustice from the interest 
in the exchange of works of art and antiquities.  61   In this respect, the opponents of 
state immunity argue that the sharing of cultural artifacts among nations, albeit 
important to the welfare of states, should not trump the enforcement of the law 
and the reparation of past injustice. Put it another way, they maintain that states 
and  holding  institutions  should  cease  to  profit  from  disputed  art  objects  under 
the  pretexts  of  enriching  the  cultural  life  of  all  peoples  and  contributing  to  the 
cultural dialogue among nations. Moreover, the point of view under examination 
underscores that the granting of immunity regardless of the facts surrounding the 
removal of an object corresponds to condoning, albeit indirectly, the illegality of 
discriminatory  or  criminal  dispossession.  With  regard  to  Nazi  looting,  Norman 
Palmer affirmed that “[t]o deny a Holocaust survivor access to justice is an austere 
and arguably disproportionate response to the administrative, economic and cul-
tural concerns of lenders and borrowers, however legitimate those concerns. […].” 
He then added that “[n]ot every observer would regard the public interest in pro-
moting international exhibitions, reassuring lenders that works will be returned 
and  reducing  the  costs  of  tracking  title,  as  justifying  such  denial”.  62    Finally,  the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 290   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

arguments  raised  by  the  opponents  of  state  immunity  reflect  the  fact  that  the 
prohibition of misappropriation and the corresponding duty of restitution have 
acquired a prominent place in the international arena and have become compo-
nents of the right to take part in cultural life.  63   

 The reality, however, is different. As a matter of fact, it is only in a minority of 
national jurisdictions that claims over wrongfully removed artworks on loan from 
foreign states stand any real chance of overcoming the jurisdictional immunity of 
the defendant state.  64   Indeed, the arguments deployed against state immunity have 
to date fared poorly in domestic and international courts.  65   Additionally, should 
a claimant overcome the obstacle posed by the defendant state’s immunity from 
jurisdiction, other hurdles stand in the way of recovering disputed art objects: prob-
lems of proof, questions of domestic and international law going to the merits,  66   
and issues of private international law. Next, where the plaintiff obtains a favorable 
judgment,  its  enforcement  against  the  assets  of  the  defendant  state  may  be  pre-
cluded by the immunity from execution.  67   As said, Article 21(1) UNCSI prohibits 
the taking of post-judgment measures of constraint against state-owned cultural 
objects,  even  if  the  defendant  state  was  not  entitled  to  jurisdictional  immunity, 
unless such objects are “placed or intended to be placed on sale.” Moreover, when 
it comes to assets of the defendant state held in the territory of the defendant state 
or in a third state, there is the problem that the courts of that other state may refuse 
to give effect to a foreign judgment obtained in what they view to be violation of 
international law.  68   

 Nevertheless, it is worth considering a few manifestations of the recent interna-
tional practice that in the long run might have an impact on the discussion over 
the content, limitation, and development of international and domestic immunity 
rules with respect to art objects lost as a result of or in connection with human rights 
violations and now owned by states and state-controlled collecting institutions. 

 The first element relates to the ICJ judgment in the case  Jurisdictional Immunities 
of the State . In its analysis of the customary international law applicable in respect 
of state immunity, the ICJ assessed a wealth of legislative, judicial, and diplomatic 
materials. Regrettably, it failed to consider a number of cases that would have sup-
ported  the  Italian  thesis  of  the  priority  of  human  rights  over  state  immunity.  69   
Specifically, the ICJ disregarded the jurisprudence whereby US courts asserted 
jurisdiction over acts of expropriation and looting carried out by military forces in 
the context of armed conflicts. The most well-known is the  Altmann  case.  70   

 The second instance of international practice concerns the implementation of 
the  Jurisdictional Immunities of the State  judgment. Since its delivery in February 
2012, various Italian tribunals promptly complied with the obligation to execute 
this judgment. However, in October 2014, the Italian Constitutional Court estab-
lished  that  the  customary  rule  granting  immunity  to  states  for   jure  imperii   acts 
amounting  to  crimes  against  humanity  and  war  crimes—as  interpreted  by  the 
ICJ—was incompatible with the fundamental human rights enshrined in the 
Italian Constitution.  71   Specifically, the Constitutional Court quashed the domestic 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  291 

provisions that compelled Italian courts to abide by the ICJ Judgment—and hence 
to decline jurisdiction in all cases in which damages are sought for international 
crimes committed by the Third Reich on Italian territory—on the grounds that 
these violated the guarantee of access to a court, a supreme principle of the Italian 
Constitution. 

 Third, it should be mentioned that a number of anti-seizure statutes recognize 
derogations to sovereign immunity in order to give precedence to the restitution 
obligations set out in international cultural heritage instruments. In effect, these 
statutes make the grant of immunity by governmental authorities conditional on 
verification by the borrower, and demonstration by the lender, in regard to the 
legal provenance of every loaned object.  72   These exceptions seek to avoid state leg-
islation being used as a vehicle to facilitate the cross-border movement of objects 
with a nefarious past.  73   

 Finally, it is interesting to mention the “Draft Convention on Immunity from 
Suit  and  Seizure  for  Cultural  Objects  Temporarily  Abroad  for  Cultural,  Educa-
tional  or  Scientific  Purposes”  adopted  in  May  2014  by  the  Cultural  Heritage 
Committee of the International Law Association  74  —even though the resolutions 
of this non-governmental organization cannot be equated to the practice of states 
or international organizations. The professed purpose of this document is to pro-
tect the integrity of international loans. Nevertheless, it recognizes that immunity 
rules can interfere with the individual rights of access to court and relief. Just as the 
domestic statutes mentioned above, this Draft Convention contains some clauses 
that aim to strike a balance between the interests of the stakeholders involved. 
Article 5 establishes that the rules on immunity from seizure or suit do not apply in 
cases where the receiving state is bound by conflicting obligations under (cultural 
heritage) international or regional instruments. Article 7 contains a due diligence 
requirement. According to this, the lending and borrowing states must, jointly or 
separately, exercise due diligence in establishing or confirming the licit provenance 
of every item of the prospected loan.  75     

 CONCLUSION 

 The foregoing analysis has demonstrated that public exhibitions expose art to the 
public  and,  inevitably,  to  the  scrutiny  of  potential  claimants.  In  addition,  it  has 
shown that the doctrine of state immunity—in its dual form of immunity from 
jurisdiction  and  immunity  from  execution—represents  a  formidable  hurdle  for 
petitioners  seeking  the  recovery  of  wrongfully  removed  art  objects  in  the  juris-
dictions where artifacts are exhibited on the occasion of temporary international 
loans.  Under  these  circumstances,  there  remain  only  a  few  possible  courses  of 
action for victims of spoliations and their heirs. First, claimants that decide to 
seek justice in the borrowing state can content themselves with a form of redress 
alternative to restitution. In effect, the immunity rules currently in force in many 
countries do not protect the borrower from claims not involving the attachment 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 292   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

of the object, such as damages for conversion or monetary restitution on grounds 
of unjust enrichment.  76   Admittedly, the possibility that these types of lawsuits are 
filed may convince borrowing institutions—but also lenders—to exclude disputed 
pieces from the loan agreement. Second, claimants can focus their efforts towards 
the state that owns the disputed property, which is often the entity responsible for 
the unlawful taking from which restitution demands originate. Thus this avenue 
can be elected regardless of whether the requested object is sent abroad for an 
international loan. In this case, claimants can try to persuade states holding con-
tested art to negotiate a win-win solution—which can be defined as a consensual, 
creative, and mutually satisfactory settlement based on ethical and political con-
cerns, fairness, and common sense, rather than on strict legal interpretation  77  —in 
order to facilitate the proper allocation of disputed artworks and to reconcile the 
interests and the (property) rights of the parties involved with the interest in the 
international exchange of art. Although the requested state may refuse to deacces-
sion items of public property, it may accord—again—a form of redress alternative 
to restitution, such as “satisfaction.”  78   For instance, claimants can obtain that the 
objects at stake are accompanied by a signage setting forth the names of the dis-
possessed owners and the circumstances of the removal.  79   Although negligible in 
comparison with full and unconditional restitution, this form of reparation entails 
an important consequence: it completes the experience of museum-goers as it 
makes it possible to present to them the ties that existed between a given work of 
art and a family heritage. This is relevant because cultural objects cannot be defined 
solely by their physical characteristics. As this type of property are inherently 
tied to the life of human beings, the values ascribed to them—be they educational, 
historical, scientific, cultural, aesthetic, or financial—are “relational” in the sense 
that they cannot be divorced from the meanings placed upon them by individuals 
and communities.  80      

  ENDNOTES 

  
 1  .   The artwork was sold at auction in June 2012 for $4.56 million. Italy had paid 670 million Italian 
Lira for it (about  € 350.000!). Mike Boehm, “Italy in Unfamiliar Role in Seizure of ‘Christ Carrying the 
Cross,’”  Los Angeles Times , 24 April 2012,  http://articles.latimes.com/2012/apr/24/entertainment/
la-et-italian-painting-20120424  (accessed 14 August 2015).  
  
 2  .   Christiane Gentili di Giuseppe et al. v. Musée du Louvre, Court of Appeal of Paris, 1st Division, 
Section A, 2 June 1999, No. 1998/19209. Following this judgment the Gentilis obtained the restitution of 
other artworks. See: Anne Laure Bandle, Alessandro Chechi, and Marc-André Renold, “Case Five Italian 
Paintings—Gentili di Giuseppe Heirs v. Musée du Louvre and France,” Platform ArThemis, Art-Law 
Centre, University of Geneva,  http://unige.ch/art-adr ; and Laetitia Nicolazzi, Alessandro Chechi, and 
Marc-André Renold, “Affaire Buste d’un jeune garçon—Héritiers Gentili di Giuseppe et Art Institute de 
Chicago,” Platform ArThemis, Art-Law Centre, University of Geneva,  http://unige.ch/art-adr .  
 3  .   22 U.S.C. § 2459.  
  
 4  .   2 December 2004, 44 ILM 801 (2005), not yet in force.   
  
  
 5  .   Jurisdictional Immunities of the State (Germany v. Italy: Greece intervening), Judgment of 
3 February 2012 ( hereafter  Jurisdictional Immunities of the State). This case was brought by Germany 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  293 

 13  .   Francioni  2007 .  
 14  .   Fincham  2011 , 669.  
 15  .   Ibid., 644–45.  
 16  .   Blake  2000 , 66.  
 17  .   Sprankling  2014 , 213.  
 18  .   Merryman  2001 , 58. The author warns that, although this rule is universally recognized, it is 

against Italy and relates to several Italian courts’ rulings (starting with  Ferrini v. Germany , Court of 
Cassation, No. 5044, 11 March 2004) to the effect that Germany could not rely on state immunity 
as a bar to actions for damages in respect of violations of human rights and humanitarian law com-
mitted by German armed forces on Italian territory during the Second World War. The ICJ found 
that Italy had violated the international custom on state immunity vis-à-vis Germany because,  inter 
alia , Italian courts exercised jurisdiction in tort proceedings against Germany and took measures of 
constraint against Villa Vigoni, a German property situated in Italy.  
 6  .   Sprankling  2014 , 206.  
  
 7  .   Sganga  2014 , 772; and Cohen 1927.  
  
  
 8  .   Article 2 of the 1995 UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects 
(1995 UNIDROIT Convention) covers the same categories identified by the 1970 UNESCO Convention, 
but does not include the designation requirement.  
 9  .   Gerstenblith  1995 , 567.  
  
 10  .   Carpenter, Katyal, and Riley  2009 , 1046.  
  
 11  .   Fincham  2011 , 646.  
  
  
 12  .   Edward Rothstein, “Antiquities, the World Is Your Homeland,”  The New York Times , 27 May 2008, 
 http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/27/arts/design/27conn.html?_r=1&pagewanted=all  (accessed 
14 August 2015).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
subject to the national rules protecting good faith purchasers.  
 19  .   Kaye  1999 , 80.  
  
 20  .   Merryman  1995 , 18–19.  
  
 21  .   For a critical analysis of the rule on non-enforceability of export restrictions, see Gordley  2013 .  
  
  
 22  .   Sprankling  2014 , 3, 21; and Sganga  2014 . Of course, international law rules can have an impact 
on the right to property of private actors only if implemented by states through legislative, judicial, 
or administrative measures. Sprankling  2014 , 41.  
  
 23  .   These include the European Convention on Human Rights (Article 1 of Protocol No. 1); 
the American Convention on Human Rights (Article 21); and the African Charter of Human and 
Peoples’ Rights (Article 14). See also Article 17 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  
  
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 14).  
  
 25  .    These  include  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (Article  13);  the  American 
Convention on Human Rights (Article 25); and the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (Article 2(3)).  
  
ICSID Convention of 1965.  
  
 27  .   Under the 1970 UNESCO Convention and the 1995 UNIDROIT Convention the States Parties 
commit to recognize and enforce the respective property rights, also by setting aside—if necessary—
the domestic norms that hinder the restitution of wrongfully removed cultural objects. Article 3(1) 
of the 1995 UNIDROIT Convention asserts the general principle of the restitution of stolen objects, 
regardless of their public or private origin. This categorical provision nullifies the domestic rules that 
allow  bona fide  purchasers to acquire good title once the applicable limitation period has run. Under 
Article 5 of the 1995 UNIDROIT Convention, the ownership title that a good faith purchaser holds 
under national law is invalidated, the possessor only remains entitled to receive a fair and reasonable 
compensation.  
  
 28  .   The  1954  UNESCO  Convention  and  its  Protocols  reiterate  a  key  “juridical  fiction”  that 
can be traced back to Article 56 of the Regulations annexed to the Hague Convention of 1907. 

 24  .   These include the European Convention on Human Rights (Article 6); and the International 

 26  .   International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), which is based on the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 294   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

 29  .   Article 3(2) of the 1995 UNIDROIT Convention provides that unlawfully excavated objects 

 31  .   The remedy of restitution can be regarded as one key component of ownership. Gambaro 

This fiction exists in the declaration that cultural objects, even when owned by the state, “shall be 
treated as private property.” This means that state-owned museums, monuments, cultural institu-
tions, and the artifacts contained therein are to be considered as neutral and should be respected 
and  protected  by  the  belligerents  as  established  by  the  laws  or  customs  of  war.  See  International 
Committee  of  the  Red  Cross,  Customary  International  Humanitarian  Law  Database,  Rule  40 
(“Respect for Cultural Property”) and Rule 51 (“Public and Private Property in Occupied Territory”), 
 https://www.icrc.org/customary-ihl/eng/docs/v1_rul  (accessed 14 August 2015).  
  
are regarded as having been stolen.  
  
 30  .   Virtually all states admit that ship owners do not lose title to a vessel when it sinks – unless 
it has been subject to some form of lawful expropriation or has been abandoned. In effect, many 
maritime states have asserted rights even in respect to centuries old sunken vessels. See Dromgoole 
2013, 99, 102. See also the 2001 UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural 
Heritage.  
  
 2013 , 137.  
 32  .   The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has decided a few cases on the right to prop-
  
erty  as  set  out  in  Article  1  of  Protocol  No.  1  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights: 
Torno v. Italy (Application No. 61781/08, Decision of 23 September 2014), Kopecky v. Slovakia 
(Application No. 44912/98, Judgment of 28 September 2004), Prince Hans-Adam II of Liechtenstein v. 
Germany (Application No. 42527/98, Judgment of 12 July 2001), and Beyeler v. Italy (Application 
No. 33202/1996, Judgment of 5 January 2000). Regarding the cultural relevance of property rights 
for indigenous peoples see Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Awas Tingni Mayagna (Sumo) 
Indigenous Community v. Nicaragua, 31 August 2001, Series C No. 79. Other human rights bodies 
have implemented the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and 
of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that relate to property 
(such as the right to an adequate standard of living and the right to housing) even if these treaties 
do not contain provisions explicitly dedicated to property rights.  
 33  .   Sganga  2014 .  
  
  
 34  .   For instance, the ECtHR has rejected a formalistic interpretation of the concepts of “property” 
and “possession” that would circumscribe their subject matters within the borders set by national 
laws. On the contrary, the Court has broadened the range of subject matters of proprietary interests 
by defining “proprietary” certain entitlements even if these were not classified as such under domestic 
law. For some examples see Sganga  2014 , 776.  
 35  .   For instance, international investment law has an impact on the content of property rights 
  
through the doctrine of direct and indirect expropriation. Additionally, the recourse to arbitra-
tion as forum for the resolution of disputes detaches the settlement from the interpretation and 
application of the property law of the host state. For some examples see ibid., 779–83. Sprankling 
 2014 , 41.  
 36  .   Jurisdictional Immunities of the State, para. 57.  
  
 37  .   Van Alebeeck  2008 , 67, 73.  
  
  
 38  .   This is demonstrated by the case  Telkes v. Hungarian National Museum  (265 NYAD 192, 197-198, 
1st Dept. 1942), where the plaintiff attempted to attach property of the Hungarian Museum as security. 
The action was dismissed by a New York court on the grounds that the museum, as an agent of the 
Hungarian State, could not be subject to US jurisdiction under the doctrine of absolute immunity.  
 39  .   Jurisdictional Immunities of the State, para. 113.  
  
 40  .   Fox  2008 , 604.  
  
  
 41  .   Article 19(c) also provides that post-judgment measures of constraint may be taken against 
the property of a state as such only if the proceeding on the merits was against that state at such. 
Brown and O’Keefe  2014 a, 324.  
 42  .   Article 18(a); Article 18(b).  
  
  
 43  .   Article 21(1)(d).  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  295 

 44  .   Article 21(1)(e).  
  
 45  .   Brown and O’Keefe  2014 b, 344–45.  
  
  
 46  .   On this relationship see Jakubowski  2013 , 8. To this it must be added that legal decisions 
from England ( Iran v. Barakat Galleries  [2009] QB 22; [2007] EWCA Civ. 1374), Ireland ( Webb v. 
Ireland  [1988] IR 353), Italy ( Associazione nazionale Italia Nostra Onlus v. Ministero per i beni e le 
attività culturali , Consiglio di Stato, No. 3154, 23 June 2008), and the United States ( United States v. 
Frederick  Schultz ,  333  F.3d  393,  2nd  Cir.  2003,  and   Autocephalous  Greek  Orthodox  Church  of 
Cyprus v. Goldberg at al ., 717 F.Supp., 1374 (S.D. Ind. 1989), aff’d, 917 F.2d 278 (7th Cir. 1990)) 
testify to the principle that every nation should be treated as the owner of representative artifacts. 
Palmer  2011 , 7.  
 47  .   Brown and O’Keefe  2014 b, 344–45.  
  
  
 48  .   Ibid., 347. On the customary law nature of the immunity from seizure of state-owned art objects 
on temporary loan in foreign jurisdictions, see also van Woudenberg  2012 , 434–44; Pavoni  2013 , 
97; and Gattini  2008 .  
  
 49  .   For instance, the US Immunity from Judicial Seizure Act provides that, whenever an art object 
of cultural significance is imported into the United States on a non-profit basis for temporary 
exhibition, and whenever there is a national interest in such an exhibition, a prior governmental 
decision may immunize such an object from “any judicial process” having the effect of depriving the 
borrowing institution of custody or control. 22 U.S.C. § 2459(a).  
  
 50  .   For instance, the laws in the United States and United Kingdom stemmed from pressure by 
Russia to protect property nationalized after the Russian Revolution or taken during and after the 
Second World War. Kaye  2010 , 336.  
  
 51  .   See the cases Office des poursuites et faillites du district de Martigny v. Compagnie Noga 
d’importation et d’exportation SA (No 5A.334/2007/frs, Swiss Federal Tribunal, 29 January 2008), 
and Diag Human v. Czech Republic (Case No. 72 E 1855/11 z-20, District Court of Vienna, 21 June 2011). 
See van Woudenberg  2012 , 310 and 302, respectively.  
 52  .   Palmer  2011 , 5–6; and Kaye  2010 , 353.  
  
 53  .   Pavoni  2013 , 95.  
  
  
 54  .   Judge Collyer of the Columbia District Court ruled that a state’s loan of artworks to foreign 
museums for exhibition purposes had to be considered a commercial transaction because there is 
“nothing ‘sovereign’ about the act of lending art pieces, even though the pieces themselves might 
belong to a sovereign.” Malewicz v. City of Amsterdam, 362 F.Supp.2d 298 (D.D.C. 2005).  
 55  .   Van Woudenberg  2012 , 63–65, and the various authors cited therein.  
  
  
 56  .   Article 2(1)(c) states that “commercial transaction” means: “(i) any commercial contract or 
transaction for the sale of goods or supply of services; (ii) any contract for a loan or other transaction 
of a financial nature, including any obligation of guarantee or of indemnity in respect of any such 
loan or transaction; (iii) any other contract or transaction of a commercial, industrial, trading or pro-
fessional nature, but not including a contract of employment of persons.”  
  
 57  .   In the  Rubin  case the plaintiffs were survivors or relatives of victims of a 1997 suicide bombing 
in Jerusalem organized by Hamas with the alleged complicity of Iran. Having obtained a default judg-
ment against Iran, including compensatory and punitive damages, the plaintiffs sought to execute the 
judgment by attaching several antiquities owned by Iran but in the possession of the Boston Museum 
of Fine Arts and Harvard University, either to persuade Iran to pay damages or to forfeit the artifacts 
and sell them at auction. In 2013, a Court of Appeals of Massachussets held that the antiquities were 
immune from attachment and execution. Rubin et al. v. Iran, No. 11–2144, 2013.  
  
 58  .   See for example United States v. Portrait of Wally, 105 F. Supp. 2d 288 (S.D.N.Y. 2000); 2002 
US Dist. LEXIS 6445, 11 April 2002; 663 F. Supp. 2d 232 (S.D.N.Y. 2009); and Shchukin v. le Centre 
National d’Art et de Culture Georges Pompidou et al. (TGI, 1eme Ch., 1 Sect., 16 July 1993). See van 
Woudenberg  2012 , 184 and 282, respectively.  
  
  
defense has been used to defeat this type of restitution claim.  

 59  .   On this issue see van Woudenberg  2012 , 367–408.  
 60  .   However, there are no examples—to the knowledge of the present author—where the immunity 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 296   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

 61  .   Kaye  2010 , 351.  
  
 62  .   Palmer  2011 , 23.  
  
  
 63  .   See UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 21 on the 
Right of everyone to take part in cultural life, Article 15, paragraph 1(a), of the International Covenant 
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.  
 64  .   See van Woudenberg  2012 , and footnotes 70, 72, and the corresponding text.  
  
  
 65  .   It suffices to recall that in  Jurisdictional Immunities of the State  the ICJ ruled that the plea of 
state immunity for acts and property serving  jure imperii  purposes remains in place, regardless of the 
gravity of the violations at issue.  
  
 66  .   For instance, restitution cannot be envisaged where the deaccessioning of artworks from public 
collections is prohibited by domestic legislation. The reason for this restriction, at least in some civil 
law systems (e.g. Italy and France), lies in that museum collections belong to the indisposable  domain 
public . Similarly, in England, the British Museum and other institutions are subject to statutory 
bans on disposal. Schönenberger  2009 , 161.  
 67  .   O’Keefe  2011 , 1006, 1035–37.  
  
 68  .   Ibid.  
  
 69  .   Pavoni  2011 .  
  
  
 70  .   Maria Altmann v. Republic of Austria, 142 F.Supp. 2d 1187 (C.D. Cal. 2001),  aff’d , 317 F.3d 
954 (9th Cir. 2002), as amended, 327 F.3d 1246 (9th Cir. 2003), 541 US 677 (2004). The  Altmann  
ruling resonated in subsequent cases: Malewicz v. City of Amsterdam, 362 F.Supp.2d 298 (D.D.C. 2005); 
Cassirer v. Kingdom of Spain and the Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection Foundation, 616 F.3d 1019 
(9th Cir. 2009), 2010 WL316970 (9th Cir. 12 August 2010); Agudas Chasidei Chabad v. Russian 
Federation, 466 F. Supp. 2d 6 (D.D.C. 2006, per Lamberth CJ), 528 F.3d 934 (D.C. Cir. 2008, per 
Williams SCJ); Orkin v. Swiss Confederation et al., 2011 U.S. App. Lexis 20639 (October 12, 2011) 
142 F.Supp. 2d 1187 (C.D. Cal. 2001),  aff’d , 317 F.3d 954 (9th Cir. 2002), as amended, 327 F.3d 1246 
(9th Cir. 2003), 541 US 677 (2004); and de Csepel v. Hungary, 808 F.Supp.2d 113 (2011).  
 71  .   Simoncioni and others v. Germany and others, No. 238, 22 October 2014.  
  
  
 72  .   In Germany, legal actions for recovery, orders of attachment and seizure are inadmissible once 
the competent authority has issued a “legally binding commitment to return.” However, the German 
statute requires the publication in advance of the information regarding the objects that will be 
loaned in order to give time for objections to be raised. In Switzerland, the  Loi sur le Transfert 
des  Biens  Culturels   (2003)  subjects  the  issuance  of  a  return  guarantee  to  specific  conditions, 
i.e. that “the import of the cultural property is not illicit” and that “no person claims ownership 
to the cultural property through an objection.” The request of a return guarantee is published in 
the Federal Bulletin in order to allow third parties to make claims. If no objections are raised within 
30 days from the publication of the request, any action is precluded as long as the assets are located in 
Switzerland. In the United Kingdom, the  Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  (2007) seeks to avoid 
looted or stolen artworks finding their way into the domestic trade via international loans. Article 
135(1) establishes that, an object on loan “may not be seized or forfeited […] unless (a) it is seized or 
forfeited under or by virtue of an order made by a court in the United Kingdom, and (b) the court is 
required to make the order under, or under provision giving effect to, a Community obligation or any 
international treaty.” See van Woudenberg  2012 , 225, 289, 310, respectively.  
 73  .   Kaye  2010 , 349–51; Forrest  2014 , 160; and Palmer  2011 , 16–17.  
  
 74  .   See International Law Association, Cultural Heritage Committee 2014. The Draft Convention 
  
is intended for eventual adoption by an international or regional organization and it is available at: 
 http://www.ila-hq.org/en/committees/index.cfm/cid/13  (accessed 14 August 2015).  
  
 75  .   Article 7 requires compliance with, at least, the standards contained in the ICOM Code of 
Ethics. This sets minimum standards of professional practice and performance for museums and 
staff. For instance, it establishes that museums should refrain from exhibiting objects which have 
been illegally exported or are of doubtful provenance: “no object or specimen should be acquired 
by […] loan […] unless the acquiring museum is satisfied that a valid title is held” (Article 2(2)); 
“every effort must be made before acquisition to ensure that any object or specimen offered for 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  297 

[…] loan […] has not been illegally obtained in or exported from, its country of origin or any 
intermediate country in which it might have been owned legally. Due diligence in this regard should 
establish the full history of the item from discovery or production” (Article 2(3)).  
 76  .   Palmer  2011 , 13–15; Kaye  2010 , 353–54.  
  
  
 77  .   The variety of solutions that can be achieved through these procedures include outright restitu-
tion, loans, donations, co-ownership, the production of replicas, the establishment of forms of inter-
state, or inter-institutional cultural cooperation.  
  
 78  .   “Satisfaction” as defined in Article 37 of the Commentaries of the International Law Com-
mission to the 2001 Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts: 
“1. The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation to give satisfaction 
for the injury caused by that act insofar as it cannot be made good by restitution or compensation. 
2. Satisfaction may consist in an acknowledgement of the breach, an expression of regret, a formal 
apology or another appropriate modality […].”  
  
 79  .   See the database  ArThemis  for two examples: Raphael Contel, Giulia Soldan, Alessandro 
Chechi, “Case Portrait of Wally—United States and Estate of Lea Bondi and Leopold Museum,” 
Platform  ArThemis,  Art-Law  Centre,  University  of  Geneva,   http://unige.ch/art-adr ;  and  Anne 
Laure  Bandle,  Raphael  Contel,  Marc-André  Renold,  “Case  Lighthouse  with  Rotating  Beam—
Flechtheim Heirs and Kunstmuseum Bonn,” Platform ArThemis, Art-Law Centre, University of 
Geneva,  http://unige.ch/art-adr .  
  

 80  .   See Lixinski  2013 , 3, and Gillman  2006 , 44.   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

   African Charter of Human and Peoples’ Rights , 27 June  1981 , 1520 UNTS 217.  

   American Convention on Human Rights , 22 November  1969 , 1144 UNTS 123.  

    Blake  ,   Janet  .  2000 . “ On Defining the Cultural Heritage .”  International and Comparative Law Quarterly  
 49 , no.  1 :  61 – 85 .  

    Brown  ,   Chester  , and   Roger     O’Keefe  .  2014 a. “ Article 19 .” In  The United Nations Convention on 
Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property: A Commentary , edited by   Roger     O’Keefe   and 
  Christian J.     Tams  ,  308 –27.  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

    ——— .  2014 b. “ Article 21 .” In  The United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States 
and Their Property. A Commentary , edited by   Roger     O’Keefe   and   Christian J.     Tams  ,  334 –47.  Oxford : 
 Oxford University Press .  

    Carpenter  ,   Kristen A.  ,   Sonia K.     Katyal  , and   Angela R.     Riley  .  2009 . “ In Defense of Property .”  Yale Law 
Journal   118 , no.  6 :  1022 –25.  

    Cohen  ,   R. Morris  .  1927 . “ Property and Sovereignty .”  The Cornell Law Quarterly   13 , no.  1 :  8 – 30 .  

    Dromgoole  ,   Sarah  .  2013 .  Underwater Cultural Heritage and International Law .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press .  

   European Convention on Human Rights , 4 November  1950 , 213 UNTS 221.  

    Fincham  ,   Derek  .  2011 . “ The Distinctiveness of Property and Heritage .”  Penn State Law Review   115 , 
no.  3 :  641 –83.  

    Forrest  ,   Craig  .  2014 . “ Immunity from Seizure and Suit in Australia: The Protection of Cultural 
Objects on Loan Act 2013 .”  International Journal of Cultural Property   21 , no.  2 :  143 –72.  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

 298   

 ALESSANDRO CHECHI

    Fox  ,   Hazel  .  2008 .  The Law of State Immunity .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

    Francioni  ,   Francesco  .  2007 . “ A Dynamic Evolution of Concept and Scope: From Cultural Property 
to Cultural Heritage .” In  Standard-Setting in UNESCO, Normative Action in Education, Science and 
Culture , Vol.  1 , edited by   A. A.     Yusuf  ,  221 –36.  Leiden :  Martinus Nijhoff and UNESCO Publishing .  

    Gambaro  ,   Antonio  .  2013 . “ Community, State, Individuals and the Ownership of Cultural Objects .” 
In  The 1970 UNESCO Convention: New Challenges , edited by   Jorge A.     Sanchez Cordero  ,  135 –49. 
 Mexico :  Instituto de Investigaciones Juridicas .  

    Gattini  ,   Andrea  .  2008 . “ The International Customary Law Nature of Immunity from Measures 
of Constraint for State Cultural Property on Loan .” In  International Law between Universalism and 
Fragmentation: Festschrift in Honour of Gerhard Hafner , edited by   Isabelle     Buffard  ,   James     Crawford  , 
  Alain     Pellet  , and   Stephan     Wittich  ,  421 –40.  Leiden/Boston :  Martinus Nijhoff Publishers .  

    Gerstenblith  ,   Patty  .  1995 . “ Identity and Cultural Property: The Protection of Cultural Property in the 
United States .”  Boston University Law Review   75 , no.  3 :  559 – 688 .  

    Gillman  ,   Derek  .  2006 .  The Idea of Cultural Heritage .  Leicester :  Institute of Art and Law .  

    Gordley  ,   James  .  2013 . “ The Enforcement of Foreign Law .” In  Enforcing Cultural Heritage Law , edited 
by   Francesco     Francioni   and   James     Gordley  ,  110 –24.  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

   International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , 16 December  1966 , 999 UNTS 171.  

   International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights , 16 December  1966 , 993 UNTS 3.  

   International Law Association, Cultural Heritage Committee .  2014 . “ Draft Convention on Immunity 
from Suit and Seizure for Cultural Objects Temporarily Abroad for Cultural, Educational or Scien-
tific Purposes .”  Conference Resolution No. 3, Washington, DC ,  http://www.ila-hq.org/en/committees/
index.cfm/cid/13   (accessed 14 August 2015) .  

    Jakubowski  ,   Andrzej  .  2013 . “ Cultural Property under the Threat of Seizure—(Re-)defining the Limits 
of State Immunity in the Face of International Crimes .”  Art Antiquity and Law   18 , no.  1 :  7 – 29 .  

    Kaye  ,   M. Lawrence  .  1999 . “ Art Wars: The Repatriation Battle .”  New York University International 
Journal of Law and Politics   31 , no.  1 :  79 – 94 .  

    ——— .  2010 . “ Art Loans and Immunity from Seizure in the United States and the United Kingdom .” 
 International Journal of Cultural Property   17 , no.  2 :  335 –59.  

    Lixinski  ,   Lucas  .  2013 .  Intangible Cultural Heritage in International Law .  Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press .  

    Merryman  ,   H. John  .  1995  “ A Licit International Trade in Cultural Objects .”  International Journal of 
Cultural Property   4 , no.  1 :  13 – 60 .  

    ——— .  2001 . “ Cultural Property, International Trade and Human Rights .”  Cardozo Arts & Entertain-
ment Law Journal   19 , no.  1 :  51 – 67 .  

    O’Keefe  ,   Roger  .  2011 . “ State Immunity and Human Rights: Heads and Walls, Hearts and Minds .” 
 Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law   44 , no.  4 :  999 – 1045 .  

    Palmer  ,   Norman  .  2011 . “ Itinerant Art and the Architecture of Immunity from Legal Process: Questions 
of Policy and Drafting .”  Art Antiquity and Law   16 , no.  1 :  1 – 23 .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211

IMMUNITY, PROPERTY AND CULTURAL OBJECTS  

  299 

    Pavoni  ,   Riccardo  .  2011 . “ An American Anomaly? On the ICJ’s Selective Reading of United States Practice 
in  Jurisdictional Immunities of the State  .”  Italian Yearbook of International Law   21 , no.  1 :  143 –59.  

    ——— .  2013 . “ Sovereign Immunity and the Enforcement of International Cultural Property Law .” 
In   Enforcing  Cultural  Heritage  Law ,  edited  by    Francesco      Francioni    and    James      Gordley  ,   79 – 109 . 
 Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

   Regulations Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land annexed to Hague Convention (IV) 
Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land of 1907 , 18 October  1907 , 1 Bevans 631.  

    Schönenberger  ,   Beat  .  2009 .  The Restitution of Cultural Assets .  Berne :  Stämpfli .  

    Sganga  ,   Caterina  .  2014 . “ Cracking the Citadel Walls: A Functional Approach to Cosmopolitan Property 
Models Within and Beyond National Property Regimes .”  Cambridge Journal of International and 
Comparative Law   3 , no.  1 :  770 –94.  

    Sprankling  ,   G. John  .  2014 .  The International Law of Property .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

   UNESCO . “ Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict .” 
14 May  1954 , 249 UNTS 240.  

    ——— . “ Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and 
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property .” 17 November  1970 , 823 UNTS 231.  

    ——— . 2002. “ Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage .” 2 November 
 2001 , 41 ILM 37.  

   UNIDROIT . 1995. “ Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects .” 24 June  1995 , 
34 ILM 1322.  

   United Nations .  2005 . “ Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property .” 
 2 December 2004, 44 ILM 801, not yet in force .  

   United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights .  General Comment No. 21 on the 
Right of Everyone to Take Part in Cultural Life, UN Doc. E/C.12/GC21, 21 December   2009 .  

   Universal Declaration of Human Rights , 10 December  1948 , UN Doc. A/810 (1948).  

    Van Alebeeck  ,   Rosanne  .  2008 .  The Immunity of States and Their Officials in International Criminal 
Law and International Human Rights Law .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

    Van Woudenberg  ,   Nout  .  2012 .  State Immunity and Cultural Objects on Loan .  Leiden/Boston :  Martinus 
Nijhoff Publishers .    

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:09:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000211


