 International Journal of Cultural Property   (2016)   23:  141– 166 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2016 International Cultural Property Society 
 doi:10.1017/S0940739116000114 

               

    The Devil in Nationalism: Indigenous 
Heritage and the Challenges of 
Decolonization 
       Michelle     Bigenho   *   †   

   Henry     Stobart    ‡   

    

          Abstract:     In 2006, Bolivians began living under their first indigenous president 
and undergoing an explicitly pro-indigenous “process of change,” alongside 
much rhetoric of indigenous autonomy and state “decolonization.” However, this 
article suggests that this same government’s twenty-first century policies regarding 
intangible heritage and “culture” hardly mark a departure from mid-twentieth-
century mestizo-dominated liberal nationalist projects. Through the ethnography 
of disputed cultural claims to folklore, such as those with Peru involving the 
devil dance, this article examines how proprietary nationalism is experienced 
and expressed among certain Bolivians. For example, indignant internationally 
touring folklore workers imagine a hyperreal scarcity of specific expressions that 
have become framed as “cultural resources” for the nation. Indeed, it is common 
to hear propertied language employed when international disputes heat up, as 
cultural images circulate at high speeds through social networks and digital media. 
Within these media platforms, the visual sensory mode often overshadows aural 
and kinesthetic ones, as socially interwoven music and dance expressions fade into 
the background and stand-alone images of spectacular costumes move forward.      

  When Miss Peru wore the  diablada  (devil dance) costume at the 2009 Miss Universe 
pageant, the Bolivian Minister of Cultures accused her of appropriating cultural 

   †   Colgate University ,  Hamilton ,  NY ,  United States  
   ‡   Royal Holloway   University of London ,  London ,  United Kingdom  

  *  Part of the research for this article was conducted with National Science Foundation funding 
(Law and Social Sciences, Award 1156260). The ideas presented here do not necessarily represent 
those of the National Science Foundation. We also acknowledge an American Council of Learned 
Societies Collaborative Research Fellowship that supported the final writing phase of this article.  

141

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 142   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

heritage and also issued a statement that Bolivia’s office for the registration of 
intellectual property would begin an international campaign to reclaim this dance 
as part of the nation’s cultural heritage.  1   In support of its case, Bolivian officials 
cited the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization’s (UNESCO) 2001 
proclamation of Bolivia’s Carnival in Oruro as the intangible heritage of humanity 
(Oruro’s Carnival is a ritual context that prominently features the devil dance). 
Official Bolivian statements of indignation even included talk of turning to the 
International Criminal Court in The Hague.  2   In 2014, officials from the Bolivian 
Ministry of Cultures were miffed when several dances they considered to be their 
own appeared in a video that Peru had presented to UNESCO as part of a petition 
to have Puno’s Festival of the Virgen de Candelaria inscribed in the country’s 
officially recognized list of intangible heritage. The Candelaria festival is celebrated 
in a southern region of Peru that borders Bolivia—a region that might be thought 
to share Aymara and Quechua indigenous histories before colonial and republican 
ones carved out national borders. 

 In the Bolivian context, the devil dance evokes a complex array of indigenous, 
non-indigenous, and nationalist meanings, making it a compelling case through 
which to examine in practice the thorny issues behind state-level intangible heritage 
governance and indigenous politics of the region. Within UNESCO’s framework, 
“indigenous heritage” poses something of a paradox because recognition instruments 
operate through UN member states. On this point, indigenous rights activists fault 
the 2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage (Intangible 
Heritage Convention), adding that many nation-states that have indigenous pop-
ulations whose intangible heritage might be recognized through this instrument 
have been slow to ratify the Convention.  3   Most Latin American states, however, 
many with significant indigenous populations, have ratified UNESCO’s Intangible 
Heritage Convention, in spite of the critiques that indigenous rights activists have 
leveled against it. Peru and Bolivia fall into this camp of ratifiers. 

 Bolivia provides an intriguing case for highlighting the complexities of indigenous 
and national intangible heritage issues. First, a significant part of the population 
self-identifies as indigenous. Second, starting in 2006, Bolivians began living under 
their first indigenous president, Evo Morales, who oversaw the drafting of a new 
constitution (2009) that on paper granted significant rights to indigenous peoples.  4   
Third, in the country’s unique present historical moment, the Bolivian government 
has attempted to decolonize the state through an officially declared “process of 
change,” which is a complex constellation described by some scholars as a “social 
movement state.”  5   In the midst of these processes, Bolivia has experienced a 
veritable intangible heritage “fever,” taking a rather protectionist stance toward 
“culture” as a potential “resource.” Finally, Bolivia has played a long-term role in 
intangible heritage politics. Since the 1970s, the country has been involved in interna-
tional discussions that have led to UNESCO’s instruments on “intangible heritage.”  6   
Under Morales’s government, and especially in the aftermath of the Miss Peru 
incident in 2009, Bolivians at the center of national government have privileged 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  143 

proprietary nationalist approaches to intangible heritage. Within Bolivia, the legis-
lature has taken a piecemeal approach, passing laws that have declared specifically 
named ritual dances to be intangible heritage and “national property,” something 
akin to what John and Jean Comaroff might call “lawfare.  7   

 However, Bolivian processes of intense cultural nationalism also need to be 
understood within the broader context of the country, which is taking control 
of its natural resources to ensure greater benefits for its citizens. From the per-
spective  of  many  Bolivians,  outsiders  have  always  profited  from  the  country’s 
resources, whether those are silver, tin, gas, lithium, or dances. If anything, state 
attempts to claim heritage as property have intensified since the rise to power 
of Evo Morales, who—as demanded by the social movements that swept him to 
power—nationalized gas extraction soon after entering office.  8   Such details should 
be seen as part of an “ecological perspective” that attempts to grasp holistically the 
meanings of intangible heritage claims in Bolivia.  9   

 In this article, we set aside the local heritage dynamics within Bolivia—something 
we address in other writings—and emphasize the Bolivian national and state-level 
proprietary intangible heritage claims on music and dance forms, placing these 
twenty-first-century concerns in relation to the country’s twentieth-century non-
indigenous nationalist projects that championed indigenous expressions ( indi-
genismo ). We argue that Bolivian enthusiasm for intangible heritage protections 
emerged not as a major part of the country’s pro-indigenous anti-neoliberal “process 
of change” but, rather, as a product of the mestizo nationalist projects of  indigen-
ismo . Furthermore, we argue that the Morales administration’s policies on “culture” 
hardly mark a departure from this mid-twentieth-century nationalist project but, 
rather, that Bolivia’s contemporary cultural politics have emerged in part through 
 indigenismo ’s processes—that is, the twentieth-century incorporation of indigenous 
cultural expressions into a non-indigenous nationalist project. 

 What is left in  indigenismo ’s wake thus  poses challenges for contemporary 
attempts at state-directed decolonization. The rise in proprietary nationalism under 
Morales’s presidency, we argue further, may be attributed in part to the accelerated 
circulation of images made possible by the digital age. At diverse intersections of 
new media platforms, visual aspects of cultural expressions, such as dance costumes, 
often carry greater symbolic, representational, and discursive weight than auditory 
and kinesthetic ones, like musical sound and choreographed movements. In this 
sensory shift, which once again begs the question of the tangible/intangible dis-
tinction in heritage, we note how some non-indigenous Bolivian attitudes reflect a 
hyperreal sense of scarcity about “culture” as a resource.  10   

 In the following sections, we first locate the complexities of Bolivian  indigenismo  
and indigeneities. Next, we explore the layered meanings of the devil dance as one 
example of contested national heritage. We then interpret two recent ethnographic 
interactions related to Bolivian heritage discussions (a participatory workshop and 
a Departmental Council of Cultures meeting in 2012). This is followed by some 
historical background to the contemporary state’s proprietary heritage policies. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 144   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

Finally, we briefly touch on the 2014 Peru–Bolivia heritage spats that exploded over 
social media in relation to Peru’s Candelaria festival heritage claim.  

 BOLIVIAN  INDIGENISMO  AND INDIGENEITY 

 What is  indigenismo ? In the first half of the twentieth century, Andean indigenous 
cultural expressions in Bolivia went from being disdained by mestizos to being the 
core of a national project. The category of “mestizo,” which is slippery and context 
sensitive, may refer literally to “mixed race,” but is more often understood as “non-
indigenous” and, in practice, more related to culture and class.  11    Indigenismo  refers 
to processes through which mestizo-led governments mined indigenous expressions 
for their potential as nationalist culture—often transforming and reframing these 
expressions so as to appeal to Western-oriented aesthetics.  12    Indigenismo  nation-
alized and celebrated these indigenous expressions, but without challenging the 
structures that continued to marginalize the country’s indigenous peoples. Ideologies 
of  mestizaje  (that the nation consists of homogeneous liberal citizens) and  indigenismo  
went hand in hand and became the centerpiece of the cultural politics of the 1952 
Revolution. This historic reference to mid-twentieth-century  indigenismo  should be 
distinguished from what some authors have referred to as the “ indigenista ” tendency 
of the Morales government, which is a decolonizing project that attempts to bring 
indigenous ideas into the very organization of government.  13   

 While  indigenismo  was a specific twentieth-century national cultural project, 
multiple indigeneities are at work in twenty-first-century Bolivia. The country’s 
indigenous populations comprise Aymaras and Quechuas, who generally live in 
the western highlands, and over 33 different ethno-linguistic groups who live 
in the eastern lowlands. In the 2001 census, 62 percent of Bolivians self-identified 
as indigenous, but only 48 percent did so in 2012 (following six years under Evo 
Morales). Neither census included the option of “mestizo,” a point of considerable 
controversy. Since the Morales administration attempted to institutionalize indig-
enous discourses through constitutional and legislative reforms, it faced the chal-
lenge of articulating these multiple and shifting indigeneities. 

 Shortly after Morales’s election in 2005, the new president called for a constituent 
assembly to write a new constitution that would better represent the country’s sig-
nificant indigenous populations. Bolivia has been operating under the new consti-
tution, which was approved by referendum vote in 2009. Having officially titled the 
country the “Plurinational State of Bolivia,” the government claimed to represent 
indigenous interests and to be working against the problems of the homogenizing 
mestizo nationalist frame. 

 Being indigenous in Bolivia is not about blood quantum, tribal rolls, or rural 
peasanthood. It is related to colonial structures that shaped separate “Spanish” and 
“Indian” republics and that today continue to color marginalizing structures and 
racist practices in many Latin American national contexts.  14   Ongoing and often 
blatant racism remains a reality in Bolivia. For example, the notorious attacks on 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  145 

indigenous authorities in Sucre in May 2008 hastened the 2010 anti-racism law.  15   
Many of Bolivia’s self-identified indigenous peoples live in cities and speak Spanish 
as their first language, and their experiences of indigeneity sometimes have more to 
do with difference, rights, and opposition to global forces than to connections with 
the land or descent from pre-conquest populations.  16   

 Indigeneities in Bolivia differ significantly from those of North America, as the 
intercultural dynamics of the former are not fundamentally structured through 
a politics of native sovereignty. Rather, they are shaped in Bolivia by questions of 
social inequality, marginalization, autonomy, rights to prior consultation, and spe-
cific practices of social organization that can move with people as they leave rural 
contexts. Therefore, the Bolivian case promotes a somewhat different political 
location from which to revisit the “in defense of property” debates.  17   In the Bolivian 
case at hand, the very cultural expressions under dispute may have indigenous 
roots, but they also have become synonymous with Bolivian nationalist claims 
through the historical processes of the fraternal twin discourses of  indigenismo  
and  mestizaje .  18   We argue that  indigenismo ’s effects have remained strong under 
Morales’s government in spite of the supposedly radically different moment the 
Bolivian state has been experiencing. 

 Whose indigeneity is represented in Morales’s government? Can the state ever 
move beyond the framings of the “authorized” and “unruly” Indian (terms coined by 
Bolivian scholar Silvia Rivera Cusicanqui and then circulated in the North American 
academic context by Charles Hale)?  19   Tensions have surrounded the perceived dom-
inance of highland Aymara indigeneity as represented by the Morales government. 
Other fissures of indigeneity have appeared. In 2011, major indigenous organizations 
that previously supported Morales’s government split with him over key struggles 
like the demand for prior consultation in the building of a road through lowland 
indigenous areas of the Isiboro Sécure National Park and Indigenous Territory.  20   

 Within the officially labeled “process of change,” the state has replaced the 
“Vice-Ministry of Culture” (singular) with the “Ministry of Cultures” (plural). 
A branch of this state apparatus even includes a “Vice-Ministry of Decolonization.” 
However, Bolivian national sovereignty, rather than indigenous cultural rights or 
indigenous sovereignty, may be seen to motivate much of the government’s cultural 
policy work, particularly in the area of specific dances that the state has moved 
under “intangible heritage,” a rubric that, in direct contradiction with UNESCO’s 
principles, has fostered ideas about exclusive forms of property-like protection.   

 WHAT MAKES THE DEVIL DANCE 

 The devil carries multiple meanings within Andean studies. It represents a spirit of 
the underworld or  ukhu pacha  and can go by various names ( supay ,  diablo ,  tío , 
and so on). These spirits share features: they are dangerous and they are asso-
ciated with artistic creativity, fertility, and wealth to be found deep in the mines.  21   
Henry Stobart’s work on the  sirenas  (spirit beings from which musicians receive 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 146   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

new tunes) locates these spirits in a similar world of  supays , devils, and demons—
all-powerful but ambiguous beings from the underworld.  22   When it comes to the 
devil dance in urban festivals, however, the dance’s meanings also need to be con-
sidered within the social webs of its performances. June Nash’s ethnography located 
this dance with ties to miners who worshipped both the Virgin of mineshaft and 
the god of the mountain ( momo ,  supay ,  el Tío ).  23   In subsequent ethnographic 
work, Thomas Abercrombie discussed the “Indian within” the non-Indian dancer, 
as expressed in these Carnival performances of urban folk nationalism.  24   

 As performed today, the devil dance involves Andean cosmologies, mestizo nation-
alism, forms of collective organizing, and local artisan economies ( Figure 1 ). The 
other dances of Bolivia’s various urban ritual processions ( morenadas ,  caporales , 
 llameradas ,  tinkus , and so on), which are similarly perceived by Bolivians to be 
under siege by neighboring countries, thrive within the same social fabric of layered 
meanings and organizations, some with greater participation by urban Aymaras 
(such as in  morenadas ) and others with greater participation by mestizos (such as in 
 caporales ), but many of them, in a way, standing in for Bolivian mestizo nationalism, 
folklore, and intangible heritage relative to the international stage.     

 Bolivia’s  urban  ritual  dance  processions  unfold  over  months  of  rehearsals 
and planning, showcasing vibrant social structures that go far beyond the narrow 

  
 F IGURE  1.  
used with kind permission.     

    Devil dancers during Carnival in Oruro, Bolivia. Photograph by Baptiste Lavat, 

 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  147 

time-space of the ritual dance processions themselves. The work of Rossana Bar-
ragán and Cleverth Cárdenas highlights the social order necessary to move 30,000 
costumed participants, all moving in choreographed steps, through the streets of 
La  Paz  in  the  Entrada  del  Gran  Poder,  a  celebration  similar  in  format  to  that 
which occurs in Oruro’s Carnival. The authors set up this argument about order in 
direct contestation to the sometimes over-zealous Bakhtinian interpretations of 
fiestas as moments of social disorder and the world turned upside down.  25   In his 
work with Aymara traders in La Paz, Nico Tassi has shown how principles of abun-
dance, rather than scarcity, motivate exchanges and structure everything from 
market presentation to a ritual parade like the Gran Poder.  26   In contrast, the 
idea that another country could “steal” or “appropriate” these performances—
a perspective often voiced by mestizo folklore workers (especially dancers)—
seems to overlook completely the social orders that sustain them. Such concerns 
of  “theft”  and  “plagiarism”  reflect  hyperreal  ideas  about  culture  as  a  scarce 
resource. 

 To specify, the hyperreal rests on simulacra, which are copies that have no origi-
nals in reality, but that still have social effects because of their perceived existence.  27   
These devil dance wars reflect how some Bolivians have come to see “culture” as a 
scarce resource, when it is anything but scarce. In this case, culture is imagined 
within a zero-sum equation with neighboring countries. If Peru names as heritage 
something Bolivians see as “theirs,” Bolivians lose, and vice versa. While the 
potentially real returns of tourism are in the mix of these concerns, more research 
is needed to show any direct correlation between heritage declarations of one 
country and the corresponding tourism losses of a neighboring country. 

 This hyperreal scarcity of culture emerges precisely as the spectacular digital 
images of costumed dancers proliferate and circulate widely. As a way to distin-
guish the present highly digitized devil dance wars under President Evo Morales, 
it should be noted that Miss Chile wore a  diablada  costume at the Miss Universe 
pageant in 1983, 1984, and 1989, and these moments of “appropriation” did 
not draw the same heated reactions.  28   Indeed, the uptick in devil dance fever, 
we argue, has more to do with the greater facility with which images of these 
dances  circulate  in  today’s  Internet  and  social  media  arenas.  In  these  cyber-
spatial circulations, the visually apprehended overwhelms other realms of cul-
tural experience—what might be heard in music, felt in the choreography, or 
expressed as abundance.  29   

 In 2014, the devil dance wars were ignited once again after Peru petitioned 
UNESCO to have Puno’s Festival of the Virgen de Candelaria entered on Peru’s 
representative list of intangible cultural heritage of humanity. Arguments about 
the shared historic transformations and continuities of the indigenous Aymara and 
Quechua regions that extend across contemporary national borders did not enter 
the Bolivian online discussions that occurred in relation to this expression of pos-
sessive mestizo nationalism. The peculiarity of these devil dance wars was one rea-
son we decided to organize the following workshop.   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 148   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

 A WORKSHOP AND A MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENTAL COUNCIL OF 

CULTURE 

 In July 2012, we convened a four-day participatory workshop in Coroico entitled 
Rethinking Creativity, Recognition and Indigeneity with 20 Bolivians involved 
in various aspects of culture and media, including representatives of indigenous 
groups.  30   We began to plan this workshop after both of us were drawn, indepen-
dently, into discussions with our respective Bolivian musician friends who raised 
concerns about intellectual property, piracy, and heritage policies. The workshop 
aimed to serve as a space where Bolivians from diverse backgrounds, who would 
not usually meet, could discuss their concerns and share experiences. The country’s 
new constitution and its wake of developing policies on culture, intellectual property, 
and heritage formed an important backdrop to these conversations.  31   

 For the present discussion, we briefly consider just one aspect of the workshop—
heritage—a topic that touched a particularly raw nerve among the participants who 
expressed great concern about the “fever” of heritage registration sweeping the 
country and the conflicts that it provoked. For example, in 2011 alone, 11 dances 
were legally declared part of Bolivia’s national heritage, comprising a campaign 
to assert ownership that was set in motion by the devil dance controversy. Work-
shop participants described the confusion and lack of communication between 
regional and national bodies involved in heritage registration procedures, and they 
discussed how heritage was being widely misunderstood as property. Participants 
mentioned that some Bolivians were even talking about “patenting” cultural expres-
sions as “heritage.” We heard how declarations of “cradle” and “capital” status for 
cultural expressions had sparked conflicts not only between neighboring countries, 
but also between adjacent communities. 

 Through the comment threads on YouTube music videos and dances, Peruvians 
and Bolivians had already waged a xenophobic war of words about conflicting her-
itage claims.  32   However, the extent of these heritage-derived conflicts within the 
country was new to us. In the days following the workshop, and together with our 
Bolivian colleagues, we found ourselves reflecting upon the idea of de-heritagization 
and even drafted—but never published—an article for a Bolivian national newspa-
per proposing this idea. In the midst of having serious misgivings about the benefits 
of Bolivia’s proprietary and nationalistic approaches to heritage policy—shaped by 
old  indigenismo  nationalism rather than decolonizing tendencies—we were invited 
to a meeting of the La Paz Departmental Council of Cultures. 

 On the evening of 24 July 2012, a workshop participant whom we will call 
“Juana” had arranged to have the workshop organizers talk with the La Paz Depart-
mental Council of Cultures. Juana was an employee of the Ministry of Cultures and 
headed up the office of the Departmental Council of Cultures, an organization that 
had emerged from the processes of the 2010 Law to Frame Autonomies and Decentral-
ization.  33   The meeting marked a relatively new local political time-space in which 
Bolivians  performed  the  politics  of  their  new  autonomies,  which,  in  this  case, 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  149 

concerned the cultural policies in the Department of La Paz.  34   After the president of 
the council touched on a few points and gave a brief introduction, we were asked to 
speak about some of the issues we had been discussing in the 2012 workshop. We had 
not been given much advance notice as to the purpose of the meeting or the reason 
for our invitation to speak. We—Michelle Bigenho, Henry Stobart, and Juan Carlos 
Cordero (one of the Bolivian members of the organizing team)—focused on heritage 
problems, introduced the idea of deheritagization, and also spoke about seeking a 
balance in intellectual property between users’ rights and creators’ rights. 

 In response, we listened to impassioned, mixed, and sometimes contradictory 

interventions by council members, some of which we reconstruct here from notes.  35   

 An actor we will call “Antonio” seemed quite peeved by our presence. He minced 
no words in his interventions. He said: “It’s no bad thing that heritage becomes 
seen as property. But this doesn’t happen here. And because we are not conscious 
about what is ours, they steal from us.” In what seemed to be a response to part 
of our presentation that included a discussion of indigenous case studies in other 
parts of the world and alternatives to intellectual property, such as the application 
of protocols, Antonio explained: “That might be what happens over there. But 
I have to publish with my own money. We need to dialogue with the context in 
which we live.” We were not sure if this reaction was aimed at the foreigners in the 
room (Stobart, Bigenho, and an undergraduate student from Bigenho’s institution) 
or against any alternative indigenous proposals that might come from outside 
Bolivia. In any case, we could hear in his statement the strong echoes of the indi-
vidual creator of art whose interests tend to diverge from collective indigenous 
concerns: “I have to publish with my own money.” 

 Cordero, the one Bolivian workshop organizer who was able to attend this 
meeting, reminded the council that the current models of intellectual property and 
heritage were indeed coming from outside Bolivia. However, Antonio responded: 
“Knowledge is the property of the world. But there is nothing wrong with it being 
under intellectual property. Bolivians are lacking in this way of thinking.” At another 
point, he added: “Property is not synonymous with prohibition. There should 
be benefits for the creator.” In our presentation, we raised the issue of Guaraní 
nationhood, a point that had emerged in the workshop discussion, which ques-
tioned the Bolivian national borders that divided this indigenous nation. Antonio 
insisted: “As for the Guaraní, it’s a lie that they are Brazilian and other nationalities. 
 They are Bolivian  and they have to be defended as such.” Furthermore, he critiqued the 
workshop’s preliminary conclusions that called for a summit of cultures. He stated: 
“There should be a summit of  arts  and cultures.” 

 The workshop’s suggestions equally unsettled “Marina,” a dancer who had been 
involved in folklore performances under international touring contracts and whom 
Bigenho has known since the 1990s. She said:

  I’m disappointed. In the dance world, they are taking our property, 
our culture. The Ministry should take a wider view ( ser más amplia ). 
They complain about the movements when they say that borders didn’t 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 150   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

exist  before.  They  should  be  saying  ‘these  things  are  Bolivian,’  like 
 caporales  … The problem is in the denomination. There are devil dancers 
in many countries. We need to do something like brand it for the country. 
It is our cultural capital. I have traveled to other places and I’ve seen people 
wearing the dress of the  chola paceña  [chola woman from La Paz]. I have to 
correct them and say this dress is not from Puno [Peru], but from La Paz 
[Bolivia]. Others, like the Chileans, are taking care of  their  property. The 
problem is the recognition of origin. The problem is the appropriation by 
other countries … What heritage do they have? Don’t the Chileans have 
the Mapuche? Instead, Chile is doing things with our dances and they are 
doing this through the media ( mediaticamente ).  

  We note here how, under this folklorist’s perspective, indigenous peoples and, 
by extension, their creative expressions have become literally national possessions: 
“Don’t the Chileans have the Mapuche?” As a folklore dancer whose cultural work 
comes from representing Bolivia’s dances to the world, Marina has a personal 
interest in seeing clearly defined lines as to what belongs within Bolivian claims. 
During a 1996 tour of France, a Bolivian dance troupe with which Marina partic-
ipated took the Chaco dances out of their presentation repertoire when they were 
performing alongside an Argentine ensemble, because these genres ( chacarera , 
 triunfo, gato ) looked so much like the Argentine performance. Bolivian folklore 
performers boast a wide variety of music and dance genres they can call their own. 
Not performing “the Chaco set” did not diminish the Bolivian presentation. One can 
imagine, however, a dancer’s concern at the possibility of other national folklore 
groups taking up other “Bolivian dances” as their own. We call attention to Marina’s 
awareness of the media circulation of these dances. As more people see, post, and 
exchange  images,  via  YouTube,  Facebook,  and  other  forms  of  social  media, 
the visuals—and, even more specifically, those of clothes and costumes—seem to 
be the points of contention rather than the sonorous and musical accompaniments 
or the dance steps. 

 Marina’s husband, “David,” a musician who also had worked on international 
tours in Europe and Japan intervened, trying to distinguish between regimes of 
authors’ rights and those of heritage. He marked the importance of recognizing 
artists who might have distinct interests in these debates, and he also suggested 
that other countries have more “advanced” cultural policies than Bolivia. Cordero 
intervened at this point, referencing the example of an  empanada  (a cheese or 
meat-filled pastry that might be eaten at afternoon tea in Bolivia). If the  empanada  
is part of Bolivian “culture,” how should Bolivians respond to demands to patent 
this culinary specialty? 

 Cordero drew on recent positions articulated at the workshop by a businessman 
we will call “Ramiro”—a man who owns a chain of shops that sells cheese pastries. 
At the workshop, Ramiro drew on his experiences in radio and as an independent 
record  producer.  He  was  one  of  the  few  workshop  participants  who  favored 
an aggressive intellectual property agenda, including the patenting of his famous 
pastries.  Cordero,  on  the  other  hand,  suggested  Bolivians  should  backtrack  to 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  151 

point zero, to consider if this is really the direction they want to go. Cordero, a well-
known Bolivian musician with national and international experience, once worked 
for Bolivia’s royalty collection society. He then became active with the transnational 
working group called CopySouth/CopiaSur.  36   Through these discussions, he started 
to take a critical view of how copyright has been administered in Bolivia. At this 
council meeting, his ideas were met with somewhat puzzled looks. Perhaps the hypo-
theticals he presented about culture as being overly protected by intellectual property 
law did not yet resonate with personal experiences, particularly in a contemporary 
context where Bolivians are looking fervently to the emancipatory potential of law-
making, something we, along with other ethnographers of Bolivia, have noticed.  37   

 Within the array of voices that represented primarily mestizo artists and folklore 
workers, an Aymara man, “Tomás,” intervened, also responding to the proposal 
for a national summit of cultures: “Tawantinsuyo [Inca empire] has been forgotten. 
I am Aymara and they have imposed this on us. The system is to blame … But then 
they call us ‘Indian,’ then ‘poor,’ then ‘national sellout’ ( vendepatria ) … A summit? 
Congress? But what is our identity?” Tomás’s words, distant from the concerns of 
folklore workers who found themselves facing off with other international folklore 
troupes, brought the conversation back to internal colonial relations and the ques-
tion of discriminatory practices against those who might identify as indigenous 
before or at least as much as they identify as Bolivian. 

 After the meeting, the workshop’s organizing team commented on the over-
powering voices that represented “artists” and their concerns. We wondered if the 
councils of cultures in other departments were so skewed to the interests of people 
making a living in folklore performance, people who tended to be urban-based 
mestizos for whom different forms of indigeneity represented potential material to 
be nationally branded. The most prominently heard voices at this meeting called 
for precisely what workshop participants had found problematic; they definitely 
wanted heritage to be property and to be the property of the Bolivian nation. 

 The lone voice of the Aymara man reminded us all of the colonial impositions and 
the subsequent national boundaries that had divided Tawantinsuyo. His statement 
glossed over at least two moments of empire, that of the Inca rule over the Aymara 
kingdoms and then that of the Spanish over Tawantinsuyo. For Tomás, the collective 
histories  of  discrimination  were  far  more  important  than  any  sense  of  ownership 
over cultural expressions. He was the only one who asked the “who are we” question, 
implicitly querying the nationalist umbrella that was supposed to cover everyone.  38   
The story of the La Paz council meeting demonstrates how indigenous Bolivian 
heritage is entangled with nationalism and the economy. Bolivian governments, 
however, have also played consistent roles in the country’s heritage policies.   

 INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AS PROPERTY OF THE STATE 

 In  2003,  the  presidents  of  Andean  countries  put  forward  the  Declaration  of 
Quirama.  39   Among other things, this document instructed national authorities 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 152   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

to rally behind UNESCO’s newly established Intangible Heritage Convention. 
The application of this international instrument was seen as being important for 
protecting “the memory and identity of Andean cultures.” The Bolivian president 
at the time, Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada, a figure with a long political trajectory as 
the architect of Bolivia’s neoliberal policies, signed this document. Four months 
later, he was ousted from office by a broad array of social movements that shut 
down the country, demanded his resignation, clamored for the nationalization 
of hydrocarbon resources, and called for radical transformations in the country’s 
governing structures. In 2005, Bolivians elected Evo Morales as the country’s first 
indigenous president, and he came to power with a people’s mandate for a consti-
tutional overhaul. During this historical moment of political transformation, how-
ever, the politics of intangible heritage continued on the same path. Within the first 
year of Morales’s administration, the government wrapped up Sánchez de Lozada’s 
unfinished business with intangible heritage, formally ratifying UNESCO’s Intan-
gible Heritage Convention. These seemingly radically different political regimes 
of Sánchez de Lozada and Morales actually coincided considerably on intangible 
cultural heritage policies. 

 We argue that since the mid-twentieth century Bolivian governments have con-
sistently tied folklore or intangible heritage to nationalism and to the economic 
promise of tourism. Culture framed as heritage has become more readily available 
for consumption.  40   Regardless of political color, Bolivian governments have read 
heritage instruments as one more way to rework indigeneity into the nation-
alist  project—an  extension  of  the  twentieth-century  projects  of   indigenismo . 
Indeed, it is notable that the music and dance genres that have been registered as 
heritage in Bolivia are rarely endangered indigenous expressions with narrow lo-
calized aesthetic appeal. Rather, in the name of proprietary nationalist claims, mes-
tizo actors and  indigenismo  processes frame a narrative of scarce cultural resources 
that actually reference dynamic national folklore traditions. 

 UNESCO histories and documents often cite Bolivia’s 1973 request that a proto-
col be added to the Universal Copyright Convention to protect “popular arts and 
cultural patrimony of all nations.”  41   Where does such a request fit within Bolivia’s 
own history? When the Bolivian government raised its voice on this issue, the coun-
try was under the dictatorship of General Hugo Banzer Suárez (1971–78), but his 
cultural politics have been interpreted as a continuation of the nationalist project 
that began with the 1952 Revolution.  42   The 1952 national revolutionary project was 
broad in scope but ultimately liberal in outcome. It included an agrarian reform 
law in 1953 that aimed to dismantle large land holdings.  43   It brought universal 
suffrage by including all people as homogeneous mestizo citizens. The negative term 
 indio  was banished and replaced officially with the term  campesino  (“peasant”). 
In this national revolutionary process of universal liberal citizenship, indigeneity 
took a special place on stage as the raw materials of a nationalist identity; non-
indigenous mestizos staged indigenous events and presented them with pride as 
Bolivian nationalist expressions.  44   Within these arrangements, however, the Bolivian 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  153 

state maintained the coloniality that was implicit within the mestizo-dominated 
state.  45   

 During his dictatorship in the 1970s, Banzer Suárez moved this nationalist cultural 
project forward by bringing popular anonymously authored folkloric expressions 
not only under the realm of “property of the state” but also as “cultural heritage 
of the nation.” In addition, he emitted a supreme decree that called for main-
taining the purity of folkloric expressions because they were like a “touristic good 
[commodity].” The decree not only prohibited carrying folklore to “other foreign 
places” in order to shield it from “alteration and usurpation,” but other passages 
of the document also encouraged, in a seemingly contradictory manner, the dis-
semination of folklore.  46   Through this decree, Banzer Suárez pushed for national 
control over cultural elements that happened to include mostly indigenous music 
and dance. In doing so, he facilitated the mining of these expressions for their eco-
nomic potential in tourism. 

 A 1989 UNESCO document even suggested that Bolivia’s 1973 call for an interna-
tional protocol on cultural expressions was linked to the economic success of Simon 
and Garfunkel’s 1970 cover of “ El cóndor pasa ” (known by its very different English title 
“If I Could,” on the album  Bridge over Troubled Water ), which lacked copyright pro-
tection.  47   Until quite recently, certain Bolivian musicians dedicated efforts to proving 
that “ El cóndor pasa ” was of national origin. However, others have argued that it was 
composed by the Peruvian Daniel Alomía Robles in 1913 as part of a  zarzuela  (the 
piece was originally scored for orchestral instruments, rather than the folkloric ones 
with which it has become associated).  48   Within the layered ironies of this tune’s 
history, its “composer” was said to have been inspired by the indigenous music—
read “unauthored” and “uncopyrightable”—that he heard in the Peruvian coun-
tryside, and in proper  indigenista  refashioning, he made this music his own.  49   
In 2004, the tune was officially declared Peruvian national heritage. In the wake of 
the 2009 devil dance controversy, and in an effort to distinguish Bolivian and Peruvian 
cultural expressions, Bolivia’s Minister of Cultures, Pablo Groux, held out an olive 
branch by officially acknowledging the Peruvian origins of “ El cóndor pasa. ”  50   

 Bolivia’s 1973 request for a protocol also can be located in relation to a film called 
 Argentinísima,  which was screened that year in Bolivia. Even though Argentina has 
indigenous Andean populations, primarily in the north, Bolivians began drawing 
nationalist cultural boundaries when Jaime Torres, an Argentine-born musician of 
Bolivian parentage was featured in this film. Torres’s performance in  Argentinísima  
caused an uproar and sparked nationalist reactions in relation to the instrument and 
the musical repertoire he played in this film.  51   Torres performed on the  charango , 
a small mandolin-like instrument that is heard in many Andean music performances. 
The national origins of this instrument were, and continue to be, a major point of 
contention among Andean countries. 

 UNESCO histories then recount the endless ping-pong effect that followed 
Bolivia’s 1973 request, as different entities of global governance weighed in on the 
matter—UNESCO, the Berne Convention (agreement that seeks to make uniform 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 154   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

the intellectual property laws within different nation-states), and the World Intel-
lectual Property Organization (WIPO).  52   Discussions went back and forth as to 
whether or not folklore and heritage should be connected at all to the intellectual 
property regimes implied by economic motivations or whether they should remain 
in the realm of cultural rights.  53   When intellectual property problems emerged 
specifically in UNESCO’s debates on intangible cultural heritage, they were cor-
doned off as the appropriate realm for WIPO and the World Trade Organization. 
Thus, the “economic rights” of intellectual property were separated from the “cultural 
dimension” of intangible cultural heritage, and UNESCO directed its attention to 
the latter realm.  54   Now, however, WIPO is also engaging with issues of what it has 
labeled “traditional cultural expressions,” even though the ethnographic record shows 
that WIPO’s well-intentioned attempts to translate these expressions to intellectual 
property frames have come up short.  55   While the global governing entities were 
attempting to segregate the economic and the cultural, Bolivian governments were 
already marrying economic interest to a framing of heritage as property and the 
potential commodity of a nation-state eager to mine its tourism future. 

 Bolivia’s neoliberal era, beginning in 1985, would not shift entirely from this 
liberal national cultural project. For example, in spite of the talk about a shrinking 
state, the 1992 Authors’ Rights Law (which is still in force at the time of writing) 
considers un-authored music to be the property of the state.  56   The present “anti-
neoliberal” government continues on the same path of considering traditional cultural 
expressions as potential economic resources, although, in some cases, privatizing 
cultural heritage has been interpreted as a calculated decision within Bolivia’s still 
ongoing neoliberal approaches.  57   

 In other areas, however, President Morales has taken a position against propri-
etary approaches to cultural knowledge, even if only at the level of strong rhetoric. 
For example, in the name of food sovereignty, he has taken a position against the 
Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, which per-
mits proprietary approaches to biological materials, such as seeds.  58   In the interest 
of collective “food sovereignty,” a concept now enshrined in the new constitution, 
cultural knowledge about seeds must be shared and intellectual property regimes 
forestalled.  59   While one can see a convergence in these policies around the theme 
of national sovereignty, Bolivia’s approach to intangible heritage seems more like 
its approach to mineral resources. With an eye on its economic future in the global 
market, the government seeks to control these resources. Its rhetorical approach is 
quite different in the area of seeds, which is a realm in which commodification is 
supposed to be held at bay and priority is given to the idea of nourishing the popu-
lation and ensuring people will “live well” ( sumaq kawsay )—a key discursive idea 
in the Bolivian state’s decolonizing rhetoric. Food sovereignty potentially points 
beyond national borders and suggests concern for the global stakes in the future 
of food production and access. The Bolivian government’s desire to control intan-
gible heritage, however, implies the inscribing of propertied logics and the drawing 
of clear boundaries with its geographic neighbors.   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  155 

 SEEN AND NOT HEARD 

 Transforming embodied performances into intangible heritage involves a specific 
inscription of the “repertoire” into the “archive,” a specific meta-cultural process 
that brings its own problems.  60   UNESCO’s intangible heritage list provides just 
such a vehicle for this transformation. When national cultural expressions are 
placed on this list, they are perceived as accruing greater transnational value.  61   
As mentioned earlier, in 2014, the devil dance wars—our catch-all phrase for 
the arguments about several different dances under dispute—once again flared 
up, online and offline, in response to Peru’s attempt to present Puno’s Festival 
of the Virgen de Candelaria to UNESCO as another Peruvian contribution to 
the Representative List of Intangible Heritage of Humanity. The materials that 
Peru  presented  for  its  case  were  placed  on  UNESCO’s  website  and  included 
its application form, representative photos, community consent forms, and a 
documentary video.  62   

 Peru’s documentary video features images of several dances, but they are shown 
in quick succession and with a poor quality soundtrack. Images of religious devo-
tion, elaborate costumes, masks, and indigenous wind instruments catch the eye, 
but the few seconds of the different musical sound examples hardly put music at 
the center of this disagreement. Providing a singular exception in the video, the 
final 38 seconds feature images taken at night (brilliant costumes shadowed under 
darkness) that are accompanied by one continuous track of  morenada  music—a song 
that accompanies another dance that some Bolivians perceive to belong nationally 
to them and that they believe Peruvians have appropriated. This is the longest 
uninterrupted stretch of music in the entire 10-minute video. 

 In late October and early November 2014, several images, articles, and posts 
circulated via Facebook feeds, as Bolivians in the country as well as outside the 
country (notably Bolivians in Britain, Argentina, and Japan), started mobilizing 
online against Peru’s case. In discussing these ethnographic details from social 
media exchanges, we do not pretend to represent the multiple sides of this dispute, 
and we recognize the skewed nature of our Facebook feeds since they are constructed 
from our Bolivian “Facebook friends” in music and folklore. Since we followed 
many of these threads through personal Facebook feeds, and not simply through 
openly posted public comments to digital articles, we registered passionate post-
ings, pleas to join causes, and few “uncivil” exchanges. These postings were made 
to an imagined, but restricted, public of Facebook audiences—a very distinct kind 
of “public” framed through social network spheres.  63   We have no intention of 
weighing in on the dispute itself but, rather, wish to point to how these disputes 
became focused on what was seen rather than on what was heard. In addition, the 
terms of discourse about national ownership or authorship were also of interest, as 
well as the language of legal and ethical recourse through the Intangible Heritage 
Convention itself and, ultimately, the hyperreal framing of such ubiquitous cul-
tural materials as scarce. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 156   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

 Here are some of the Internet examples that surfaced through Facebook feeds. 
An article from the Bolivian paper  Página siete  was circulated that carried the head-
line: “In Five Years, There Have Been Denouncements of 10 Cases of Plagiarism 
of Bolivian Music and Dance.” The article featured a spectacular photo of a devil 
dance costume from 28 October 2014.  64   A Facebook comment to the shared article 
read: “We have to defend our heritage from delinquents who seek to benefit economi-
cally from Bolivia’s common cultural property ( acervo ).” A time-yellowed newspa-
per clipping of a 1968 Peruvian article was shared, and for those who do not have 
the superpowers of microscopic vision, a link was included to Oruro’s Departmen-
tal Committee of Ethnography and Folklore, which had posted a blog of the article 
in 2010. The Peruvian article, which is essentially a complaint about invasive Bolivian 
dances, was presented as evidence that a few years before 1968 the Candelaria fes-
tival did not include  diabladas  or  morenadas , which are the two key dances at the 
center of this dispute.  65   

 In another Facebook post, the Bolivian Organization for the Defense and Dis-
semination of Folklore called for a protest in front of UNESCO’s office in Calacoto, 
La Paz. They protested the Peruvians’ “indiscriminate theft” of their dances, music, 
and traditions. The call to protest was prefaced with mention of the “negligence, 
indifference, and passivity” of the Bolivian authorities. Another post called for 
a worldwide simultaneous protest at UNESCO offices in “every city and country 
possible.” We note the transnational implications, real and imagined, of these com-
ments. Through postings and comments, people emphasized that Bolivian dances 
have an origin that needs to be recognized. A Facebook group even formed with 
the name “Bolivian dances don’t have borders, but they do have origins and they 
are Bolivian.” Throughout this visually encountered dispute, intangible heritage 
claims were being read as markers of geographic origin, as Facebook users slapped 
tricolored national flag-themed “Made in Bolivia” stickers on stunning photos of 
costumed dancers. 

 The Bolivian Minister of Cultures, Pablo Groux, eventually did respond, and a 
YouTube video of his statement was posted.  66   In an 18-minute video, he justified 
Bolivia’s formal objection to Peru’s petition, detailing specific articles of the Intan-
gible Heritage Convention that he believed to be compromised in Peru’s petition 
process. He said that four minutes of the 10-minute documentary video contained 
dances that came from Oruro’s Carnival. In his point-by-point justification for 
Bolivia’s objection, he faulted Peru’s petition because it did not mention the 
Bolivian origin of many of the dances in the Candelaria festival, did not mention 
Bolivians’ participation in the festival, and did not include a specific inventory of 
the dances encompassed under the umbrella of the festival, other than the fact 
that they included Quechua and Aymara communities as participants. He said that 
the Bolivian musicians, choreographers, and artisans were not recognized for their 
creative contributions to what Peru was claiming as their folklore, and he closed the 
video with a formal request for Bolivian participation at UNESCO’s November 2014 
meeting in Paris. Groux’s call for an inventory of dances brings to mind Michael 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  157 

Brown’s cautionary note about the problems of such lists in “a world of permeable 
borders.”  67   In this case, Peru left out the list, but Groux’s knowledge of global gov-
ernance led him to demand it. 

 An article from  Infodiez  (which is pitched as a digital newspaper for the Bolivian 
community in Argentina) was shared on 12 November 2014, and it featured the 
Bolivian ambassador to UNESCO, Sergio Cáceres, weighing in with a position 
quite different from Groux’s.  68   Cáceres states that the Peruvian inscription was 
basically a done deal and that Bolivians did not need to do anything because the 
country’s national heritage was “not at risk.” He also aims to clarify for Bolivians 
the fact that “inscribing something in this list of intangible heritage does not grant 
a certificate of property, origin, or exclusivity about any kind of cultural practice.” 
The article is followed by a comment thread that almost uniformly expresses some 
form of chauvinistic Bolivian nationalism and questions the patriotism of the 
Bolivian ambassador. 

 Another article posted on Facebook features a discussion of how the Oruro 
bands, in possible protest, considered not traveling to Puno for the Candelaria 
festival. However, the president of the Departmental Federation of Bands and Pro-
fessional Musicians of Oruro stated that he wished to avoid getting in the way of 
musicians’ rights to seek work contracts, even when these might take them across 
the border.  69   Comment posts in Facebook call for musicians to “put on the Bolivian 
T-shirt.” During Oruro’s Carnival in 2015, the authors followed online discussions 
that critiqued the Bolivian bands that had taken contracts to play in the Candelaria 
festival. Working musicians were publically shamed for seeking these work contracts 
across the Peruvian–Bolivian border. 

 The Internet and, even more specifically, social media circulations have added 
a  heightened  awareness  around  nationalist  cultural  boundary  maintenance. 
These boundary projects are being promoted by those who have access to the 
Internet on a regular basis and who quickly latch onto the visual images associated 
with folklore dance and, even more specifically, with dance costumes. In this case, 
the Bolivian culture boundary vigilantes tend to be mestizos, who are far from 
identifying as any circumscribable indigenous community that might be strug-
gling  for  greater  control  over  haphazard  digital  circulation  of  their  culture’s 
images.  70   Although the ambassador tried to clarify that the intangible heritage 
list does not operate as a registration for exclusive use, many Bolivians contin-
ued to read heritage in this way, imagining a scarcity of cultural resources as 
competitively claimed by culturally warring countries. 

 We heard about the same concerns at the Departmental Council of Cultures 
meeting,  when  Marina  insisted  on  the  need  to  “correct”  dancers  from  other 
Andean countries when they used clothing she associated with La Paz (Bolivia), 
even though such dress also is worn in Puno (Peru). Some of the posts mentioned 
specific concerns about Bolivia losing tourism to Peru in the wake of this declara-
tion. As noted above, more research would be needed to address any real economic 
losses to Bolivia on this front, and this research could consider why tourists might 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 158   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

choose one destination over another (time of possible travel and coincidence with 
fiesta dates, visa requirements, cost of an airline ticket to the capital of the country, 
infrastructure to accommodate tourists, and so on). We argue that a hyperreal sense 
of scarcity fuels many of these devil dance wars and that this sensitivity extends from 
sensory media intersections that privilege the visual mode, a mode that too easily 
blocks out sounds, choreography, and the complex social relations that make any of 
these fiestas possible in the first place.   

 CONCLUSIONS: THE DEVIL IN NATIONALISM 

 President Morales requested Groux’s resignation shortly after the Candelaria fes-
tival debacle. In fact, during his presidency, several different people have held the 
post of Minister of Culture(s) and Tourism—one reason for caution when it comes 
to reading state outcomes as clear expressions of specifically stated policies. States 
are not single black boxes. Nor are nationalist projects consistently coherent. 
However, the Morales pro-indigenous government has set out to decolonize what 
has been a long-standing mestizo-centered state, and they have done so through 
a major constitutional overhaul and an explicit decolonizing project. Early in the 
Morales regime, skeptics and champions of the new government argued over 
whether or not it was even possible to decolonize a state.  71   Even those who worked 
within the regime saw the limits of this project. For example, David Aruquipa, who 
served as the country’s Director of Cultural Heritage over the first four years of 
Morales’s presidency (2006–10) reminisced: “Decolonization quickly became 
a slogan rather than the substantive center of all we did.”  72   This movement, he sug-
gested, related to the legacy of neoliberalism, the constraints on his team from 
the presidential palace, and the socially conservative forces within the then Vice 
Ministry of Culture. He went on to propose that the cultural heritage laws his team 
was tasked to create fed “a new form of hegemony that reduces the possibilities of 
innovative kinds of cultural constructions and threatens to create new forms of 
exclusion,” where culture is reduced to “the production of ‘indigenous’ handi-
crafts, music, and dress.”  73   Disillusionment with the decolonial framework is even 
more trenchantly expressed by Silvia Rivera Cusicanqui, who has stated that it is 
“practically useless for action in the streets and for engaging with concrete indige-
nous struggles. It has, nevertheless, been cleverly adopted by new aspirants to inter-
nal colonialist power, in Bolivia and elsewhere, and this is an even more pressing 
reason for remaining outside its lure.”  74   

 In spite of the officially reframed Bolivian “Plurinational State,” indigenous sov-
ereignties are anything but given in the country. Rather, the government has taken 
a national proprietary approach to Bolivia’s expressive cultures—a policy that, 
as we have argued, has its roots in  indigenismo , the culturally performative flipside 
of the mestizo nation as promoted through the 1952 Revolution. Bolivia’s defense 
of its cultural expressions cannot be easily extricated from a history of twentieth-
century  indigenismo , filtered through the unfinished work of building a mestizo 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  159 

nation and the dark days of Banzer Suárez’s dictatorship in the 1970s. While Bolivia’s 
neoliberal policies have been implemented since 1985 and recent heritage-making 
case studies in other ethnographic work have reflected neoliberal approaches (with 
their own contradictions that are beyond the scope of this article), we point to the 
liberal nationalist project that continues to haunt many of Bolivia’s internationally 
prominent cultural heritage disputes. Scholars continue to assess whether or not 
President Morales could ever really decolonize a state or effectively promote an 
anti-neoliberal project in the contemporary global context,  75   but, in this article, 
we underscore that a liberal mestizo/ indigenista  nationalist project lives on in the 
mestizo-driven heritage politics of this self-described decolonizing government.  76   
While decolonizing the state has been a central concern in the process of change, 
less attention has been paid to the need for decolonizing the still predominant 
mestizo nationalist project. 

 The La Paz Departmental Council of Cultures, which is part of the new local 
autonomous  governments,  strongly  reflects  the  interests  of  mestizo  folklore 
artists, according to whom Bolivia’s indigeneity should be nationally branded. 
This position does not look all that different from the mid-twentieth-century 
 indigenismo , which has been the main act of Bolivian cultural nationalism. We 
note some differences, however, primary among them being the overt language 
of intellectual property: “We’re going to  patent  it like patrimony” and “ brand  it 
for the country.”  77   During the November 2014 Facebook interactions, one dancer 
even referenced Bolivian dances as being related to her own registered trademark: 
“This is my cultural identity, my Origin, my Essence, my Registered Trademark.” 
In spite of UNESCO’s official readings of heritage (that is, that it is not supposed 
to  be  about  property),  some  Bolivians  interacting  internationally  online  and 
offline have come to see heritage as being threatened by a hyperreal scarcity of 
cultural resources. 

 Heritage governance, even under a supposedly pro-indigenous regime, inevitably 
gets caught in the bureaucratic and nationalist nets already cast since the mid-
twentieth century. We argue that the present government, in spite of its decoloniz-
ing intentions, has not managed to decouple heritage politics from the legacies 
of mestizo-centered  indigenismo  and its accompanying nationalist project. Indeed, 
in the present context, heritage politics has started to look like a form of updated 
 indigenismo , only this time it is digitally charged, visually focused, much more 
proprietary, and under the simulacrum of scarcity.  That  is the devil in Bolivia’s 
nationalism.    

  ENDNOTES 

  
13 de agosto 2009.  
  
  

 1  .     “El gobierno impugna el uso del atuendo de la Diablada como traje típico peruano,”  Bolpress , 

 2  .     Ibid.  
 3  .     Marrie  2009 . Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, 17 October 2003.  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 160   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

  
 4  .     Morales’s subject position as “indigenous” has been questioned, and he himself has denied 
being indigenous, emphasizing instead his labor union background. “Evo ‘nunca’ se consideró 
un presidente indígena,”  Página siete , 25 de septiembre 2011, 7. However, he remained in power 
over these years because those of humble backgrounds, who might be considered “indigenous” 
by others, voted for him as “one of their own.”  
 5  .     See Gustafson  2010 .  
  
 6  .     Sherkin  2001 .  
  
 7  .     Comaroff and Comaroff  2009 , 56.  
  
  
 8  .     The nationalization process, at closer examination, was a renegotiation of Bolivia’s existing 
contracts, a process that left Bolivia as the majority shareholder and with a more generous percentage 
of the profits on major fields. See Hylton and Thomson  2007 .  
 9  .     See Brown  2005 , 40.  
  
 10  .     For critical perspectives on the tangible/intangible divide, see Kirshenblatt-Gimblett  2004 ; 
  
Torres and Romero  2005 ; Smith  2006 ; Lacarrieu  2008 ; Smith and Akagawa  2009 ; Byrne  2009 ; 
Collins  2012 ; Harrison  2013 .  
 11  .     See Barragán  1992a ; Barragán  1992b .  
  
 12  .     Salmón  1997 ; Rossells  2004 ; Bigenho  2005 ,  2006 .  
  
 13  .     See Postero  2010 .  
  
 14  .     Hale  1994 ; Nelson  1999 ; Colloredo-Mansfeld  1999 ; Canessa  2012 .  
  
 15  .     Bolivia  2010 ,  Ley N o . 045 .  
  
 16  .     See Canessa  2007 ; Lazar  2008 .  
  
 17  .     Carpenter, Katyal, and Riley  2009 ; Brown  2010 ; Carpenter, Katyal, and Riley  2010 .  
  
 18  .     Bigenho  2006 , 268.  
  
 19  .     Hale  2004 .  
  
  
 20  .     Advocates for the Isiboro Sécure National Park and Indigenous Territory marched twice to La Paz 
in 2011 and 2012. The “prior” consultation was finally held, and, in official terms, the result was in favor of 
building this road. However, reports detail the contested nature of this consultation. Achtenberg  2012 .  
 21  .     Martínez  2010 , 144.  
  
 22  .     Stobart  2006 , 115.  
  
 23  .     Nash  1979 , 121–69.  
  
 24  .     Abercrombie  1991 , 119.  
  
 25  .     Barragán and Cárdenas  2009 .  
  
 26  .     Tassi  2016 , 128–32.  
  
 27  .     Baudrillard  1994 .  
  
 28  .     Córdova  2009 , 9.  
  
  
 29  .     On  principles  and  aesthetics  of  abundance  in  an  urban  Aymara  context,  see  Tassi   2016 . 
In ethnography completed in the 1990s, Bigenho noted how Bolivian folklore festival contexts, 
with a very different structuring of performance time from fiestas, led to a privileging of the visual 
over the aural and kinesthetic—altering the duration, content, and overall significance of music 
performances. In the twenty-first century era of social media, these sensory shifts toward the visual 
have become even more exaggerated. Bigenho  2002 , 61–96.  
  
 30  .     The workshop was supported by the National Science Foundation and was co-organized 
together with Bolivian research assistants Juan Carlos Cordero and Bernardo Rozo, and Hampshire 
College student Phoebe Smolin.  
  
website. See Bigenho and Stobart  2014 .  
  
  
  
substitutes. These councils exist as part of a relatively new autonomous local governing structure.  
  
 35  .     The quotes are reconstructed from notes rather than directly quoted from a recording. With the 
exceptions of the names of workshop organizers and public figures, we have used pseudonyms in this passage.  

 32  .     Stobart  2010 .  
 33  .     Bolivia  2010 ,  Ley N o . 031 .  
 34  .     Each department has its own council that includes 20 members—10 regular members and 10 

 31  .     The workshop’s discussions and associated dissemination activities are detailed in a dedicated 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 51  .     Rios  2014 .  
 52  .     Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 20 March 1914, UNTS 

 36  .     See Copy/South Research Group  2006 .  
  
 37  .     See Fabricant  2012 .  
  
  
 38  .     The “who are we” question, or who constitutes the community and thereby the practitioners of 
a particular heritage, is a problematic point identified by others working on heritage (Kearney  2009 , 
215) and was seen in the Kallawaya case as studied by Callahan ( 2011 ).  
  
org/documentos/actas/Quirama.htm  (accessed 20 March 2013).  
 40  .     Torres and Romero  2005 , 281.  
  
 41  .     Sherkin  2001 . Universal Copyright Convention, 6 September 1952.  
  
 42  .     Sánchez C.  2001 .  
  
 43  .     Bolivia  1953 ,  Ley N o . 3464 .  
  
 44  .     See Bigenho  2006 .  
  
 45  .     Rivera Cusicanqui  1993 .  
  
  
 46  .     Sánchez C.  2001 , 116; Decreto Supremo 15304, 1978. For the Mexican context, Elizabeth 
Emma Ferry ( 2002 , 338) refers to this as the “idiom” of heritage in the national project. In the case 
she analyzed, the Mexican Revolution redefined property in ways that would promote the goals of 
the revolution. Thus, mining cooperatives used “patrimonial strategies” to organize labor production 
and consumption.  
  
 47  .     Sherkin  2001 , 54, note 13.  
  
 48  .     See Llórens Amico  1983 .  
  
 49  .     Ibid, 102.  
  
 50  .     For  ethnography  on  this  tune’s  importance  for  global  “Andean”  music,  see  Bigenho 
 2012 , 32–59. See also “Bolivia reconoce que la canción ‘El cóndor pasa’ es del Perú,”  El Comercio , 
22 de septiembre, 2009.  
  
  
11850,  http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/text.jsp?file_id=283698  (accessed 9 June 2016).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
UNTS 299.  
 59  .     Nicole Fabricant reveals on-the-ground challenges to President Morales’s rhetoric, showing, 
  
for example, how soybean production in Santa Cruz depends on genetically modified seeds sold by 
the likes of Monsanto. See Fabricant  2012 , 176–78.  
  
  
universalist discourses. See Coombe and Baird  2016 , 347.  
 62  .     UNESCO  2014 .  
  
 63  .     See Gershon  2010 .  
  
  
 64  .     “En cinco años, se denunciaron 10 casos de plagio de música y danzas bolivianas,”  Página siete , 
28 de octubre, 2014,  http://www.paginasiete.bo/cultura/2014/10/28/cinco-anos-denunciaron-casos-
plagio-musica-danzas-bolivianas-36515.html  (accessed 7 November 2014).  
  
 65  .     “Publicación peruana de 1968 que RECONOCE la ausencia de diabladas morenadas y otras 
danzas bolivianas antes de 1968,”  Comité Departmental de Etnografia y Folklore de Oruro Bolivia , 
12 de mayo, 2010,  http://comitedeetnografiayfolklore.blogspot.com  (accessed 14 November 2014).  
  
 66  .     “Bolivia hace conocer su posición frente a la postulación de la Festividad de la Candelaria de 
Puno,”  YouTube , 7 November 2014,  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ohdy_O_6yQQ  (accessed 
7 November 2014).  
  

 53  .     Sherkin  2001 ; Aikawa  2004 .  
 54  .     Aikawa-Faure  2009 .  
 55  .     World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)  2010 ; see Noble  2007 .  
 56  .     See also Sánchez C.  2001 , 118–19; Bigenho  2002 , 199–225; and Bolivia  1992 ,  Ley N o . 1322 .  
 57  .     Albro  2010 , 160.  
 58  .     Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, 15 April 1994, 1869 

 60  .     Taylor  2003 ; Kirshenblatt-Gimblett  2004 .  
 61  .     Even intangible heritage, supposedly focusing on the local, also embraces global value and 

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  161 

 39  .     14th Consejo Presidencial Andino, “Declaración de Quirama,” 2003,  http://www.comunidadandina.

 67  .     Brown  2004 , 51.  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 162   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

 70  .     See Hennessy  2012 .  
 71  .     Bigenho recalls an extended discussion on this topic at a panel of the Latin American Studies 

  
 68  .     See Juan Perez, “Danzas: Embajador boliviano ante la Unesco defiende a Perú, dice que ‘pedir la 
no inscripción es una acción desmedida,’”  Infodiez.com , 12 de noviembre 2014,  http://www.infodiez.
com/embajador-boliviano-ante-la-unesco-defiende-a-peru-en-tema-danzas-bolivia-como-pais-no-
deberia-hacer-nada-no-hay-nada-que-ponga-en-riesgo-el-patrimonio-nacional/  (accessed 13 November 
2014).  
  
 69  .     “Bandas de música revisan su participacion en fiesta de Puno,”  Página siete , 14 de noviembre 2014, 
 http://www.paginasiete.bo/cultura/2014/11/14/bandas-musica-revisan-participacion-fiesta-puno-
38217.html .  
  
  
Association Congress in 2007.  
 72  .     Quoted in Farthing and Kohl  2014 , 60.  
  
 73  .     Ibid.  
  
 74  .     Rivera Cusicanqui  2014 .  
  
 75  .     See Webber  2009 ; Howard  2010 ; Fabricant  2012 ; Postero  2013 .  
  
  
 76  .     Postero’s work shows how the Morales government has maintained powerful central govern-
mental structures, in spite of legal nods to autonomies. She also reads the confrontation over the 
Isiboro Sécure National Park and Indigenous Territory as revealing the tensions of “liberal democracy” 
within Bolivia’s new plurinational form. See Postero  2014 , 410, 419.  
  
 77  .     Nation branding has taken off in these countries as well. Peru beat Bolivia to this strategy, pro-
ducing a brand insignia based on the Nazca Lines in 2011. See Silverman  2015 . Bolivia has followed 
with a “Bolivia awaits you” branded message and image.   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Abercrombie  ,   Thomas  .  1991 .  “To Be Indian, to Be Bolivian: ‘Ethnic’ and ‘National’ Discourses 
of Identity.”  In  Nation-States and Indians in Latin America , edited by   Greg     Urban   and   Joel     Sherzer  , 
 95 – 130 .  Austin :  University of Texas Press .  

    Achtenberg  ,   Emily  .  2012 . “Bolivia: New Road Contract Ramps up Stakes in TIPNIS Conflict.” 
 NACLA Blog , Rebel Currents,  https://nacla.org/blog/2012/10/20/bolivia-new-road-contract-ramps-
stakes-tipnis-conflict  (accessed 10 November 2014).  

    Aikawa  ,   Noriko  .  2004 .  “An Historical Overview of the Preparation of the UNESCO International 
Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage.”   Museum International   56 , 
no.  1–2 :  137 –49.  

    Aikawa-Faure  ,   Noriko  .  2009 .  “From the Proclamation of Masterpieces to the Convention for the 
Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage.”  In  Intangible Heritage , edited by   Laurajane     Smith   and 
  Natsuko     Akagawa  ,  13 – 44 .  New York :  Routledge .  

    Albro  ,   Robert  .  2010 .  “Neoliberal Cultural Heritage and Bolivia’s New Indigenous Public.”  In  Ethnogra-
phies of Neoliberalism , edited by   Carol J.     Greenhouse  ,  146 –61.  Philadelphia :  University of Pennsylvania 
Press .  

    Barragán  ,   Rossana  .  1992 a.  “Entre polleras, lliqllas, y ñañacas: Los mestizos y la emergencia de 
la  tercera  república.”   In   Etnicidad,  economía  y  simbolismo  en  los  Andes ,  edited  by    Silvia      Arze  , 
  Rossana      Barragán  ,    Laura      Escobari  ,  and    Ximena      Medinaceli  ,   85 – 117 .   La  Paz :   Hisbol,  Ifea, 
Sbh-Asur .  

    ——— .   1992 b.   “Identidades  indias  y  mestizas:  una  intervención  al  debate.”    Autodeterminación: 
Análisis histórico-político y teoría social   10 :  17 – 44 .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  163 

    Barragán  ,   Rossana  , and   Cleverth     Cárdenas  .  2009 .  Gran Poder: La morenada  (con Johnny Guerreros, 
Nancy Maldonado, Carmen Tito, Lía Tito, Mitsuko Shimose, Irineo Uturunco, Lolange Zalles, and 
Soledad Ardaya).  La Paz :  IEB, Asdi/Sarec, Archivo de La Paz, UMSA .  

    Baudrillard  ,   Jean  .  1994 .  Simulacra and Simulation , translated by   Sheila     Faria Glaser  .  Ann Arbor : 
 University of Michigan Press .  

    Bigenho  ,   Michelle  .  2002 .  Sounding Indigenous: Authenticity in Bolivian Music Performance .  New York : 
 Palgrave Macmillan .  

    ——— .  2005 .  “Making Music Safe for the Nation: Folklore Pioneers in Bolivian Indigenism.”  
In  Natives Making Nation: Gender, Indigeneity, and the State in the Andes , edited by   Andrew     Canessa  , 
 60 – 80 .  Tucson :  University of Arizona Press .  

    ——— .  2006 .  “Embodied Matters: Bolivian Fantasy and  Indigenismo .”   Journal of Latin American and 
Caribbean Anthropology   11 , no.  2 :  267 –93.  

    ——— .  2012 .  Intimate Distance: Andean Music in Japan .  Durham :  Duke University Press .  

    Bigenho  ,   Michelle  , and   Henry     Stobart  , curators and eds.  2014 . “Rethinking Creativity, Recognition 
and Indigenous Heritage,”  https://www.royalholloway.ac.uk/boliviamusicip/home.aspx  (accessed 
10 November 2014).  

    Bolivia  .  1953 .  Ley N o  3464: Reforma agraria ,  http://www.lexivox.org/norms/BO-DL-19530802.xhtml  
(accessed 8 June 2016).  

    ——— .  1992 .  Ley N o  1322: Derecho de autor ,  http://docs.bolivia.justia.com/nacionales/leyes/ley-
1322-1989-1993.pdf  (accessed 9 June 2016).  

    ——— .  2010 .  Ley N o  031: Marco de autonomías y descentralización “Andrés Ibáñez,”   http://www.
unesco.org/culture/natlaws/media/pdf/bolivia/bo_ley31_10_spaorof  (accessed 8 June 2016).  

    ——— .  2010 .  Ley N o  045: Contra el racismo y toda forma de discriminación ,  http://www.noracismo.
gob.bo/archivos-pdf/LEY_%20045_CONTRA_EL_RACISMO_Y_TODA_FORMA_DE_
DISCRIMINACION.pdf  (accessed 8 June 2016).  

    Brown  ,   Michael F  .  2004 .  “Heritage as Property.”  In  Property in Question: Value Transformation in the 
Global Economy , edited by   Katherine     Verdery   and   Caroline     Humphrey  ,  49 – 68 .  Oxford :  Berg .  

    ——— .  2005 .  “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work on the Protection of Intangible Culture Property.”  
 International Journal of Cultural Property   12 , no.  1 :  40 – 61 .  

    ——— .  2010 .  “Culture, Property, and Peoplehood: A Comment on Carpenter, Katyal, and Riley’s 
‘In Defense of Property.’”   International Journal of Cultural Property   17 , no.  3 :  569 –79.  

    Byrne  ,   Denis  .  2009 .  “A Critique of Unfeeling Heritage.”  In  Intangible Heritage , edited by   Laurajane   
  Smith   and   Natsuko     Akagawa  ,  229 –52.  New York :  Routledge .  

    Callahan  ,   Mollie  .  2011 .  Signs of the Time: Kallawaya Medical Expertise and Social Reproduction in 21st 
Century Bolivia . PhD dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan.  

    Canessa  ,   Andrew  .  2007 .  “Who Is Indigenous? Self-Identification, Indigeneity, and Claims to Justice 
in Contemporary Bolivia.”   Urban Anthropology   36 , no.  3 :  195 – 237 .  

    ——— .  2012 .  Intimate Indigeneities: Race, Sex, and History in the Small Spaces of Andean Life . 
 Durham :  Duke University Press .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 164   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

    Carpenter  ,   Kristen A.     Sonia K.     Katyal  , and   Angela R.     Riley  .  2009 .  “In Defense of Property.”   Yale Law 
Journal   118 :  1022 – 1125 .  

    ——— .  2010 .  “Clarifying Cultural Property.”   International Journal of Cultural Property   17 , no.  3 :  581 –98.  

    Collins  ,   John F  .  2012 .  “Reconstructing the ‘Cradle of Brazil’: The Detachability of Morality and the 
Nature of Cultural Labor in Salvador, Bahia’s Pelourinho World Heritage Site.”   International Journal 
of Cultural Property   19 , no.  3 :  423 –52.  

    Colloredo-Mansfeld  ,   Rudi  .  1999 .  The Native Leisure Class: Consumption and Cultural Creativity in the 
Andes .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press .  

    Comaroff  ,   John L.  , and   Jean     Comaroff  .  2009 .  Ethnicity Inc .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press .  

    Coombe  ,   Rosemary J.  , and   Melissa F.     Baird  .  2016 .  “The Limits of Heritage: Corporate Interests and 
Cultural Rights on Resource Frontiers.”  In  A Companion to Heritage Studies , edited by   William     Logan  , 
  Máiréad     Nic Craith  , and   Ullrich     Kockel  ,  337 –54.  Oxford :  John Wiley and Sons .  

   Copy/South Research Group .  2006 .  The Copy/South Dossier: Issues in the Economics, Politics and Ideology 
of Copyright in the Global South , edited by   Alan     Story  ,   Colin     Darch  , and   Debora     Halbert  ,  http://www.
gutenberg.org/ebooks/22746  (accessed 10 November 2014).  

    Córdova  ,   Ximena  .  2009 . “Contextualising the Diablada of Oruro: Commentary to Paper by Gladys 
Medina, ‘The Diablada of Oruro Carnival: A Case Study of a Unique Cultural Phenomenon.’” Paper 
presented at the Latin American Music Seminar, Institute for the Study of the Americas, London.  

    Fabricant  ,   Nicole  .  2012 .  Mobilizing Bolivia’s Displaced: Indigenous Politics and the Struggle over Land . 
 Chapel Hill :  University of North Carolina Press .  

    Farthing  ,   Linda  , and   Benjamin     Kohl  .  2014 .  Evo’s Bolivia: Continuity and Change .  Austin :  University of 
Texas Press .  

    Ferry  ,   Elizabeth Emma  .  2002 .  “Inalienable Commodities: The Production and Circulation of Silver 
and Patrimony in a Mexican Mining Cooperative.”   Cultural Anthropology   17 , no.  3 :  331 –58.  

    Gershon  ,   Ilana  .  2010 .  The Breakup 2.0: Disconnecting over New Media .  Ithaca :  Cornell University Press .  

    Gustafson  ,   Bret  .  2010 .  “When States Act Like Movements: Dismantling Local Power and ‘Seating’ 
Sovereignty in Post-Neoliberal Bolivia.”   Latin American Perspectives   37 , no.  4 :  48 – 66 .  

    Hale  ,    Charles  .   1994 .   “Between  Che  Guevara  and  the  Pachamama:  Mestizos,  Indians,  and  Identity 
Politics in the Anti-quincentenary Campaign.”   Critique of Anthropology   14 , no.  1 :  9 – 39 .  

    ——— .  2004 .  “Rethinking Indigenous Politics in the Era of the ‘Indio Permitido.’”   North American 
Congress on Latin America Report on the Americas   38 , no.  2 :  16 – 21 .  

    Harrison  ,   Rodney  .  2013 .  Heritage: Critical Approaches .  New York :  Routledge .  

    Hennessy  ,   Kate  .  2012 .  “Cultural Heritage on the Web: Applied Digital Visual Anthropology and Local 
Cultural Property Rights Discourse.”   International Journal of Cultural Property   19 , no.  3 :  345 –69.  

    Howard  ,   Rosaleen  .  2010 .  “Language, Signs, and the Performance of Power: The Discursive Struggle 
over Decolonization in the Bolivia of Evo Morales.”   Latin American Perspectives   37 , no.  3 :  176 –94.  

    Hylton  ,   Forrest  , and   Sinclair     Thomson  .  2007 .  Revolutionary Horizons: Past and Present in Bolivian 
Politics .  London :  Verso .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

INDIGENOUS HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES OF DECOLONIZATION  

  165 

    Kearney  ,   Amanda  .  2009 .  “Intangible Cultural Heritage: Global Awareness and Local Interest.”  
In   Intangible  Heritage ,  edited  by    Laurajane      Smith    and    Natsuko      Akagawa  ,   209 –25.   New  York : 
 Routledge .  

    Kirshenblatt-Gimblett  ,    Barbara  .   2004 .   “Intangible  Heritage  as  Metacultural  Production.”    Museum 
International   56 , no.  1–2 :  52 – 65 .  

    Lacarrieu  ,   Mónica  .  2008 .  “¿Es necesario gestionar el patrimonio inmaterial? Notas y reflexiones para 
repensar las estrategias políticas de gestión.”   Boletín de gestión cultural   17 ,  www.gestioncultural.org/
boletin/2008/bgc17-patrimonioinmaterial.htm  (accessed 27 August 2015).  

    Lazar  ,    Sian  .   2008 .   El  Alto,  Rebel  City:  Self  and  Citizenship  in  Andean  Bolivia .   Durham :   Duke 
University Press .  

    Llórens Amico  ,   José Antonio  .  1983 .  Música popular en Lima: criollos y andinos .  Lima :  Instituto de 
Estudios Peruanos and Instituto Indigenista Interamericano .  

    Marrie  ,   Henrietta  .  2009 .  “The UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage and the Protection and Maintenance of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Indigenous Peo-
ples.”  In  Intangible Heritage , edited by   Laurajane     Smith   and   Natsuko     Akagawa  ,  169 –92.  New York : 
 Routledge .  

    Martínez  ,   Rosalía  .  2010 .  “La música y el Tata Pujllay: Carnaval entre los Tarabuco (Bolivia).”  In  Diablos 
tentadores y pinkillus embriagadores … en la fiesta de Anata/Phujllay: Estudios de antropología musical 
del carnaval en los Andes de Bolivia , edited by   Arnaud Gérard     A.  ,  143 –81.  Potosí, Bolivia :  Universidad 
Autónoma Tomás Frías/FAUTAPO/Plural Editores .  

    Nash  ,   June  .  1979 .  We Eat the Mines and the Mines Eat Us: Dependency and Exploitation in Bolivian Tin 
Mines .  New York :  Columbia University Press .  

    Nelson  ,   Diane  .  1999 .  A Finger in the Wound: Body Politics in Quincentennial Guatemala .  Berkeley : 
 University of California Press .  

    Noble  ,    Brian  .   2007 .   “Justice,  Transaction,  Translation:  Blackfoot  Tipi  Transfers  and  WIPO’s 
Search for the Facts of Traditional Knowledge Exchange.”   American Anthropologist   109 , no.  2 : 
 338 –49.  

    Postero  ,   Nancy  .  2010 .  “Morales’s MAS Government: Building Indigenous Popular Hegemony in 
Bolivia.”   Latin American Perspectives   37 , no.  3 :  18 – 34 .  

    ——— .  2013 .  “Bolivia’s Challenge to ‘Colonial Neoliberalism.’”  In  Neoliberalism, Interrupted: Social 
Change and Contested Governance in Contemporary Latin America , edited by   Mark     Goodale   and 
  Nancy     Postero  ,  25 – 52 .  Stanford :  Stanford University Press .  

    ——— .  2014 .  “El Pueblo Boliviano, de Composición Plural: A Look at Plurinationalism in Bolivia.”  
In  The Promise and Perils of Populism: Global Perspectives , edited by   Carlos     de la Torre  ,  398 – 430 . 
 Lexington :  University Press of Kentucky .  

    Rios  ,   Fernando  .  2014   “‘They’re Stealing Our Music’: The  Argentinísima  Controversy, National Culture 
Boundaries, and the Rise of a Bolivian Nationalist Discourse.”   Latin American Music Review   35 , no.  2 : 
 197 – 227 .  

    Rivera Cusicanqui  ,   Silvia  .  1993 .  “La raíz: colonizadores y colonizados.”  In  Violencias encubiertas en 
Bolivia I , edited by   Xavier     Albó   and   Raul     Barrios  ,  27 – 139 .  La Paz, Bolivia :  Centro de Investigación y 
Promoción del Campesinado/Aruwiyiri .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114

 166   

 MICHELLE BIGENHO AND HENRY STOBART

    ——— .   2014 .   “The  Potosí  Principle:  Another  View  of  Totality.”    E-misférica    11 ,  no.   1 ,   http://
hemisphericinstitute.org/hemi/en/emisferica-111-decolonial-gesture/e111-essay-the-potosi-
principle-another-view-of-totality  (accessed 27 August 2015).  

    Rossells  ,   Beatríz  .  2004 .  “Espejos y máscaras de la identidad: el discurso indigenista en las artes plásticas 
(1900–1950).”  In  Estudios bolivianos 12: La cultura del pre-52 , edited by   Ana     Rebeca Prada  ,  297 – 400 . 
 La Paz :  Instituto de Estudios Bolivianos/CIMA .  

    Salmón  ,   Josefa  .  1997 .  El espejo indígena: el discurso indigenista en Bolivia 1900–1956 .  La Paz :  Plural 
Editores/UMSA .  

    Sánchez C.  ,   Wálter  .  2001 .  “Patrimonio, propiedad intelectual, autoría y ‘música indígena.’”  In  XIV Reunión 
anual de etnología: Aportes indígenas: Estados y democracias, Tomo II ,  107 –25.  La Paz :  MUSEF Editores .  

    Sherkin  ,   Samantha  .  2001 . “A Historical Study on the Preparation of the 1989 Recommendation on 
the Safeguarding of Traditional Culture and Folklore.” Intangible Cultural Heritage Unit, UNESCO, 
 http://www.folklife.si.edu/resources/Unesco/sherkin.htm .  

    Silverman  ,   Helaine  .  2015 .  “Branding Peru: Cultural Heritage and Popular Culture in the Marketing 
Strategy of PromPerú.”  In  Encounters with Popular Pasts: Cultural Heritage and Popular Culture , edited 
by   Mike     Robinson   and   Helaine     Silverman  ,  131 –48.  New York :  Springer .  

    Smith  ,   Laurajane  .  2006 .  Uses of Heritage .  New York :  Routledge .  

    Smith  ,   Laurajane  , and   Natsuko     Akagawa  .  2009 .  “Introduction.”  In  Intangible Heritage , edited by 
  Laurajane     Smith   and   Natsuko     Akagawa  ,  1 – 9 .  New York :  Routledge .  

    Stobart  ,   Henry  .  2006 .  “Devils, Daydreams, and Desire: Siren Traditions and Musical Creation in the 
Central-Southern Andes.”  In  Music of the Sirens , edited by   Linda     Phyllis Austern   and   Inna     Naroditskaya  , 
 105 –39.  Bloomington :  Indiana University Press .  

    ——— .  2010 .  “Rampant Reproduction and Digital Democracy: Shifting Landscapes of Music Production 
and ‘Piracy’ in Bolivia.”   Ethnomusicology Forum   19 , no.  1 :  27 – 56 .  

    Tassi  ,   Nico  .  2016 .  The Native World-System: An Ethnography of Bolivian Aymara Traders in the Global 
Economy .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

    Taylor  ,   Diana  .  2003 .  The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the Americas . 
 Durham :  Duke University Press .  

    Torres  ,   Elizabeth  , and   Javier     Romero  .  2005 .  “Gestores culturales: Entre la cultura y el patrimonio.”  
 Bulletin de I’Institut Français d’Études Andines   34 , no.  3 :  277 –88.  

   UNESCO .  2014 . “Evaluation of nominations for inscription in 2014 on the Representative List of the 
Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity (item 10 on the agenda),”  http://www.unesco.org/culture/
ich/en/10-representative-list-00748  (accessed 12 November 2014).  

    Webber  ,   Jeffery R  .  2009 .  “From Naked Barbarism to Barbarism with Benefits: Neoliberal Capitalism, 
Natural Gas Policy, and the Evo Morales Government in Bolivia.”  In  Post-neoliberalism in the Americas , 
edited by   Laura     Macdonald   and   Arne     Ruckert  ,  105 –19.  New York :  Palgrave Macmillan .  

   WIPO .  2010 .  The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions/ Expressions of Folklore: Revised Objectives 
and Principles .  Geneva :  WIPO .    

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:54:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000114


