International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2013
Vol. 19, No. 7, 613–631, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.681681

Degraded towns in Poland as cultural heritage

Mirek Dymitrow*

Department of Human and Economic Geography, University of Gothenburg, Box 630, SE
405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden
(Received 3 February 2012; ﬁnal version received 22 March 2012)

This paper discusses how the concept of cultural heritage is currently used in
relation to the so-called degraded towns (i.e. deprived of their urban status) in
Poland. It shows the role of heritagisation in the process of restitution of urban
status, and addresses the effects of the ongoing revitalisation of degraded towns
in order to restore their lost urban glory. I argue that the Polish understanding of
urbanity is ambiguous, muddling formality with cultural connotations. I address
how such convolution both rewrites history and affects modernity by the imposi-
tion of values and foreclosures. I also discuss how alterations to the built environ-
ment made in the name of cultural heritage (revitalisation) are often conducted
with disregard to identity, authenticity and historical hybridity, and how the intro-
duction of ‘history’ into a modern arena affects the local society. I conclude that
considering degraded towns as a special form of cultural heritage is a new
construction, where coupling of the disconnected dimensions of the Polish under-
standing of urbanity becomes even more apparent. I stress that this ﬁeld is neither
sufﬁciently differentiated nor problematised, and that cultural heritage relating to
degraded towns is often taken for granted.
Keywords: urban–rural; town privileges; cultural heritage; revitalisation; Poland

Introduction
This paper discusses the way the concept of cultural heritage is currently applied in
Poland to towns deprived of their urban status. Poland is a country where urbanity is
interpreted as both a formal and a cultural concept. Therefore, loss of formal urban
status may, on the one hand, conﬂict with the long-standing urban identities of the
residents; on the other, its recovery is greatly inhibited due to speciﬁc formal require-
ments. Such premises create tension that is dealt with by forging a new type of heri-
tage, the degraded town. This paper discusses a range of aspects and problems of the
heritagisation of degraded towns in Poland, which emerge as a result of the different
understandings of urbanity, and of what urbanity actually does. It is argued that the
degraded towns are used as attributes to give tangibility to the valued concept of
urbanity, which has been lost under questionable circumstances and whose heritagisa-
tion occurs in order to secure that lost value in the struggles for restitution of urban
status. Moreover, since urban status today is also associated with greater chances of
development, it is unclear whether heritage is used to bypass or outsmart the law, or
whether it is the law that stands in the way of fulﬁlment of a heritagisation process

*Email: gusdymmi@student.gu.se

Ó 2012 Taylor & Francis

614

M. Dymitrow

based on a recourse to urban traditions. This paper is an example of how the dis-
course of heritage is used in conversations between politicians and the general public,
where heritage is advanced as something self-evident. It also provides a deconstruc-
tion of a type of heritage that is largely focused – often in an aesthetic manner – on
material objects (mainly the towns’ – often residual – urban morphology), whose
‘revitalisation’ is thought to facilitate restitution of urban status. Summarily, the paper
juxtaposes the historical urban identity of degraded towns with the modern role of
urban status as a catalyst in social and economic development, to which the discourse
of heritage is being added. It is argued that this interface is neither sufﬁciently
differentiated nor problematised.

Background
The term urbanisation denotes an increase in the proportion of the total population
residing in urban areas (Pacione 2009, p. 68); however, the deﬁnition of what is
urban varies widely around the world:

Among 228 countries for which the United Nations has data, about half use adminis-
trative deﬁnitions of urban (e.g., living in the capital city), 51 use size and density, 39
use functional characteristics (e.g., economic activity), 22 have no deﬁnition of urban,
and 8 deﬁne all
their
population as urban. (Vlahov and Galea 2002, p. 52)

(e.g., Singapore) or none (e.g., Polynesian countries) of

The opposite of urbanisation may denote the social process based on the outﬂow of
urban population to the countryside (deurbanisation) or refer to the introduction of
rural elements within urban areas (ruralisation) (cf. Szymańska 2009). However, it
may also occur by means of legislation; either by changing the national deﬁnition
of urbanity, or by annulling the formal urban status of a speciﬁc, hitherto urban, set-
tlement (in Polish literature, the latter is widely referred to as degradation). Because
of constant spatio-temporal societal transformations, urban decline due to depopula-
tion, economic stagnation or autonomy erosion (cf. Aydalot 1987, Clark 1989) is a
common process around the world. Between 1790 and 1840, many English towns
lost their urban status due to deteriorating service provision and lack of industry
(Hann 2005). In India, numerous centres were eliminated from the town list in
1961 in the face of competition with the larger urban centres (Bhattacharya 2006).
Placer depletion in the 1960s contributed to loss of urban status of several Soviet
gold-mining settlements (Kaser 1983). The most drastic case is probably Sweden,
where an administrative reform in 1971 dismantled the traditional concept of urban-
ity altogether. Although treated instrumentally by the concerned authorities, loss of
urban status may effectively have negative social implications, especially regarding
towns with long-standing urban traditions (cf. Nietyksza 1986). In Sweden, for
example, 13 settlements have returned to the informal usage of the term stad (city),
purely for image and marketing reasons. A similar – albeit formal – connotation is
seen with the city status in the UK, with no special rights other than prestige. How-
ever, in both cases, lack of city status is not necessarily synonymous with rural sta-
tus, as many towns are still considered urban areas.

In Poland, formal urbanity coincides with the administrative deﬁnition, yet it is
formalised by using the traditional concept of town privileges (also known as civic
rights) that gives the right to the city title. Dating back to the Middle Ages, town
privileges, whose original meaning (right to trading, establishment of guilds, etc.) is

International Journal of Heritage Studies

615

long gone, have no longer any practical importance per se; it is merely a cultural
remnant (note that none of the countries listed by the UN employs a cultural deﬁni-
tion of an urban area). However, unlike Sweden or England, lack of city status in
Poland is equivalent with rural status, as the concept of town privileges is utilised
to deﬁne urban areas according to the administrative criterion. The latter, in turn,
presupposes a set of modern features like sufﬁcient population, centrality, infrastruc-
ture, speciﬁc institutions, a pronounced non-agricultural employment sector and so
forth. Such a combination of the two platforms is difﬁcult
to reconcile, and
becomes explicitly apparent when the degraded towns apply for urban status on cul-
tural, identity-laden grounds, which do not always coincide with the administrative
requirements.

This irreconcilability becomes a major source of confusion, and is strikingly vis-
ible in central and eastern Poland, where the urban network is scarce and underde-
veloped. This particular territory succumbed during the Russian occupation in the
nineteenth century to a massive, mechanised administrative reform that deprived
338 Polish towns (75%) of their town privileges. Having been enforced by a for-
eign oppressor (and allegedly as a form of punishment), the reform differs from
similar ones around the world whose initiator was the native government enacting a
(supposedly) justiﬁed domestic strategy. The Russian reform is still emotionally
charged amongst Poles, and is often brought up whenever the question of urban
restitution (formal recovery of town privileges) becomes topical. Although many
former towns have to date been restituted, the great majority remain rural (through-
out the country there are currently about 1000 degraded towns). This situation is
disadvantageous to the non-restituted (yet de facto urban) towns, as urban status
does not merely boost the prestige of a settlement (cf. Sokołowski 2011b); it is also
believed to have a signiﬁcant impact on its development (e.g. eligibility to apply
for urban-speciﬁc grants), but also in terms of greater visibility and, as such,
increased attractiveness for investors and tourists (Borusewicz 1999, Drobek 2004,
Pacholak 2010, Rosa 2010).

Until 1989, restitutions were conducted by central authorities, but after the dem-
ocratisation of Poland, the mode was changed to require the initiative to come from
local governments. Since the process itself remained contrived and the prospect of
an application being approved was contingent on many uncontrollable factors, con-
cerned local governments began appealing to the negative emotive aspects associ-
ated with an urban landscape made rural by force. That is when, in the early and
mid-1990s, the concept of ‘cultural heritage’ was reinvented, and began to be heav-
ily exploited as an argument within the ﬁghts for restitution, and continues to this
very day.

I have examined nearly 60 different petitions, appeals, recommendations, declara-
tions, newspaper articles and blog threads dedicated to the restitution of degraded
towns, issued by actors ranging from county councils and local governments to local
interest groups, cultural associations and individuals, including those with a promi-
nent local proﬁle. The discourse of heritage is quite simple: urbanity – as a historical
concept – is seen as something valuable and a legacy that should be honoured by
restoring the towns’ formal urban status. As such, restitution is seen as a means of
protection of cultural heritage. The relative scarcity of reference to the towns actually
having achieved a sufﬁcient level of de facto urbanity that should be indorsed by
awarding them town privileges is very signiﬁcant in the debate. Instead, the formal
requirements are seen as something that must be overcome: ‘Law is law but history

616

M. Dymitrow

is history’ (Grzegorczyk 2009). The more unachievable the requirements, the more
pronounced the argumentation for the past, the old, history, the centuries-long tradi-
tion and particularly the injustice and the disgrace associated with foreign oppression.
‘Reversal of historic justice by a free Poland’ (Grzegorczyk 2009) is often addressed,
and some claim that the towns should not even have to go through the restitution pro-
cess, because the degradation was a violation of Polish law (Turobińszczyzna 2007).
Restitution is also seen as an act of deﬁance towards the past Communist politics,
whose lack of interest in the degraded towns and their ‘glorious urban traditions’
(TMZB 2006) was conditioned by their association with the development of capital-
ism – the antithesis of Communism – in the nineteenth century. Urbanity is romanti-
cised in a variety of ways; it is seen as a determinant of development and of
civilisational progress (urban superiority over rural), but also of the cultural and
social lifestyle the degraded towns lack. Urban artefacts such as urban morphology,
the market square and the coat of arms are put forward as evidence justifying restitu-
tion of town privileges. There is frequent stress on the prestige associated with urban
status and on the preserved urban mentality amongst
locals, detectable in, for
instance, their use of language (I’m going to town). The will of ‘the residents’
(addressed collectively) for restitution is often put forward, not seldom with a hint of
envy in references to nearby towns that appear less urban than some degraded towns.
Summarily, restitution – here understood as the search for urban identity by appealing
to the heritage of urban traditions – became a hot topic and an important issue for
many towns (for instance, Bodzentyn applied seven times before it was restituted;
Drobek 1999, p. 131). Consequently, more towns (44) were restituted in the 1990s
alone than between WW2 and 1980 (40) (my calculations).

The new interest in degraded towns also caught the attention of academics (for
instance, Górak 1990, Siemiński 1991, Drobek and Heffner 1993, Rykel 1993,
Kazimierski 1994, Nawrot 1995, Demidowicz 1996–1999, Drobek 1999,
Koprukowniak 2000, Kosiński 2000), who were concerned with the developmental
potential of the degraded towns and the problems and conditions of urban restitutions,
but also with the towns’ history in terms of population, economy, morphology and
heritage:

[Degraded towns] are part of [Polish] history, heritage and culture. They constitute a
speciﬁc element within Poland’s spatial economic structure. They are also an integral
part of the country’s settlement system, a component unknown of in other European
countries. They linger in Poland’s local
tradition, and, in spite of many historical
storms, they have managed to survive in oblivion. They are a testimony of foreign
violence, old injustice and present incomprehension (…). In an era of globalisation,
internationalisation of the world economy, European integration and new regionalism
(…), no perspectives of development and no rational way towards development can
be sighted for this type of towns. (Siemiński 2000, p. 14, my translation)

Exploitation of degraded towns as cultural heritage was not only addressed by
direct reference to their unfortunate past. The 2000s ignited a new wave of cultural
heritagisation projects (largely subsidised by the European Union), conducted in
order to physically ‘revitalise’ the neglected urban appearance of degraded towns:

The planning of heritage should include rehabilitation, revitalisation and renovation of
certain areas. The point of departure for shaping the environment should be striving
for a holistic, sustainable recognition of socio-economic, cultural, spatio-technical and
ecological aspects of
that same environment.

lives of communities that

inhabit

International Journal of Heritage Studies

617

Sustainable development is unthinkable without concern about cultural identity and
sense of community, nor without responsibility for the environment on a local level.
(Przesmycka 2001, my translation)

Along with revitalisation projects, the number of restitutions rampantly increased
during the 2000s, and the interest from academics in degraded towns was kept alive
(cf. Sokołowski 2002, 2008, 2011a, 2011b, Murzyn and Gwosdz 2003, Szmytkie
2003, Drobek 2005, Krzysztoﬁk 2006, Miszewska 2007, Szmytkie and Krzysztoﬁk
2011). However, the focus became more geographic, that is more concerned with
the towns’ contribution to Poland’s urbanisation, rather than with their cultural
dimension. Still, with the restitution process being continuously driven by forces
nested in a heritage discourse, degraded towns created a peculiar phenomenon,
where development-oriented issues of urbanisation became irredeemably entwined
with emotional issues. These interrelations are discussed below with the help of a
theoretical framework from the ﬁeld of ethnology. The discussion is also based on
my own ﬁeldwork, conducted in 130 degraded towns between 2009 and 2011, and
from previous and ongoing research on various problems of this type of settlements
(Dymitrow [2010] 2012, 2012).

Production of cultural heritage
Heritage can be understood in many ways. It may denote

a process that uses objects and sites as vehicles for the transmission of ideas in order
to satisfy various contemporary needs (…), a product of the present yet drawing upon
an assumed imaginary past and an equally assumed imaginary future. (Ashworth
2007)

It can also be deﬁned as the legacy of tangible things (artefacts) and intangible attri-
butes (mentifacts and sociofacts) of a society that are inherited from past genera-
tions and maintained for the beneﬁt of future generations. While the latter two
denote values that are expressed through oral traditions and customary behaviour,
artefacts constitute the material culture of a society. Collectively,
the material
culture comprises the built environment, that is, the landscape created by humans
(Fellmann et al. 2007, p. 217). An example of a human-made landscape is an urban
settlement network; it takes centuries to develop and becomes part of a country’s
cultural heritage (Jażdżewska 2006, p. 254). Heritagisation of townscapes is a
global process (cf. Ashworth and Tunbridge 2004) driven by a societal urge for
nostalgia (Viken and Nyseth 2009), where townscapes become the entity, heritage
the method and identity the goal (Ashworth 2007). Heritagisation covers human
settlements of all sizes and contexts, from bustling Havana to Croatian Hum, the
world’s smallest town of only 20 inhabitants, but it is also pertinent to rurality (cf.
Munkejord 2009). In Europe, it is campaigned for by, for instance, the European
Council for the Village and the Small Town (ECOVAST), operating in 20 countries
with the goal to safeguard the well-being and heritage of rural communities. In
Poland (a member state), heritagisation is similar to that of other places; however,
urban heritagisation may become problematic,
in that its close association with
town privileges is affected by administrative constraints.

In the modern developed world, the progressive urbanisation of the traditional
rural landscape renders the concept of rural–urban dichotomy anachronistic, and the

618

M. Dymitrow

phenomenon is today more accurately described as a rural–urban continuum (cf.
Sokołowski 1999, Champion and Hugo 2004, Dahly and Adair 2007; note how
ECOVAST merges villages and small towns into one group). In this context, the
very usage of town privileges may be regarded as inadequate; not only do town
privileges per deﬁnition uphold the antiquated dichotomy, but the mere usage of
this expired mediaeval charter may be challenged. Given their lack of contemporary
signiﬁcance (other than historico-symbolic), town privileges can be seen as a form
of cultural heritage of its own. Therefore, heritagisation of degraded towns is based
on a strange force of equilibration, where loss of one form of cultural heritage
(town privileges) creates another (the degraded town). Moreover, should restitution
occur, the process becomes reversed.

As the preceding quotations indicate, the new production of degraded towns as
heritage material is depicted in an array of mindscapes. Developmental issues not-
withstanding, cultural heritage is clearly extended towards both the physical
(revitalisation) and the mental dimension (perception), while it is being assigned a
collective past (cf. Ronström 2005). Siemiński’s quoted text has a strong focus on
uniqueness, integrality, locality, robustness as well as destitution, while Przesmy-
cka’s is solution oriented with an inclination towards social aspects such as local
identity and community. The described mindscapes can be subsumed into three
major domains that are subject to different actors: physical (spatial planners, urban
designers and architects), administrative (local governments) and emotive (residents,
aesthetes–amateurs and traditionalists). Although these domains operate in different
ways (cf. Ronström 2005), their goals may either interact or compete. The physical
and administrative domains are economically oriented (possibility of applying for
urban-speciﬁc EU-grants to avert economic stagnation, depopulation etc.); at the
same time the physical domain – along with the emotive domain – are also non-
economical (aesthetisation, social sustainability). All, however, imply some kind of
development and appeal to locality. Tourism, seen as a way to develop degraded
towns (cf. Murzyn and Gwosdz 2003), is currently establishing itself as a fourth
domain, where the speciﬁcity of the towns’ built environment is utilised to appeal
to the preferences of potential visitors, in order to strengthen the local economy. As
shown by a recent wave of books, degraded towns are frequently depicted in terms
of their historical and cultural, as well as recreational and aesthetic values (cf.
Kwiatek 2006, Sołtyk 2009, Fronczak 2010, Sańko 2010). Such encapsulation cre-
ates a socially constructed gaze of degraded towns (cf. Urry 1990), which, further
assisted by mediated messages and foresights, renders a combined, anticipated
mindscape (cf. Johansson 2009, pp. 259–260). A mindscape constructed in this way
falls within the social frame of will, goal and control (cf. Goffman 1974); the will
to eschew degradation by striving for restitution by means of controlled transforma-
tion of marginalisation into prosperity.

Both current restitution trends and revitalisation trends are geographically clus-
tered as a result of a process known as ‘diffusion of innovations’1 (cf. Krzysztoﬁk
2006), and both may inﬂuence each other. A return to urban status may spawn a
revitalisation procedure in order to ‘live up’ to the regained honours. Conversely,
revitalisation may visually enhance the perceived urbanity of a de jure rural
degraded town,
its appearance may then become imbued with a new meaning
(urban identity), which in turn may be enunciated as a desire for legal action
(application for restitution of urban status). However, restitution achieved by means
of cultural heritage production rather than by some other, more pragmatic means,

International Journal of Heritage Studies

619

may prove unsustainable, as urbanity is not merely a valued concept, but a synergy
of many other, more concrete traits (cf. Drobek 1999, Sokołowski 1999, Dahly and
Adair 2007). Therefore, envisioning degraded towns as an unconditional manifesta-
tion of cultural heritage entails a special perspective that needs to be scrutinised
further.

The case of Szydłów
Szydłów (1100 inhabitants), sometimes called ’the Polish Carcassonne’, was one of
the towns that had joined the 1990s heritage-towards-restitution hype:

Request nr 823 to the President of the Council of Ministers: (…) During the deputy
meeting in Szydłów (…) the issue of restitution of town privileges has emerged.
Szydłów – a settlement of glorious history and a beautiful heritage of national
treasures – lost its town privileges as a result of Czarist authoritarian politics after the
fall of the January Uprising [1863]. The ambition of Szydłów’s residents is restitution
of town privileges (…). (Jaskiernia 1999, my translation)

In his reply, the Secretary of State responded that deprivation of town privileges
was not only the result of political repression, but also of the towns’ prior economic
collapse. For this reason, any automatic restitution would seem doubtful. He also
mentions that the majority of residents are not always in favour of restitution, as
reﬂected by local consultations (Borusewicz 1999). The last point is instructive. As
Szmytkie and Krzysztoﬁk (2011, p. 33) speculate, the strongest factor for initiating
a restitution process today is actually the lobby of the local community and the
local governments. It means that if such lobbying is only pursued by a few local
patriots (often by the means of ﬁerce blog propaganda), or by a small career-ori-
ented local elite (a mayor’s post is more prestigious than that of village head), then
such action is not really the ambition of the residents, despite what the request
quoted above implies. Indeed, to this day, Szydłów remains rural. That, in turn,
marks the presence of the local, rural voice. Borcz et al. (2009, p. 60) found that
despite developmental incentives from urban-speciﬁc grants, many degraded towns
do not strive for restitution, probably as a result of the more favourable rural taxes
or due to poor identiﬁcation with the town’s urban identity. I would also add a third
reason: some people may just not care. However, the situation is quite differenti-
ated. Of the 106 ‘new’ towns created between 1980 and 2011, 67.9% were restitu-
tions (Szmytkie and Krzysztoﬁk 2011, p. 28). This shows that urban identiﬁcation
is indeed an important factor, despite occurrences of towns that have actually expe-
rienced a developmental decline after restitution (cf. Drobek 2005).

In his response to Szydłów’s request from 1999, the Secretary also gives evi-
dence that the prospect of urban restitution entails a creative process that triggers
many initiatives amongst the locals, such as improvements to the town’s appearance
and infrastructure, but it also strengthens community cohesion. Despite Szydłów’s
unsuccessful initial request, the restitution issue was raised once again during a
presidential conference in 2010 (Walczak 2010), probably an inspiring one, as in
mid-2011 extensive revitalisation of Szydłów’s market square, town hall and curtain
walls was initiated. Likewise, restitution of urban status is now inscribed into the
2015 municipal strategy towards sustainable development, as the ﬁnal objective for
protection of cultural heritage. Urbanity is now being approached from another
angle – the physical.

620

M. Dymitrow

Design and conﬁguration

[O]nce towns, now deprived of their town privileges,
these small villages have
retained the attributes of an urban appearance and the nostalgic ‘townish’ ambitions of
their residents, who try to distinguish themselves from their ‘peasantish’ neighbours,
despite lack of occupational differences. They are associated with words like sleepy,
quiet, (…), neat, (…), picturesque. (…) [T]here is often a central market square, once
a bustling place for local commerce and social meetings (…). The painted houses
drown in greenery and ﬂowers in the summer. The tiny shops, until expelled by super-
markets, still tempt customers with sometimes very original display windows (…).
Despite widespread lingering poverty, a resurgent local initiative is arduously trying to
change this state of lethargy. (Kwiatek 2006, p. 5, 6; my translation)

The positive factors [of degraded towns] are their advantageous natural conditions,
friendly environment, lakes, ponds, rivers and forests, which may serve as a basis for
recreation and tourism development. (Borcz et al. 2009, p. 129)

The excerpts above quite accurately capture the way degraded towns in Poland are
currently being commodiﬁed. They appeal to the microcosm of scale, legibility, delin-
eation, aesthetics and social interaction. A degraded town is given physicality in terms
of spatial dominants, heedful ornamentation and small-town architecture. There is a
strong emphasis on the core-periphery relationship, where the periphery of degraded
towns is also associated with natural and environmental attractions, thus extending the
scope towards new domains. Interestingly, such commodiﬁcation opposes commer-
cialisation inherent to big cities, while at the same time commercialising small towns

Figure 1. A peaceful market square in the degraded town of Kromołów (photo by the
author, July 2011).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

621

by appealing to their non-commercialised nature – the authentic and unspoiled experi-
ence market (cf. Svensson 1997, p. 69; see Figure 1):

Being brutal, one can already say that you can make money on history, landmarks,
beauty, peace and quiet. (Siemiński (2000, p. 22, my translation)

Nevertheless, the authenticity of degraded towns may be debated, as many of
them were destroyed or gravely deteriorated by years of neglect and misuse by
the Communist authorities (cf. Adamczewka-Wejchert and Wejchert 1986, pp.
123–130). Market squares were seen as pieces of empty space that could be
customised accordingly to prevailing needs;
it could involve cramming the
interior with bland industrial and retail establishments, or demolishing parts of
frontages and replacing them with hulky, contextually alien, ediﬁces. Today,
these disharmonies are being tended to by various revitalisation projects, but
those tend to give the towns a very dated look from a speciﬁc era, or, more
alarmingly, a hotchpotch of
to artistic
latitude than historical conformity. Revitalisation in Poland is contemporarily
understood as granting the place its lost values, which, to be effective, must go
hand in hand with the intellectual process of restoring memory (Batko 2010). A
successful project should therefore adhere to some basic, historically shaped,
the townscape being
design principles, capable of capturing the essence of
redressed.
townscape analyses
(cf. Conzen 1960) and subsequent adaptations to a modern context (cf. Ashworth
1991). However, this is not always the case, and inadequate proceedings often-
times result in towns assuming a ‘fairy tale look’ (cf. Johansson 2009, p. 126),
or the characteristics of historical theme parks. In the centre of the newly ‘revi-
talised’ market square of
the degraded town of Radoszyce, a conspicuously
placed sign reads:

It would require both careful morphogenetical

incoherent styles that

is more subject

Project: Restoration of Radoszyce’s former glory and augmentation of the functional
aesthetics of its public space by revitalisation of the market square. (as of July 2011)

In fact, the market square, although pleasant, bears no resemblance to its former
appearance. With a minimum of open space (a characteristic of historic squares),
mostly taken up by lawns and trees, the market square consists virtually of a clutter
of objects: marble chess boards, Parisian street lamps, a modernist military stele, a
gazebo/well hybrid, a defunct fountain and an exotic oversized sundial. At the same
time, the surrounding buildings remain in a very poor state. Is this the contempo-
rary understanding of former glory? Despite historical mockery, such demonstration
of an instantly recognisable image of a chimeric small town must nevertheless be
considered as at least an improvement in functional aesthetics (prior to revitalisation
it was a thicket). On the whole, the concept of small traditional town is experienc-
ing a renaissance in Poland. This is demonstrated by the addition, in 2011, of two
open-air museums – in Sanok and Nowy Sącz – dedicated to the small Galician
town (Galicia is a cultural region associated with the Partitions of Poland), using
reconstructions of buildings from degraded towns from the time of Poland’s occupa-
tion (Ginalski 2011, Muzeum et al. 2011). Such development suggests that the
small town is contemporarily seen as something valuable, a fact that may actually
aid the degraded towns in regaining their urban status.

622

M. Dymitrow

The realm of values

[Cultural heritage sites] are (…) powerful and symbolically charged spaces of
experience, with an ability to channel important values such as identity, authenticity,
and authority. (Svensson 1998, p. 16)

that

In order to understand the value-ladenness of such symbolism, it is necessary to
deconstruct it. Cultural heritage has widely become divided into a cultural process
(cf. Eriksen 2001) and an institutional process (cf. Beckman 1998). Studies of cul-
tural processes depart from empiricism in search for meaning and understanding of
cultural practices, although not necessarily in an administrative sense, something
that studies of institutional processes do. In application to degraded towns, both
themes can be discerned. On the one hand, past urban traditions that are still visible
in the towns’ urban morphology may spawn a sense of urban consciousness
amongst the towns’ (rural) residents and initiate a spontaneous cultural process. On
the other, due to the formality of town privileges in Poland, heritage can also be
achieved by institutional means,
is, when urbanity is approached from an
administrative angle (application for restitution automatically raises the question of
lost urbanity). Both urban morphology and town privileges – seen as urban-speciﬁc
features – are two forms of cultural heritage; the ﬁrst material, the second immate-
rial. Both are remnants of past traditions and ideals that still deﬁne Polish society;
they are expressions of local and national identity. According to Ronström’s (2000)
classiﬁcation, both correspond to the fundamentalist deﬁnition of cultural heritage:
they are both ‘old’ things. Seen with the eyes of more moderate fractions of schol-
ars (focusing on the aesthetics or uniqueness), such classiﬁcation becomes problem-
atic. Town privileges are neither aesthetic nor unique, while urban morphology may
very well be both, but it may also be neither. Since aesthetics is in the eyes of the
beholder and uniqueness may be debatable, then the cultural impact of any of them
should not be taken for granted. The interface between the two spheres is intricate,
and needs further elaboration in order to make it more transparent.

Beckman (1993, pp. 97–100) suggests four analytically discernible values (instru-
mental, educational, moral, pleasure-laden) based on two sets of juxtaposed dichoto-
mies: emotion/cognition and materiality/idea. In this vein, heritagisation of degraded
towns can be seen as an ‘instrumental value’ because it facilitates restitution of town
privileges, which in turn provides a wider variety of means for local development,
and the provision of a better life for its residents. Since degraded towns are formally
synonymous with the 43,000 other rural settlements in Poland, heritagisation also
delivers them from obscurity and oblivion, making them a new object of study and
interest (as illustrated by the new wave of books, open-air museums, scientiﬁc studies
and so forth that has occurred since the emergence of degraded towns as cultural heri-
tage in the 1990s). As such, heritagisation of degraded towns also brings about an
‘educational value’. Furthermore, the preﬁx ‘degraded’ is a reminder of past foreign
oppression, especially for towns degraded during the reform of 1869–1870, which is
widely regarded as the epitome of depreciation. Given the currently deployed popu-
list recourse to patriotism in Poland (Sidorenko 2008), heritagisation of degraded
towns stays in line with generic national norms, and its value becomes imbued mor-
ally. This can be clearly seen in the statements regarding urban restitution, some of
which smack of strong reactionary aspirations. There are also traits of a fourth, ‘plea-
sure-laden value’. The sudden, heritagisation assisted emergence of degraded towns

International Journal of Heritage Studies

623

‘creates’ unexploited areas, which attract tourists sporting genius loci qualities like
‘magic’, ‘cosiness’, ‘homeliness’, ‘timelessness’ and ‘serenity’; this in turn makes the
towns perfect vacation spots. Furthermore, tourism entails improvements to infra-
structure, the service sector and the built environment (most notably by revitalisa-
tion), which also makes heritagisation of degraded towns valuable to their residents
in the pleasure-laden terms of assortment, aesthetics and comfort.

Characteristics of heritagisation
Regardless of the nature of value, the sheer context of adding value is important.
Kirshenblatt-Gimblett (1998, p. 150) contends: ‘Heritage adds value to existing assets
that have either ceased to be viable (…) or that never were economically productive
(…)’. Geopolitical circumstances notwithstanding,
the main reason why most
degraded towns were degraded in the ﬁrst place was their economic inefﬁciency
within trade (Kołodziejczyk [1961] 1979). Because of that, they lost their urban via-
bility and importance. Now, some 130 years later, these towns emerge as something
forgotten and misunderstood, whereupon extensive measures are being undertaken to
revitalise their morphological structure and to regenerate their urban character. Never-
theless, as Kirshenblatt-Gimblett (1998, p. 151) puts it, ‘[d]espite a discourse of (…)
revitalization and regeneration, heritage produces something new in the present that
has recourse to the past’ and the heritagisation is nothing short of a ‘transvaluation of
the obsolete, the mistaken, the outmoded, the dead, and the defunct’ (1998, p. 149).
Indeed, it is all about ‘selling the good old days’ to achieve something else, even
though those good old days may sometimes be difﬁcult to visualise. On the peripher-
ies for years, the rural locals of degraded towns may be unable to see beyond the
reality of their everyday life and those past traditions seen as something valuable
may just be too far away. Therefore, in order to become recognised as cultural heri-
tage sites, degraded towns must be observed from the outside and that is what is hap-
pening in Poland right now. Kirshenblatt-Gimblett’s point on ‘alienability of
inalienable possessions’ (p. 165) is useful here. This applies particularly to those
degraded towns that have become heavily altered through the course of time. In order
to become aligned with history, modernity must be historicised. That is where revi-
talisation comes in. However, revitalisation is also important for the tourist stream, as
it must accommodate the preconstructed virtuality of anticipant visitors (cf. Kirs-
henblatt-Gimblett 1998, p. 166). Although we are capable of channelling our vision
to ﬁnd exactly what we are looking for, the gap between virtuality and reality should
not be too wide, otherwise the interest may simply die out. From what I have seen
during my ﬁeld studies (2009–2011), many towns appear very neglected and unat-
tractive; maybe consumption of these – in deﬁance to Kirshenblatt-Gimblett’s conten-
tion (1998, p. 153) – should not be consumed locally; maybe they are better off as a
ﬁgure of imagination or a subject for distant analyses? Such a solution is also tanta-
mount to the feelings shared by some residents of the more rural degraded towns.
Judging from their reactions, many just want to be left alone; they do not want their
property photographed and trampled and their privacy disturbed. This creates tension,
which in Kirshenblatt-Gimblett’s (1998, p. 156) words, could be described as a ‘prob-
lematic relationship of [the heritage’s] objects to the instruments of their display’. We
must not forget that degraded towns also include people who inhabit them. When
socially constructed ‘cultural heritage’ is attributed to the socially constructed concept
‘degraded town’ that in turn is imposed in situ on socially constructed local – often

624

M. Dymitrow

Figure 2. Man on the porch facing the market square in the degraded town of Janowiec
(photo by the author, July 2011).

rural – norms, conﬂicts are bound to arise. The old man on the porch may simply not
see himself as a ‘degraded citizen’; this is his home – as it always has been. No more
and no less (Figure 2).

Problems and downsides
Degraded towns are often perceived as Polish heritage, whereas many of them were
largely inhabited by Ukrainians, Belarusians, Lithuanians, Germans and particularly
Jews (note that anti-Semitism has a strong presence in Poland).2 Furthermore, many
of the towns were privately owned, as feudalism was abolished only years before
the reform of 1869–1870. Within the production of cultural heritage, there is often-
times only one type of dominating heritage, while anything that departs from it is
detached or obscured; as such, production of cultural heritage is difﬁcult to recon-
cile with cultural diversity (Johansson 2009, p. 44, 254). Heritagisation of those
degraded towns as ‘Polish heritage’ or as ‘people’s heritage’ forecloses their history
of multiculturalism (cf. Klein 1997) and aristocratic heredity (cf. Bendix 2000).

Degraded towns lost their urban status during a time when Poland ceased to
exist; when ‘Polishness’ was conﬁned to mentifacts and hope for a future indepen-
dence; Davies (2001) calls this period ‘the legacy of spiritual mastery’. Moreover,
the degradations occurred following bloody Polish nationalist insurrections. Accord-
ingly, the radical reform became interpreted by contemporary and later historiogra-
phers – sometimes without proper
repression
(Kołodziejczyk [1961] 1979, p. 65). This theory is so widespread that the reform
has become notorious. Clearly, punishment was never stated as the ofﬁcial reason

recognition – as an act of

International Journal of Heritage Studies

625

for the reform; only logically acceptable beneﬁts in terms of tax reliefs and freedom
from feudal owners were speciﬁed. There were even instances of voluntary requests
for degradation (the town of Tarnogród), issued by the residents themselves to avoid
the costs of town administration (Nietyksza 1986, pp. 89–90). Furthermore, the
reform occurred at the time of Imperial Russia’s peak in terms of political power
and territorial expansion.3 In other words, if the reason for degradation were punish-
ment, then, given its power, Russia could state that, and do so ‘legitimately’, as the
Polish uprisings did in fact break Russian law. Therefore, it all breaks down to the
aspect of
retroactively constructed valorisation propelled by sheer nostalgia:
degraded towns are more willingly perceived as treasuries of patriotism and spiritual
mastery than as economically depressed rural pockets of the Polish hinterland. An
approach such as this also helps crystallising and cementing a Polish identity that
uses a Whig history outlook,4 where the preferred historisation of past national
memories is not interpreted from the circumstances of their time, but is rather cho-
sen to ﬁt into the contemporary ruling master narrative (cf. Kearney 1971, Davies
2011). In such a perspective, heritagisation works as ‘a beautifying gloss, rendering
the speciﬁcity of past political, economic, and social experiences into far less com-
plex whole than what socio-historical scrutiny would reveal’ (Bendix 2000, p. 38).
There are also more concrete examples of aspirations for timeless purity and
authenticity. Given the multicultural past of most degraded towns (ethnicity, creed
and ownership), it is interesting how slickly heritagisation is used to erase traces of
historical hybridity. I was amazed how the ongoing revitalisation homogenises
towns belonging to different historical regions, with their own architectures, norms
and habits. The revitalisation scheme is very much the same everywhere (dated
wells, benches, street lights and cobblestone pavement), modelled upon Kazimierz
Dolny – the epitome of a Polish small
town (cf. Adamczewka-Wejchert and
Wejchert 1986). This may be due to the local planners’ high susceptibility to fash-
ions to avoid risk by ‘using a catalogue of heritage clichés’ (Ashworth 2007). Such
sameness, despite the call for uniqueness, is also a money issue, as many towns
seem to use the same entrepreneurs, or at least the same raw materials and mass-
produced elements. Still, as Sumień (1989, p. 138) has noted, uniformity destroys
the speciﬁcs of genius loci – the fundamental characteristic of historic towns.
Indeed, the revitalisation hype has oftentimes resulted in ad hoc alterations, and its
lack of proper supervision inevitably adds to further loss of cultural hybridity.

Tradition vs. modernity
Physical historisation of degraded towns not only vanquishes hybridity, it also has
practical implications. Many market squares of degraded towns lost their function as
urban spaces during the Communist era, when they were transformed into lawns or
parks, some of which evolved into dishevelled, inaccessible tracts or into dark thick-
ets serving as dens for alcoholics. Emergence of the cultural heritage discourse
entailed heavy revitalisation of market squares, primarily by removing vegetation and
driving out alcoholics from their ordinary venues. Since alcoholism is one of the
main social plagues in Poland, and whilst the number of social health care centres is
still insufﬁcient (cf. Wojciechowski 2009), ‘history’ can be said to have collided with
modernity. Morphological alterations automatically imply a change of function, and
such change entails consequences; not only for delinquents and addicts, but also for
diligent citizens who ﬁnd themselves exposed in a previously sheltered environment.

626

M. Dymitrow

Complications at the expense of history may also be regarded from another
perspective. Eriksen (1993, p. 23) contends that tradition, despite being created by
modernity as its opposition, is actually part of modernity itself, because without
modernity as a context,
tradition would have no meaning. Indeed, why would
degraded towns become ‘discovered’ right now, and not some 50 years ago?
Perhaps, because the modernity of the Communist era was more concerned with
progressive and futuristic aspects of development, whilst
the (post)modernity of
the 2010s is more in line with sustainable development. In the latter case, human
well-being is considered to include subtleties like identity and belonging derived
from tradition. Eriksen (1995, p. 46) attributes provision of these qualities to his-
tory by means of the social production of memory. She also sees the academic
discipline of history as a major contributor to such production, rendering history a
‘mythology of modernity’,
is, a linear metanarrative capable of supplying
contemporary populations with roots and answers to existential questions. This is
very much in line with what I implied earlier about the Whiggishness of national
histories and their unifying power. Such reasoning can also be found in Nora’s
(2001, p. 365) thoughts on the recent ‘acceleration’ of history, where the shortage
of environments of memory (milieux de memoire) is supplemented by artiﬁcially
created sites of memory (lieux de memoire). Given that loss of urbanity is beyond
the memorial reach of individuals, urbanity must be reconstructed, even if in dis-
regard to time, scale and local needs. In fact, excessive ‘prefabricated aesthetisa-
tion’ of degraded towns may actually erase the last bastions of memorial
environments, hitherto preserved by the absence of exploitation. If not tended to,
not only may precipitous heritagisation result in strangely misplaced, windswept
‘urban’ market squares amidst tiny agrarian villages; it may also hollow the speci-
ﬁcity of townscape heritage.

that

Conclusion
The Polish administrative system utilises town privileges – a mediaeval cultural
remnant with no contemporary signiﬁcance – to deﬁne symbolically its modern
understanding of urbanity. This in turn creates confusion as to what urbanity exactly
means. Town privileges are primarily associated with historical events, such as the
1869–1870 administrative reform enforced by the Russian occupation of Poland,
depriving 75% of towns of their urban status. The issue of the history of foreign
oppression, as well as Poland’s chequered relations with Russia, makes this particu-
lar loss of urbanity an important identity issue for the towns concerned. Loss of
urbanity is further enhanced by the fact that the lack of town privileges in Poland
reduces a settlement to rural status – seen in this particular context as being pejora-
tive. Furthermore, since degradations are no longer employed with respect for local
identity, some dubiously urban centres retain their
town status (like
Wyśmierzyce with 850 inhabitants); it adds to the confusion: ‘why can they, and
not we?’ Such a situation cannot be satisfactorily accommodated today. Although
town privileges have a clear cultural connotation, they stand for something quite
different – an administrative deﬁnition of urbanity accompanied by certain prerequi-
sites that must be met, which is not always the case. However, the vague deﬁnition
of
these prerequisites gives leeway for arbitrary evaluations in favour of the
applicant towns (as seen in the progressive departures from the minimum required
population number). Although beneﬁcial in terms of local identity building, such

formal

International Journal of Heritage Studies

627

proceedings are likely to contaminate the Polish deﬁnition of urbanity. Most
countries rely on more rigid criteria to deﬁne their urban areas. In Poland, however,
there is an opportunity for heritage to enter this formal arena. There is nothing unu-
sual about the heritagisation of urbanity and it is a global process; however, it is a
totally different platform, one that has recourse to urban identity rather than to
urban-speciﬁc governance and development. In Poland, this is a major source of
conﬂict, yet the division seems to prevail as a hegemonic discourse. If we regard
the cultural landscape as a form of human heritage, it would include all settlements:
cities, towns and villages, including degraded towns. Bringing forth the latter as a
‘special’ form of cultural heritage appeals in some morbid way to the very act of
degradation, making them a heritage of foreign oppression (not all that different
from Holocaust heritage). Statements depicting degraded towns as a testimony of
foreign violence, old injustice and present incomprehension may very well be true
in ideological terms, and probably in social terms too, but not necessarily so in eco-
nomic terms. As such, they may unwittingly pave the way for either arbitrary evalu-
ations on behalf of the legislative bodies, or for unrealistic local restitutionary
aspirations, nurtured by issues of urban identity.

In Poland, the distinction between formal and cultural urbanity is neither sufﬁ-
ciently differentiated nor problematised. This means that when degraded towns strive
for urban status cultural heritage is often used as an argument. However, this is done
without accounting for, or at least acknowledging, heritage’s subjective nature, and
its socially constructed mode and intricacies. Questions need to be asked, such as
whose heritage is it, what is included and what is excluded, what does it actually do,
and, most importantly, is urban heritage really a purpose of its own, or merely a ‘free
ride’ towards restitution, the latter regarded as an incentive towards development.
The production of cultural heritage often becomes internalised as a speciﬁc mind-
scape, a stereotype of a small cosy town that is being replicated by the force of the
diffusion of innovations under the auspices of patriotism. Further aided by hasty
physical ‘revitalisation’, heritage becomes instead synonymous with aesthetics and
technical maintenance, irrespective of the essence of what is being preserved actually
being lost. Urbanity can be enhanced by stylisation, but can it really be conjured by
a replica of a nineteenth century street lamp and some paint? Urbanity does include
morphology and other visual tropes, but the concept is foremost a synergy of many
different traits that takes time to evolve and consolidate; it is not merely an adminis-
trative label that can be achieved by uninformed reference to an old reform and a
quick makeover. Therefore, degraded towns – as Kirshenblatt-Gimblett (1998) would
put it – are not lost and found, despite increased interest from tourists, academics
and local governments; they are imbued with a new meaning to serve some other
purpose. Understanding this relation is crucial for understanding the new role of
degraded towns that has adapted to reﬂect a changed reality.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the following persons who, in one way or another, have
contributed to this paper: Dr Carina Johansson and Prof. Owe Ronström at Gotland
University; Prof. Marie Stenseke, Assoc. Prof. Mats Fridlund, Dr Åsa Westermark and Dr
Bodil Jansund at the University of Gothenburg; and Mr John Barﬁeld of Macon, Georgia.
The author also thanks the editor Dr Laurajane Smith and the two anonymous reviewers for
their valuable feedback.


