InternatIonal Journal of HerItage StudIeS , 2017
Vol. 23, no. 10, 913–927
https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2017.1347890

Heritage on the move. Cross-cultural heritage as a response to 
globalisation, mobilities and multiple migrations

Laia Colomer 

faculty of arts and Humanities, linnaeus university, Kalmar, Sweden

ARTICLE HISTORY
received 24 March 2017 
accepted 9 June 2017

KEYWORDS
Heritage communities; 
faro Convention; 
deterritorialization; third 
Culture Kid; global nomads

ABSTRACT
Globalisation  is  creating  new  perceptions  of  social  and  cultural  spaces 
as well as complex and diverse pictures of migration flows. This leads to 
changes in expressions of culture, identity, and belonging and thus the role 
of heritage today. I argue that common or dominant notions of heritage 
cannot  accommodate  these  new  cultural  identities-in-flux  created  by 
and acting in a transplanetary networked and culturally deterritorialized 
world.  To  support  my  arguments,  I  will  introduce ‘Third  Culture  Kids’  or 
‘global nomads’, defined as a particular type of migrant community whose 
cultural identities are characterised high patterns of global mobility during 
childhood. My research focus on the uses and meaning of cultural heritage 
among this onward migrant community, and it reveals that these global 
nomads both use common forms of heritage as a cultural capital to crisscross 
cultures, and designate places of mobility, like airports, to recall collective 
memories as people on the move. These results pose additional questions to 
the traditional use of heritage, and suggest others visions of heritage today, 
as people’s cultural identities turn to be now more characterised by mobility, 
cultural flux, and belonging to horizontal networks.

Introduction
Milena1 is a 36-year-old woman currently living and working in Vietnam as hotel manager. Her par-
ents, a Christian Hungarian-Serbian and a Muslim Italian-Bosnian, are from the former Yugoslavia. 
In 1972, they began expat life in China as diplomats because her father was a sinologist during Tito’s 
regime. Milena was born in China and grew up and studied there, but she spent a year in Yugoslavia 
every two years. When the Yugoslav wars started in 1991, her father refused to continue representing 
his country, and the family remained in China by necessity. When her parents divorced, Milena stayed 
with her mother, who was then working as an international hotelier. During the following years, she 
travelled constantly and temporarily lived in dozens of countries all over the world as her mother’s 
career moved. At the age of 15, she moved to Singapore and attended high school at an English 
medium boarding school, meeting international students for the first time. She became a Canadian 
citizen during her university studies there. As an adult, she has continued working internationally, 
travelling and living in many countries, primarily in Asia. She is fluent in English, Chinese, Spanish, 
Indonesian, and Serbian. When interviewed, she stated: ‘Yes, we were based in Beijing, but I do not 
have the feeling of having lived there; I spent a lot of time in a plane’.

CONTACT  laia Colomer 

  laia.colomer@lnu.se

© 2017 laia Colomer. Published with license by Informa uK limited, trading as taylor & francis group

914 

 

 L. COLOMER

Milena identifies herself as a global nomad or ‘Third Culture Kids’ (TCKs), a particular type of 
migrant, defined by high international mobility during childhood and a lack of attachment to any of 
the particular cultures and national discourses of the countries in which they have grown up. Milena 
did not choose to move; her parents made that decision based on an increasingly globalised job market. 
Like any kid, she grew up developing cultural skills and affiliations, but with the major difference of 
doing so while experiencing both high international mobility and the serial processes of multicultural 
integration. As an adult, she does not feel a sense of belonging to any one culture or place/country. 
We may say instead that she is the heir to an increasingly globalised world. In her case, globalisation 
not only describes a social, economic and political momentum but also the formative condition of her 
childhood. As we will see, Milena, like most adult TCKs, has an approach to heritage and collective 
memories directly connected to onward mobility, the deterritorialization of culture, and to the for-
mation of community identities in a network society.

Building on the above narrative and following current trends in the sociology and anthropology 
of  globalisation  and  mobilities,  this  paper  will  advocate  that  heritage  studies  also  shifts  its  focus 
from culturally fixed essentialist categories to the flows and fluxes of people’s cultures, identities, and 
attachments. For that I suggest to move our focal point to people, as the subject of action in giving 
meaning and attributing value2 to heritage. Heritage is thus viewed ‘as the interaction between people 
and the world, and between people themselves’ (Holtorf and Fairclough 2013, 198; see also Fojut 2009; 
Schofield 2015). I will argue that because globalisation embeds increasing forms of deterritorialization 
(see Papastergiadis 2000; Scholte 2005; Tomlinson 2003), and because mobility has become both a 
fundamental social issue and an inclusive category (see Adey et al. 2014; Cresswell 2006, 2010; Glick 
Schiller and Salazar 2013; Urry 2007), it is worth developing visions of heritage that better capture 
how these particulars are affecting, not cultures as defined containers, but people’s cultural identity, 
and consequently how people both use current forms of heritage and give (new) meanings to heritage. 
In this context, I frame my work on the notion of heritage as developed by the 2005 Faro Convention 
of the Council of Europe (see also Council of Europe 2009) which adopted a people-centred per-
spective and established that heritage must have a purpose to everyday public life, for example in 
terms of values, identity, social integration and economic sustainability (see also Fojut 2009; Holtorf 
and Fairclough 2013). The Faro’s notion of ‘heritage communities’ is of relevance here as a category 
of analysis to visualise a cluster of people connected despite distance and by the fact of not sharing a 
common territory.

To support my arguments, I will introduce Third Culture Kids (or ‘global nomads’, as they also like 
to be referred). Their particular features makes them suitable to illustrate the complexity of this new 
cultural and sociological phenomena of ‘deterritorialization of culture’, providing a rich source for 
reflection on the effects of globalisation for current and future conceptions of heritage. As members 
of a community of global onward migrants, global nomads develop both other visions on the use of 
heritage while crisscrossing cultures, and attachment to places according to their shared collective 
memories. I refer to the resulting heritage as ‘cross-cultural heritage’, a concept derived from the 
particular meanings given by people to their surroundings as they move and live between places and 
cultures. Cross-cultural heritage thus tries address a key question in heritage studies today: what 
would be the heritage of citizens whose collective identity is not based on a sense of ethnic, cultural 
or national belonging?

Heritage and globalisation
Scholte (2005) notes that globalisation today is not interchangeable with terms such as ‘internation-
alization’ (i.e., transactions and interdependence between countries through cross-border activity), 
‘liberalization’ (i.e., removing officially imposed restrictions on the movement of resources between 
countries), ‘universalization’ (i.e., a process of dispersing various objects and experiences to people all 
around the world), or ‘Westernization’ (i.e., regarding a particular type of universalization). By contrast, 
the sociology of globalisation argues instead that globalisation is currently defined by transplanetary 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  915

and supraterritorial connectivities, which underpin a completely different paradigm of social space 
beyond the territorialism of modernity (e.g. Appadurai 1996; Beck 2000, 2005a; Castells 2010a, 2010b; 
see also Held and McGrew 2003). Transplanetary and supraterritorial connectivities refer to social 
links between people located at points anywhere on earth. These connections provide a distinct arena 
of social life beyond the exchange between countries with inter- or transnational relations (Scholte 
2005, 59–84; but see also Appadurai’s [1996] global ethnoscapes, Beck’s [2000] cosmopolitan paradigm 
of second modernity, and Castells’s [2010a] network society). These new relations are qualitatively 
different (e.g. denser, intense, instant and simultaneous) and cannot be adequately mapped on terri-
torial grids (Scholte 2005). They go beyond national identities, as people’s connectivity is no longer 
territorially monopolised in the same way. More people live in the social spaces of the local and the 
global arenas, and not exclusively in those of the nation. When exploring the impact of globalisation 
and migration in established notions of belonging, Papastergiadis uses the term deterritorialization 
of culture to refer to this phenomenon and defines it as

the ways in which people now feel they belong to various communities despite the fact they do not share a common 
territory with all the other members. It also refers to the way that a national or even a regional culture can no 
longer be conceived of as reflecting a coherent and distinct identity. This gives attention to the ways communities 
are connected despite distance, and redefined through exchange, has challenged earlier assumptions that cultures 
could be mapped into autonomous and bounded spaces. The authenticity of a cultural formation is no longer 
singularly linked to its physical proximity to a given cultural centre (Papastergiadis 2000, 208)
In the field of global studies, heritage literature tends to focus on one of two issues. The first involves 
the effects of globalisation on cultures, which are understood as connected to sovereign nation-states, 
particularly in regards to the internationalisation of Western heritage conservation and management 
practices (e.g. Harrison 2013; Labadi and Long 2010; Meskell 2015). The second includes the pol-
itics and ethics of intercultural postcolonial encounters that globalisation is intensifying (e.g. Biehl  
et al. 2015; Meskell 2009),and encourages reflexive and critical examinations of westernised heritage 
practices among indigenous or minority groups. In both cases, globalisation is largely understood 
in terms of Westernalization (i.e., the universalization of the social structures of modernity; Scholte 
2005, 58) or internationalisation (i.e., a growth of transactions and interdependence between coun-
tries or communities; Scholte 2005, 54, 55), and it is examined on the same ontological and meth-
odological grounds as modern rationality (Scholte 2005, 257–259, 264–266; see also Beck 2005b), a 
tendency to characterise and mediate cultures as ‘substance’ (Appadurai 1996, 12), as unities of cultural 
uniqueness and authenticity rather than as the result of ongoing practices of community hybridization 
(e.g. Papastergiadis 2000). Without dismissing the existing of Westernalization processes in heritage 
management and its political and ethical consequences, this article aims to turn our attention to the 
fact that globalisation has also led to fundamental changes in people’s geopolitical and sociological 
landscapes, touching people’s capacity in defining their cultural identity and community belonging, 
and consequently the meaning of heritage for them. In relation to this, Winter (2014) offers a timely 
reminder that heritage studies has not yet debated this theorization at the global level. Consequently, 
it needs to seriously address both the heterogeneous nature of heritage and the conceptualisation of 
multiple heritages.

Heritage and migration
Milena’s short account above exemplifies the ways in which globalisation processes are changing the 
characteristics of people’s mobility. The United Nations (2013) calculated that in 2013, the number 
of international migrants worldwide reached 232 million, a substantial increase from 175 million in 
2000 and 154 million in 1990. This has affected both developed and developing countries, and contrary 
to perceptions in developed countries, South-to-South migration slightly exceeds South-to-North 
migration (see also Castles, De Haas, and Miller 2013). The classic sociological profile of the migrant 
as an impoverished non-White man has also changed. People of all statuses and classes, including a 
growing numbers of solo women and unaccompanied children, are on the move (e.g. Anthias and 

916 

 

 L. COLOMER

Lazardis 2000). More relevant to the present discussion is the fact that today’s migrations may include 
several moves in a life’s journey, as there is not necessarily any fixed final destination (Ossman 2013). 
This mobility encompasses multiple paths, multiple directions and multiple relocations. Along these 
multiple journeys, people perceive, understand and negotiate their different encounters not only in 
relation to their culture of origin but also according to the experiences gained during their relocations. 
These negotiations are visualised in numerous ways, including social and cultural identity construction 
and in the sense of place and belonging (e.g. Ossman 2013). In addition to the traditional push and 
pull of market forces on mobility, other motivations are playing important roles, such as those based 
on gender wellbeing, living conditions, social freedom, and career trajectory, not necessarily related 
to better salaries (Fassman, Haller, and Lane 2009). Further, mobility has become easier to imagine 
and sustain as a result of low cost transportation and new communication technologies, which enable 
migrants to remain connected with places of origin and to often travel back and forth (Fassman, Haller, 
and Lane 2009). Finally, current mobility patterns also show that people’s migration is not an anom-
aly of sedentarism, or something that happens occasionally to reach another place, but a constituent 
action full of significance and meaning per se, affecting equally those who move and those who do 
not. Accordingly, when analysing immigration in the UK, Vertovec (2007) rightly notes that it is not 
enough to see diversity only in terms of ethnicity. Other relevant variables need to be added, such as 
differential immigration status, gender and age profiles, migration channels, spatial distribution and 
degree of mixture with other residents, locality and access to employment, and capacity of transna-
tional engagements. These observations point toward a need to go beyond studies on socioeconomic 
migration, segregation and other issues based on ethnic or immigrant classification alone.

The key question is thus whether it is possible, in the scenario of global migration flows, ‘to draw 
on memory and heritage to form new identity stories that include rather than exclude cultural diver-
sity and “mixed” cultures’ (Macdonald 2013, 162). In a chapter dedicated to transcultural heritage, 
Macdonald (2013) explores how national heritage managers and museums have struggled to address 
the current changing identity constellations of Europe, by considering the potential of existing monu-
ments and collections to tell new memory stories. Innocenti (2015) answers this question by addressing 
the concept of ‘migrating heritage’, described as resulting from the power of cooperation in a techno-
logically based networked society, assuming that ‘cultural networks at local, national and transnational 
levels can contribute to the development of new models and institutional practices of heritage within 
cultural institutions’ (Innocenti 2015, 6). However, the struggle in both cases is how these debates 
over citizens’ identity transformation represented in museums could be sustained in national institu-
tions without making them discrete cultures again. After discussing how the Museum of London has 
dealt with issues of diversity and migration in their exhibition rooms following alike debates in UK 
academia and public institutions over the last two decades, Ross (2015) moves a step forward and, 
while observing a post-national metropolis such as London today and its globalised residents, notices:

… it may be useful to move away from the idea of migration as being settled communities. Today, migration 
feels more like a state of constant movement with individuals passing through London, staying perhaps for few 
years and then moving on. London today may be better imagined as a perpetual motion machine rather than a 
place to pitch your tent and stay (…) but does it make them any less representative of the experience of being a 
Londoner in the twenty-first century? (Ross 2015, 76 and 77)
The question that remains unanswered in heritage studies is therefore how to incorporate mobility 
and hibridity as a normalised practice rather than one in opposition to territorially based and discrete 
cultural entities.

The community of TCKs
When using the terms ‘global nomads’ or ‘Third Culture Kids’ (TCKs), I am referring to children who 
spend a significant number of their formative years outside their parents’ native culture(s), and who 
live in several countries other than the one stated on their passport during that time. While abroad, 
they acquire meaningful relations with other cultures (after Pollock and Van Reken 2009). The term 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  917

TCK was originally coined in the 1960s by R.H. Useem to sociologically define US children who 
grew up while following their parents abroad. Traditionally, TCKs represent the children of expatriate 
groups, such as members of the diplomatic service, corporate employees, military personnel, or mis-
sionaries. Today, they include increasing numbers of children of people moving abroad due to career 
choices in a globalised labour market (e.g. researchers and academics, skilled workers and individual 
entrepreneurs, NGO employees, international journalists, international school educators, professional 
sports people, etc.), but also independent families that simply look to improve their quality of life. 
The term is popularly applied to children of ‘expat’ parents rather than those of ‘migrants’ parents 
(see Remarque Koutonin 2015). However, some scholars have recently noticed a middling process 
of global/continental multiple mobile migration, which they define as ‘onward migration’ (Lindley 
and Van Hear 2007) or ‘serial migration’ (Ossman 2013), and which mobility profile matches with 
TCK parents or TCK themselves. In this new context, it is clear that the term ‘Third Culture Kids’ 
will need a better definition in sociological terms if we aim to continue using it (see also Tanu 2015).3 
Nevertheless, since Pollock and Van Reken (2009) work, an increasing quantity of material has been 
published by adult TCKs, including articles, books, or simple short entries in e-magazines, personal 
blogs, and Facebook groups. This growing visibility has encouraged the first works in sociology and 
social anthropology (e.g. Benjamin and Dervin 2015; Désilets 2015; Tanu 2015) as well as extensive 
studies in social psychology and international education (e.g. Bagnall 2015; Fail, Thompson, and 
Walker 2004; Moore and Barker 2012; Trąbka 2014). All these works coincide in defining TCKness 
by the lack of cultural ownership, a sense of liminality between cultures, and sense of community 
distinguished from other migrant/expatriate and diaspora groups, based on their onward mobility 
during their formative years (Figure 1).

While traditional migrants leave one country to live in another, causing them to experience la 
double absence (Sayand 1999), developing cultural attachments both in their culture of origin and 
their culture of adoption, global nomads grow up in several different cultures to the point of blurring 
the notions of ‘origin’ and ‘adoption’. The question TCKs most dread is therefore ‘Where do you come 
from?’, because it is unclear to them what the question is referring to: their current home, upbring-
ing, passport, family background, ethnic affiliation, or cultural identification. Adult TCKs identify 

Figure 1. living crisscrossing countries, cultures, and languages. The cracks is where the light gets in, by anna elisabeth gustafsson, 
2016. Image origin: anna elisabeth gustafsson.

918 

 

 L. COLOMER

themselves as a community distinct from diaspora, migrant and ‘expat compound’ groups not because 
of their cultural origins or their adopted culture but because of their condition as serial migrants 
during their formative years (Désilets 2015). Whereas migration studies uses terms such as hybridity, 
biculturalism or creolization to stress how identity is negotiated between the culture of origin and the 
culture of arrival, global nomads might not feel that they have a single place of origin or arrival with 
which to negotiate; instead, they have many of both.

Social psychology and neuroscience maintain that high mobility during people’s formative years 
affects the behavioural of those parts of their brains that develop culturally and socially adult per-
sonalities, to the point of developing other ways to perceive, imagine and behave in the world (Solms 
and Turnbull 2002; Trąbka 2014; Wasserman and Zambo 2013). In the case of TCKs and despite 
the variance in personal mobility trajectories, their experiences coalesce around the feeling of living 
between cultures, or being stuck permanently in the position of cultural outsider, which leads to a 
negative sense of cultural dispossession as well as a positive, strong sense of ‘multicultural identity’ 
or ‘multiple cultural identities’ (Moore and Barker 2012, 559). This sense of liminality expressed in 
terms of multiculturalism is what allows adult TCKs to go beyond both territorialism notions of place, 
belonging and origin.

A first approach to global nomads’ cultural identity and heritage
To analyse the links between mobility, cultural identity and heritage among adult TCKs, my research 
combined two types qualitative research methods: an electronic questionnaire and in-depth online 
interviews with a selected number of participants. The electronic questionnaire represents the most 
convenient way of gathering information from a population that by definition is living anywhere in 
the world. The e-survey was posted in several social media online forums and web pages on and for 
adult TCKs, emailed to particular already known adult TCKs or researchers working with TCKs, and 
to several international organisations with direct contact with TCKs (e.g. alumni of international 
schools). It has always been asked to spread the existence of this e-survey to create a snowball effect 
among adult TCKs. Between June and September 2016, the questionnaire gathered 146 responders 
aged 18 + who had spent at least one year of their childhood in more than two countries. The e-survey 
included open-ended questions and range questions, and was designed based on a critical analysis of 
current literature produced by and on TCKs. It also draws on an earlier pilot e-survey conducted in 
2015 (see Colomer and Holtorf, forthcoming). A simple statistical analysis of the data has provided 
insights into notions and experiences tied to cultural identity, as well as to global nomads’ conceptions 
of tangible and intangible heritage. The 10 in-depth online interviews, conducted in the fall 2016 and 
winter 2017, were structured based on a number of key questions that helped define the areas to be 
explored, but still allowed the interviewee to diverge in order to pursue an idea or go into greater detail. 
Interviews thus served to clarify previous answers and to gain a deeper understanding of the senses 
and uses of heritage among the TCKs, along with their collective memories of mobility and takes on 
cosmopolitanism, multiculturalism and homemaking processes. Here I will summarise these results 
and give two short examples of both how heritage is meaningfully used, and how other materialities 
better account their collective memory.

The average profile of respondents is that of a female between 36 and 65 years old with one passport 
(either from the USA or the UK), who is fluent in three languages (usually English, Spanish and French) 
and has lived in at least three different countries in her childhood. The time spent abroad usually 
occurred as a result of business and career choices or the economic necessities of the respondent’s par-
ents. The average participant combined international schools (following an international curriculum) 
and local schools (following local national curriculum). An initial exploration of the participant’s sense 
of belonging and identity showed a strong connection to a nomadic life across places and cultures. 
‘Global mobility’ (74%) and ‘multiculturalism’ (69%) were considered more important for identity 
construction than religion, sexual orientation, gender, birthplace, passport, school, socioeconomic 
condition, and current place of residency. Including further questions about participants sense of 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  919

belonging and identity, this initial exploration confirmed that participants’ profile matches with the 
described above for TCKs. After, the e-survey explored first, the use of common forms of heritage; 
then asked about TCK’s collective memories; and finally, explored their perceptions on UNESCO 
WH Sites as places significant for people with a multicultural profile. In this article I will describe and 
discus the results of the first two blocks.

The first part of the e-survey explored whether participants recognise local and national heritages 
as significant to their global nomad and multicultural identity. Their answers reveal that current 
forms of cultural heritage are of value to global nomads but this affirmation needs to be clarify. First, 
they accepted (61.4%) that local/national cultural heritages help them establish their cultural iden-
tity as global nomads. But 46.6% responders agree that only national heritages are relevant for that 
purpose. Particularly national, regional, city and cosmopolitan city heritages individually are not 
highly pondered (less than 20%) as suited here, even there is a tendency to recognise the relevance 
of cosmopolitan city (12%) in front national heritages (8%). Instead, when the optional answer was 
‘… the mix of different cultural heritage’ participants clearly recognised its value (more than 40%). 
During interviews participants were asked to explain these particulars, and then it was revealed that 
even national heritages are significant, they are not the most relevant in representing their cultural 
identity. Local heritages play a similar role. Because global nomads have lived in several nation states, 
attended regular schools, and understand the relevance of borders and passports in a globalised world 
(Désilets 2015), heritages operate as a sort of contributory (adaptive) condition for them. Encounters 
with multiple national and local heritages become transformed into Bourdieu’s embodied cultural 
capital. Separately, they act as tools for integrating into each particular culture; together, they become 
what may be called multiculturalism, which does not have a defined cultural form but helps global 
nomads to transition between cultures. Moore and Barker describe it accurately: ‘they have the ability 
to shift between different cultural identities or blend identities without necessarily feeling a sense of 
belonging to any of them’ (2012, 559). When asked whether their multicultural life is represented 
in any type of local/national cultural heritage, almost 55% of responders considered that it does not 
(as opposed to 17.3% who did). One of the interviewees was very clear about this: ‘I visit national 
museums; and it is very interesting to know about their culture; but it is not about me’ (Ibo, original 
emphasis). Instead participants believe that ‘… the mix of different cultural heritages’ (67%), ‘… the 
cultural heritage around the world’ (47%), and ‘… the natural landscape’ (47%) are the best scenarios 
in which to build their identity. The first two statements clearly denote the global and multicultural 
profile of these responders, whereas natural landscapes are selected because (based on comments 
extracted from several interviews) they are considered to be the places in which cultural belongings 
and identity negotiations do not occur, spaces devoid of human cultural interaction.

When asked about the type of unique collective memories that people experiencing cross-cultural 
lives might share, the majority of responders considered multiculturalism (82%), multiple moves (80%), 
mobility (78%), and globalism (78%) to be the most relevant, followed by international schooling 
(71%), restlessness (65%), rootlessness (55%), and cosmopolitanism (54%). Furthermore, they believed 
that the cultural heritage of global nomads must address or represent either ‘… the experience of being 
nomad’ (78%), ‘… multiculturalism’ (78%) or ‘… globalism’ (69%). Participants were after asked to 
openly name places, objects or performances that might represent global nomads’ collective memory. 
The answers are varied, but certain topics or items reoccur: cooking and food diversity, music and 
performance arts, storytelling (particularly those of other global nomads), natural places, interna-
tional schools (as multicultural/TCKness meeting places). Furthermore, there are a lot of references 
to places or objects related to mobility, particularly airports, passports, suitcases, time zone charts, 
transportation tickets, and all kind places of transportation (e.g. buses, trains and roads, depending 
on each personal experience).

Airports are certainly a common reference in most publications about and by adult TCKs (e.g. Iyer 
2000, chapter 2). To determine whether this phenomenon is part of their collective memories, the 
e-survey included two further questions regarding these particular issues with a selected number of 
categories. They cover a variety of options denoting mobility and stillness (for comparative purpose) 

920 

 

 L. COLOMER

as well as places and objects that are old or contemporary, iconic or novel. Highest rated were ‘airports’ 
(76%) and ‘suitcases’ (69%) followed by so-called ‘sacred objects4’ (58%), ‘Internet/networking’ (57%), 
‘cosmopolitan cities’ (55%), and ‘railway and bus stations’ (53%). When asked how these same cate-
gories are relevant to their personal emotional attachments, responders equally, if not increasingly, 
sympathised with airports (63%5), ‘sacred objects’ (60%) and cosmopolitan cities (59%). The positive 
reaction toward airports challenges contemporary perceptions of airports as ‘non-places’ (Augé 2006), 
as spaces of circulation, consumption, and communication which ‘cannot be defined as relational, or 
historical, or concerned by identity’ (Augé 2006, 77, 78). According to Augé, airports are elements in 
the middle of a meaningful landscape that do not belong there but act as mere transit knots between 
places and people. They are anonymous, disorienting and off-putting places that people try to avoid. 
However, in the eyes of global nomads, as expressed in my e-survey and the subsequent interviews, 
airports are among the most significant places in their lives, a place where TCKs feel comfortable 
(48%). Of the participants, 45% did not agree with the idea that airports are places full of solitude and 
isolation, as lacking in personality (53%), or as places to avoid unless for travelling (38%). Airports 
are meaningful spaces for global nomads, as they are ‘the only fixed place emotionally related to our 
past, present, and future’ (Iyer 2000, 67) (Figure 2).

The second element referenced by participants is ‘sacred objects’. I suggest that the examination 
of these objects need to go beyond traditional modes of interpreting material culture, for instance, as 
mere souvenirs or cultural markers of the homeland. In the anthropology and heritage of migration, 
movable artefacts become ‘empowering mediators in the construction of a transnational sense of 
selfhood’ (Svašek 2012, 14) both in relation to the past (‘it is part of my history’), and in relation to 
the present (‘this represents who I have been and I am’). Sacred objects have additionally the effect of 
empowering TCKs in the future, as they make further serial relocations emotionally easier (‘as far I 
carry this object I can move to another place’), embedding thus a flux condition. Furthermore, sacred 
objects have also the important role of home-making in mobile life: they embody the sense of home that 
the owner has experienced, created, recreated, and embedded in his or her different dwellings. Since 
among adult TCKs home is ‘a feeling rather than a place’ (Désilets 2015, 145), it is thus interesting to 
further examine the interchangeable phenomenon of sacred objects both embedding the intangible 
sense of home and becoming the only tangible form of home.

Cross-cultural heritage in the context of globalisation
Participants to my research approach to common forms to heritage differently due to their cross-cul-
tural and mobile life experience. In addition, they recall other places and objects to signify their collec-
tive memories. Here I will both discuss these particulars in the context of the sociology of globalisation 
and the mobilities turn, and open thus a gaze on how they can be conceptualised in heritage studies. I 
refer it as cross-cultural heritage, and aims to provide a different view from which to address alternative 
forms of valuing the collective memories of citizens embedded with multiculturalism and mobility.
One of the effects of globalisation and current forms of mobility is that ‘social action must be reim-
agined as possibly be able to take place “at-a-distance”, and that ideas about home and not-home, local 
and global, must be substantially rethought’ (Skrbis and Woodward 2013, 58). In the framework of the 
network society, Manuel Castells calls this phenomenon the ‘space of flows’ (or the technological and 
structural possibility of organising the simultaneity of social practices without geographical contiguity; 
Castells 2010a). He further explores how these network flows prelude the creation of different kinds 
of collective identities beside the dominant ‘legitimizing identity’ (Castells 2010b). Global nomads do 
not represent a resistance movement opposing the new global order. They are better described as a 
proactive, identity-gathering group who ‘build interests, values, and projects around experiences and 
refuse to dissolve by establishing a specific connection between nature, history, geography, and cul-
ture’ (Castells 2010b, 425). Similarly, Appadurai refers to the ‘community of sentiment’ as a group that 
‘begins to imagine and feel things together’ while creating post-national sodalities (Appadurai 1996, 
8). These identities, such as global nomads, crisscross the new global context and call for other forms 

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  921

Figure 2. airplains and airports are memory landmarks for tCKs. Yet another goodbye, by anna elisabeth gustafsson, 2016. Image 
origin: anna elisabeth gustafsson.

of coexistence that might be defined as a cosmopolitan ethos (Skrbis and Woodward 2013, 10–16), 
or embedded multiculturalism. I describe these practices of identity process as horizontal because 
they are determined not by ethnic or cultural affiliations transformed into national or minority group 
projects, but by a community of peers whose commonality, is defined by the embodied experience of 
high international mobility during childhood, and its consequence in the construction of subjective 
identity – a particular experience that creates distinctive shared collective memories. Accepting the 
existence of these horizontal and deterritorialized ways of collectively being, acting and remember-
ing, means that heritage studies needs to develop methodological tools that take into account their 
collective memories.

The notion of ‘heritage community’, first suggested at the 2005 Faro Convention of the Council 
of Europe (Council of Europe 2005), may help us in that purpose. The Faro Convention affirms that 
heritage should genuinely reflect citizens’ responsibilities for the attribution of heritage values, and 
for that develops the notion of ‘heritage communities’ which consist of ‘people who value specific 
aspects of cultural heritage which they wish, within the framework of public action, to sustain and 

922 

 

 L. COLOMER

transmit to future generations’ (Council of Europe 2005, Article 2b). These people may be unrelated 
in terms of territory, cultural background, place of residence or social context but nevertheless form 
a distributed community (see also Fojut 2009; Holtorf and Fairclough 2013). In the case of global 
nomads, the notion of a ‘heritage community’ recognises their uses and perceptions of heritage in 
the absence of defined geographical origins and cultural backgrounds. It also operationalizes how 
to value landmarks of collective memory (like airports and other places of mobility) as significant 
heritage places. As analytical category, it is thus a first step in designing other forms of engagement 
and giving significance to other forms of heritage perceptions (Colomer and Holtorf, forthcoming; 
see also Schofield 2015).

If the global nomads represent a heritage community, the heritage that emerges is what I call 
‘cross-cultural heritage’, and it derives from particular meanings given by people to their surround-
ings as they move in between cultures.6 When defining cross-cultural heritage, it would first need 
to consider how participants in my research have a chameleonic way of using common forms of 
cultural heritage. Heritage is understood as a tool for culturally navigation and social integration 
while crossing borders; it is not considered a source or representation of cultural identity. National 
and local heritages are embodied as cultural capital, but they do not enter into the subjective identity 
level of the individual. As Isar, Viejo-Rose and Anheier notice (2011, 9), the old lieux de mémoire 
seem to have lost much of their power to forge and sustain a single vision of the past, but they remain 
useful in negotiating their respective cultural and identity differences (i.e., Ashworth, Graham, and 
Tunbridge 2007). Global nomads add a new dimension to this occurrence, as they use these lieux to 
navigate along cross-cultural life experiences and to add value to their multicultural identity without 
fully identifying with them (in terms of subjective cultural identity) because these lieux do not repre-
sent ‘mobility’. It is certainly a different way of using heritage in a transmigration context. Regarding 
collective memories, it is interesting to notice a division. Participants in my survey distinguished 
among those things and performances that denote multiculturalism, and those that denote mobility. 
The former is usually represented through forms of common intangible heritage, such cuisine, and 
music and art performances. These are cultural expressions that traditionally have celebrated diversity 
and permit the reconfiguration of differences, and thus accept re-creations under the form of creo-
lization and hybridization practices. Mobility instead, does not have any representation in common 
forms of cultural heritage and therefore TCKs turn their attention to other places and objects on the 
move, like airports.

The ability of ‘mobilities’ (Adey et al. 2014; Cresswell 2006, 2010; Glick Schiller and Salazar 2013; 
Urry 2000, 2007) to focus on the phenomenology of human interactions with spaces and objects in 
a networked and fluctuating society helps to shape cross-cultural heritage in relation to adult TCKs’ 
collective  memories  (as  in  Halbwachs).  Mobilities  transform  location  into  a  set  of  relations,  and 
therefore, society and culture also move from being fixed in place to being understood both as an 
amalgamation of mobile spaces and as movement from one place to another. Here meaning is included 
in movement (Cresswell 2006), which in turn helps to signify, for example, airports as meaningful 
places, as a ‘place-ballet’ (Cresswell 2006, 257) of actions, experiences, affections, and memories. For 
adult TCKs, airports are the places in which their global mobility occurs, and singularly symbolise 
the transitional life and their in-flux worlds, the movement and the journey. It is obvious that airports 
are not built to engage with the past neither to become elements of the interest for archaeologists or 
heritage managers. They are basically architectures for the transportation of objects and people. Their 
relevance as heritage places does not derive from the space itself (cf. Harrison and Schofield 2010, 
250–258), but the emotions that people are able to attach to them, the meanings and interpretations 
that people invest in them. The potential value of these places of mobility as actual heritage places thus 
arises from the affection invested in them by this particular community of users who see them as part 
of their collective memories – assuming here that affect is a form through, and with which, the world 
is considered, acted, perceived, and consequently remembered. Airports (or any other places where 
mobility is performed) act as a metaphor for a deterritorialized global, displaced and dislocated life. 
They represent the material culture of mobility.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HERITAGE STUDIES  

  923

Conclusions
Globalisation is neither the end of the nation nor of cultural diversity, but of their reconfiguration. 
Although traditional notions of belonging and identity recalled in heritage narratives may be of value 
to moored communities and modern nations, they are becoming increasingly restrictive to citizens on 
the move and in a networked society. Based on this new context, a central issue for social sciences is 
to examine the way in which nation-states and cultures become denationalised and deterritorialized 
(and no longer internationalised) owing to the cultural capital of an emerging networked and mobile 
society. The key question is how do people with plural destinations, multiscale journeys and diverse 
embodied cultural encounters define and represent their multicultural realities. It becomes particularly 
pressing in the case of adult TCKs, whose social and cultural capital is defined by the lack of singular 
geographical anchors and cultural attachments, or at least to those related to the territorialism of the 
nation-state.

Today, global nomads represent an extreme case of mobilities and multicultural identities, but 
in the future, they will be part of a mainstream pattern rather than an exception (Friedman 2007). 
Globalisation today has not only provided the means to move (e.g. low-fare flights, EU Schengen, 
relocation of production and workforce) but also fostered a mentality that allows all kinds of people to 
imagine transnational and transcontinental migration as a real option (Salazar 2012). Once migrants 
have encountered and overcome one international move, they acquire the personal and cultural (and 
sometimes legal) capital to migrate again. As many parents enter into the dynamics of multiple migra-
tions, more children are going to grow up in-between places and in-between cultures, and with the 
sense that multiple migration is a ‘natural’ occurrence. In this context, TCKs’ experiences might help 
us to foresee what belonging and identity could mean in a globalised world, and consequently, the 
meanings and uses of heritage for cross-cultural people in the future. It will be important to increas-
ingly understand that cultural heritage in this arena is not used to recall roots, but to come to terms 
with routes.

In this scenario, heritage studies may need to move its analytical eyes from past elements that 
have been fixed geographically and culturally to places and materialities representing mobile lives. 
The latter not only represent the departure and arrival of people, both physically and metaphorically 
(as is common in the heritage of migration and post-colonial studies), but their continuous flow and 
mobility and how this experience develops in other visions. To understand such groups there is a need 
to move away from essentialist forms of cultures and heritages to a more open process of creating 
the meanings of heritage in dialogue with (networked) community of heritage users. My research 
demonstrates that adult TCKs or global nomads not only share a cross-cultural lifestyle and multi-
cultural identity but also distinctive collective memories. These memories forge and sustain a vision 
of a shared past experience, which helps them to identify themselves and cope with the uncertainties 
surrounding ‘us’ and ‘them’. Based on the results, it is clear that the use of common forms of heritage 
in an operational way among multicultural onward migrants is another way of investing meaning 
and value to heritage. Next to this, we may need also to acknowledge the existence of other objects 
and places as potential heritages for people living on the move. While a lot of research remains to 
be done, cross-cultural heritage endorses the potentiality of engendering innovative approaches in 
heritage studies, focusing on the relations between mobility, identity, belonging, collective memories 
and their physical expressions in (in)material culture.

Notes
1. 
2. 

 Milena is participant number #071. Milena is a fictitious name.
 Here, I use the notion of value as defined by English Heritage (2008), which lists four types of values relevant to 
conservation: evidential value, historical value, aesthetic value, and communal value. The last one is of special 
interest here, as its assessment resides in the opinions and feelings of members of the public: ‘Communal 
value derives from the meaning of a place for the people who relate to it, for whom it figures in their collective 
experience or memory’ (2008, 31, paragraph 54). Places and objects that embody these values might be of 

924 

 

 L. COLOMER

commemorative, symbolic, spiritual or social value and thus important aspects of collective identity because of 
the emotional links attached to them. The document therefore defines the notion of social value as 

places that people perceive as a source of identity, distinctiveness, social interaction and coherence. Some 
may be comparatively modest, acquiring communal significance through the passage of time as a result 
of a collective memory of stories linked to them. They tend to gain value through the resonance of past 
events in the present, providing reference points for a community’s identity or sense of itself. They may 
have fulfilled a community function that has generated a deeper attachment, or shaped some aspect of 
community behavior or attitudes (…) They may relate to an activity that is associated with the place 
rather than with its physical fabric. The social value of a place may indeed have no direct relationship 
to any formal historical or aesthetic values that may have been ascribed to it. (English Heritage 2008, 
32, paragraph 56 and 57)

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

 The purpose of my research is not to undertake the task of defining TCK’s sociological profile. Neither I took for 
grant that they are a (sub)culture. In fact, my survey explored how adults with a childhood touched by global 
mobility relate to cultural heritage. Accordingly, I limit the subject population of my research to those who 
(regardless of their passport, the reason for their parents’ mobility or knowledge of what means TCK) lived 
in at least 2 countries beside the one on their passport country for a significant time (defined as 1 year). For 
practical reasons and with the aim avoiding new terms without clear sociological profiles, I will alternatively 
use the term ‘global nomads’ when referring to TCKs. Furthermore, I use the category of ‘culture’ as defined 
and used by my participants, without any aim to counter or support their notions, even if they are extensively 
using this category in a discrete and substantive mode, as in ‘culturespeak’ (Hannerz 1999; Wikan 1999; see 
also Grillo 2003 for discussion).
 In the world of TCKs, ‘sacred objects’ are objects that children take with them (or parents encourage them to 
take) when they move to a new home. These objects help them to remember their past and feel at home in the 
new place (Pollock and Van Reken 2009).
 This reduction of 13% was explored during the interviews. The question in the survey used the phrase ‘positive 
emotions’,  and  thus  not  all  responders  agreed  with  it  despite  their  connections  with  airports.  Participants 
developed strong emotions regarding airports, but those emotions were not necessarily positive. Because airports 
are the anteroom for uncertain new relocations, the doorway to loved friends and family, and the gateway to 
repeated farewells, global kids viewed them with contradictory emotions, ranging from sadness, fear, anger, 
joy, stress, surprise, happiness, caution, confusion, etc.
 In the present study, the term ‘cross-cultural heritage’ denotes the heritage that traverses single cultures, is 
formed by life-experiences characterised by frequent moves and influenced by a variety of cultures. Although 
all manifestations of cross-cultural heritage vary and there is no single cross-cultural culture, there are some 
charactersistics that tend to distinguish cross-cultural heritage from other (single-)cultural heritage.

Acknowledgements
This paper largely benefited from the advice and critical comments of Anders Högberg and Ian Lilley, and from early 
talks on heritage and TCKs with Cornelius Holtorf . I acknowledge also Jaime Almansa Sánchez and Sharon Macdonald 
for their comments on the e-survey design. Thanks also to the anonymous referees for their comments that contributed 
greatly to improvements to this manuscript. Finally, I would like to specially thank all participants of the e-survey and 
those who kindly accepted to be interviewed.

Disclosure statement
The author declares that there is no conflict of interest.

Funding
This work was funded by a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Individual Fellowship, as part of the European Union’s Horizon 
2020 Research and Innovation Programme [grant number 658760].

Notes on contributor
Laia Colomer is an archaeologist with extensive professional and academic experience in archaeological heritage man-
agement and public archaeology. The question currently driving her research focuses on how particular heritage com-
munities use and develop cultural heritage to reinforce or redefine their identity in an increasingly globalised world. 
She was educated in Barcelona (PhD in Prehistory Archaeology, UAB) and in London (MA in Public Archaeology, 


