The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4, pp. 201–224

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2007.00321.x

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral
Medicines in Vietnam after World Trade
Organization Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth
University of Wollongong

Antiretroviral (ARV) drugs, where they are accessible, have been shown to prolong the lives
and increase the health and well-being of people living with human immunodeﬁciency virus/
acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome. In general terms, whether a country is able to provide
affordable ARVs to people in need is determined by the pricing structure of the drugs, which
is in turn based on the patent environment that regulates them. Increasing access in many
developing countries, including Vietnam, requires a thorough understanding of the patent
environment and of the legal options that will allow the production and/or importation of
affordable treatments. This article provides an analysis of current patent law in Vietnam with
regard to the production and importation of pharmaceuticals. It then reviews the current
situation of supply of ARVs with regard to pharmaceutical patents and Vietnam’s obliga-
tions and practices against international agreements. The study concludes by suggesting
options for utilizing current law to improve access to ARVs and makes recommendations for
the implementation of Vietnamese patent law.

Keywords Vietnam; patents; ARV; access to medicines

Antiretroviral (ARV) drugs, where they are accessible, have been shown to prolong
the lives and increase the health and well-being of people living with human
immunodeﬁciency virus/acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (HIV/AIDS). In-
creasing access to life-saving HIV/AIDS treatment is now the single most pressing
challenge in the ﬁght against the disease. Yet, of the estimated six million people
worldwide in need, only a fraction of this number are able to access them. The
Vietnam Ministry of Health (MOH) reports that over 80,000 HIV/AIDS cases have
been detected to date, but estimates that the real number is likely to be closer to
200,000 (MOH, 2003). The majority of reported HIV cases are among injecting drug
users (50–60% of the total reported cases), with HIV prevalence among injecting
drug users at 30%. Recent epidemiological data suggest that HIV is becoming a
more generalized epidemic in the most hard-hit areas of the country including Quang
Ninh, Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi. The prevalence among pregnant women is
nearing or has surpassed 1% in these areas. Nationwide, HIV prevalence among
military candidates reached almost 1% in 2001. HIV cases have been reported in all
64 provinces of Vietnam (World Health Organization [WHO], 2004).

As the number of those infected and affected by HIV/AIDS continues to
individuals, families and society face increasing economic and social

increase,

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

201

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

pressures to provide appropriate healthcare, psychosocial support and medical
treatment that has the potential to prolong the lives of those infected. Yet, the most
effective therapy for people with HIV/AIDS—ARV therapy—is largely unavailable
in Vietnam. In 2003, the government provided ARV drugs for approximately 50
individuals at a cost of nearly $5,000 per person per year (MOH, 2003). It provides
ARV treatment primarily to those who have been infected through occupational
exposure. The current cost of ARV therapy is prohibitively expensive for nearly all
other affected Vietnamese.

Recent research indicates that healthcare providers in Vietnam often pres-
instead of the international
cribe only one or two ARV drugs at a time,
medical standard of triple-drug therapy. International health authorities, including
the WHO, do not recommend the use of mono- or dual therapies. Mono- and
dual therapies are not as effective in reducing morbidity and mortality and their use
leads to HIV drug resistance within a much shorter time frame than triple
combinations.

The cost of the extremely limited access to affordable ARV therapy for
individuals and families, and to the healthcare system, is enormous. Recent research
in Vietnam indicates that healthcare expenditure for families with one HIV-positive
member is ten times higher than those for families without a member living with
HIV/AIDS (United Nations Development Programme, 2003). Data from develop-
ing countries such as Brazil and the Ukraine demonstrate that there are signiﬁcant
social and economic beneﬁts to providing universal free access to ARV therapy for
people living with HIV/AIDS. People with access to ARV drugs live longer, have
far fewer health problems and are able to contribute as productive members of
society for much longer than those without access to ARVs. Brazil, for example,
reported a $1.1 billion cost savings, 40–75% reduced mortality, 60–80% reduced
morbidity and an 85% reduction in hospitalizations from providing universal free
access to ARVs between 1996 and 2001 (Teixeira, 2002). The Vietnam National
AIDS Strategy aims to provide ARV drugs to 70% of the people living with HIV/
AIDS. To reach even this limited target, the government must ﬁnd ways to reduce
the price of ARV therapy and make it easily and cheaply available to people who
need it.

In general terms, whether a country is able to provide affordable ARVs to
people in need is determined by the pricing structure of the drugs, which is in turn
based on the patent environment that regulates them. Trade agreements, including
the bilateral trade agreement with the United States, the new Vietnamese patent law
that resulted from recent entry to the World Trade Organization (WTO), and other
laws and regulations on importation and production of pharmaceuticals will
affect Vietnam’s ability to ensure equitable access to ARVs. Increasing access in
many developing countries, including Vietnam, requires a thorough understanding
of this environment and of the legal options that will allow the production and/
or importation of affordable treatments (Rozek and Tully, 1999). This article
provides an analysis of current patent law in Vietnam with regard to the

202

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

production and importation of pharmaceuticals.
the
current situation of supply of ARVs with regard to pharmaceutical patents and
Vietnam’s obligations and practices against international agreements. The article
concludes by suggesting options for utilizing current law to improve access to
ARVs and makes recommendations for the implementation of Vietnamese patent
law.

then reviews

It

Availability, Affordability and Use of Antiretrovirals

Local Production
In 2004, nine different ARVs were registered in Vietnam (Kuanpoth and Duong,
2004). Most of them were the innovator’s branded products, and were imported.
However, they are not always available and their high prices render them unafford-
able for most people with HIV/AIDS. In addition, four manufacturers have a
licence from the MOH for the local production of ARV drugs. However, only
one company (STADA Vietnam JV Ltd) is actually producing it; currently, the
company has two ARV products on the market (lamivudine and a combi-
nation tablet of lamivudine+zidovudine). STADA procures raw materials from a
company in India and supplies the assembled product in Vietnam (Kuanpoth,
2006). It is also exporting the ﬁnished product of lamivudine to some countries
in Africa (Kuanpoth and Duong, 2004). The company plans to launch a locally
produced generic version of indinavir shortly. Unfortunately, the WHO does
not list indinavir as an optimal treatment option in either a ﬁrst- or second-line
regimen.

The restricted market and manufacture of ARVs in Vietnam, in combination
with the fact that most ARV drugs are under patents, implies that not a single,
appropriate ﬁrst-line triple regimen (as recommended by the WHO) is available
from local producers. Because recent WHO guidelines have highlighted that all ﬁve
ﬁrst-line ARVs should be available in order to be able to provide proper ﬁrst-line
ARV treatment to all those who require it, the local production and supply
of ﬁrst-line ARVs ought to be expanded to include efavirenz, nevirapine and
stavudine.

It may be noted that local manufacturers in Vietnam have not been prequaliﬁed
by the WHO. It would be advisable for local manufacturers to prepare and apply
for WHO prequaliﬁcation because many donors, including the Global Fund for
AIDS, TB and Malaria, impose this as a condition for providing funds for the
procurement of ARVs. In fact, prequaliﬁcation not only opens up the possibility of
supplying ARVs to Vietnam using donor funds, but may also expand export
possibilities, because donor agencies may consider procuring ARVs for neighbour-
ing countries from prequaliﬁed Vietnamese manufacturers.

Prices of Antiretrovirals
Available data indicate that the price of ARVs in Vietnam is generally much higher
than current international best prices (WHO, 2003). The prices of two locally

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

203

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

produced ARVs (lamivudine 150 mg and lamivudine+zidovudine 150+300 mg)
are considerably lower than imported ARVs, but still signiﬁcantly above the best
price available on the international market (see Appendix A).

While the prices of locally produced ARVs are considerably lower than those
of the imported ARVs currently on the Vietnamese market, they are ﬁve to
seven times higher than the current best offer on the international market. This is
caused, at least in part, by the fact that the market for ARVs is very small. Only
a small percentage of those who need these products can afford to buy them,
while public funds for procurement of ARV drugs in Vietnam are still very
limited.

Thus, the government of Vietnam may wish to consider both importation
and ways of reducing the cost of locally produced ARVs in order to improve
their affordability and accessibility. The parallel
in
principle, be used as a means to increase competition and put pressure on
local producers to reduce their price. Prices can be reduced further by waiving
taxes, duties and fees on both ﬁnished products and raw materials; such
waivers
should probably also include packaging materials and non-active
ingredients.

import of ARVs could,

Rational Prescription and Use
Prices obviously have implications for the availability of and access to medicines.
But the relatively high prices of ARVs also have implications for rational use.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that people living with HIV/AIDS take incomplete
ARV regimens or on an irregular basis. While there are multiple reasons for this, the
high prices of ARVs, combined with the very low economic status of people with
HIV, ﬁgure prominently among them. This is aggravated by the fact that not all
ARVs required for triple therapy are registered, which is probably one of the
causes of the frequent prescription of inappropriate and/or outdated dual therapy.
Another compounding factor is the irregular supply and availability of ARVs in
both the public and private sector.1 The result is that a relatively high percentage
of those who have any access to ARVs are using them in a haphazard way.
Thus, there is a considerable risk that resistance will occur quickly, which may
necessitate an early switch to considerably more expensive second-line therapy
by a relatively large percentage of patients. This is undesirable for medical
reasons (treatment options will quickly run out) as well as ﬁnancial reasons (the
cost of second-line treatment is three to 11 times higher than that of ﬁrst-line
treatment).

The problems associated with the prescription and use of mono- or dual therapy
could be addressed by focusing on increasing access to triple ﬁxed dose combi-
nations (FDCs). However, interrupted use (whether due to supply problems or
for ﬁnancial reasons) may continue all the same. There is a clear and urgent need for
the implementation of a comprehensive supply system that will ensure the continued
availability of ARV drugs. This system may or may not include the private

204

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

sector. Preferably, ARVs should be distributed free to patients, or at a nominal
fee. Furthermore, proper
training of prescribers, and the development of
information materials explaining the importance of adherence to triple therapy, is
urgent.

Patent Status of Certain ARV Medicines in Vietnam

A search of patent documentation at the National Ofﬁce of Intellectual Property
(NOIP) found that most ARV drugs recommended for HIV treatment are under
patent protection, or subject to patent applications, in Vietnam (see Appendix B).
The entities that own those patents, or have ﬁled the applications, are foreign
originator companies. These companies therefore can use patent rights to prevent
anyone from commercially using the drugs.

The drugs are protected in Vietnam as a product or process patents or both. In
the case of a patent over the drug or a patent over the process for manufacturing the
drug, the patent holder can restrict the use of the patented drug or the drug that
has been obtained directly from the patented process. For example, a patent is
granted for a drug comprising lamivudine as an active ingredient. This product
patent gives the holder the right to make, dispose of, offer to dispose of, use, import
or store the drug whether for disposal or otherwise. The manufacturing, importing
or selling of any drug that contains lamivudine as the only active ingredient
would be regarded as an infringement of the patent and subject the infringer to
legal action.

Vietnam has followed the practice of the European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO) and
other developed countries by protecting new use and a new composition (i.e. a
formulated product containing a known active ingredient and appropriate
additives) of the known drug, even though the drug itself is known and comprises
part of the state of the art (Kuanpoth and Duong, 2004). Because of this practice,
patents have been granted to a new use, a new indication or a new composition
of some known ARV drugs. For example, didanosine is an old and known drug
and cannot be patented as an active ingredient, but several patents have been
issued to protect didanosine in different
including combinations of
previously known didanosine, products comprising didanosine in a combined
preparation, compositions comprising didanosine as an antiretroviral agent and a
pharmaceutical kit comprising didanosine as an antiretroviral agent. Obviously, this
patent-granting practice has allowed pharmaceutical companies to claim exclusive
rights over formulations that do not generate a truly new and inventive product.

forms,

Because the production and importation of several generic ARV drugs, needed
in order to provide treatment in line with international and WHO standards at
affordable prices, is not feasible without infringing patents, Vietnam may have to
apply available legal options (particularly compulsory licensing) to ensure the
availability of these medicines. Availability may promote competition and increase
the affordability of ARV medicines.

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

205

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Vietnam and its Obligations under International Intellectual Property
Agreements

The Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights Agreement and Public
Health
The Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS
Agreement) is a comprehensive agreement containing new multilateral rules and
regulations with relatively high standards of intellectual property (IP) protection.
The TRIPS Agreement has previously linked trade measures to the enforcement of
intellectual property (IP) rights. Member countries have to conform their national
laws to the WTO standards. The TRIPS Agreement requires all WTO members to
provide a 20-year patent protection for ‘‘any inventions, whether products or
processes, in all ﬁelds of technology’’, including pharmaceuticals.

However, the TRIPS Agreement, as reafﬁrmed by the Doha Declaration on the
TRIPS Agreement and Public Health (WTO Ministerial Conference, 2001), leaves
room for developing countries to protect public health interests and improve access
to medicines. Members may apply any possible legal measures to combat abusive
practices, provided that certain conditions stipulated in the TRIPS Agreement are
fulﬁlled (Correa, 2000a; Rein, 2001). Feasible options under the TRIPS Agreement
include:


the adoption of the principle of the international exhaustion of rights so as to
facilitate parallel imports of cheaper drugs (article 6);

 ﬂexible interpretation to each provision of the TRIPS Agreement in light of its



objectives and principles (articles 7 and 8);
exclusion of certain biotechnological inventions, as well as medical methods for
the treatment of human and animals (article 27);

 provision for limited exceptions to patent rights such as research exemption,

Bolar provisions, prior users’ rights, etc. (article 30); and
the use of compulsory licences for making patented drugs available (article 31).



Vietnamese IP Law
Before 2006, Vietnam protected IP rights under the Civil Code, which entered into
force on 1 July 1996. The implementation of the Civil Code relating to the
protection of IP rights was elaborated under various decrees and circulars. There
were two regulations for the protection of patents and trade secrets relating to
pharmaceuticals, including:
 decree 63/CP, 24 October 1996, for the Implementation of the Provisions of the
Civil Code on Industrial Property which was amended and supplemented by
Decree 06/2001, 1 February 2001; and

 decree 54/2000/ND-CP, 3 October 2000, for the Protection of Industrial
Property Rights upon Business Secrets, Geographical Indications, Trade Names

206

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

and Protection of Rights against Unfair Competition Relating to Industrial
Property.
In an attempt to gain WTO membership, Vietnam revised its IP legislation by
enacting Intellectual Property Law 50/2005 (IP Law), which came into force on
1 July 2006. The law, which consists of 6 parts, 18 chapters, 222 articles, provides
protection for all subject matters of IP rights as demanded by the TRIPS Agreement
(Vale, 2006). The new IP law revised the patent system in many areas, including the
introduction of the requirements for utility solutions, the adoption of priority rights
in line with the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (Paris
Convention), improvement of the enforcement provisions including introducing
border control mechanisms, etc.

One of the aims of Vietnamese law on patents is to provide a temporary
monopoly for inventors in order to foster the development of a required techno-
logical base, and to assist in the acquisition of foreign technologies. The law also
intends to create fair competition among businesses.

Vietnam and International IP Agreements
Vietnam up until now has been a party to ﬁve international IP agreements, including
(1) the Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization and the TRIPS
Agreement; (2) the Paris Convention; (3) the Convention Establishing the World
Intellectual Property Organization; (4) the Patent Cooperation Treaty; and (5) the
Madrid Agreement on the International Registration of Marks.

Vietnam and WTO/TRIPS Agreement
In 1995, Vietnam began the process of ﬁling its application to the WTO and has
undergone several
rounds of negotiation with the WTO Working Party
on Vietnam’s Accession to WTO. It ﬁnally gained WTO membership and
became the WTO’s 150th member on 11 January 2007. The entry of Vietnam into
the WTO is of great signiﬁcance because its ratiﬁcation implies important changes
in the IP laws in compliance with the TRIPS Agreement provisions (World
Bank, 2006).

Bilateral Trade Agreement Between Vietnam and the United States
On 13 July 2000, Vietnam and the United States signed the ‘‘Agreement between the
United States of America and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam on Trade
Relations’’ (BTA). The agreement entered into force on 10 December 2001 and is
the most comprehensive bilateral agreement that Vietnam has ever signed with
another country. The BTA can be considered to be the ﬁrst phase in the introduc-
tion of international IP norms to Vietnam as it contains several provisions similar to
those enshrined in the TRIPS Agreement.

An important section of the BTA, articles 1–18 of chapter II, requires both countries
to provide a level of protection for IP rights2 consistent with the prevailing
TRIPS Agreement standards. Vietnam has agreed to implement fully the obligations

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

207

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

of chapter II of the BTA within the following time periods, calculated from 10 December
2001:



12 months for trademark and patent obligations;
18 months for trade secrets and most copyright and neighbouring rights
obligations;
30 months for obligations with regard to encrypted programme-carrying
satellite signals; and
24 months for IP enforcement obligations.





Pharmaceutical Patenting under Vietnamese Law

The IP Law of Vietnam stipulates three conditions that a patentable invention has to
satisfy: (1) novelty; (2) inventive step; and (3) industrial applicability. The novelty
provision is similar to the novelty standard used in many other countries, which requires
that a patentable invention should not be known, used or described in a publication
anywhere in the world (IP Law 50/2005, article 60(1)). In addition, the invention must be
able to be described as an ‘‘inventive step’’, which means it is the result of creative
activity and is not obvious to a person ordinarily skilled in the art. To be considered as
an inventive step, an invention must possess a certain degree of improvement on existing
knowledge. Industrial applicability refers to the fact that the invention must be able to
be usefully developed and applied in an industrial or commercial context.

There are two distinct kinds of inventions that are protected as patents under
Vietnamese law: inventions and utility solutions (called utility models in other
countries) (IP Law 50/2005, article 58(2)). The IP Law provides patent protection
for inventions for 20 years from the date of ﬁling of the application, on the
condition that the patent holder pays annual maintenance fees to the NOIP, which
administers patent granting in Vietnam.

Product and Process Patents
As in other countries, patent protection in Vietnam can be obtained either as a
product or a process patent. A new pharmaceutical substance itself can be patented,
provided that it is not obvious to a person skilled in the art. A patent can also be
issued to protect new and non-obvious pharmaceutical processes.

The subject matters excluded from patentability listed in the IP Law include,
among others, animals and plants, biological processes (except for bio-engineering
processes) for cultivating animals and plants (IP Law 50/2005, article 59(5)) and
inventions contrary to the interests of society, public order or humanitarian
practices (Dzung, 2007). Although the law does not make provisions relating to
the patentability of genes and gene sequences, the practical approach of this rule is
that these two subjects are patentable if they meet the requirements of novelty,
inventive step and industrial applicability (Kuanpoth and Duong, 2004).

Vietnamese law expressly prohibits the granting of patents for methods for the
treatment of the human or animal body (Dzung, 2007, p. 141). The intention of the
law is to protect medical practitioners from the restrictions of monopoly privileges,

208

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

while at the same time allowing for healthy competition. In other words, medical
methods are not under patent and this gives physicians the freedom to treat their
patients with any appropriate method that they see ﬁt. However, when the required
drugs are not available in the market due to the restrictions of an exclusive
monopoly, it is doubtful that a physician can reasonably carry out the most
appropriate and beneﬁcial medical treatment.

Special Cases of Pharmaceutical Patents
There are two issues relating to the patentability of a known pharmaceutical. When
a pharmaceutical substance has already been known to the public, the claims to the
product as such are ruled out. Alternative solutions for the pharmaceutical
company are: (1) to claim new pharmaceutical compositions; or (2) to claim a
new use of the product that already has a pharmaceutical use.

First, it is common for a research-based pharmaceutical company to claim that
a broad pharmaceutical composition, containing a known active ingredient and
appropriate additives, and formulated by them, is a new composition. To the
research-based company, such a claim is advantageous as the claim is not limited to
any speciﬁc pharmaceutical indication. The commercial use of the claimed com-
pound, in any way, would constitute a patent infringement. Whether the claims
directed to a pharmaceutical composition should be permitted is the question. Some
developed countries and regions (e.g. the United States, the European Union and
Japan) have permitted patenting of these inventions. In accordance with this line of
practice, composition claims are accepted in Vietnam (Dzung, 2007).

Second, an invention used in one area may have applications in other areas. For
example, an agrochemical substance may be used as a pharmaceutical product, or a
well-known drug can have a new therapeutic application. The pharmaceutical
companies may claim the use of a known compound as a new pharmaceutical. It
is questionable whether the claim to a new use of the known drug should be
permissible, because this type of claim is equivalent to a claim to a method of
treatment. As already mentioned, Vietnamese law excludes methods of treatment
from patentability.

According to the practice of the NOIP, the claim to a new use or the ﬁrst
medical indication of a known compound (e.g. the use of compound X as an
antiretroviral agent) is patentable. The claim to a second use or the second medical
indication, or the so-called Swiss claim (e.g. the use of compound X for the
preparation of an agent for the treatment of disease Y), is also accepted by the
NOIP. The NOIP follows the guidelines of the EPO by treating ﬁrst and second
medicinal indications (i.e. new medicinal uses) as a product claim, and thus not
prohibited from patentability under article 59 of the IP Law (Kuanpoth and
Duong, 2004).

Article 7 of the BTA, in compliance with the TRIPS Agreement, article 27, both
of which deal with ‘‘patentable subject-matters’’, requires Vietnam to protect
pharmaceuticals, both the product and the process. However, the BTA and the

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

209

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

TRIPS Agreement do not deﬁne ‘‘product’’ and ‘‘process’’ (Correa, 2000b, pp.
20–6). This leaves Vietnam considerable freedom to determine what should be
protected under product and process patents.

It is advisable that the national law of Vietnam limits the scope of patentability
to new pharmaceutical substances and new processes for manufacturing pharma-
ceuticals only. Patent protection would therefore only be available for a new
medical product or new chemical entity that would satisfy the stipulated criteria
for patentability. Given that a single medical product can have multiple uses and
formulations, providing patents for the subsequent uses or the new composition of a
known drug would unnecessarily prolong the monopolistic market enjoyed by the
patent holder and deprive consumers of the right to essential medicines (Correa,
2000b, pp. 23–4). This suggestion should be followed immediately as it does not
require any amendment to the existing legislation but only a change in NOIP
practice.

Vietnam should treat claims to use an aspect of a medicine as a method of
medical treatment and therefore as a non-patentable subject matter. It should also
treat a pharmaceutical composition as being ‘‘anticipated by the effective ingredient
that it contains’’ and therefore not patentable on the grounds of lack of novelty
(Correa, 2000b, p. 55).

Compulsory Licensing

Vietnamese law has adopted several available options in framing the national patent
legislation. One of these options is the system of compulsory licensing. Compulsory
licensing means a non-voluntary licence issued by the state to a third party
without the consent of the patent holder, on the condition that the licensee pays
reasonable remuneration to the patent holder in return. A compulsory licence
authorizes the licensee to perform acts covered by the patent rights (e.g. manufac-
turing, selling or importing the patented product) without the consent of the patent
holder.

Under Vietnamese law, a compulsory or non-voluntary licence is a licence
granted by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) without the consent of
the patent owner. The licensee can legally exploit the rights under patents, which
would otherwise be regarded as an infringement of the patent. A compulsory licence
may be granted in one of the following circumstances (Correa, 2000b, pp. 93–100).

Public Non-Commercial Use
According to the IP Law, article 145(1)(a), a compulsory licence can be issued in
situations where public interest is involved, including: (1) the needs of national
defence and security; (2) prevention and treatment of diseases; and (3) other urgent
needs of society.

This provision is important and can be applied in order to improve access to
medicines. When issuing a compulsory licence on the basis of meeting public needs,
Vietnamese law does not require consultation with the patent holder. The waiver of

210

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

consultation, in compliance with the TRIPS Agreement, article 31(b), aims to avoid
the delay of the issuance of the licence.

Non-Working or Inadequate Working of Patents
According to articles 136(1) and 145(1)(b) of the IP Law, when the patent holder
does not use the invention to satisfy a demand for the patented product in the
domestic market, this becomes grounds for the MOST to issue a compulsory
licence. In other words, a compulsory licence can be issued in the event that the
patent holder does not use the patented invention domestically or does not use it to
fulﬁl a domestic demand for the patented product to satisfy the needs of national
defence, security, disease prevention, treatment and nutrition for people or to meet
other social urgent needs (e.g. selling the medicinal product at an excessive price).
Although the term ‘‘use of patents’’ is now clearly deﬁned under the new law by
referring to the manufacture of the product or the import of the patented product
into Vietnam,3 the working of the invention may be done by the proprietor or by a
voluntary licensee (Kuanpoth and Duong, 2004).

Refusal to Issue a Voluntary Licence
Under article 145(1)(c) of the IP Law, a compulsory licence may be granted when
the patent holder has refused to grant a voluntary licence to others. However, it has
to be proved that the proposed user has made efforts to obtain authorization from
the patent holder to use the patent on reasonable commercial terms and conditions
and that such efforts have not been successful. This provision aims to facilitate the
establishment or development of commercial or industrial activities.

Use to Remedy Anti-Competitive Practices
The monopolistic position conferred by patents may allow the patent holder to
resort to anti-competitive practices such as ﬁxing or maintaining unreasonable
purchase or selling prices, or engaging in price ﬁxing or other collusive agree-
ments with another enterprise, etc. Article 145(1)(d) of the IP Law authorizes
the state to issue a compulsory licence to remedy the situation. Although the
TRIPS Agreement provides that in issuing a compulsory licence in this circum-
stance the state authority does not have to follow the conditions under articles 31(b)
and 31(f) of the TRIPS Agreement (i.e. there is no need for prior negotiation
with the patent holder, and the condition that supply should be ‘‘predominantly
for the domestic market’’ is also waived), the Vietnamese law does not waive these
conditions. This may unnecessarily delay the grant of compulsory licences.

The Vietnamese IP law incorporates most of the possibilities for compulsory
licensing in order encourage a competitive environment and guarantee the avail-
ability of essential medicines. However, the existing law of Vietnam does not
contain a speciﬁc provision for compulsory licensing in cases of national emergency
and circumstances of extreme urgency. The government of Vietnam may wish to
consider adding such a clause, because, under the TRIPS Agreement, it would be
allowed to waive prior negotiations with the patent holder. This would mean that

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

211

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

the relevant government agency would be permitted to use the patented invention
by itself or issue authorization of rights on relevant patented products to any
enterprise without consultation with the patent holder. As the Doha Declaration
makes it clear that each country has the right to determine what constitutes a
national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency, the public health
crisis should be regarded as a national emergency and that the provision is used to
facilitate access to ARV drugs on that basis.

Imports of Medicines

The large variation in drug prices in the world market has led to the evolution of a
marketing practice called ‘‘parallel importing’’. Parallel import refers to the situation
where products manufactured and sold abroad with the permission of the patent
holder are imported by third parties into a country without the authorization of the
patent holder. Because of the price differentials of pharmaceuticals across markets, a
distributor will obtain a product in a low-price country and ship it to an unauthor-
ized distributor in a high-price country, who will then compete directly with the
patent holder or the authorized distributor in that country.

There are three situations in which drugs manufactured and sold abroad are

legally imported into the country, including (Correa, 2000b, pp. 100–2):

 parallel import of drugs put on the market with authorization of the patent

import of generic drugs in situations where there is no existing patent;

holder; and

 parallel import of drugs sold under compulsory licensing.

Import of Generic Medicines
Generic medicines are drugs that are not protected by a patent or whose legal
protection has expired. They can be marketed under a brand name or a generic
(non-proprietary) name. Non-research-based companies generally market generic
drugs. These ﬁrms do not normally engage in research and development (R&D), but
only sell low-priced generics. Competition in the generic drug market can create
downward price pressure and is considered to be the most essential factor in
improving access to medicines.

Generic versions of medicines can be produced locally or may come from other
markets where generic drugs exist. Local pharmaceutical distributors tend to use
legal rights, under patent and trademark law, to create territorial restrictions that
block the import of generics. Vietnam, indeed all developing countries, should
encourage local generic production and the import of foreign-made medicines from
countries where prices are much lower due to the absence of patent protection
(Maskus, 2000). The possibility for the entry of foreign generic drugs will confront
the licensed distributors with competitive pressure to set lower prices (Abbott, 1998;
Beal, 1998).

212

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Under the current law of Vietnam, anyone can import drugs that are not
patented in the country, subject to various import regulations. The importer,
however, has to obtain an import licence from the MOH, required so that the
MOH can ensure that the import of the generics will not have negative effects on
patients, especially when the imported drugs are substandard. However, health and
safety regulations must be carefully implemented to ensure that they do not become
a barrier to cross-border trade in pharmaceuticals. Vietnam and other countries
should attempt to bring the varied national drug regulations into line, in order to
remove barriers to the import of medicines. However, when the medicine to be
imported is under patent protection in Vietnam, an import is possible only when a
compulsory licence is issued to authorize import of the patented drug (IP Law
50/2005, articles 124(1)(d), 133, 136, and 145).

Parallel Import
When the patented medicine has been sold in a foreign market by the company that
owns a patent in Vietnam or with the consent of that company, the subsequent
import or resale of the medicine will not infringe the company’s patent right (Bala
and Sagoo, 2000). The exclusive rights to the product have been exhausted by the
act of selling it. This is known as ‘‘the principle of exhaustion of right’’.4 Countries
implement this principle differently. Some apply the principle when drugs are sold
within the national border only (called national exhaustion), but other countries
and regions, notably the European Union, impose no restrictions on import when
drugs are put on sale in countries that are members of the community (called
regional exhaustion). There are many countries that currently incorporate the
principle of international exhaustion of right into their national legislation. Under
the principle, the patent rights are exhausted after the ﬁrst marketing of the
patented article by the right holder or with the holder’s consent, regardless of the
place of marketing (Heath, 1997).

The BTA Vietnam signed with the United States, in line with article 6 of the
TRIPS Agreement and the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health, does not specify the principle of exhaustion that Vietnam must adopt.
Vietnam is free to establish its own regime for such exhaustion of right without
challenge, subject to the principles of National Treatment and Most-Favoured-
Nation Treatment. Under article 125(2)(b) of the IP Law, Vietnam law stipulates
that it is permitted to import and use the patented article that has been put on sale
either in Vietnam or in a foreign market by the patent holder or with his/her
consent. This provision allows for the importation of medicines that have been
marketed with low prices by the patent holder or anyone associated with the patent
holder (e.g. a voluntary licensee, a distributor or a subsidiary).

The provision on the international exhaustion has been maintained in the
national legislation, even after Vietnam became a WTO member. It is equally
important that relevant regulations concerning the importation of medicines should

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

213

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

be revised, with one of its aims being to facilitate the parallel imports of drugs to
meet the country’s need for essential medicines.

It should be noted that on 28 May 2004, the MOH adopted the ‘‘Regulation on
Parallel Import of Medicines for Treatment of Humans’’. The Regulation provides
for the issuance of a licence for parallel import of medicines into Vietnam. It
contains provisions that ensure the quality of the imported drug. The most
signiﬁcant provision is article 9, which speciﬁes that the Head of the Vietnamese
Bureau of Medicine Control is authorized to issue the licence for parallel import
and that the decision relating to the application for a licence must be made within 15
days. This may provide a fast-track mechanism for parallel import of medicines and
should be investigated by those seeking to improve access to ARVs in Vietnam.

Import of Drugs Sold under Compulsory Licensing
The possibility for a developing country to search for alternative sources of supply
for medicines has become increasingly difﬁcult since 2005 when India, the world’s
major supplier of generic medicines, was obliged to implement pharmaceutical
product patents. India was then no longer able to supply other countries with
generic versions of medicines, especially newly developed medicines, such as those
for the treatment of resistant HIV or other diseases (Dhar, 2006). Full-scale
pharmaceutical patenting may eventually wipe out all alternative sources of drug
supply and multinational companies could then become the sole source of drugs for
poor countries.

However, countries that have sufﬁcient manufacturing capacity might still be
able to use compulsory licensing to produce and export drugs to the countries that
need them. While the TRIPS Agreement requires that a compulsory licence be
granted ‘‘predominantly’’ for the supply of the domestic market, this does leave
some room for export (TRIPS Agreement, article 31(f)). Moreover, in cases where a
compulsory licence has been granted to remedy anti-competitive practices, there is
no export restriction (TRIPS Agreement, article 31(b)). Finally, the Doha Declara-
tion and WTO Decisions of 30 August 2003 (WTO General Council Decision, 2003)
and of December 2005 (WTO General Council Decision, 2005) permit the export of
medicines to a country with insufﬁcient or no manufacturing capacities in the
pharmaceutical sector.

Because the current law of Vietnam adopts all measures related to compulsory
licensing and parallel imports, Vietnam must implement these provisions exten-
sively. Implementing these mechanisms and strengthening collaborations could
signiﬁcantly improve access to medicines. The collaborative efforts should be
sought not only with other countries (e.g. Canada, India, China, Thailand, etc.)
but also among relevant government agencies. At the international level, inter-
country collaboration should have the common aim of increasing access to
medicines and making those essential products affordable for all. Vietnam and
other ASEAN members should pool productive resources and create a regional
supply of drugs. Vietnam must be prepared to use compulsory licensing to facilitate

214

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

the production and export of medicines that it has the capacity to produce. At the
same time, it may also need a compulsory licence for the import of drugs for which
it lacks manufacturing capacity.

A united stand is also required among government agencies of Vietnam,
particularly between the health authorities and those in the MOST and the NOIP.
National and international cooperation should be focused not only on looking at
ways of lessening obstacles for the use of compulsory licensing and parallel import
of medicines but also on the exchange of information regarding patents and
pharmaceuticals.

Defences to Patent Infringement

Vietnamese law, in line with the TRIPS Agreement and the BTA, provides for
defences to a patent infringement action. Apart from defences under the compul-
sory licensing and the parallel importing provisions mentioned earlier, the IP Law
does not regard the following acts as infringing patent rights:
 personal use for non-commercial purposes (IP Law 50/2005, article 125(2)(a));

 use of patented objects on a foreign vessel that temporarily or accidentally enters

experimental use (IP Law 50/2005, article 125(2)(a));

Vietnam (IP Law 50/2005, article 125(2)(c)); and

 prior users’ right (IP Law 50/2005, articles 125(2)(d) and 134).

The TRIPS Agreement and the BTA provide general terms for the exceptions
to patent rights, only requiring that ‘‘such exceptions do not unreasonably conﬂict
with a normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the legitimate interests of
third parties’’ (TRIPS Agreement, article 30).5 Vietnam is therefore entitled to
adopt a wide range of defences to patent infringement. Unfortunately, many
exceptions to patent infringement that are part of the law of many countries are
absent from the patent legislation of Vietnam, including Bolar provision6 and
individual prescriptions.7

Drug Regulations and Problems of Data Exclusivity

While patents and patent law are of utmost importance in the pharmaceutical
sector—and play an important role in determining whether a medicine can legally
be imported, sold or used—medicines also require marketing authorization
(i.e. have to be registered) before they can legally be manufactured, imported, sold
and/or used. Vietnamese law requires pharmaceuticals to be registered with the
competent authority, the MOH. It generally takes between 6 and 9 months for a
drug to be registered. In special situations (e.g. when there is an urgent need for
drugs for the prevention of epidemics), the MOH may permit the distribution of a
drug that is not registered in Vietnam (Kuanpoth and Duong, 2004).

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

215

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Drug Registration
Only a limited number of ARVs are currently registered in Vietnam (see Appendix
C). This is an important additional factor limiting access to ARVs and it poses
challenges in providing appropriate treatment. The study in 2004 found that not
even one single WHO-recommended triple regimen can be formed out of the ARVs
registered in Vietnam (Kuanpoth and Duong, 2004). The lack of sufﬁcient
registration may stem from the fact that the Vietnamese MOH does not register
the drug unless the applicant can prove that the manufacturing, importing and
selling of the said medicine will not infringe the IP rights of other companies. This
obligation is imposed on the person who seeks to register the drug in order to
prevent counterfeit drugs from entering the market. While the counterfeiting
problem can be addressed through the formulation and implementation of com-
prehensive strategies involving strengthening, adoption and enforcement of legisla-
tion, regulations and inspections, it is doubtful that the linking of registration with
patent status can have any signiﬁcant effect on this problem. By contrast, the
obligation unnecessarily restrains the entry of generic medicines.

The person who seeks registration of generic medicines should not have any
responsibility to inform the drug regulatory authority regarding the IP infringement
because it concerns the private right of the patent holder. The law of most countries,
as well as the TRIPS Agreement, makes it very clear that IP rights are private rights.
The owner of the rights must protect their own interests, not the state. The practice
of linking patent status to registration obviously provides legal protection for IP
rights that are much stronger than any other rights of the private party, and
therefore should be revised.

Registration of Imported Drugs
Organizations (e.g. companies, private enterprises, foreign-owned capital enter-
prises, etc.) may be licensed by the drug regulatory authority to import drugs to
Vietnam that have been registered with the MOH. The Vietnamese regulation
requires a licensed importer to satisfy the following requirements:
 meeting the criteria for good manufacturing practice (GMP) and the criteria for

preservation and transportation of drugs promulgated by the MOH;

 having ﬁnancial resources and business experience (i.e. having been in business

for more than 3 years);

 possessing management skills and quality assurance (e.g. a system to examine
and assure quality of drugs, including at least a university-degree pharmacist for
supervising such a system);

 having no record of violating pharmaceutical rules within the last 3 years; and
 having adequate staff specializing in import/export matters.

The above-mentioned requirements apply to both proﬁt and non-proﬁt orga-
nizations. Manufacturers that import raw materials for local assembly need to
obtain a licence from the drug regulatory authority. Foreign enterprises that have

216

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

no establishment in Vietnam may supply medicines to Vietnam under import/
export contracts with local enterprises that have obtained a licence to trade in
pharmaceuticals. In addition, donor agencies or non-governmental organizations
wishing to import medicines would have to do so via an established and licensed
import agency.

In cases where the import of drugs is carried out by charitable organizations,
the import has to comply with the requirements and conditions stipulated under
Circular no.13/1998 on Guiding the Reception, Management and Usage of Foreign
Medicinal Aid to Vietnam. Circular no.13/1998 has laid down criteria for the
import of drugs for donation in the country. Signiﬁcantly, it requires that the
imported drugs must be of good quality and must come from reliable sources.
Furthermore, authorization by the Department of Pharmaceutical Management of
the MOH is required before the import of the drug can be made.

Registration of Imported Drugs for Personal Use
Vietnam has adopted regulations for importing drugs to the country for personal
use. Imported drugs for non-commercial purposes refer to drugs that are bought
from a foreign country and then brought into Vietnam. The drugs must be brought
into the country for personal use and must not be sold in the market. Under the
regulation, the importation of such drugs for non-commercial purposes shall not
exceed US$30 per one import and the value of each individual drug shall not exceed
US$10. Further, a person cannot import the same drug to Vietnam for non-
commercial purposes more than three times a year.

In other countries, people who have started ARV therapy and face problems
due to interrupted supply, or because they need drugs that are not yet registered,
can consider purchasing quantities of such drugs abroad, and importing them for
their personal use, provided of course that they can afford it. While obviously not
being a structural or ideal solution, it is a solution that can increase individual
patients’ options. This strategy has been used especially during the ‘‘start-up’’ phase
of providing treatment, when supply may be erratic.

Vietnamese law, however, seriously limits such importation. In the case of
expensive medicines, like ARVs, the import regulations obviously severely restrict
the amount that can be imported. Even with the cheapest ﬁrst-line regimen available
on the international market (e.g. stavudine,
lamivudine and nevirapine), an
individual could at most import a 1-month supply for personal use. For the
cheapest second-line regimen, this would translate into just a 1-week supply. In
addition, the same person may only receive/import medicines in this way no more
than three times per year.

There is no public health rationale for limiting the value of such imports so
dramatically. Presumably, this measure was meant to discourage commercial sale;
however, the same objective could be achieved by simply prohibiting the commer-
cial sale of medicines imported for personal use. If the goal of improved access to
ARVs is to be achieved, appropriate legislative structures relating to the import of

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

217

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

drugs must be established. The existing regulations clearly act as a barrier to the
import of generic medicines to Vietnam and should be considered for revision.

Problems of Data Exclusivity
The problem of data exclusivity concerns the regulatory authority and third-party
use of clinical tests, and other data, submitted during the regulatory approval
processes. As mentioned earlier, the organization that seeks registration of medi-
cines must submit data relating to the drug’s quality, safety and efﬁcacy (the so-
called test data) to the drug regulatory authority. Because the origination of these
data involves considerable effort, international agreements demand protection for
such data.

Article 39.3 of the TRIPS Agreement obliges the member states to protect
undisclosed test and other data relating to new chemical entities against ‘‘unfair
commercial use’’ and ‘‘disclosure’’ of the data when the state requires submission of
such data as a condition of approving the marketing of pharmaceutical products
(Correa, 2002).

The BTA requires Vietnam to provide protection for test data higher than the
TRIPS Agreement standard. In addition to the protection against unfair commer-
cial use and disclosure, article 9.6 of the BTA obliges Vietnam to prohibit third
parties (e.g. company A, which is a generic producer seeking to introduce generic
versions) from relying on the test data previously submitted by the ﬁrst company
(e.g. company B, which is an originator company) in support of an application for
product approval, for at least 5 years. This is tantamount to granting exclusivity
protection over test data to the originator company.

Furthermore, while the TRIPS Agreement requires protection only for new
chemical entities, the BTA does not contain such a limitation. This means
exclusivity protection must be provided for all kinds of data submitted for market-
ing approval, including data with respect to compositions, dosage forms and new
uses of a known drug.

Because of the data exclusivity provision under the BTA, the regulatory autho-
rities of Vietnam cannot rely on the data submitted by the originator company to
register generic versions of the same drugs for 5 years after registration of the
originator product. Moreover, registration for a second or subsequent indication
triggers a new 5-year exclusivity period. Small generic manufacturers have to enter
into a long and costly testing process before the marketing approval of a generic drug
can be obtained, and this will effectively delay the generic registration for 5 years. It
may also restrain the effectiveness of the compulsory licensing system, potentially
preventing the Drug Administration from registering the generic drug produced under
the compulsory licence. Thus, the person to whom a compulsory licence is granted
cannot use the licensed invention efﬁciently and independently without the co-
operation of the patent holder. There is no doubt that this obligation unnecessarily
confers monopolistic protection to pharmaceutical companies and could damage
public health efforts in Vietnam.

218

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Conclusion and Recommendations

Vietnam is currently providing patent protection for pharmaceutical products to a
level that is as high as the standards under the TRIPS Agreement. Patent law also
necessarily ﬁts into the Vietnamese policy objective of protecting public interests, and
it does this by excluding market monopolization from some important sectors such as
medical treatments and biological inventions. Social interests and personal beneﬁts are
well balanced by the provisions of compulsory licensing and parallel importing.

It was found out that most of the ARV drugs recommended for HIV/AIDS
treatment are under patent protection or
to patent applications.
Because production and import of generic versions of these patented ARVs is
prohibited, ensuring that all the necessary ﬁrst and second triple regimens will be
available in Vietnam at affordable prices will be a complicated process. The
characteristics of patent and drug regulatory systems, and the practices related to
their implementation, exert a powerful inﬂuence on the public health response to the
epidemic and have important implications for access to HIV/AIDS medicines.

subject

More speciﬁcally, the fact that there are a signiﬁcant number of patents and
patent applications for HIV/AIDS drugs is limiting the possibilities for making use
of lower-priced generic versions of several
important ARV drugs. It appears
inevitable that the Vietnamese government will have to make use of the legal
mechanisms that are available under the existing legislation in order to make these
treatments widely available. To improve access to affordable ARV drugs for people
living with HIV in Vietnam, the following options and recommendations should be
considered:
 Encourage any interested person to import to Vietnam the same drugs sold at a
lower price in a foreign country by the patent holder or with the holder’s
consent. However, the possibility for parallel import may be constrained by the
restrictive clauses imposed on the distributor in the country from which Vietnam
wants to import the drug. This problem could be dealt with by the application of
competition law and inter-country collaboration, which may, however, be time
consuming.

 Undertake price negotiation with the companies that hold patents on ARVs in
Vietnam. Negotiation with the patent holder is probably the quickest and safest
method of improving access to ARVs (quick because the drugs sold by the
patent holder have been registered, and safe because there is no risk of patent
infringement). But it appears to be an impractical solution as negotiations will
not always result in affordable prices because of the unequal bargaining power
of the negotiating parties.8
Issue a compulsory licence for either importation or local production of ARVs.
This will, however, require strong political will and determination from the
Vietnamese government, because there is bound to be pressure to abandon this
strategy. However, other countries, both developed and developing, have
successfully used this legal measure to facilitate the availability of patented



r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

219

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

products. There is no reason why Vietnam should not use this mechanism to
achieve the aim of guaranteeing public interests. However, while it is advisable
to apply compulsory licensing, the fact that the compulsory licence alone is
inadequate in addressing the problem of accessibility must be considered. In
order to further facilitate access to medicines, Vietnam could provide for a
registration-waiver or fast-track registration of the product produced under
compulsory licence (short term). Failing that, the product would have to go
through the full registration process (medium/long term).

 Facilitate import and use of ARVs for non-commercial uses. As all the ARVs
are patented or under patent application in Vietnam, it is strongly recommended
that small- and large-scale imports of ARVs for personal use or non-proﬁt
distribution are potentially exempted from a patent infringement action under
the current legislation. The Vietnamese government should initiate a coopera-
tive scheme for ARV donation with foreign and intergovernmental organiza-
tions with the aim of providing ARVs free of charge to people living with HIV/
AIDS.

Appendix A

Table A1: Cost per Patient per Year (US$)

Lamivudine
150 mg

Lamivudine+zidovudine
150/300 mg

$1,860–2,240

Current price of imported ARVs (originator
company)
Best offer by originator company (Vietnam
not eligible)
Locally produced
International best price (WHO prequaliﬁed) $65 (Hetero,

$69

$487

$2,336

$237

$949
$197 (Cipla, India)

India)

Note:
Most originator companies only offer their best prices to Sub-Saharan Africa or least-
developed countries. Hence, Vietnam is not eligible (a notable exception is Boehringer
Ingelheim, which offers its best price to all ‘‘low-income countries’’, as deﬁned by the World
Bank; Vietnam does fall into this category). Second-best prices offered by some companies
(Merck and Roche) are considerably higher than their best prices. Other companies (Glaxo
Smith Kline and Bristol-Myers Squibb) do not provide any price indication.
Source: Kuanpoth and Duong (2004).

220

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Appendix B

Table B1: Patent Status of Antiretrovirals

Antiretroviral drug (X)

Patented/pending patent applications

Pharmaceutical
composition having
only X as an active
ingredient

Pharmaceutical
composition having
X and another
compound

First-line ARVs

Zidovudine
Lamivudine
Nevirapine
Efavirenz
Stavudine

First-line FDCs:

Stavudine+lamivudine
Zidovudine+lamivudine
Zidovudine+lamivudine+nevirapine
Stavudine+lamivudine+nevirapine
Zidovudine+lamivudine+efavirenz
Stavudine+lamivudine+efavirenz

Second-line ARVs:

Tenofovir
Didanosine
Abacavir
Ritonavir
Lopinavir
Saquinavir
Lopinavir+ritonavir

Other ARVS
Nelﬁnavir
Amprenavir
Indinavir
Zidovudine+lamivudine+abacavir

Source: Kuanpoth and Duong (2004).

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

221

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Appendix C

Table C1: Antiretrovirals Registered in Vietnam (July 2003)

Registered

Originator brand

Generic

Yes

Yes

First-line ARVs:

Zidovudine
Lamivudine
Stavudine
Nevirapine
Efavirenz
Stavudine+lamivudine
Zidovudine+lamivudine
Zidovudine+lamivudine+nevirapine
Stavudine+lamivudine+nevirapine

Second-line ARVs:

Abacavir
Tenofovir
Didanosine
Lopinavir/ritonavir
Ritonavir
Saquinavir
Other ARVs:

Indinavir
Nelﬁnavir

Note:
Locally produced ARVs.
Source: Kuanpoth and Duong (2004).

About the Author

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Jakkrit Kuanpoth, LL.B. (Hons.), Barrister-at-Law (of Thai Bar), LL.M. (War-
wick), Ph.D. (Aberdeen); Senior Lecturer, Faculty of Law, University of Wollon-
gong, Australia; e-mail: jakkrit@uow.edu.au

Notes

1 Currently, the Vietnamese government allocates the annual sum of US$ 200,000 for
ARVs. Because of the current Vietnamese guidelines and the limited ﬁnancial capability,
only one drug (azidothymidine) is prescribed free of charge for governmental ofﬁcials
(e.g. health workers, police, etc.) who were accidentally exposed to HIV.

2 Under article 2(3) of chapter II of the BTA, ‘‘intellectual property rights’’ refer to

copyrights and related rights, trademarks, patents, layout designs (topographies) of
integrated circuits, encrypted programme-carrying satellite signals, conﬁdential
information (trade secrets), industrial designs and rights in plant varieties.

222

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

3 Article 27.1 of the TRIPS Agreement stipulates that the patent holders can satisfy the

obligation of working the patents through imports.

4 ‘‘Exhaustion of rights’’ is a legal principle that can be described as a situation where the IP
rights are exhausted as to a particular article upon the ﬁrst authorized sale of that article by
the holder of IP rights or with the holder’s consent such as the sale by the holder’s licensee.
The purchaser of that article can use and resell the article without patent liability.

5 Similar terms are found under article 7(4) of the BTA.
6 The ‘‘Bolar provision’’ was ﬁrst adopted under the US Hatch–Waxman Act or the Drug

Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984, and subsequently
introduced into the patent law of many other countries. This provision provides a
defence to a patent infringement action when an act of testing of a patented medicine is
committed for the purpose of obtaining market approval of a generic product. The
generic medicine would, however, be marketed only after the patent has expired or a
compulsory licence is granted for exploitation of the patent.

7 The law of many countries provides an exception to exclusive rights for an act relating to
preparation for individual cases in a pharmacy, or by a medical doctor, of the patented
medicines described in a doctor’s or dentist’s prescription. This exception does not cover
general private consumption but aims to exclude health professionals from the effects of
patent rights. It extends not only to anyone involved in the preparation or use of the
medicine but also to the doctor or dentist who writes out the prescription.

8 Although Vietnam may apply compulsory licensing on patented ARVs before entering
into price negotiations with patent holders, as in the case of Brazil, it seems that these
negotiations will be difﬁcult and time consuming. Vietnam appears to lack the expertise
needed to negotiate prices in this situation. In addition, no one person or organization in
Vietnam has a clear and ﬁrm mandate to undertake such negotiations. Ideally, the
negotiator/procurement staff should have access to market intelligence and should have
experience; this may make it difﬁcult to identify an appropriate person or organization.
If need be, negotiators/procurement staff could be trained with the help of similar
institutions in other countries.

References

Abbott, F. M. (1998) ‘First Report (Final) to the Committee on International Trade Law of

the International Law Association on the Subject of Parallel Importation’, Journal of
International Economic Law, 1, 607–36.

Bala, K. and Sagoo, K. (2000) ‘Patents and Prices’, HAI News, 112, April–May, 1–9.
Beal, H. E. (1998) ‘The Conﬂicts between Parallel Trade and Product Access and Innovation:

The Case of Pharmaceuticals’, Journal of International Economic Law, 1, 637–53.

Correa, C. M. (2000a) Intellectual Property Rights, the WTO and Developing Countries: The

TRIPS Agreement and Policy Options. Zed Books Ltd, London.

Correa, C. M. (2000b) Integrating Public Health Concerns into Patent Legislation in

Developing Countries. South Centre, Geneva.

Correa, C. M. (2002) Protection of Data Submitted for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals:

Implementing the Standards of the TRIPS Agreement. South Centre, Geneva.

Dhar, B. (2006) Post 2005—TRIPS Scenario in Patent Protection in the Pharmaceutical Sector:
The Cast of the Generic Pharmaceutical Industry in India [online]. ICTSD-UNCTAD Project

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4

223

Jakkrit Kuanpoth

Patents and Access to Antiretroviral Medicines after WTO Accession

on IPRs and Sustainable Development, Geneva. Available at hhttp://www.iprsonline.org/
unctadictsd/docs/Dhar%20Indian%20Pharma%20November06.pdfi [Accessed on April
2007].

Dzung, N. N. (2007) ‘Vietnam Patent Law: Substantive Law Provisions and Existing

Uncertainties’, Chicago-Kent Journal of Intellectual Property, 6, 139–40.

Heath, C. (1997) ‘Parallel Imports and International Trade’, International Review of

Industrial Property and Copyright Law, 28(5), 623–32.

Kuanpoth, J. (2006) Harmonisation of TRIPS-Plus IPR Policies and Potential Impacts on

Technological Capability: A Case Study of the Pharmaceutical Industry in Thailand
[online]. ICTSD-UNCTAD Project on IPRs and Sustainable Development, Geneva.
Available at hhttp://www.iprsonline.org/unctadictsd/regional_research.htmi [Accessed
on April 2007].

Kuanpoth, J. and Duong, L. H. (2004) Legal and Trade Issues Related to Access to Affordable

Anti-retroviral Drugs for People Living with HIV/AIDS in Vietnam. Report
Commissioned by the Ford Foundation, Hanoi.

Maskus, K. E. (2000) Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy. Institute for

International Economics, Washington, DC.

Ministry of Health (2003) HIV/AIDS: The Challenge in Social-Economic Development.

Report of the Ministry of Health at the Consultative Group Meeting held in Hanoi, 13
December 2003.

Rein, J. (2001) ‘International Governance through Trade Agreements: Patent Protection for
Essential Medicines’, Northwestern Journal of International Law and Business, 21, 379–96.
Rozek, R. P. and Tully, N. (1999) ‘The TRIPS Agreement and Access to health Care’, The

Journal of World Intellectual Property, 2(5), 813–9.

Teixeira, P. R. (2002) The Brazilian Response to the HIV/AIDS Epidemic: Prevention,

Treatment and Human Rights. National STD/AIDS Program, Ministry of Health, Rio
de Janeiro.

United Nations Development Programme (2003) Socio-Economic Impact of AIDS in
Vietnam: A Preliminary Note. United Nations Development Programme, Hanoi.

Vale, C. (2006) ‘Vietnam’s IP Modernization’, Managing Intellectual Property, 157 (March),

22–4.

World Bank (2006) Accession to WTO and the Intellectual Property System in Vietnam

[online]. Available at hhttp://www.siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRANETTRADE/
Resources/WBI-Training/vietIPR_hai.pdfi [Accessed on April 2007].

World Health Organization (2003) Rapid Assessment of Access to HIV/AIDS Medicines in

Vietnam. World Health Organization Vietnam, Hanoi.

World Health Organization (2004) ‘3 by 5’ Initiative in Vietnam. Report of the Joint

MOH–WHO–UNAIDS Emergency Country Mission, Hanoi, 8–17 March.

World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference (2001) 4th Session, Doha, 9–14 November

2001 (WT/MIN(01)/December/2), 20 November.

World Trade Organization General Council Decision (2003) Implementation of Paragraph 6

of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health. Decision of the
General Council of 30 August 2003 (WT/L/540).

World Trade Organization General Council Decision (2005) Amendment of the TRIPS

Agreement. General Council, Decision of 6 December 2005 (WT/L/641).

224

r 2007 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, nos. 3/4


