The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 81–93

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00382.x

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural
Expression: Art, Trade and Geographical
Indications

Anselm Kamperman Sanders
Maastricht University

After the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Cultural Diversity, the interaction between
the protection of traditional cultural expressions (TCEs) and geographical indicators (GIs) is an
interesting one. The capacity of a geographical indication of origin to create a global market
with local control over brand, quality and methods of production seems to make it immensely
suitable for preservation of cultural diversity. Since the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights does not limit the potential causes of action for the unauthorized
use of GIs, the tort of misappropriation may be applied in relation to TCEs. In order to
reconcile intellectual property rights with non-Western belief systems, application of the tort of
misappropriation, unjust enrichment and the remedy of restitution may make enforcement of
GIs in relation to TCEs more palatable than other forms of protection.

Keywords geographical indications; culture; unfair competition; misappropriation

In the Preamble of the 2001 Universal Declaration of Cultural Diversity (UNESCO
Convention), the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) deﬁned the concept of culture as follows:

Culture should be regarded as the set of distinctive spiritual, material,
intellectual and emotional features of society or a social group, and that
it encompasses, in addition to art and literature, lifestyles, ways of living
together, value systems,
(UNESCO, 2001,
Preamble, fn. 2).

traditions and beliefs

The UNESCO Convention entered into force on 18 March 2007 and provides a
framework for states to engage in protective measures to safeguard the diversity of
cultural expressions against the inﬂuences of globalization and free trade.

Trade in cultural expressions is of prime importance for cultural industries that
wish to export products embodying cultural expression freely across the globe, yet
many states wish to reduce the inﬂuence of foreign culture and rather stimulate their
own. To that end, many countries have in place, legitimately or not (Van den
Bossche, 2007), systems to protect predominantly domestic cultural values against
the onslaught of popular cultural goods and services, such as Hollywood movies,
books, television programmes, musical recordings, video games and online content.
These systems comprise direct subsidies,1 import restrictions, tax rebates, screen
quotas,2 licensing restrictions, price ﬁxing, limits on foreign investment and foreign

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

81

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

ownership, nationality requirements, domestic content requirements and intellec-
tual property protection. Striking in this respect is the practice of siphoning off a
percentage of the revenue of mandatory collecting rights societies for domestic
artists and production. Copyright holders, foreign or domestic, will not receive the
full proceeds of the secondary use rights of their works, but the collecting rights
society rather acts as an organizer or sponsor of domestic cultural events, or
‘‘ﬁnancial coach’’ of individual members.3

Unlike the protective measures for the protection of cultural expression described
above, this contribution will discuss more free trade-oriented methods of stimulating
and protecting localized art and cultural expression by means of the intellectual
property system. The focus is on the use of geographical indications (GIs) to create a
differentiated market for cultural expressions with localized characteristics and on the
possibilities available under the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) and Paris Convention for the Protection of
Industrial Property (Paris Convention)4 to use unfair competition law as a means to
augment a GI-type protection for traditional knowledge and cultural expressions with
the doctrinal basis to act against misappropriation.

GIs as a Model for Protecting Cultural Expressions?

Most commonly associated with wines, cheeses and other agricultural products, GIs
are known to be powerful marketing tools that enable consumers to differentiate
between goods and make rational choices about price, quality and product character-
istics (Akerlof, 1970). GIs may indicate a country, region, locality, city, or even an
address from which a product or service emanates. Like a trademark, GIs are signs
whose function (Maniatis and Kamperman Sanders, 1993) is to provide information
and protect its owner. GIs indicate the precise geographical origin and denote a
quality or reputation that results from that place of origin of a product. According to
Kretschmer (2003), GIs are eminently suitable for citizens from developing nations to
experiment individually or collectively with accessing global markets. Asserting one’s
position on a global market through branding encapsulating local products and its
associated knowledge on production and cultural expression may lead to self-
discovery and a restatement and even preservation of traditions. The creation of
value in the minds of those expressing culture and in the marketplace is conducive to
the protection of cultural diversity, as market differentiation, even in purely economic
terms, increases consumer welfare. Its abilities to engender collective stakeholdership,
the connection to a certain place or locality, and differentiating characteristics, make
GIs eminently suitable to play a role in the protection, not only of a market in
traditional cultural expressions (TCEs), but also of TCEs and cultural diversity itself.
In spite of the fact that the international deﬁnition of what exactly constitutes a
GI is not uniform, the question whether TCEs can be protected by GIs has been
convincingly answered afﬁrmatively by Zografos (2006). The Paris Convention
covers two notions of GIs: ‘‘indications of source or appellations of origin’’,5 which

82

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

are further deﬁned by the Madrid Agreement for Repression of False and Deceptive
Indications of Source of Goods (Madrid Agreement)6 and the Lisbon Agreement
for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration
(Lisbon Agreement). It is of importance to realize that the notion of ‘‘appellation’’
covers names, whereas ‘‘indication’’ also comprises drawings, photos, national
emblems, ﬂags or even symbolism.

The Madrid Agreement indicates that ‘‘indications of source’’ denote that a
product or service originates from a certain area, country, region or locality.
According to the Lisbon Agreement, ‘‘appellation of origin’’ covers a ‘‘geographical
name of a country, region, or locality, which serves to designate a product originating
therein, the quality and characteristics of which are due exclusively or essentially to the
geographical environment, including natural and human factors’’.7

In the European Union (EU), GIs are protected on the basis of Council
Regulation 510/2006/EC,8 which offers protection to GIs of agricultural products
and foodstuffs.9 It employs other deﬁnitions. Whereas the deﬁnition of designation
of origin10 corresponds largely with those of the Lisbon Agreement, the deﬁnition
of ‘‘geographical indication’’11 raises the threshold for appellations of origin.

The TRIPS Agreement has yet another deﬁnition in article 22, which deﬁnes
GIs as ‘‘indications which identify a good as originating in the territory of a
member, or locality in that territory, where a given quality, reputation or other
characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographic origin’’.
Although similar to the deﬁnition in the Council Regulation, the notion of
‘‘indication’’ is wider than that of ‘‘name’’, and its overall scope is somewhat wider
(Gervais, 1998, pp. 123–5; Stewart, 1993). The crucial aspect of the deﬁnition of GIs
in the TRIPS Agreement is the requirement that the goods to be covered have a
quality or characteristic that derives from the place of origin and cannot have been
derived from another place.

Whatever the deﬁnition in various international agreements, however, it is clear
that within the context of the TRIPS Agreement, GIs can be used for price
discrimination, but also for the bundling of local knowledge through a localized
organization of producers. Unlike a trademark, which can be transferred freely,
irrespective of the locality in which production takes place, the link between the
product and its geographical origin furthermore ensures that the geographical
indication is tied to a locality and controlled locally.

The TRIPS Agreement does not specify by which method World Trade
Organization (WTO) members have to protect GIs. This can be done through a
sui generis GI protection regime, or through use of trademark and certiﬁcation
marks. Trade and certiﬁcation mark systems can be relied upon for applications,
registrations, oppositions, cancellations, adjudication and enforcement through
national trademark regimes (Bengedkey and Mead, 1992; McCarthy, 1998–2009,
pp. 19–32; Pollack, 1962). A system like this meets the requirements for national
treatment and TRIPS Agreement enforcement requirements in tandem with the
national trademark regime. The disadvantage, however, is clear to see. Although

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

83

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

such multiple registration may not be a problem for strong entities or regions which
have considerable economic power,12 smaller and poorer regions or municipalities
may have greater difﬁculty and the cost of undertaking the task of registering in
numerous countries.

The system of protection by means of a sui generis GI system is different in
nature. GIs are territorial in the sense that they are recognized in and by the
jurisdiction where the area or locality lies that they are related to. The feature of
territoriality is both its strength and its weakness. Legal protection is granted in a
local territory, but like any IP right, it is territorial and conﬁned to its national
jurisdiction. International conventions are commonly used to remedy this territorial
feature. The key idea is that once a GI is recognized by the government in one
country, other members to an international agreement will recognize the right in the
GI too. The scope of protection for GIs found in the TRIPS Agreement encom-
passes two levels of protection that tailor for the protection of GIs as indicators of
consistent quality and an enhanced protection enabling product differentiation
(Kamperman Sanders, 2005). The aforementioned local control on a territorial
connection explains why at the ﬁfth session of the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and
Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore,13 the point was made that
TCE’s that can be qualiﬁed as goods, such as handicraft items, can also be protected
by GIs. In this instance, a GI can be afﬁxed to a product that is made from natural
resources or through knowledge held by an indigenous group. Furthermore, some
TCEs consisting of names, signs or other indications can themselves serve as GIs. It
is then interesting to look at the scope of protection that GIs enjoy.

Integrity of Information
The prohibited acts described in article 22(2) of the TRIPS Agreement encompass
misleading use of GIs ‘‘by any means in the designation or presentation of a good
that indicated that the good in question originates in a geographical area other than
the true place of origin’’ and acts of unfair competition as deﬁned under article 10bis
of the Paris Convention.14 Through this provision, article 22(2) not only covers
misleading allusions to or connotations of origin by use of both words and graphics,
but also covers the use of a GI on goods of low(er) quality emanating from the
proper geographical area. Article 22(4) extends this protection to a case of use of
GIs that, although correct, do not correspond with the geographical indication
commonly understood to produce the goods with the special qualities in question,
or although factually correct do not correspond with consumer expectations about
origin and quality. Usually this situation arises in those cases where the same name
exists in different territories, or when a description is used that is likely to confuse
the consumer as to the geographical area from which the product is commonly
understood to come from, like: ‘‘Parma cheese produced in America’’ (Baeumer,
1999, p. 17).

84

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

Article 22(2) protection is designed to safeguard that the consumer receives
accurate information that enables him to differentiate between products emanating
from the designated area from substitute products from outside the designated area.
As indicators of quality, GIs provide information that help consumers make choices
and reduce risk, or differently put: ‘‘If he [the consumer] is interested in origin, it is
normally because origin imports an expectation about some quality’’ (Cornish and
Phillips, 1982, p. 43). When the integrity of this information is tampered with, so as
to render it incomplete or deceptive, this leads to market failure and welfare loss.
Akerlof (1970) succinctly depicts the breakdown in the market when the consumer
cannot trust the information about the product he wishes to purchase. The
consumer will then prefer to buy goods of lower quality until—as in a vicious
circle—the only goods available will be those of the lowest quality. Article 22(2) and
22(4) therefore also leans against allusions to a geographical indication or con-
notations in writing and image that distort the conveyance of correct information.
The inclusion of actions against unfair competition under article 10bis of the Paris
Convention in GIs protection, however, means that the potential scope of protection is
not limited to confusion, but also extends to concepts such as dilution, the depreciation
of goodwill or reputation, or even attempts to derive an undeserved beneﬁt from a GI.
The doctrine of unfair competition may be internationally recognized by its inclusion
in article 10bis of the Paris Convention, but a national comparison shows a wide
diversity of forms of implementation (Kamperman Sanders, 1997; Ohly, 1995; de Very,
2005) albeit all with the aim to strike a balance between fairness and freedom in
competition. It is this general and elastic principle that provides the courts with the
possibility to award protection to the fruits of someone’s ingenuity, skill, or labour on a
case-by-case basis. This need for elasticity means that it is not possible to encapsulate
all unfair acts in statutory provisions (Sell, 1958). Two main approaches for giving
effect to the obligations of article 10bis of the Paris Convention can be discerned,
namely protection on the basis of general provisions in a civil code, or enacted
legislation on unfair competition (WIPO, 1994). Despite all examples of unfair
behaviour provided for by article 10bis of the Paris Convention itself, or national
legislation, there is always a residual category of ‘‘unfair commercial practices’’ that
may be covered by a general clause. Here judges have to draw the line between what is
fair and unfair in the marketplace (Ohly, 1995). The United Kingdom, however, has
chosen to give effect to the obligations of the Paris Convention in relation to speciﬁc
heads of interest under the law of passing off, injurious falsehood, or trade secrets only
(Graf von Westerholt and Gysenberg, 1981), rather than ‘‘under a wide general-
isation’’.15 Still, once a speciﬁc head of interest can be deﬁned, the law of passing off
has shown to be ﬂexible as well (Wadlow, 1995). In deﬁning a head of interest for the
protection of TCEs, however, one has to be conscious of the fact that indigenous
peoples may have a different value system and often regard traditional knowledge and
cultural heritage as ‘‘deeply personal and spiritual’’, a resource not subject to
exploitation and misappropriation (Conway-Jones, 2005, p. 3). In the context of
article 10bis of the Paris Convention, the concept of protection of misappropriation is

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

85

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

also present. It is not clearly exempliﬁed, but is nevertheless capable of offering a
protective measure against the usurpation of intellectual assets that may be considered
as the property or quasi-property of another (Kamperman Sanders, 1997). In this
respect, the concept of misappropriation can be used to prevent someone from passing
off one’s own goods as those from someone else (Cornish and Llewelyn, 2003, pp. 593
et seq.), but also from ‘‘reaping where he has not sown’’ in the sense of the landmark
case International News Service v Associated Press.16 This is not so much a form of
assertion of an exclusive right of property, but the protection against usurpation or
unjust enrichment (Callmann, 1942). When tied to and limited by geographical factors,
such as land and human involvement, unjust enrichment may just be enough to create
head of interest that merits protection for TCEs. If one limits the remedy for unjust
enrichment to restitution of what one has gained at the expense of another, the scope of
protection against misappropriation of TCEs will furthermore not be overbroad.

Product Differentiation
Article 23 of the TRIPS Agreement is limited in application to wines and spirits, but
offers a wider scope of protection. There is no need for the consumer to be misled or
proof that certain behaviour constitutes an act of unfair competition. The burden of
proof is not as high. For wines and spirits this additional protection translates into
the possibility to protect GIs even when the consumer is not confused. A prohibi-
tion of use of expressions such as ‘‘kind’’, ‘‘type’’ or ‘‘style’’ in relation to a GI
reﬂects that the purpose for the protection lies in the safeguarding of a particular
production technique or product characteristic and may even be used to protect a
GI against the dilution of a reputation for superior quality. As such, article 23
protection may be used to facilitate product differentiation and would ideally
enable producers in a designated geographical area to set higher prices, produce
more, and preserve those traditional methods of production and levels of high
quality that result from sustained investment, enable start-up industries to develop
innovative production techniques, or enable producers to make the transformation
from local to global markets.

Still, it is important to realize that there are limitations to article 23 protection.
Through article 24(4), existing use of a GI is preserved and generic terms are
excluded from protection. Apart from formal limitations there is also a real-life
limitation in economic terms. For a GI to derive real beneﬁt from this level
of enhanced protection,
investment in advertising and marketing is a must.
Reputation needs time to develop. In this respect, some authors (Hausman and
Rodrik, 2002) emphasize that the key to economic development is learning what
one is good at producing.

Traditional Knowledge and Cultural Expressions

At an international level, the discussion on extending the protection of GIs to
encompass traditional knowledge and cultural expressions has predominantly

86

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

focused on biopiracy issues and the protection of genetic resources (Raﬁ Commu-
nique, 1994). Protection of traditional cultural expressions is, however, also part of
the ongoing discussion in the context of the so-called development agenda at WIPO
and the TRIPS Agreement discussions at the WTO (Kamperman Sanders, 2005;
2007). Although the discussion on these issues is often conducted in parallel, it is
clear that different forms of protection for traditional knowledge need to be
considered (Correa, 2001). Concerns over biopiracy, misappropriation of genetic
resources and beneﬁt sharing arrangements demand measures in the regulatory
sphere of sovereignty and public international law.17 Protection of cultural expres-
sions calls for different measures, a private property IP regime that is shaped by
local mores, endorsed by the state, recognized internationally, and one which
provides incentives for innovative approaches to preservation and marketing of
traditional knowledge and culture. The question then is whether to do this through
sui generis systems or through traditional IP tools. It is here that developed and
developing countries do not see eye to eye.18

Intellectual property law is commonly designed to provide incentives to create,
rather than to preserve. For traditional cultural expressions, this means that a
supportive legal regime should not exclusively focus on the act of creation.
Finding novel ways of expressing traditional culture is an act of creation in and
by itself, but this is different to the fostering of innovative approaches to preser-
vation, and marketing of traditional knowledge and culture is more related
to marketing and channelling revenues into traditional modes of production
(Weeraworawit, 2003, p. 159). It is here that a system akin to those protecting
GIs may be considered for the protection of TCEs. GIs are sustainable over a long
period of time, even into perpetuity for as long as a particular method of production
is maintained. A GI is also not reliant on concepts such as novelty or originality,
like patent or copyright systems are. As such a GI would seem ideally suited as an
example for the protection of traditional knowledge and cultural expressions. GIs
serve to instil value in a sign that encapsulates locally produced goods containing
unique geographical ingredients or produced with localized human knowledge.
Protecting TCEs as GIs may not protect the knowledge encapsulated in the product
per se, in fact the knowledge remains in the public domain. However, an entitlement
is created that permits the holders of the right to protect not only a sign, but also a
connection with or even paternity to the product that is the TCE. This is where the
aforementioned concept of misappropriation may play an important role, so in the
next section some practical examples will be provided. First, however, the issue of
recognition of TCEs as GIs has to be further explored.

Qualifying for Protection

The issue of recognition domestically and internationally is a hotly contested
issue in the area of standard GIs, so this issue will also be of concern for
protection of TCEs. In essence all IP rights are territorial and it would be up to

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

87

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

the nation state to decide whether ‘‘Cultural Expressions’’ would be recognized
and what the criteria are. Then international protection would have to be
ensured. In 2005, the EU submitted a proposal under the Doha Round at the
WTO on a multilateral register for GIs, introducing a legally binding system
requiring member states to report their GIs to the WTO. This multilateral register
would also have to cover agricultural products and handicrafts. Recently, during
the WTO Trade Negotiations Committee meetings in May and June 2008,19 this
proposal was modiﬁed to entail a register in which GI holders can publish their
GIs multilaterally for notiﬁcation, but would have to go through the national
register of each country to obtain legal protection. The WTO registration would
have the purpose of providing evidence of the claim to the GI. Most notably, this
would be that the indication is not generic, for if it is, it must be excluded from
protection under articles 22 and 23 of the TRIPS Agreement. Once the GI, or for
that matter a ‘‘Cultural Expression’’, is notiﬁed to the WTO, this could lead to
protection in other member states, either through an automatic recognition (like
in the Lisbon Agreement system), or through a national recognition of the WTO
notiﬁcation.

Which TCEs should, however, qualify for protection? The combined rationale
for protection of GIs, traditional knowledge and cultural expression already
provides an indication for the type of requirements that should be used by national
governments in order to describe which products or productions fall within the
protected category, just like Parma Ham, Champagne, or Port wine, the method of
production, or the form of the cultural expression. If one only looks at India one
can think of folk dances like Bhangra of the Punjab, Bihu of Assam etc., or theatre
like the oldest surviving theatre traditions of the world, the 2000-year-old Kutiyat-
tam of Kerala. The advantage of a GI-type system is clear to see. Since there is no
prohibition against using the Kutiyattam itself as inspiration for new development
in theatre, there would be a prohibition against using the term Kutiyattam in
relation to theatre that does not adhere to the prescribed ‘‘ingredients’’ of a
Kutiyattam play. Not to be allowed to use the component parts (story line,
narrative, characters, symbolism, music) of Kutiyattam would go too far for a
Westerner placing value on progress and innovation. According to WIPO (2001,
p. 25), traditional knowledge includes ‘‘tradition based literary, artistic and
scientiﬁc works, performances, inventions, scientiﬁc discoveries, designs, marks,
names and symbols, undisclosed information and all other tradition-based innova-
tions and creations resulting from intellectual activity in the industrial, scientiﬁc,
literary or artistic ﬁeld’’. Yet when it comes to traditional knowledge, holistic
notions of knowledge and indigenous expressions often sit uneasy with the liberties
that modern business takes with what indigenous peoples perceive to be sacred
(Antons, 2005). It is in this context that the concept of misappropriation is useful.
If, for example, Maori patterns are used for tattoos of persons who have not earned
the tribal right to wear them, both the tattoo artist and the wearer have mis-
appropriated the imagery (Gray, 2005).

88

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

The remedies for misappropriation of TCEs can mostly be restitutional. Any
beneﬁt that has passed from the claimant to the enriched must then be restored.
Admittedly, given the more or less permanent nature of the tattoo, this example
presents problems. Financial compensation may be in order if corrective tattooing
or laser-removal treatment is not deemed appropriate. In other cases of misappro-
priation, however, handing over infringing goods and corrections in the media may
be sufﬁcient.

Conclusion

In a globalizing world the preservation of cultural diversity has become a prime
concern. Intellectual property rights, traditionally used to foster innovation, can
also be used for the purpose of preservation. A GI-type protection for traditional
knowledge and cultural expressions with the doctrinal basis to act against mis-
appropriation may offer a way forward in reconciling local traditional knowledge
and belief systems with Western notions of property.

About the Author

Anselm Kamperman Sanders, is a Professor of Law and Director of the Masters
Intellectual Property Law and Knowledge Management (LLM/MSc) at Maastricht
University, the Netherlands, and Academic Director IEEM Intellectual Property
Law School, Macau SAR, China; e-mail: a.kampermansanders@pr.unimaas.nl

Notes

1 For Europe, Eurimages fund, Council of Europe, Resolution (88) 15 of 16 October
1988, Media Plus, Decision 2000/821/EC of the Council of 20 December 2000 on Media
Plus—development, distribution and promotion; and Decisions 613/2001/EC of the
European Parliament and the Council of 19 January 2001 on MEDIA training. For
Canada, see the Department of Canadian Heritage website for a number of measures
beneﬁtting Canadian publishers and music, ﬁlm, and multimedia producers [online].
Available at hhttp://www.pch.gc.cai [Accessed July 2009].

2 See, for example, the quota system for foreign broadcasts in the Television Without

Frontiers Directive 89/552/EEC, which was adopted in 1989, revised in 1997 by
Directive 97/36/EC and in 2007 to become the Audiovisual Media Services Directive
2007/65/EC.

3 See, for example, the website of BUMA/Stemra, a Dutch collecting society for music

[online]. Available at hhttp://www.bumastemra.nli [Accessed July 2009]. The society
runs a social fund that provides loans, donations, pension plans and insurance for
individual music authors who are members and a cultural fund that promotes Dutch
music as a product by organizing, ﬁnancing and subsidizing numerous events nationally
and internationally. Similar arrangements are available for authors, performing artists,
music publishers, producers and distributors of music, ﬁlm and interactive software,
photographers, editors, translators, etc.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

89

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

4 Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property of 20 March 1883, as revised

at Brussels, 1900, Washington, 1911, The Hague, 1925, London, 1934, Lisbon, 1958,
and Stockholm, 1967, and as amended on 2 October 1979.

5 Article 10 of the Paris Convention, on False Indications of Source of Goods.

6 Madrid Agreement for the Repression of False or Deceptive Indications of Source on

Goods of 14 April 1891, as revised at Washington 1911, The Hague, 1925, London,
1934, and Lisbon, 1958.

7 Article 2 of the Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their

International Registration of 31 October 1958, as revised at Stockholm, 1967, and as
amended on 28 September 1979.

8 Replacing Regulation 2081/92/EEC, as amended by Council Regulation 692/2003.

9 Regulation 510/2006/EC of 20 March 2006 on the protection of geographical

indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs was
implemented following the WTO panel reports in United States (WT/DS174) and
Australia (WT/DS290), adopted by the DSB on 20 April 2005. The new Regulation
extends the protection available for EU geographical indications to foreign geographical
indications, without requiring an equivalent and reciprocal level of protection offered to
EU geographical indications by the foreign government. Non-EU producers wishing to
apply for protection of their geographical indication may furthermore apply directly to
the commission, rather than having to address their own national government.

10 Regulation 2081/92/EEC, article 2(2)(a) designation of origin means the name of a

region, a speciﬁc place or, in exceptional cases, a country, used to describe an
agricultural product or a foodstuff:
 originating in that region, speciﬁc place or country and
 the quality or characteristics of which are essentially or exclusively due to a particular
geographical environment with its inherent natural and human factors, and the
production, processing and preparation of which take place in the deﬁned
geographical area.

11 Regulation 2081/92/EEC, article 2(2)(b) geographical indication means the name of a

region, a speciﬁc place or, in exceptional cases, a country, used to describe an
agricultural product or a foodstuff:
 originating in that region, speciﬁc place or country and
 which possesses a speciﬁc quality, reputation or other characteristics attributable to
that geographical origin and the production and/or processing and/or preparation of
which take place in the deﬁned geographical area.

12 Vide Champagne or Roquefort.

13 See Document WIPO/GR TKF/IC/5/3, 52.
14 Paris Convention, article 10bis—Unfair Competition

(1) The countries of the Union are bound to assure to nationals of such countries
effective protection against unfair competition.
(2) Any act of competition contrary to honest practices in industrial or commercial
matters constitutes an act of unfair competition.
(3) The following in particular shall be prohibited:
1. all acts of such a nature as to create confusion by any means whatever with the
establishment, the goods, or the industrial or commercial activities, of a competitor;

90

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

2. false allegations in the course of trade of such a nature as to discredit the
establishment, the goods, or the industrial or commercial activities, of a competitor;
3. indications or allegations the use of which in the course of trade is liable to mislead the
public as to the nature, the manufacturing process, the characteristics, the suitability for
their purpose, or the quantity, of the goods.

15 Victoria Park Racing and Recreation Grounds Co. v Taylor (1937) 58 CLR 479; see in this
respect also Mogul Steamship Co. v McGregor Gow & Co. (1889) 23 QBD 598 at 625–6;
and Hodgkinson & Corby Ltd and Roho Inc. v Wards Mobility Services Ltd (1995) FSR
169 per Jacob J.: ‘‘There is no tort of copying. There is no tort of taking a man’s market
or customers. Neither the market nor the customers are the plaintiff’s to own. There is
no tort of making use of another’s goodwill as such. There is no tort of competition’’.

16 248 US 215 (1918).
17 For a repository of articles on this issue see the website available at hhttp://

www. iprsonline.org/resources/tk.htmi [Accessed July 2009].

18 See country positions submitted to the 11th Inter Governmental Conference (IGC)

meeting held from 3 to 12 July 2007 in Geneva at the WIPO.

19 See Document TN/C/W/52 of 19 July 2008, available from documents online at hhttp://

www.wto.orgi [Accessed July 2009].

References

Akerlof, G. (1970) ‘The Market for ‘‘Lemons’’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market

Mechanism’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488–500.

Antons, C. (2005) ‘Traditional Knowledge and Intellectual Property Rights in Australia and

Southeast Asia’, in C. Heath and A. Kamperman Sanders (eds.), New Frontiers of
Intellectual Property Law. Hart Publishing, Oxford, pp. 37–52.

Baeumer, L. (1999) ‘Protection of Geographical Indications under WIPO Treaties and

Questions Concerning the Relationship between those Treaties and the TRIPS
Agreement’ in ‘Symposium on the Protection of Geographical Indications in the
Worldwide Context’, WIPO publication No. 760(E), proceedings of symposium held in
WIPO, Geneva, Egez, Hungary, 23–25 October 1997.

Bengedkey, L. and Mead, C. (1992) ‘International Protection of Appellations of Origin and

Other Geographical Designations of Regional Origin Under the Lanham Act’,
Trademark Reporter, 82, 765–792.

Callmann, R. (1942) ‘He Who Reaps Where He Has Not Sown: Unjust Enrichment in the

Law of Unfair Competition’, Harvard Law Review, 55, 595–614.

Conway-Jones, D. (2005) ‘Safeguarding Hawaiian Traditional Knowledge and Cultural

Heritage: Supporting the Right to Self-determination and Preventing the
Commodiﬁcation of Culture’, Howard Law Journal, 48, 737–762.

Cornish, W. and Llewelyn, D. (2003) Intellectual Property: Patent, Copyright, Trade Marks

and Allied Rights, 5th edition. Thomson Sweet & Maxwell, London.

Cornish, W. and Phillips, J. (1982) ‘The Economic Function of Trade Marks: An Analysis

with Special Reference to Developing Countries’, International Review of Industrial
Property and Copyright Law, 13, 41–64.

Correa, C. (2001) Traditional Knowledge and Intellectual Property—Issues and Options
Surrounding the Protection of Traditional Knowledge [online]. QUNO. Available at

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

91

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

hhttp://www.quno.org/geneva/pdf/economic/Discussion/Traditional-Knowledge-IP-
English.pdfi [Accessed April 2009].

de Very, R. (2005) Towards a European Unfair Competition Law. Koninklijke Brill, Leiden.
Gervais, D. (1998) The TRIPS Agreement. Drafting History and Analysis. Sweet & Maxwell,

London.

Graf von Westerholt, H. and Gysenberg, H. (1981) ‘Vereinigtes K ¨onigreich von

Grobritannien und Nordirland, Part VI, in E. Ulmer (ed.), Das Recht des unlauteren
Wettbewerbs in den Mitgliedstaaten der EWG. Carl Heymanns Verlag, K ¨oln.

Gray, E. (2005) ‘Maori Culture and Trade Mark Law in New Zealand’, in C. Heath and A.
Kamperman Sanders (eds.), New Frontiers of Intellectual Property Law. Hart Publishing,
Oxford, pp. 71–96.

Hausman, R. and Rodrik, D. (2002) ‘Economic Development As Self-Discovery’, National

Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8952 [online]. Available at hhttp://
ksghome.harvard.edu/  .drodrik.academic.ksg/papers.htmli[Accessed April 2009]

Kamperman Sanders, A. (1997) Unfair Competition Law—The Protection of Intellectual and

Industrial Creativity. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Kamperman Sanders, A. (2005) ‘Future Solutions for Protecting Geographical Indications

Worldwide’, in C. Heath and A. Kamperman Sanders (eds.), New Frontiers of
Intellectual Property Law. Hart Publishing, Oxford, pp. 133–48.

Kamperman Sanders, A. (2007) ‘The Development Agenda for Intellectual Property’, in C.

Heath and A. Kamperman Sanders (eds.), Intellectual Property and Free Trade
Agreements. Hart Publishing, Oxford, pp. 3–26.

Kretschmer, M. (2003) ‘The Economics of Geographical Indications’, in ‘Queen Mary and

Fordham University NY Joint Seminar Series’, proceedings of a conference held in
Barbican, London, November 2003 (unpublished).

Maniatis, S. M. and Kamperman Sanders, A. (1993) ‘A Consumer Trade Mark: Protection

based on Origin and Quality’, European Intellectual Property Review, 11, 406–415.

McCarthy, J. (1998–2009) McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition, 4th edition.

West Publishing, New York.

Ohly, A. (1995) Richterrecht und Generalklausel im Recht des unlauteren Wettbewerbs. Carl

Heymanns Verlag, K ¨oln.

Pollack, L. (1962) ‘Roquefort—An Example of Multiple Protection for a Designation of

Regional Origin Under the Lanham Act’, Trademark Reporter, 52, 755–67.

Raﬁ Communique (1994), ‘Bioprospecting-Biopiracy and Indigenous Peoples’ [online],

November. Available at hhttp://www.raﬁusa.orgi [Accessed July 2009].

Sell, E. (1958) ‘The Doctrine of Misappropriation in Unfair Competition. The Associate

Press Doctrine after Forty Years’, Vanderbilt Law Review, 11, 483–500.

Stewart, T. (1993) The GATT Uruguay Round, A Negotiating History. Kluwer Law

International, The Hague.

United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (2001) Universal

Declaration on Cultural Diversity. Available at hhttp://www.unesco.orgi [Accessed July
2009].

van den Bossche, P. (2007) Free Trade and Culture: A Study of Relevant WTO Rules and

Constraints on National Cultural Policy Measures. Boekmanstudies, Amsterdam.

Wadlow, C. (1995) The Law of Passing-off. Sweet and Maxwell, London.

92

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

Incentives for and Protection of Cultural Expression

Anselm Kamperman Sanders

Weeraworawit, W. (2003) ‘International Legal Protection for Genetic Resources, Traditional

Knowledge and Folklore: Challenges for the Intellectual Property System’, in C.
Bellmann, G. Dutﬁeld and R. Mel ´endez-Ortiz (eds.), Trading In Knowledge:
Development Perspectives on Trips, Trade and Sustainability. Earthscan Publications,
London, pp. 157–65.

World Intellectual Property Organization (1994) Protection against Unfair Competition.

World Intellectual Property Organization, Geneva.

World Intellectual Property Organization (2001) Report on Fact-Finding Missions on

Intellectual Property and Traditional Knowledge. World Intellectual Property
Organization, Geneva.

Zografos, D. (2006) ‘Can Geographical Indications be a Viable Alternative for the Protection

of Traditional Cultural Expressions?’, in F. Macmillan and K. Bowrey (eds.), New
Directions in Copyright Law, Vol. 3, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, pp. 37–55.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 2

93


