The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2015) Vol. 18, no. 1–2, pp. 41–64

doi: 10.1111/jwip.12030

Intellectual Property Rights Access to Genetic
Resources and Indian Shrimp Aquaculture: Evolving
Policy Responses to Globalization

Anitha Ramanna-Pathak
Consultant, Pune, India

Globalization of the aquaculture industry raises important questions regarding the means to ensure a balance
between intellectual property rights (IPRs) and access to resources. Advocates of IPRs endorse convergence towards
implementing Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPs) agreement as a method for promoting
innovation, while others support divergence from global standards in order to uphold access to resources. This study
analyzes the impact of the convergence–divergence debate on IPRs and access to resources in India's shrimp
aquaculture sector. The Indian shrimp sector is at a crucial juncture, moving towards greater globalization and
integration with international markets, along with the introduction of new species, new technologies and an increasing
role for foreign companies. India requires access to foreign-improved breeding material and technology, but must also
create incentives for companies and institutions to invest in genetic material. In response to globalization, India's
policy demonstrates both convergence and divergence with global standards. This paper outlines the policy options for
India and points out that India's policy choices need not be restricted to one model, but can be based on innovative
strategies to ensure a balance between IPRs and access over aquatic resources.

Keywords Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs); access to resources; shrimp; aquaculture; globalization; convergence;
transvergence; India

Introduction

Globalization of the aquaculture industry is occurring worldwide through greater privatization and
commercialization of aquatic resources, the application of modern biotechnology to aquaculture and
the expansion of legal and biological methods to protect aquatic material. Globalization can be deﬁned as
the integration of economies, industries, markets, cultures and policymaking around the world.1 A key
feature of the aquaculture industry today is a greater focus on global markets. Aquaculture is one of the
fastest growing industries in the world, and approximately 50% of the total world ﬁsh harvest is
internationally traded (Garcia and Grainger, 2005). As compared to 9% for meat products, 37% of world
aquatic production is traded internationally (Gura, 2009). Some experts predict an increase in future
aquaculture trade, with India, Latin America and Africa becoming signiﬁcant exporters of aquaculture
products during the next two decades (Garcia and Grainger, 2005). Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) notes an increasing globalization of the ﬁsheries value chain, in which processing is being
outsourced to Asia (e.g. China, Thailand and Vietnam) and, to a lesser degree, Central and Eastern Europe
(e.g. Poland and Baltic countries) and North Africa (Morocco) (Gura, 2009). Mergers and acquisitions
within the aquaculture industry are increasing and the market penetration of aquaculture genetics
companies in the North is already very high (around 70% in salmon and trout seed) (Gura, 2009).

Hailed as ushering in ‘blue revolution’, aquaculture's promise is that, within the next three decades, it
could produce most of the world's marine produce, help to alleviate poverty and food shortages in some of
the world's poorest countries2. Mirroring developments in the green revolution, the blue revolution has
seen companies breeding ﬁsh to improve traits, such as their growth rate, conversion of feed into ﬂesh,

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

41


