The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 600–621

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00378.x

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public
Interest: Towards a More Inclusive
Interpretation

Robin Wright
Melbourne Law School

Intellectual property law aims to protect the public interest in two often-contradictory ways:
by granting exclusive rights to encourage creativity and by limiting those rights in certain
situations for socially beneﬁcial purposes. The Three-Step Test in international intellectual
property treaties aims to ensure that limitations and exceptions to intellectual property rights
do not inappropriately encroach upon the interests of rights holders. This article examines the
interpretation of the Three-Step Test as included in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights for copyright and patents by two World Trade Organization
dispute-resolution panels and by other commentators. It looks at how these interpretations
have dealt with the public policy motivations underlying limitations and exceptions to
exclusive rights, and considers the ways in which the public policy intentions that underlie
decisions by national legislators to adopt the limitations and exceptions to intellectual
property rights can be considered in each step of the test. The conclusion reached is that
the Three-Step Test contains the potential to allow both aspects of the public interest to be
considered as part of an inclusive interpretation.

Keywords copyright; patent; public interest; Three-Step Test

The notion of the ‘‘public interest’’ in intellectual property law contains a contra-
diction that tends to polarize debate. The long history of national legislation and
international treaties for the protection of the rights of authors and other rights
holders has established that there is a public interest in the provision of exclusive
intellectual property rights to encourage innovation and further creativity by
enabling their effective economic exploitation. However, these instruments also
include provisions that recognize a public interest in the derogation of those rights
in certain situations to encourage wider social access to and use of knowledge,
information and cultural products.1 Intellectual property law therefore promotes
the public interest via two different and inherently contradictory mechanisms:
creating rights that operate to exclude use by anyone other than the designated
owner but also permitting socially valuable uses in certain limited situations. The
appropriate extent of each is determined by national policy considerations and
regulated by international law.

This policy contradiction creates a tension in the interpretation of intellectual
property legislation and the international treaties that govern national intellectual
property laws. Intellectual property rights owners argue that they should be

600

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

it has now been incorporated into a number of international

provided with the widest possible protection of their rights. However, representa-
tives of user interests contend that important social value can also arise from
limiting these rights in certain circumstances to provide public beneﬁts in areas such
as private use, freedom of speech, research, public health or education. Both
positions aim to protect the public interest but legislation drafted to enhance the
beneﬁts provided by one may potentially impede the beneﬁts provided by the other.
Standing at the centre of this debate over the most appropriate way for
intellectual property laws to support the public interest is the Three-Step Test
now included in a number of international treaties. The test governs the inter-
nationally agreed scope of exceptions and limitations to intellectual property rights.
First introduced in 1967 into the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works (Berne Convention) in relation to the reproduction right in copyright
law,
intellectual
property treaties that deal with a broad range of rights, most notably within the
provisions dealing with different intellectual property rights in the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The test protects the
rights of intellectual property owners by placing restraints on the scope of
exceptions and limitations to intellectual property rights that members are per-
mitted to include in their national legislation. However, its existence also conﬁrms
that the exclusive rights granted by intellectual property legislation are not absolute.
The interpretation of the Three-Step Test is therefore a highly contested area in
international intellectual property debates. While this conﬂict is often credited,
perhaps incorrectly, with ensuring a proper ‘‘balance’’ within intellectual property
law between the interests of rights owners and the interests of users of the material
(Burrell and Coleman, 2005, pp. 187–91), in practice the reaction to any interpreta-
tion of the test is characterized by intense lobbying by or on behalf of rights holders
as well as user groups. In addition, there is limited judicial precedent supporting an
agreed interpretation of the test. The interpretations made have focused predomi-
nantly on providing appropriate protection for the economic interests of rights
holders. However, there has been less detailed discussion concerning in what
circumstances or to what extent exceptions or limitations introduced to provide
wider public or social beneﬁts should be permitted to derogate from the interests of
rights holders (Grifﬁths, 2006).

Outline

The inclusion of the Three-Step Test in TRIPS in 1994 has led to its examination in
a number of World Trade Organization (WTO) dispute-resolution panel reports.
These have dealt with the test as applied to copyright, patents and trademarks. In
Canada—Patent Protection of Pharmaceutical Products (Patent Case) in March
2000 a complaint by the European Communities and their member states (EC) led
to an examination of whether certain exceptions contained in Canadian patent law
complied with the Three-Step Test in TRIPS, article 30. In June of the same year, in

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

601

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

United States—Section 110(5) of the US Copyright Act (Copyright Case), a
complaint by the EC against exceptions contained in section 110(5) of the US
Copyright Act led to an assessment of the compliance of the US legislation with
TRIPS, article 13. In 2005, a complaint by the United States and Australia
regarding the non-compliance of certain EC regulations relating to trademarks
and geographical indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs led to a panel
report: European Communities—Protection of Trademarks and Geographical Indica-
tions for Agricultural Products and Foodstuffs (Trademark Case) that included a
discussion of compliance by the EC with TRIPS, article 17. The test is now also
included in some national legislative instruments and there is a signiﬁcant amount
of academic commentary concerning its interpretation.

This article will explore how arguments about the social beneﬁts arising from
public policy considerations that extend beyond the speciﬁc interests of rights
holders have entered the debate surrounding interpretation of the Three-Step Test.
The ﬁrst section provides background information about the incorporation of the
Three-Step Test into the international intellectual property treaties including how
the test ﬁrst entered the treaties and why the drafters were prepared to allow nations
to provide exceptions to intellectual property rights in certain situations. The
following section examines the two WTO cases that dealt with the Three-Step Test
in relation to patents and copyright. These have been chosen because of the
similarity of the structure of the tests in articles 13 and 30 of TRIPS and the Berne
Convention, article 9(2).2 The discussion focuses on the role played by the wider
public policy rationales underlying the provision of the exceptions in arguments
made by the respondent nations and in the interpretation of the test undertaken by
the panels. In both these cases, the respondent nations argued that the disputed
provision had a legitimate public policy rationale, which should be taken into
account when using the Three-Step Test to determine its validity. The section
considers how and at what point these arguments were examined by the panels and
what, if any, impact they had on the ﬁnal interpretation of the test.

In the ﬁnal section, the test itself is examined step by step to determine in which
sections of the test as worded in TRIPS, articles 13 and 30 there is potential for
wider public interest considerations to be taken into account under each of the three
criteria. It looks at how each limb of the test was interpreted by both the WTO
panels and by the commentators and explores where and how the public policy
rationale for an exception can potentially play a role in the interpretation of each
step.

The article concludes that a public policy rationale focused on the provision of
social beneﬁts can validly form part of consideration within each step of the Three-
Step Test and to do so could lead to a more compelling interpretation of the test
that takes both sides of the public interest supported by intellectual property law
into account. This discussion has important public policy implications as digital
technologies now pose both challenges and opportunities for those engaged with the
production and use of intellectual property products. The expansion of the activities

602

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

of public service institutions such as libraries and museums into the digital world
alongside the development of commercial digital delivery business models for
intellectual property products will continue to challenge the effectiveness of the
test and its ability to provide an appropriate balance between such activities. In
addition, the Three-Step Test is now increasingly being incorporated into domestic
legislation,3 which means that its interpretation is no longer only of concern to
those engaged in the arcane world of treaty interpretation, but can have an impact
on the daily activities of citizens.

The Three-Step Test

In 1967, a general right of reproduction was introduced into the Berne Convention.
(article 9(1)). A reproduction right was already a part of the majority of national
copyright laws4 (Ricketson, 2002, p. 23), but the proposal for the explicit inclusion
of a general right in the treaty for the ﬁrst time created a debate about the
circumstances in which national legislators should be permitted to provide excep-
tions or limitations to the new right.

The study group developing the preparatory documents for the revision of the

Berne Convention in Stockholm in 1967 observed that:

. . . on the one hand, it was obvious that all the forms of exploiting a
work which had, or were likely to acquire, considerable economic or
practical
importance must in principle be reserved to the authors;
exceptions that might restrict the possibilities open to authors in these
respects were unacceptable. On the other hand,
it should not be
forgotten that domestic laws already contained a series of exceptions
in favour of various public and cultural interests and that it would be
vain to suppose that countries would be ready at this stage to abolish
these exceptions to any appreciable extent (Document S/1, Records
1967, pp. 111–2).

Existing exceptions in national legislation included provisions relating to a
range of uses such as, public speeches, quotations. school books, newspaper articles,
private use, reproduction by photocopying in libraries and reproduction for the use
of the blind (Document S/1, Records 1967, p. 112). The study group considered that
it would not be appropriate to include a full list of permitted exceptions in the
convention, as this could ‘‘encourage the adoption of all the exceptions allowed and
abolish the right of remuneration’’ and also could ‘‘never cover all the special cases
existing in national legislation’’ (Document S/1, Records 1967, p. 112). Instead, they
determined to ﬁnd:

. . . a formula capable of safeguarding the legitimate interests of the
author while leaving a sufﬁcient margin of freedom to the national
legislation to satisfy important social or cultural needs (Document. S/1,
Records 1967, p. 113).

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

603

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

As a result, a provision was added outlining the general terms under which
national legislators would be permitted to allow an exercise of the reproduction
right by someone other than the author. The ﬁnal agreed provision became known
as the Three-Step Test. It provided that national legislation could permit the
reproduction of works protected by the convention:

. . . in certain special cases, provided that such reproduction does not
conﬂict with a normal exploitation of
the work and does not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the author (Berne
Convention, article 9(2)).

This ﬁrst iteration of the test, with minor wording changes, has since been
adopted and expanded to apply to a broader range of rights through its inclusion in
TRIPS (articles 13, 17, 26(2), 30), the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO) Copyright Treaty (WCT) (article 10) and the WIPO Performances and
Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) (article 16).

The inclusion of the test in TRIPS reﬂects both the desire of the members to
‘‘promote effective and adequate protection of intellectual property rights’’ and the
objectives and principles of the instrument as contained in articles 7 and 8. TRIPS,
article 7 notes that the protection of intellectual property rights should contribute to
the ‘‘transfer and dissemination of technology’’ to beneﬁt both producers and users
of technical knowledge ‘‘in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare’’.
TRIPS, article 8 refers to the necessity of adopting ‘‘measures necessary to protect
public health and nutrition’’, to promote the public interest in sectors important to
a nation’s socioeconomic and technological development and to avoid the restraint
of trade. The test is now well established as part of these multilateral agreements
and plays a key role in international intellectual property and trade agendas.

WTO Panel Interpretations

The inclusion of the Three-Step Test in TRIPS in relation to copyright, trademarks,
industrial design and patents means that the test now functions in the context of
international trade and is subject to the binding dispute-settlement mechanisms of
the WTO. The two WTO dispute-resolution cases discussed in this article con-
sidered the test as included in TRIPS, article 13 relating to copyright that reads:

Members shall conﬁne limitations or exceptions to exclusive rights to
certain special cases which do not conﬂict with a normal exploitation of
the work and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of
the right holder (TRIPS, article 13)

and article 30 that relates to patents:5

Members may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights confer-
red by a patent provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conﬂict
with a normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably

604

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the
legitimate interests of third parties (TRIPS, article 30).

These provisions adopt slightly different wording from article 9(2) of the Berne
Convention6 reﬂecting the different contexts in which the test operates in TRIPS. In
both these cases, the WTO panels undertook interpretation of the text in line with
article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (Vienna Convention)
(Patent Case, paragraphs 4.30, 7.13; Copyright Case, paragraph 6.43).

A treaty is to be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the
light of its object and purpose (Vienna Convention, article 31(1)).

In both the disputes the defendant nations argued that an important social
beneﬁt ﬂowed from the disputed exceptions included in their national legislation. In
the Patent Case, the panel was required to determine whether two exceptions that
allowed certain uses of the patent by parties other than the patent owner during the
patent term provided in the Canadian Patent Act 1985 were compliant with article
30 of TRIPS. In the Copyright Case, the panel examined whether or not section
110(5) of the US Copyright Act that permitted limited public performance of
broadcasts in certain settings complied with article 13 of TRIPS. In both cases, the
wider public beneﬁt arising from the challenged exception was one of the factors
used by the defendant nation to argue that the exception in question was compliant
with the Three-Step Test.

Canadian Patent Case

The Patent Case in 2000 delivered the ﬁrst report by a WTO panel dealing with an
interpretation of the Three-Step Test. It involved a dispute between the EC and
Canada that inquired into whether two exemptions in the Canadian Patent Act
1985, the ‘‘regulatory review’’ exception (section 55.2(1)) and the ‘‘stockpiling
exception’’ (section 55.2(2)), were compliant with TRIPS, article 30. The ‘‘regula-
tory review’’ exception provided that it was not a patent infringement to ‘‘make,
construct, use or sell’’ a patented invention if done as part of the development or
submission of information required under any law regulating the ‘‘manufacture,
construction, use or sale of a product’’ (Canadian Patent Act 1985, section 55.2(1)).
This was intended to allow generic pharmaceutical manufacturers to undertake the
preparation needed to meet regulatory review requirements before a patent had
expired thus allowing them to take a generic drug to market immediately upon
expiry. The ‘‘stockpiling’’ exception allowed for the same acts to be undertaken for
the purposes of ‘‘the manufacture and storage of articles intended for sale after the
date on which the term of the patent expires’’ (Canadian Patent Act 1985, section
55.2(2)). Canada argued that these exceptions had been introduced to allow generic
manufacturers to compete freely with the patentee after a patent expired, thus
protecting public health by promoting access to cost-effective, generic medicines

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

605

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

(Patent Case, paragraph 4.10). Its aim was to ensure that patentees were not able ‘‘to
exploit time-consuming regulatory review systems . . . in order to extend the term of
patent protection and to gain a windfall monopoly’’ (Patent Case, paragraph 4.12).
The EC challenged the validity of these exceptions, claiming that Canada was in
breach of its TRIPS obligations relating to patentable subject matter, the rights
conferred on the owner of a patent (articles 27.1 and 28.1) and the requirement in
article 33 that the term of patent protection should not end before 20 years from the
ﬁling date. Canada responded that the provisions in question complied with the
requirements of the Three-Step Test for exceptions to patent rights in article 30 and
did not reduce the minimum term of protection required under article 33 (Patent
Case, paragraphs 3.1–3.2).

From the outset, Canada argued that the exceptions provided a public value for
Canadian society and that TRIPS contemplated members adopting measures that
introduced limited exceptions that would prevent a patent monopoly extending
beyond its speciﬁc term. It explained that the exceptions were provided:

. . . in the interests of promoting full competition in regulated-product
markets after the expiry of that term and of realizing the cost-saving
beneﬁts that competition in those markets (particularly the health care
products market) conferred on society (Patent Case, paragraph 4.12).

In response, the EC argued that:

. . . the TRIPS negotiating parties had taken societal
interests into
consideration when agreeing on the balance of interests which were
enshrined in the TRIPS Agreement. Consequently, individual WTO
members could not now rebalance these interests unilaterally by
modifying the level of protection provided for in the Agreement
(Patent Case, paragraph 4.30).

Canada asserted that TRIPS allowed for broader public interest considerations
to be taken into account when framing valid exceptions, on condition that the rights
of the patent owners were preserved. The EC argued that exceptions should not
reduce the economic returns of patent owners and that any de facto period of
economic returns, which was available after the expiry date of a patent due to
regulatory review delays, had been built into the TRIPS system intentionally. The EC
contended that ‘‘[i]t was one of the major features of TRIPS that its implementation
was in principle neutral vis-a`-vis societal values’’ (Patent Case, paragraph 4.30). This
meant that public policy considerations could not be invoked to justify measures such
as Canada had adopted, because these had already been taken into consideration
when negotiating the ﬁnal text of the agreement (Patent Case, paragraph 7.25).

In its report, the panel concluded that:

. . . Article 30’s very existence amounts to a recognition that the
deﬁnition of patent rights contained in Article 28 would need certain

606

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

adjustments. On the other hand, the three limiting conditions attached
to Article 30 testify strongly that the negotiators of the Agreement did
not intend Article 30 to bring about what would be equivalent to a
renegotiation of the basic balance of the Agreement (Patent Case,
paragraph 7.26).

It found that section 55.2(2), the ‘‘stockpiling exception’’, was not a ‘‘limited
exception’’ as required under the ﬁrst limb of the test in article 30 as it constituted
‘‘a substantial curtailment of the exclusionary rights required to be granted to
patent owners under article 28.1 of TRIPS’’ (Patent Case, paragraph 7.36).7
However, it determined that section 55.2(1), the ‘‘regulatory review’’ exception,
was a permitted exception as it met each of the requirements of the Three-Step Test
in article 30 (Patent Case, paragraphs 7.44, 7.57, 7.73).8 This exception, unlike
section 55.2(2), was considered sufﬁciently narrow in scope to meet the require-
ments of step one of the test, because the extent of any curtailment of article 28.1
rights that may result was limited by the requirements of the regulatory approval
process (Patent Case, paragraph 7.45).

US Copyright Case

The Copyright Case, a dispute between the EC and the United States, was brought
before a WTO panel in 1999 requiring an interpretation of the Three-Step Test in
TRIPS, article 13. The dispute concerned section 110(5) of the US Copyright Act as
amended by the Fairness in Music Licensing Act enacted on 27 October 1998. The
provision permitted the public performance or display of musical works delivered
via a broadcast in certain retail and food or drinking establishments, subject to size
and audio-visual equipment limitations.

The provision had originally been intended to ‘‘exempt from copyright liability
anyone who merely turns on, in a public place, an ordinary radio or television
receiving apparatus of a kind commonly sold to members of the public for private
use’’ (Copyright Case, paragraph 2.5). When amended in 1998, the section was
divided into two parts. The ﬁrst retained the original exemption allowing display of
a work on a single receiving device but was restricted to a very narrow type of work
(the communication of a transmission embodying a performance or display of a
work other than non-dramatic musical works, i.e. music that is part of an opera,
operetta, musical or other similar dramatic work when performed in a dramatic
context)—referred to as the ‘‘homestyle’’ exemption. The second was a much
broader provision exempting retail and food and drinking establishments that
complied with certain speciﬁed size and audio-visual equipment restrictions from
copyright infringement when displaying a transmission of non-dramatic musical
works (a much larger potential category of works)—referred to as the ‘‘business’’
exemption.

The panel determined that for the exception to be valid it must comply with the
Three-Step Test in article 13.9 The EC argued that section 110(5) did not comply

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

607

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

with article 13 because step one of the test required that there be a ‘‘special
public policy or other exceptional circumstance’’ that would make it inappro-
priate or impossible to enforce the exclusive rights conferred by the convention
and that
in question did not pursue such legitimate public
policy objectives (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.105). In response, the United
States argued that TRIPS only required that an exception had a speciﬁc policy
objective:

the sections

It does not impose any requirement as to the legitimacy of the policy
objectives that a particular country might consider special in the light of
its own history and national priorities (Copyright Case, paragraph
6.106).

The United States claimed that

the provisions had a speciﬁc public
policy objective that was ‘‘fostering small businesses and preventing abusive tactics
by CMOs’’ (collective management organizations) (Copyright Case, paragraph
6.115).

The panel concluded that the wording of article 13 did not require a legitimate
public policy for an exception to comply with the ﬁrst limb of the test (Copyright
Case, paragraph 6.111). However, it noted that:

. . . public policy purposes stated by law-makers when enacting a
limitation or exception may be useful from a factual perspective for
making inferences about the scope of a limitation or exception or the
clarity of its deﬁnition (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.112).

It found that the limited ‘‘homestyle’’ exemption in section 110(5)(A) met the
requirements of the test in article 13, but that the wider ‘‘business’’ exemption in
section 110(5)(B) did not. The arguments taken into account included the potential
for economic loss to rights holders now or in the future (Copyright Case,
paragraphs 6.184–6.186), the number of rights holders likely to be affected (Copy-
right Case, paragraphs 6.206, 6.215) and the existence of any mechanism for
licensing the rights in question (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.216). The panel re-
iterated that when interpreting step one of article 13 it was not required to ‘‘pass
value judgement on the legitimacy of an exception or limitation’’. It noted the
intention contained within the Berne Convention to allow for the possibility of
providing minor exceptions ‘‘as long as they are de minimis in scope’’ (Copyright
Case, paragraph 6.158) and concluded that the ‘‘homestyle’’ exemption met the
requirement in step one that a valid exemption be ‘‘well-deﬁned and limited in its
scope and reach’’ (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.159). The panel did not make a
judgement on the legitimacy of the speciﬁc public policy intentions of the US
legislators; however, it noted that the claimed public policy objectives and the
legislative history ‘‘could be of subsidiary relevance for drawing inferences about
the scope of an exemption and the clarity of its deﬁnition’’ (Copyright Case,
paragraphs 6.156–6.159).

608

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

Public Policy and a Step-by-Step Interpretation
Interpretation of the Three-Step Test has customarily been undertaken by addres-
sing each of the three limbs of the test separately and sequentially from one to three
(Patent Case, paragraph 7.20). Failure to meet the criteria in any one of the steps
will result in the overall test not being satisﬁed (Ginsburg, 2001, p. 12; Knights,
2000, p. 3). The result is that if arguments concerning the public policy intentions of
legislators introducing the exception are not considered as part of the interpretation
at each step, it is possible that these issues could be completely excluded from the
overall evaluation, particularly if they are not taken into account in step one. This
has the potential to eliminate consideration of the anticipated wider social beneﬁts
of an exception from the test completely. However, each limb of the test does
contain the potential for some consideration of the broader public policy basis of
the exception or limitation in question and adopting an interpretive methodology
that takes this into account may assist with ensuring that the wider social policy
intentions of legislators form part of a balanced implementation of the test.

The two WTO disputes discussed here were decided predominantly on the basis
of likely economic harm to rights owners and the fact situations did not lend
themselves speciﬁcally to a deeper consideration of the value of the wider public
interest concerns being promoted by the governments in question. It may not be
appropriate for a WTO panel to pass value judgements on such issues (Copyright
Case, paragraphs 6.112, 6.157). However, it is suggested that wider public interest
considerations should not be completely excluded from the interpretation of the
Three-Step Test, even if an interpreter is not required to rule on their legitimacy.
In July 2008, a group of experts in copyright law from Europe and the United
States signed a declaration at the International Association for the Advancement of
Teaching and Research in Intellectual Property, calling for a more balanced
interpretation of the Three-Step Test in copyright law (Ermet, 2008). The declara-
tion stated that:

The public interest is not well served if copyright law neglects the more
general interests of individuals and groups in society when establishing
incentives for right holders (Geiger et al., 2008, p. 2).

It calls for a new interpretation of the Three-Step Test and argued that the test
requires ‘‘. . . a comprehensive overall assessment, rather than the step-by-step
application that its usual, but misleading, description implies’’ (Geiger et al., 2008,
p. 2). The declaration argues that this would ensure that an interpretation of the test
did not result in an inappropriate balance between the interests of rights holders and
those of the larger general public. To some extent, this argument is justiﬁed by the
practices undertaken by WTO panels to date, as there is already a tendency for facts
and arguments used in the interpretation of each step under consideration to cross
over between the three steps.

However, there may also be an opportunity for working towards a more
balanced and equitable outcome by adopting an interpretation at each step of the

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

609

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

test that seeks to ensure that the legislators’ social policy intentions are not excluded
from consideration in any step. Interpretations undertaken in the two WTO cases
discussed here demonstrate how the interpretation of the ordinary meaning of the
words in each of the steps has the potential to accommodate a consideration of the
public policy intentions underlying exceptions and limitations. To do this may help
to avoid the potential for a particular interpretation to exclude completely any
consideration of the wider social beneﬁt intentions of legislators from the inter-
pretation.

The following section will examine each of the three steps of the test and explore
where and how wider social policy intentions can be taken into account in an
interpretation of that step. The steps are considered here in reverse order, starting
with step three, in which the ordinary meaning of the words appears to provide the
greatest scope for the public policy intentions underlying an exception or limitation
to form part of the interpretation.

Step Three—No Unreasonable Prejudice to Legitimate Interests

The third criteria of the Three-Step Test aims to protect the economic and
non-economic interests of rights holders from an over-reaching exception or
limitation by providing that, in addition to the prohibition against a conﬂict
with ‘‘normal exploitation’’
in step two, there is appropriate protection of a
rights holder’s interests beyond what
is considered normal exploitation. In
TRIPS, articles 13 and 30, step three requires that the exceptions or limitations in
question, ‘‘do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests’’ of the right
holder (article 13) or the patent owner (article 30). In article 30, the provision
includes a further requirement also to take account of ‘‘the legitimate interests of
third parties’’.

In this step, the use of the limiting words ‘‘legitimate’’ and ‘‘unreasonable’’
indicates that the rights of owners are not absolute and, in certain situations, some
derogation of those rights could be considered legitimate. This wording acknowl-
edges that it may be acceptable for an exception or limitation to cause some
prejudice to the interests of a rights holder, as long as this does not extend to an
unreasonable level, and also that a rights holder will not be able to insist on the
protection of illegitimate interests. The panel in the Patent Case discussed inter-
pretation of the term ‘‘legitimate interests’’ as follows:

To make sense of the term ‘‘legitimate interests’’ in this context, that
term must be deﬁned in the way that it is often used in legal discourse—
as a normative claim calling for protection of
interests that are
‘‘justiﬁable’’ in the sense that they are supported by relevant public
policies or other social norms (Patent Case, paragraph 7.69).

It noted that the negotiating history of both article 9(2) of the Berne Conven-
tion and article 30 of TRIPS showed that those drafting the text of the test had

610

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

referred initially to an illustrative list of permissible socially valuable exceptions
(Ricketson, 2002, p. 24) and also referred to the existence of ‘‘one of the most
widely adopted article 30 type exceptions in national patent laws’’—the use of a
patented product for scientiﬁc experimentation (Patent Case, paragraph 7.69). This
indicated that whereas rights holders must be protected from unreasonable harm to
their interests, to receive this protection the interests claimed must be justiﬁable and
‘‘supported by relevant public policies or other social norms’’ (Patent Case,
paragraph 7.69). The panel concluded that it was appropriate for ‘‘normative
claims of interest’’ to play a part in the interpretation of step three of the test. When
attempting to determine whether a patent owner had a ‘‘legitimate interest’’ in
having access to a de facto period of market exclusivity resulting from regulatory
delays in obtaining marketing approval, the panel noted that the ‘‘community of
governments was obviously still divided over the merits of such claims’’ (Patent
Case, paragraph 7.82) and therefore in this situation the public policy issues were
unresolved:

The Panel believed that Article 30’s ‘‘legitimate interests’’ concept
should not be used to decide, through adjudication, a normative
policy issues that is still obviously a matter of unresolved political
debate (Patent Case, paragraph 7.82).

However, this suggests that if the exception had been supported by clearly
accepted public policy purposes and social norms, this would have been taken into
account as part of the panel’s evaluation of legitimate interests.

In the Copyright Case, the panel took a legal positivist approach when
determining whether the provision was compliant with article 13. It used economic
data on market conditions submitted by the parties to decide if any prejudice caused
to the legitimate interests of the rights holder as a result of the exception reached ‘‘a
level beyond reasonable’’ (Copyright Case, paragraphs 6.225–6.226). However, the
panel also noted that this was not to say ‘‘that legitimate interests are necessarily
limited to this economic value’’ (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.227) and that
‘‘legitimate’’ also has a normative connotation:

. . . in the context of calling for the protection of interests that are
justiﬁable in the light of the objectives that underlie that protection of
exclusive rights (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.224).

It has been suggested that it would be possible to merge the different
approaches taken by the copyright and patent panels in this step of the test and
‘‘to follow a normative approach including the legal interest in the full enjoyment of
exclusive rights’’ to allow a balancing of all interests involved (Senftleben, 2006,
p. 434). Ginsburg has argued that ‘‘the same normative concerns that advocate
against a purely economic evaluation of ‘‘normal exploitation’’ in step two of the
test should similarly inform the analysis of whether a right holder’s interests are
‘‘legitimate’’’’ in step three (Ginsburg, 2001, p. 15). She notes that while an author

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

611

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

has a legitimate interest in being paid for a use, they have ‘‘a less legitimate interest
in preventing it altogether’’ (Ginsburg, 2001, pp. 15–16). Ricketson also notes that:

. . . the adjective ‘‘legitimate’’ implies that there is a ‘‘proper’’ sphere of
application for authors’ interests, and that this should not be overreaching
or pursued regardless of other considerations (Ricketson, 2002, p. 39).

The third criterion of the test therefore focuses most predominantly on the non-
economic interests of rights holders and in article 30 also takes into account the
legitimate interests of third parties. The normative interpretive approach adopted
by the panel in the Patent Case took into account ‘‘relevant public policies or social
norms’’ (Patent Case, paragraph 7.69), an approach which was also adopted by the
panel in the Trademark Case (Senftleben, 2006, p. 434). The Copyright Case panel
noted the lack of speciﬁc reference in article 13 to the legitimate interests of third
parties; however, it still indicated that an economic analysis formed only part of a
wider analysis of legitimate interests in this step. So both WTO panels have
acknowledged scope for the inclusion of wider social value policy considerations
in the interpretation of step three of the test. However, the cases provide little
guidance on what might constitute an appropriate measure of ‘‘legitimate’’ rights or
‘‘unreasonable’’ prejudice in future situations.

Step Two—No Conﬂict with Normal Exploitation

The requirement in step two of the test is that there must be no conﬂict (or in article
30 no unreasonable conﬂict) with the ‘‘normal exploitation’’ of a work. Achieving
an appropriate deﬁnition of ‘‘normal exploitation’’ is potentially problematic in
light of the shifting nature of the market and technologies and the social context
surrounding the use of intellectual property. In addition, any deﬁnition of ‘‘normal
exploitation’’ is to some extent itself deﬁned by what rights are available for
exploitation because they are not already limited by the existence of an exception
(Goldstein, 2001, pp. 295–6).

In the Copyright Case, the panel noted that the deﬁnition of ‘‘normal
exploitation’’ could have both the empirical connotation of ‘‘regular, usual, typical
or ordinary’’ and a more normative deﬁnition such as ‘‘conforming to a type or
standard’’ (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.166). It aimed to develop an interpretation
that gave ‘‘meaning and effect to both connotations’’ (Copyright Cases, paragraph
6.166). However, the ﬁnal interpretation adopted relied primarily on a quantitative
analysis of economic impact, initially determining that an exception conﬂicts with
‘‘normal exploitation’’ if:

. . . uses, that in principle are covered by the right but exempted under the
exception or limitation, enter into economic competition with the ways
that right holder[s] normally extract economic value from that right to
the work (i.e., the full copyright) and thereby deprive them of signiﬁcant
or tangible commercial gains (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.183).

612

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

To include the second or more normative connotation of the term in its
interpretation, the panel also examined the potential future effects of the exception
on the market by considering, in addition, ‘‘those forms of exploitation which with
a certain degree of likelihood and plausibility, could acquire considerable economic
or practical importance’’ (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.180). The panel did not
make any further normative evaluation of the type or standard of exploitation that
an owner should be able to exploit. Ginsburg has suggested that this was possibly
because:

. . . the case . . . did not present signiﬁcant normative difﬁculties, since
the pork barrel exceptions at issue did not further speech, scholarship, or
other creative activities often fostered by copyright exceptions
(Ginsburg, 2001, p. 14).

By comparison, the panel in the Patent Case did include a normative evaluation
in the interpretation of what constituted a ‘‘normal exploitation’’ of the rights in
question. The key question it addressed when evaluating the validity of the ‘‘early
working’’ exception in section 55.2(1) was whether the additional period of market
exclusivity that would be available to patent owners after the term of the patent (if
competitors were not permitted to take steps to obtain market approval during the
term of the patent) should be considered part of an owner’s ‘‘normal exploitation’’
(Patent Case, paragraph 7.52). The panel considered that the deﬁnition of ‘‘normal’’
could refer to either an empirical conclusion about what is regular or usual or to a
more normative standard of entitlement and the term was used in article 30 in a way
that combined the two (Patent Case, paragraph 7.54). In evaluating what was a
regular or usual exploitation (i.e. the empirical connotation of normal), the panel
determined that any additional period of de facto market exclusivity was ‘‘not a
natural or normal consequence of enforcing patent rights’’ (Patent Case, paragraph
7.57) as such a period was not available to the majority of patent owners for whom
there was no marketing regulation. Rather it was:

. . . an unintended consequence of the conjunction of the patent laws
with product regulatory laws, where the combination of patent rights
with the time demands of the regulatory process gives a greater than
normal period of market exclusivity to the enforcement of certain patent
rights (Patent Case, paragraph 7.57).

When examining the normative connotation of normal, the panel considered
whether the exercise of this area of exploitation was ‘‘normal in the sense of being
essential to the achievement of the goals of patent policy’’ (Patent Case, paragraph
7.58). Thus, rather than widening the scope of ‘‘normal exploitation’’ by adding the
impact of potential future markets as in the Copyright Case, the patent panel
permitted either an empirical or a normative evaluation to be determinative and
required a claim of normal exploitation to be ‘‘justiﬁed in the light of the policy
objectives underlying the grant of exclusive rights’’, rather than merely resulting

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

613

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

from any possible exercise of exclusive rights (Senftleben, 2006, p. 424). As the EC
had not provided evidence that either most patent owners extracted value from the
de facto period of market exclusivity or that for them to do so was essential to the
achievement of patent policy goals, the exception was held not to conﬂict with
‘‘normal exploitation’’ (Patent Case, paragraph 7.58). The panel therefore did not
go on to consider what would have made any such conﬂict ‘‘unreasonable’’.

The panel in the Copyright Case noted that the very existence of article 13
meant that the deﬁnition of ‘‘normal exploitation’’ could not extend to every
possible form of commercial exploitation:

. . . not every use of a work, which in principle is covered by the scope of
exclusive rights and involves commercial gain, necessarily conﬂicts with
a normal exploitation of that work. If this were the case, hardly any
exception or limitation could pass the test of the second condition and
Article 13 might be left devoid of meaning, because normal exploitation
would be equated with full use of exclusive rights (Copyright Case,
paragraph 6.182).

However, the interpretation of step two of the test still remains somewhat
‘‘open ended and uncertain’’ (Ricketson, 2002, p. 36). Neither the wording of the
test, nor the considerations undertaken by the WTO panels give a clear indication of
to what extent normative policy considerations should be taken into account when
determining what would be considered normal exploitation.

Commentators have adopted differing positions on the inclusion of normative
factors in an interpretation of step, two of the test. Ricketson has suggested that any
interpretation of the second step, as contained in article 9(2) of the Berne
Convention, should be viewed against the wider context of the treaty and include
an investigation of non-economic normative considerations including ‘‘whether this
particular kind of use is one that the copyright owner should control’’ (Ricketson,
2002, p. 35).

Ginsburg has noted that if the analysis of ‘‘normal exploitation’’ is limited to
the more strictly empirical deﬁnition relied upon by the panels in the WTO cases
and a more normative analysis does not form part of the interpretation:

. . . there is a risk that even traditionally privileged uses, such as
scholarship or parody, could be deemed ‘‘normal exploitations,’’
assuming copyright owners could develop a low transactions cost
method of charging for them (Ginsburg, 2001, p. 14).

The focus in step two of the test on the level of actual or potential economic
harm to the copyright owner remains the key criteria used to determine any conﬂict
with ‘‘normal exploitation’’ (Senftleben, 2004, p. 194). However, despite the fact
that the two WTO cases provide only limited guidance on the requirements of the
normative connotation of the term ‘‘normal exploitation’’, both panels indicated
that such an assessment also plays a part in an analysis of the step. The extent to

614

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

which normative considerations are considered an appropriate part of any deter-
mination may depend on the speciﬁc facts of a case. However, the conclusion of the
patent panel suggests ﬂexibility surrounding the need to consider the policy under-
pinnings of an exception or limitation in the interpretation of this step. The
constantly changing nature of what is considered normal exploitation in the
contemporary environment also suggests that any deﬁnition may not remain ﬁxed
and that ‘‘value judgements will need to be made which will clearly vary according
to the society and culture concerned’’ (Ricketson, 2002, p. 36).

Step One—Special Case

The ﬁrst criterion of the Three-Step Test is worded differently in TRIPS, articles 13
and 30. Whereas step one of the copyright provision in article 13 refers to the
exception consisting of a ‘‘special case’’, the wording in article 30 relating to patents
requires that the exception be ‘‘limited’’. The WTO panels examining this criterion
both sought to ‘‘measure the extent to which legal rights were curtailed by the
limitation in question’’ (Senftleben, 2006, p. 420) and determined that only a small
diminution of the rights would be permissible. The panel in the Copyright Case
considered that the word ‘‘certain’’ meant that the scope of the exception must be
known and particularized and that the word ‘‘special’’ added an additional
requirement that the exception should be narrow in both a quantitative and a
qualitative sense (Copyright Case, paragraphs 6.108–9). In the Patent Case, the
panel determined that ‘‘the word ‘‘limited’’ must be given a meaning separate from
any limitation implicit in the word ‘‘exception’’ itself’’ and therefore must ‘‘connote
a narrow exception—one which makes only a small diminution of the rights in
question’’ (Patent Case, paragraph 7.30). Neither panel undertook a normative
evaluation of the legitimacy of the exceptions in question (Senftleben, 2006, p. 421).
The Copyright Case panel speciﬁcally rejected the proposition that exceptions
‘‘must be justiﬁed in terms of a legitimate public policy purpose in order to fulﬁll the
ﬁrst condition of the article’’ (Copyright Case, paragraphs 6.111–2).

Some commentators, however, have pointed to a connection between the
requirement in some versions of step one of the Three-Step Test that limitations
or exceptions be conﬁned to ‘‘certain special cases’’ and the need for a legitimate
public policy objective underlying a decision by legislators to restrict the rights of
rights holders (Ficsor, 2002, p. 133). When commenting on the test as included in
the Berne Convention in 1987, Ricketson stated:

. . . there must be something ‘‘special’’ about this purposes, ‘‘special’’
here meaning that it is justiﬁed by some clear reason of public policy or
some other exceptional circumstance (Ricketson, 1987, p. 482).

However, he later noted that in the test as incorporated into TRIPS, there was
no requirement that a ‘‘certain special case’’ have an underlying public policy
justiﬁcation (Ricketson, 2002, p. 31; 2003, p. 22).

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

615

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Other commentators, however, do consider that a legitimate public policy
rationale for an exception forms part of step one of the test. Senftleben notes that
while he believes the panel
in the Copyright Case was correct in avoiding
‘‘inappropriate panel ‘‘activism’’’’ (Senftleben, 2004, p. 145) by declining to rule
on the validity of the speciﬁc domestic policy rationale in that case, he still considers
the existence of a justiﬁable reason underlying an exception plays a key role in the
interpretation of what constitutes a ‘‘special case’’ for the purposes of step one:

The legislative decision to set limits to the author’s exclusive rights must
be a reaction to an understandable need for the reconciliation of the user
interest at stake with the author’s legitimate interests. . . . In sum, a
limitation that rests on a rational justiﬁcatory basis making its adoption
plausible constitutes a special case in the sense of the three-step test
(Senftleben, 2004, p. 152).

Gervais notes that Ricketson’s initial position on the Berne provision was
solidly anchored in the history and the text of the Berne Convention and considers
that as ‘‘few countries will act in a purely arbitrary way’’:

Any exception to copyright is arguably ‘‘special’’ because any exception
short of a complete repeal of the Copyright Act would arguably be
‘‘limited in its ﬁeld of application’’ (Gervais, 2005, pp. 14–16).

On the other hand, it has been suggested that to consider the legitimacy of the
public policy rationale underlying an exception in step one could inappropriately
place an interpreter in the position of ‘‘evaluating the merits of local policy
determinations’’ (Ginsburg, 2001, p. 12). Also, the list of national exceptions that
were in existence when the Three-Step Test was ﬁrst introduced into the Berne
Convention could not themselves necessarily claim ‘‘persuasive policy underpin-
nings’’ and therefore it is arguable that under current interpretations of the test:
‘‘‘‘special cases’’ can include unworthy as well as laudable exceptions, so long as
they are sufﬁciently narrow’’ (Ginsburg, 2001, p. 12).

The proper role for consideration of the public policy intentions underlying an
exception in the interpretation of step one of the test therefore remains contested,
with the panels in both the copyright and patent cases rejecting any requirement for
a normative evaluation of the legitimacy of the public policy purposes underlying
the exceptions. However, the copyright case panel stated that:

. . . public policy purposes stated by law-makers when enacting a
limitation or exception may be useful from a factual perspective for
making inferences about the scope of a limitation or exception or the
clarity of its deﬁnition (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.112).

In addition, the panel in the Patent Case undertook a global assessment of
factors inﬂuencing the scope of an exception (Senftleben, 2006, p. 421). This
suggests that, in certain situations, the policy intentions of legislators may be

616

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

relevant. While the terms of step one of the test may not explicitly require
interpreters to pass judgement on the legitimacy of the public policy decision
underlying the exception, taking the intentions of the legislators into account is
likely to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the context in which the
text is operating. A particular case may be more or less compellingly ‘‘special’’ or an
exception more or less demonstrably ‘‘limited’’ if its policy underpinnings are taken
into account as part of the evaluation.

interpretation of

Incorporating the Wider Public Interest
This discussion demonstrates that the Three-Step Test, particularly as incorporated
into TRIPS in articles 13 and 30, does contain the potential for some resolution of
the conﬂict between the two different forms of public interest supported by
intellectual property law. If the wider social beneﬁt intentions of legislators
play a part in the interpretation of all three limbs of the test, while each
step is still evaluated primarily to avoid any inappropriate incursion onto the
legitimate interests of rights holders, this could potentially lead to a more inclusive
overall
the test. Such an evaluation would not require a
radical departure from existing interpretive precedent, but may mean that con-
sideration of the wider social beneﬁts offered by an exception or limitation is less
likely to be completely removed from an interpretation of the test due to the
sequential step by step methodology and the uncertainty surrounding the inter-
pretation of step one. The wider social beneﬁt of a proposed exception or limitation
can potentially play a legitimate role in the interpretation of each step of the test but
will not necessarily be sufﬁciently persuasive to override a stronger case for the
protection of an owner’s intellectual property rights as determined within each of
the steps.

In relation to step three of the test as contained in TRIPS articles 13, 30, the
panels in both the WTO cases noted that to be considered legitimate, the interests of
rights holders must be justiﬁable in a normative sense. If there is a sufﬁciently
persuasive public policy justiﬁcation for an exemption or limitation, this may assist
with evaluating the legitimacy of the interests claimed by rights holders and whether
any potential prejudice to those interests caused by the exception would be
considered unreasonable.

In the deﬁnition of ‘‘normal exploitation’’ in step two both panels considered
that the normative connotation should be taken into account as well as or as an
alternative to empirical considerations when interpreting the term. If an approach
such as that taken by the panel in the Patent Case allowing either a normative or a
qualitative evaluation to be determinative was to be adopted, this would allow for
the possibility that in appropriate situations a public interest purpose ‘‘might
provide sufﬁcient non-economic normative consideration to outweigh considera-
tions of an economic kind’’ (Ricketson, 2003, p. 75).

The role of wider social policy beneﬁt considerations in step one of the test
remains more contentious. It has been speciﬁcally discounted as a necessary

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

617

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

requirement for a legitimate ‘‘special case’’ by the panel in the Copyright Case;
however, it was accepted as part of the factual matrix that may be used to evaluate
the appropriate scope or clarity of the exemption. There is argument from
commentators based on reference to the preparatory documents of the treaties that
a sound public policy justiﬁcation should play a role in the determination of
whether an exception constitutes a ‘‘special case’’ (Ficsor, 2002, pp. 129–33;
Senftleben, 2004, p. 152). The suggestion that taking public policy justiﬁcations
for an exception into account under step one of the test would create ‘‘unnecessary
complexity’’ (Ricketson and Ginsburg, 2006, p. 767) does not address the possibility
that not to do so could potentially result in the complete exclusion of any
consideration of the wider social beneﬁts of an exception from the test if the
interpretation does not proceed to steps two and three. It appears appropriate that
any interpretation of the Three-Step Test should take into account both aspects of
the public interest that the provision was designed to protect and ensure that neither
is excluded from the debate.

Ficsor has commented in relation to exceptions in the Berne Convention that:

The text and the negotiating history of the Convention show that
speciﬁc public and cultural policy purposes not only have served for
the adoption of these provisions, but also that they must be kept in mind
constantly in the application thereof (Ficsor, 2002, p. 131).

Ensuring that normative considerations play a part in the interpretation of
each step of the Three-Step Test could contribute to a more inclusive discussion of
the most appropriate way for intellectual property legislation to support both
aspects of the ‘‘public interest’’. This is likely to have important social policy as
well as commercial implications in the contemporary international intellectual
property environment where the Three-Step Test plays an increasingly promi-
nent role.

About the Author

Robin Wright is a Research Fellow with the Centre for Media and Communications
Law and the Intellectual Property Research Institute of Australia at Melbourne
Law School, University of Melbourne, Australia. She holds an LLB(Hons) from
LaTrobe University and has practiced as an in-house solicitor for an Australian
university. She also holds a Master of Arts from Monash University and a Bachelor
of Music from the University of Melbourne. In the 1990s Robin was the Online
Manager at Cinemedia (now the Australian Centre for the Moving Image) where
she managed a major broadband digital video research trial investigating the online
delivery of educational video material. Her research interests include Australian and
international copyright law and its intersection with the media, education and
cultural sectors and digital technologies; e-mail: r.wright@unimelb.edu.au

618

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

Notes

This article derives from a project funded primarily by the Australian Research Council
entitled: Cultural Collections, Creators and Copyright: Museums, Galleries, Libraries and
Archives and Australia’s Digital Heritage (Kenyon and Christie, LP0669566). The project is
also funded by a number of key Australian cultural institutions and peak bodies in the
creative sector.

1 In the closing speech of the Conference for the Protection of Authors’ Rights on 18

September 1884, Federal Councillor Numa Droz, president of the conference, stated
that ‘‘limitations on absolute protection are dictated, rightly in my opinion, by the
public interest’’.

2 A discussion of the test for trademark exceptions contained in TRIPS, article 17 differs
from the test as it relates to patents and copyright because the wording of article 17 does
not refer to conﬂict with normal exploitation or unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate
interests of the might owner. It also includes a requirement to take account of the legiti-
mate interests of third parties (Trademark Case, paragraph 7.649).
The panel in the Trademark Case drew upon interpretations adopted in the Patent Case
and the Copyright Case but emphasized the need to interpret article 17 ‘‘according to its
own terms’’. The difference in wording and interpretation between article 17 and articles
13 and 30 of TRIPS may be a relevant subject for further examination.

3 Australian Copyright Act 1968 (Cth) section 200AB; Directive 2001/29/EC of the
European Parliament of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copy-
right and related rights in the information society [2001] OJ L167/10, article 5(5).

4 ‘‘This prerogative has a fundamental place in the legislation of the countries of the
Union; the fact that it is not recognized in the convention would therefore appear to be
an anomaly’’ (Document S/1, Records 1967, p. 111).

5 The three-step test is also included in TRIPS in article 17 in relation to trademarks and

in article 26(2) in relation to industrial designs.

6 Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention is also incorporated into TRIPS by article 9(1) which

requires that members comply with articles 1 through 21 of the Berne Convention.

7 The panel asserted in relation to the interpretation of the Three-Step Test that ‘‘The
three conditions are cumulative, each being a separate and independent requirement that
must be satisﬁed. Failure to comply with any one of the three conditions results in the
article 30 exception being disallowed’’ (Patent Case, paragraph 7.20). Therefore, as the
stockpiling exception did not comply with step one, it was not necessary to investigate its
compliance with steps two and three to decide that the exception was inconsistent with
Canada’s obligations under article 28.1 of TRIPS (Patent Case, paragraph 7.38).

8 The panel determined that the ‘‘regulatory review’’ exception was compliant with the
three-step test because, ﬁrst, it was a ‘‘limited exception’’ as required under step one as
this step did not require the panel to address the issue of economic impact (this was
addressed in different contexts in steps two and three) and the exception only allowed
for a narrow curtailment of the patentees rights. Second, the exception did not conﬂict
with a normal exploitation of the patent owners, rights, as a de facto period of market
exclusivity arising from the regulatory process could not be considered part of ‘‘normal’’
exploitation of a patent. Third, there had not been prejudice to the legitimate interests of
the patent owner, as it was not legitimate to claim that a patentee’s interests extended to

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

619

Robin Wright

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

a de facto period of market exclusivity occasioned by regulatory delays (Patent Case,
paragraphs 7.40–7.84).

9 The EC had initially argued that article 13 should not be used to test the US exception as

it only applied to the exclusive rights newly introduced in the TRIPS agreement itself
(Copyright Case, paragraph 6.34). However, the United States argued that article 13 also
applied to exceptions to all the exclusive rights incorporated into the agreement as part of
the Berne Convention, which included the right of public performance (Copyright Case,
paragraph 6.94). The panel accepted the US argument and, in addition, concluded that
valid exceptions were not necessarily limited to non-commercial uses or to the exceptions
that had been in existence before 1967 (Copyright Case, paragraph 6.93).

References

Burrell, R. and Coleman, A. (2005) Copyright Exceptions: The Digital Impact. Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge.

Canada—Patent Protection of Pharmaceutical Products, WTO Doc WT/DS114/R (2000),

17 March, Report of the Panel.

Ermet, M. (2008) ‘IP Experts Sign Declaration Seeking Balanced Copyright Three-Step Test’,

Intellectual Property Watch [online], 24 July. Available at hhttp://www.ip-watch.org/
weblog/index.php?p=1172i [Accessed April 2009].

European Communities—Protection of Trademarks and Geographical Indications for

Agricultural Products and Foodstuffs, WTO Doc WT/DS174/R, WT/DS290/R (2005),
Report of the Panel.

Ficsor, M. (2002) ‘How Much of What? The ‘Three-Step Test’ and its Application in Two

Recent WTO Dispute Settlement Cases’, Revue Internationale du Droit d’Auteur,
192(April), 111–251.

Geiger, C., Hilty, R. M., Grifﬁths, J., Suthersanan, U., Benabou, V. L., Bently, L.,

Dreier, T., Dusollier, S., Ghidini, G., Ruse-Khan, H. G., Hugenholtz, B., Kallinikou,
D., Koelman, K., Kur, A., Makeen, M., Mizaras, V., MacQueen, H., Nilsson, G. O.,
Peukert, A., Reichman, J., Rosen, J., Schovsbo, J., Senftleben, M., Siiriainen, F.,
Torremans, P. L. C., Traple, E., Vivant, M., Weber, R., Westkamp, G., Xalabarder, R.
(2008), Declaration: A Balanced Interpretation of the ‘Three-Step Test’ in Copyright Law,
July. Available at hhttp://www.ip.mpg.de/shared/data/pdf/declaration_three_
steps.pdfi [Accessed April 2009].

Gervais, D. J. (2005) ‘Towards a New Core International Copyright Norm: The Reverse

Three-Step Test’, Marquette Intellectual Property Law Review, 9, 1–26.

Ginsburg, J. C. (2001) ‘Toward Supranational Copyright Law? The WTO Panel Decision
and the ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ for Copyright Exceptions’, Revue Internationale du Droit
d’Auteur, 187, 3–65.

Goldstein, P. (2001) International Copyright: Principles, Law and Practice. Oxford University

Press, Oxford.

Grifﬁths, J. (2006) ‘The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’—Its Relationship with the Common

Law Concepts of ‘‘Fairness’’ and ‘‘Public Interest’’’, in ‘‘Rethinking the Three
Step Test’’, discussion paper for a workshop conducted in Paris, ULIP,
16 February.

620

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

The ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and the Wider Public Interest

Robin Wright

Knights, R. (2000) ‘Limitations and Exceptions under the ‘‘Three-Step Test’’ and in National

Legislation—Differences between the Analog and Digital Environments’. Paper
presented at the WIPO Regional Workshop on Copyright and Related Rights in the
Information Age, Montevideo, 13–14 September.

Ricketson, S. (1987) The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works:

1886–1986. Kluwer, London.

Ricketson, S. (2002) The Three-Step Test, Deemed Quantities, Libraries and Closed

Exceptions. Centre for Copyright Studies, Strawberry Hills, NSW.

Ricketson, S. (2003) WIPO Study on Limitations and Exceptions of Copyright and Related

Rights in the Digital Environment, WIPO Standing Committee on Copyright and Related
Rights, SCCR/9/7. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/copyright/en/
sccr_9/sccr_9_7.doci [Accessed April 2009].

Ricketson, S. and Ginsburg, J. C. (2006) International Copyright and Neighbouring Rights:

The Berne Convention and Beyond. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Senftleben, M. (2004) Copyright, Limitations and the Three-Step Test: An Analysis of the

Three-Step Test in International and EC Copyright Law. Kluwer Law International, The
Hague.

Senftleben, M. (2006) ‘Towards a Horizontal Standard for Limiting Intellectual Property

Rights?—WTO Panel Reports Shed Light on the Three-Step Test in Copyright Law and
Related Tests in Patent and Trademark Law’, International Review of Intellectual
Property and Competition Law (IIC), 37, 407–38.

United States—Section 110(5) of the US Copyright Act, WTO Doc WT/DS160/R (2000),

15 June, Report of the Panel.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2009) Vol. 12, no. 6

621


