The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6, pp. 160–190

doi: 10.1002/jwip.12028

Patent Law Treaty: Promises Not Delivered-How the
Negotiations Resulted in Ambiguities in the Treaty

Cees Mulder
Maastricht University, The Netherlands

The Patent Law Treaty was drafted with the aim to “streamline and harmonize” formal requirements set by national or
regional Patent Ofﬁces for the ﬁling of national or regional patent applications and the maintenance of patents. In this
Article, a number of core issues of the Patent Law Treaty has been selected: requirements for the accordance of a ﬁling
date, relief in respect of time limits and restoration of priority. A conclusion of this Article is that the goals of the Patent
Law Treaty were not achieved by the Treaty as concluded. One of the reasons is that the Treaty contains too many
optional requirements (“may require”), which may be implemented as compulsory by the Contracting Parties,
allowing them too much freedom when implementing requirements of the Treaty into their national and regional
patent laws. This deﬁes the aim of harmonization and streamlining of the Patent Law Treaty. The negotiation history is
described and discussed with emphasis on what went wrong during the negotiations. Reasons for the failure of the
Patent Law Treaty are discussed and recommendations for repair are given.

Keywords patent law treaty; negotiations; effect of PLT; ﬁling date requirements; relief in respect of time limits;
continued processing; reinstatement of rights; restoration of priority right

Introduction to Patent Law Treaty

The Patent Law Treaty (PLT) was concluded during a Diplomatic Conference held at the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) in Geneva (Switzerland) from May 11 to June 2, 2000.1 The
PLT is open to States member of WIPO and/or States party to the Paris Convention for the Protection of
Industrial Property;2 it is also open to certain intergovernmental organizations, such as the European
Patent Organization.3 Instruments of ratiﬁcation or accession must be deposited with the Director General
of WIPO. The PLT entered into force on April 28, 2005.

The PLT emanated from discussions on the reform of substantive patent law that began in 1984.
Those discussions continued until June 1991, during which a ﬁrst part of a Diplomatic Conference to
conclude a “Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as far as Patents are Concerned.”4 The second
part of the Diplomatic Conference was scheduled for July 1993, but did never take place. In January 1994,
the United States discontinued substantive patent law harmonization discussions due to a lack of domestic
support for the effort.5 The international community was disappointed by the ensuing “loss of momentum”
on the subject of substantive patent law harmonization as a result of the position of the United States.
In 1995, it was agreed that another approach for promoting harmonization, covering matters
concerning the formality requirements of national and regional patent procedures, would be initiated by
WIPO.6 Five sessions of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty,7 and three sessions of its
successor, the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents (SCP),8 were held to develop the “Basic
Proposal” to be presented to the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty, which
was held from May 11 to June 2, 2000.9,10

The Final Act of the PLT witnessing the Diplomatic Conference and its outcome, was signed by 104
countries and 3 Intergovernmental Organizations. At present 66 countries signed the PLT. In 2005 the
PLT was in force in 11 countries; currently (October 2014) there are 36 Contracting Parties.11

The PLT includes 27 articles and 21 rules. In addition, six “Agreed Statements” were adopted at the

end of the Conference.12

160

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

Aim and Purpose of the PLT

Since the adoption of the PLT, the involvement of the WIPO has diminished as there are no centralized
functions. The International Bureau of WIPO merely acts as a depository of the PLT and is not in a
position to give an ofﬁcial interpretation of the Treaty; such interpretation being in the exclusive
competence of the PLT Contracting Parties.

The PLT aims at harmonizing and streamlining formal procedures relating to national and regional
patent applications and maintenance of patents. In spite of the goal of harmonization, the PLT does not
establish a uniform procedure for all PLT Contracting Parties by leaving many requirements optional,
thereby allowing divergence in implementation between PLT Contracting Parties.13

The PLT sets forth, with one exception, maximum formal/procedural requirements that Contracting
Parties may impose on patent applicants and patentees. Otherwise, PLT Contracting Parties are free to
provide requirements that, from the viewpoint of applicants and owners, are more favorable than PLT
requirements.14 The one exception to this freedom are the ﬁling date requirements, which are both a
maximum and a minimum, i.e., a so-called “ﬁling-date standard.”15

The aim of the PLT is to simplify the formal obligations and to reduce the associated costs for patent
applicants and owners of patents in obtaining and preserving their rights in inventions in many countries of
the world. The PLT complements the existing international obligations and fosters the policy of strong
intellectual property protection. The PLT simpliﬁes the ﬁling of an application and obtaining and
maintaining of patents throughout the world and, to a large extent, promotes the merging of national and
international formal requirements associated with patent applications and patents.

In a birds’ eye view, the principle features of the PLT offer the following advantages:

 The PLT simpliﬁes and minimizes application requirements for obtaining a ﬁling date;
 The PLT imposes a maximum on the formal requirements that a PLT Contracting Party may impose;
 The PLT eases representation requirements for formal matters;
 The PLT provides a basis for means of communications, including the electronic ﬁling of applications;
 The PLT provides relief in respect of time limits that may be imposed by the Ofﬁce of a PLT

Contracting Party and re-instatement of rights where an applicant or owner has unintentionally failed to
comply with a time limit and that failure has the direct consequence of causing a loss of rights; and

 The PLT provides for correction or addition of priority claims and restoration of priority rights.

A main feature of the PLT is that it provides standardized formality requirements for patent
applications, which are ﬁled with a national or regional patent Ofﬁce. Instead of deﬁning these
requirements again or differently in the PLT, it was decided to incorporate by reference the provisions
of the PCT and its Regulations, wherever appropriate, into the PLT (see Mulder (2011a) for a discussion
of the issue of “Incorporation by reference of PCT provisions into the PLT”). The main reason for
this is that the PCT already regulates in detail the formality requirements with respect to patent
applications.16

From the viewpoint of inventors, applicants and patent attorneys, standardization and simpliﬁcation
of the formality requirements lead to a reduced risk of formality errors resulting in a less frequent loss of
rights. On the other hand, Ofﬁces may operate more efﬁciently because of the simpliﬁcation of procedures
and the streamlining of the process. Eventually, this will result in cost reductions on both sides.

After the failure in 1994 of the earlier “Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as far as Patents
are Concerned,” there was an eagerness to conclude a new Treaty which was limited to cover matters
concerning the formality requirements of national and regional patent procedures. This pushing ahead has
resulted in the introduction of weaknesses into the PLT. In particular, the achievement of the goal of the

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

161

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

PLT to “streamline and harmonize” formal requirements was often disregarded if a negotiating party
insisted to have certain measures implemented into the PLT, which reﬂected peculiarities of its national
law. This has resulted in a Treaty which allows too much freedom when a Contracting Party implements
the basic requirements of the PLT into its national or regional patent law.

Basic Features of the PLT
In a number of documents, the main features of the PLT are described.17,18,19 In the following paragraphs a
condensed overview of these principle features is presented.

Filing Date Requirements
The accordance of a date of ﬁling is essential to deciding who has priority for the grant of a patent in each
country and to determining prior art and the patentability of the invention. It is also relevant to claiming a
right of priority under the Paris Convention as well as to the calculation of the term of patent protection.
Article 5 PLT sets a maximum and minimum set of requirements for obtaining a ﬁling date and
procedures to avoid loss of the ﬁling date because of a failure to comply with other formality requirements.
In principle, the Ofﬁce of any PLT Contracting Party is obliged to accord a ﬁling date to an application on
the basis of only three elements. These requirements are (Article 5(1)(a) PLT):

(i) an indication that what is ﬁled is intended to be a patent application;
(ii) indications identifying the applicant or allowing the applicant to be contacted; and
(iii) a part which on the face of it appears to be a description.

No additional element can be required for a ﬁling date to be accorded. In particular, a PLT Contracting
Party cannot require the presence of one or more claims as a ﬁling date requirement. In addition, an
applicant can ﬁle the description in any language (Article 5(2)(b) PLT), or replace the description and/or
drawings by a reference to a previously ﬁled application (Article 5(7) PLT). A PLT Contracting Party
may, for the purposes of the ﬁling date, accept a drawing as the element referred to Article 5(1)(a)(iii) PLT
(Article 5(1)(b) PLT).

The PLT also provides rules to establish a ﬁling date where a part of the description or drawing is
missing from the initially ﬁled application. Normally, the ﬁling of a missing part results in the accordance
of a later ﬁling date, i.e., the ﬁling date becomes the date on which the missing part or missing drawing is
ﬁled (Article 5(6)(a) PLT). However, if the application claims priority of an earlier application and the
missing part or drawing is “completely contained” in the earlier application, the originally accorded ﬁling
date will be maintained (Article 5(6)(b) PLT).

Standardized Application and Forms
A main feature of the PLT is that it provides standardized formality requirements for patent applications,
which are ﬁled with a national or regional patent Ofﬁce. Instead of deﬁning these requirements again or
differently in the PLT, it was decided to incorporate by reference the provisions of the PCT and its
Regulations, wherever appropriate, into the PLT (Article 6(1) PLT). In addition, the PLT provides for the
establishment of several Model International Forms that have to be accepted by all Ofﬁces of PLT
Contracting Parties (Article 6(2) and 8(3) PLT).

Simplified Procedures Before the Office
“Simpliﬁcation” is one of the keywords for the PLT. The PLT simpliﬁes a number of procedures before the
Ofﬁce of PLT Contracting Parties during the processing of a patent application, as well as for the
maintenance of a patent.

162

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

The PLT allows an Ofﬁce of a PLT Contracting Party to require an applicant or owner to appoint a
representative for the purposes of any procedure before the Ofﬁce, except for certain procedures (Article 7
(2) PLT). In addition, an Ofﬁce may only require the applicant to ﬁle evidence in support of the formal
contents of an application, declarations of priority or the authentication of translations when the Ofﬁce has
a reasonable doubt as to the truthfulness of the indications or the accuracy of the translation submitted by
the applicant (Article 6(6) PLT). As regards signature, a PLT Contracting Party may require evidence only
where the Ofﬁce has a reasonable doubt as to its authenticity (Article 8(4)(c) PLT).

A PLT Contracting Party may not require the applicant to ﬁle a copy or a certiﬁed copy of the earlier
application or the previously ﬁled application if such earlier application or previously ﬁled application has
been ﬁled with the Ofﬁce of that Contracting Party (Rule 4(3) PLT). The same applies to cases where the
Ofﬁce could obtain the copy or the certiﬁcation from other Ofﬁces through a digital library, which is
accepted by that Ofﬁce for that purpose (Rule 4(3) PLT). In addition, an Ofﬁce may require a translation of
the earlier application only where the validity of the priority claim is relevant to the determination of
whether the invention concerned is patentable (Rule 4(4) PLT).

Avoiding Loss of Rights
Apart from the ﬁling date requirements, one of the principal features of the PLT is that it prescribes
procedures for the avoidance of unintentional loss of rights as a result of failure to comply with formality
requirements. It can be regarded as a breakthrough of the PLT that for all these measures of relief, time
limits with a duration of at least two months are speciﬁed.

Relief in Respect of Time Limits
In principle, the PLT provides three types of relief procedures. The ﬁrst is an extension of the time limit
(for at least 2 months) where an applicant or owner requests the extension prior to the expiration of
the time limit (Article 11(1)(i) PLT). The second is an extension of the time limit (again for at least 2
months) where an applicant or owner requests the extension after the expiration of the unobserved time
limit (Article 11(1)(ii) PLT). The third remedy is the provision of continued processing (Article 11(2)
PLT).

A PLT Contracting Party is not obliged to provide the ﬁrst type of extension (extension prior to the
expiration of the time limit). However, it is obliged to provide either the second type of extension
(extension after the expiration of the time limit) or continued processing. Relief under these provisions is
limited to non-compliance with a time limit ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce for an action in a procedure before the
Ofﬁce; it does not apply to time limits the duration of which is ﬁxed in the law.

Reinstatement of Rights
Another safeguard provision established by the PLT is the provision of reinstatement of rights if an
applicant or owner fails to meet a time limit and, as a consequence, loses his rights with respect to an
application or patent unintentionally or in spite of all due care required by the circumstances (Article 12
PLT). The time limit to request reinstatement of rights shall not be less than 2 months from the date on
which the reason of the non-compliance with the time limit is removed, or not less than 12 months from the
expiration of the missed time limit, whichever is shorter (Article 13(2) PLT). In contrast to the relief in
respect of time limits, reinstatement of rights is applicable to all time limits, including time limits of which
the duration is ﬁxed in the law.

Correction and Addition of a Priority Claim
The PLT provides for the possibility of addition and correction of priority claims for national/regional
applications (Article 13 PLT). This provision was copied into the PLT from the already existing provision
in PCT Rule 26bis.1.20

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

163

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

Restoration of the Priority Right
Another safeguard provision established by the PLT is the provision of restoration of the priority right.
There are two cases to be considered. In the ﬁrst case, restoration of the priority right must be provided
where an application is ﬁled after the expiration of the 12-month priority period if the failure to claim
priority within the Paris Convention period occurred in spite of all due care taken by the applicant or was
unintentional (Article 13(2) PLT). The request for restoration including the ﬁling of the application must
be made within a time limit of at least 2 months from the date on which the priority period expired.

In the second case, restoration of the priority right must be provided where an applicant cannot submit
a copy of an earlier application within 16 months from the priority date because of a delay in the Ofﬁce
with which the earlier application was ﬁled (Article 13(3) PLT).

Paper and Electronic Communications
One of the goals of the PLT is to facilitate the implementation of electronic ﬁling of applications and other
communications while, at the same time, not excluding any users from the beneﬁts of the patent system, if
they are not ready to apply electronic ﬁling.

In principle, a PLT Contracting Party may,

the
implementation of full electronic ﬁling) with certain exceptions (Rule 8 PLT). These exceptions are the
obligation on all Ofﬁces to accord a ﬁling date for a paper application (Article 5(1) PLT), and to accept the
ﬁling of communications on paper for the purpose of meeting a time limit (Article 8(1)(d) PLT).

if it so wishes, exclude paper ﬁling (i.e.

Methodology

The research methodology used in this Article mainly consists of an analysis of the documents in relation
to the negotiation history of the PLT. In particular, the reports and preparatory documents of the sessions
of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty in the period from December 1995 to
December 1997, and the sessions of the SCP in the period from June 1998 to September 1999 have been
studied.21,22 In addition, the Summary Minutes of the Main Committees during the Diplomatic Conference
for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty held in Geneva in the period May-June 2000 have been
studied.23 Where necessary, the documents in relation to the 1991 Diplomatic Conference for the adoption
of the “Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as far as Patents are Concerned” in The Hague were
taken into account.24

The majority of the Travaux Pre´ paratoires of the PLT is not directly available to the public. Some of
the later preparatory documents are accessible and downloadable from web pages of the WIPO. However,
the earlier versions of the “Draft PLT Articles and Draft Regulations” including the corresponding
“Notes,” “Reports” and other related documents can be accessed by requesting the WIPO to make them
available.25

Information has also been gathered by speaking with representatives of the Patent Law Section and
the Patent Cooperation Treaty Legal Division of the WIPO and with representatives of the Directorate-
General Legal and International Affairs of the European Patent Ofﬁce. These conversations have been
conducted off the record following the request of the persons involved not to be quoted in an explicit
manner.

Negotiation History of the PLT

Five sessions of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty in the period from December 1995 to
December 1997,26 and three sessions of the SCP in the period from June 1998 to September 1999,27 were
held in Geneva to come to the “Basic Proposal” of the PLT and its Regulations which was presented to the

164

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty in Geneva from May 11 to June 2,
2000.28,29

As indicated above, the original negotiations to come to a “Patent Law Treaty” (ofﬁcially addressed
as the “Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as far as Patents are Concerned”;30 also addressed as
the “Patent Harmonization Treaty”) that would harmonize formal as well as substantive patent law
stranded in January 1994 when the United States declared that it was unable to continue the discussions
because of a lack of domestic support.31

In 1995, the WIPO initiated another approach for promoting harmonization whereby only matters
concerning the formality requirements of national and regional patent procedures would be
covered.32,33,34 Convened by the Director General following decisions made by the General Assembly
of WIPO and the Assembly of the Paris Union in their meetings of September/October 1995,35,36 the
Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty held its ﬁrst session in Geneva in December 1995. The
meetings of the Committee were attended by representatives of States members of WIPO and/or the Paris
Union. Representatives of the European Communities, the European Patent Ofﬁce, the Organization of
African Unity and the World Trade Organization as well as representatives of numerous non-
governmental organizations took part in the sessions in an observer capacity.

During the meetings of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty the delegation of the
United States repeated time after time “that it was still not in a position to discuss substantive patent law
harmonization.”37 In addition, the delegation continuously expressed its concern about any requirement
present in or introduced into the Draft PLT that could be regarded as a substantive requirement. By way of
example, in the Draft PLT as presented at the second session of Committee of Experts on the Patent Law
Treaty, there was a new Article on unity of invention (Article 6 and corresponding implementing Rule 6)
which was regarded as “not appropriate for inclusion in this Treaty directed to formalities” as observed by
the delegation of the United States.38 In the Draft PLT as presented at the fourth session of the Committee
of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty the Article on “unity of invention” was deleted.

In March 1998, the Assemblies of the Member States of WIPO and the Unions administered by the
WIPO approved a proposal for the establishment of “Standing Committees.”39,40 The SCP became the
successor of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty. Because considerable progress had
already been made, three sessions of the SCP (in June 1998, April 1999 and September 1999) were
sufﬁcient to convene a Diplomatic Conference in Geneva to conclude the PLT and the Regulations under
the PLT (May 11 to June 2, 2000).

In this Article, aspects of the negotiation history will be described with respect to three core issues of

the PLT (parts of this Article were incorporated in Mulder, 2011b). These are:

(1) Requirements for the accordance of a ﬁling date (Article 5 PLT). The focus will be on the following

three issues:

 The basic requirements for according a ﬁling date (Article 5(1) PLT);
 The ﬁling date where a missing part of the description or a missing drawing is ﬁled (Article 5(6)
 The ﬁling of an application by reference to a previously ﬁled application (Article 5(7) PLT).

PLT);

(2) Relief in respect of time limits including continued processing (Article 11 PLT) and reinstatement of

rights after a ﬁnding of due care or unintentionality by the Ofﬁce (Article12 PLT).

(3) Restoration of the priority right (Article 13(2) and (3) PLT).

None of the above subjects was present in the Draft PLT put before the Committee of Experts on the
Patent Law Treaty at its ﬁrst session in December 1995, although some of the later added provisions were
modeled after texts in the Basic Proposal submitted to the 1991 Diplomatic Conference in The Hague.41

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

165

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

Filing Date Requirements

Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty
In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the ﬁrst
session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty there was no article on requirements for
accordance of a ﬁling date.42 This was also noted in the corresponding “Notes” prepared by the
International Bureau.43 In the “Report” adopted by the Committee of Experts, many delegations favored,
amongst other things, the inclusion in the PLT of provisions relating to requirements for the accordance of
a ﬁling date.44

As a consequence a ﬁrst draft of an Article 3 PLT “Filing Date” was presented before the Committee
on its second session.45 The text was modeled after Article 8 of the Basic Proposal submitted to the 1991
Diplomatic Conference in relation to the “Patent Harmonization Treaty.”46 The ﬁling date requirements
contained 4 items:

Article 3(1) (Requirements)

(a) The ﬁling date of the application shall be the date of receipt by the Ofﬁce of a communication

containing the following elements:

(i) an express or implicit indication to the effect that the communication is an application for a

patent;

(ii) indications allowing the identity of the applicant to be established;
(iii) a description;
(iv) if the description is not in the language or in one of the languages of or admitted by the Ofﬁce, an

indication to the effect that the application contains a description.

In the corresponding “Notes” prepared by the International Bureau, it was remarked that Article 3 sets
an international standard for the granting of a ﬁling date. In that respect, Article 3 is different from other
provisions of the Treaty, which establish a maximum list of allowed requirements.47 In the “Report”
adopted by the Committee of Experts, many delegations noted with satisfaction that a provision on the
ﬁling date had been included.48 Several delegations proposed that the payment of a ﬁling fee should be a
requirement for a ﬁling date to be accorded; this proposal was rejected by a majority of delegations.49
Several delegations also suggested that the inclusion of claims should be a requirement for a ﬁling date to
be accorded. This suggestion was opposed by a majority of delegations, which were of the view that,
although claims were necessary before a patent could be granted, it was not necessary to furnish them at
the date of ﬁling.50

In the third session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Article 3 PLT on “Filing
Date” was renumbered to become Article 2 PLT.51 In addition, a new paragraph (4) was added to the
Article allowing an applicant to replace the description and drawings by reference to another application
from which priority is claimed; in addition, a certiﬁed copy of the earlier application must be furnished to
the Ofﬁce within a prescribed time limit. This provision was modeled after Article 8(4) of the Basic
Proposal submitted to the 1991 Diplomatic Conference in relation to the “Patent Harmonization Treaty.”52
In the subsequent “Report” adopted by the Committee of Experts, it was agreed that the paragraph on
“ﬁling by reference” would be maintained.53 Several delegations suggested that the applicant should be
required to furnish details concerning the date and country of ﬁling of the previously ﬁled application or
even that the title of that application should be indicated.54 It was also suggested that the provision should
not be restricted to those applications in respect of which priority is claimed.55 The delegation of the
United States of America suggested that the paragraph should provide for the electronic exchange of
documents between Ofﬁces in place of submitting certiﬁed copies.56 The International Bureau explained

166

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

that if the required certiﬁed copy of the previously ﬁled application were not ﬁled, the application
containing a reference to that previously ﬁled application would be considered as not having been ﬁled.57
Eventually, many suggestions were honored in the later versions of the PLT. In addition, the regulatory
requirements relating to “ﬁling by reference to a previously ﬁled application” were moved to the
Regulations under the PLT and, due to lack of agreement between the delegations, contain a puzzling mix
of compulsory requirements (“shall”) and optional requirements which may be implemented as
compulsory (“may require”) by a PLT Contracting Party (see Rule 2(5) PLT: Requirements under Article
5(7)(a) PLT). The pile of optional requirements which may be implemented as compulsory by a PLT
Contracting Party, allows too much freedom when implementing requirements of the PLT into its national
and regional patent laws and is contrary to the aim of harmonization and streamlining as advocated by the
PLT.

In the meantime, the WIPO General Assembly and the Assembly of the Paris Union58 considering a
Memorandum by the Director General in respect of Matters Concerning the Patent Law Treaty, decided,
amongst others, to include ﬁling date provisions in the draft PLT.59

In the fourth session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Article 2 PLT on “Filing
Date” was renumbered to become Article 4 PLT.60 The formulation “a description” in item (iii) of Article
4(1)(a) PLT of the requirements for accordance of a ﬁling date was broadened to read: “a part which on the
face of it appears to be a description,” this formulation is identical to the one in PCT Article 11(1)(iii)(d).
In addition, in item ii of Article 4(1)(a) PLT, apart from “indications allowing the identity of the applicant
… to be established,” a formulation was added “or allowing the applicant … to be contacted by the
Ofﬁce.” For example, where the application indicates the address without any name and there is only one
resident at that address, the requirement of Article 4(1)(a)(ii) PLT would be regarded as having been
complied with.

In the Draft PLT, a new item (b) was added to Article 4(3) PLT (subsequent compliance with
requirements) in relation to the late ﬁling of drawings. If the applicant ﬁles missing drawings later on, the
ﬁling date would become the date on which the Ofﬁce has received those drawings. Where these “later
furnished drawings do not contain new matter” the original ﬁling date may be retained. In the “Report,” the
International Bureau commented that the standard applied by a PLT Contracting Party in determining
whether later furnished drawings contained “new matter” was a matter of substance.61

In the ﬁfth session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty there were no substantial
changes in Article 4 PLT on “Filing Date”.62 A new item (c) was added to Article 4(3) PLT in relation to
missing drawings and missing parts of the description, a provision according to which, where priority is
claimed in the application, the contents of the priority document has to be taken into account in
establishing whether correction by way of furnishing a missing part of the description or missing drawing
should be allowed without loss of the initial ﬁling date.63

Standing Committee on the Law of Patents
In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the ﬁrst
session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Article 4(1)(a) PLT was restricted to three
items:64

Article 4(1) (Elements of Application)

(a) Subject to paragraphs (2) to (5), a Contracting Party shall provide that the ﬁling date of an
application shall be the date on which its Ofﬁce has received all of the following elements, ﬁled by
means permitted by the Ofﬁce:

(i) an express or implicit indication to the effect that the elements are intended to be an application;

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

167

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

(ii) indications allowing the identity of the applicant to be established or allowing the applicant to be

contacted by the Ofﬁce;

(iii) a part which on the face of it appears to be a description;

The above formulations of the ﬁling date requirements are already relatively close to the texts adopted

during the Diplomatic Conference.

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” presented at the ﬁrst session of the Standing Committee on
the Law of Patents, the provision permitting an applicant to replace the description and any drawings in an
application by reference to a previously ﬁled application in respect of the same invention was no longer
restricted to references to applications from which priority is claimed, but broadened to also cover
references to any previously ﬁled application by the same applicant or his predecessor in title (Article 4(7)
PLT).65

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the
second session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, there were no substantial changes in
Article 4 PLT on “Filing Date”.66 Following a proposal by the delegation of Australia with respect to the
paragraph in Article 4 PLT in relation to the ﬁling of missing parts of the description and missing
drawings, and suggestions by the International Bureau based on this proposal, the formulation “the
missing part of the description and the missing drawing … do not contain new matter” in paragraph (5) of
Article 4 PLT, was replaced by “the missing part of the description or missing drawing be completely
contained in the earlier application”; this formulation was incorporated in a new paragraph of the Rule
regulating the details concerning the ﬁling date requirements under Article 4 PLT.67,68

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the
third session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Article 4 PLT on “Filing Date” and
implementing Rule 2 PLT were “framed” indicating that the Article and Rule had been adopted by the
Standing Committee.69 Two amendments are worth mentioning. The ﬁrst one is that a new item was added
to the requirements of Rule 2(4) PLT in relation to the situation where the applicant ﬁles missing parts of the
description or missing drawings based on an earlier application from which priority is claimed (Article 4(6)
(b) PLT), i.e. that “the application, at the time of ﬁling, contained an indication that the contents of the earlier
application were incorporated by reference in the application”.70 The second one is that in Article 4(6)(b)
PLT relating to the situation where the applicant ﬁles missing parts of the description or missing drawings
based on an earlier application from which priority is claimed, the words “at the time of ﬁling” were replaced
by the words “at the date on which one or more elements referred to in Article 4(1)(a) were ﬁrst received by
the Ofﬁce”.71 It is noted that all requirements in Rule 2(4) PLT are of the kind “may require”: this allows a
PLT Contracting Party to select its own mix of compulsory requirements when implementing the ﬁling of
missing parts of the description or missing drawings based on an earlier application. This freedom of choice
is contrary to the aim of the PLT to streamline and harmonize formal requirements.

Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the PLT
In the Draft Proposal submitted to the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty
submitted by the Director General of WIPO, Article 4 PLT on “Filing Date” was renumbered to become
Article 5 PLT.72

Issues relevant for the Draft PLT were discussed at a session of the PCT Assembly held in
March 2000; these issues were summarized in a document submitted for consideration to the PLT
Diplomatic Conference.73 In relation to the ﬁling date requirements, it was suggested that a discussion
should take place at the Diplomatic Conference on the question of amending draft Article 5(1) PLT,
perhaps in a general way or subject to future amendments of the Regulations, in order to allow applicants
to obtain a ﬁling date using future technologies.74

168

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

During the meetings at the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty, the
ﬁling date requirements were extensively discussed.75,76 Of course, the issue of adding a fourth item: “(iv)
a part which on the face appears to a claim or claims” was brought up and rejected (again).77

It was observed by a representative of the WIPO, that PCT Article 11(1) was also relevant as the PCT
was the starting point for the provision on the ﬁling date in Article 5(1) PLT.78 The drafting of the PLT
had closely followed the PCT, although, in some cases, it had been deemed that the PLT should be more
user-friendly. In PCT Article 11(1), there are seven requirements for according a ﬁling date under
the PCT. Two of those requirements would not apply to national ﬁlings, because they dealt with
residency requirements and the designation of a PLT Contracting State. Of the remaining ﬁve, three
corresponded to items in the PLT. There were two remaining items in the ﬁling date requirements for the
PCT where the PLT was more liberal, namely the inclusion of claims and the language requirements.79 A
Representative of the European Patent Organization said that Article 5(1) PLT was perhaps the most
important provision in the draft PLT, as it established a uniform worldwide standard; any possible
deviation from this standard, including the possibility for national Ofﬁces to require a fee, should
be avoided.80 Eventually, the three items of Article 5(1)(a) PLT for establishing a ﬁling date were
maintained as proposed.

In addition, the language requirements in Article 5(2) PLT were adopted in relation to the languages
in which the three items of Article 5(1)(a) PLT can be ﬁled.81 It was observed by a representative of the
WIPO that the possibility of ﬁling the description of an application in any language was one of the key
issues of the draft PLT.82

With respect to Article 5(5) PLT relating to the notiﬁcation concerning a missing part of the
description or a missing drawing, a representative of the WIPO emphasized that an Ofﬁce would not be
required to make any special check for missing descriptions or drawings; also, Article 5(5) PLT did not
apply where the Ofﬁce discovered the omission in a different procedure, for example in the course of
substantive examination.83 With regard to Article 5(6) PLT relating to the situation where the missing part
of the description or the missing drawing was ﬁled subsequently, the representative of the WIPO pointed
out that the ﬁling date would, under Article 5(6)(a) PLT, be the date on which the missing part of the
description or missing drawing was received by the Ofﬁce, whereas Article 5(6)(b) and (c) PLT addressed
two situations in which the earlier date of receipt of the incomplete application could be preserved as the
ﬁling date.84 Article 5(5) and (6) PLT were meant to give an applicant the opportunity to ﬁle missing parts
as quickly as possible in order to minimize the loss of ﬁling date.85

With respect to Article 5(7) PLT allowing an applicant to replace the description or the drawings by a
reference to an earlier application, a representative of the WIPO emphasized that it is a very user-friendly
provision.86 The representative of the Institute of Professional Representatives before the European
Patent Ofﬁce (epi) said that ﬁling by reference would particularly be beneﬁcial for small applicants who
had to ﬁle in the last minute before the expiration of the priority period, and who were not interested in
applying in a great number of countries, and therefore did not want to incur the cost of a PCT application.87

Conclusion
From the above overview of the negotiations, it can be concluded that Article 5 PLT is a breakthrough in
that it simpliﬁes and minimizes application requirements for obtaining a ﬁling date. However, even the
text of article comprises at least two formulations specifying optional requirements, which may be
implemented as compulsory (“may require”) by a PLT Contracting Party. Furthermore, Rule 2 PLT
implementing Article 5 PLT includes a complicated mix of “shall” and “may require” requirements. The
majority of the latter requirements results from speciﬁc wishes of negotiating parties to insert a certain
optional requirement into the draft Treaty. The inclusion of “may require” formulations should have been
avoided or at least minimized because it introduces too much freedom for PLT Contracting Parties when

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

169

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

implementing requirements of the PLT into their national and regional patent laws. This abundance of
“may require” formulations is contrary to the aim of harmonization and streamlining of the PLT.

Relief in Respect of Time Limits

Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty
In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the ﬁrst
session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, there was no article on relief in respect of
time limits.88 In the “Report” adopted by the Committee of Experts, a number of delegations favored,
amongst other things, the inclusion in the PLT of provisions relating to the extension of speciﬁc time
limits.89

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the
third session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, there was a new Article 12 PLT
“Extension of a time limit”.90 Article 12 PLT sets a minimum of rights a Contracting Party shall extend to
an applicant or owner in respect of a request for an extension of a time limit. It is to be noted that this
Article deals with the time limit for an action before the Ofﬁce, and not the time limit before a court.91
Article 12(1) PLT addresses the situation in which an applicant or owner requests the extension of a time
limit before that time limit has expired. However, in accordance with subparagraph (c), the term does not
include the submission of a priority claim for which a new Article 13 PLT (belated claiming of priority)
was introduced. An Ofﬁce would not be permitted to impose any payment of a fee for the ﬁrst extension of
the time limit.92 Article 12(2) PLT addresses the situation in which an applicant or owner requests the
extension of a time limit after that time limit has expired. Subparagraph (b) is intended to prevent that an
applicant or owner loses rights attached to his application or other communication because of a failure to
meet a time limit if he has taken all due care required by the circumstances to comply with the time limit.93
In the meantime, the WIPO General Assembly and the Assembly of the Paris Union (meeting in
September/October 1996) considering a Memorandum by the Director General in respect of Matters
Concerning the Patent Law Treaty, decided, amongst others, to include provisions relating to restoration
of rights where a time limit has been missed (including “further processing”) and extension of time limits
which have not yet expired but whose extension has been requested by the party concerned.94

In the “Report” adopted by the Committee of Experts of the third session, many delegations and
representatives of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations supported the principle of
harmonization of extension of time limits expressed in Article 12 PLT.95 However, several delegations
expressed the view that it was necessary to differentiate between time limits established by law or
convention and those established by the Ofﬁce. By way of example, several delegations observed that the
time limit for the payment of fees for the maintenance of industrial property rights should not be extensible
beyond what was prescribed by Article 5bis of the Paris Convention.96

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the
fourth session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Article 12 PLT was renumbered to
become Article 13 PLT and new Article 14 PLT was introduced.97 Article 13 PLT sets a minimum of
rights a PLT Contracting Party must extend to an applicant or owner in respect of a request for an extension
of a time limit established by the Ofﬁce whereas the extension of time limits established by national
legislation or regional treaty is regulated by Article 14 PLT.98 Article 13(1) PLT addresses the situation in
which an applicant or owner requests the extension of a time limit established by the Ofﬁce before that
time limit has expired whereas Article 13(2) PLT addresses the situation in which an applicant or owner
requests the extension of a time limit established by the Ofﬁce after that time limit has expired.99 Article
14 PLT sets a minimum of rights a PLT Contracting Party must extend to an applicant or owner concerned
in respect of a request for an extension of a time limit established by national legislation or under a treaty
providing for the grant of regional patents. Except in respect of intervening rights (Article 14(5) PLT), any

170

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

PLT Contracting Party would be free to be more liberal in granting such an extension. As in the case of
Article 13 PLT, it was be noted that Article 14 PLT deals with the time limit for an action before the Ofﬁce,
and not the time limit before a court.100

In the “Report” adopted by the Committee of Experts it was agreed that Article 13(2) PLT related to
restoration, not extension, and should be transferred to Article 14 PLT.101 In addition, a proposal by the
delegation of the United States of America that the concept “in spite of due care required by the
circumstances” be replaced by the concept “the failure to comply was unintentional” was approved.102
Relief in the form of “further processing” or restoration of rights may be available in the case where
the time limit to request extension of a time limit has expired.103 In particular, Article 14(1)(a) PLT was
introduced following the approval by the previous session of the Committee of Experts that a proposal
providing for “further processing” should generally be permitted on the mere basis of a request and the
payment of a fee.104 Further processing under this provision would be restricted to the cases in which an
application is to be, or has been, refused or considered withdrawn or abandoned following failure to
comply with a time limit ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce for an action before the Ofﬁce.105

In the “Report” adopted by the Committee of Experts, the Representative of the European Patent
Organization explained that it was intended to extend further processing under the European Patent
Convention (in view of the EPC 2000 Revision) to non-compliance with time limits established under that
Convention.106 Accordingly, it was agreed that the International Bureau would revise the corresponding
provisions.

Standing Committee on the Law of Patents
In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the ﬁrst
session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Article 13 PLT (“Extension of a time limit ﬁxed
by the Ofﬁce”) was restricted to requests for extension of a time limit ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce for an action in a
procedure before the Ofﬁce prior to the expiration of that time limit.107 Article 13(1) PLT provides for the
extension of a time limit as of right; in particular, the applicant or owner concerned could not be required to
state the grounds on which the request is based.108 Article 14 PLT provides that “further processing” of an
application should generally be permitted on the mere basis of a request and the payment of a fee.109 In
contrast to restoration of rights, a Contracting Party would not be permitted to restrict further processing to
those cases in which the failure to comply with the time limit occurred in spite of all due care or was
unintentional, so that there would be no requirement for a declaration or other evidence in this respect.110
Article 15 PLT provides for the restoration of rights in respect of an application or patent following
failure to comply with a time limit for an action before the Ofﬁce. However, restoration would be restricted
to those situations in which the failure of the time limit occurred in spite of all due care required by the
circumstances or was unintentional (Article 15(1)(iii) PLT).111

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the
second session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Articles 13, 14, 15 and 16 PLT were
renumbered to become Articles 10, 11, 12 and 13 PLT, respectively.112 In the corresponding “Notes” the
distinction between Articles 10, 11, 12 and 13 PLT was explained by the International Bureau:113
 Article 10 PLT provides for the extension of a time limit as of right, where the request for such extension

is made before the expiration of that time limit. It is limited to the extension of time limits ﬁxed by the
Ofﬁce for an action in a procedure before the Ofﬁce and is subject only to the payment of a fee.
Accordingly, the applicant or owner concerned could not be required to state the grounds on which the
request under Article 10 PLT is based.114
 In contrast, Articles 11 and 12 PLT apply where the request for relief is made after the expiration of the

time limit concerned. Article 11 PLT provides for the Ofﬁce to consider the time limit to have been

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

171

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

complied with, and to continue processing and re-instate any rights with respect to the application (or
patent), subject only to the payment of a fee, provided that the request is ﬁled, and the requirements in
respect of which the time limit applied are complied with in due time.115 As in the case of Article 10
PLT, Article 11 PLT is limited to the extension of time limits ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce for an action in a
procedure before the Ofﬁce.

 As in the case of Article 11, Article 12 PLT provides for the re-instatement of rights where the request is

made after the expiration of the time limits concerned. In contrast to Article 11 PLT, Article 12 PLT is
not restricted to time limits ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce but applies to any time limit in respect of which failure to
comply has the direct consequence of causing a loss of rights with respect to the application or patent
concerned.116
 Article 13 PLT provides for the addition of a priority claim (Article 13(1) PLT). In addition, Article 13

PLT provides for the restoration of a priority claim in the case of the delayed ﬁling of the subsequent
application (Article 13(2) PLT) or the failure to furnish a copy of the earlier application within the
prescribed time limit (Article 13(3) PLT). In order to avoid the possibility of double relief, the time
limits referred to in Article 13(1), (2) and (3)(a) PLT are expressly excluded in the exceptions under
Articles 10 to 12 PLT.117,115,116,117

Each of Articles 10 to 13 PLT sets the maximum standard, which a PLT Contracting Party may apply.
A PLT Contracting Party would be permitted, but is not obliged, to dispense with any requirement under
these Articles, or to apply any requirement or provide any relief which, from the viewpoint of applicants,
owners or other interested persons, is more favorable than the requirements or relief prescribed in these
Articles and associated Regulations.118

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the
third session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Article 10 PLT (“relief in respect of the
non-compliance with a time limit”) was reformulated to provide for relief in respect of the non-
compliance with a time limit ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce with regard to an application or a patent, without
specifying the form of relief.119 In particular, Article 10 PLT does not distinguish between extensions of
time limits ﬁled after the expiration of the un-extended time limit and remedies like continued processing,
which have the effect to reinstate the rights of the applicant or owner. It only obliges PLT Contracting
Parties to provide for at least one relief for applicants or owners in the case of a missed time limit, subject
only to a request and the payment of a fee.120.

In the “Report” of the third session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, the
basic concept of draft Article 10 PLT providing certain relief without specifying its mechanism was
supported in general.121 However, some delegations preferred to accommodate both requests ﬁled
before and after the expiration of the time limit. Based on the discussion, the International Bureau
presented a revised text of Article 10 PLT for consideration by the Committee, which reads as
follows:122

Article 10(1) (Extension of Time Limits)
A Contracting Party may provide for the extension, for the period prescribed in the Regulations, of a
time limit ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce for an action in a procedure before the Ofﬁce in respect of an application or a
patent, if a request to that effect is made to the Ofﬁce in accordance with the requirements prescribed in
the Regulations, and the request is made, at the option of the Contracting Party:

(a) prior to the expiration of the time limit; or
(b) after the expiration of the time limit, and within the time limit prescribed in the Regulations.

Article 10(2) (Continued Processing)

172

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

Where an applicant or owner has failed to comply with a time limit ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce of a Contracting
Party for an action in a procedure before the Ofﬁce in respect of an application or a patent, and that
Contracting Party does not provide for extension of a time limit under paragraph (1)(ii), the Contracting
Party shall (notify the applicant or owner, and) provide for continued processing with respect to the
application or patent and, if necessary, re-instatement of the rights of the applicant or owner with respect
to that application or patent, if:

(i) a request to that effect is made to the Ofﬁce in accordance with the requirements prescribed in the

Regulations;

(ii) the request is made, and all of the requirements in respect of which the time limit for the action

concerned applied are complied with, within the time limit prescribed in the Regulations.

The above text of Article 10 PLT is a combination of the earlier Articles 10 and 11 PLT and is already
relatively close to the text adopted during the Diplomatic Conference. As regards Article 10(1) PLT,
several delegations supported the text suggested by the International Bureau; other Representatives were
in favor of replacing “may” by “shall.”123

Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the PLT
In the Draft Proposal submitted to the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty
submitted by the Director General of WIPO, Article 10 PLT on “Relief in respect of time limits” was
renumbered to become Article 11 PLT and Article 13 PLT on “Re-instatement of rights after a ﬁnding of
due care or unintentionality by the Ofﬁce” was renumbered to become Article 12 PLT.124

During the meetings at the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty, the
requirements for extension of time limits were extensively discussed. A delegation asked whether a PLT
Contracting Party was obliged to provide for the extension of time limits even though Article 11(1) PLT
was a “may” provision. A representative of the WIPO referred to Article 11(2) PLT according to which a
PLT Contracting Party that did not provide for the extension of time limits after the expiration of the time
limit (Article 11(1)(ii) PLT), would be obliged to provide for continued processing.125 A representative of
the European Patent Organization said that Article 11(2) PLT was the core provision of the whole Article,
making it mandatory to provide for relief of missed time limits, either in form of an extension of the time
limit requested after its expiry, or through continued processing.126-127

With respect to Article 12 PLT, a Representative of WIPO explained that Article 12 PLT provided for
the re-instatement of rights after a ﬁnding of due care or unintentionally by the Ofﬁce. In contrast to Article
11 PLT, Article 12 PLT was not limited to time limits ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce, but applied to any time limit for
an action in a procedure before the Ofﬁce. It also only dealt with time limits where failure to comply had
the direct consequence of causing loss of rights with respect to an application or patent.128

Conclusion
From the above overview of the negotiations, it can be concluded that Articles 11 and 12 PLT regulate
minimum requirements for relief in respect of time limits and reinstatement of rights. However, the
formulations chosen in Article 11 PLT in relation to extension of time limits and the provision of
continued processing are a typical compromise while accommodating the common practice before the US
Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO) and the European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO). The EPO allows extension
of ofﬁce time limits (see Rule 132 EPC “Periods speciﬁed by the European Patent Ofﬁce”) if requested
before the expiry of the time limit and allows applicants to request continued processing when the time
limit is overrun (see Article 121 and Rule 135 EPC “Further processing of the European patent
application”). On the other hand, the USPTO allows applicants to request extension of time limits after

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

173

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

expiry of the time limit. Both options were accommodated in the PLT by inserting the formulation “may
require” into Article 11(1) PLT. Article 11(2) PLT contains a “shall,” but this comes into effect only if the
“may require” extension of time limits after expiry of the time limit (Article 11(1)(ii) PLT) is not provided
in the national law.

Article 12 PLT is also a compromise because no choice was made between whether and, if so,
how much argumentation is required upon requesting re-instatement of rights. For a request for re-
instatement to be successful, the EPO requires that the applicant for or proprietor of a European patent
proves “all due care required by the circumstance” (see Article 122 and Rule 136 EPC “Re-establishment
of rights”) whereas before the USPTO it is sufﬁcient that the delay was “unintentional.” Again this
introduces too much freedom for PLT Contracting Parties when implementing requirements of the PLT
into their national and regional patent laws and is contrary to the aim of harmonization and streamlining of
the PLT.

Restoration of Priority Right

Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty
In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the ﬁrst
session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, there was no article on restoration of the
priority right.129 In the “Report” adopted by the Committee of Experts, a number of delegations favored,
amongst other things, the inclusion in the PLT of provisions relating to restoration of rights.130

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at
the third session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, there was a new Article 13
PLT “Belated claiming of priority”.131 This provision was modeled after Article 7 of the Basic
Proposal submitted to the 1991 Diplomatic Conference in relation to the “Patent Harmonization
Treaty”.132

Article 13(1) PLT addresses the situation in which an application which could claim the priority of an
earlier application does not, when ﬁled, contain such a claim. The paragraph allows the claiming of
priority in a separate declaration ﬁled later than the application. This is permissible since the Paris
Convention does not require that the priority claim (“the declaration” containing the priority claim,
according to the terminology of Article 4D(1) of that Convention) be contained in the subsequent
application itself.133 Article 13(2) PLT provides for the restoration of the priority right where a subsequent
application is ﬁled after, but within 2 months from, the date on which the priority period expired. It applies
only where the failure to ﬁle the application within the priority period occurred in spite of all due care
required by the circumstances having been taken.134

In the meantime, the WIPO General Assembly and the Assembly of the Paris Union (meeting in
September/October 1996) considering a Memorandum by the Director General in respect of Matters
Concerning the Patent Law Treaty, decided, amongst others, to include provisions relating to the belated
claiming of priority (delayed submission of priority claim and delayed ﬁling of the subsequent
application) in the draft PLT.135

In the subsequent “Report” adopted by the Committee of Experts, the basic concept of draft Article 13

PLT was supported in general.136

In the fourth session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Article 13 PLT on
“Belated claiming of priority” was renumbered to become Article 15 PLT.137 In the “Report” adopted by
the Committee of Experts, the delegation of France asked whether, under Article 15(2)(a) PLT, the
priority period would be extended to 14 months or would remain a 12-month period subject to possible
restoration and, in the latter case, whether third party rights would be recognized.138 The International
Bureau replied that the priority period would remain a 12-month period and that third party rights would
not be recognized in case of restoration.

174

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

In the ﬁfth session of the Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, the title of Article 15 PLT
was amended to become: “Addition and restoration of priority claim.”139 As before, Article 15(1) PLT
addresses the situation in which an application which could claim the priority of an earlier application does
not, when ﬁled, contain such a priority claim.140 Article 15(2) PLT provides for the restoration of the
priority right where a subsequent application is ﬁled after, but within 2 months, from the expiration of the
priority period. It was noted again that the priority period, namely the 12-month period under Article 4C(1)
of the Paris Convention, would not be extended.141 Article 15(3) PLT provides a remedy for the applicant
where his right of priority is lost because of the failure on the part of the Ofﬁce with which the earlier
application was ﬁled to provide a copy of that application in time for the applicant to comply with the
prescribed time limit, despite a timely request for that copy having been made.142 A new paragraph (5) was
added to Article 15 PLT allowing a PLT Contracting Party to levy a fee in relation to Article 15(1), (2) or
(3) PLT to be paid to its Ofﬁce.

Standing Committee on the Law of Patents
In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the ﬁrst
session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Article 15 PLT on “Addition and restoration of
priority claim” was renumbered to become Article 16 PLT.143

Article 16(1) PLT in relation of the addition of a priority claim is modeled after a portion of PCT Rule
26bis.1.144,145 Article 16(2) PLT in relation to restoration of the priority was amended to include that the
failure to furnish that application within the priority period occurred either in spite of all due care required
by the circumstances having been taken, or, at
the option of the PLT Contracting Party, was
unintentional.146

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the
second session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Article 16 PLT was renumbered to
become Article 13 PLT. In the corresponding “Notes” the scope of Articles 13 PLT in relation to Articles
10-12 PLT was explained by the International Bureau (also see Standing Committee on the Law of Patents
Section): Article 13 PLT provides for the addition of a priority claim (Article 13(1) PLT). In addition,
Article 13 PLT provides for the restoration of a priority claim in the case of the delayed ﬁling of the
subsequent application (Article 13(2) PLT) or the failure to furnish a copy of the earlier application within
the prescribed time limit (Article 13(3) PLT).

In the “Draft PLT and Draft Regulations” prepared by the International Bureau and presented at the
third session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, there were only minor amendment to Article
13 PLT on “Correction, addition or restoration of priority claim.”147 Later on, the title was amended to read:
“Correction or addition of priority claim; restoration of priority right.”148 In the “Report” of the third
session of the Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, only minor amendments were proposed and
adopted. Amongst others, the word “may” in the chapeau of Article 13(1) PLT was changed into “shall.”149

Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the PLT
With respect to Article 13 PLT in the Draft Proposal submitted to the Diplomatic Conference for the
Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty submitted by the Director General of WIPO, a representative of the
WIPO explained Article 13 PLT comprised three provisions relating to priority claims, all of which were
intended to be very user-friendly.150,151 The remedy of Article 13(1) PLT already existed under the PCT in
Rule 26bis.1. With respect to Article 13(2) PLT, the Representative of WIPO explained that this paragraph
provided for the restoration of the priority right where the application claiming priority was not received
by the Ofﬁce until after the expiration of the 12-month priority period. It did not provide for an extension
of the priority period provided for under the Paris Convention and the provision would apply only after the
expiration of that period.152

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

175

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

With respect to Article 13(3) PLT, the Representative of WIPO noted that it was intended to address
the situation where the applicant requested a copy of the earlier application on which the priority claim
was based, but as a result of delays in the Ofﬁce with which the earlier application had been ﬁled, he did not
receive it in time to comply with the period for ﬁling that application, which was typically 16 months.153

Conclusion
From the above overview of the negotiations, it can be concluded that Article 13 PLT regulates minimum
requirements for the correction or addition of a priority claim (Article 13(1) PLT), the restoration of a
priority claim in the case of the delayed ﬁling of the subsequent application (Article 13(2) PLT) or the
failure to furnish a copy of the earlier application within the prescribed time limit (Article 13(3) PLT).
Article 13(1) PLT was copied into the PLT based on PCT Rule 26bis.1 which functions well.
However, Article 13(2) PLT is again (see Conclusion in Restoration of Priority Right Section) a
compromise between different viewpoints of the delegations, because no choice was made between
whether and, if so, how much argumentation is required upon requesting restoration of the priority right.
For a request for restoration to be successful, the EPO requires that the applicant for or proprietor of a
European patent proves all due care required by the circumstance whereas before the USPTO it is
sufﬁcient that the delay was unintentional. Again this introduces too much freedom for PLT Contracting
Parties when implementing requirements of the PLT into their national and regional patent laws and is
contrary to the aim of harmonization and streamlining of the PLT.

Guidance by WIPO
The WIPO is a specialized agency of the United Nations.154 It is dedicated to developing a balanced and
accessible international intellectual property system.155

During the negotiation process of the PLT, the WIPO played an active role by preparing the draft texts
of the PLT and its Regulations, looking for compromises and seeking political agreement between the
interests of the various States.

As the conclusion of the PLT, the involvement of the WIPO has diminished, because there are no
centralized functions. The International Bureau of WIPO merely acts as depository of the PLT and is not in
a position to give an ofﬁcial interpretation of the Treaty; as such interpretation is the exclusive competence
of the PLT Contracting Parties.

The International Bureau has issued a set of Explanatory Notes on the PLT and Regulations under the
PLT; the Notes have not been adopted by the Diplomatic Conference.156 These Notes are helpful in
understanding the meaning of the PLT. However, these texts are based on the Notes prepared by the
International Bureau of WIPO in preparation for the meetings of the Committee of Experts on the Patent
Law Treaty and the SCP, which are sometimes difﬁcult to understand, if one has not followed the
developments during the negotiation process.

In order to stimulate the electronic distribution of draft modiﬁcations in the Treaty and the submission
of comments and observations, a PLT Web Forum was established following a decision of the PLT
Assembly at its ﬁrst session.157,158 The PLT Web Forum is intended to be used for consultations prior to the
meetings of the PLT Assembly.159

As the PLT is a mix of compulsory requirements (“shall”) and optional requirements which may
be implemented as compulsory (“may require”) by a PLT Contracting Party, a lot of choices need be
made when implementing the PLT into the national/regional patent law of an aspirant PLT Contracting
Party.160

In 2010 a Questionnaire was established and placed on the PLT Web Forum to collect information
from the PLT Contracting Parties on how the PLT is implemented at the national/regional level, and to

176

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

share such information with current and future PLT Contracting Parties, as well as with patent
practitioners and the public.161 The Questionnaire encompasses eleven categories of questions, amongst
which are the following ones:

 Question 1 - Filing date (Article 5 and Rule 2 PLT);
 Question 4 - Relief in respect of time limits (Article 11 and Rule 12 PLT);
 Question 5 - Reinstatement of Rights (Article 12 and Rule 13 PLT);
 Question 6 - Restoration of priority rights where the ﬁling of the subsequent application was delayed
 Question 7 - Restoration of priority rights where the ﬁling of a copy of the earlier application was

(Article 13(2) and Rule 14(4) and (5) PLT);

delayed (Article 13(3) and Rule 14(6) PLT).

Most of these Questions are split into a number of sub-questions. By way of example, three of the six

sub-questions of Question 1 read as follows:

Q1-2

Q1-5

Q1-6

Does your Office accept a drawing as the element referred to as “a part which on the face of it
appears to be a description” in Article 5(1)(a)(iii) PLT? (Reference: Article 5(1)(b) PLT).
For the filing date to be determined under Article 5(6)(b) PLT (filing of a missing part of the
description or a missing drawing), which of the optional elements referred to in Rule 2(4) PLT
are required by your Office? (Reference: Rule 2(4) PLT).
For a reference to a previously filed application to replace the description and any drawing for
the purpose of the filing date under Article 5(7) PLT, which of the requirements referred to in
Rule 2(5) PLT are required by your Office? (Reference: Rule 2(5) PLT)

A number of PLT Contracting Parties have posted answers to the Questionnaire.162 From the
responses a large variety of choices can be observed. With respect to Q1-2 (Is a “drawing” accepted as a
“description?”), 10 PLT Contracting Parties answered “Yes,” 14 “No” and one Party answered: “This is
something we would consider on a case by case basis if and when it arose.” 163

With respect to Q1-5 (“ﬁling missing parts of the description or missing drawings”) six sub-questions
have to be answered in relation to “which of the optional elements referred to in PLT Rule 2(4) are
required by your Ofﬁce?”. 164

Question Q1-5

(a) A copy of the earlier application
(b) A copy of the earlier application and its filing date, certified as correct
(c) A translation of the earlier application
(d) The missing part of the description or missing drawing must be completely

contained in the earlier application

(e) The application must contain an indication that the contents of the earlier

application were incorporated by reference

(f) An indication as to where the missing part of the description or the missing

drawing is contained in the earlier application or in the translation

Yes

No

20
8
15
17

10

9

3
15
8
6

13

14

With respect to Q1-6 (“ﬁling by reference”) ﬁve sub-questions have to be answered in relation to

“which of the requirements referred to in PLT Rule 2(5) are required by your Ofﬁce?” 165

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

177

Cees Mulder

Question Q1-6

(a) The reference to a previously filed application must indicate the filing date of

the previously filed application

(b) A copy of the previously filed application
(c) A copy of the previously filed application, certified as correct
(d) A translation of the previously filed application
(e) The reference mentioned in PLT Article 5(7)(a) shall be to a previously filed

application that has been filed by the applicant or his predecessor or
successor in title

Patent Law Treaty

Yes

16

17
7
15
11

No

6

5
15
7
11

From the above comparison, it can be concluded that when a country considers becoming a
Contracting Party to the PLT, studying the responses to the Questionnaire is not very helpful in making
choices.

When asked, the WIPO provides assistance to an aspirant PLT Contracting Party. This assistance is
given bilaterally on a case-by-case basis, depending on the circumstances of the country concerned.
Example texts can be employed as a guidance on how the requirements of the PLT can be implemented in
the national/regional law. However, these texts have no ofﬁcial status.

Two examples are given here. The ﬁrst example of a textual suggestion relates to the requirements for
the accordance of a ﬁling date (Article 5 PLT). Such an Article could be formulated in the national law as
follows:166

“Filing date of the Application

1. The accordance of the ﬁling date of an application shall require that on such a date the application

ﬁled with the Institution contains:

(a) an express indication that the grant of a patent is applied for;
(b) information identifying the applicant or allowing the applicant to be contacted; and
(c) a part which on the face of it appears to be a description, or reference to a previously ﬁled

application.

2. A reference to a previously ﬁled application under paragraph 1(c) shall state the ﬁling date and
number of that application and the Ofﬁce with which that application was ﬁled. The reference shall
indicate that it replaces the description for the purpose of the ﬁling date.

3. Where the application contains a reference under paragraph 2, a copy of the previously ﬁled
application shall be ﬁled within two months from the date on which the application containing the
reference was received by the Institute. Where the previously ﬁled application is not in one of the
ofﬁcial languages of (), a translation thereof shall be ﬁled within the same period.”

The second example relates to the remedy of “continued processing.” With respect to providing
relieve in respect of time limits, a PLT Contracting Party may provide for the extension of a time limit
ﬁxed by the Ofﬁce for an action in a procedure before the Ofﬁce, if a request to that effect is made to the
Ofﬁce in accordance with the requirements prescribed in the Regulations, and the request is ﬁled, at the
option of the Contracting Party either prior to the expiration of the time limit, or after the expiration of the
time limit (Article 11(1) and Rule 12(1) PLT). In principle, the PLT does not oblige a PLT Contracting
Party to impose continued processing. However, the relief is mandatory if it is not allowed to ﬁle the
request for an extension of a time limit after the expiration of the time limit (Article 11(2) and Rule 12(3)
and (4) PLT). This implies that if a PLT Contracting Party chooses that the request for the extension of the
time limit can only be ﬁled before the expiration thereof, providing continued processing is mandatory, but

178

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

if a giving country allows that the request for extension can be ﬁled after the expired time limit (but within
a certain period of time; Rule 12(2)(b) PLT), there is no need providing for continued processing
provisions. On the other hand, if the national law of a PLT Contracting Party (already) has a provision on
continued processing, it is not mandatory to provide for the extension of time limits (see the wording “may
provide for the extension” in the chapeau of Article 11(1) PLT).

A textual suggestion in relation to providing “continued processing” in the patent law of a PLT

Contracting Party reads as follows:

1) If the applicant for a patent has failed to perform an act in the course of the procedure before the
Institute within a time limit prescribed by this Law (or the Regulations), the direct result of which is a
loss of rights conferred by a patent application, he may ﬁle a request for the continued processing. The
Institute shall allow the continued processing, provided that the applicant:

(a) ﬁles a request for the continued processing, and performs all the omitted acts within a time limit

referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article;

(b) pays the fee and procedural charges in accordance with Article () of this Law.

2) A time limit for ﬁling a request and for the performance of the omitted acts referred to in paragraph 1

of this Article shall be two months from the notiﬁcation to the applicant or holder of a patent.

3) If the omitted acts have not been performed within a time limit referred to in paragraph 2 of this
Article, or if the fees and procedural charges referred to in Article () of this Law have not been paid, a
request for the continued processing shall be considered as not ﬁled, and the Institute shall issue a
conclusion to that effect.

4) A request for the continued processing shall not be ﬁled in the case of failure to comply with a time

limit:

(a) referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article,
(b) (…)
(c) for performing all the acts in the appeal procedure,
(d) for actions in inter partes proceedings.

5) The content of the request, the conditions and the procedure concerning the request referred to in

paragraph 1 of this Article shall be regulated more speciﬁcally by the Implementing Regulations.

An aspirant PLT Contracting Party is, of course, entirely free to make its own choices when
implementing the PLT in its national/regional patent law. Nevertheless, it is believed that such textual
suggestions are very helpful in understanding and illustrating the scope of the PLT and would stimulate a
more uniform implementation of the PLT in national/regional patent laws. A more active role of the WIPO
would be welcomed in this respect.

Discussion

Since the continuation of the 1991 Diplomatic Conference in The Hague on the harmonization of the
substantive provisions of patent laws had become impossible in view of the position taken by the
delegation of the United States of America,167 the WIPO incited new negotiations in 1995 which
eventually resulted in the adoption of the PLT during a Diplomatic Conference held in Geneva in 2000.
The resulting PLT focuses on the harmonization of patent formalities with the aim of stimulating
uniformity, simpliﬁcation and cost reduction within the international patent system.

During the negotiation process, a number of provisions in the PLT were modeled after texts of
Articles already contained in the Basic Proposal submitted to the 1991 Diplomatic Conference in relation
to the “Patent Harmonization Treaty.”168 In addition, many proposals to amend the Draft Articles and

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

179

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

Draft Regulations under the PLT were brought forward by the delegations in order to accommodate the
local practice in their home countries. If no agreement could be reached on the implementation of such a
requirement, often the desired amendment was incorporated in the PLT but without prescribing that this
was mandatory. As a consequence, the PLT contains a mix of compulsory requirements (“shall”) and
optional requirements which may be implemented as compulsory (“may require”) by a PLT Contracting
Party. Such diversity of requirements is counterproductive with respect to achieving the goal of the PLT to
“streamline and harmonize” formal requirements set by national and regional Patent Ofﬁces for the ﬁling
of national or regional patent applications,
the maintenance of patents and certain additional
requirements.169

From studying the documents relating to the negotiation history of the PLT, it can be inferred that the
role of the WIPO in the negotiation process resulting in the PLT was more of a facilitating nature than
aimed at obtaining a Treaty that encompasses mainly compulsory requirements. The inclusion of optional
requirements should only have been allowed in a limited number of exceptional cases. On the other hand,
it can be understood that the desire to reach an agreement on a PLT often made it necessary to bridge
differences; this was not always possible, and this is one of the reasons why there are so many alternative
routes in the PLT.

By allowing too much freedom in relation to the fundamental requirements of the PLT has resulted in
a fallible Treaty. This conclusion becomes the more evident from studying the answers posted by a
number of PLT Contracting Parties to the Questionnaire on the PLT Web Forum.170 The large variety of
choices deﬁes any striving to “streamline and harmonize” formal requirements.

In principle, there are two ways in solving these fundamental problems of the PLT. One option to
make the PLT more coherent is to amend the Treaty in a comprehensive manner. As a ﬁrst step, the
Regulations under the PLT could be made more restrictive by deleting the majority of the “may require”
formulations and/or by reformulating them into obligatory (“shall”) requirements. Amending the PLT
Rules does not require a Revision Conference. Whether consensus can be reached on these amendments is
questionable, in particular, because a number of PLT Contracting Parties has already amended their
national or regional law in view of the PLT as concluded in 2000.

Another option would be to re-open negotiations in relation to the “Treaty Supplementing the Paris
Convention as far as Patents are Concerned.” This could work because the objections by one of the major
Contracting Parties have recently been overcome.171-172

By not changing anything in the PLT, the Contracting Parties will continue to implement the PLT into
their national law. This will result in less harmonization and streamlining in patent laws than before the
adoption of the PLT.

Conclusion

When the PLT was negotiated in the nineties of the previous century, the emphasis was on making the
ﬁling of a patent application as simple and user-friendly as possible. Inventors and small business
enterprises were afforded easy access to ﬁling a patent application. The requirements for the accordance of
a ﬁling date were reduced to an absolute minimum, rendering it practically impossible to miss this date. As
a consequence, procedures had to be put in place at the (receiving) Ofﬁces allowing the applicant to meet
additional requirements (such as furnishing a set of claims) at a later stage. All this laid a heavy
administrative burden on the Ofﬁces which have to deal with such applications.

In the present time, the focus of the national Ofﬁces and intergovernmental organizations dealing with
national and regional patent applications, is moving away from the needs of the applicants to issues such as
how to deal with huge numbers of patent applications in a more efﬁcient manner. Therefore, the
procedural requirements of the PLT are regarded as counterproductive to achieving that objective.

180

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

Perhaps this is also one of the reasons why accession to the PLT of countries and intergovernmental
organizations, such as the European Patent Organization, takes place at a slow pace.173

In view of the above, the following conclusions can be formulated:

(1) The PLT did not achieve the goal of streamlining and harmonizing formal requirements set by
national or regional Patent Ofﬁces for the ﬁling of national or regional patent applications and the
maintenance of patents.

(2) The PLT contains too many optional requirements, which may be implemented as compulsory (“may
require”) by PLT Contracting Parties, allowing them too much freedom when implementing
requirements of the PLT into their national and regional patent laws. This deﬁes the aim of
harmonization and streamlining of the PLT. A solution to make the PLT more coherent would be to
amend the PLT Rules in making them more restrictive.

(3) The WIPO could play a more active role in issuing instructions and guidelines on how to implement
the PLT in national and regional patent laws. A preferred manner of implementing the PLT could be
advocated.

(4) The provision in the PLT allowing an applicant to ﬁle a missing part of the description or a missing
drawing based on content which is “completely contained” in an earlier application from which
priority is claimed, while maintaining the originally accorded ﬁling date, is a powerful tool because it
permits an applicant to complete his application without losing his priority claim.

(5) The obligation of a PLT Contracting State to provide for relief in respect of time limits either by means
of providing an extension of the time limit or by providing continued processing is one of the major
achievements of the PLT.

(6) The obligation of a PLT Contracting State to provide for restoration of priority rights is a powerful
instrument to rectify mistakes in relation to priority claims allowing applicants to counteract the
unintentional loss of such rights.

About the Author
Cees Mulder is a European Patent Attorney and a Lecturer in Intellectual Property Law at the Department
of International and European Law at the Faculty of Law of Maastricht University (NL). Helze 1, NL-5662
JE Geldrop, The Netherlands; e-mail: cees.mulder@helze.com

Notes

1. Patent Law Treaty, WIPO Publication No. 258(E). See http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/plt/ (Accessed

October 2014).

2. Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, WIPO Publication No. 351(E). See http://www.

wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/paris/ (Accessed October 2014).

3. At present, the European Patent Organization is not a Contracting Party to the Patent Law Treaty. The option for
Intergovernmental Organizations to become Party to the PLT was created in Article 20(2) PLT. In addition, the
European Patent Organization is explicitly mentioned in Article 20(3) and Article 26 PLT as one of the Regional
Patent Organizations that may become Party to the PLT. In the Basic Proposal for the Revision of the European
Patent Convention (issued in preparation of the Revision Conference in November 2000), the European Patent
Organization indicated its wish to become a Contracting Party to the PLT. “Basic Proposal for the Revision of
the European Patent Convention”; Document MR/2/00, Travaux Pre´ paratoires to the EPC 2000; comment in

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

181

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

relation to Article 80 EPC. See: http://www.epo.org/law-practice/legal-texts/archive/documentation/travaux-
preparatoires.html (Accessed October 2014).

4. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of a Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as
far as Patents are Concerned - Volume I: First Part of the Diplomatic Conference - The Hague, 1991”, WIPO
Publication No. 351(E).

5. “The Situation Concerning the Patent Law Treaty (PLT)” (memorandum of the International Bureau),
Consultative Meeting for the further preparation of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of the Patent
Law Treaty, Document PLT/CM/2 (March 1995), Items 4 and 7.

6. “Report” (adopted by the Assembly), Assembly of the International Union for the Protection of Industrial

Property (Paris Union), Document P/A/XXII/2 (October 1994).

7. Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/topic.jsp?group_id¼53
8. Standing Committee on the Law of Patents. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/topic.jsp?group_id¼

(Accessed October 2014).

9. Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/topic.

61&items¼30 (Accessed October 2014).
jsp?group_id¼136 (Accessed October 2014).

10. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty (Geneva, 2000)”, WIPO

Publication No 327(E).

11. PLT Contracting Parties. See http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ShowResults.jsp?lang¼en&treaty_id¼4 (Ac-

cessed October 2014). On December 18, 2013, the PLT entered into force for the United States of America
thereby becoming the 36th Contracting Party.

12. “Agreed Statements by the Diplomatic Conference regarding the Patent Law Treaty and the Regulations under
the Patent Law Treaty” (adopted by the Diplomatic Conference on June 1, 2000). See http://www.wipo.int/

treaties/en/text.jsp?ﬁle_id¼289482 (Accessed October 2014).

13. “Basic Features to the Patent Law Treaty” (prepared by the Secretariat) (November 2006), Item 3. See http://

www.wipo.int/patent-law/en/pdf/plt_features.pdf (Accessed October 2014).

14. “Report” (adopted by the Standing Committee), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/3/
(Accessed

http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼3824

1999). See

(September

11
October 2014).

15. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/2/4

(February 1999). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼3713 (Accessed October

2014).

16. “Basic Features to the Patent Law Treaty (PLT)” (prepared by the International Bureau; November 2006).
17. “The Patent Law Treaty (PLT)” in the WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook: Policy, Law and Use - Chapter 5:
“International Treaties and Conventions on Intellectual Property”, items 5.398-5.423 (WIPO Publication No.
489). See http://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/iprm/ (Accessed October 2014).

18. “Basic Features to the Patent Law Treaty (PLT)” (prepared by the International Bureau; November 2006).
19. “Explanatory Notes on the Patent Law Treaty and Regulations under the Patent Law Treaty adopted by the
Diplomatic Conference on June 1, 2000” (prepared by the International Bureau), Diplomatic Conference for the
Adoption of the PLT, Document PT/DC/48 Prov. (November 2000), Note 11.01. See http://www.wipo.int/
export/sites/www/scp/en/meetings/pt_dc/pdf/pt_dc_48p1.pdf (Accessed October 2014). Also see http://www.
wipo.int/patent-law/en/plt.htm (Accessed October 2014).

20. PCT Rule 26bis.1 allows an applicant to correct or add a priority claim, on or after the ﬁling date, to an
application which could have claimed the priority of an earlier application but did not do so. PCT Rule 26bis.1
was introduced in the PCT on July 1, 1998.

21. Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/topic.jsp?group_id¼53

(Accessed October 2014).

182

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

22. Standing Committee on the Law of Patents. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/topic.jsp?group_id¼61&

items¼30 (Accessed October 2014).

23. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty (Geneva, 2000)”, WIPO

Publication No 327(E), pp. 262-568.

24. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of a Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as
far as Patents are Concerned - Volume I: First Part of the Diplomatic Conference - The Hague, 1991”, WIPO
Publication No. 351(E).

25. Recently, an e-version of the Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law
Treaty (Geneva, 2000) was made available on the ftp website of WIPO.See ftp://ftp.wipo.int/pub/library/
ebooks/Internationalconferences-recordsproceedings/wipo_pub_327e.pdf (Accessed October 2014).

26. Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meet-

27. Standing Committee on the Law of Patents. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/topic.jsp?group_id¼61&

ing_id¼3286 (Accessed October 2014).
items¼30 (Accessed October 2014).
details.jsp?meeting_id¼4057 (Accessed October 2014). Many of the early documents are not electronically

28. “Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty”. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/

available but can, on request, be obtained from the WIPO.

29. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty (Geneva, 2000)”, WIPO

Publication No 327(E).

30. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of a Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as
far as Patents are Concerned - Volume I: First Part of the Diplomatic Conference - The Hague, 1991”, WIPO
Publication No. 351(E).

31. On January 24, 1994, the International Bureau was informed, through a press release of the Department of
Commerce of the United States of America, “that the United States would not seek to resume negotiations of a
treaty harmonizing the world’s patent laws at this time. While other international negotiations continue, we will
maintain our ﬁrst-to-invent system while keeping open the option of full patent harmonization in the future”. See
“The Situation Concerning the Patent Law Treaty (PLT)” (memorandum of the International Bureau),
Consultative Meeting for the further preparation of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of the Patent
Law Treaty, Document PLT/CM/2 (March 1995), Item 7.

32. “Report” (adopted by the Assembly), Assembly of the International Union for the Protection of Industrial

Property (Paris Union), Document P/A/XXII/2 (October 1994).

33. “The Situation Concerning the Patent Law Treaty (PLT)” (memorandum of the International Bureau),
Consultative Meeting for the further preparation of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of the Patent
Law Treaty, Document PLT/CM/2 (March 1995).

34. “Report” (adopted by the Consultative Meeting), Consultative Meeting for the further preparation of the

Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CM/4 (May 1995).

35. WIPO General Assembly, Meeting WO/GA/XVI (September 25 to October 3, 1995). See http://www.wipo.int/

meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼2688 (Accessed October 2014). The documents are not electronically available.

36. International Union for the Protection of Industrial Property (Paris Union) Assembly, Meeting P/A/XXIII

(September 25 to October 3, 1995).

37. See e.g. “Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty - Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts),
Document PLT/CE/II/5 (June 1996), Item 12: “The delegation of the United States of America recalled its
opening remarks made in the ﬁrst session of the Committee of Experts and stated that it was still not in a position
to discuss substantive patent law harmonization.”

38. Ibid, Item 12: “The distinction between formal and substantive matters was important. In this regard, the
delegation expressed its concern over inclusion of the new Article on unity of invention as a substantive
requirement that was not appropriate for inclusion in this Treaty directed to formalities.”

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

183

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

39. “Assembly of the Member States of WIPO - General Report” (adopted by the Assemblies of the Member States),

Document A/32/7 (March 1998). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/doc_details.jsp?doc_id¼778 (Accessed

October 2014).

40. “Organizational Matters and Overview of the Issues to be Considered by the Standing Committee on the Law of
Patents” (Memorandum prepared by the International Bureau), Document SCP/1/2 (May 1998). See http://

www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼3462 (Accessed October 2014).

41. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of a Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as
far as Patents are Concerned - Volume I: First Part of the Diplomatic Conference - The Hague, 1991”, WIPO
Publication No. 351(E).

42. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts

on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/I/2 (October 1995).

43. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/I/4 (October 1995), Item 2.01.

44. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document
PLT/CE/I/5 (December 1995), see e.g. Items 14 (Canada), 27 (Switzerland), 37 (EPO) and 193 (Chairman).
45. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts

on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/II/2 (April 1996).

46. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of a Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as
far as Patents are Concerned - Volume I: First Part of the Diplomatic Conference - The Hague, 1991”, WIPO
Publication No. 351(E), Article 8 “Filing Date”.

47. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/II/3 (April 1996), Item 3.01.

48. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/II/5 (June 1996), see e.g. Items 15 (Switzerland), 16 (Canada), 28 (EPO).

49. Ibid, Items 162-163.
50. Ibid, Item 164 .
51. “Selected Provisions of the Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International

Bureau), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/III/2 (September 1996).

52. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of a Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as
far as Patents are Concerned - Volume I: First Part of the Diplomatic Conference - The Hague, 1991”, WIPO
Publication No. 351(E), Article 8 “Filing Date”.

53. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/III/6 (November 1996), Item 63.

54. Ibid, Item 64.
55. Ibid, Item 65.
56. Ibid, Item 66.
57. Ibid, Item 67.
58. Meeting of the Assembly of the Paris Union: September 23 to October 2, 1996 (Geneva).
59. “Scope of the Patent Law Treaty” (Memorandum by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the

Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/III/5 (October 1996).

60. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts

on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/IV/2 (April 1997).

61. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/IV/4 (June 1997), Item 62.

62. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts
on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/V/2 (October 1997). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/

details.jsp?meeting_id¼3286 (Accessed October 2014).

184

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

63. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/V/3 (October 1997), Item 4.23. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼3286

(Accessed October 2014).

64. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee
on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/1/3 (April 1998). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?

meeting_id¼3462 (Accessed October 2014).

65. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/1/4

(April 1998), Item 4.27.

66. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee
on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/2/3 (February 1999). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?

meeting_id¼3713 (Accessed October 2014).

67. “Draft Article 4(5bis) and draft Rule 2(2)” (Proposal by the delegation of Australia), Standing Committee on
the Law of Patents, Document SCP/2/9 (April 1999). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?

meeting_id¼3713 (Accessed October 2014).

68. “Draft Article 4(5bis) and draft Rule 2(2)” (Suggestion of the International Bureau, based on the Proposal by the
delegation of Australia in document SCP/2/9), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/2/
9bis (April 1999).

69. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee

on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/3/2 (June 1999).

70. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/3/3

(June 1999), Item R2.07 (proposal by the delegation of the United States of America).

71. Ibid, Item 27.
72. “Basic Proposal for the Patent Law Treaty” (submitted by the Director General of WIPO), Diplomatic
Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty, Document PT/DC/3 (November 1999). See http://www.

wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼4057 (Accessed October 2014).

73. “Results of the 28th (16th Extraordinary) Session of the PCT Assembly, March 13 to 17, 2000; Issues for possible
Discussion at the Diplomatic Conference” (prepared by the International Bureau), Diplomatic Conference for
the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty, Document PT/DC/6 (April 2000).

74. Ibid, Item 33.
75. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 9th session (Friday, May 19,
2000, morning); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law (Geneva,
2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Item 701.

76. Ibid, Item 706.
77. Ibid, Item 705.
78. Ibid, Item 718.
79. Ibid, Item 718.
80. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 10th session (Friday, May 19,
2000, afternoon); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law
(Geneva, 2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Item 731.

81. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 11th session (Friday, May 19,
2000, evening); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law (Geneva,
2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Item 811.

82. Ibid, Item 806.
83. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 19th session (Wednesday,
May 24, 2000, evening); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law
(Geneva, 2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Item 1861.

84. Ibid, Item 1861.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

185

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

85. Ibid, Item 1867.
86. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 20h session (Thursday,
May 25, 2000, morning); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law
(Geneva, 2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Item 1944.

87. Ibid, Item 1960.
88. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts

on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/I/2 (October 1995).

89. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/I/5 (December 1995), Items 46 (Japan), 205 (France and AIPPI).

90. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts

on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/III/2 (September 1996).

91. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/III/3 (September 1996), Item 12.01.

92. Ibid, Item 12.02.
93. Ibid, Item 12.05.
94. “Scope of the Patent Law Treaty” (Memorandum by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the

Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/III/5 (October 1996).

95. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/III/6 (November 1996), Item 159.

96. Ibid, Item 167.
97. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts

on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/IV/2 (April 1997).

98. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/IV/3 (April 1997), Item 13.01.

99. Ibid, Items 13.02 and 13.05.

100. Ibid, Item 14.01.
101. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/IV/4 (June 1996), Item 189.

102. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/IV/4 (June 1996), Item 190.

103. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/V/3 (October 1997), Item 13.05. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼3286

(Accessed October 2014).

104. Ibid, Item 14.01.
105. Ibid, Item 14.02.
106. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/V/5 (December 1997), Item 213. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼3286

(Accessed October 2014).

107. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee
on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/1/3 (April 1998). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?

meeting_id¼3462 (Accessed October 2014).

108. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/1/4

(April 1998), Item 13.02.

109. Ibid, Items 14.01 and 14.10.
110. Ibid, Item 14.10.
111. Ibid, Item 15.01.

186

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

112. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee
on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/2/3 (February 1999). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?

meeting_id¼3713 (Accessed October 2014).

113. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/2/4

(February 1999), Item 10.01.

114. Ibid, Item 10.01.
115. Ibid, Item 10.02.
116. Ibid, Item 10.03.
117. Ibid, Item 10.04.
118. Ibid, Item 10.05.
119. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee
on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/3/2 (June 1999). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?

meeting_id¼3713 (Accessed October 2014).

120. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/3/3

Item 10.02. See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼3824 (Accessed

(June 1999),
October 2014).

121. “Report” (adopted by the Standing Committee), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/3/

11 (September 1999), Item 64.

122. Ibid, Item 71.
123. Ibid, Item 72.
124. “Basic Proposal for the Patent Law Treaty” (submitted by the Director General of WIPO), Diplomatic
Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law Treaty, Document PT/DC/3 (November 1999). See http://www.

wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼4057 (Accessed October 2014).

125. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 13th session (Monday,
May 22, 2000, morning); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law
(Geneva, 2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Items 1196 and 1197.

126. Ibid, Item 1213.
127. For a comparison of the requirements in respect of relief regarding time-limits and the remedy of
continued processing under the PLT with their counterparts in the European Patent Convention, see Cees
Mulder: “Periods and Remedies under the EPC: Compliance of the EPC with the PLT: Part 1 - Extension
of Periods and Further Processing”, European Intellectual Property Review, Volume 34, Issue 1 (2012),
pp. 12-21.

128. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 13th session (Monday,
May 22, 2000, morning); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent Law
(Geneva, 2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Item 1285.

129. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts

on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/I/2 (October 1995).

130. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document
PLT/CE/I/5 (December 1995), Items 46 (Japan), 169 (international Bureau), 200 (observer organization) and
205 (France and AIPPI).

131. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts

on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/III/2 (September 1996).

132. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of a Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as
far as Patents are Concerned - Volume I: First Part of the Diplomatic Conference - The Hague, 1991”, WIPO
Publication No. 351(E), Article 7 “Belated claiming of priority”.

133. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/III/3 (September 1996), Item 12.01.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

187

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

134. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts
on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/III/2 (September 1996), Article 13(2): “Delayed Filing of the
Subsequent Application”.

135. “Scope of the Patent Law Treaty” (Memorandum by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the

Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/III/5 (October 1996).

136. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document
PLT/CE/III/6 (November 1996), Items 17 (Switzerland), 21 (Australia), 32 (Japan Patent Attorneys
Association) and 114 (several delegations).

137. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts

on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/IV/2 (April 1997).

138. “Report” (adopted by the Committee of Experts), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/IV/4 (June 1997), Item 218.

139. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts
on the Patent Law Treaty, Document PLT/CE/V/2 (October 1997). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/

details.jsp?meeting_id¼3286 (Accessed October 2014).

140. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Committee of Experts on the Patent Law Treaty, Document

PLT/CE/V/3 (October 1997), Item 15.03.

141. Ibid, Item 15.06.
142. Ibid, Item 15.12.
143. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee
on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/1/3 (April 1998). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?

meeting_id¼3462 (Accessed October 2014).

144. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/1/4

(April 1998), Item 16.02.

145. PCT Rule 26bis.1 entered into force on July 1, 1998.
146. “Notes” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/1/4

(April 1998), Item 16.02, Item 16.06.

147. “Draft Patent Law Treaty and Draft Regulations” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee

on the Law of Patents, Document SCP/3/2 (June 1999).

148. “Draft Patent Law Treaty: Working Document” (prepared by the International Bureau), Standing Committee on

the Law of Patents, Document SCP/3/7 (July 1999).

149. Ibid, Item 80.
150. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 16th session (Tuesday,
May 23, 2000, afternoon); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent
Law (Geneva, 2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Item 1483.

151. For a comparison of the remedies of reinstatement of rights and restoration of the priority right under the PLT with
the remedy of re-establishment of rights under the European Patent Convention, see Cees Mulder: “Periods and
Remedies under the EPC: Compliance of the EPC with the PLT: Part 2 -Re-establishment of Rights”, European
Intellectual Property Review, Volume 34, Issue 2 (2012), pp. 87–94.

152. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 16th session (Tuesday,
May 23, 2000, afternoon); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent
Law (Geneva, 2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Item 1502.

153. Summary Minutes of the Main Committee I (prepared by the International Bureau); 16th session (Tuesday,
May 23, 2000, afternoon); published in Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Patent
Law (Geneva, 2000) (WIPO Publication 327E), Item 1573.

188

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

Patent Law Treaty

Cees Mulder

154. “Agreement between the United Nations and the World Intellectual Property Organization” (Agreement entered

into effect on December 17, 1974). See http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/text.jsp?ﬁle_id¼305623 (Accessed

October 2014).

155. “Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization” (signed at Stockholm on July 14, 1967
and as amended on September 28, 1979 (document WO 029 EN). See http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/text.jsp?

ﬁle_id¼283854 (Accessed October 2014).

156. “Explanatory Notes on the Patent Law Treaty and Regulations under the Patent Law Treaty adopted by the
Diplomatic Conference on June 1, 2000” (prepared by the International Bureau), Diplomatic Conference for the
adoption of the PLT, Document PT/DC/48 Prov. (November 2000), Note 5.23. See http://www.wipo.int/export/
sites/www/scp/en/meetings/pt_dc/pdf/pt_dc_48p1.pdf (Accessed October 2014). Also see http://www.wipo.
int/patent-law/en/plt.htm (Accessed October 2014).

157. Meeting of the PLT Assembly in Geneva during the forty-ﬁrst series of meetings of the Assemblies of the

Member States of WIPO (September 26 to October 5, 2005).

158. “Future Work” (prepared by the International Bureau), PLT Assembly, 1st (ordinary) session, Document PLT/A/
1/3. (July 2005), Item 3 (ii). See http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting_id¼9003 (Accessed

October 2014).

159. See http://www.wipo.int/plt-forum/en/ (Accessed October 2014).
160. In the Articles of the PLT there are 19 occurrences and in the PLT Rules 58 occurrences of the wording “may

require”.

161. See http://www.wipo.int/plt-forum/en/questionnaire/ (Accessed October 2014).
162. See http://www.wipo.int/plt-forum/en/questionnaire/table.html (Accessed October 2014). Currently (Octo-

ber 2014), 25 of the 36 PLT Contracting Parties have responded to the Questionnaire.

163. United Kingdom.
164. Ukraine declared that this procedure is “not applicable” in its Ofﬁce.
165. Serbia has declared that its Patent Law does not contain such provisions. The Montenegrin has declared that its

Patent Law does not contain such provisions.

166. Note that this text is more or less the same as what can be found in Rule 40(1) implementing the ﬁling date

requirements of Article 80 of the European Patent Convention (EPC 2000).

167. See § 1 and § 5.
168. “Records of the Diplomatic Conference for the Conclusion of a Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as
far as Patents are Concerned - Volume I: First Part of the Diplomatic Conference - The Hague, 1991”, WIPO
Publication No. 351(E).

169. “Basic Features to the Patent Law Treaty” (prepared by the Secretariat) (November 2006), Item 2.See http://

www.wipo.int/patent-law/en/pdf/plt_features.pdf (Accessed October 2014).

170. See http://www.wipo.int/plt-forum/en/questionnaire/table.html (Accessed October 2014).
171. Upon the entry into force of the America Invents Act (March 16, 2013), the main obstacles which obstructed
agreement on the “Treaty Supplementing the Paris Convention as far as Patents are Concerned” in 1994 were
overcome.

172. In December 2012, US Congress passed the Patent Law Treaties Implementation Act of 2012 to implement the
provisions of the Patent Law Treaty. This Act and ensuing changes became effective on December 18,
2013.

173. In the comment in relation to Article 80 EPC in the “Basic Proposal for the Revision of the European Patent
Convention” (Document MR/2/00), Travaux Pre´ paratoires to the EPC 2000, the EPO indicated its intention “to
be become a Contraction Party to the PLT”. See: http://www.epo.org/law-practice/legal-texts/archive/
documentation/travaux-preparatoires.html (Accessed October 2014). In the comment in relation to Article 80
EPC in the Revision of the European Patent Convention (EPC 2000): Synoptic presentation EPC 1973/2000 -
Part I: The Articles (Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Patent Ofﬁce, Special Edition No.4, 2007), the EPO did not

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6

189

Cees Mulder

Patent Law Treaty

repeat this intention. See: http://archive.epo.org/epo/pubs/oj007/08_07/special_edition_4_epc_2000_synoptic.
pdf (Accessed October 2014).

References

Mulder, C. A. M. (2011a) Filing date requirements under the PCT—Alignment with the PLT? The WIPO Journal,

2(2), 173–195.

Mulder, C. A. M. (2011b) ‘On the Alignment of the European Patent Convention and the Patent Cooperation Treaty
with Requirements of the Patent Law Treaty’, Unpublished PhD Thesis, Faculty of Law, Maastricht University

(NL), http://arno.unimaas.nl/show.cgi?ﬁd¼23885 (Accessed October 2014).

190

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2014) Vol. 17, no. 5–6


