DOI: 10.1111/jwip.12078

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Climate change and terroir: The challenge of
adapting geographical indications

Lisa F. Clark1

| William A. Kerr2

1 Department of Agricultural and Resource
Economics, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada

2 University Distinguished Professor,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada

Correspondence
William A. Kerr, Department of Agricultural
and Resource Economics, University of
Saskatchewan, 51 Campus Dr Saskatoon,
SK, S7K 4N5, Canada.
Email: william.kerr@usask.ca

The concept of terroir is often included in legal descriptions
of Geographical Indicators (GIs). GIs are intellectual property
that recognizes a food, beverage, or artisan product as
holding distinct properties based on geographic origin. GIs
are used to indicate these distinctions while deterring the
sale of products carrying similar labels without having the GI
determined qualities. Climate change and its effects on
aspects of terroir such as rainfall, water availability, soil
quality, and temperature is already having an effect on some
production aspects crucial to what brings distinctiveness to
GI products based on terroir. These factors raise questions as
to how conceptions of terroir and the formalized rules
underpinning the distinctiveness of GIs are evolving in the
face of climatological changes. This paper discusses how
climate change may influence how terroir is encoded in
legally recognized GIs and how this will influence interna-
tional
in
GI-protected food and beverages. It discusses the relation-
ship between GIs, credence attributes and the legal
recognition of terroir. It then explores three options for
products with GIs based on terroir that are experiencing
climate change: product quality change, definitional change,
or re-interpreting the boundaries of terroir relevant to the GI
distinction.

recognition,

and trade

regulation,

flows

K E Y W O R D S
climate change, geographical indications, intellectual property,
terroir

© 2017 The Authors. The Journal of World Intellectual Property © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

88 | wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jwip

J World Intellect Prop. 2017;20:88–102.

CLARK AND KERR

| 89

1 | CLIMATE CHANGE AND TERROIR: THE CHALLENGE OF ADAPTING
GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS

A Geographical Indication (GI) is legally tied to a specific, closely defined, geographic location. GIs are also often seen
as a means by which traditional methods and commensurate lifestyles can be preserved (Broude, 2005). The attributes
of each product are often tied to specific agronomic or other production practices, which form the legal justification
for the GI. Hence, the central hypothesis of this paper is that climate change can affect local agronomic conditions in
ways which necessitate adaptation of farming methods or a change in location that may contravene the legal basis of
GIs based on terroir. This paper explores the likely effects of climate change on agricultural producers who enjoy the
benefits provided by a GI and how both farmers and/or the GI institution may or may not adapt to climate change. It
also assesses the need for further research into the likely effects on the communities and cultures GIs are designed, in
part, to sustain.

The concept of terroir is central to the potential difficulties climate change can precipitate for those endowed
with the legal rights to a GI. Terroir pertains to location specific interactions among soil, moisture, sunlight, and
other natural factors that impart particular qualities to a product. Although originally developed for French wine,1
using terroir to legally protect food and beverages from fraudulent claims is now applied to other specialty
agricultural products such as coffee, tea, tequila, honey, olive oil, fruits, and cheese (Vaudour, Costantini, Jones, &
Mocali, 2015). Climate change raises interesting questions as to how conceptions of terroir and the formalized
rules and practices behind GI-protected food and beverages can evolve in the face of climatological shifts. Climate
change is predicted to alter precipitation patterns, ambient temperatures, weed veracity, disease outbreaks, pest
infestations, and erosion rates (Backlund et al., 2008; Burton & Lim, 2005; Kulshreshtha, 2011; Mooney & Arthur,
1990; Parry, Rosenzweig, Iglesiasc, Livermored, & Fischer, 2004). There is a considerable body of research
examining the effects of climate change on agriculture, and the meaning of terroir in GIs, but there appears to be
little analysis of the implications of climate change for food and beverage sectors carrying a GI label primarily
based on terroir. The anticipated effects of climate change on agricultural production can be expected in some
cases to alter the underlying basis of terroir. Drawing on academic literature from the fields of environmental
science, rural sociology, food science, agricultural economics, social anthropology, trade policy as well as law, the
paper discusses how climate change may influence how the concept of terroir is encoded in legally recognized
Geographical Indications and how this will influence international regulation, recognition, and trade flows in
GI-protected food and beverages.
It begins by discussing the legal definition of a GI, then discusses the
relationship between GIs, credence attributes in food and beverages and the legal recognition of terroir. The paper
then defines a typology of GIs based on how terroir and human capital are recognized as intrinsic components of
the GI-protected product. The discussion then turns to examining the effects climate change is having on
agriculture in general, and then explores three possible options for products with GIs based on terroir that are
experiencing climate change: product quality change, definitional change, or re-interpreting the boundaries of
terroir relevant to the GI distinction. It focuses on three case studies to illustrate how some GI-protected food and
beverages are responding to climate change: European wine, Assam tea, and Olives\Olive oil.

2 | LEGAL RECOGNITION OF CREDENCE ATTRIBUTES THROUGH GIs

To fully understand the relationship between how GIs are recognized, how terroir is incorporated into those GIs and
what potential effects climate change may have on the integrity of the GI label, it is crucial to specify what a GI is, and
how it is recognized in the legal system. It is also important to understand the basis for the creation of GIs in the first
place. It has been a long running and central theme of agricultural development that farmers need to find a means to
escape from commodity production whereby: (i) profits are competed away due to the entry of additional competitors
(e.g., other farmers) and (ii) technological changes mean that existing lifestyles and communities are threatened (e.g.,

90 |

CLARK AND KERR

by the competitive pressure to adapt and the scale bias embodied in many technological advances). One means to
escape the commodity trap is through product differentiation (Gordon, Hannesson, & Kerr, 1999; Wolf, 1944).
Product differentiation may be accomplished through individual farms being able to produce a unique product for a
market niche or groups of farmers banding together in a cooperative or other group marketing structure (Brink et al.,
1997; Fulton, Jones, & Schrader, 1998; Hobbs, 2001). One of the most effective means to achieve such product
differentiation is to gain a geographical indication for the products of a group of farmers (Herrmann, 2009).

2.1 | The need for legal protection for claims related to terroir

GIs received legal recognition in the multilateral trading space with the signing of the World Trade Organization
(WTO) Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) that came into effect in 1994. GIs
are defined in this agreement as something that: “identify a good as originated in the territory of a Member, where a
given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical origin” (TRIPS,
1994, Article 22.1).

The World Intellectual Property Organization (2016, p.1) defines a Geographical Indication as:

a sign used on products that have a specific geographical origin and possess qualities or a reputation that are
due to that origin. In order to function as a GI, a sign must identify a product as originating in a given place. In
addition, the qualities, characteristics or reputation of the production should be essentially due to the place
of origin. Since the qualities depend on the geographical place of production, there is a clear link between the
product and its original place of production.

GIs are considered to be property rights, and member countries have to provide legal tools to protect these rights.
To receive the legal protection provided by the receipt of a GI designation requires that a case be made for the product
seeking designation. The case must demonstrate that the product has attributes that differentiate it from similar
products. Part of the reason why a legal definition is required is that the characteristics differentiating the product
from others are credence attributes (Giovannucci, Josling, Kerr, O’Connor, & Yeung, 2009).

Credence attributes are qualities that cannot be determined even after the product has been inspected and
consumed (Hobbs, 1996).2 Arguably, if the special attributes that differentiated the product could be easily discerned
by purchasers via inspection (a search attribute) or even consumption (an experience attribute) then a geographical
indication would not be necessary. This is because purchasers would be able to determine the provenance of a good
and be able to reject those that are not authentic. For example, the legal protection of Port is required because it is not
possible for consumers to determine if the fortified red wine they are consuming was actually sourced in the Douro
valley in Portugal. Without the legal protection of a GI counterfeit products could be passed off as Port through the
use of false labeling. Having one’s product recognized as the exclusive collective intellectual property of farmers (or
artisans) in a particular geographic area provides the protection that stems from the power of the state through its law-
making capacity. This means that the differential associated with the product becomes legally sanctioned
exclusivity—competitors are prevented from entering the market in effect giving the holders of the GI a monopoly.3
Thus, profit erosion by new competitors is eliminated. The monopoly may also provide sufficient price premiums to
accommodate the higher costs associated with traditional production methods, meaning that lifestyles and
communities can be maintained.

Of course, the practice of labeling products in one legal jurisdiction, which holds a GI designation in another legal
jurisdiction, is a current legal practice taking place in many countries. This is because the GI granted by a foreign
jurisdiction is not recognized. For example, a fortified red wine is labeled as Port because it is considered a generic
term—in other words the GI for Port granted by the European Union (EU) is not recognized in the particular political
jurisdiction. Such practices abound—sparkling white wine labeled as Champagne, white cheese labeled as Feta, ham
labeled a Parma, etc.

CLARK AND KERR

| 91

What justifies a GI are credence attributes. It is not normally sufficient to simply specify that the product comes
from a particular geographic area to receive a GI; either terroir or particular post-harvest production skills must be
specified.4 For example, in the case of Port, the vineyards in the Douro valley where the wine input for Port must
be grown cannot be irrigated. As a result, consumers must be informed that the product incorporates the
attribute—primarily through labeling. In the case of GIs, credence attributes must be legally defined for them to
receive legal protection. Many, but not all, GIs are based on the credence attribute of terroir.

2.2 | The modern concept of terroir

Terroir provides the criteria for identifying a product’s credence attributes. The literal translation of terroir is terrain,
soil, land, ground, or earth. It is better understood as a concept based on the idea that a product’s qualities come with the
territory. Terroir is defined as something that can only be drawn from one location, and no one else outside of that
location can claim (via labeling) to make the same product. In its Guide on Geographical Indications, the Food and
Agricultural Organization defines terroir as

(1) a delimited geographic space. (2) where a human community, (3) has constructed over a course of history
a collective intellectual or tacit production know-how, (4) based on a system of interactions between
physical and biological milieu, and a set of human factors, (5) in which the socio-technical trajectories put
into play, (6) reveal an originality, (7) confer a typically, (8) and can engender a reputation, (9) for a product
that originates in that terroir (Giovannucci et al., 2009, p. xv).

GIs based on terroir have their origin as far back as the seventeenth century when it was used to define and
protect Chianti wine (Tomasi, Gaiotti, & Jones, 2013). The concept of terroir was central to the protection of the
Champagne label in the nineteenth century (Marre, 2004). Historically, GIs were based primarily on terroir but in the
present context, and particularly as a result of the evolution of agricultural/rural development policy in the EU (Josling,
2006), GIs are increasingly granted based on attributes related to human capital inputs rather than terroir (Viju, Yeung,
& Kerr, 2013).

As Berard et al. (2005, p. 2) state, terroir is a spatial and ecological concept that “links actors, their histories, their
social organizations, their activities, and most importantly, their agricultural practices.” These human capital-based GIs
are largely used as a way to protect, promote and preserve artisan skills in the production of food and non-food
products.5 Trubek (2008) claims that traditions and cultural practices contributing to the development and flavors of
food and beverages based on terroir are central to the concept. Terroir, however, cannot be claimed solely based on
traditions and cultural practices comprising human capital.

As an example of the requirements for a product to receive a GI designation, the EU Guide to Applicants

(Regulation (EC) No 1151/2012) is illustrative:

The product must be specific: it cannot be a generic product, with no characteristics distinguishing it
from others. . .The description must give technical, scientific data to describe the specific product.
Include the product’s specific physical, microbiological, chemical, and organoleptic6 data. . .In the
Specification, describe the geographical area by referring as far as possible to physical boundaries (e.g.
rivers, roads) or administrative boundaries. It must be clear to a farmer and to an inspector whether each
individual field is within or outside the area. . .It should demonstrate in what way the product’s
characteristics are due to the geographical area and what the natural, human and other elements are
which give its specificity to the product. . .Identify and describe the characteristics of the defined
geographical area relevant to the link. These may include the pedo-climatic features; topography,
climate, soil, rainfall, exposure, altitude, etc.

92 |

CLARK AND KERR

Thus, the legal definition used to grant a GI is premised on specific descriptions that become the basis upon which
the legal protection is provided. While the specific example presented pertains to the EU’s sui generis system for GIs,
other countries have similar requirements in their sui generis systems (Giovannucci et al., 2009). In essence, the
granting of a GI locks the farmers or artisans into a particular, specified, production system. The system receives
the legal protection of the state. If the objective is to protect a traditional way of life or method of production, it can be
instrumental in achieving that objective by both increasing income through the granting of a monopoly and preventing
others from passing off their goods as those meeting the specification of the GI.7

Once granted, the reputation of the GI can be burnished through advertising and other forms of marketing. GIs
are monitored and controlled by regional institutions. This is to prevent fraudulent activity, but also to maintain the
standards set out in the details of the geographical distinction. When a geographic region like Bordeaux carries cachet,
exclusive control produces economic benefits for local producers whether or not specific, unique qualities are found in
the product or not (Hughes, 2006).

Farmers may alter their production processes to maximize their returns within the specifications set out for
the GI. In the process of protecting a traditional method of production newer cost-saving technologies available to
competitors producing near-substitutes8 may have to be eschewed because they do not fit within those specified
for the GI. As a result, the relative competitiveness of those producing to GI standards will decline over time.
Hence, those enjoying the GI will increasingly have their livelihood intertwined and dependent upon the viability of
the GI. This can be an enviable position to be in,9 and one that those seeking a GI designation aspire to and
envision (Bérard & Marchenay, 2006; Giovannucci et al., 2009). It is, however, dependent on the continued
viability of the GI. Given the specifications of a particular terroir, climate change can be a disruptive force that
threatens the ongoing viability of a GI.

As long as markets and consumer tastes remain relatively stable, the holders of a GI may be able to sustain both
their livelihood and their lifestyle, including aspects of community. A major disruption, such as climate change,
however, may threaten both. This is because obtaining a GI carries with it certain obligations that form the legal basis
upon which the GI was granted. These may include specific production practices and well-specified geographic
boundaries, neither of which can be easily changed because they are an intrinsic part of the legal definition.10

2.3 | PDOs and links with “terroir”

Of the geographical and human characteristics set out in the legal understanding of a GI, those particularly vulnerable
to climate change are those solely based on terroir. Under the banner of a GI in the EU context, there are sub-
categories of Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) and Protected Designations of Origin (PDO). A PGI is “where
the product must be produced, processed OR prepared, and which has specific qualities attributable to that
geographical area” (Giovannucci et al., 2009, p. xiv). PGIs refer to names of areas with some link to product quality and
with at least one stage of production, processing, or preparation occurring in the area of question.

2.4 | The legal specifications of terroir

A PDO necessitates that the “product must be produced AND processed in the defined geographic area, using
recognized know-how” (Giovannucci et al., 2009, p. xiv). Qualities and properties are exclusively determined by
natural and human factors. PDO regulatory boards are made up of farmers, cooperatives, industries, marketing
companies, and public administrators. They are responsible for establishing the reference standards and regulations
for the PDO, certifying, and giving the seal of approval to any products wishing to use the official label. In the wine
industry for example, under the PDO label, winemakers, winegrowers, and experts through an association or
organization define what constitutes a particular zone that is permitted to produce wines under common producing
rules considered to be traditional. The designated zones are usually based on pre-existing administrative boundaries
or patterns of hydrological networks, roads, or railways. The PGI is not as stringent as those applied to a PDO, although

CLARK AND KERR

| 93

there are special conditions granted to some products carrying the PDO label (recognized as designations of origin in
the country prior to 2004), such as Roquefort cheese. Roquefort has a limited geographical area of processing (caves in
Roquefort can only be used to mature Roquefort cheese), but the milk can come from outside the processing area
(Kireeva, 2011). In order to qualify for a PDO, the raw materials used in production must come from the defined
geographical area. There are no such rules for PGIs. PDOs and PGIs have been recognized in some jurisdictions
outside the EU by, for example, recognition being agreed in EU preferential trade agreements. They are now viewed as
an important policy tool that can give producers opportunities to move from commodity production to producing for a
differentiated niche market. They can add value to local production systems and help producers obtain market
recognition including, in many cases, premium prices (Babjoub, Ajal, Fernandez-Gutierrez, & Cassasco-Pancorbo,
2016). Despite the substantial differences between PDOs and PGIs, terroir is sometimes used to refer to a PDO and
can be confused with a PGI (Barham, 2003). In some cases however, one or more terroir units may be present in the
designated area of the PDO and be included in the definition of the PDO (Vaudour et al., 2015).

2.5 | GIs effected by climate change

As it concerns assessing the effects of climate change on GI, four relevant types of GIs can be identified: (i) exclusively
terroir-based GI, which do not rely on any particular geographically tied human capital for processing (e.g., olive oil
where terroir defines the agronomic conditions under which the olive trees are cultivated but the olives are pressed
using modern pressing technology); (ii) those based on a combination of terroir and geographically specific human
capital (e.g., artisan cheeses where the milk production is terroir-based and is combined with artisan processing
methods); (iii) cases where agricultural inputs are not terroir-based but the human capital is associated with a particular
geographic area (e.g., cured meat where the animals can be raised outside the geographic area but the meat processing
is based on human capital that is tied to a specific geographical location—e.g., Parma ham); and (iv) those in which the
product is not based directly on agricultural inputs (e.g., Kotpad Handloom fabric). Climate change is unlikely to have a
negative impact for GIs in categories (iii) and (iv). This is because the primary input is either not an agricultural product,
as in the case of category (iv), or can be brought into the geographic area for processing, such as category (iii). Hence, if
agricultural production is forced to shift to a different geographical area, it still can be transported to the center of
artisan production within the specified geographic area. Categories (i) and (ii) could, however, face significant
challenges in maintaining their terroir-based GI as the effects of climate change advance. The next section focuses on
GIs that fall into categories (i) and (ii), both of which are dependent on the ability of the terroir to continue to provide
the credence attributes associated with the product.

3 | CLIMATE CHANGE AND GIs BASED ON TERROIR

Climate change is expected to lead to a more vigorous hydrological cycle, including more total rainfall and more
frequent high intensity rainfall events (IPCC, 2013). Climate change models predict that rainfall amounts and
intensities are expected to continue to increase during the twenty-first century. These rainfall changes along with
expected changes in temperature, solar radiation, and atmospheric CO2 concentrations will likely have significant
impacts on soil erosion rates (Nearing, Pruski, & O’Neal, 2004). Even in cases where annual rainfall is projected to
decrease, system feedbacks related to decreased biomass production could lead to greater susceptibility to soil
erosion (Vaudour et al., 2015).

If climate change makes a GI solely based on terroir no longer viable in its existing form because rainfall is too
plentiful for, for example, optimal olive production, or if temperature rises sufficiently to reduce the productivity of
vineyards, then to secure the continued viability of the valuable GI asset, the holders of the GI must find ways to adapt.
The need to adapt will arise when the productivity of the geographic area declines sufficiently that livelihoods are
threatened. The problem, however, is that not all farmers within the geographically designated region will be affected
equally. Some will find that it is imperative to adapt while others will be able and likely desire, to continue as before.

94 |

CLARK AND KERR

Given that most GIs are the intellectual property of a group of farmers, the differential effects on individual farm
operations will bring into play group dynamics and lead to stress within the organization that holds the GI. Thus, there
is both a need for the GI specifications to adapt to changing climate and for the organization that holds the GI to
accommodate adaptation to climate change.

3.1 | Institutional adaptability

Institutional adaptation to change is an issue that has affected a range of groupings of farmers including traditional
agricultural co-operatives (Fairbairn, 2004; LeVay, 1983), new generation agricultural cooperatives (Fulton et al.,
1998), and organic producer organizations (Clark, 2015; Khaledi, Weseen, Sawyer, Ferguson, & Gray, 2010). Yeung
and Kerr (2011) outline some of the difficulties faced by the farmer groups holding GIs when confronted with
pressures to change that are unrelated to climate change. Adaptation in institutions with group-based decision-
making can be a major challenge. There are potential strategies, however, that could help GI rights-holder groups
adapt to climate change: lower production quality standards, modifying production practices, and probably the least
desirable, changing the boundaries of the geographical distinction (or some combination of the three). There is also the
status quo option (do nothing), but for most terroir-based GI products that are (or will likely be) affected by climate
change, this may be an untenable option.

Some argue that the terroir-based GIs that may be affected by climate change can simply alter human capital
inputs and production processes to adjust. Under the PGI specifications for an artisanal cheese, for example, milk may
be brought into a particular region to produce a GI-protected cheese that does not violate the standards and
guidelines of production. What if, however, changing production processes alters the organoleptic qualities of the
product, thus undermining the foundation of the terroir-based GI?

3.2 | Case studies

Climate change will present a number of challenges for some GIs based in whole, or in part, on terroir. These challenges
will encompass legal issues, economic impacts and group dynamics. As each bundle of attributes that comprise a
terroir is unique, it is impossible to generalize the form which adaptation will take. Each case will be different. Individual
cases can provide insights into both the challenges presented by climate change and the adaptive response elicited.
Three terroir-based GIs are considered in what follows.

3.2.1 | European wine

If yields are declining as a result of climate change, then lowering the minimum standard for a product to be included in
the GI’s standards may be proposed. For example, if olive yields are declining, top grade olives that qualify to be
included as a GI product may be insufficient to meet demand and some farmers may propose lowering the minimum
standard for inclusion of olives in the GI. Research on the potential effects of climate change on wine has primarily
focused on Europe, as the EU is the world’s largest wine economy with approximately 70% of global production, and
60% of global consumption. It is also the major proponent of using legal GI designations as the means to protect and
expand agricultural industries (Josling, 2006). Maintaining consistency across the EU requires overarching single
market wide wine quality classifications and production laws. The first iteration of categorical distinctions carried on
labels was QWPRS (Quality Wine Produced in a Specific Region) and Table Wine. In 2011, these categories were
replaced with PDO and PGI. Appellations granted by national governments that attained PDO status have, in some
cases, provided terroir-defined wines in the EU with legal protection from fraudulently labeled wines since 1935
(Vaudour, 2003).

The effects of climate change on viticulture are likely to vary across the EU. Early studies predict that growing
seasons will lengthen and precipitation will increase in the Northern part of Europe, and decrease in the South (Lough,

CLARK AND KERR

| 95

Wigley, & Palutikof, 1983). Based on spatial modeling, these changes may result in more favorable conditions in
Bordeaux and Champagne. In terms of varietals, analysis of Sangiovese and Cabernet Sauvignon in Italy show that higher
temperatures may result in shorter growing seasons leading to higher variability in grape yields (Bindi, Fibbi, Gozzini,
Orlandini, & Miglietta, 1996). Jones, White, Cooper, and Storchmann (2005) report that pest and disease pressure arising
from milder winters and changes to sea levels may influence viticultural microclimates. Increase of atmospheric CO2 may
result in changes to grape quality and the texture of oak wood used for wine barrels. The potential effect of climate
change on wine growing areas in the EU has been outlined by Mozelle and Thach (2014), p. 85:

In Europe, the impact of global warming on wine growing regions would be large. The loss of the Gulf Stream
would chill Bordeaux and parts of Spain, forcing a replanting toward cooler climate grapes. . . However,
other regions would become warmer. Alsace, for example, has been experiencing a shortening of the growing
season and a shift of harvest from October to September in the last three decades. . .Burgundy may soon
come to “resemble Bordeaux. . .So troubling is this possibility, even the term, “climate,” as an expression of
Burgundian identity, is facing pressure toward redefinition. . .Even the region’s planting of Pinot noir may
wane as the finicky grape begins to lose viability. . . Spain’s interior may experience such change in rising
temperatures and water availability, that it “may be difficult to survive” at all. . .Tuscany’s Chianti region is
finding grapes ripening far too early forcing a shift in varieties. . .Vast portions of Europe on the
Mediterranean coastline, especially Italy, Greece, and France, may become completely inhospitable to grape
production by 2050. . .Southern England, by contrast, is resembling Champagne and has had several
vintages of note.

Examining these types of changes through the GI lens suggests that there may be pressure to alter the legal
geographical delimitations of a number of terroirs. If the areas on the Mediterranean coastline become inhospitable to
grape production, can they remain in the definitions of whatever terroir defines the particular GI? It would suggest not,
and to allow such areas to remain as part of the GI could lead to low quality grapes being included as inputs to the GI
wine product with the potential to lower the reputation of the GI. As the effects of climate change are likely to be felt
slowly over time, those owning land in the valuable GI area are likely to resist having the geographic extent of the GI
area legally redefined to exclude their land—which would precipitate a rapid decline in its value. On the other hand,
those producers in the GI region not affected so severely by climate change will want to change the geographic
boundary to protect the wine’s quality and the value of the GI. Hence, there is likely to be considerable stress within
the institution holding the GI. Another option, however, may be to source raw materials from outside of the
designated geographic region.

There are reports that the terroir conditions associated with Champagne are moving north, possibly extending
into southern England, and that some French Champagne houses are considering acquiring land in England to secure a
future supply of grapes with appropriate characteristics (Kime, 2014). Would French holders of GI rights to
Champagne allow the geographic area to be defined to include parts of England for this iconic French product? As
Blakeney (2014, p. 52) notes:

it can be envisaged that the grape producing areas of southern England may in time become closer to the
growing conditions for Champagne than the vineyards of Epernay. In this situation, the wine producers of
the Champagne province may look to England for their raw material. Some growers in areas where grape
yields are declining significantly would be in favour, they need a new source of grapes that have the right
terroir while those less affected by climate change would worry about the reputation effect of reducing the
association of Champagne as being French.

Such an adaptation would likely be difficult. Presumably, climate change will disproportionately affect grape
growers and winemakers in EU member states such as France that emphasize geographic location in their marketing

96 |

CLARK AND KERR

rather than the grape varieties.11 Close identification with a legally defined GI inhibits the potential range of
adaptations. Neither varietal nor regional substitutions can be easily achieved in these countries and, in some cases,
are prohibited. This suggests that the notion of terroir-based wines, where a grape variety is expressed in terms of
certain land and weather characteristics, may be too inflexible to allow for adaptations to a changing climate. Thus,
according to Ashenfelter and Storchmann (2016), unless the appellation rules in the EU are loosened and planting
rights are abolished, its wine producers are likely to be one of the losers from climate change.

Adaptation is likely to prove difficult for the groups that are the collective holders of GIs, which are legally defined
by terroir. Within the groups, as suggested above, there are likely to be losers as well as winners from any potential
change to the legal justification for the GI. Hence, achieving agreement on the form of adaptation, if any, is likely to be
difficult. If agreement could be achieved among the rights holders and application made to alter the legal definition of
the GI, other parties may wish to intervene in the change. If production practices that change or lower input standards
(e.g., grape quality) are included in the proposed new definition of terroir, the GI regulators may question whether the
terroir actually imparts the special qualities required for a GI designation to be granted. As GIs endow the group of
producers with a monopoly—implying consumers pay a higher price—consumers may also call into question whether
flexible definitions of terroir constitute a rationale for the legal protection of intellectual property.

3.2.2 | Assam tea

Assam tea is another example of a GI product primarily based on terroir. Assam Orthodox Tea, as it is officially known,
is registered as a Geographical Indication in India. Assam is an Indian state and the single largest tea growing area in the
world. It produces 55% of the tea produced in India and accounts for 31% of global tea production. The quality of the
tea produced is dependent upon the climatic conditions in Assam, which arise from low altitude and ample rainfall.
Assam Orthodox teas are defined as “teas grown and manufactured out of the basis Camellia Sinenses var. Assamica
and other variants in tea estates located in the Brahmapurtra or Assam valley in North East India” (Indian Tea
Association, 2016). Climate change, however, has already begun to influence the conditions of production. Assam is
already pushing the upper boundary of the optimum range for tea growing.

Growers in the Assam region claim that rising temperatures are changing the distinct flavors attributed to the GI-
protected tea. Assam produced 564,000 tons of tea in 2007, but this fell to 460,000 tons in 2010. While the decline in
productivity resulted in a 10% price increase for teas from Assam (Hussain, 2010), this was not able to offset the nearly
20% decline in output resulting in lower revenues for producers. Rainfall patterns are also changing. According to the
chief scientist at the Tea Research Association, over the past century the average temperature in Assam has increased
by 1.3°C and rainfall has declined by 20 cm a year. Rainfall has also become less predictable over the last 30 years.
Worries about rainfall and temperature are prompting some producers to increase vegetation cover to create more
bodies of water on vacant land within plantations (Cousins, 2015). The general effectiveness of such measures is,
however, unknown.

As a result of these changes in climate, the quality of the product may decline. As Hussain (2010) notes:

the flavor of Assam tea is changing. The strong flavor profile attributed to Assam has been noticed to be
declining. As one tea planter in Jorhat, Assam’s main tea growing district stated, ‘Assam tea’s strong flavor is
its hallmark’, in essence, what gives it the value attributed to the GI distinction.

Lowering the quality of the product could lead to factious issues for the group that is legally vested in the GI. Most
agricultural production is defined by distributions of quality. It is the basis for the considerable degree of sorting and
grading that takes place in agriculture (Considine, Kerr, Smith, & Ulmer, 1986; Erdman, 1950; Farris, 1960). Many
products with GI designations have minimum quality standards, for example, olive oils with GIs can only be pressed
from olives harvested directly off of the tree, not from the ground (see Hinojosa-Rodriguez, Parra-Lopez, Carmona-
Torres, & Sayadi, 2014). This means that production that does not meet the minimum standards is not allowed to

CLARK AND KERR

| 97

display the GI. This sub-standard product is sold in alternative markets, processed into other products or discarded. If
climate change reduces average quality, this means that more product will fail to meet the minimum standard to be
included in the GI. The income of some producers of GI products will decline. To maintain incomes (at least in the short
run) one alternative is to lower the minimum standard, meaning more product qualifies to receive the premium
associated with the GI. Altering quantity standards to enhance farmers’ returns through grade manipulation has a long
history in agriculture (Mehren, 1955).

While this path of adaptation may be desired by some producers of the GI whose incomes are declining, others
will worry about the long term effects on the GIs’ reputation if consumers are less satisfied with the quality of the
product. Given the credence nature of many terroir-based attributes, lowering quality may be a risk some may be
willing to take, but others will be concerned about the degree to which the attributes are truly credence in nature. In
any case, permission will have to be sought to alter the official GI description, thus allowing the information on the
strategy of lowering quality to become a matter of public record. It will likely be difficult to reach a consensus on such a
change among the membership of those that collectively hold the legal rights to the GI.

To return yield or quality to pre-climate change levels, some farmers may suggest that new production practices
be allowed (e.g., the use of irrigation or pesticides where they were not allowed under the conditions that the GI was
granted). Each of these adaptations to climate change has its specific challenges, and in particular within the
institutional structure of the group holding the legal rights to the GI. This route of adaptation is to alter the production
methods incorporated in the GI’s definition to offset the decline in productivity associated with climate change.

Assam Orthodox Tea appears to be experiencing declining revenues due to climate change. Redefining the legal
specifications of the GI by lowering minimum quality or experimenting with technological solutions may be the type of
short-term solutions that appeal to some tea producers but these may lead to discernable declines in the appeal of
Assam sourced tea for consumers. In the long run this will reduce the collective returns from the GI. Consumers may
not be able to identify the provenance of the tea due to its credence nature but may well be able to discern a decline in
quality as terroir changes in Assam.

3.2.3 | Olives and olive oil

Farmers in the olive oil industry have engaged aggressively in production differentiation through geographical
indications. In 2010, there were over 100 origin-labeled extra Virgin Olive Oils (VOOs) around the world, with those in
the EU having either PGI or PDO designations. Groups of farmers in Italy, Greece and Spain are the heaviest users of
GIs. The market value for European-origin VOOs was 215 million Euros per year from 2006 to 2008. Several studies
have been conducted demonstrating the differences among VOOs originating in different geographic regions related
to, for example, olive tree variety, soil, climate, and cultivation practices as well as processes for extraction, storage
conditions, etc. The differentiation in these factors causes physicochemical differences in sensorial attributes and the
chemical composition of VOOs (Babjoub et al., 2016). VOOs certified under a PDO are required to fulfill a specific set
of conditions including the tree varieties planted, the physical, chemical, and organoleptic characteristics of the oil as
well as the cultivation practices. How the olives are collected, sorted, and transported may also be specified. Those
who use the GI are required to follow the strict practices set out in the legal description of the PDO.

Climate is particularly important to the VOO industry that uses GIs and climate change is creating considerable
concern for holders of the rights to the GIs. Studies of temperature indicate that it has been increasing over time. This
can be significant for a VOO PDO because increased temperatures influence the timing of flowering of woody species
such as olive trees. Early flowering may lead to lower fruit production while later flowering may increase olive
production. Early flowering can also lead to situations where reproductive organs are at greater risk to any sharp drops
in temperature that may occur in late winter (International Olive Council, 2010).

In response to the need to address some aspects of climate change, olive growers in Andralusia, southern Spain
are employing soil conservation practices. They are changing some practices used in the groves, including cessation of
olive-desuckering debris burning, the shredding of olive-pruning debris for use as inert soil cover and the use of cover

98 |

CLARK AND KERR

crops managed through mowing. These changes in practices contribute to sustainable olive growing. By adopting
these practices, growers can reduce soil erosion (Rodriguez-Entrena & Arriaza, 2013). In Hinojosa-Rodriguez et al.’s
(2014) study of PDOs in Spain, they found that not only do PDOs result in better quality product, but they also have
positive effects on improving environmentally sustainable agricultural practices in olive groves. Although this may not
combat all aspects of climate change, a shift in these practices is contributing to soil health without drastically
changing pertinent processes related to the GI attributed to VOOs from this region.

Unless the effects of climate change are spread evenly across all producers, such changes in productive practices
are likely to prove controversial. The first controversial aspect is likely to be similar to that described above for the
second type of adaptation. Changing the production process may alter quality or the perception of quality or add cost
and time to production. Farmers whose incomes are negatively affected to a greater degree by climate change are
likely to be willing to risk a change in quality. Others, who are less affected, will be opposed to accepting this risk.
Again, to change the production practices embedded in the GI (such as a move to irrigation) would require a formal
petition to alter the specifications of the GI, making the change a matter of public record. If the reputation of the GI is,
in part, based on the use of traditional production methods, then there may be adverse effects on the value of the GI.12
The olive oil industry is taking measures to address the challenges that climate change is creating, but the worry is
that even on-farm changes to production practices may not be enough to combat temperature rises and changes in
rainfall. Particular olive oil producing regions whose GI is terroir-based, Sicilian olive oil for example, may not be able to
adequately address climate change with the result that the amount of olive oil produced may be reduced. Reduced
yields and/or increases in costs may reduce the viability of using traditional methods, thus nullifying the benefit of
having a GI designation.

If a climatological shift occurs where the particular agronomic conditions defining terroir takes place, changing
the geographic boundaries of the designated geographic area may be proposed. This seems to be the last option a
GI based on terroir would choose because it ultimately undermines the entire concept of terroir and the basis of the
GI. Still, it is important to consider, as in some cases, this may be the only option for particular geographical regions
subject to the negative effects of climate change. One example of a GI protected product that altered geographic
parameters related to the product is tequila. Although the factors behind the change in boundaries were
economically motivated and not directly related to climate change, the tequila example is illustrative of how a GI
protected product may be forced to respond in order to protect the GI label and the value behind the label (see
Bowen & Zapata, 2009).

Virgin Olive Oil GIs are based primarily on terroir and are, for the most part, located in areas where climate change
is expected to have major and negative effects. While there may be some adaptation of production practices that fall
within the existing legal scope of GIs, yields and quality are likely to decline in future. The result will be pressure to
lower quality (through the relaxation of specifications for olives) or distinctiveness (through planting hardier varieties
of trees). Such potential changes are likely to prove contentious among the groups of producers holding rights to the
GI and invoke a negative reaction from consumers. Hence, adapting to climate change across the wide swath of
southern Europe represents a considerable challenge.

4 | CONCLUSION

In many parts of the world, climate change will provide an incentive for agricultural producers to adapt their
production and post-harvest systems to evolving agronomic conditions (Kulshreshtha, 2011). Some farmers will
successfully adapt their operations in response to climate change—as they have successfully adapted to myriad
technological changes over the era of scientific agriculture (Kerr, 2014)—but others will not be willing or able to adapt.
Limiting the negative impacts of climate change for agricultural producers is one of the major public policy challenges
faced by the sector. Some groups of producers, however, may face additional constraints on their strategies to adapt
to climate change—those that have been legally endowed with the rights to a geographical indication based on terroir.

CLARK AND KERR

| 99

While many GIs are premised on artisan-based intellectual property and, hence, unlikely to be affected by changes in
climate, others are based on terroir, which is defined by specific geographic qualities such as soil, rainfall, sunlight, plant
type, etc. that are, in part, a function of climatic conditions. As the properties imparted by terroir to agricultural products
are credence attributes, legal protection requires detailed specification of terroir. Receiving a GI designation provides
protection from similar products not produced according to the legal definition of terroir but also endows the group of
farmers with a monopoly over the sale of their product (Yeung & Kerr, 2011). This monopoly provides the basis for
ongoing profitability13 using traditional methods to sustain particular lifestyles. If climate change reduces productivity
or quality, then production based on legally defined terroir may not provide sufficient benefits for farm businesses or
lifestyles to be maintained. As a result, pressure for altering the legal specification of terroir may arise.14

Adaptation options are likely to include a move away from traditional production practices, reductions in the
specifications of quality, and altering the geographic scope of the GI designation. Given that the rationale for granting
the GI is based on the unique properties of the underlying terroir, those granting the designation may question the new
justification and, given that consumers associate the GI with certain attributes, there may be resistance to altering the
existing legal specification. Further, as not all farmers in the group holding the legal rights to the GI will be negatively
impacted to the same degree by climate change, adaptation strategies may prove contentious among the group of
rights holders. Hence, adaptation may be considerably constrained and the value of being endowed with a GI reduced.
Given that in a number of jurisdictions the granting of GIs is seen as an important plank of agricultural policy, the issue
of how adaptation can be managed needs to be addressed. How GIs can be adapted will be part of the larger issue of
the effect of climate change on agriculture.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Dr. Lisa F. Clark is a Research Associate in the Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics at the University
of Saskatchewan, Canada. She has published widely in the area of food policy and is the author of the book The
Changing Politics of Organic Food in North America.
Dr. William A. Kerr is a University Distinguished Professor at the University of Saskatchewan, Canada. He has
published papers on a range on intellectual property issues in agriculture including geographical indications, traditional
knowledge, bio-prospecting and genetically modified organisms. He is a co-author of the book Guide to Geographical
Indications—Linking Products and Their Origins.

ENDNOTES

1 The system of Appellations d’Origine Contrôlée (AOC) in France established “by the Law of the 30th of July of 1935 has
created a specific type of French wine: AOC wines. These wines use the notion of terroir to distinguish themselves from the
other wines. A terroir relies on natural and human factors and their specificities.” See Calboli and Gervais (2015).

2 Economists classify product attributes into search, experience and credence. Search attributes are those that can be
discerned by inspection (e.g., blemishes on fruit) at the point of purchase. Experience attributes are those that can be
determined through consumption (e.g., the tenderness of a pork chop). See Hobbs (1996).

3 The monopoly only extends to the use of the name associated with the GI in marketing. It does not prevent competitors from
entering the market with a similar (or exact duplicate) product as long as they do not use the GI in their marketing. For
example, wine makers in South Africa can make sparking white wine using the same method as producers in the Champagne
region of France as long as they do not market it as Champagne.

4 There may be some long-standing GIs based simply on production being located in particular geographic areas that were

grandfathered when modern legal regimes for GIs were established.

5 Others argue that the conception of terroir is socially constructed to privilege certain actors and modes of development over

others (see Banks & Sharpe, 2006; Bowen & Zapata, 2009; Gade, 2004; Moran, 1993).

6 Organoleptic properties are the aspects of food, water or other substances that an individual experiences via the senses

including taste, sight, smell, and touch.

100 |

CLARK AND KERR

7 Yeung and Kerr (2011) provide a discussion of the limits to the protection provided by GIs. Of course, GIs do not prevent the
production and marketing of duplicate or similar products as long as the GI label is not used—for example, fortified red wine
marketed as Pipe in Port style bottles (Kerr, 2006).

8 For example, olive oil produced using improved crushing technology and, hence, not conforming to the standards of the GI

that specifies traditional crushing methods.

9 Of course, enjoying a GI designation is not a guarantee of profitability (Giovannucci et al., 2009; Yeung & Kerr, 2011).
10 In the EU sui generis system: “Procedures should be laid down to allow the amendment of product specifications
after registration” (European Union, 2012). The group holding the GI devises the procedures. While changes to
specifications pertaining to terroir may be changed in response to climate change, we argue in what follows that
obtaining agreement among the farmers holding the GI may be difficult as climate change will likely affect them to
different degrees.

11 This is not typically the case with new world (e.g., the Antipodes, the Americas, South Africa) wine producers whose

marketing emphasises grape varieties.
12 As is the case with the Champagne GI.
13 Of course, having a monopoly does not ensure profitability (Yeung & Kerr, 2011).
14 There is also a question related to the potential of those outside the territory specified in the GI to challenge the validity
of the designation as climate change alters terroir (i.e., could it be argued that the GI for Champagne is no longer valid
given that the terroir in the region is changing.). If so, the result could be that the GI would revert to a generic
designation, which could be used by producers of sparkling wine outside the geographically designated area of the
previous GI.

REFERENCES

Ashenfelter, O., & Storchmann, K. (2016). The economics of wine, weather, and climate change. Review of Environmental

Economics and Policy, 10(1), 25–46.

Babjoub, A., Ajal, E. A., Fernandez-Gutierrez, A., & Cassasco-Pancorbo, A. (2016). Evaluating the potential of phenolic profiles
as discriminant features among extra virgin olive oils from Moroccan controlled designations of origin. Food Research
International, 84, 41–51.

Backlund, P., Schimel, D., Janetos, A., Hatfield, J., Ryan, M., Archer, S., & Lettenmaier, D. (2008). Introduction. In The effects of
climate change on agriculture, land resources, water resources, and biodiversity. Washington, D.C: A Report by the U.S.
Climate Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research.

Banks, G., & Sharpe, S. (2006). Wines, regions and geographic imperative: The coonawarra example. New Zealand Geographer,

62(3), 173–184.

Barham, E. (2003). Translating terroir: The global challenge of french AOC labelling. Journal of Rural Studies, 19, 127–138.
Berard, L., Cegarra, M., Jama, M. D., Louafi, S., Marchenay, P., Roussel, E., & Verdeaux, F. (2005). Biodiversity and local rcological

knowledge in France. Paris: INRA, CIRAD, IDDRI, IFB.

Bérard, L., & Marchenay, P. (2006). Local products and geographical indications: Taking account of local knowledge and

biodiversity. International Social Science Journal, 58(187), 109–116.

Bindi, M., Fibbi, L., Gozzini, B., Orlandini, S., & Miglietta, F. (1996). Modelling the impact of future climate scenarios on yield

and yield variability on grapevine. Climate Research, 7, 213–224.

Blakeney, M. (2014). Geographical indications: What do they indicate? The WIPO Journal, 6(1), 50–56.
Bowen, S., & Zapata, A.V. (2009). Geographical indications, terroir, and socioeconomic and ecological sustainability: The case

of tequila. Journal of Rural Studies, 25(1), 108–119.

Brink, L., Hobbs, J. E., Kerr, W. A, Klein, K. K., McCarthy, M., & Oxley, J. (1997). The hog and pork industries of Denmark and the
Netherlands, a competitiveness analysis. Canada, Ottawa: Economic and Policy Analysis Directorate, Policy Branch,
Agriculture and Agri-Food.

Broude, T. (2005). Taking trade and culture seriously: Geographical indications and cultural protection in WTO law. University

of Pennsylvania Journal of International Economic Law, 26(4), 623–652.

Burton, I., & Lim, B. (2005). Achieving adequate adaptation in agriculture. Climatic Change, 70, 191–200.
Calboli, I., & Gervais, D. (2015). Socio-economic aspects of geographical indications. Geneva: World Intellectual Property
http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/geoind/en/wipo_geo_bud_15/

Available

at:

Organization.
wipo_geo_bud_15_9.pdf [Accessed on June 2016].

online

Clark, L. F. (2015). The changing politics of organic food in North America. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Considine, J. I., Kerr, W. A., Smith, G. R., & Ulmer, S. M. (1986). The Impact of a new grading system on the beef cattle industry:

The case of Canada. Western Journal of Agricultural Economics, 11(2), 184–194.

CLARK AND KERR

| 101

Cousins, S. (2015). Climate change causing a headache for Assam tea growers in India. Available online at: https://www.

newscientist.com/article/mg22630264-400-climate-change-causing-a-headache-for-assam-tea-growers-in-india/
[Accessed on July 2016].

Erdman, H. E. (1950). Problems in establishing grades for farm products. Journal of Farm Economics, 32, 15–29.
Guide to Applicants: Regulation (EC) No 1151/2012. Available online at: http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/quality/schemes/

guides/guide-for-applicants_en.pdf [Accessed on July 2016].

European Union (2012). Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012 of the European Parliament and of the council of 21 November 2012
on quality schemes for agricultural products and foodstuffs. Official Journal of the European Union, L343/1, 14.12.2012.
Fairbairn, B. (2004). Cohesion, adhesion, and identities. In Co-operative membership and globalization. New directions in research

and practice (pp. 18–50). Centre for the Study of Co-operatives Saskatoon, University of Saskatchewan: Saskatoon.

Farris, P. L. (1960). Uniform grades and standards; product differentiation and product development. Journal of Farm

Economics, 42, 854–63.

Fulton, M., Jones, B., & Schrader, L. (1998). New generation cooperatives. Purdue Agricultural Economics Report, 7–10.
Gade, D. W. (2004). Tradition, territory, and terroir in French viniculture: Cassis, France and appellation contrôlée. Annals of

the Association of American Geographers, 94(4), 848–867.

Giovannucci, D., Josling, T., Kerr, W. A., O’Connor, B., & Yeung, M. T. (2009). Guide to geographical indications—linking products

and their origins. International Trade Centre: Geneva.

Gordon, D. V., Hannesson, R., & Kerr, W. A. (1999). What is a commodity? An empirical definition using time series

econometrics. Journal of International Food and Agribusiness Marketing, 10(2), 1–29.

Herrmann, R.

(2009). The law and economics of geographical

indications: Introduction. The Estey Centre Journal of

International Law and Trade Policy, 10(1), 12.

Hinojosa-Rodriguez, A., Parra-Lopez, C., Carmona-Torres, C., & Sayadi, S. (2014). Protected designation of origin in the olive

growing sector: Adoption factors and goodness of practices in Andalusia, Spain Ascensión. New Medit, 3, 2–12.

Hobbs, J. E. (2001) Dimensions of competitiveness: Lessons from the Danish pork industry. Current Agricultural, Food and

Resource Issues, 2, 1–11.

Hobbs, J. E. (1996). A transaction cost approach to supply chain management. Supply Chain Management, 1(2), 15–27.
Hughes, J. (2006). Champagne, feta, and bourbon: The spirited debate about geographical indications. Hastings Law Journal,

58, 299–386.

Hussain, W. (2010). Tea off: India’s farmers say climate changing brew, Associated Press, Posted 12/31/2010. Available online at:

http://www.mercurynews.com/ci_16983887 [Accessed on July 2016].

Indian Tea Association (2016). Tea growing regions. Available online at: http://www.indiatea.org/tea_growing_regions.php

[Accessed on July 2016].

International Olive Council (2010). Technical activities, OLIVAE (English edition) No. 113. Available online at: http://www.

internationaloliveoil.org/ [Accessed on July 2016].

IPCC (2013). Climate change 2013: The physical science basis, intergovernmental panel on climate change. Available online at:

http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/ [Accessed on July 2016].

Jones, G. V., White, M. A., Cooper, O. R., & Storchmann, K. (2005). Climate change and global wine quality. Climatic Change,

73(3), 319–343.

Josling, T. (2006). War on terroir: Geographical indications as a transatlantic trade conflict. Journal of Agricultural Economics,

57(3), 337–363.

Kerr, W. A. (2014). The trade system and biotechnology. In S. J. Smyth, P. W. B. Phillips, & D. Castle (Eds.), Handbook on

agriculture, biotechnology and development (pp. 217–229). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Kerr, W. A. (2006). Enjoying a good port with a clear conscience: Geographic indicators, rent seeking and development. Journal

of International Law and Trade Policy, 7(1), 1–14.

Khaledi, M., Weseen, S., Sawyer, E., Ferguson, S., & Gray, R. (2010). Factors influencing partial and complete adoption of

organic farming practices in Saskatchewan, Canada. Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, 58(1), 37–56.

Kime, F. (2014). Champagne growers cast a wary eye at England. The Daily Climate, May 9. Available online at: http://www.

dailyclimate.org/tdc-newsroom/2014/05/champagne-climate-trouble [Accessed on July 2016].

Kireeva, I. (2011). How to register geographical indications in the European Community. World Patent Information, 33(1),

72–77.

Kulshreshtha, S. N. (2011). Climate change, prairie agriculture, and prairie economy: The new normal. Canadian Journal of

Agricultural Economics, 59(1), 19–44.

LeVay, C. (1983). Agricultural co-operative theory: A review. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 34(1), 1–44.
Lough, J. M., Wigley, T. M. L., & Palutikof, J. P. (1983). Climate and climate impact scenarios for Europe in a Warmer World.

Journal of Climate and Applied Meteorology, 22, 1673–1684.

Marre, A. (2004). Is there any wine terroirs in champagne? Geographical Review of the East, 44(1–2), Available online at: http://

rge.revues.org/994 [Accessed on July 2016].

102 |

CLARK AND KERR

Mehren, G. L. (1955). Place of marketing agreements in stabilizing farm income. Journal of Marketing, 19(4), 331–337.
Mooney, S., & Arthur, L. M. (1990). The impacts of climate change on agriculture in Manitoba. Canadian Journal of Agricultural

Economics, 38(4), 685–94.

Moran, W. (1993). The wine appellation as territory in France and California. Annals of the Association of American Geographers,

83, 694–717.

Mozelle, M. R., & Thach, L. (2014). The impact of climate change on the global wine industry: Challenges and solutions. Wine

Economics and Policy, 3(2), 81–89.

Nearing, M. A., Pruski, F. F., & O’Neal, M. R. (2004). Expected climate change impacts on soil erosion rates: A review. Journal of

Soil and Water Conservation, 59(1), 43–50.

Parry, M. L., Rosenzweig, C., Iglesiasc, A., Livermored, M., & Fischer, G. (2004). Effects of climate change on global food

production under SRES emissions and socio-economic scenarios. Global Environmental Change, 14, 53–67.

Rodriguez-Entrena, M., & Arriaza, M. (2013). Adoption of conservation agriculture in olive groves: Evidences from Southern

Spain. Land Use Policy, 34, 294–300.

Tomasi, D., Gaiotti, F., & Jones, G. V. (2013). The power of the terroir: The case study of Prosecco wine. Basel: Springer.
Trubek, A. (2008). The taste of place: A cultural journey into ‘Terroir’. Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
TRIPS (1994). Agreement on trade related aspects of intellectual property. World Trade Organization: Geneva. Available online

at: https://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/27-trips.pdf [Accessed on July 2016].

Vaudour, E. (2003). Les terroirs viticoles. Paris: Dunod.
Vaudour, E., Costantini, E., Jones, G. V., & Mocali, S. (2015). An overview of the recent approaches to terroir functional

modelling, footprinting and zoning. Soil, 1, 287–312.

Viju, C., Yeung, M. T., & Kerr, W. A. (2013). Geographical indications, conflicted preferential agreements, and market access.

Journal of International Economic Law, 16(2), 409–437.

Wolf, A. F. (1944). Measuring the effects of agricultural advertising. Journal of Farm Economics, 26(2), 324–347.
World Intellectual Property Organization (2016). What is a geographical indication? Geneva: World Intellectual Property

Organization. Available online at: http://www.wipo.int/geo_indications/en/ [Accessed on July 2016].

Yeung, M. T., & Kerr, W. A. (2011). Are geographical indications a wise strategy for developing country farmers? Journal of

World Intellectual Property, 14(5), 353–367.

How to cite this article: Clark LF, Kerr WA. Climate change and terroir: The challenge of adapting
geographical indications. J World Intellect Prop. 2017;20:88–102. https://doi.org/10.1111/jwip.12078


