Second Protocol to the Hague

Convention of 1954 for the Protection

of Cultural Property in 

the Event of Armed Conﬂict 
The Hague (March 26, 1999)

The Parties,

Conscious of the need to improve the protection of cultural property in the event of
armed con(cid:223)ict and to establish an enhanced system of protection for speci(cid:222)cally
designated cultural property;

Reaf(cid:222)rming the importance of the provisions of the Convention for the Protection
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Con(cid:223)ict, done at the Hague on 14
May 1954, and emphasizing the necessity to supplement these provisions through
measures to reinforce their implementation;

Desiring to provide the High Contracting Parties to the Convention with a means
of being more closely involved in the protection of cultural property in the event
of armed con(cid:223)ict by establishing appropriate procedures therefor;

Considering that the rules governing the protection of cultural property in the event
of armed con(cid:223)ict should re(cid:223)ect developments in international law;

Af(cid:222)rming that the rules of customary international law will continue to govern
questions not regulated by the provisions of this Protocol;

Have agreed as follows:

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 8, No. 2, 1999, pp. 530— 549

530

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

documents 531

Chapter 1

Introduction

Article 1

De(cid:222)nitions

For the purposes of this Protocol:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)
(j)

(k)

(cid:210)Party(cid:211) means a State Party to this Protocol;
(cid:210)cultural property(cid:211) means cultural property as de(cid:222)ned in Article 1 of the
Convention;
(cid:210)Convention(cid:211) means the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Prop-
erty in the Event of Armed Con(cid:223)ict, done at The Hague on 14 May 1954;
(cid:210)High Contracting Party(cid:211) means a State Party to the Convention;
(cid:210)enhanced protection(cid:211) means the system of enhanced protection estab-
lished by Articles 10 and 11;
(cid:210)military objective(cid:211) means an object which by its nature, location, purpose,
or use makes an effective contribution to military action and whose total or
partial destruction, capture or neutralization, in the circumstances ruling at
the time, offers a de(cid:222)nite military advantage;
(cid:210)illicit(cid:211) means under compulsion or otherwise in violation of the applica-
ble rules of the domestic law of the occupied territory or of international
law.
(cid:210)List(cid:211) means the International List of Cultural Property under Enhanced
Protection established in accordance with Article 27, sub-paragraph 1(b);
(cid:210)Director-General(cid:211) means the Director-General of UNESCO;
(cid:210)UNESCO(cid:211) means the United Nations Educational, Scienti(cid:222)c and Cul-
tural Organization;
(cid:210)First Protocol(cid:211) means the Protocol for the Protection of Cultural Prop-
erty in the Event of Armed Con(cid:223)ict done at The Hague on 14 May 1954;

Article 2

Relation to the Convention

This Protocol supplements the Convention in relations between the Parties.

Article 3

Scope of application

1.
In addition to the provisions which shall apply in time of peace, this Pro-
tocol shall apply in situations referred to in Article 18 paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
Convention and in Article 22 paragraph 1.

2. When one of the parties to an armed con(cid:223)ict is not bound by this Protocol,
the Parties to this Protocol shall remain bound by it in their mutual relations.
They shall furthermore be bound by this Protocol in relation to a State party to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

532 international journal of cultural property

the con(cid:223)ict which is not bound by it, if the latter accepts the provisions of this
Protocol and so long as it applies them.

Article 4

Relationship between Chapter 3 and other provisions of the Convention and this
Protocol

The application of the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Protocol is without

prejudice to:

(a)

(b)

the application of the provisions of Chapter I of the Convention and of
Chapter 2 of this Protocol;
the application of the provisions of Chapter II of the Convention save
that, as between Parties to this Protocol or as between a Party and a State
which  accepts  and  applies  this  Protocol  in  accordance  with  Article  3
paragraph 2, where cultural property has been granted both special and
enhanced protection, only the provisions of enhanced protection shall
apply.

Chapter 2

General provisions regarding protection

Article 5

Safeguarding of cultural property

Preparatory measures taken in time of peace for the safeguarding of cultural
property against the foreseeable effects of an armed con(cid:223)ict pursuant to Article 3
of the Convention shall include, as appropriate, the preparation of inventories, the
planning of emergency measures for protection against (cid:222)re or structural collapse,
the preparation for the removal of movable cultural property or the provision for
adequate in situ protection of such property, and the designation of competent au-
thorities responsible for the safeguarding of cultural property.

Article 6

Respect for cultural property

With the goal of ensuring respect for cultural property in accordance with Ar-

ticle 4 of the Convention:

(a)

a waiver on the basis of imperative military necessity pursuant to Article 4
paragraph 2 of the Convention may only be invoked to direct an act of hos-
tility against cultural property when and for as long as:
(i)

that cultural property has, by its function, been made into a military
objective; and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

documents 533

(ii)

there is no feasible alternative available to obtain a similar military
advantage to that offered by directing an act of hostility against that
objective;

a waiver on the basis of imperative military necessity pursuant to Article 4
paragraph 2 of the Convention may only be invoked to use cultural property
for purposes which are likely to expose it to destruction or damage when and
for as long as no choice is possible between such use of the cultural property
and another feasible method for obtaining a similar military advantage;
the decision to invoke imperative military necessity shall only be taken by
an of(cid:222)cer commanding a force the equivalent of a battalion in size or larger,
or a force smaller in size where circumstances do not permit otherwise;
in case of an attack based on a decision taken in accordance with sub-
paragraph (a), an effective advance warning shall be given whenever cir-
cumstances permit.

(b)

(c)

(d)

Article 7

Precautions in attack

Without prejudice to other precautions required by international humanitar-

ian law in the conduct of military operations, each Party to the con(cid:223)ict shall:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

do everything feasible to verify that the objectives to be attacked are not cul-
tural property protected under Article 4 of the Convention;
take all feasible precautions in the choice of means and methods of attack
with a view to avoiding, and in any event to minimizing, incidental damage
to cultural property protected under Article 4 of the Convention;
refrain from deciding to launch any attack which may be expected to cause
incidental damage to cultural property protected under Article 4 of the
Convention which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct
military advantage anticipated; and
cancel or suspend an attack if it becomes apparent:
(i)

that the objective is cultural property protected under Article 4 of
the Convention;
that the attack may be expected to cause incidental damage to cul-
tural property protected under Article 4 of the Convention which
would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military ad-
vantage anticipated.

(ii)

Article 8

Precautions against the effects of hostilities

The Parties to the con(cid:223)ict shall, to the maximum extent feasible:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

534 international journal of cultural property

(a)

(b)

remove movable cultural property from the vicinity of military objectives or
provide for adequate in situ protection;
avoid locating military objectives near cultural property.

Article 9

Protection of cultural property in occupied territory

1.
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 4 and 5 of the Convention,
a Party in occupation of the whole or part of the territory of another Party shall
prohibit and prevent in relation to the occupied territory:
(a)
(b)

any illicit export, other removal or transfer of ownership of cultural property;
any archaeological excavation, save where this is strictly required to safe-
guard, record or preserve cultural property;
any alteration to, or change of use of, cultural property which is intended
to conceal or destroy cultural, historical or scienti(cid:222)c evidence.

(c)

2.
Any archaeological excavation of, alteration to, or change of use of, cultural
property in occupied territory shall, unless circumstances do not permit, be car-
ried out in close co-operation with the competent national authorities of the oc-
cupied territory.

Chapter 3

Enhanced Protection

Article 10

Enhanced protection

Cultural property may be placed under enhanced protection provided that it

meets the following three conditions:

(a)
(b)

(c)

it is cultural heritage of the greatest importance for humanity;
it  is  protected  by  adequate  domestic  legal  and  administrative  measures
recognising  its  exceptional  cultural  and  historic  value  and  ensuring  the
highest level of protection;
it is not used for military purposes or to shield military sites and a decla-
ration has been made by the Party which has control over the cultural prop-
erty, con(cid:222)rming that it will not be so used.

Article 11

The granting of enhanced protection

Each Party should submit to the Committee a list of cultural property for

1.
which it intends to request the granting of enhanced protection.

2.
The Party which has jurisdiction or control over the cultural property may
request that it be included in the List to be established in accordance with Article

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

documents 535

27 sub-paragraph 1(b). This request shall include all necessary information related
to the criteria mentioned in Article 10. The Committee may invite a Party to re-
quest that cultural property be included in the List.

3.
Other Parties, the International Committee of the Blue Shield and other
non-governmental organisations with relevant expertise may recommend speci(cid:222)c
cultural property to the Committee. In such cases, the Committee may decide to
invite a Party to request inclusion of that cultural property in the List.

4.
Neither the request for inclusion of cultural property situated in a territory,
sovereignty or jurisdiction over which is claimed by more than one State, nor its in-
clusion, shall in any way prejudice the rights of the parties to the dispute.

5.
Upon receipt of a request for inclusion in the List, the Committee shall in-
form all Parties of the request. Parties may submit representations regarding such
a request to the Committee within sixty days. These representations shall be made
only on the basis of the criteria mentioned in Article 10. They shall be speci(cid:222)c and
related to facts. The Committee shall consider the representations, providing the
Party requesting inclusion with a reasonable opportunity to respond before tak-
ing the decision. When such representations are before the Committee, decisions
for inclusion in the List shall be taken, notwithstanding Article 26, by a majority
of four-(cid:222)fths of its members present and voting.

6.
In deciding upon a request, the Committee should ask the advice of gov-
ernmental and non-governmental organisations, as well as of individual experts.

A decision to grant or deny enhanced protection may only be made on the

7.
basis of the criteria mentioned in Article 10.

8.
In exceptional cases, when the Committee has concluded that the Party re-
questing inclusion of cultural property in the List cannot ful(cid:222)ll the criteria of Ar-
ticle 10 sub-paragraph (b), the Committee may decide to grant enhanced protec-
tion, provided that the requesting Party submits a request for international assistance
under Article 32.

9.
Upon the outbreak of hostilities, a Party to the con(cid:223)ict may request, on an
emergency basis, enhanced protection of cultural property under its jurisdiction or
control by communicating this request to the Committee. The Committee shall
transmit this request immediately to all Parties to the con(cid:223)ict. In such cases the Com-
mittee will consider representations from the Parties concerned on an expedited basis.
The decision to grant provisional enhanced protection shall be taken as soon as pos-
sible and, notwithstanding Article 26, by a majority of four-(cid:222)fths of its members pres-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

536 international journal of cultural property

ent and voting. Provisional enhanced protection may be granted by the Committee
pending the outcome of the regular procedure for the granting of enhanced protec-
tion, provided that the provisions of Article 10 sub-paragraphs (a) and (c) are met.

Enhanced protection shall be granted to cultural property by the Commit-

10.
tee from the moment of its entry in the List.

11.
The Director-General shall, without delay, send to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and to all Parties noti(cid:222)cation of any decision of the Com-
mittee to include cultural property on the List.

Article 12

Immunity of cultural property under enhanced protection

The Parties to a con(cid:223)ict shall ensure the immunity of cultural property under
enhanced protection by refraining from making such property the object of attack
or from any use of the property or its immediate surroundings in support of mil-
itary action.

Article 13

Loss of enhanced protection

1.

Cultural property under enhanced protection shall only lose such protection:
if such protection is suspended or cancelled in accordance with Ar-
(a)
ticle 14; or
if, and for as long as, the property has, by its use, become a military
objective.

(b)

In the circumstances of sub-paragraph 1(b), such property may only be the

2.
object of attack if:

(a)

(b)

(c)

the attack is the only feasible means of terminating the use of the
property referred to in sub-paragraph 1(b);
all feasible precautions are taken in the choice of means and meth-
ods of attack, with a view to terminating such use and avoiding, or
in any event minimising, damage to the cultural property;
unless circumstances do not permit, due to requirements of imme-
diate self-defence:
(i)

the attack is ordered at the highest operational level of com-
mand;
effective advance warning is issued to the opposing forces
requiring the termination of the use referred to in sub-
paragraph 1(b); and

(ii)

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

documents 537

(iii) Reasonable time is given to the opposing forces to redress

the situation.

Article 14

Suspension and cancellation of enhanced protection

1.
Where cultural property no longer meets any one of the criteria in Article
10 of this Protocol, the Committee may suspend its enhanced protection status or
cancel that status by removing that cultural property from the List.

2.
In the case of a serious violation of Article 12 in relation to cultural prop-
erty under enhanced protection arising from its use in support of military action,
the Committee may suspend its enhanced protection status. Where such violations
are continuous, the Committee may exceptionally cancel the enhanced protection
status by removing the cultural property from the List.

3.
The Director-General shall, without delay, send to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and to all Parties to this Protocol noti(cid:222)cation of any de-
cision of the Committee to suspend or cancel the enhanced protection of cultural
property.

Before taking such a decision, the Committee shall afford an opportunity

4.
to the Parties to make their views known.

Chapter 4

Criminal responsibility and jurisdiction

Article 15

Serious violations of this Protocol

1.
Any person commits an offence within the meaning of this Protocol if that
person intentionally and in violation of the Convention of this Protocol commits
any of the following acts:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

making cultural property under enhanced protection the object of
attack;
using cultural property under enhanced protection or its immediate
surroundings in support of military action;
extensive destruction or appropriation of cultural property pro-
tected under the Convention and this Protocol;
making cultural property protected under the Convention and this
Protocol the object of attack;
theft, pillage or misappropriation of, or acts of vandalism directed
against cultural property protected under the Convention.

538 international journal of cultural property

2.
Each Party shall adopt such measures as may be necessary to establish as
criminal offences under its domestic law the offences set forth in this Article and
to make such offences punishable by appropriate penalties. When doing so, Parties
shall comply with general principles of law and international law, including the
rules extending individual criminal responsibility to persons other than those who
directly commit the act.

Article 16

Jurisdiction

1.
Without prejudice to paragraph 2, each Party shall take the necessary leg-
islative measures to establish its jurisdiction over offences set forth in Article 15 in
the following cases:

(a)
(b)
(c)

when such an offence is committed in the territory of that State;
when the alleged offender is a national of that State;
in the case of offences set forth in Article 15 sub-paragraphs [1] (a)
to (c), when the alleged offender is present in its territory.

2. With respect to the exercise of jurisdiction and without prejudice to Arti-
cle 28 of the Convention:

(a)

(b)

this Protocol does not preclude the incurring of individual criminal
responsibility or the exercise of jurisdiction under national and in-
ternational law that may be applicable, or affect the exercise of ju-
risdiction under customary international law;
Except in so far as a State which is not Party to this Protocol may
accept and apply its provisions in accordance with Article 3 para-
graph 2, members of the armed forces and nationals of a State
which is not Party to this Protocol, except for those nationals serv-
ing in the armed forces of a State which is a Party to this Protocol,
do not incur individual criminal responsibility by virtue of this Pro-
tocol, nor does this Protocol impose an obligation to establish ju-
risdiction over such persons or to extradite them.

Article 17

Prosecution

1.
The Party in whose territory the alleged offender of an offence set forth
in Article 15 sub-paragraphs 1 (a) to (c) is found to be present shall, if it does
not extradite that person, submit, without exception whatsoever and without
undue delay, the case to its competent authorities, for the purpose of prosecution,
through proceedings in accordance with its domestic law or with, if applicable, the
relevant rules of international law.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

documents 539

2. Without prejudice to, if applicable, the relevant rules of international law,
any person regarding whom proceedings are being carried out in connection with
the Convention or this Protocol shall be guaranteed fair treatment and a fair trial
in accordance with domestic law and international law at all stages of the pro-
ceedings, and in no cases shall be provided guarantees less favorable to such person
than those provided by international law.

Article 18

Extradition

1.
The offences set forth in Article 15 sub-paragraphs 1 (a) to (c) shall be
deemed to be included as extraditable offences in any extradition treaty existing be-
tween any of the Parties before the entry into force of this Protocol. Parties un-
dertake to include such offences in every extradition treaty to be subsequently con-
cluded between them.

2. When a Party which makes extradition conditional on the existence of a
treaty receives a request for extradition from another Party with which it has no ex-
tradition treaty, the requested Party may, at its option, consider the present Pro-
tocol as the legal basis for extradition in respect of offences as set forth in Arti-
cle 15 sub-paragraphs 1 (a) to (c).

3.
Parties which do not make extradition conditional on the existence of a
treaty shall recognise the offences set forth in Article 15 sub-paragraphs 1 (a) to
(c) as extraditable offences between them, subject to the conditions provided by
the law of the requested Party.

If necessary, offences set forth in Article 15 sub-paragraphs 1 (a) to (c) shall
4.
be treated, for the purposes of extradition between Parties, as if they had been
committed not only in the place which they occurred but also in the territory of the
Parties that have established jurisdiction in accordance with Article 16 paragraph 1.

Article 19

Mutual legal assistance

Parties shall afford one another the greatest measure of assistance in con-
1.
nection with investigations or criminal or extradition proceedings brought in re-
spect of the offences set forth in Article 15, including assistance in obtaining evi-
dence at their disposal necessary for the proceedings.

2.
Parties shall carry out their obligations under paragraph 1 in conformity
with any treaties or other arrangements on mutual legal assistance that may exist

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

540 international journal of cultural property

between them. In the absence of such treaties or arrangements, Parties shall afford
one another assistance in accordance with their domestic law.

Article 20

Grounds for refusal

1.
For the purpose of extradition, offences set forth in Article 15 sub-paragraphs
1 (a) to (c), and for the purpose of mutual legal assistance, offences set forth
in Article 15 shall not be regarded as political offences nor as offences connected
with political offences nor as offences inspired by political motives. Accord-
ingly, a request for extradition or for mutual legal assistance based on such of-
fences may not be refused on the sole ground that it concerns a political offence
or an offence connected with a political offence or an offence inspired by po-
litical motives.

2.
Nothing in this Protocol shall be interpreted as imposing an obligation to
extradite or to afford mutual legal assistance if the requested Party has substan-
tial grounds for believing that the request for extradition for offences set forth in
Article 15 sub-paragraphs 1 (a) to (c) or for mutual legal assistance with respect to
offences set forth in Article 15 has been made for the purpose of prosecuting or
punishing a person on account of that person(cid:213)s race, religion, nationality, ethnic
origin or political opinion or that compliance with the request would cause prej-
udice to that person(cid:213)s position for any of these reasons.

Article 21

Measures regarding other violations

Without prejudice to Article 28 of the Convention, each Party shall adopt
such legislative, administrative or disciplinary measures as may be necessary to sup-
press the following acts when committed intentionally:

(a)

(b)

any use of cultural property in violation of the Convention or this
Protocol;
any illicit export, other removal or transfer of ownership of cultural
property from occupied territory in violation of the Convention or
this Protocol.

Chapter 5

The protection of cultural property in armed con(cid:223)icts
not of an international character

Article 22

Armed con(cid:223)icts not of an international character

This Protocol shall apply in the event of an armed con(cid:223)ict not of an in-

1.
ternational character, occurring within the territory of one of the Parties.

documents 541

2.
This Protocol shall not apply to situations of internal disturbances and
tensions, such as riots, isolated and sporadic acts of violence and other acts of a
similar nature.

3.
Nothing in this Protocol shall be invoked for the purpose of affecting the
sovereignty of a State or the responsibility of the government, by all legitimate
means, to maintain or re-establish law and order in the State or to defend the na-
tional unity and territorial integrity of the State.

4.
Nothing in this Protocol shall prejudice the primary jurisdiction of a Party
in whose territory an armed con(cid:223)ict not of an international character occurs over
the violations set forth in Article 15.

5.
Nothing in this Protocol shall be invoked as a justi(cid:222)cation for intervening,
directly or indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the armed con(cid:223)ict or in the in-
ternal or external affairs of the Party in the territory of which that con(cid:223)ict occurs.

The application of this Protocol to the situation referred to in paragraph

6.
1 shall not affect the legal status of the parties to the con(cid:223)ict.

7.

UNESCO may offer its services to the parties to the con(cid:223)ict.

Chapter 6

Institutional Issues

Article 23

Meeting of the Parties

The Meeting of the Parties shall be convened at the same time as the Gen-
1.
eral Conference of UNESCO, and in co-ordination with the Meeting of the High
Contracting Parties, if such a meeting has been called by the Director-General.

2.

3.

The Meeting of the Parties shall adopt its Rules of Procedure.

The Meeting of the Parties shall have the following functions:
(a)

to elect the Members of the Committee, in accordance with Arti-
cle 24 paragraph 1;
to endorse the Guidelines developed by the Committee in accor-
dance with Article 27 sub-paragraph 1(a);
to provide guidelines for, and to supervise the use of the Fund by
the Committee;
to consider the report submitted by the Committee in accordance
with Article 27 sub-paragraph 1(d);

(b)

(c)

(d)

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

542 international journal of cultural property

(e)

to discuss any problem related to the application of this Protocol,
and to make recommendations, as appropriate.

At the request of at least one-(cid:222)fth of the Parties, the Director-General shall

4.
convene an Extraordinary Meeting of the Parties.

Article 24

Committee  for  the  Protection  of  Cultural  Property  in  the  Event  of  Armed
Con(cid:223)ict

1.
The Committee for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Con(cid:223)ict is hereby established. It shall be composed of twelve Parties which
shall be elected by the Meeting of the Parties.

The Committee shall meet once a year in ordinary session and in extraor-

2.
dinary sessions whenever it deems necessary.

In determining membership of the Committee, Parties shall seek to ensure

3.
an equitable representation of the different regions and cultures of the world.

Parties members of the Committee shall choose as their representatives per-
4.
sons quali(cid:222)ed in the (cid:222)elds of cultural heritage, defence or international law, and
they shall endeavour, in consultation with one another, to ensure that the Com-
mittee as a whole contains adequate expertise in all these (cid:222)elds.

Article 25

Term of of(cid:222)ce

A party shall be elected to the Committee for four years and shall be eligi-

1.
ble for immediate re-election only once.

2.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the term of of(cid:222)ce of half
of the members chosen at the time of the (cid:222)rst election shall cease at the end of the
(cid:222)rst ordinary session of the Meeting of the Parties following that at which they
were elected. These members shall be chosen by lot by the President of this Meet-
ing after the (cid:222)rst election.

Article 26

Rules of procedure

1.

The Committee shall adopt its Rules of Procedure.

A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. Decisions of the

2.
Committee shall be taken by a majority of two-thirds of its members voting.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

documents 543

Members shall not participate in the voting on any decisions relating to cul-

3.
tural property affected by an armed con(cid:223)ict to which they are parties.

Article 27

Functions

1.

The Committee shall have the following functions:
(a)
(b)

to develop Guidelines for the implementation of this Protocol;
to grant, suspend or cancel enhanced protection for cultural prop-
erty and to establish, maintain and promote the List of Cultural
Property under Enhanced Protection;
to monitor and supervise the implementation of this Protocol and
promote  the  identi(cid:222)cation  of cultural  property  under  enhanced
protection;
to consider and comment on reports of the Parties, to seek clari(cid:222)-
cations as required, and prepare its own report on the implementa-
tion of this Protocol for the Meeting of the Parties;
to receive and consider requests for international assistance under
Article 32;
to determine the use of the Fund;
to perform any other function which may be assigned to it by the
Meeting of the Parties.

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f )
(g)

The functions of the Committee shall be performed in co-operation with

2.
the Director-General.

3.
The Committee shall co-operate with international and national govern-
mental and non-governmental organizations having objectives similar to those of
the Convention, its First Protocol and this Protocol. To assist in the implementa-
tion of its functions, the Committee may invite to its meetings, in an advisory ca-
pacity, eminent professional organizations such as those which have formal rela-
tions with UNESCO, including the International Committee of the Blue Shield
(ICBS) and its constituent bodies. Representatives of the International Centre for
the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (Rome Cen-
tre) (ICCROM) and of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
may also be invited to attend in an advisory capacity.

Article 28

Secretariat

The Committee shall be assisted by the Secretariat of UNESCO which shall
prepare the Committee(cid:213)s documentation and the agenda for its meetings and shall
have the responsibility for the implementation of its decisions.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

544 international journal of cultural property

Article 29

The Fund for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Con(cid:223)ict

1.

A Fund is hereby established for the following purposes:
(a)

(b)

to provide (cid:222)nancial or other assistance in support of preparatory or
other measures to be taken in peacetime in accordance with, inter
alia, Article 5, Article 10 sub-paragraph (b) and Article 30; and
to provide (cid:222)nancial or other assistance in relation to emergency,
provisional or other measures to be taken in order to protect cul-
tural property during periods of armed con(cid:223)ict or of immediate re-
covery after the end of hostilities in accordance with, inter alia, Ar-
ticle 8 sub-paragraph (a).

The Fund shall constitute a trust fund, in conformity with the provisions

2.
of the (cid:222)nancial regulations of UNESCO.

3.
Disbursements from the Fund shall be used only for such purpose as the
Committee shall decide in accordance with the guidelines as de(cid:222)ned in Article 23
sub-paragraph 3(c). The Committee may accept contributions to be used only for
a certain programme or project, provided that the Committee shall have decided
on the implementation of such programme or project.

4.

The resources of the Fund shall consist of:
(a)
(b)

voluntary contributions made by the Parties;
contributions, gifts or bequests made by;
(i)
(ii)

(iii)

other States;
UNESCO or other organizations of the United Nations
system;
other intergovernmental or non-governmental organizations;
and
public or private bodies or individuals;

(iv)
any interest accruing on the Fund;
funds raised by collections and receipts from events organized for
the bene(cid:222)t of the Fund; and
all other resources authorized by the guidelines applicable to the Fund.

(c)
(d)

(e)

Chapter 7

Dissemination of Information and International Assistance

Article 30

Dissemination

1.
The Parties shall endeavour by appropriate means, and in particular by ed-
ucational and information programmes, to strengthen appreciation and respect for
cultural property by their entire population.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

documents 545

The Parties shall disseminate this Protocol as widely as possible, both in

2.
time of peace and in time of armed con(cid:223)ict.

3.
Any military or civilian authorities who, in time of armed con(cid:223)ict, as-
sume responsibilities with respect to the application of this Protocol, shall be
fully acquainted with the text thereof. To this end the Parties shall, as appro-
priate:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

incorporate guidelines and instructions on the protection of cul-
tural property in their military regulations;
develop and implement, in cooperation with UNESCO and rele-
vant governmental and non-governmental organizations, peacetime
training and educational programmes;
communicate to one another, through the Director-General, infor-
mation on the laws, administrative provisions and measures taken
under sub-paragraphs (a) and (b);
communicate  to  one  another,  as  soon  as  possible,  through  the 
Director-General, the laws and administrative provisions which they
may adopt to ensure the application of this Protocol.

Article 31

International cooperation

In situations of serious violations of this Protocol, the Parties undertake to act,
jointly through the Committee, or individually, in cooperation with UNESCO and
the United Nations and in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations.

Article 32

International assistance

1.
A Party may request from the Committee international assistance for cul-
tural property under enhanced protection as well as assistance with respect to the
preparation, development or implementation of the laws, administrative provi-
sions and measures referred to in Article 10.

2.
A party to the con(cid:223)ict, which is not a Party to this Protocol but which ac-
cepts and applies provisions in accordance with Article 3, paragraph 2, may request
appropriate international assistance from the Committee.

3.
The Committee shall adopt rules for the submission of requests for inter-
national assistance and shall de(cid:222)ne the forms the international assistance may
take.

Parties are encouraged to give technical assistance of all kinds, through the

4.
Committee, to those Parties or parties to the con(cid:223)ict who request it.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

546 international journal of cultural property

Article 33

Assistance of UNESCO

1.
A Party may call upon UNESCO for technical assistance in organizing the
protection of its cultural property, such as preparatory action to safeguard cultural
property, preventive and organizational measures for emergency situations and
compilation of national inventories of cultural property, or in connection with any
other problem arising out of the application of this Protocol. UNESCO shall ac-
cord such assistance within the limits (cid:222)xed by its programme and by its resources.

Parties are encouraged to provide technical assistance at bilateral or multi-

2.
lateral level.

UNESCO is authorized to make, on its own initiative, proposals on these

3.
matters to the Parties.

Chapter 8

Execution of this Protocol

Article 34

Protecting Powers

This Protocol shall be applied with the co-operation of the Protecting Pow-

ers responsible for safeguarding the interests of the Parties to the con(cid:223)ict.

Article 35

Conciliation procedure

1.
The Protecting Powers shall lend their good of(cid:222)ces in all cases where they
may deem it useful in the interests of cultural property, particularly if there is dis-
agreement between the Parties to the con(cid:223)ict as to the application or interpreta-
tion of the provisions of this Protocol.

2.
For this purpose, each of the Protecting Powers may, either at the invitation of
one Party, of the Director-General, or on its own initiative, propose to the Parties to
the con(cid:223)ict a meeting of their representatives, and in particular of the authorities re-
sponsible for the protection of cultural property, if considered appropriate, on the
territory of a State not party to the con(cid:223)ict. The Parties to the con(cid:223)ict shall be bound
to give effect to the proposals for meeting made to them. The Protecting Powers shall
propose for approval by the Parties to the con(cid:223)ict a person belonging to a State not
party to the con(cid:223)ict or a person presented by the Director-General, which person
shall be invited to take part in such a meeting in the capacity of Chairman.

Article 36

Conciliation in absence of Protecting Powers

1.

In a con(cid:223)ict where no Protecting Powers are appointed, the Director-General

documents 547

may lend good of(cid:222)ces or act by any other form of conciliation or mediation, with
a view to settling the disagreement.

2.
At the invitation of one Party or of the Director-General, the Chairman of
the Committee may propose to the Parties to the con(cid:223)ict a meeting of their rep-
resentatives, and in particular of the authorities responsible for the protection of
cultural property, if considered appropriate, on the territory of a State not party
to the con(cid:223)ict.

Article 37

Translations and reports

The Parties shall translate this Protocol into their of(cid:222)cial languages and

1.
shall communicate these of(cid:222)cial translations to the Director-General.

The Parties shall submit to the Committee, every four years, a report on the

2.
implementation of this Protocol.

Article 38

State responsibility

No provision in this Protocol relating to individual criminal responsibility
shall affect the responsibility of States under international law, including the duty
to provide reparation.

Chapter 9

Final Clauses

Article 39

Languages

This Protocol is drawn up in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and

Spanish, the six texts being equally authentic.

Article 40

Signature

This Protocol shall bear the date of 26 March 1999. It shall be opened for sig-
nature by all High Contracting Parties at The Hague from 17 May 1999 until 31
December 1999.

Article 41

Rati(cid:222)cation, acceptance or approval

1.
This Protocol shall be subject to rati(cid:222)cation, acceptance or approval by
High Contracting Parties which have signed this Protocol, in accordance with
their respective constitutional procedures.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

548 international journal of cultural property

The instruments of rati(cid:222)cation, acceptance or approval shall be deposited

2.
with the Director-General.

Article 42

Accession

This Protocol shall be open for accession by other High Contracting Par-

1.
ties from 1 January 2000.

Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession

2.
with the Director-General.

Article 43

Entry into force

This Protocol shall enter into force three months after twenty instruments

1.
of rati(cid:222)cation, acceptance, approval or accession have been deposited.

Thereafter, it shall enter into force, for each Party, three months after the

2.
deposit of its instrument of rati(cid:222)cation, acceptance, approval or accession.

Article 44

Entry into force in situations of armed con(cid:223)ict

The situations referred to in Articles 18 and 19 of the Convention shall give
immediate effect to rati(cid:222)cations, acceptances or approvals of or accessions to this
Protocol deposited by the parties to the con(cid:223)ict either before or after the begin-
ning of hostilities or occupation. In such cases, the Director-General shall trans-
mit the communications referred to in Article 46 by the speediest method.

Article 45

Denunciation

1.

Each Party may denounce this Protocol.

The denunciation shall be noti(cid:222)ed by an instrument in writing, deposited

2.
with the Director-General.

3.
The denunciation shall take effect one year after the receipt of the instru-
ment of denunciation. However, if, on the expiry of this period, the denouncing
Party is involved in an armed con(cid:223)ict, the denunciation shall not take effect until
the end of hostilities, or until the operations of repatriating cultural property are
completed, whichever is the later.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840

documents 549

Article 46

Noti(cid:222)cations

The Director-General shall inform all High Contracting Parties as well as the
United Nations, of the deposit of all the instruments of rati(cid:222)cation, acceptance,
approval or accession provided for in Articles 41 and 42 and of denunciations pro-
vided for [in] Article 45.

Article 47

Registration with the United Nations

In conformity with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations, this
Protocol shall be registered with the Secretariat of the United Nations at the re-
quest of the Director-General.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have signed the

present Protocol.

DONE at The Hague, this twenty-sixth day of March 1999, in a single copy
which shall be deposited in the archives of the UNESCO, and certi(cid:222)ed true copies
of which shall be delivered to all the High Contracting Parties.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:27:39, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739199770840


