International Journal of Cultural Property (2005) 12:163–181. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2005 International Cultural Property Society
DOI: 10.1017/S0940739105050150

Forever Nearing the Finish Line:
Heritage Policy and the Problem
of Memory in Postwar Beirut
Adrienne Fricke*

Abstract: Between 1976 and 1991, central Beirut, repository of centuries of his-
toric structures, was substantially destroyed by civil war. In 1994, a private com-
pany known by its French acronym Solidère was created by government decree
and given the task of reconstructing the center of Beirut. Despite political prob-
lems, the Solidère project brought the hope of social recovery through economic
renewal; yet progress should not come at the cost of memory.

How can Beirut, destroyed, be a site of both recovery and erasure? Even
though traditional legal and political discourses acknowledge that cultural
heritage holds a powerful position in reconstruction, there are few tools for
capturing its functions. Using heuristics originally employed in archeology and
art history, this article addresses psychological aspects of reconstruction by
discussing contemporary Lebanese art. If culture is defined not only as what
people do but how they make sense of what they have done, the enormity of the
political problems of post–civil war reconstruction become clear. National
governments hoping to consolidate authority would do well to consider how
best to approach public places resonant with emotionally charged memories.
Policymakers should consider the complex benefits of negative heritage in
drafting laws that will enable its protection. Legal reform carried out with the
goal of balanced heritage policies that accommodate negative heritage is key
for postconflict urban spaces. By acknowledging the weight of the past, such
policies would also bolster confidence in the emergent government and the
political process.

J’habitais la maison d’en face,
Face à la guerre et au Jardin,
De morts plantés et de rosiers,

I lived in the house over there
Facing war and a Garden
Planted with corpses and roses,

*University of Pennsylvania Law School. Email: africke@alumni.law.upenn.edu.

163

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

164

ADRIENNE FRICKE

Ancêtres oubliés dans la dynamique d’une allée
Dans une cube de mémoire.
Sous le balcon d’un oeil, une moitié de corps,
L’autre formant un angle sur le trottoir.
Une moitié de corps, sign isolé sur ma fresque de
haine.

Forgotten ancestors in the movement of an alley
In a cubicle of memory.
Under the balcony an eye, half a body,
The other half at an angle with the sidewalk.
Half a body, a single sign on my canvas of
hatred.

Nadia Tueni, Archives Sentimentales d’une Guerre au Liban, 1982.

“For the Lebanese and for tourists, betting on horses has always been
a favorite leisure activity.” Paid advertisement, Solidère, New York Times,
November 22, 1993.

BERUIT: AN INTRODUCTION

Between 1976 and 1991, central Beirut, a repository of centuries of historic struc-
tures, including important monuments from the Ottoman and French colonial
periods, was substantially destroyed by civil war. The war saw violence between
sectarian groups, including Shiites, Sunnis, Greek Orthodox, Greek Catholics, Ma-
ronite Catholics, and Druzes, and the city space was drawn up into sectarian en-
claves. Although the fighting engulfed the entire country, the devastation of Beirut’s
city center has come to symbolize the destruction of Lebanese society; its ruined
buildings and infrastructure are the primary locus of the history of the conflict.
As the commercial heart of the country, the city center was the space where
Lebanon’s many religious and ethnic groups could engage in a neutral setting.
This shared public space was destroyed physically and socially by snipers, shelling,
mortar attacks, and gunfights between rival militias. Further damage occurred dur-
ing the Israeli bombing and siege of the city in the early 1980s and was heightened
by the armed interventions of various foreign powers. Former commercial and
civic buildings, formerly the scene of intercommunal commerce and social inter-
action, were transformed into militia headquarters. The city’s roads and infra-
structure sustained severe damage.

When the fighting finally ended in 1991, Lebanon faced the problem of how to
rebuild its once-flourishing capital. Rather than taking on this monumental and
emotionally charged task itself, the postwar government delegated responsibility
for reconstruction to a private entity, the Lebanese Company for the Development
and Reconstruction of Beirut Central District S.A.L. (better known by its French
acronym Solidère), with controversial ties to leading politicians, including the bil-
lionaire former prime minister, Rafik Hariri. Significantly, several of the primary
stakeholders in Solidère are believed to have participated in the demolition of parts
of the Beirut Central District, or BCD, during breaks in the fighting, which critics
say lends an air of war profiteering to the reconstruction effort. Since becoming

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

FOREVER NEARING THE FINISH LINE

165

the official redevelopment authority, Solidère has sought to remake, not repair,
the central city space.

The story of Solidère embodies major themes in Lebanese governance: private
and personal influence, the cult of capitalism, and a weak state unwilling, if not
unable, to perform its regulatory functions. The legal framework for the Solidère
project, Law 117, was put in place on December 7, 1991, by the outgoing Lebanese
government; it amends the constitution and cedes to a private development au-
thority the power of eminent domain. While this legal mechanism is roughly anal-
ogous to the Redevelopment Authorities used to revitalize decaying urban areas in
the United States, it poses unique problems in a postwar setting in which sectar-
ian divisions continue to dominate and where the redeveloping entity is function-
ally run by the prime minister under a different guise. The reconstruction of
downtown Beirut is an object lesson in the politics of reconstruction and govern-
mental accountability in postconflict situations; in this sense, the formal and legal
process of reconstruction is as important as the substantive questions of historic
preservation or urban planning that have been made and partially fulfilled.

In this case, and in every war-torn city in recovery, the legal and political fields
have been the first to address these issues. But these traditional schools of thought
have failed to address a psychosocial problem: how can Beirut, destroyed, be a site
of both recovery and erasure?

Using heuristics originally employed in archeology and art history, this article
addresses the psychological aspects of reconstruction by discussing contemporary
Lebanese art that takes as its subject memory, loss, and architecture in the postwar
setting. Discussions about cultural heritage often tap into deep aquifers of un-
examined emotions, regardless of the discipline or forum in which the discussion
takes place.1 Even though traditional legal and political discourses acknowledge
that cultural heritage holds a powerful position in reconstruction, there are few
tools for capturing its functions. Yet an engagement with the emotional and psy-
chic aspects of heritage, especially negative heritage, should be thoughtfully em-
braced through policies of cultural management. This kind of management includes
not only the traditional purviews of the archeologist, anthropologist, and art his-
torian, but also the activities of the government and, by extension, the private com-
panies which have contracted to carry out its mandate. In fact, cultural management
in postwar settings may be necessary for meaningful civic development and in-
strumental in reinforcing a sustainable civil society. Conversely, the sublimation
of negative cultural heritage’s emotional charge may result in an incubation and
reexpression of deep social divisions. The main ideas used here for understanding
the current process of rebuilding in Beirut—memory, amnesia, and nostalgia—
highlight rather than suppress the emotional aspects of recovery that continue to
seep through the porous, if tidy, discourse of postwar development.

The examination of the reconstruction leads to a set of policy considerations
for incorporating a broader notion of heritage that could accommodate the re-
membrance of national trauma, with the understanding that should the region

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

166

ADRIENNE FRICKE

remain stable, Solidère would likely fulfill its vision of complete redevelopment by
2018. Despite the fact that significant political changes would be necessary to gain
popular and governmental support for a remembrance initiative as suggested in
this article, the value of the thought experiment persists: to accept the status quo
as an economic and political necessity would mean acquiescence to Lebanon’s willed
postwar amnesia. Unfortunately, a majority of the buildings in the BCD that sur-
vived the shelling and bullets have already been razed by the very corporation
entrusted with redevelopment of the area. Whereas 265 key structures have been
identified as worthy of preservation, including religious and public buildings, a
more inclusive program of urban planning, including secular and private build-
ings, is necessary for the psychic healing of Lebanese society. While it may be too
late to incorporate a more expansive vision of urban planning into the BCD, there
are many private and residential structures elsewhere in the city that might ben-
efit from a frank assessment of the issues at stake. In time, the cultural manage-
ment of postwar Beirut may prove as important as the reconstruction of its roads
and electricity grid.

The Solidère project has brought the hope of social recovery through economic
renewal to the Lebanese; this article does not suggest that Lebanese society should
remain psychologically frozen in the war years or shun economic growth. It is
problematic to equate the level of violence inflicted by the loss of culture and the
loss of human life in a war. Progress, however, should not come at the cost of
memory. Absent the painful process of examining recent history and the role of
the Lebanese in the violence that consumed their country, the danger of repeating
the mistakes that led to the war looms large.

LEGAL FRAMEWORKS: LAW 117 AND THE PRIVATIZATION

OF RECONSTRUCTION

The dubious legislative history of the private company Solidère, headed by the
onetime prime minister of Lebanon, billionaire Rafik Hariri, is rarely discussed
in media accounts of Beirut’s comeback, but an overview helps clarify the polit-
ical stakes in the project. After the first major episode of fighting in 1975–76
destroyed the Beirut Central District, the government created the Council for
Development and Reconstruction (CDR) to assume the role formerly held by
the ministry of planning. The council had commissioned a plan from the
Atelier Parisien d’Urbanisme (APUR) based on discussions between private and
public organizations interested in the reconstruction effort. Jad Tabet, a promi-
nent Lebanese architect, characterized the goal of the APUR 1977 plan as “re-
molding” the center “into a meeting place for the various communities, thus
expressing sentiments of national consciousness to reinforce Lebanon’s unity.”2
Lebanese literary scholar Saree Makdisi observed that the 1977 plan sought to
“restore the class and communal diversity that had characterized it before the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

FOREVER NEARING THE FINISH LINE

167

war,”3 showing an awareness of the long-term problems of economic inequity
for postwar society.

The government’s APUR plan, although technically in effect throughout the war,
was never implemented, so its relative merits and flaws will remain theoretical.
Instead, private entities profited from the lack of governmental controls between
1983 and 1994; ironically, most of the city center was demolished by these would-be
developers during ceasefires and lulls in the violence. The unsanctioned dynamit-
ing of the BCD, which was termed cleaning up, began in 1983, and only an out-
break of fighting in 1984 stopped the demolition.4 Approximately 80% of the
remaining structures were destroyed during the ceasefires of the following years.
The final clearing of the area occurred precipitously over a holiday weekend in
1994, in what commercial district landowner Omar Daouk called “the biggest land
grab in history.”5 The official 1977 APUR plan called for the rehabilitation, not
eradication, of many of the areas destroyed in the cleanup, including historic struc-
tures, several traditional Souks, and the Saifi neighborhood.6 Many Lebanese be-
lieve that the economic forces allied in Solidère (including former Prime Minister
Hariri) were responsible for the furtive destruction of much of the downtown
area.7 Certainly Solidère stepped into the vacuum created by the lack of buildings
and infrastructure. Angus Gavin, spokesman for Solidère, stated in one of its of-
ficial publications that the destruction of the city center had been “on such a mas-
sive scale that reconstruction was no longer a simple matter of restoring the fabric
as it existed before the war.”8

Law 117 provides the framework for Solidère by modifying the earlier amend-
ments to the 1977 law that created the Council for Development and Reconstruc-
tion.9 By the end of the war in 1991, nearly 100,000 claimants clamored for legal
priority to a mere 1,630 parcels of land. This posed a serious obstacle to the vision
of the private developers.10 Law 117 amended the 1977 legislation and granted
Solidère the power to expropriate the property of existing owners, who receive shares
of Solidère stock in return. Landholders received 65% of the total number of Solidère
shares, with an estimated value of $1.2 billion. Solidère’s remaining shares, valued
at $650 million, were sold to the Lebanese public to raise cash for infrastructure. For-
mer Prime Minister Hariri was the majority stockholder and the driving force be-
hind the company; his resignation from office in 2004 caused stock in Solidère to
drop. Lebanese commentators in the early 1990s considered Solidère fundamen-
tally flawed because the legislation amending the constitution to grant it full power
over reconstruction was passed by an outgoing government and ignored public in-
put.11 Regardless, the language of Law 117 does not mandate the creation of Solidère
per se, although it would have been difficult to imagine another set of developers
competing for the job. Solidère engaged in a worldwide advertising campaign to pro-
mote its vision of the new Beirut, including a six-page spread in the New York Times,
a year before it had gained legal status as the sole official developer of the down-
town district.12 The problems inherent in this glossy vision of the downtown area
were clear to a British journalist visiting the BCD in 1999:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

168

ADRIENNE FRICKE

Solidère represents the hope for rebirth of rich Beirut, and there hasn’t
been much left for ordinary Lebanese. While Solidère glistens . . . much
of Beirut sits in poverty. People living in the downtown area were un-
ceremoniously removed to make way for Solidère; many families still in-
habit their bombed-out homes; and the Palestinian refugee camps, which
include Sabra and Chatila, notoriously massacred by the Christian Pha-
lange under Israeli guard in 1982, are poorer than ever.13

In addition to the perceived extralegal reclamation of the BCD by private war
profiteers, the reconstruction produced anxiety about the postwar government’s
ability to protect individual property rights. Under the law, the Council for De-
velopment and Reconstruction is charged with administering those property
rights.14 However, public confidence in the government has been undermined by
its significant administrative overlap with Solidère consultants. For example, the
appointment of Fadel al-Shalak, former head of Hariri’s OGER Liban engineer-
ing group (which had laid the groundwork for Solidère), signaled what many
saw as the “main private organization in the building industry . . . tak[ing] over
the official planning advisory body.”15 One traditional landowner stated suc-
cinctly, “What the gunmen could not achieve, the developers finished off. They
have undervalued the land, and are offering derisory compensation.”16 Approx-
imately 2,600 families, owners, and tenants, were effectively dispossessed by the
Solidère project.17

In the spirit of collective avoidance surrounding the war, the Lebanese seem to
have suppressed the memory of political resistance to Solidère’s literal and legal
occupation of the field. In a prescient 1997 essay on urban narrative and spatial
identity in Beirut, Saree Makdisi observed that “we are losing sight of how [Solidère]
came to be the only option, how other options were foreclosed long before the
reconstruction effort officially began, how the whole process has been presented
. . . as an accomplished fact.”18 Eight years later, the apparent abuse of political
process is still rarely discussed, but the Lebanese have hardly forgotten. The per-
sistence of memory means that even if Solidère’s abrogation of power is almost
always represented as a fait accompli, people are aware that the process was not
participatory or universally welcomed.

NEGATIVE HERITAGE AND CULTURAL MANAGEMENT

How do cultures negotiate the memory of trauma such as genocide or civil war?
To grasp the complex posture Beirutis have taken towards reconstruction, this ar-
ticle borrows Lynn Meskell’s term negative heritage, and the French historiographer
Pierre Nora’s concept of lieux de mémoire or realms of memory to discuss how
collective memory and place intersect. These analytic tools help illustrate how the
intangible culture of violence is mediated through physical spaces such as build-
ings, monuments, and landscapes.19

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

FOREVER NEARING THE FINISH LINE

169

Negative heritage is used to capture those cultural symbols and spaces that
through trauma have become the repository of negative memory in the collective
imagination. Negative heritage can encompass conflicting kinds of memory, be-
cause each instance of it possesses a twin potential: the interpreting society can
“mobilize . . . [it] for positive didactic purposes” (as in the case of the Auschwitz
memorial); or it can be erased, if it resists “cultural rehabilitation and incorpora-
tion into the national imaginary” (as in the case of Nazi and Soviet statues and
architecture).20 The Beirut Central District constitutes a major site of negative her-
itage for the Lebanese, as well as for the world, which can be “mobilized as for-
getting as well as remembering.” The desire to recover from trauma in the most
expedient way possible is both natural and intuitive, and any compassionate in-
terlocutor of the postwar process in Lebanon must acknowledge the enormous
difficulty of contemplating the last 30 years of strife. For a nation accustomed to
survival, such introspection must feel strange, if not indulgent. Still, the polyva-
lent interpretations of negative heritage that follow from the subject’s position in
a cultural matrix make it key to reconstruction efforts.

The literal deconstruction of the downtown area created a sort of pilgrimage
site described by architect Brian Hanson in 1999 as “the most radical of projects,
a sacred nothing which people still flock to see.”21 The cultural management strat-
egies employed to overcome the horrors of the past involve what Meskell terms
past mastering: the way a society deals with inherently disturbing sites through
erasure or forgetting. The two aspects of past mastering are the erasure or eradi-
cation of the negative heritage and the inscription of a safe, sanitized past.

Solidère has been actively eradicating the urban landscape of downtown Beirut.
Since becoming the official developer, the company has employed a logic of refash-
ioning the central city space. While the restoration work Solidère has done is ad-
mirable, it is striking that many buildings that could have been saved were torn down.
Even structures from the French colonial period, whose visual vocabulary Solidère
employs, were destroyed. A well-documented example was the demolition of a
nineteenth-century rococo police station in Martyrs’ Square, which Prime Minister
Hariri had initially promised to rebuild. The replacement of authentic, potentially
troubling relics of prewar buildings with safe, neutral simulacra of colonial styles is
a recurring theme in the BCD. Solidère’s efforts have left religious buildings mag-
nificently restored but isolated among a wasteland of car parks and empty lots, lonely
monuments to a lost society. Removed from their urban context, these buildings have
become historical sites, not places of living remembrance. Meanwhile, original co-
lonial structures have been cannibalized. Costa Domani, a leading member of the
Association pour la Protection des Sites et Anciens Murs de Liban, noted that much
of the fine building material used in the older Italianate villas and palaces has turned
up at flea markets. He observes pessimistically that

Anything in Lebanon is tied to money value—not sentimental or archi-
tectural value. The land is the thing that is valuable—anything built on
the land has no value whatsoever. Those who have made money have

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

170

ADRIENNE FRICKE

done so through land speculation. To safeguard old houses, you need a
change in people’s thinking.22

There are multiple ironies to the past mastering of the BCD. On a material level,
the aversion to remembering and contemplating the causes of the war (which pro-
vided the political will for the deconstruction of the city center) resulted in the
unearthing of a treasure trove of archeological finds that were hastily excavated
prior to the major rebuilding phase. But even these long-buried objects were pow-
erful sites of negative history, as prominent journalist and longtime resident of
Beirut Robert Fisk observes:

Perhaps it is this pattern of calamity [multiple earthquakes and fires,
revealed in the archeological evidence of the downtown excavations] that
makes the Lebanese so frightened of their history. They have still not
examined the reasons for the civil war that ended four years ago—the
Beirut newspapers refer to that conflict and its 150,000 dead as al-
hawadess, “the events”—and this unwillingness to deal with the demons
of history has manifested itself in one of the most exciting archaeolog-
ical digs in recent Middle East history.23

On a political level, there is great concern that the representation of artifacts from
time periods “claimed” by religious groups could be used as legitimate claims to
cultural, and therefore political, dominance. Fadl El-Shalak, head of the CDR, ad-
mits, “We are frightened of our history because we are not united in our under-
standing of it.”24

The second sobering irony is that the posture of forgetting and its desire to
clean up through demolition risks the reconstitution of the conditions that led to
the civil conflicts of the 1860s, 1958, and 1975–91, and, ultimately, a reenactment
of the social trauma. The desire to make culture anew has the unfortunate effect
of suppressing trauma; the danger is that it may facilitate the reexpression of the
violence it seeks to forget. For this reason, both the metaphysical and physical as-
pects of reconstruction must inform the reform and creation of cultural heritage
policies in Lebanon.

THE NEW FACES OF THE PAST

How is memory expressed in terms of architecture and urban planning?
Historiographer Pierre Nora’s term “lieux de mémoire” helps define sites in which
we find “a residual sense of continuity of memory; places in which memory is crys-
tallized.”25 By exploring the operation of nostalgia via these realms of memory, the
concept allows us to understand how past mastering occurs:

Lieux de memoire arise out of a sense that there is no such thing as spon-
taneous memory, hence we must create archives, mark anniversaries, or-
ganize celebrations, pronounce eulogies, and authenticate documents
because such things no longer happen as a matter of course.26

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

FOREVER NEARING THE FINISH LINE

171

When the realms of memory are physically erased, spontaneous memory trig-
gered by their visual consumption is no longer possible. The rupture or trauma
experienced by a society in a civil war renders both spontaneous and constructed
memory difficult, painful, or psychically impossible. The eradication of these phys-
ical traces of memory—in the Beiruti case, perhaps as literal an occurrence of
negative heritage eradication as the destruction of a tall building prized by mili-
tias for having an excellent sniper range—leaves a space open for reworking of
cultural narratives. In the case of Solidère, large numbers of viable structures were
obliterated to make way for a refashioned, commercial space. The result is a lovely,
well-planned representation of a Beirut that literally never was: a finely crafted
site one might expect at Disney World, cast in terms of other, more orderly spaces
and times:

Solidère is the glamorous, exciting side of the reconstruction; it’s the part
which aims to recapture the spirit of Beirut in the 60s, when (as people
tell you) it was known as the Paris of the Middle East (for its sophisti-
cation) and little Lebanon was the Switzerland of the Middle East (for
its mountains and banks).27

By providing a sanitized and safe vision of a happy, prosperous past, the Solidère
architects are producing a nostalgia whose commercial and tourist value is as sig-
nificant as it is repressive of more personal, troubled memories. Solidère Chair-
man Nasser Chamma’a’s 1995 proclamation that “We are preserving what is worth
preserving,” (emphasis added)28 implies a value-extraction model of heritage. The
redevelopment of the BCD in the manner of a quasimandate-era Lebanon that
never existed signals a profound commitment to forget, or more pointedly, the
will to amnesia, characterized by a physical inability to remember. If memory is
bound up in some critical way with space, then the destruction of that space hin-
ders the process of remembrance.

Solidère’s slogan “Beirut: Ancient City of the Future” makes explicit the focus
on the twin prerogatives of ultramodernity and reverence for the distant past. A
significant number of edited studies by major Lebanese architects, economists, and
urban planners were published in Arabic and French outlining salient objections
to Solidère in legal, practical, and aesthetic terms.29 Ominously, the internal Leb-
anese opposition to the Solidère plan has dropped out of the larger media narra-
tive, mirroring the larger public will to forget. A British travel writer noted without
irony in 1999 that “a company called Solidère was created to oversee the gigantic
building site largely on the initiative of the country’s richest man, Rafik Hariri . . .
He had the dream of taking the area worst damaged by the war and turning it back
into a showpiece” (emphasis added).30 The confection of a showpiece, a delicious
glimpse of a past that few Lebanese experienced and even fewer can now afford to
consume, implies a series of fake memory realms, where negative heritage is
dammed up, unable to flow into the collective imaginary.

The effect of selective erasure is only partial, however, and in Beirut it has fed
an aesthetic movement obsessed with memory and its policies. The public dis-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

172

ADRIENNE FRICKE

course around the reconstruction efforts has been reflected significantly, and to a
certain extent shaped by, the work of a number of artists, many of whom are grad-
uates of the architecture program at the American University in Beirut.31 These
sculptors, videographers, and writers have been active in producing art and media
interventions focused on memory, heritage, and the physical spaces of Beirut. In
particular, the work of artists like Walid Raad and the other members of the Arab
Image Foundation speak directly to the negative heritage/nostalgia conundrum
by addressing the personal act of memory repression in pieces designed to be per-
formed against a public backdrop of urban existence.32 In the words of Arab Image
Foundation cofounder Akram Zaatari, “it is exactly the absence of any corporate,
state, or institutional demand for art that marks the kind of art practices coming
out of Lebanon. It is the political economy of art-making.”

As reconstruction moves forward and iconic spaces are set to be rebuilt, the
overt politics of remembrance are surfacing in the Lebanese press. Public outcry
at the proposed demolition of signature works, such as Joseph Philippe Karam’s
Modernist mixed-use “Bubble Dome” (officially known as the Beirut City Center
Building or BCCB) have resulted in successful, if only short-term, solutions. Solidère
has agreed to freeze the sale of the site for only five years, making the rehabilita-
tion temporary. Although the building was never officially an art space, young
people have used the old, disused movie theater as an alternative cultural venue
for the last decade, and it is hoped that this generation will prove loyal to the
space. Termed an “object lesson in the city’s tempestuous political history,” the
BCCB, also popularly known as the Bubble, the Blob, and the Egg, will be reno-
vated by postmodern architect Bernard Khoury, who plans to preserve its artillery-
scarred surface—“bullet pocks, mortar holes, crumbling plaster and all”—wrapped
in wire mesh, and surround it with permanent red scaffolding, giving it, in Khoury’s
words, “the permanent feel of a construction site.”33 Khoury’s project embodies
his vision of Beirut, “messy, chaotic, and full of life,” which signals a sharp depar-
ture from the prim colonial idiom of the BCD. Khoury imagines his structure as
providing the “way Beirut’s past and future intersect in the present.” This ambi-
tious project is significant in that Khoury intends to preserve well-known ele-
ments of negative heritage in his rehabilitation. Equally significant is the fact that
Solidère approved his radical design for the signature site.

The Bubble overlooks Martyr’s Square, a mercantile space completely razed dur-
ing the war. Solidère is sponsoring an international design competition for the
rebuilding of the Square. The site of execution of early Lebanese nationalists by
the Ottomans, it became the endpoint of the Green Line, which separated Chris-
tian from Muslim Beirut throughout the war. In a prescient statement to the press,
Solidère’s manager of urban development, Angus Gavin, observed that “It’s the
only place where all the groups in the city really came together. That has to hap-
pen again; if [downtown] works, it means the idea of a multireligious, multiethnic
society is back in business.”34 Submissions will be judged by an international seven-
member jury under the auspices of the Union of International Architects, and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

FOREVER NEARING THE FINISH LINE

173

Solidère has solicited submissions from prominent architects, including Frank
Gehry, Norman Foster, and Rafael Moneo;35 results will be announced in 2005.
Whereas it is a glamorous solution, Beiruti urban planners must still grapple with
the fundamental need to incorporate negative heritage in the larger scheme. Hashim
Sarkis, Beiruti activist, architect, and Agha Khan professor of landscape architec-
ture and urbanism in Muslim societies, observes that reconstruction architects “have
not yet taken on the responsibility of imagining the Beirut of the future. . .if you
rely on star architects to do that, each one just throwing their little icon in Beirut,
then you are missing the point.”36

INTANGIBLE NEGATIVE HERITAGE: THE ATLAS GROUP ARCHIVES

If the Lebanese civil war was fought on some level over different constructions of
the nation,37 and central Beirut functions in the national imagination as the for-
mer site of prosperity and then collective mass violence, it makes sense to con-
sider how it can be managed as negative heritage in which the physical realms of
memory have been excised. Given that this vast swath of negative heritage has
been gutted from the BCD and rebuilt as a projected fantasy, it is important to
look to other kinds of remembrance. There are a number of young artists and
architects based in Beirut whose works center on the topic of postwar construc-
tion, rebuilding, and erasure, engaging theories of memory. In particular, two pieces
by the professor, historian, and multimedia artist Walid Raad reflect lived experi-
ence of modern history in Lebanon in light of the missing realms of memory.

Whereas the limitations of using a piece of art as a heuristic for examining public
policy are obvious, the advantages in the case of the redevelopment of the fetishized
heart of Beirut are numerous. Because the official process amounts to the erasure
and calculated imposition of a system of buildings, it makes explicit the will to for-
get the trauma of the immediate past. The swift, systematic razing of the downtown
area and the construction of elegant but historically ersatz structures proves this
point. By rebuilding in the architectural idiom of a modified French mandate–past,
the current memory regime articulates nostalgia for a time before the civil wars of
1975–91, when Lebanon was a financial center commonly referred to as “the Paris
of the Middle East.” Yet this carefully manicured vision is being contested in the realm
of intangible heritage: namely, performed multimedia works of art.

The Atlas Group is an imaginary, nonprofit research foundation founded by
Walid Raad in 1999 in Beirut to explore the contemporary history of Lebanon
and, in particular, some of the unexamined dimensions of the Lebanese wars (1975–
1991).38 Raad publishes and exhibits his work with its main platform of public
performance, as a “historian of the Lebanese Civil War,” presenting findings from
an archive of either constructed or found images. Educated in both Lebanon and
the United States, he is frank about the personal and emotional content of his
work, his own history of trauma, and his concern over what he sees as the collec-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

174

ADRIENNE FRICKE

tive will to forget the past. Two pieces in particular speak to the current regime of
memory management: Sweet Talk or Photographic Documents of Beirut and Miss-
ing Lebanese Wars_Notebook Volume 72.39

In Sweet Talk, Raad presents photographs of “every street, storefront, building, and
other spaces of national, technological, architectural, cultural, political, and eco-
nomic significance,” beginning in 1973 and continuing “to this day.” He claims that
his imaginary foundation (the Atlas Group), has “recruited dozens of men and
women” to take these photographs, which are often blurry, unreadable as images, and
labeled with fictitious addresses. Raad has discussed and presented these images at
public lectures and at academic conferences40 as well as on national televised talk
shows in Lebanon, in which he solicits help “from every Lebanese citizen,” encour-
aging individuals to contact him with their stories and images. The reaction to this
piece varies with the audience; I have witnessed only the Lebanese performances,
which engender a mix of shock, sorrow, and outrage. Even Lebanese colleagues
within the academy who are sympathetic to Raad’s larger project were shocked by
the performance on national TV: the idea that ordinary people were tricked into be-
lieving in his simulacra of documentation of their painful history, and in his au-
thority as a historian, was received as cruel and obnoxious. Yet, arguably, the visceral
reaction underscores the effectiveness of the piece: the excitement people feel at the
idea of such an archive, and their shock and disgust when they discover that the im-
ages are unreal, imprecise, or manufactured, speak to the deep need to engage with
the trauma of the war. Significantly, it foregrounds the similarity of the process by
which the authorities of Solidère have created an ersatz Ottoman mandate–era space
that guides Lebanese to misremember the days prior to and between the wars.

Raad’s piece Missing Lebanese Wars takes a less literal approach to memory. He
presents the work of a deceased Lebanese archivist who catalogued the activities
of prominent historians of the Civil War. In particular, he claims that they all went
down together each week to the Hippodrome to bet. They wouldn’t bet on the
horses, however; they wagered on how far from the finish line the winning horse
would be in the newspaper photo (see figure 1). In Raad’s memoryscape, the
photographer’s trip wire is always set too early, so that the winning horse is never
photographed at the finish line. Raad’s fictitious group of gambler-historians trade
bets on just how far before the finish line the photographer will snap the shot. This
provides an apt metaphor for the repercussions of a given set of narrative strat-
egies, the forever unknown ending of the national history; by focusing our atten-
tion on the partisan historians’ wagers, Raad directs us to ponder the suspension of
history sometime just before the end of the race, or the end of a political era. As with
the photographer at the Hippodrome, the trip wire of national memory is forever
set at an anterior moment crafted through nostalgic images and structures. This
anterior suspension helps elide the events of the war from the national narrative;
no one has yet won or lost the race, and no one will ever be forced to.

Yet negative heritage is stubborn. The poem with which this article begins was
composed by Nadia Tueni in 1972, prior to the outbreak of the war.41 The poem’s

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

FOREVER NEARING THE FINISH LINE

175

FIGURE 1. Missing Lebanese Wars, plate 137 (1991–2001). File: AG_AGA_Fakhouri: 137.
Color Print, 25 ⫻ 30 cm. Copyright © The Atlas Group/Walid Raad and Fadl Fakhouri.

protagonist mentally revisits the house where she lived during another war, recal-
ling in graphic detail that her building faced a “Garden/Planted with corpses and
roses/Forgotten ancestors in the movement of an alley/In a cubicle of memory.”
Tueni’s Sentimental Archives fits well into Nora’s interpretive device: with the spa-
tial realm of her memory gone, she must create a memory house. These archives
of emotion frame symbols of violence and social discord (an eye, a body split in
two, the forgotten ancestors, and the confinement of memory) within the space of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

176

ADRIENNE FRICKE

the house—the garden, alley, balcony, and sidewalk. We can imagine the poem as
a snapshot of the internal process by which memory unfolds in the ordinary sites
of negative heritage that have been rendered extraordinary by the scope and in-
tensity of the war.

POLICY CONSIDERATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Policymakers will do well to consider the complex benefits of negative heritage in
drafting laws that will enable its protection. As one commentator notes, the years
of vicious bloodshed, violence, kidnappings, and massacres “created a profound
trauma that will take rather more than a few multinational retail outlets to cure.”42
In Lebanon, public awareness of symbols of cultural heritage is acute. Policy-
makers operating in and around state and municipal bureaucracies can best serve
their constituencies by addressing the psychosocial aspects of postwar Beirut. The
legal regime in Lebanon is characterized by a number of pressing problems that
reach far beyond issues of cultural heritage law, yet which affect it directly.43 Lack
of public participation and governmental accountability, and the inherent prob-
lems of the confessional system have all reinforced the privatization of the recon-
struction effort. Yet there is cause for hope: in 2004, positive steps were taken
towards improving reconstruction policies in Beirut’s city center as well as imple-
menting preservation programs in five major historical towns, financed through
World Bank Cultural Heritage and Urban Development (CHUD) loans.44

While a detailed analysis of Lebanese public policy lies beyond the scope of this
article, attention to two areas would likely result in improvement of the current
situation. Certain legal and social issues must be addressed for the government to
ensure a minimum threshold of positive public reception. The existing laws af-
fecting urban planning, preservation, and housing must be revisited if larger build-
ings with the potential for economically diverse and integrated residential and
commercial use are to be saved on the periphery of the BCD. Current zoning laws
encourage the demolition of larger spaces (zoning categories one and two), since
the total built-up area allowed is far greater if the existing building is demolished
than if the original structure remains. Tax incentives, such as the one passed in
June 2004 giving landlords who perform maintenance on their properties a 5%
income-tax deduction, should be supported as a way to encourage smaller inves-
tors to rehabilitate, rather than demolish, otherwise functional war-era buildings.
Such incentives would help preserve the architectural heritage of the neighbor-
hoods bordering the BCD, which are now under scrutiny for redevelopment.45

Land-use and housing regulations need urgent attention if negative heritage sites
are to be maintained for public use and consumption. The current rental law (No.
159/92, also known as the Free Contracts Law) discourages maintenance of older
tenant-occupied buildings. Since rents are stabilized at pre-1992 prices, the offers of
Solidère or other investors who will pay top dollar for land are tempting to prop-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

FOREVER NEARING THE FINISH LINE

177

erty owners who might be mobilized to protect the heritage of their neighborhoods
under less dire economic situations. A draft rent law has been hotly debated for more
than two years, with both landlords and tenants permanently dissatisfied, perhaps
because the real issue is not about rent as much as a crisis in affordable housing
stock.46 Nearly half of Beirutis rent their homes, and there is little moderately priced
housing stock, which further entrenches lifetime tenants, who pass their leases on
through family members. The social effects of Solidère’s vision are palpable, with
nearly 70,000 of the luxury apartments in the BCD empty in 2004.47

Preservation laws are similarly retrograde. The Directorate of Antiquities pro-
tects only structures built prior to 1701, under the Antiquities Law and the Urban
Code. Yet opportunities for revision are forthcoming, since the World Bank CHUD
project (which will revitalize historic sectors of Baalbek, Byblos, Tyre, Tripoli, and
Saida) includes a mandate to bring future heritage-related practices within the
UNESCO codes of conduct.48 Other changes require less work, but would yield a
significant payoff. For example, the rules for designation and listing in the Na-
tional Heritage Register should be changed, since groups of buildings are cur-
rently very difficult to list.49 Unfortunately, from 1990 to 1997, groups of private
buildings were added to the list, but the mechanisms to protect them were not
sufficient. Legal reform carried out with the goal of balanced heritage policies that
accommodate negative heritage would not only improve the texture of postwar
life in Beirut by acknowledging the weight of the past, it would also help bolster
confidence in the government and the political process.

In tandem with legal reform, lawmakers should focus on revising and consoli-
dating the administrative bodies currently responsible for implementing laws af-
fecting cultural heritage. Admittedly, Solidère is a powerful and unaccountable
quasigovernmental development agency with the ability to seize land for public
use. The Lebanese government could consolidate the various administrative enti-
ties that currently oversee cultural heritage sites and policy, to make them more
effective and give them more equal footing when negotiating with Solidère. Jour-
nalist Lisa Ball-Lechgar explains the current system:

At the moment, two separate departments handle the administration of
sites and their promotion: the Directorate of Antiquities (DGA) reports
to the Ministry of Culture, while the Directorate for the Operation of
Archeological Sites and Museums comes under the Ministry of Tour-
ism. This means that it is often not clear who is responsible for each
service, leading in turn to not enough money being spent on areas such
as site security and preservation.50

Social issues, while posing more diffuse difficulties, are no less crucial to the ulti-
mate success of reconstruction. These should include educational and informa-
tional programs that encourage continued civic participation and public discussion
of Beirut’s urban and social history and the reconstruction efforts. Past initiatives
supported by the French and British cultural centers have included well-attended
public presentations, design conferences, and panel debates on the politics and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

178

ADRIENNE FRICKE

aesthetics of reconstruction.51 The American University in Beirut hosted an influ-
ential monthlong public seminar series entitled “La Meen Beirut? (Whose Bei-
rut?)” in May of 2004, in which artists, urban planners, developers, and transit
specialists exchanged ideas on the impact of reconstruction. Such informal grass-
roots activity should be encouraged by the government. Small grants would go far
to sustain the public’s participation in such fora and would represent a tiny por-
tion of reconstruction budgets. After years of unevenly monitored development,
the government and Solidère should take care to preserve what remains of the
public’s goodwill concerning the cultural heritage of the downtown BCD. By pro-
moting education about both negative and positive cultural heritage, the govern-
ment can improve the chances of consolidating a national Lebanese identity
mediated through the lieux de memoire of public spaces.

There are no completely happy endings in narratives of nation building. Yet
with awareness of the psychosocial dimensions of urban planning in postwar Bei-
rut, the mobilization of negative heritage can bring positive didactic, psychologi-
cal, and even financial aspects to the collective experience of national reconstruction.
For policymakers, artists, and urban planners alike, the national goal must be, in
the words of architect and conservationist Mona Hallak, to “honor what this place
was, and what we lost.”52 By creating spaces for emotional as well as political ex-
pression, nonsectarian governmental initiatives would increase public awareness
of its commitment to transparency and good-faith efforts to contend with the
challenges that lie on the finish line of history.

CONCLUSION

If war is hell, then reconstruction is a psychological and financial purgatory. In
war-damaged urban areas that have experienced prolonged civil wars, it is also a
tricky political process. Major world cities have been or are being destroyed through
armed civil conflicts, and it appears that the global community will face the chal-
lenges of reconstruction repeatedly in the coming decades. The legal and eco-
nomic aspects of reconstruction are often debated, but it is rare that reconstruction
discourse openly addresses the problem of promoting a postwar culture of peace
and national inclusiveness. It is vital to discuss the reconstruction of public space
and monuments in particular, not only because traditionally they are the sites of
commerce, but also the places where the social relations we call culture are medi-
ated. If we define culture not only as what people do, but how they make sense of
what they have done, we begin to grasp the enormity of the political problems of
post–civil war reconstruction. National governments hoping to consolidate au-
thority would do well to consider how best to approach public places resonant
with emotionally charged memories. A successful approach to reconstruction can
aid in governmental authority by making explicit a public commitment to the
rights of all citizens, regardless of past trauma.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

FOREVER NEARING THE FINISH LINE

179

ENDNOTES

1. For a North American example, see Judge Bauer’s unusual rhetorical strategy in the cel-
ebrated Kanakaria Mosaics case, in which he begins his opinion with a lengthy quotation from By-
ron’s The Siege of Corinth. Autocephalous Greek-Orthodox Church of Cyprus v. Goldberg, 917 F.2d
278, 279 (7th Cir. 1990).

2. Tabet, “Towards a Master Plan for Post-War Lebanon,” 91.
3. Makdisi, “Laying Claim to Beirut,” 667.
4. Makdisi, “Laying Claim to Beirut.”
5. Llewellyn, “The Big Build-Up.” Sunday Times, January 29, 1995.
6. Makdisi, “Laying Claim to Beirut”; Tabet, “Towards a Master Plan for Post-War Lebanon.”
7. For example, see Salaam, Al- I’amar Wa-Al-Maslahah Al-‘Ammah Fi Al-‘Imarah Wa-Al-Madinah;

Corm, Al- I’amar Wa-Al-Maslahah Al-‘Ammah Fi Iqtisad Ma-Ba’da-Al-Harb Wa-Siyasatuhu.

8. Gavin, Beirut Reborn.
9. Full text available at 具http://almashriq.hiof.no/lebanon/300/340/342/law_no91-117.html典 (re-

trieved on March 7, 2005).

10. Stewart, “Economic Recovery and Reconstruction in Postwar Beirut,” 487.
11. See Beyhum, “Fi taqyim wa naqd al-martakazat al-dustouria wa al-qanounia,” 87–8.
12. Advertising section, New York Times, November 22, 1993.
13. Viner, “48 Hours.” The Guardian, March 6, 1999.
14. Lebanon does not have an analogue to the “Sunshine Laws” of the Federal Advisory Com-
mittee Act, the American statute whose application limits the influence of private interests on advi-
sory bodies. 2-7 Administrative Law § 7.07. Transparency and faith in the government remain a
source of anxiety for citizens.

15. Sarkis, “Territorial Claims,” 114.
16. Omar Daouk, cited in Tim Llewellyn, “The Big Build-Up.” Sunday Times, January 29, 1995.
17. Llewellyn, “The Big Build-Up.” Sunday Times, January 29, 1995.
18. Makdisi, “Laying Claim to Beirut,” 665.
19. Meskell, “Negative Heritage and Past Mastering in Archaeology;” Nora, Realms of Memory.
20. Meskell, “Negative Heritage and Past Mastering in Archaeology,” 558.
21. Hanson, “Redrawing Beirut’s Geography of Fear.”
22. Costa Domani, APSAL, as quoted in Robert Fisk, “Architecture: Building a new Lebanon rav-

ages its Ottoman Treasures.” The Independent (London), November 26, 1997.

23. Fisk, “Lebanese recoil as the demons of their history are unearthed; The city’s destruction in
the civil war provided a great chance to unlock the past, but not everyone has welcomed it.” The
Independent (London), March 1, 1995.

24. As quoted in Robert Fisk, “Lebanese Recoil,” cited in the previous note.
25. Nora, Realms of Memory, Introduction.
26. Nora, Realms of Memory, 8.
27. Viner, “48 Hours.” The Guardian, March 6, 1999.
28. Llewellyn, “The Big Build-Up.” Sunday Times, January 29, 1995.
29. Examples include Tabet, I’amar wa’l Al-Maslaha Al-‘Ammah Fi Al-Turath Wa-Al-Hadathah;
Corm, Al- I’amar Wa-Al-Maslahah Al-‘Ammah Fi Iqtisad Ma-Ba’da-Al-Harb Wa-Siyasatuh. In French,
see also, Beyhum, Reconstruire Beyrouth.

30. Harvey, “A War Shattered City.” The Times (London), March 13, 1999.
31. These include Walid Saadek, Akram Zaatari, Joana Hadjithomas, Jalal Toufic, and others af-
filiated with the Fondation Arabe pour l’Image (Arab Image Foundation). For details, see 具http://
www.fai.org.lb/典 (retrieved on December 11, 2003).

32. As quoted in Wilson-Goldie, “Liberties.” Daily Star, March 20, 2004.
33. Spindle, “Returning to Beirut.” The Wall Street Journal, June 25, 2004; Wilson-Goldie, “Beirut’s

icon of modernist architecture set to be revamped.” Daily Star, July 2, 2004.

34. As quoted in Spindle, “Returning to Beirut,” cited in the previous note.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

180

ADRIENNE FRICKE

35. Leftly, “Foster, Gehry and Moneo invited to redesign Beirut.” Building, May 7, 2004. For con-

test details, see 具http://www.beirutmartyrssquare.com典/

36. Wilson-Goldie, “A Spectacle of Anticipation.” Daily Star, September 1, 2004.
37. For an excellent eye-witness account of the social, economic, and political history of the pe-
riod, see Fisk, Pity the Nation.
38. Walid Raad is a media artist and assistant professor of art at Cooper Union (New York) 具http://
www.cooper.edu/art/faculty.html典 His works include textual analysis, video, performance, and pho-
tography projects. Representative samples of his work can be seen at 具http://www.theatlasgroup.org/典
(retrieved on December 9, 2003).
39. Sweet Talk can be found at 具http://www.theatlasgroup.org/data/TypeAGP.html典; Missing Leb-
anese Wars can be found at 具http://www.theatlasgroup.org/data/TypeA.html典 (retrieved on Decem-
ber 9, 2003); see also Abdallah and Awada, “Missing Lebanon Wars.”

40. Raad presented his fictitious archive during the Lebanese history panel of the Building City
and Nation conference in Beirut (July 1999). Ironically, a number of historians walked out of his
performance in protest.

41. Amyuni, “The Image of the City,” 31.
42. Taylor, “Laughter in the Dark.” The Independent, June 3, 2004.
43. For a concise background of the pratfalls of reconstruction, see Adwan, “Corruption in Re-

construction.” Lebanese Transparency Association Report, December 7, 2004.

44. For a detailed discussion of the implementation of the CHUD-financed project, see Ball-

Lechgar, “Inner City Revival.” Lebanon Opportunities, April 2004.

45. Ball-Lechgar, “Old vs. New.” Lebanon Opportunities, July 2004.
46. “New Rent Law: A Problem or a Solution?” Judicial and Regulatory Outlook, Information
International Monthly, July 2002, available at 具http://www.information-international.com/iimonthly/
issue1/judicial.html典 (retrieved on December 9, 2004); see also Tayyar. “Lebanon’s Real Estate Sec-
tor.” International Market Insight, December 12, 2002, available at 具http://strategis.ic.ca/epic/internet/
inimr-ri.nsf/en/gr112464e.html典 (retrieved on December 9, 2004).

47. Khayat, “Beirut is for Everybody.” Daily Star, May 21, 2004; see also Khayat. “Beirut’s Urban

Planning.” Daily Star, May 7, 2004.

48. Ball-Lechgar, “Inner City Revival.” Lebanon Opportunities, April 2004.
49. Ball-Lechgar, “Old vs. New.” Lebanon Opportunities, July 1, 2004.
50. Ball-Lechgar, “Inner City Revival.” Lebanon Opportunities, April 2004.
51. Wilson-Goldie, “Liberties.” Daily Star, March 20, 2004; Medlej, “Reconstruction of Beirut.”

Daily Star, February 4, 2004.

52. As quoted in Wilson-Goldie, “Breaking in Beirut’s Brand New Art District,” Daily Star, July

29, 2004.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abdallah, Ziad, and Farah Awada. “Missing Lebanon Wars: A Project by Walid Raad.” Public Culture
11 (1999): i–iv.

Al-Radi, Selma. “In the Aftermath of Civil War: Cultural Heritage in Lebanon.” The Getty Conser-
vation Institute Newsletter 11(1) (1996). http://www.getty.edu/conservation/resources/newsletter/
11_1/news2_1.html (accessed December 9, 2003).

Amyuni, Mona Takieddine. “The Image of the City: Wounded Beirut.” Alif: Journal of Comparative
Poetics 7, Spring (1987):27–51.

Beyhum, Nabil. “Fi taqyim wa naqd al-martakazat al-dustouria wa al-qanounia” [A Critical Ap-
praisal of the Legal and the Constitutional Aspects]. In I’amar Beirut wa’l fursa al-da’i’a [The Re-
construction of Beirut and Lost Opportunity], edited by Bahadin Al-Basat, Ziyad Aql, Nabil Beyhum,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150

FOREVER NEARING THE FINISH LINE

181

Tony Choueri, Georges Corm, Kamal Hamdan, Biyar Khoury, Assem Salaam, Taufic Shanbour, and
Jad Tabet, 27–37. Beirut: Dar Rami al-Khal, 1992.

Beyhum, Nabil, and Maison de l’Orient Méditerranéen (Lyons, France). Reconstruire Beyrouth : Les
Paris Sur Le Possible [Reconstructing Beirut: Wagering What is Possible] Table Ronde Tenue À Lyons
Du 27 Au 29 Novembre 1990 [Round Table held in Lyons, France November 27–29, 1990], Études
Sur Le Monde Arabe; No 5. Lyons, France: Maison de l’ Orient Méditerranéen, 1991.

Corm, Georges. Al-I’amar Wa-Al-Maslahah Al-‘Ammah Fi Iqtisad Ma-Ba’da-Al-Harb Wa-Siyasatuh
[Reconstruction and the Public Interest in the Post-War Economy and Politics]. Beirut: Mu’assasat
al-Abhath al-Madiniyah, Dar al-Jadid, Mu’assasat Ford, 1995.

Fisk, Robert. Pity the Nation: Lebanon at War. London: Deutsch, 1990.

Gavin, Angus, and Ramez Bahige Maluf. Beirut Reborn: The Restoration and Development of the Cen-
tral District. London: Academy Editions; Distributed by National Books Network, 1996.

Hanson, Brian. “Redrawing Beirut’s Geography of Fear.” Rev. of Projecting Beirut. Building Design
March 19, 1999: 20.

Makdisi, Saree. “Laying Claim to Beirut: Reconstruction, Urban-Development, Urban Narrative and
Spatial Identity in the Age of Solidere.” Critical Inquiry 23 (1997): 660–705.

Meskell, Lynn. “Negative Heritage and Past Mastering in Archaeology.” Anthropological Quarterly 75
(2002): 557–74.

Nora, Pierre. Realms of Memory. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.

Salaam, A’sim. Al- I’amar Wa-Al-Maslahah Al-‘Ammah Fi Al-‘Imarah Wa-Al-Madinah [Reconstruc-
tion and the Public Interest in Architecture and the city]. Beirut: Dar al-Jadid, Mu’assasat al-Dirasat
al-Madiniyah, Mu’assasat Ford, 1995.

Sarkis, Hashim. “Territorial Claims: Architecture and Post-War Attitudes Toward the Built Environ-
ment.” In Recovering Beirut, edited by Samir Khalaf and Philip S. Khoury, 101–127. New York: Brill,
1993.

Stewart, Dona J. “Economic Recovery and Reconstruction in Postwar Beirut,” Geographical Review
86 (1996): 487–504.

Tabet, Jad. “Towards a Master Plan for Post-War Lebanon.” In Recovering Beirut: Urban Design and
Post-War Reconstruction, edited by Samir Khalaf and Philip S. Khoury, 81–100. Leiden: Brill, 1993.

———. I’amar wa’l Al-Maslaha Al-‘Ammah Fi Al-Turath Wa-Al-Hadathah: Madinat Al-Harb Wa-
Dhakirat Al-Mustaqbal (Reconstruction and the Public Interest in Heritage and Modernity: City of
War and Memories of the Future). Beirut: Mu’assasat al-Abhath al-Madiniyah, 1996.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:22:26, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050150


