International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Nature as heritage: the Swedish case

Bosse Sundin

To cite this article: Bosse Sundin (2005) Nature as heritage: the Swedish case, International
Journal of Heritage Studies, 11:1, 9-20, DOI: 10.1080/13527250500036767
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527250500036767

Published online: 15 Aug 2006.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 485

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 11, No. 1, March 2005, pp. 9–20

Nature as Heritage: The Swedish Case
Bosse Sundin

BosseSundin
bo.sundin@idehist.umu.se
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RJHS103659.sgm
10.1080/13527250500036767
International Journal of Heritage Studies
1352-7258 (print)/1470-3610 (online)
Original Article
2005Taylor & Francis Group Ltd
111000000March 2005

In  1909  the  Swedish  parliament  passed  two  laws  regarding  natural  landmarks  and
National Parks. This may be seen as a discovery of ‘Nature as Heritage’. But there are
earlier examples. From the 17th century, antiquarians had paid attention to certain natu-
ral landmarks and in the 19th century it was common to see nature as something that
fostered the spirit of the people (das Volk). Around 1900 an increasing role was played by
nationalistic motives. The National Parks were supposed to preserve and display the essen-
tial quality of Swedish nature. Biology and geology, the theory of evolution and the glacia-
tion  theory  played  a  major  role  in  emphasising  these  new  national  symbols.  But  as
examples for Sweden indicate, it is difficult to make a heritage of a landscape. In this essay
two separate discourses, namely antiquarian and environmental, are discussed.

Keywords: Sweden; Nature; Heritage; Antiquities; National Parks; Environmental 
History

In discussing nature as heritage in the Swedish case, the obvious starting point, is 1909
when parliament passed two laws in relation to natural landmarks and National Parks.
In the same year the Swedish Society for the Protection of Nature was founded. What
happened in 1909 was a result of actions beginning in 1904. That year, Professor Hugo
Conwentz,  the  foremost  spokesman  for  nature  protection  in  Germany,  lectured  in
Stockholm,  Uppsala,  Gothenburg  and  Lund  on  the  dangers  threatening  the  natural
landscape and its plant and animal populations. These talks, which were widely publi-
cised, were the primary impetus for a motion in parliament proposing an inquiry into
appropriate  measures  for  protecting  Sweden’s  nature  and  landmarks.  The  proposal
won parliamentary support and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences was given the
task of executing the proposed inquiry. Five years later it resulted in the laws regarding
natural landmarks and National Parks.1

The Swedish case is by no means unique. The decades around 1900 saw a wave of
preservation and conservation movements. A few examples: in 1894, in Britain, the

Bosse Sundin, Umeå University. Correspondence to: bo.sundin@idehist.umu.se

ISSN 1352–7258 (print)/ISSN 1470–3610 (online) © 2005 Taylor & Francis Group Ltd
DOI: 10.1080/13527250500036767

10 B. Sundin

National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty was founded; in 1895,
in  the  USA,  the  American  Scenic  and  Historic  Preservation  Society;  in  1904,  in  the
Netherlands, Vereniging tot behoud van Natuurmonumenten (Society for the Preser-
vation  of  Natural  Landmarks).  In  France,  in  1906,  a  law  was  passed  regarding  ‘la
protection des sites et monuments naturel de caractère artistique’. In Prussia, in the
same  year,  a  state  authority  for  the  care  of  natural  landmarks—Staatliche  Stelle  für
Naturdenkmalpflege—was founded. More examples could be given.2

In a way, this may be seen as a rather sudden discovery of ‘Nature as Heritage’. But
there are earlier examples. By 1819 the German scientist Alexander von Humboldt was
already using the concept monuments de la nature when he talked about old, big trees
and early in the 19th century geologists could discuss ‘the ruins of nature’ or the earth’s
crust as ‘the archive of nature’.

In the Swedish case, antiquarians as early as the 17th century paid attention not only
to rune stones, burial mounds, cairns, etc. but also to certain natural landmarks. In part
this was due to an uncertainty whether objects, for example a formation of stones, were
natural or cultural artefacts. There was also an interest in lusus naturae, the jokes or
oddities of nature. And, obviously, the antiquarian’s investigations of objects like burial
mounds involve a sense of the landscape in which they were found.3

Figure 1 Burial mounds as depicted in antiquarian N. H. Sjöborg, Samlingar för Nordens fornälskare (Stockholm, 1822).
Figure 2 Burial mounds as depicted in antiquarian N. H. Sjöborg, Samlingar för Nordens fornälskare (Stockholm, 1822).

At the beginning of the 19th century, and even more popular towards its end, nature
was also commonly seen as something that fostered the spirit of the people, das Volk,
das Volksgeist. Each people, each Volk, had its own uniqueness due to the very nature,
the native soil, from which it, since the beginning of history, had emerged. In the back-
ground we can find ideas from Montesquieu, Herder and Romantic philosophers. This

Figure 1 Burial mounds as depicted in antiquarian N. H. Sjöborg, Samlingar för Nordens
fornälskare (Stockholm, 1822).

International Journal of Heritage Studies

11

Figure 2 Burial mounds as depicted by antiquarian N. H. Sjöborg, Samlingar för Nordens
fornälskare (Stockholm, 1822).

can be illustrated by an article by geologist Arvid Högbom. It discussed how Sweden
had been formed by glaciation and the following elevation of the land. The title of the
article is ‘Huru naturen danat Sverige’ (How nature has founded Sweden) and we can
see  Moder  Svea  (Mother  Sweden)  placed  between  prehistoric  wild  savages  from  the
Stone Age and presumably civilised Vikings. The history of the nation begins with the
glaciation,  and  the  elevation  of  land  is  a  symbol  of  nature  founding  the  national
culture.4 The interest in dialects and folklore also pointed at a possible natural heritage.
Certain natural objects were noticed because of the legends, historical memories, or
folk traditions associated with them.

Figure 3 From A.G. Högbom, ‘Huru naturen danat Sverige’, in: J. F. Nyström, Sveriges rike. Handbok för det svenska folket (Stockholm, 1899).

Also around 1900 an increasing role was played by nationalistic motives. The interest
in nature and natural landmarks was inspired by a newly awoken patriotism. For the
older  patriotism,  Sweden’s  greatness  was  to  be  found  mainly  in  its  proud  history,
studded with military victories. The new national enthusiasm was characterised by a
biologically influenced conception of the nation in which nature provided its distinc-
tive element. The moors, forests, and other natural wonders became national symbols
with a deeper significance than that of the heroes and warrior-kings of the past.5

Nowadays we are so used to the concept of ‘National Parks’ that we tend to forget
the nationalistic context in which it was formulated. The National Parks were supposed
to preserve and display the essential quality of Swedish nature. Most of them were to
be  found  in  Lapland  and  all  the  larger  ones  were  located  in  Norrland,  the  north.6

12 B. Sundin

Figure 3 From A.G. Högbom, ‘Huru naturen danat Sverige’, in: J. F. Nyström, Sveriges
rike. Handbok för det svenska folket (Stockholm, 1899).

Among the reasons cited for this was the claim that these regions, with their forests,
mountains  and  glaciers  and  wide-open  spaces  suggested  a  significant  aspect  of  the
Swedish national identity. The northern character of Sweden became central to the new
national consciousness. At the foot of Lapland’s glaciers, surrounded by the nomadic
Lapps, one was closer to the Ice Age than anywhere else in Sweden. The new patriotism
was also expressed by artists and writers of the so-called ‘national romantic’ spirit. A
standard example is Nobel Laureate Selma Lagerlöf’s The Wonderful Adventures of Nils,
first published in 1906–1907, a reader in geography at Swedish schools for more than
half a century.

Scientific inventory and research into the country’s natural resources undoubtedly
played a large part in emphasising these new national symbols. In our context, ‘Nature
as Heritage’, the role of biology and geology should be stressed or, to be more precise,
the theory of evolution and glaciation theory. Quaternary geology and quaternary biol-
ogy were fashionable disciplines. Varved clay, boulder ridges, bogs, and swamps were
nature’s own archives from which the history of the evolution of Sweden’s flora and
fauna since the last Ice Age could be traced. An idea of how the climate had changed
and how various species and plant communities had succeeded one another was being
formed. The picture taking shape was one of nature in constant flux.7

This  discovery  of  the  history  of  the  landscape  recurs  over  and  over  again  in  the
context of nature protection; one might even say that in essence the idea of protecting
nature emerges directly from it. And it is no coincidence that most of the early advocates

International Journal of Heritage Studies

13

for nature preservation were biologists and geologists. Interest was directed towards
what was apprehended to be nature in its original state. Put simply, it was a matter of
preserving for future generations at least one boulder ridge, one primeval forest, one
swamp, one peat bog. But interest was also shown in natural landmarks that triggered
fantasy or had historical connotations—an oak described by Linnaeus on one of his
journeys to a Swedish landscape, an erratic stone which, according to an old saga, had
been thrown by a giant, and so on. In particular, lusus naturae, jokes, freaks, oddities
and curiosities of nature generated excitement. The first volumes of the yearbook of the
Society for the Protection of Nature are packed with such examples as curious rock
formations, a spruce with ‘branches which have grown into trees themselves’, and so on.
Most popular, without competition, were trees of various kinds. The law of 1909
gave  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  the  task  of  proclaiming  various  landmarks  as
protected. The Academy regularly published a national register. In the first edition,
published in 1919, protected objects numbered close to 100. Seven years later there
were 301. In 1932, 460 were listed. Taking that list as an example, under the heading
‘Areas’, we find 69 objects described variously as forest, meadow, limestone formation,
moraine area, bay with islets, bird cliff, and so on. ‘Geological Landmarks’ mentions 33
objects, the majority individual erratic rocks. Under ‘Plants’ we discover 43 protected
species and under ‘Wildlife’ 21 species. The last group, individual plants, flowers, and
stands, included by far the largest number of protected objects—371 out of a grand
total  of  460,  mostly  single  trees,  usually  oaks.  So,  until  the  1930s  it  would  not  be
misleading to say that the typical natural landmark was an individual tree—‘a large
beech’,  ‘a  great  and  beautiful  juniper’,  ‘a  giant  spruce’,  ‘a  “troll”  pine’,  or,  most
commonly, ‘a majestic old oak’.8 It is not surprising that the logo of the Society for the
Protection of Nature was an oak.

The analogy between the legislation for the protection of nature and the legislation
for the preservation of relics of the past, antiquities, was widely exploited. And it is not
unfair to say that early nature protection was ‘museum like’ in character. The Swedish
concept of ‘natural monument’ or ‘natural landmark’ (naturminnesmärke) is based on
the German Naturdenkmal, and has lost some of its original resonance today. In fact it
is  impossible  to  translate  into  English,  but  the  concept  is  a  combination  of  nature,
remembrance and mark (trace).

Earlier, the desire had been to preserve those relics of the past (forminne in Swedish,
meaning ‘ancient memory’) that bore witness to the history of man. Now, it was essen-
tial to preserve those monuments that spoke of the history of nature. To allow these
living monuments to be destroyed would be the same as allowing Sweden’s rune stones
to crumble away. Therefore, it was said, natural landmarks ought to be seen as serving
as the outdoor wing of the Museum of Natural History, as a great national museum or
as an ‘artless Skansen’ (the well-known outdoor museum in Stockholm).

So,  the  paradoxical  situation  occurred  in  which  a  dynamic  view  of  nature  that
stressed its evolution produced a mainly static preservation of nature and a focus on a
supposed, primeval, untouched nature and its monuments, oddities, and curiosities.
This contained the seeds of many conflicts. For example, full-scale protection for one
or other type of natural phenomenon did not guarantee protection from future change.

14 B. Sundin

It  was  soon  discovered  that  a  number  of  protected  areas—for  example  the  Ängsö
National Park—were in fact examples not of untouched nature but of highly cultivated
land. Protection therefore led to the opposite of its intent—the protected areas became
overgrown and corrupted.9

Today  we  can  see  that  what  was  discovered  is  that  there  is  no  virgin,  untouched
nature,  no  ‘wilderness’.  There  is  landscape:  ‘A  composition  of  man-made  or  man-
modified spaces to serve as infrastructure or background for our collective existence.’10
To put it more simply: nature is heritage, but it is embedded in a landscape cultural
construction. But this implicit understanding did not have immediate impact on the
heritage discourse. In fact, in the Swedish case it is possible, since 1909, to discern two
different discourses.

In the ‘Landscape as Arena: Science, Institutions and the Discourses on Environ-
ment, 1800–2000’ research programme we have tentatively suggested that the land-
scape has functioned as an arena for the growth of cultural and intellectual processes
or discourses—an antiquarian and an environmental discourse—which have consti-
tuted mental, imagined landscapes or ideas about ‘nature as heritage’, but which also
involve  the  establishment  of  different  institutions,  organisations,  professions,  etc.11
These discourses are strikingly parallel. In the 19th century they were united, but in the
20th the trend has been one of separation.12

At the institutional level, on the side of the antiquarian discourse, we have the Royal
Swedish Academy of Letters, History and Antiquities, which, since it was established in
1786, had been more or less in charge of the care of ancient monuments—the cultural
heritage. On the other side we have the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, which,
since 1909 and until the beginning of the 1960s, had been in charge of the natural heri-
tage—National  Parks  and  natural  landmarks.  Nowadays  they  belong  to  different
ministries, the ministry of culture and the ministry of environment.

The central or national museums are separate; on the antiquarian side is the Swedish
Museum  of  History,  on  the  environmental  side  the  National  Museum  of  Natural
History.  We  also  find  two  separate  civil  service  departments:  the  Central  Board  of
National Antiquities and the National Environmental Protection Board.

The separate discourses can also be found at regional and local levels (but will not be
specified here), in the county and the municipal administration, and also in voluntary
associations—‘homestead societies’ versus nature protection societies.

The parallel is also striking at the conceptual level. These concepts are difficult to
translate, but for anyone familiar with Swedish, the parallel must be striking. Forminne
(‘ancient  memory’)  versus  naturminne  (‘natural  landmark’),  kulturmiljö  (‘cultural
environment’) versus naturmiljö (‘natural environment’), and so on.

Finally, the disciplinary foundation of the discourses is different. The antiquarian is
based on disciplines like ethnology, archaeology, and art history, what we call ‘museum
disciplines’, and disciplines like agrarian history and cultural geography. The environ-
mental sciences are above all bio- and geosciences and some technical environmental
sciences.

I hope this brief summary has made it clear that it is possible to talk about two sepa-
rate  discourses.  They  meet  in  the  landscape  but  with  different  concepts,  values  and

International Journal of Heritage Studies

15

ambitions. If so, then it should be clear that we now have a problem if we talk about
nature as heritage. I know that I am perhaps oversimplifying matters, but I would say
that a trend has been apparent during the 20th century, as discussed below.

At the beginning of the century, as discussed above, it not unfair to say that the envi-
ronmental  discourse  could  discuss  nature  as  heritage—recall  all  those  oaks,  erratic
stones,  etc.  The  antiquarian  discourse,  on  the  other  hand,  was  focused  mainly  on
ancient monuments. Towards the middle of the century the environmental discourse
had  changed  focus,  from  ‘nature  as  heritage’  to  environmental  problems—water
pollution, air pollution, etc. It was no longer a matter of preserving individual objects
and areas in nature. Instead, it was necessary to acquire knowledge and insights to deal
with environmental pollution and the waste of resources endangering the very life of
our planet.

The antiquarian discourse, on the other hand, had by then begun to focus not only
on  separate  ancient  monuments  but  also  on  the  cultural  environment,  the  cultural
landscape. One could say that the hegemony had changed. If, at the beginning of the
20th  century  the  environmental  discourse  was  modelled  on  the  antiquarian,  then
towards  the  1960s  the  antiquarian  was  modelled  on  the  environmental.  Hence  the
change from fornminne (ancient monument) to cultural environment, the landscape.13
But it is difficult to make a heritage of a landscape, at least if by heritage one means
something that should be preserved. Let me give an example. Towards the middle of
the 20th century vast areas in Norrland, the northernmost two-thirds of Sweden, were
drastically and suddenly transformed as a result of schemes for lake-level regulation
and power-station construction. The radical transformation of the landscape gave rise
to considerable discussions. One of the first voices, questioning the consequences of the
development of hydroelectric power in the early 1940s, came from the Swedish Central
Board of National Antiquities. It coincided with a change, in 1942, in the law regulating
the care of ancient monuments and relics of the past. It stipulated that every enterprise,
which might touch areas with presumed relics of the past, must finance field surveys of
the areas in question to determine whether anything of value, illuminating the prehis-
tory of the nation, was endangered.

When a new project was due to start, the Board—with financial support from the
exploiters—carried out archaeological and ethnological investigations. The idea was
not  to  preserve  but  to  document  prehistoric  and  historic  remains  in  the  areas  that
were to be put under water or were threatened by erosion as a result of variations in
the  level  of  water.  Most  of  the  investigations  were  archaeological  and  resulted  in
numerous  habitation-site  finds—pieces  of  pottery,  scrapers,  daggers,  knives,  arrow-
heads,  spearheads,  boiling  stones—which  are  stored  at  the  Museum  of  National
Antiquities in Stockholm. But it was also a matter of recordings—in text, picture and
sometimes  even  sound—of  the  landscape,  the  buildings  of  the  more  recent  settlers
and  their  folk  life,  dialects  and  myths  and  tales.  In  a  few  cases  the  investigations
resulted in a more thorough description of the area which was to be put under water
and the people who had to leave. The best example is the book which was published
after investigations carried out in relation to the regulation of Lake Lossen for power
purposes. The area of the lake was quadrupled and some 100 people had to leave their

16 B. Sundin

homes.  The  book  gives  an  exhaustive  report  of  the  life  around  Lake  Lossen:  family
relations,  food  and  food  habits,  clothing,  folklore,  popular  movements,  games  and
plays, festivities, etc.14

The result of the cooperation between the power companies and the antiquarians
was not only a legitimisation of the new technological landscape but also the discovery
of  an  old  landscape.  At  the  same  time  that  the  landscape  became  the  object  of  a
dramatic physical change, the archaeological and ethnological investigations changed
the mental landscape. What the antiquarians documented, before it disappeared, was a
cultural landscape. It turned out, as a result of the investigations, that Norrland in the
past was not just wilderness and natural scenery, it had for thousands of years been
inhabited by various settlers—hunters, fishermen, reindeer herdsmen, farmers. And
they were not isolated. Numerous finds bear witness to contact with other cultures.
One example: at Lake Hotingsjön in the centre of Norrland a family cemetery with 14
graves from the Viking era and the beginning of the medieval period was found. The
finds speak of distant origins.

The world of the men and women who lived at Hotingsjön was a remote but not an
isolated  one.  It  is  true  that  most  of  the  grave  finds  came  from  central  Sweden  and
Gotland, but some found their way there from countries east of the Baltic. The first new
settlers buried in the mounds of Långön had their belts decorated with small bronze
mounts of oriental origin. In one of the other graves the dead man’s tinder box was in
a  pouch  made  of  leather  from  a  giant  lizard  such  as  is  now  found  in  India  or  its
neighbours.15

To quote one of the antiquarians commenting on Lake Ottsjön, close to the moun-
tains, where a large number of cultivation cairns (piles of stones cleared from the land
in medieval times) were found in the forest: 

This is no ‘wilderness’. For ages this landscape has been the home of people who have
moulded it in different ways. We can follow the traces of these people, not only during
historical times, but also during earlier periods. Like the true cultivated landscape in
other parts of Sweden, the scenery of Norrland has been in process of transformation
ever since prehistoric times, not only as a result of climatic changes and other natural
phenomena but also through the constant influence of man.16

The investigations played an important role in changing the interest of the antiquar-
ians  from  the  unique  monument  to  the  cultural  milieu.  By  tradition  the  Board  of
National  Antiquities  had  been  focused  on  the  preservation  of  impressive  burial
mounds,  rune  stones,  medieval  churches,  castles,  etc.  Now  they  developed  a  ‘holis-
tic’  view  of  the  landscape  which  included  nature,  prehistoric  remains,  habitation
sites of more recent settlers, hunting pits, reindeer herdsmen’s huts, installations for
fishing, etc.

Out of this emerged a view of continual change which, in fact, served as a justifica-
tion for the new technological landscape. It was simply the latest transformation of the
landscape. Another example: at Lake Ransaren in the mountains of southern Lapland
the antiquarians documented a settlement which was the result of recent colonisation.
It had lasted no more than two generations, 1890–1950. What made it interesting was
that everything that had been used in connection with the colonisation—the whole set

International Journal of Heritage Studies

17

Figure 4 Lake Ransaren. From Sverker Jansson & Harald Hvarfner, Ancient Hunters and
Settlements in the Mountains of Sweden (Stockholm, 1966).

of means of subsistence from the 19th century—was still in existence and in use in the
1950s when the greater part of this area was drowned as a result of the damming and
regulation of Lake Ransaren.

Figure 4 Lake Ransaren. From Sverker Jansson & Harald Hvarfner, Ancient Hunters and Settlements in the Mountains of Sweden (Stockholm, 1966).

With the example from this old-fashioned settlement, with which, as the antiquarian
said,  ‘the  modern  age  never  quite  caught  up’,  he  asked  and  answered  the  following
question: 

How could this remarkable milieu have been preserved? The answer is that this could
only have been done if the people had been treated like objects in a museum which are
preserved as they were found, without modern additions.17

Figure 5 Sami storehouse at Lake Ransaren. From Sverker Jansson & Harald Hvarfner, Ancient Hunters and Settlements in the Mountains of Sweden (Stockholm, 1966).

And concerning the landscape that was a product of the colonisation of the mountain
area in the 19th century, he said, as an echo of social Darwinism: 

The landscape has an intimate and inseparable connection with the way of life which
here prevails. If the inhabitants move away, the present appearance of the landscape
will disappear. If they stay, it will still be radically changed. It is a landscape that is
indissolubly  linked  with  an  outdated  and  primitive  form  of  cultivation  which  no
longer has the power to survive in the present age.18

His comments are, and I write it without irony, a good illustration of an antiquarian
participating in the transformation of an old landscape into a modern technological

18 B. Sundin

Figure 5
Ancient Hunters and Settlements in the Mountains of Sweden (Stockholm, 1966).

Sami storehouse at Lake Ransaren. From Sverker Jansson & Harald Hvarfner,

landscape. And it is easy to agree. To most of the inhabitants in the areas affected by
hydroelectric power it meant good times with job opportunities, better roads, electric-
ity, etc. But the question and the answer also reflect certain values: a cultural milieu has
antiquarian value only if it is untouched by modern times and represents something
old-fashioned and archaic.

The dilemma has recently been highlighted in the debate concerning certain World
Heritage  Sites.  Laponia  in  northern  Sweden,  inscribed  on  UNESCO’s  list  of  World
Heritage in 1996, is a good example. It consists of four National Parks and two nature
reserves. It was selected as a candidate on the basis of criteria regarding both nature and
culture. In terms of cultural criteria, Laponia has been populated by the Sami since
prehistoric  times,  and  is  considered  to  be  one  of  the  best-preserved  examples  of
nomadic rangeland in northern Scandinavia. It includes both settlements and grazing
areas for large reindeer herds, and supports a traditional livelihood which, according to

International Journal of Heritage Studies

19

advocates of Laponia’s World Heritage designation, stems from an early stage in the
economic and social evolution of humankind.19

It  is  often  promoted  as  ‘Europe’s  largest  continuous  area  of  virtually  untouched
nature’. Laponia, says the Board of Antiquities, ‘is the cultural landscape of the Saami
people and one of the last large wildernesses of Western Europe’.20 UNESCO gives this
description of the area: 

The Arctic Circle region of northern Sweden is the home of the Saami, or Lapp people.
It is the largest area in the world (and one of the last) with an ancestral way of life based
on  the  seasonal  movement  of  livestock.  Every  summer,  the  Saami  lead  their  huge
herds  of  reindeer  towards  the  mountains  through  a  natural  landscape  hitherto
preserved, but now threatened by the advent of motor vehicles. Historical and ongo-
ing  geological  processes  can  be  seen  in  the  glacial  moraines  and  changing  water
courses.21

So,  what  Sami  people  should  be  ‘allowed’  in  this  world  heritage?  An  archaic  Sami
herder with tent, skis and reindeer with sledge or the modern Sami herder, integrated
with  the  market  economy,  using  high-tech  equipment—snowmobiles,  helicopters,
motorbikes—in connection with reindeer herding?

To put the question in a more general way: how can nature be preserved as heritage
without denying the continuing transformation of the landscape and the impact of man?

Notes

1 [1]

Sundin, ‘Environmental Protection and National Parks’. The early history of nature protec-
tion in Sweden has been treated in detail by Haraldsson, Skydda vår nature!

2 [2] The international development was reported in depth by a commission of inquiry appointed
within  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture;  see Betänkande  rörande  åtgärder  till  skydd  för  vårt  lands
nature och naturminnesmärken. Afg. af inom K. Jordbruksdepartementet för ändamålet tillkal-
lade sakkunnige, Stockholm, 1907.

3 [3] Molin, Den rätta tidens matt, gives many examples of the practices of travelling antiquarians

and their observations in the landscape in the 18th and early 19th century.

4 [4] Nordlund,  Det  upphöjda  landet,  investigates  aspects  of  geological,  plant  geographical  and
archaeological  research  in  the  shoreline  displacement  between  land  and  sea  pursued  in
Sweden during the period 1860–1930, and the significance of this research for the view of the
‘Swedish’ landscape and its post-glacial history.
Sundin, 202.
Ibid., 208.

5 [5]
6 [6]
7 [7] Nordlund, 260ff.; Sundin, 210f.
8 [8] Almqvist and Florin, Förteckning å svenska nationalparker samt å fridlysta naturminnesmärken.
9 [9] As early as 1905, in a critical study of the Academy’s first nature protection committee, bota-
nist Gunnar Andersson indicated that total protection of forest meadows would lead to their
being  transformed  into  spruce  woodlands.  See  Andersson,  ‘I  Sverige  under  senaste  tiden
företagna åtgärder till naturens skydd’.

10[10] Definition  by  Jackson  in  Discovering  the  Vernacular  Landscape,  8,  here  quoted  from  Nye,

Technologies of Landscape, 1.

11[11] The programme is presented in Sundin, Landskapet som arena.
12[12] For a discussion of a common discourse in the 19th century, with examples from archaeology
and geology, see Molin and Nordlund, ‘“Här vandra sålunda fornforskningen och geologien
hand i hand vid hvarandras sida”’, 3.

20 B. Sundin

13[13] The  antiquarian  discourse  in  the  20th  century  is  discussed  in  detail  in  Pettersson,

Fädernesland och framtidsland and Den svenska kulturmiljövårdens värdegrunder.

14[14] Hvarfner et al., Lossen.
15[15]

Janson and Hvarfner, Ancient Hunters and Settlements in the Mountains of Sweden. This beau-
tiful book, which gives a survey of the investigations, was first published in Swedish in 1960.
Six  years  later  it  was  translated  into  English.  The  following  quotes  are  from  the  English
version, published in 1966.
Ibid., 16.
Ibid., 15.
Ibid., 15.

16[16]
17[17]
18[18]
19[19] Beach, ‘World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples’, 96.
20[20] Citation  from  the  homepage  of  the  Board  of  Antiquities,  describing  Laponia.  See  http://

www.raa.se/varveng/lapplande.asp

21[21] Citation from http://whc.unesco.org/sites/774.htm

References

Almqvist, E., and R. Florin. Förteckning å svenska nationalparker samt å fridlysta naturminnesmärken.

Stockholm: K. Svenska Vetenskapsakademiens skrifter i naturskyddsärenden, no. 21 (1932).

Andersson, G. ‘I Sverige under senaste tiden företagna åtgärder till naturens skydd’. Ymer (1905).
Beach,  H.  ‘World  Heritage  and  Indigenous  Peoples—The  Example  of  Laponia’.  In  Upholders  of
Culture.  Past  and  Present,  edited  by  B.  Sundin.  Stockholm:  Royal  Swedish  Academy  of
Engineering Sciences, IVA, Stockholm, 2001.

Haraldsson,  D.  Skydda  vår  nature!  Svenska  Naturskyddsföreningens  framväxt  och  tidiga  utveckling.

Lund: Bibliotheca Historica Lundensis, 1987 (English summary).

Hvarfner, H. et al. Lossen. Liv och arbete vid en Härjedalssjö. Stockholm: Riksantikvarieämbetet, 1961

(English summary).

Jackson, J. B. Discovering the Vernacular Landscape. Cambridge, MA: Yale University Press, 1984.
Janson, S., and H. Hvarfner. Ancient Hunters and Settlements in the Mountains of Sweden. Archeologi-
cal  and  Ethological  Investigations  Carried  out  in  Connection  with  Power-station  Projects  and
Lake Regulation Schemes. Stockholm: Riksantikvarieämbetet, 1966.

Molin, T. Den rätta tidens mått. Götiska förbundet, fornforskningen och det antikvariska landskapet.

Umeå: Skrifter från Landskapet som arena, no. 6 (2003).

Molin, T., and C. Nordlund, ‘“Här vandra sålunda fornforskningen och geologien hand I hand vid
hvarandras sida”: Om vetenskapliggörandet av det svenska landskapet under 1800-talet’. Rig
(1999): 3.

Nordlund,  C.  Det  upphöjda  landet.  Vetenskapen,  landhöjningsfrågan  och  kartläggningen  av  Sveriges
förflutna,  1860–1930.  Umeå:  Skrifter  från  Landskapet  som  arena,  no.  36  (2001)  (English
summary).

Nye, D. E., ed. Technologies of Landscape: From Reaping to Recycling. Cambridge, MA: University of

Massachusetts Press, 1999.

Pettersson,  R.  Fädernesland  och  framtidsland.  Sigurd  Curman  och  kulturminnesvårdens  etablering.

Umeå: Skrifter från Landskapet som arena, no. 2 (2001) (English summary).

———.  Den  svenska  kulturmiljövårdens  värdegrunder.  En  idéhistorisk  bakgrund  och  analys.  Umeå:

Skrifter från Landskapet som arena, no. 7 (2003).

Sundin, B. ‘Environmental Protection and National Parks’. In Science in Sweden. The Royal Swedish
Academy of Sciences, edited by T. Frängsmyr. Canton, MA: Science History Publications, 1989.
———,  ed.  Landskapet  som  arena.  Vetenskapen,  institutionerna  och  miljön,  1800–2000.  Umeå:

Skrifter från Landskapet som arena, no. 1 (2001) (English summary).


