International Journal of Cultural Property (2007) 14:169–204. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2007 International Cultural Property Society
DOI: 10.1017/S0940739107070105

The Reform of the European Community
Audiovisual Media Regulation: Television
Without Cultural Diversity
Mira Burri Nenova*

Abstract: In the profoundly changing and dynamic world of contemporary
audiovisual media, what has remained surprisingly unaffected is regulation. In
the European Union, the new Audiovisual Media Services Directive (AVMS),
proposed by the European Commission on 13 December 2005, should allegedly
rectify this situation. Amending the existing Television without Frontiers
Directive, it should offer a “fresh approach” and meet the challenge of
appropriately regulating media in a complex environment. It is meant to
achieve a balance between the free circulation of TV broadcast and new
audiovisual media and the preservation of values of cultural identity and
diversity, while respecting the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality
inherent to the European Community (EC). This paper examines whether and
how the changes envisaged to the EC audiovisual media regime might
influence cultural diversity in Europe. It addresses subseqently the question of
whether the new AVMS properly safeguards the balance between competition
and the public interest in this regard, or whether cultural diversity remains a
mere political banner.

Thanks to the recently introduced Bluewin TV,1 Swiss consumers are now able to
use their fixed telephone line to comfortably enjoy the delights of a television offer
encompassing more than 100 television (TV) channels, 70 radio channels, and
500 video-on-demand films, including additional gadgets such as an electronic
program guide, a live pause function, and remote recording via mobile phone or

*World Trade Institute, University of Berne, Switzerland. Email: mira.nenova@wti.org

Acknowledgements: The present study emerged from my work for the project “eDiversity: The Legal
Protection of Cultural Diversity in a Digital Networked Environment,” part of the Swiss National
Centre for Competence in Research (NCCR): Trade Regulation. This article would not have been
possible without the previous work done by Christoph Beat Graber and his valuable comments.
Further thanks go to Miriam Sahlfeld for critical feedback on earlier drafts and Susan Kaplan for
improving the language. Any errors of fact or interpretation are my own.

169

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

170

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

the Internet. To the casual observer, this may seem like just another offer trying to
lure customers into spending more money. However, the more careful observer
notices some distinct features of Bluewin TV. One such notable characteristic is
that Bluewin TV is not an offer made by a conventional TV, satellite, or cable TV
distributor. Rather, it is a service provided by the Swiss telephony operator Swiss-
com AG, who as the former monopolist in the fixed telephony market, still enjoys
a significant market position in the markets for communications networks and
services in Switzerland.

Bluewin TV can indeed be construed as a most manifest (although certainly
not an exclusive2) example of the practical implementation of digitization3 and
convergence,4 particularly when one considers that it is based on the IPTV (In-
ternet Protocol television5) platform developed by Microsoft. The Bluewin TV
instance also clearly shows the degree of penetration of the digitization/convergence
phenomena into our everyday lives and our decreasing defiance of the ubiquity of
ones and zeroes.6

Before attempting an analysis of the regulatory implications of novel techno-
logical developments in the media, which is one of the objectives pursued by the
present article, it should be noted that both digitization and convergence have
progressed immensely in the last 5 years. As far as digitization is concerned, Moore’s
Law7 has remained valid and the potential of microprocessors has continued to
increase at a rapid pace, allowing the processing and storage of vast amounts of
information (be it audio, video, or text). Furthermore, almost all networks (in
developed and even in developing countries) have become Internet protocol based,8
allowing for swift transmission of data and thereby changing existing business and
consumer behavior patterns.9 As a process stemming from digitization,10 conver-
gence has also reached a new level of advancement. The long-heralded merging of
telecommunications, media and information technology services, networks, and
market players has become reality in many respects (albeit not in the originally
predicted shape and form11). There is now a real supply and, what is more im-
portant, a demand for converged services.12 Particularly on the broadband Inter-
net, different media, such as video gaming, music, streamed radio, and online
newspapers have proliferated and are widely accepted as substitutes for traditional
analog media.13 Beyond this, there is a new generation of Internet-based services
(such as social networking sites, blogs, and wikis): the so-called Web 2.0,14 which
emphasize online collaboration and enrich and stimulate the communication
environment.15
Among the various consequences of the advanced digitization/convergence,
we consider the increased importance of content as the core.16 A second notable
implication taken up in this discussion concerns the new ways of accessing and
consuming content, which also lead to new ways of creating it. Although in the
audiovisual media the progress of digitization/convergence has been less pro-
nounced (especially if compared with the most advanced convergence platform of
the Internet), the article argues that its repercussions could be the most far reach-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

171

ing. The availability of multiple new channels for distribution of content (and of
new content); the new opportunities for consumers to access and interact; and the
repositioning of global market players along the entire value chain of content cre-
ation, packaging, and distribution strongly influence all media and their role in
modern society. Such possibilities fundamentally change the character of commu-
nication and impinge on culture.17

In a world of profound changes and dynamism, what has remained surpris-
ingly unaffected is regulation. Particularly in respect of the audiovisual media, the
regulatory framework has remained literally unchanged since the onset of conver-
gence and despite the substantial modifications in the parallel telecommunica-
tions regime.18 In the European Union (EU), the new Audiovisual Media Services
Directive (AVMS), proposed by the European Commission on December 13, 2005,19
should allegedly rectify this situation. Amending the existing Television without
Frontiers Directive (TVWF),20 it should offer a “fresh approach”21 and meet the
challenge of appropriately regulating media in a complex and dynamic environ-
ment. It is meant to achieve a balance between the free circulation of TV broad-
cast and new audiovisual media and the preservation of values of cultural identity
and diversity, while respecting the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality
inherent to the European Community (EC).22

This article aims to examine whether and how the changes envisaged to the EC
audiovisual media regime might influence cultural diversity in Europe and, sub-
sequently, address the question of whether the new AVMS appropriately safe-
guards the balance between competition and the public interest in this regard.

The article tackles the aforementioned issues in four parts. With a few broad
brushstrokes, the first part outlines the development of the EC audiovisual media
regulation and its main tenets. The second part draws on this background and
discusses the proposed changes thereto. Part three examines their potential im-
pact on cultural diversity in Europe and questions the concept of cultural diver-
sity used by the Commission as a policy goal. Part four draws conclusions and
suggests that the AVMS does not appropriately address the new media environ-
ment and the balance between competition and cultural diversity as a legitimate
public interest objective may be endangered through its implementation.

OVERVIEW OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND THE CURRENT STATE

OF EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AUDIOVISUAL REGULATION

Broadcasting was not one of the original regulatory domains of the EC and was
not covered by the Treaty of Rome establishing the European Economic Commu-
nity in 1957. It was only with the Maastricht Treaty,23 which entered into force on
November 1, 1993, that the audiovisual sector was referred to explicitly, although
arguably different rules of the emerging body of community law touched on di-
verse aspects of media regulation even before the change took place.24

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

172

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

The attempts to shape a distinct EC audiovisual policy began before the Maas-
tricht Treaty, however. They were triggered mostly by endogenous factors, which
were epitomized by the development of satellite broadcasting, the proliferation of
TV broadcasters, and the rapidly increasing deficit with the United States in au-
diovisual trade. The Green Paper on the Establishment of a Common Market in
Broadcasting of 198425 marked the beginning of the Community’s audiovisual
media policy. The latter advanced in parallel to but independently26 of the under-
takings of the Council of Europe (CoE). The CoE had indeed had a longer estab-
lished stance on media matters.27 It was also the first to adopt a regulatory act to
that effect with the Convention on Transfrontier Television (CTT).28
The EC decided to follow the blueprint of the CTT.29 Consequently, Council
Directive 89/552/EEC on the Coordination of Certain Provisions Laid Down by
Law, Regulation or Administrative Action in Member States Concerning the Pur-
suit of Television Broadcasting Activities,30 which was adopted in 1989, mirrors to
a great extent the structure and the basic provisions of the CTT.31 Since the be-
ginning of the 1990s,32 this directive,33 commonly known as the Television with-
out Frontiers Directive, has provided the essential regulatory framework for television
broadcasting and related activities at the Community level. As the prime EC reg-
ulatory tool for audiovisual media, the TVWF will be at the heart of this enquiry.
The TVWF can be best described as a liberalization measure. It is in essence a
concretization of the freedom of services under the specific conditions of televi-
sion, including a minimum level of partial harmonization,34 which ensures the
conditions necessary and sufficient for the consolidation of the single market for
media services.35 As a piece of secondary law, the directive follows the core prin-
ciples of freedom to provide services and freedom of establishment.36 Article 2(a)
of the TVWF explicitly guarantees these freedoms and provides that no member
state can restrict reception or retransmission of a broadcast from another mem-
ber state for reasons falling within the areas coordinated by the directive. The TVWF
regulates four major areas that cover the following:

1. Promotion of European works37 and works by independent producers38
2. Advertising, teleshopping and sponsoring39
3. Protection of minors and public order 40
4. Right of reply41

The TVWF, in the amended version of 1997,42 ensures further that events, which
are regarded by a member state as of major importance to society (such as, most
manifestly, the Football World Cup), may not be broadcast in such a way (e.g., on
pay TV only), as to deprive a substantial part of the population of that member
state of the opportunity to watch them.43

The core principle of application of the lex specialis TVWF rules is the so-called
country of origin rule (also referred to as home State or sending State rule), whereby
each member state must ensure that all television broadcasters under its jurisdic-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

173

tion comply.44 The member state’s jurisdiction is defined through the principle of
country of establishment with specific practical criteria applying to its precise de-
termination (e.g., head office of the service provider; place where programing pol-
icy decisions are taken).45 Each broadcaster falls under the jurisdiction of one
member state only, and it is sufficient that the broadcasters comply with the law of
the member state from which they emanate.46 The receiving state cannot exercise
secondary control47 except under special, restrictively interpreted,48 derogations
(such as the protection of minors or prevention of incitement to hatred).49 How-
ever, it should not be forgotten that the TVWF defines only a minimum set of
common rules, and member states are free to impose more detailed or stricter
rules on broadcasters under their jurisdiction.50

With the benefit of hindsight and summarizing the 17 years of application of
the TVWF, one can argue that the TVWF has clearly been a success. It has con-
tributed to overcoming the existing fragmentation of national laws and, by facil-
itating the free circulation of television broadcasts, has fostered the European
audiovisual media industry. The numbers contained in the recent Commission
report on the implementation of the TVWF 51 are unambiguous evidence in this
regard: Whereas at the beginning of 2001, more than 660 channels with potential
national coverage were broadcast via terrestrial transmitters, satellite, or cable,52 3
years later more than 860 such channels were active in the EU15.53 This should be
compared to the fewer than 90 channels existing in 1989.54 As the number of chan-
nels has grown, so have the revenues of broadcasters, which now make a substan-
tial contribution to overall economic growth.55

Yet, although these data show what the European Commission likes to describe
as a flourishing content industry,56 there is a flip side to the coin. Deregulation of
TV markets has had multiple, less glamorous, effects.57 The quantity of imported
programs and their costs have soared.58 Beyond this, and more importantly, the
quality and the range of programs on offer have been radically altered.59 The pur-
suit of a maximization of profits and a minimization of financial risks has re-
sulted in much “imitation, blandness and the recycling of those genres, themes
and approaches regarded as profitable.”60 The formats and contents of TV pro-
grams, films, and shows have become increasingly homogeneous.61 The tradi-
tional function of television, to inform, has been twisted and has become a
“tabloidization of news”62 and infotainment.63 The competitive pressure has also
changed the position of public service broadcasters and initiated a process of con-
vergence of the public and the commercial systems, in particular with respect to
their programing output.64

Against this backdrop, one could suggest that whilst the TVWF has clearly been
a “victory for commercial forces and those who favoured anti-protectionist poli-
cies,”65 it has done little for the achievement of cultural goals. Although, as men-
tioned earlier, the TVWF followed the CTT,66 the two acts had essentially different
bases. The latter initiative of the CoE had as its underlying rationale the freedom
of expression, enshrined in article 10 of the European Convention of Human Rights

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

174

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

(ECHR),67 while the act of the Community has been primarily a single market
measure.68 It is based on articles 47(2) and 55 EC (previously articles 57(2) and
66) and is a harmonization instrument meant to ensure that the free movements
of establishment and services are not distorted.

The intrinsic duality of audiovisual services as having both an economic and a
cultural nature, albeit repeatedly stated by the Community institutions, could not
be properly reflected at the EC level. The conflicting values and objectives belong-
ing to distinct differentiated societal spheres69 could not be appropriately resolved
through the chosen legal model. This became apparent not only in the provisions
of the TVWF, but was also later revealed by the failed attempt to adopt a directive
regulating media ownership70:“Tensions between ‘the economic aims of complet-
ing the single market [and] . . . the concern to protect cultural identity and a plu-
ralist media’ further complicate the more conventional EU conflicts between
interventionists and liberalisers, and between integrationalist and intergovernmen-
tal approaches.”71 Furthermore, they render a coherent media regulation at the
Community level unattainable. Paradoxically, it has been the EC competition rules
(in the sense of economic regulation), applying both in the fields of media and
telecommunications,72 that by fighting the concentration in media markets, safe-
guarded a certain level of content diversity.73 The next sections investigate whether
the new EC act regulating audiovisual media will be better able to meet the public
interest goal of protecting the diversity of cultural expressions and whether the
Community has indeed properly defined this goal.

THE NEED FOR A CHANGE AND STEPS LEADING TO THE AVMS

The TVWF directive incorporated an obligation for the Community to review it
by 2002.74 However, this was not the sole reason that prompted the revision. Nei-
ther can the reason be found in some of the shortcomings of the TVWF as an
instrument for regulating European audiovisual media, as hinted earlier. Rather,
the reason for a change was exogenous to the legal model and endogenous to the
audiovisual environment. The development and application of digital technolo-
gies, combined with strong convergence effects, as sketched at the beginning of
this article, have radically and irreversibly transformed the media landscape. They
have also triggered some specific developments in broadcasting markets, such as
increased pay-per-view, new nonlinear services delivery (e.g., video-on-demand),
peer-to-peer exchanges of audiovisual content, changed viewer habits, and new
advertising methods. Together, these phenomena and processes called for a mod-
ernized legal framework to fit the new reality of European broadcasting.75

Despite the wide agreement on the need for a change, the revision of the TVWF
has been a rough ride. It was an essential part of the overall reform, launched by
the Green Paper on Convergence in 1999,76 toward the turbulently developing,
technologically driven sectors of telecommunications, information technologies

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

175

and audiovisual media. The reform of the media sector was indeed the last build-
ing block in this major undertaking of the Community, which is also endowed
with a specific role in the context of the Lisbon strategy to establish the EU as the
“most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world.”77

The actual review process of the TVWF commenced with the Fourth Commu-
nication on the Application of the TVWF Directive for the period 2001 to 2002.78
In an annex to this communication, the Commission proposed a work program
for the modernization of audiovisual services rules and a timetable of future
actions.79 The subsequent efforts80 focused on six priority areas, namely (1) rules
applicable to audiovisual content services (scope); (2) cultural diversity and pro-
motion of European and independent audiovisual production; (3) media plural-
ism; (4) commercial communications; (5) protection of minors and human dignity,
right of reply; and (6) rights to information and short reporting.81

Procedurally, the adoption of the AVMS was subject to the codecision formula
set out in article 251 EC, which involves the Commission, the Council, and the
European Parliament (EP). Key documents in this process are the original pro-
posal of the Commission of December 13, 2005;82 the Report of the Committee
on Culture and Education;83 the text adopted by the EP in first reading84 and the
subsequent Commission’s amended proposal.85 This analysis refers to the consol-
idated text.86

MAIN TENETS OF THE ENVISAGED REFORM

Of the various changes that the AVMS will bring about, we focus our attention on
three of the novel (and most contentious) solutions, which are likely to have sub-
stantial effect on the media ecosystem in Europe and on the diversity of cultural
expressions therein. These key issues are scope of the AVMS, rules on advertising,
and product placement.

Extended Scope of the AVMS

The first and most groundbreaking element of the reform involves a readjustment
of the scope of the directive. The Commission’s crucial argument in this respect is
that, given the impact that audiovisual media services have on the economy and
society, the AVMS rules should apply to all content services, irrespective of the
technology that delivers them. This is in stark contrast to the current situation,
where the different delivery modes receive different regulatory treatment and cause
regulatory asymmetries.

To remedy this situation, a broader, generic definition of audiovisual media ser-
vice was proposed, which also implies a larger scope for application of the AVMS.
Pursuant to article 187 thereof, an audiovisual media service is identified through
six essential elements, which must be simultaneously present: (1) a service within

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

176

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

the meaning of the Treaty provisions (articles 49 and 50 EC); (2) provided under
editorial responsibility of a media service provider;88 (3) the principal purpose of
which is the provision of programs consisting of moving images with or without
sound;89 (4) to inform, entertain or educate; (5) to the general public; (6) by elec-
tronic communications networks.90 Pursuant to this definition, it is apparent that
any content service of commercial nature91 will be caught by the AVMS.
Linear and Nonlinear Audiovisual Media Services

Under the all-encompassing category of audiovisual media services, two subcat-
egories are defined, which as discussed in the following text are treated differently
under the AVMS regime. The first subcategory is that of television broadcast or
linear service. It covers audiovisual media services “provided by a media service
provider for simultaneous viewing of programmes on the basis of a programme
schedule.”92 The second subcategory comprises on-demand or nonlinear services,
which are offers of audiovisual content “for the viewing of programmes at the
moment chosen by the user and at his/her individual request on the basis of a
catalogue of programmes selected by the media service provider.”93
On the basis of these definitions, one can say that the rule-of-thumb for delim-
itating the categories of linear/nonlinear services is the possibility of choice and
control the user can exercise and also the impact they have on society (being
“pushed” to everyone or “pulled” individually).94

Taken together, the broader definition of audiovisual media service and the de-

lineation of the two categories have three important effects:

1. The overarching idea of platform-neutral content regulation is properly re-
flected, and the transport technology does not lead to the exclusion of any
content services from the reach of the AVMS.

2. Most importantly, the country of origin principle, as the core to the EC audio-
visual media regulation regime, is extended to all content services, including
the nonlinear. This minimum level of harmonization guarantees a function-
ing single market and prevents the emergence of an uneven playing field
laden with diverging national rules: Indeed, although it is often said that non-
linear services were previously unregulated, 19 out of the 25 member states
do already have some form of regulation.95 The rules at the Community level
allegedly also contribute to legal certainty, which supports the convergence
of linear and nonlinear on the supply side and creates a beneficial environ-
ment of consumer trust and product awareness.96

3. Some flexibility is preserved, which allows for a less stringent approach to new
media services. The regulation of conventional television broadcast (or linear
media services) remains almost unchanged (with some relaxation of the rules
on advertising and product placement, as discussed below). Nonlinear ser-
vices are subject to a much lighter regime and would have to satisfy only a basic
tier of rules. These rules cover the protection of minors and human dignity,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

177

right of reply, identification of commercial communications, and minimum
qualitative obligations regarding commercial communications.

The overall effect aspired to by the above-outlined reform was, in the words of
the European Commission, to increase choice, diversity, and investment in the Eu-
ropean audiovisual media leading to a “vibrant ‘audiovisual content without fron-
tiers’ industry that is strongly rooted in the EU.”97 Yet, this aspiration may remain
unfulfilled. In practical terms, the effects of the changes made cannot be unequiv-
ocally framed as positive. Although the TVWF affected only licensed broadcasters,
the AVMS now covers a much broader range of stakeholders, who formerly were,
if not unregulated, at least less regulated98 (e.g., by generic rules such as the
e-Commerce Directive99). Although the providers of nonlinear services only must
comply with the laws of their own member state, the regulatory burden on them
is substantial and may be detrimental.100 Innovation and entry of new market
players may be seriously hampered.101 User-generated content as an emerging fea-
ture of broadband use and the related business models such as Google and You-
Tube, which support the insertion of advertising into the more popular pieces of
content, are affected: the content producer, who chooses to accept advertising, is
subject to the AVMS as a nonlinear provider, even though the advertising itself is
chosen by the site host.102 This may be prohibitive for furthering the Web 2.0 ef-
fects of user-generated and distributed content, which is often central to consum-
ers’ Internet experience,103 and may suppress this new type of creativity.

New linear operators (e.g., new channel providers) also face relatively heavy reg-
ulatory burdens (in contrast to the incumbent linear operators for whom the nom-
inal burden is small). In seeking a reduction in sunk costs and realization of positive
network effects, content providers have the stimulus to consolidate, which re-
inforces concentration in the broadcasting markets104 and thus has a negative im-
pact on the diversity of cultural expressions in the European media environment.
“Cultural” Quotas for Nonlinear Services?

An immediate concern in the context of this new, broader definition of audiovi-
sual media services and cultural diversity is whether the existing quota mecha-
nisms for European works (article 4 TVWF) and for independent productions
(article 5 TVWF) are preserved under the AVMS regime. In the framework of
TVWF, article 4(1) prescribed that member states ensure “where practicable and
by appropriate means, that broadcasters reserve for European works a majority
proportion of their transmission time, excluding the time appointed to news, sports
events, games, advertising, teletext services and teleshopping.”105 This proportion
was to be achieved progressively, on the basis of suitable criteria.106 Article 5(1)
TVWF provided further that, where practicable and by appropriate means, broad-
casters reserve at least 10% of their transmission time, or alternatively, 10% of
their programing budget, for European works created by producers who are in-
dependent of broadcasters.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

178

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

Articles 4 and 5 TVWF were the only tools at Community level that were
intrinsically meant to serve cultural goals, ensuring a balance of offerings in the
EC broadcasting markets. Regardless of the implementation option chosen by
the individual member states,107 the impact study prepared for the TVWF re-
view108 showed that the measures to promote European and independent pro-
ductions have indeed had considerable impact. The average ratio of European
works in the qualifying transmission time of the channels increased from
52.1% in 1993 to 57.4% in 2002. The average proportion of independent pro-
ductions increased from 16.2% in 1993 to 20.2% in 2002 and the share of recent
independent productions from 11.3% to 15.7%.109 The impact study suggested
further that, taking into account these developments, there is no need to
change110 either the majority share for European works or the minimum share
for independent productions: Articles 4 and 5 TVWF were deemed to already be
achieving their cultural aims “inasmuch as . . . [they] have increased the propor-
tion of European works and independent productions broadcast by channels in
the EU.”111

The EU Commissioner for Information Society and Media, Viviane Reding was
delighted by the high share of airtime devoted to European works and stated that,
“This is proof of the high quality of Europe’s home-grown audiovisual content
and of the vitality of an audiovisual industry that draws upon Europe’s rich cul-
tural diversity.”112 It is arguable to the contrary that the higher share of European
productions is by no means a sign of increased (or existing) diversity of cultural
expressions. The definition of what qualifies as European work is neither based on
originality and quality criteria nor does it require a particular expression of na-
tional and European themes.113 It is based merely on the construct that most of
its authors and workers reside in one or more member states and comply with
one of the three conditions: (1) the work is made by one or more producers es-
tablished in a member state or states party to the CTT; (2) the production is su-
pervised and controlled by producer(s) established in one or more of those states;
or (3) the contribution of coproducers of those states to the total coproduction
costs is preponderant and the coproduction is not controlled by producer(s) es-
tablished outside those states.114

Indeed, in this shape and form, the cultural diversity rationale for the promo-
tion of European works is barely distinguishable from a protectionist one, aiming
to secure a certain amount of airtime for works produced with European money.115
It is noteworthy that the impact study could not prove that, in the absence of
articles 4 and 5 TVWF, the trade deficit with the United States116 would have been
larger and that the measures to promote the circulation of programs within the
EU have also promoted exports.117 We deem that such a definition of European
works and the related policy measures do little to prevent the increasing homog-
enization of content and deteriorating quality of programs.118 A “Big Brother”
type of TV show financed with European money qualifies perfectly as both a Eu-
ropean work and an independent production.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

179

The question of whether the quota mechanisms will be translated into the do-
main of nonlinear audiovisual services was key in the discussions of the AVMS.
They exposed yet again the existing divergences between the Community institu-
tions and between the Community and the member state levels, as well as the
profound conflict between the simultaneous pursuit of economic and cultural
goals.119 Most agreed that the quota system, as contained in the TVWF, will be
preserved under the AVMS but will apply only to linear (television broadcasting)
services. With regard to nonlinear services, there was a strong conviction that a
quota rule would be burdensome and in any case, difficult to install and track.
The AVMS does include a soft-law provision, however, which creates an obliga-
tion for the member states to ensure that media service providers under their ju-
risdiction “promote, where practicable and by appropriate means, production of
and access to European works.”120 The European Commission is further obliged
to report to the Parliament and the Council every 3 years on the application of
this provision, taking into consideration the market, technological developments
and the objective of cultural diversity.121

Interestingly, the AVMS also mentions that, at least technically, a quota mech-
anism is possible despite the entirely different characteristics of nonlinear audio-
visual services: The quotas may be based on the products on offer (instead of on
broadcasts as with linear services). They could take the form of a minimum share
of European works proportionate to economic performance, a minimum share of
European works in video-on-demand catalogs, or the attractive presentation of
European works in electronic program guides.122

The question is therefore not so much whether imposing quotas is still doable.
It is more fundamental: Has the increase in consumer choice and multichannel
capacity rendered the rules on broadcasting quotas obsolete? And related to this:
Is there a need for a new legal model ensuring the diversity of cultural expressions
in the new audiovisual media settings?

Before looking into these questions, one needs to acknowledge a few things per-
tinent in this context. Firstly, that the linear and nonlinear market segments do
compete, at least indirectly.123 In the long term, nonlinear audiovisual media ser-
vices have the potential to partially replace linear services, a fact also admitted by
the European legislator.124 Secondly, the effects of a quota mechanism for nonlin-
ear services are quite unpredictable and may even have diametrically opposed out-
comes. A first option is that consumers (empowered by technology) would simply
not choose European works and thus render any investment/catalog quota inef-
fective. Another rather different option is an application of the so-called Long Tail
theory.125 This means that in the new environment of indefinitely diverse media,
the consumer selection constantly discovers niche products and/or generates new
ones (similarly to the Amazon bookselling platform126). Consumers are stimu-
lated to consume products otherwise unavailable to them (because of the scarcity
of time slots in TV schedules) and thus induce markets to develop new types of
content, such as archived European content, original works, documentaries, or

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

180

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

director’s cuts.127 This may ultimately lead to a higher share of available and ef-
fectively consumed European works, which, if realized, will be a genuine expres-
sion of cultural diversity.

As a tentative conclusion based on the aforementioned text and as an answer to
the questions raised, the European legislator took a rather unimaginative ap-
proach in addressing cultural policy objectives at the Community level in the face
of new technological developments, changed business, and consumer behavior pat-
terns. Preserving the status quo quota system for linear services and creating soft-
law stimulus for nonlinear services is by no means an adequate answer to the
dynamic and complex environment of audiovisual media and the redefined need
to safeguard some diversity in it. Quota mechanisms based on the existing defi-
nition of European works are in any case of dubious cultural value. However, the
parties involved in the AVMS legislative process seemed unwilling to take up and
pursue the controversial cultural questions and reignite the latent conflicts be-
tween integrationists and intergovernmentalists, interventionists, and liberalizers
when other, notably economic, interests were at stake.

Audiovisual Commercial Communications

The second major reform brought by the AVMS is in the area of advertising, or
what is now referred to as audiovisual commercial communications. This is indeed
a most crucial area of media regulation, because advertising is the main source of
revenue for European television broadcasters and likely to remain so.128 The gross
television advertising market has consistently expanded and reached Y25.7 billion
for the EU15 in 2004, which is a 7.2% increase in relation to 2003.129 As far as new
media are concerned, Internet advertising and computer games revenues are
the fastest growing share of media spending and expected to continue growing
considerably.130

Similarly to the audiovisual media service definition, the concept of audiovisual
commercial communication is a broad one. It is a notion taken from the e-Commerce
Directive with an almost identical content131 and is meant to encapsulate all rules
related to advertising. It is defined as follows:

Images with or without sound which are designed to promote, directly
or indirectly, the goods, services or image of a natural or legal entity
pursuing an economic activity. Such images accompany or are included
in a programme in return for payment or for similar consideration or
for self-promotional purposes. Forms of audiovisual commercial com-
munication include, inter alia, television advertising, sponsorship, tele-
shopping and product placement.132

In the so-defined domain of audiovisual commercial communications, the first
objective of the reform undertaken was to secure a basic tier of rules at the EC
level, which would provide legal certainty across all member states. Thus, pursu-
ant to the AVMS, all audiovisual commercial communications must comply with

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

181

the principles laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union and, in particular they must not prejudice respect for human dignity; in-
clude any discrimination on grounds of race, sex or, nationality; offend religious
or political beliefs; encourage behavior prejudicial to health or safety; or encour-
age behavior grossly prejudicial to the protection of the environment.133 Further,
all forms of commercial communications regarding cigarettes and other tobacco
products, medicinal products, and medical treatment available only on prescrip-
tion are prohibited.134 Special care has also been taken for the protection of
minors.135

The second objective of the TVWF review in the field of audiovisual commer-
cial communications was to deregulate them and adopt a lighter, flexible approach
allowing more possibilities for broadcasters and content providers to increase the
value of advertising time, which would also properly reflect the more multifaceted
media environment.136 According to the principles of flexibility and simplicity pur-
sued, the European Commission introduced two blocks of changes:

1. A relaxation of the rules on the insertion of advertising in TV programs and

daily advertising limits

2. New regulation of product placement

The following text looks into these and contemplates their justifications and po-
tential effects on cultural diversity.
Rules on Advertising

The AVMS removes some of the existing quantitative limits on advertising. The
current 3-hours-per-day limit on advertising is dropped, because practical expe-
rience has shown that in fact no TV channel comes close to it. The 12-minute
upper limit on all advertising in any given hour is maintained, however.137 As to
the insertion of advertising, the European Commission was eager to grant broad-
casters more freedom to choose the most suitable moment for advertisements
within the programs. Yet, the EP was adamant in this regard and insisted on the
principle that advertising and teleshopping spots can be inserted only between pro-
grams. In its amended proposal after EP’s first reading, the Commission avoided
an explicit formulation of this rule and stated only that, member states must en-
sure, “where advertising or teleshopping is inserted during programmes, that the
integrity of the programmes, taking into account natural breaks in and the dura-
tion and the nature of the programme” is not prejudiced.138

The frequency of advertising breaks was a hot topic in the discussions of the
AVMS. In its initial proposal, the European Commission foresaw a minimum of
35 minutes between the advertisements inserted in films made for television (ex-
cluding series, serials, light entertainment programs, and documentaries), cinemat-
ographic works, and children’s and news programs. The proposal of the EP
Committee on Culture and Education reversed this to the TVWF benchmark of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

182

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

45 minutes and included concerts, theater plays, and operas in the provision. In-
terestingly, the text adopted by the Parliament at first reading ignores the proposal
of its own committee and even goes below the minimum suggested by the Com-
mission. The rule is now that films made for television (excluding series, serials
and documentaries), cinematographic works, and news programs may be inter-
rupted by advertising and/or teleshopping once for each scheduled period of at
least 30 minutes.139

Thus, although the EP has normally put brakes on the European Commission’s
spur to liberalize advertising in audiovisual media, it is apparent here that the will-
ingness to allow more freedom to broadcasters has prevailed. This will undoubt-
edly give better opportunities for broadcasters and content providers to monetize
but will also speed up the already advanced commercialization of television.140
Trying to show the programs of greatest appeal in the most valuable time slots to
attract advertising naturally leads to marginalization of specific, original pro-
grams and those that otherwise diverge from the mainstream.

Rules on Product Placement

The second important change in the domain of audiovisual commercial commu-
nications is the newly formulated attitude toward product placement.141 Product
placement is defined as “any form of audiovisual commercial communication con-
sisting of the inclusion of or reference to a product, a service or the trade mark
thereof so that it is featured within audiovisual media services, normally in return
for payment or for similar consideration.”142

In the Commission’s original proposal, product placement was fully legitimized
and taken as an essential element of advertising techniques. The opposition was
too strong, however. The compromise reached is to preserve the ban on product
placement, but it is no longer an outright ban.143 Product placement is now per-
mitted in cinematographic works, films, and series made for audiovisual media
services, light entertainment, and sports programs.144 Such programs must re-
spect certain conditions; they should never affect or jeopardize the editorial re-
sponsibility and independence of the media service provider, nor should they
“directly encourage the purchase or rental of goods or services” or give “undue
prominence to the product in question.”145 Following the general rule of separate
and clearly identifiable commercial communications,146 viewers are to be appro-
priately informed of the existence of product placement at the start and at the end
of the program, and when a program resumes after an advertising break.147 In any
event, product placement for tobacco products, cigarettes, or medicinal products
and medical treatments available on prescription only is not allowed.148

It is imperative to note here that, although the EP limited the scope of the le-
gitimization of product placement, what is allowed is not negligible; indeed, the
major audiovisual formats of cinematographic works, films, and series made for
television and sports broadcasts do allow product placement.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

183

The Commission argues that by providing a clear framework for product place-
ment, new revenues for the European audiovisual industry would be secured. This
would increase its competitiveness, especially vis-à-vis the U.S. media industry,149
where product placement accounts for 1.7% of the total advertising revenues of
free-to-air broadcasters and increased by an average of 21% per year between 1999
and 2004.150 More oddly, the Commission also believes that the new rules on prod-
uct placement will “help to boost our creative economy and thus reinforce cul-
tural diversity.”151 Indeed, both the rules on advertising and the rules on product
placement are seen as “further instruments safeguarding cultural diversity.”152

Although the less restrictive EC regime on product placement may be some-
what justified in view of its value as a financial source for content providers and
to prevent the emergence of multiple national rules distorting the single market, it
is difficult for us to see how product placement contributes to cultural diversity.
The nature of product placement is such that it is an integral part of the fic-
tional work or sports event.153 Because of this essential characteristic, the viewer
cannot simply skip the advertisement or switch channels until the commercial break
is over. Furthermore, often part of the story line of fictional works and thus part
of the reality they represent as product placement’s attractant effect may be much
stronger than that of conventional advertising in commercial breaks. The com-
mercial intention of product placement is indeed partly concealed and therefore
less obtrusive or even not realized at all by the recipients, who cannot avoid this
type of integrated advertising easily.154 With the advances in technology enabling
consumers to pull content individually, the incentives to include product place-
ment will increase for the content providers as well as the companies whose prod-
ucts and services are advertised. This will naturally lead to an increase in the
quantity and quality of product placement (in the sense that its intertwining with
the plot will be perfected thus multiplying its effects155). Thereby, the commodi-
fication of artistic productions156 will be strongly intensified and diversity of cul-
tural expressions smothered rather than stimulated.

CONCLUSION ON THE IMPACT OF THE AVMS

ON CULTURAL DIVERSITY

As already noted, the precise effects of the regulatory changes undertaken and the
development of the diverse audiovisual media markets are hard to predict.

The extreme nature of the predictive challenge is due to the unusual
volatility of content markets and citizen tastes in media consumption,
which rely on network effects to a great extent (especially in non-linear
demand patterns) as well as having extreme economies of scale because
of the perfect reproducibility of digital content.157

The concrete implications for the diversity of cultural expressions are even harder
to predict because cultural diversity itself is a dynamic parameter.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

184

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

Despite the constraints of prediction, some trends in the development of Eu-
ropean audiovisual media are already discernible. The completely new landscape
described in the beginning of this article is likely to continue its transformation
gradually but profoundly.158 The multiplication of channels for content distribu-
tion is likely to go on. By 2010 to 2014 (i.e., within the projected lifetime of the
AVMS), most member states will have completed the transition to digital sig-
nal.159 On this transition, every household will receive between 20 and 40 free
TV channels.160 This growth in channel choice will reduce the total audience
share of the primary channels161 and the share of individual primary channels
in each member state. Audience fragmentation will put revenue pressure on the
primary channels (especially commercial ones) and undermine the public fund-
ing of leading public primary channels.162 Furthermore, the new media distribu-
tion channels, above all broadband, will draw consumers away from traditional
entertainment media, further reducing the audience share of primary chan-
nels.163 Pulling individual content through digital TV or Internet channels is an
emergent consumer behavior pattern likely to change the business models of
content providers, distributors, and advertisers and further fragment the media
environment. Whichever pattern of access to and use of audiovisual content pre-
vails,164 it is apparent that the split between multichannel and analog house-
holds, already a reality, will become more pronounced.165 If Internet penetration
is to stabilize at 65% to 75% by household and mobile phone penetration at
85%,166 this means that a substantial proportion of people will remain offline.
This minority is “both the most vulnerable in society and least likely to change
(typically comprising the most elderly, non-formally qualified and/or poorest
quartiles).”167

The broader picture of the European media landscape will thus be one of in-
creased fragmentation of audiences and increasing gap between the digital haves
and have-nots. At the same time, a concentration among the diverse market play-
ers, both horizontally and vertically, is expected, so they can make better use of all
the existing channels (e.g., by placing a single video clip on broadband, mobile,
and digital TV networks) and benefiting from economies of scale. Such an envi-
ronment makes the design of an appropriate regulatory model extremely difficult,
in particular where the objective of catering for public interest is concerned. The
focus of this article is on only one of these objectives, namely the sustainability of
the diversity of cultural expressions in audiovisual media.

Cultural diversity has always been defined as one of the vital justifications for
European audiovisual media policy. At its very onset, epitomized by the Rhodes
Summit of the European Council, the Council stressed that the future TVWF ini-
tiative should “provide an opportunity of demonstrating the richness and diver-
sity of European culture”168 and “contribute to a substantial strengthening of a
European cultural identity. . . .”169 Later, when formulating the principles of the
Community’s audiovisual strategy for the digital age, the European Commission
stated the following:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

185

The audiovisual industry is . . . not an industry like any other and does
not simply produce goods to be sold on the market like other goods. It
is in fact a cultural industry par excellence. It has a major influence on
what citizens know, believe and feel and plays a crucial role in the trans-
mission, development and even construction of cultural identities.170

In the AVMS, the Parliament was particularly insistent on the amendment of

recital 3, which, pursuant to the EP’s formulation, held the following:

Audiovisual media services are as much cultural goods as they are eco-
nomic goods. Their growing importance for societies, democracy—in
particular by ensuring freedom of information, diversity of opinion and
media pluralism—education, and culture justifies the application of spe-
cific rules to these services, and the enforcement of those rules, notably
in order to preserve the fundamental rights and freedoms laid down in
the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, the Euro-
pean Convention for Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Free-
doms and the United Nations Covenant on Civil and Political Freedoms,
and in order to ensure the protection of minors and vulnerable and dis-
abled people.171

Despite these lengthy deliberations and handsome rhetoric, this examination of
the major provisions of the AVMS found no concrete solutions addressing cul-
tural diversity considerations or any of the values innate to cultural identity and
diversity. The future-proof broad definition of audiovisual media services would
allow for increasing the reach of the Community media framework and an ex-
tension of the economically beneficial country of origin principle. However, the
regulation of nonlinear services may be onerous for smaller market players or in-
dividual providers of content, which may in turn create a barrier to newly emerg-
ing creativity and online content distribution. The preservation of the status quo
regarding quotas for European works and independent productions, which re-
main applicable to television broadcast but not to nonlinear services, is a mere
political compromise, which disregards the new technological developments and
the increasing fragmentation of audiences. In its present form, one can argue that
it bears no real relation to cultural policy objectives; and even if achieved, the
quotas do not reflect cultural diversity. With respect to advertising and product
placement, it can also be argued that the liberalizing rationales have prevailed and
there are no genuine considerations of protecting and promoting the diversity of
cultural expressions.

The amazing gap between the rhetoric of the European legislator and the real-
ity of the regulatory instruments adopted in the AVMS also reveals no real un-
derstanding of what cultural diversity in audiovisual media is. Indeed, this at times
frivolous waving of the banner of cultural diversity may undermine the very value
of this notion.

Pursuant to the definition given by UNESCO in its Convention on the Protec-
tion and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions,172 cultural diversity
is defined as

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

186

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

the manifold ways in which the cultures of groups and societies find
expression. These expressions are passed on within and among groups
and societies. Cultural diversity is made manifest not only through the
varied ways in which the cultural heritage of humanity is expressed, aug-
mented and transmitted through the variety of cultural expressions, but
also through diverse modes of artistic creation, production, dissemina-
tion, distribution, and enjoyment, whatever the means and technologies
used.173

This all-encompassing concept of cultural diversity and the inherent complexity
of the notion of culture174 admittedly make it hard to delineate clear-cut contours
of cultural diversity in audiovisual media. The tendency to give different conno-
tations to the concept of cultural diversity in different contexts (e.g., ethnocentric
in the UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity,175 as cultural multiplicity in
the context of the protection of traditional cultural expressions in societies with
indigenous and immigrant communities,176 or as media pluralism177) is not very
helpful either.

It should have been precisely the task of the European legislator to find the
contours of cultural diversity and then to examine the regulatory options. In the
concrete setting of audiovisual media, such an endeavor could follow the basic
lines:

Diverse is such a cultural landscape, where next to the big commercial
productions, which pursue above all maximisation of viewers’ numbers,
there is the possibility for existence of other productions—productions
that depart from the “mainstream” through, for instance, the original
touch of their author, their “low budget” production costs, experimental
or avant-garde nature, or due to other reasons, which stimulate the fan-
tasy and thoughts of the public.178

Looking at the markets for audiovisual media services, the Community legislator
may then examine possible objective parameters for measuring diversity. Moreau
and Peltier suggest, for example, three dimensions of diversity: variety, balance,
and disparity.179 By quantifying them, they attempt an analysis of national film
markets,180 thereby allowing for an assessment of the efficiency of the different
cultural policy measures taken.181 The EC is undoubtedly free in its choice of ap-
proaches but not, we argue, free to simply protect European media under the dis-
guise of cultural diversity policy.

COMMITMENTS OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY TO THE

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL DIVERSITY

An almost perfect justification for the lack of real provisions on the protection
and promotion of cultural diversity in the AVMS is that the European Commu-
nity has no explicit regulatory competence on these issues. Indeed, the relatively
fuzzy definition of the scope of the Community competences in article 151 EC182

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

187

and above all the principle of subsidiarity, leave little room for the Community
action. The member states are meant to pursue their own cultural policy goals as
they see fit, and the Community has repeatedly confirmed the conformity of mea-
sures intended to their achievement with EC law. In addition to the derogations to
the free movements explicitly formulated in article 30 EC, it was in Cassis de Di-
jon183 that the Court of Justice developed an open-ended list of mandatory re-
quirements (also known as imperative requirements or overriding requirements in
the public interest).184 Cultural policy measures implemented in the audiovisual
sector fall within this category and “constitute an overriding requirement relating
to the general interest which justifies a restriction on the freedom to provide ser-
vices.”185 Thus, the creation of the single market, while certainly being the more
dominant goal of the Community policies, allows the parallel existence of other
objectives, including within the domain of culture.186 It is important to note, how-
ever, that the Community courts have been protecting these public interest goals
only negatively, in the sense of an exception from the freedom to provide services,
rather than in the positive manner of the European Court of Human Rights when
interpreting and applying the freedom of speech provision of article 10 ECHR.187
The new audiovisual media environment, elements of which previously de-
scribed, calls however for a positive and comprehensive approach at the Commu-
nity level. A puzzle of fragmented measures at the member state level would not
work properly in an ecosystem of increasingly fragmented audiences, multiple chan-
nels, and sophisticated technologies enabling consumer’s choice and control. Sub-
sidized programing and national rules of origin will affect a continually diminishing
slice of the average household’s content alternatives.188 Furthermore, the mea-
sures taken at the national level often appear to be pursuing more protectionist
than cultural goals, thereby leading to both distortion of the market mechanisms
and devaluation of the cultural objectives.189

Furthermore, as parties to the UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity, the
EC member states and the European Community itself190 have clearly taken, if
not legally binding obligations,191 at least an engagement with regard to the pro-
tection and promotion of cultural expressions and need to meet these aims.192

SUMMARY

A revision usually entails a correction, improvement and/or an update. The AVMS
is an update but hardly an improvement on the previous TVWF regime, in par-
ticular as far as its contribution to cultural diversity in the European media is
concerned. The AVMS also reveals that, at the Community level as well as in the
member states, “cultural policy making is in a profound state of transition as the
audiovisual sector moves from being a separable and quarantined domain of gov-
ernance to its enactment as part of a whole-of-government modelling in which it
emerges as a service industry in a ‘digital economy.’”193

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

188

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

When examining the provisions of the AVMS, we exposed a wide gap between
the cultural diversity rhetoric and the real instruments put in place by the
Community legislator. The lack of a clear and comprehensive vision of how to
approach the new dynamic multifaceted audiovisual environment and the misun-
derstanding and/or ignoring of new phenomena and processes is also apparent.
This may have unintended consequences in numerous directions, such as reduced
creativity or wrong incentivizing of European content producers. Isolated actions
such as the promotion of coproductions may have also dubious effects, and may
even lead to a loss of cultural diversity as producers focus on the lowest common
cultural denominator and move from unique concepts to the development of for-
mats for the global marketplace.194

Furthermore, it is obvious that the EC legislator in its cultural policy endeavors
still tends to stick to versions of international relations theory stressing the com-
petitiveness of nations vis-à-vis others as the primary governance problem.195 The
High Level Group on Audiovisual Policy was deeply convinced, for example, that:

At the heart of the matter is the question of whether the predicted ex-
plosion in demand for audiovisual material will be met by European
productions or by imports. . . . The danger is that the channel prolifer-
ation brought about digital technology will lead to further market frag-
mentation, making it more difficult for European producers to compete
with American imports.196

To put it simply, it is argued in contrast that cultural diversity in European media
is certainly not a question of whether the European production of “Big Brother”
will be replaced by a U.S. production of “Big Sister.”

We deem that in its present form the AVMS, while securing a competitive en-
vironment and also providing for legal certainty for new media, does not actively
contribute to the diversity of cultural expressions in European audiovisual media.
In the new audiovisual media landscape and taking account of the changed pat-
terns of viewers’ and businesses’ behavior, a set of new priorities is emerging, which
should be carefully considered and reflected in the overall Community framework
of audiovisual media policy. In no particular order, these involve the following:

1. Make full use of the phenomena of digital media distribution and content
creation in the sense of prolonging the Long Tail, which may include inter
alia efforts to digitize all European content, facilitate the search of such con-
tent,197 and create public awareness in this respect.

2. Stimulate the Web 2.0 effects in user-generated content creation and harness

the new creativity.

3. Reduce the asymmetry of information between the digital haves and the dig-
ital have-nots: Provision of diverse content in nondigitized form and active
promotion of media literacy. The latter may be a vital asset to actively choos-
ing, filtering, consuming, and creating media, thus shaping communication
and culture.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

189

4. Rethink the role of public service broadcasters in the new media setting.
5. Create proper incentives for the production of European works using crite-

ria not simply based on their origin.

Admittedly, the EC has been already taking steps in some of these directions
(e.g., media literacy,198 content online,199 and content production with the Media
2007 program200), but there is a significant lack of coherence and prioritization.
Although “coherence has never been the strongest aspect of EU audio-visual pol-
icy,”201 it may become indispensable in the new digital media environment.

ENDNOTES

1. See Neue Zürcher Zeitung, “Bluewin-TV von Swisscom geht auf Sendung,” October 31, 2006.

See also http://www.tv.bluewin.ch/ (accessed May 18, 2007).
2. A perhaps more infamous example of convergence from the recent past is the purchase of
YouTube (http://www.youtube.com) by Google (http://www.google.com), which brought together a
popular online platform for posting audiovisual content and the most used search engine. See for
example, Andrew Ross Sorkin, “Dot-Com Boom Echoed in Deal to Buy YouTube,” New York Times,
October 10, 2006; and Economist, “Two Kings Get Together,” October 12, 2006.

3. In its simplest form, a digital code is a binary bit or digit indicating one of two alternatives
(represented as either 0 or 1) to denote the presence or absence of an electrical signal or two differ-
ent voltage levels. Binary bits can be grouped in various combinations to represent numbers,
alphabetical characters, symbols, or any other type of information. Through a combination of mi-
croprocessors and sophisticated algorithms, these bit streams can then be compressed to manage-
able lengths, therewith allowing a wide range of content to be stored, retrieved, and transported
electronically in the form of encoded text, audio, and video traffic over any digital network.

4. On convergence, see Blackman, “Convergence,” 163ff; Longstaff, “New Ways to Think”;
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development [OECD], The Implications of Conver-
gence; Geradin and Luff, The WTO and Global Convergence; Mueller, “Convergence: A Reality Check,”
311ff; Larouche, “Dealing with Convergence,” 390ff.

5. On IPTV, see Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 5; Marsden et al., Assessing

Indirect Impacts, 55ff.

6. See for example, OECD, The Future Digital Economy.
7. Gordon Moore of Intel postulated in 1965 that the transistor density on a single integrated
circuit microchip would double approximately every 18 months. This rule showing the incredible
pace of technological advance became known as Moore’s Law. On Moore’s Law, see for example,
Rob Frieden, Managing the Internet-Driven Change, 17ff.

8. OECD, Information Technology Outlook 2006.
9. OECD, Information Technology Outlook 2006.
10. Mueller, “Digital Convergence and its Consequences.”
11. Longstaff, “New Ways to Think.”
12. Bluewin TV is a clear consequence of this development, where operators offer the so-called
quadruple play (i.e., a bundled package of fixed and mobile telephony, broadband Internet access,
and multichannel television, including on-demand services) and distribute it through any network.
The lack of demand for converged services was one of the reasons for the bursting of the dot-com
bubble in 2001. See Economist, “Beyond the Bubble,” October 9, 2003.

13. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 6.
14. Web 2.0 is a phrase coined by O’Reilly Media (http://www.oreilly.com/) in 2004. Proponents
of the Web 2.0 concept say that it differs from early Web development (labeled Web 1.0) in that it

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

190

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

moves away from static web sites, the use of search engines, and surfing from one web site to the
next and moves toward a more dynamic and interactive World Wide Web. See O’Reilly, “What Is
Web 2.0?”; OECD, Participative Web.

15. See Benkler, The Wealth of Networks; Jenkins, Convergence Culture.
16. See for example, OECD, Information Technology Outlook 2006; OECD, Digital Broadband

Content.

17. Castells, The Information Age, 356. Castells noted, “The potential integration of text, images,
and sounds in the same system, interacting from multiple points, in chosen time (real and delayed)
along a global network, in conditions of open and affordable access, does fundamentally change the
character of communication. And communication decisively shapes culture. . . .”

18. On the developments of EC telecommunications law, see Nihoul and Rodford, EU Electronic

Communications Law; Walden and Angel, Telecommunications Law.
19. European Commission Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Coun-
cil Amending Council Directive 89/552/EEC on the Coordination of Certain Provisions Laid Down
by Law, Regulation or Administrative Action in Member States Concerning the Pursuit of Television
Broadcasting Activities, COM(2005) 646 final, December 13, 2005. See also Commission Staff Work-
ing Document, Annex to the Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Coun-
cil Amending Council Directive 89/552/EEC, SEC(2005) 1625/2, December 13, 2005.
20. Council Directive 89/552/EEC of October 3, 1989, on the Coordination of Certain Provisions
Laid Down by Law, Regulation or Administrative Action in Member States Concerning the Pursuit
of Television Broadcasting Activities, OJ L 298/23, October 17, 1989.
21. European Commission, Proposal for a Directive Amending Council Directive 89/552/EEC,

COM(2005) 646 final, December 13, 2005, 2.

22. See article 5(3) of the EC Treaty and the Protocol on the Application of the Principles of
Subsidiarity and Proportionality Attached to the Treaty of Amsterdam Amending the Treaty on Eu-
ropean Union, the Treaties Establishing the European Communities and Related Acts, OJ C 340/1,
November 10, 1997.
23. Treaty on European Union, adopted in Maastricht, OJ C 191/1, July 29, 1992. The Maas-
tricht Treaty inserted a new Title IX into the structure of the Treaty of Rome. It bore the broad
rubric of “Culture” and included one article: article 128, which is now, since the Amsterdam
renumbering, article 151 EC. Article 151 entails an obligation for the Community to “contribute to
the flowering of the cultures of the Member States, while respecting their national and regional
diversity.” Following the principle of subsidiarity, the Community is to encourage cooperation be-
tween member states but could, if necessary, supplement their action in certain fields, notably,
“artistic and literary creation, including in the audiovisual sector.” Article 151(4) EC specifies fur-
ther that the Community must take cultural aspects into account in its action under other provi-
sions of the treaty. For a comprehensive analysis of article 151 EC, see Craufurd Smith, Culture
and European Union Law. On the duties of the EC institutions in the field of culture, see de Witte,
“Trade in Culture,” 237ff.

24. The European Court of Justice played an important role in expanding the scope of activities
falling under the Community’s prerogative. Since Sacchi, it is clear that the broadcasting of televised
messages falls under the rules of the treaty relating to the provision of services. See Case 155/73
Guiseppe Sacchi, ECR [1974] 409. See also case 52/79 Procureur du Roi v. Marc J V C Debauve and
others [1980] ECR 860; case 62/79 Coditel v. Ciné-Vog Films (Coditel I) [1980] ECR 881 and case
262/81 Coditel v. Ciné-Vog Films (Coditel II) [1982] ECR 3381.

25. European Commission, Television without Frontiers: Green Paper on the Establishment of
the Common Market for Broadcasting, Especially by Satellite and Cable, COM(84) 300, May 1984.
For the developments leading to the adoption of the TVWF, see Levy, Europe’s Digital Revolution,
41ff.

26. Graber, “Kulturpolitische Auswirkungen,” 995.
27. The endeavors of the CoE to adopt a binding legal instrument covering certain cultural as-
pects of transfrontier broadcasting began in the early 1980s. Various steps followed, which found

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

191

expression in a number of recommendations. For an account, see Explanatory Report to the Euro-
pean Convention on Transfrontier Television (ETS No. 132), Strasbourg, May 5, 1989, as amended
by the provisions of the Protocol (ETS No. 171), which entered into force on March 1, 2002.

28. Council of Europe, European Convention on Transfrontier Television (ETS No. 132), Stras-
bourg, May 5, 1989. The CTT was opened for signature by the CoE Member States and other States
Party to the European Cultural Convention (ETS No. 018), Paris, December 19, 1954.
29. See European Council Decisions of December 2–3, 1988, Rhodes, in Bulletin of the European
Communities, No. 12/1988, para. 1.1.9.
30. OJ L 298/23, October 17, 1989.
31. The CTT provides a minimum of common rules in fields such as programing, advertising,
and the protection of certain individual rights. It entrusts the transmitting states with the task of
ensuring that the TV program services transmitted comply with its provisions. In return, freedom of
reception of program services is guaranteed, as well as the retransmission of the programs which
comply with the minimum rules of the convention.

32. Pursuant to article 25 TVWF, member states were obliged to bring their laws, regulations, and
administrative provisions into conformity with the directive by October 3, 1991.
33. Updated and revised through directive 97/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Coun-
cil of June 30, 1997 Amending Council Directive 89/552/EEC on the Coordination of Certain Pro-
visions Laid Down by Law, Regulation or Administrative Action in Member States Concerning the
Pursuit of Television Broadcasting Activities, OJ L 202/60, July 30, 1997. This article refers to the
consolidated version of Directive 89/552/EEC and directive 97/36/EC.
34. Cases C-34/95, C-35/95, and C-36/95 Konsumentombudsmannen (KO) v. De Agostini (Sven-
ska) Förlag AB and TV-Shop I Sverige AB, ECR [1997] I-03843, para. 32. See also Drijber, “The Re-
vised Television without Frontiers Directive,” 92. On the different types of harmonization in EC law,
see Slot, “Harmonisation,” 378ff.
35. See case C-412/93 Société d’Importation Edouard Leclerc-Siplec v. TF1 Publicité SA and M6
Publicité SA, ECR [1995] I-179, paras 28–29 and cases C-34/95, C-35/95, and C-36/95 Konsumen-
tombudsmannen (KO) v. De Agostini (Svenska) Förlag AB and TV-Shop I Sverige AB, ECR [1997]
I-3843, paras 24–28. See also Wheeler, “Supranational Regulation,” 351ff.

36. See articles 43 and 49 EC Treaty.
37. Articles 4 and 6 TVWF.
38. Article 5 TVWF.
39. Articles 10–20 TVWF.
40. Articles 22, 22(a) and 22(b) TVWF.
41. Article 23 TVWF. Teleshopping rules were added by the 1997 amendment of the TVWF.
42. Directive 97/36/EC Amending Council Directive 89/552/EEC on the Coordination of Cer-
tain Provisions Laid Down by Law, Regulation or Administrative Action in Member States Concern-
ing the Pursuit of Television Broadcasting Activities, OJ L 202/60, July 30, 1997.

without Frontiers Directive,” 92ff.

43. Article 3(a) TVWF.
44. Article 2 TVWF.
45. See Article 2(3)–(5) TVWF. For the relevant case law, see Drijber, “The Revised Television
46. See case C-11/95 Commission v. Belgium [1996] ECR I-4115, para. 34 and case 14/96 Criminal
Proceedings against Paul Denuit [1997] ECR I-2785, paras. 32–34. For the limitations of the trans-
mitting state principle, see cases C-34/95, C-35/95, and C-36/95 Konsumentombudsmannen (KO) v.
De Agostini (Svenska) Förlag AB and TV-Shop I Sverige AB, ECR [1997] I-3843, paras. 33–35.
47. Cases C-34/95, C-35/95, and C-36/95 Konsumentombudsmannen (KO) v. De Agostini (Sven-
48. See for example, see case C-348/96 Calfa [1999] ECR I-0011, paras. 21 and 23. For a more
extensive overview of the case law, see Drijber, “The Revised Television without Frontiers Directive,”
98ff; and Stuyck, Annotation on Cases C-34/95, C-35/95, and C-36/95.

ska) Förlag AB and TV-Shop I Sverige AB, ECR [1997] I-3843.

49. See article 2(a)(2) TVWF.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

192

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

without Frontiers,” COM(2006) 49 final, February 10, 2006.

50. See article 3(1) TVWF.
51. European Commission, Fifth Report on the Application of Directive 89/552/EEC “Television
52. Fifth Report on the Application of Directive 89/552/EEC “Television without Frontiers,”
COM(2006) 49 final, February 10, 2006, referring to the European Audiovisual Observatory, 2001
Yearbook.
53. Fifth Report on the Application of Directive 89/552/EEC “Television without Frontiers,”
COM(2006) 49 final, February 10, 2006, referring to the European Audiovisual Observatory, 2004
Yearbook.

54. Papathanassopoulos, European Television in the Digital Age, 14.
55. Public service broadcasters in the EU25 zone had total revenues of Y29.1 billion in 2003, whereas
private broadcasters recorded revenues totalling Y18.3 billion. Pay TV and package subscriptions
increased their revenues to an overall amount of Y13.6 billion in 2003. See European Commission,
Fifth Report on the Application of Directive 89/552/EEC “Television without Frontiers,” COM(2006)
49 final, February 10, 2006, referring to the European Audiovisual Observatory, 2005 Yearbook.
Frontiers Directive, MEMO/06/208, Brussels, May 18, 2006, 1.

56. European Commission, Commission Proposal for a Modernisation of the Television without

57. For an overview, see Papathanassopoulos, European Television in the Digital Age, 9ff.
58. Papathanassopoulos, European Television in the Digital Age, 17ff.
59. Papathanassopoulos, European Television in the Digital Age, 18ff, referring to Blumler, “Vul-

nerable Values at Stake,” 22ff; Achile and Miège, “The Limits of Adaptation Strategies,” 31ff.

60. Papathanassopoulos, European Television in the Digital Age, 19, referring to McQuail, “Com-
mercialisation and Beyond,” 119ff; Ouilette and Lewis, “Moving Beyond,” 96. See also Webster, Theo-
ries of Information Society, 22. On the multichannel paradox, whereby despite the diversity of channels,
there is no actual diversity of content, see Ariño, “Competition Law and Pluralism,” 98ff.

61. For a critique of the cultural industries and on the homogeneity of content, see Graber, Han-
del und Kultur, 18ff. For counter arguments, see Romano, “Technologische, wirtschaftliche und kul-
turelle Entwicklungen,” 4ff.

62. Papathanassopoulos, European Television in the Digital Age, 20ff. See also Esser, “‘Tabloidiza-

tion’ of News,” 291ff.

63. Franklin, Newszak and News Media, 4.
64. Papathanassopoulos, European Television in the Digital Age, 19, referring to Pfetsch, “Conver-

gence through Privatization?” 428.

65. Negrine and Papathanassopoulos, The Internationalisation of Television, 76.
66. The European Court of Justice has even held that the CTT and its explanatory memorandum
can be used to clarify the interpretation of the TVWF. See joined cases C-320/94, C-328/94, C-329/
94, C-337/94, C-338/94, C-339/94 Reti Televisive Italiane SpA (RTI), Radio Torre, Rete A Srl, Vallau
Italiana Promomarket Srl, Radio Italia Solo Musica Srl and Others, and GETE Srl v. Ministero delle
Poste e Telecomunicazioni [1996] ECR I-6471, para. 33.

67. Council of Europe, Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Free-

doms, Rome, November 4, 1950, as amended by Protocol No. 11, ETS No. 155.

68. Graber, “Kulturpolitische Auswirkungen“, 996ff.
69. See Fischer-Lescano and Teubner, “Regime-Collisions,” 999ff.
70. Levy, Europe’s Digital Revolution, 50ff. See also Westphal, “Media Pluralism and European Reg-

ulation,” 461ff. On media ownership, see Baker, “Media Concentration,” 873ff.

71. Hitchens, “Identifying European Community Audio-Visual Policy,” 71ff, as referred to by Levy,
Europe’s Digital Revolution, 40. See also in the same sense, Wheeler, “Supranational Regulation,” 349ff.
72. An example is the recent decision of the Commission to refer Sweden to the European Court
of Justice for its failure to change rules giving the state-owned company Boxer TV Access a monop-
oly over the provision of access control services in the Swedish digital terrestrial broadcasting net-
work. The case is based on Commission Directive 2002/77/EC of September 16, 2002, on Competition
in the Markets for Electronic Communications Networks and Services, OJ L 249/21, September 17,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

193

2002. See European Commission, “Competition: Commission Takes Sweden to Court for Failure to
End Broadcasting Services Monopoly,” Press Release, IP/06/1411, October 17, 2006.
73. See Commission Decision of April 2, 2003, Declaring a Concentration to be Compatible with
the Common Market and the EEA Agreement (case no. COMP/M. 2876—Newscorp/Telepiù), C(2003)
1082 final, April 2, 2003. Previous cases on media concentration include case no. IV/M.110, ABC/
Generale des aux/Canal+/WH Smith, OJ C 244/06, September 10, 1991; case no. IV/M.469, MSG
Media Service, OJ L 364, November 9, 1994; case no. IV/M.490, Nordic Satellite Distribution, OJ L 53,
July 19, 1995, case no. IV/M.553, RTL/Veronica/Endemol, OJ L 294, November 19, 1996; case no.
IV/M.993, DFI/Premiere, OJ C 374/4, 20 December 1997.

74. See article 25(a) TVWF.
75. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 3ff.
76. European Commission, Green Paper on the Convergence of the Telecommunications, Media
and Information Technology Sectors, and the Implications for Regulation: Towards an Information
Society Approach, COM(97) 623 final, December 3, 1997. See also European Commission, Com-
munication on Principles and Guidelines for the Community’s Audiovisual Policy in the Digital
Age, COM(1999) 657 final, December 14, 1999.

77. European Council, Presidency Conclusions, Lisbon, March 23–24, 2000, para. 5. See also
European Commission, i2010—A European Information Society for Growth and Employment,
COM(2005) 229 final, June 1, 2005.
78. European Commission, Fourth Report on the Application of Directive 89/552/EEC “Televi-

sion without Frontiers,” COM(2002) 778 final, January 6, 2003.

79. In the period up to the adoption of the new directive, legal certainty in the changing
environment of European media has been guaranteed through an interpretative communication
on television advertising, in particular new advertising techniques (split screen, virtual, and
interactive advertising) and update of the recommendation on the protection of minors and
human dignity. See European Commission, Interpretative Communication on Certain Aspects of
the Provisions on Televised Advertising in the “Television without Frontiers” Directive, OJ C 102/2,
April 28, 2004, and Recommendation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the
Protection of Minors and Human Dignity and the Right of Reply in Relation to the Competitive-
ness of the European Audiovisual and Information Services Industry, OJ L 38/72, December 27,
2006.
80. There were particularly intensive discussions, which involved manifold stakeholders. All stake-
holders’ opinions from the diverse hearings are available at http://ec.europa.eu/comm/avpolicy/reg/
tvwf/modernisation/proposal_2005/index_en.htm (accessed May 18, 2007).
81. See European Commission, Fourth Report on the Application of Directive 89/552/EEC “Tele-
vision without Frontiers,” COM(2002) 778 final, January 6, 2003, Annex, 33ff. See also the six Issue
Papers of July 2005 at http://ec.europa.eu/comm/avpolicy/docs/reg/modernisation/liverpool_2005/
uk-conference-report-en.pdf (accessed May 18, 2007).
82. European Commission, Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Coun-
cil Amending Council Directive 89/552/EEC on the Coordination of Certain Provisions Laid Down
by Law, Regulation or Administrative Action in Member States Concerning the Pursuit of Television
Broadcasting Activities, COM(2005) 646 final, December 13, 2005.
83. Report of the Committee on Culture and Education, Rapporteur: Ruth Hieronymi, A6–0399/

2006, November 22, 2006.
84. European Parliament, Legislative Resolution on the Proposal for a Directive of the European
Parliament and of the Council Amending Council Directive 89/552/EEC on the Coordination of
Certain Provisions Laid Down by Law, Regulation or Administrative Action in Member States Con-
cerning the Pursuit of Television Broadcasting Activities, P6_TA-PROV(2006)0559, December 13,
2006.
85. Amended proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council Amending
Council Directive 89/552/EEC on the Coordination of Certain Provisions Laid Down by Law, Reg-
ulation or Administrative Action in Member States Concerning the Pursuit of Television Broadcast-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

194

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

ing Activities (“Audiovisual Media Services without Frontiers”), COM(2007) 170 final, March 29,
2007.

86. Draft Audiovisual Media Services Directive, Consolidated Text, including EP First Reading
Amendments Accepted in full and the Amended Commission Proposal, nonbinding text provided
by the European Commission, http://ec.europa.eu/avpolicy/reg/tvwf/modernisation/proposal_2005/
index_en.htm (accessed May 18, 2007).

87. “‘Audiovisual media service’ means a service as defined by Articles 49 and 50 of the Treaty
which is under the editorial responsibility of a media service provider and the principal purpose of
which is the provision of programmes in order to inform, entertain or educate the general public by
electronic communications networks within the meaning of Article 2(a) of Directive 2002/21/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council. Such audiovisual media services are either television
broadcasts as defined in paragraph (c) of this Article or on-demand services as defined in paragraph
(e) of this Article and/or audiovisual commercial communication.”

88. Media service provider is defined in article 1(b) AVMS as “the natural or legal person who
has editorial responsibility for the choice of the audiovisual content of the audiovisual media service
and determines the manner in which it is organised.”

89. The concepts of programs and editorial responsibility were introduced by the EP in pursuit of
a clearer delineation from other audiovisual services. Program is defined as “a set of moving images
with or without sound constituting an individual item within a schedule or a catalogue established
by a media service provider and whose form and content is comparable to the form and content of
television broadcasting” (article 1(aa) AVMS). Editorial responsibility is the “responsibility for the
composition of the schedule or compilation of programmes intended for the general public, in a
professional capacity, in order to deliver the media content within a set time frame or to allow it to
be ordered from a catalogue” (article 1(kd) AVMS).
90. Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March 7, 2002, on a
Common Regulatory Framework for Electronic Communications Networks and Services (Frame-
work Directive), OJ L 108/33, April 24, 2002. Article 2(a) thereof defines electronic communications
networks as “transmission systems and, where applicable, switching or routing equipment and other
resources which permit the conveyance of signals by wire, by radio, by optical or by other electro-
magnetic means, including satellite networks, fixed (circuit- and packet-switched, including Inter-
net) and mobile terrestrial networks, electricity cable systems, to the extent that they are used for the
purpose of transmitting signals, networks used for radio and television broadcasting, and cable tele-
vision networks, irrespective of the type of information conveyed.”

91. In recital 13 AVMS, it was stressed that the economic element must be significant to justify
the application of the directive. Accordingly, the scope “does not cover activities which are primarily
non-economic and which are not in competition with television broadcasting, such as private web-
sites and services consisting of the provision or distribution of audiovisual content generated by
private users for the purposes of sharing and exchange within communities of interest. The defini-
tion excludes all services not intended for the distribution of audiovisual content, i.e. where any
audiovisual content is merely incidental to the service and not its principal purpose.” See also recit-
als 14–16 AVMS.

92. Article 1(c) AVMS. The AVMS clarifies in its recital 16 that the notion of simultaneous view-
ing also entails quasi simultaneous viewing because of the variations in the short time lag, which
occurs between the transmission and the reception of the broadcast because of technical reasons
inherent in the transmission process.

93. Article 1(e) AVMS.
94. Recital 28 AVMS.
95. All of the member states had some requirements on advertising, protection of minors and
human dignity. None had rules regarding European or independent productions and only one mem-
ber state had some regulation of advertising limits. See Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact As-
sessment, 16ff.

96. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 75.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

195

97. European Commission, The Commission Proposal for a Modernisation of the Television

without Frontiers Directive, MEMO/05/475, Brussels, December 13, 2005.

98. Marsden et al., Assessing Indirect Impacts, vi.
99. Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June 8, 2000, on
certain legal aspects of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the inter-
nal market (directive on electronic commerce), OJ L 178/1, July 17, 2000.

100. This was a major contentious issue during the AVMS adoption process. See for example,
Bob McDowall, “The Television without Frontiers Directive: Another “Directive Too Far,” IT Analy-
sis, May 5, 2006, http://www.it-analysis.com/business/content.php?cid⫽8476 (accessed May 18, 2007)
and Economist, “Regulation without Frontiers,” October 12, 2006.

101. Marsden et al., Assessing Indirect Impacts, passim.
102. Marsden et al., Assessing Indirect Impacts, 25.
103. Benkler, The Wealth of Networks.
104. Marsden et al., Assessing Indirect Impacts, 130.
105. Emphasis added. “European works” were defined pursuant to criteria set out by article 6

TVWF.

106. Article 4(1) TVWF.
107. For an overview of the national legislation put in place in the diverse member states, see
Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, Chapter 6. Although most member states have transcribed
the definitions directly into national legislation, France and Germany apply stricter definitions. France
distinguishes between audiovisual works and cinematographic works. Germany defines what is in-
cluded as qualifying hours: feature films, television movies, series, documentaries, and comparable
productions. Six member states—Finland, France, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, and the United
Kingdom—apply higher percentage requirements than those contained in TVWF on some or all of
their broadcasters. For example, in France, legislation requires all broadcasters to reserve at least
60% of their qualifying hours for European audiovisual and cinematographic works.
108. Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures. See also European Commission, Seventh Commu-
nication on the Application of Articles 4 and 5 of Directive 89/552/EEC “Television without Fron-
tiers,” as Amended by Directive 97/36/EC for the Period 2003–2004, COM(2006) 459 final, August
14, 2006.

109. Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, 14. The more prescriptive a member state is in the
way that it implements articles 4 and 5, the higher the average ratio of European works to qualifying
transmission hours in that country. Member states with a national average for European works greater
than the EU average—such as Finland, France, Greece, Italy, and Luxembourg—are also among the
most prescriptive in the way that they apply articles 4 and 5 (section 8.1).

110. The impact study noted, however, that the where practicable mode, which offers an exemp-
tion from the requirements of articles 4 and 5 TVWF, compares unfavorably with other legislation
(despite the existing reporting obligation), where general rules are established and the exemptions
clearly defined, leaving less room for avoidance. It was further considered that the use of this ex-
emption may need to be reviewed because secondary channels take a greater share and often be-
come part of larger multichannel conglomerates. Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, 181 and
section 8.2.5.

111. Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, 181 (emphasis added) and section 4.6.3.
112. European Commission, “European Works’ Share of TV Broadcasting Time Now Stable Over

60%,” IP/06/1115, Brussels, August 22, 2006.

113. Graber, Handel und Kultur, 253ff.
114. Article 6(2) in conjunction with 6(1)(a) and (b) TVWF.
115. Such a rationale is apparent from recital 20 TVWF: “Whereas it is therefore necessary to pro-
mote markets of sufficient size for television productions in the member states to recover necessary
investments not only by establishing common rules opening up national markets but also by envis-
aging for European productions where practicable and by appropriate means a majority proportion
in television programmes of all Member States.” See Donaldson, “Television Without Frontiers,” 90ff.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

196

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

116. Although it was found that, “there is a greater appetite for US programming among Euro-
pean audiences than for programmes produced in other Member States . . . [because] US pro-
gramme storylines have broad appeal, whereas European production has a national cultural appeal
which does not travel well.” See Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, 18 and section 9.3.3. For an
interesting comment on the global power of American popular culture (influencing through attrac-
tion rather than coercion), see Rosendorf, “Social and Cultural Globalization,” 117ff.

117. Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 8.5.
118. There is evidence that primary channels have reduced the proportion of European works
that are stock programs (generally more expensive) and increased the proportion of (generally cheaper)
flow programs. See Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 7.3.4.

119. These conflicts are not new and arose every time the TVWF was discussed. See Drijber, “The
Revised Television without Frontiers Directive,” 90. For a parallel with the EC film domain, see Anna
Herold, “EU Film Policy.”

120. Article 3(f)(1) AVMS (emphasis added).
121. Article 3(f)(4) AVMS.
122. Article 3(f)(1) and recital 35 AVMS. See also Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assess-

ment, 52.

123. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 47.
124. Recital 35 AVMS.
125. Marsden et al., Assessing Indirect Impacts, 22ff; Anderson, The Long Tail. See also Shirkey,

“Power Laws,” 46ff.

126. Brynjolfsson, Hu and Smith, “Consumer Surplus in the Digital Economy”; Brynjolfsson, Hu

and Smith, “From Niches to Riches.”

sion without Frontiers,” COM(2006) 49 final, February 10, 2006, 4.

127. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 66. See in this respect, European Charter
for the Development and the Take-up of Film Online, initiated in May 2005 by Commissioner Red-
ing and endorsed by film makers and business leaders on May 23, 2006, at the Europe Day of the
59th Cannes Film Festival, http://ec.europa.eu/comm/avpolicy/docs/other_actions/film_online_en.pdf
(accessed May 18, 2007).
128. European Commission, Fifth Report on the Application of Directive 89/552/EEC “Televi-
129. Fifth Report on the Application of Directive 89/552/EEC “Television without Frontiers,”
COM(2006) 49 final, February 10, 2006, 4, referring to the European Audiovisual Observatory, 2005
Yearbook. See also Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 3.2.1.
tising Expenditure Forecasts, July 2005, http://zenithoptimedia.com (accessed May 18, 2007).

130. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 9, referring to Zenith Optimedia, Adver-
131. Directive 2000/31/EC on electronic commerce (OJ L 178/1, 17 July 2000) defines in its ar-
ticle 2(f), “commercial communication” as “any form of communication by electronic means de-
signed to promote, directly or indirectly, the goods, services or image of a company, organisation or
person pursuing a commercial, industrial or craft activity or exercising a regulated profession.”

132. Article 1(f) AVMS.
133. Article 3(g) AVMS.
134. Article 3(g), points (d) and (f) AVMS.
135. Article 3(g), points (e) and (g); Article 3(g)(2).
136. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 79.
137. Article 18 AVMS reads: “The proportion of short forms of advertising such as adver-
tising spots and teleshopping spots within a given clock hour shall not exceed 20%.” See also
European Commission, Interpretative Communication on Certain Aspects of the Provisions on
Televised Advertising in the “Television without Frontiers” Directive, OJ C 102/2, 28 April 2004,
paras. 9–13.

138. Article 11(1) AVMS (emphasis added).
139. Article 11(2) AVMS. The provision clarifies further that the transmission of children’s pro-
grams may be interrupted by advertising and/or teleshopping once for each scheduled period of at

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

197

least 30 minutes, provided the scheduled duration of the program is greater than 30 minutes. No
advertising or teleshopping may be inserted during religious services.

140. See Graber, Zwischen Geist und Geld, 151ff.
141. The notion of product placement is not entirely new. The Unfair Commercial Practices Di-
rective mentions in its provisions “legitimate product placement” and the Commission Communi-
cation interpreting the TVWF Directive allows product presentation for the purposes of identifying
the sponsor. See directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May 11,
2005, concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market and
amending council directive 84/450/EEC, directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC, and 2002/65/EC of the Eu-
ropean Parliament and of the Council and Regulation (EC) No. 2006/2004 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council (“Unfair Commercial Practices Directive”), OJ L 149/22, June 11, 2005,
recital 6.

142. Article 1(k) AVMS.
143. Surreptitious advertising remains fully banned. See articles 1(h) and 3(g)(a) AVMS. See also

recitals 40 and 45 AVMS.

144. As well as in cases where no payment is made but certain goods or services are merely pro-

vided free of charge. See article 3(i)(2) AVMS.

145. Article 3(i)(3), points (a)–(c) AVMS. “Undue prominence,” as clarified by recitals 46 and
46(b), is prominence, which is not justified by the editorial requirements of the program, or the
need to lend verisimilitude. Undue prominence is given when the repeated representation of the
brand, good, or service or the nature of its presentation is such as to give undue prominence to
products in the context of production props or product placement, taking account of the content of
the programs in which they appear.

146. Article 3(g)(a) AVMS. See also Article 10(1) AVMS.
147. Article 3(i)(3)(d) AVMS.
148. Article 3(i)(4) AVMS.
149. The EU has notoriously vast deficit vis-à-vis the United States, which amounts to about Y4.1

billion. See Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 3.3.1.

150. See Carat and Koan, Comparative Study on the Impact of Control Measures, 60ff.
151. European Commission, Commission Proposal for a Modernisation of the Television with-

out Frontiers Directive, MEMO/05/475, Brussels, December 13, 2005.
MEMO/05/475, Brussels, December 13, 2005.

152. Commission Proposal for a Modernisation of the Television without Frontiers Directive,

153. There are different types of product placement. One can distinguish between product place-
ment per se, where branded goods are presented, either visually (if the product is shown) or verbally
(if it is mentioned or described). Endorsement is an intensification of the verbal placement, when
the media representative mentions certain positive features of the product. One may also distinguish
different degrees of product integration: on-set placement where the product is only part of the
requisite scenery versus creative placement where the product plays an active role in the plot.

154. Rössler and Bacher, “Transcultural Effects of Product Placement,” 99.
155. It has been established that stronger placement effects can be expected when the placement
is presented as a natural part of the story. See Rössler and Bacher, “Transcultural Effects of Product
Placement,” 101.

156. For the classical critique of the cultural industries, see Adorno, Aesthetic Theory. On the re-
lationship between art and money, see Graber, Zwischen Geist und Geld; Graber and Teubner, “Art
and Money,” 61ff.

157. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 4ff.
158. In the midterm (2009–2010) and even for some time thereafter, no complete overhaul of the
European audiovisual media is foreseen. See Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 5.
The same position is shared by Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 3.5.4.

159. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 13.
160. Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 3.5.1.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

198

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

161. These are defined as channels with audience share equal to or greater than 3%. See Graham

et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 7.

162. Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 3.5.5.
163. Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 3.5.1.
164. RAND Europe outlines three plausible scenarios for the digital future of audiovisual media:
(i) Linear Continuum: where the citizen behaviour will change at the margins, but media consump-
tion will remain a largely linear experience; (ii) Digital Content Divide: where the digital “haves” will
experience greatly increased interactive media use, while an equal number of “refuseniks”
will continue exactly as before to rely on offline media and public service broadcasters; (iii) Time Shift-
ing Linear Consumption: where the majority of the population will use broadband and mobile or in-
home devices to time-shift their media to suit their schedule instead of that of the broadcaster. See
Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 8. The same scenarios have been reiterated in Com-
mission Staff Working Document, Annex to the Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament
and of the Council Amending Council Directive 89/552/EEC, SEC(2005) 1625/2, December 13, 2005.

165. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 8.
166. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 6, referring to the Oxford Internet Survey
(OxIS), February 2005, http://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/ (accessed May 18, 2007). See also PEW Internet
and American Life Project, The Future of the Internet II.

167. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 6.
168. European Council Decisions of December 2–3, 1988, Rhodes, Rhodes, in Bulletin of the Eu-

169. European Council Decisions of December 2–3, 1988, Rhodes, Rhodes, in Bulletin of the Eu-

ropean Communities, No. 12/1988.
ropean Communities, No. 12/1988.

170. European Commission, Communication on Principles and Guidelines for the Community’
Audiovisual Policy in the Digital Age, COM(1999) 657 final, December 14, 1999, 8. See also Council
Resolution of January 21, 2002, on the Role of Culture in the Development of the European Union,
OJ C 32/2, February 5, 2002, and Council Conclusions of December 19, 2002, on the “Television
without Frontiers” Directive, OJ C 13/1, January 18, 2003, recital 3.

171. The amended Commission’s proposal, while preserving the above text, substantially short-
ened it. Recital 3 now reads, “Audiovisual media services are as much cultural services as they are
economic services. Their growing importance for societies, democracy—in particular by ensuring
freedom of information, diversity of opinion and media pluralism—education and culture justifies
the application of specific rules to these services.”

172. UNESCO, Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Ex-
pressions, adopted at the 33rd Session of the General Conference of UNESCO, October 20, 2005,
entered into force March 18, 2007 (hereinafter UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity). On the
UNESCO Convention, see Graber, “The New UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity.” On cul-
tural diversity, see Graber, Handel und Kultur, 73ff; Smiers, Arts under Pressure; Graber, Girsberger,
and Nenova, Free Trade versus Cultural Diversity.

173. Article 4(1) of the UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity.
174. It was in 1952 that Kroeber and Kluckholn compiled a list of more than 200 different def-
initions of culture (Kroeber and Kluckholn, Culture: A Critical Review). Since then the concept has
only gained in complexity and controversies despite the ample literature discussing it.

175. For a critique, see Aylwin and Coombe, “Cultural Pluralism Protects Traditional Knowledge.”
176. See for example, WIPO, Traditional Cultural Expressions, para. 4.
177. On the meaning of media pluralism and the different existing notions in the community
acts and case law, as well as in the academic literature, see Westphal, “Media Pluralism and European
Regulation,” 467ff.

178. Graber, Handel und Kultur, 74. In the original: “Vielfältig ist eine Kulturlandschaft, in der
neben kommerziellen Grossproduktionen, bei denen die Maximierung der Zuschauerzahlen allem
andern vorgeht, auch solche existieren können, die sich z.B. durch die eigenwillige Handschrift ihrer
Autoren vom ‘mainstream’ abheben, mit einem ‘low budget’ produziert wurden, experimenteller oder

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

199

avantgardistischer Machart sind oder aus anderen Gründen einen eigenen Aufwand des Publikums
an Phantasie oder Gedanken erfordern” (translation by the author).

179. Variety refers to the number of categories into which a certain quantity can be partitioned
(e.g., types of programs). Balance refers to the pattern in the distribution of that quantity across the
relevant categories. As for disparity, it refers to the nature and the degree to which the categories
themselves are different from each other. The greater the variety, the balance and the disparity of a
system are, the larger its diversity.

180. Moreau and Peltier, “Cultural Diversity in the Movie Industry.” Moreau and Peltier examine
the EU15, France, Hungary, South Korea and Mexico and refer to both supplied and consumed diversity.

181. Moreau and Peltier, “Cultural Diversity in the Movie Industry.”
182. For a critique, see Craufurd Smith, “Article 151 EC and European Identity,” 277ff.
183. Case 120/78 Rewe Zentrale v. Bundesmonopolverwaltung für Branntwein (Cassis de Dijon)

[1979] ECR 649.

184. See Scott, “Mandatory or Imperative Requirements”; Spaventa, “On Discrimination and the
Theory of Mandatory Requirements,” 457ff. These mandatory requirements apply only to indistinctly
applicable measures (case 113/80 Commission v. Ireland (Irish Souvenirs) [1981] ECR 1626, para. 11;
case 177/83 Ringelhan [1984] ECR 3651, para. 19; case 59/82 Schutzverband gegen Unwesen in der
Wirtschaft v. Weinvertriebs-GmbH [1983] ECR 1217, para. 11; case C-21/88 Du Pont de Nemours
[1990] ECR I-889, para. 14; joined cases C-1 and 176/90 Aragonesa de Publicidad Exterior SA and
Publivía SAE v Departamento de Sanidad y Seguridad Social de la Generalitat de Cataluña [1991]
ECR I-4151). And only in the absence of harmonization (case 120/78 Cassis de Dijon, para. 8).
185. Case C-288/89 Stichting Collectieve Antennevoorziening Gouda and others v. Commissariaat
voor de Media, ECR [1991] I-4007, para. 23. See also case C-353/89 Commission v. the Netherlands,
ECR [1991] I-4069, para. 30; C-148/91 Vereniging Veronica Omroep Organisatie v. Commissariaat
voor de Media, ECR [1993] I-487, paras. 9–10 and case C-23/93 TV10 SA v. Commissariaat voor de
Media, ECR [1994] I-4795, paras. 18–19.

186. Graber, “Kulturpolitische Auswirkungen,” 997.
187. Graber, “Kulturpolitische Auswirkungen,” 998.
188. Mueller, “Convergence: A Reality Check,” 322.
189. The impact study points out, “The additional content requirements on broadcasters to re-
flect linguistic or cultural specificities of a particular Member State, intentionally or otherwise, . . .
act as barriers to cross-border trade in programmes and channels because (a) they set conditions on
programme content that only domestic programme producers can meet; and (b) they lead to chan-
nel schedules that are specific to a Member State, thereby limiting the appeal of these channels in
other markets.” See Graham et al., Impact Study of Measures, section 6.4.3.

190. The EC itself is a party to the convention. See Council Decision of May 18, 2006, on the
Conclusion of the Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Ex-
pressions, OJ L 201/15, August 25, 2006.

191. See in particular articles 7–11 of the UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity. For a cri-
tique of the lack of binding obligations in the Convention, see Acheson and Maule, “Convention on
Cultural Diversity,” 243ff.

192. Although not a very solid instrument, the UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity pro-
vided recognition of the significance of cultural diversity at the international level and an impetus
for actions. The role of the EC can be crucial in this regard for elaborating comprehensive nonpro-
tectionist action plans for the protection and promotion of diversity of cultural expressions, which
would also strengthen the value of the UNESCO convention. Such activities, although in an early
stage, are already underway. See http://www.unesco.de/ (accessed May 18, 2007).

193. O’Regan and Goldsmith, “Making Cultural Policy,” 88.
194. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 56.
195. O’Regan and Goldsmith, “Making Cultural Policy,” 69, referring to Schlesinger, “Television
Production, Audio-Visual Policy and the Creative Industries.” On the flaws of the competitiveness
argument in general, see Paul Krugman, Pop Internationalism, 3ff.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

200

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

196. High Level Group on Audiovisual Policy, The Digital Age: European Audiovisual Policy,

Chaired by Commissioner Marcelino Oreja, November 26, 1998.

197. See Brynjolfsson, Hu, and Smith, “From Niches to Riches,” who stress the importance of
search as enhancing choice and prove that the facilitation of search changes the distribution of
sales.

198. Recital 26(a) AVMS states, “Media literacy refers to skills, knowledge and understanding that
allow consumers to use media effectively and safely. Media-literate people will be able to exercise
informed choices, understand the nature of content and services and take advantage of the full range
of opportunities offered by new communications technologies. They will be better able to protect
themselves and their families from harmful or offensive material. Therefore development of media
literacy in all sections of society should be promoted and monitored.” See also European Commis-
sion, “Making Sense of Today’s Media Content: Commission Begins Public Media Literacy Consul-
tation,” press release, IP/06/1362, Brussels, October 6, 2006. On the media literacy initiative, see http://
ec.europa.eu/avpolicy/media_literacy/index_en.htm (accessed May 18, 2007).
199. European Charter for the Development and the Take-up of Film Online, http://ec.europa.eu/
avpolicy/other_actions/content_online/index_en.htm (accessed May 18, 2007).
200. Decision no. 1718/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November
15, 2006, Concerning the Implementation of a Programme of Support for the European Audiovisual
Sector (MEDIA 2007), OJ L 327/12, November 24, 2006.

201. Levy, Europe’s Digital Revolution, 40.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Acheson, Keith, and Christopher Maule. “Convention on Cultural Diversity.” Journal of Cultural Eco-
nomics 28 (2004): 243–56.

Achile, Yves, and Bernard Miège. “The Limits of Adaptation Strategies of European Public Service
Television.” Media, Culture and Society 16 (1994): 31–46.

Adorno, Theodor W. Aesthetic Theory. London: Routledge, 1984.

Anderson, Chris. The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is Selling Less of More. New York: Hype-
rion, 2006.

Ariño, Mónica. “Competition Law and Pluralism in European Digital Broadcasting: Addressing the
Gaps.” Communications and Strategies 54 (2004): 97–128.

Aylwin, Nicole, and Rosemary J. Coombe. “Cultural Pluralism Protects Traditional Knowledge,” 2006.
http://www.wacc.org.uk/wacc/publications/media_development/2006_3/cultural_pluralism_protects_
traditional_knowledge (accessed May 18, 2007).

Baker, C. Edwin. “Media Concentration: Giving Up on Democracy.” Florida Law Review 54 (2002):
843–919.

Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.

Blackman, Colin R. “Convergence between Telecommunications and Other Media.” Telecommuni-
cations Policy, 22 (1998): 163–70.

Blumler, Jay G. “Vulnerable Values at Stake.” In Television and the Public Interest: Vulnerable Values in
Western European Broadcasting, edited by Jay G. Blumler. London: Sage, 1992.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

201

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu Hu, and Michael D. Smith. “Consumer Surplus in the Digital Economy: Es-
timating the Value of Increased Product Variety at Online Booksellers.” MIT Sloan Working Paper
4305–03 (2003). http://ssrn.com/abstract⫽400940 (accessed May 18, 2007).

———. “From Niches to Riches: The Anatomy of the Long Tail.” Sloan Management Review 47 (2006):
67–71.

Castells, Manuel. “The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture,” Vol. 1, In The Rise of the
Network Society, Oxford: Blackwell, 2000.

Craufurd Smith, Rachael. “Article 151 EC and European Identity.” In Culture and European Union
Law, edited by Rachael Craufurd Smith, 277–97. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.

———, ed. Culture and European Union Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.

de Witte, Bruno. “Trade in Culture: International Legal Regimes and EU Constitutional Values.” In
The EU and the WTO—Legal and Constitutional Issues, edited by Gráinne de Búrca and Joanne Scott,
237–55. Oxford: Hart, 2003.

Donaldson, John D. “‘Television Without Frontiers’: The Continuing Tension between Liberal Free
Trade and European Cultural Integrity.” Fordham International Law Journal 20 (1996): 90–180.

Drijber, Berend Jan. “The Revised Television without Frontiers Directive: Is it Fit for the Next Cen-
tury.” Common Market Law Review 36 (1999); 87–122.

Esser, Frank. “‘Tabloidization’ of News: A Comparative Analysis of Anglo-American and German
Press Journalism.” European Journal of Communication 14 (1999): 291–324.

Fischer-Lescano, Andreas, and Gunther Teubner. “Regime-Collisions: The Vain Search for Legal Unity
in the Fragmentation of Global Law.” Michigan Journal of International Law 25 (2004): 999–1046.

Franklin, Bob. Newszak and News Media. London: Arnold, 1997.
Frieden, Rob. Managing the Internet-Driven Change in International Telecommunications. Boston/
London: Artech House, 2001.

Geradin, Damien, and David Luff, eds. The WTO and Global Convergence in Telecommunications and
Audio-Visual Services. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Graber, Christoph Beat. Zwischen Geist und Geld; Interferenzen von Kunst und Wirtschaft aus rechtli-
cher Sicht. Baden-Baden: Nomos, 1994.

———. “Kulturpolitische Auswirkungen eines Schweizer Beitritts zur Europäischen Union—
Untersucht am Beispiel des Film—und Fernsehrechts.” In Der Beitritt der Schweiz zur Europäischen
Union: Brennpunkte und Auswirkungen, edited by Thomas Cottier and Alwin R. Kopsˇe, 987–1024.
Zurich: Schulthess, 1998.

———. Handel und Kultur im Audiovisionsrecht der WTO. Völkerrechtliche, ökonomische und kul-
turpolitische Grundlagen einer globalen Medienordnung. Berne: Staempfli, 2003.

———. “The New UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity: A Counterbalance to the WTO“.
Journal of International Economic Law 9 (2006): 553–74.

Graber, Christoph Beat, and Gunther Teubner. “Art and Money: Constitutional Rights in the Private
Sphere?” Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 18 (1998): 61–74.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

202

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

Graber, Christoph Beat, Michael Girsberger, and Mira Nenova, Free Trade versus Cultural Diversity:
WTO Negotiations in the Field of Audiovisual Services. Zurich: Schulthess, 2004.

Graham, David, Adrian Edward, Farid El-Husseini et al. Impact Study of Measures (Community and
National) Concerning the Promotion of Distribution and Production of TV Programmes Provided for
Under Article 25(a) of the TV Without Frontiers Directive. Final Report Prepared for The Audiovisual,
Media and Internet Unit of DG Information Society, Brussels, May 24, 2005.

Herold, Anna. “EU Film Policy: Between Art and Commerce.” European Diversity and Autonomy
Papers EDAP 3 (2004).

Hitchens, Lesley P. “Identifying European Community Audio-Visual Policy in the Dawn of the In-
formation Society.” In Yearbook of Media and Entertainment Law 1996. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1997.

Horlings, Edwin, Chris Marsden, Constantijn van Oranje, and Maarten Botterman. Contribution to
Impact Assessment of the Revision of the Television without Frontiers Directive. Report Prepared for
DG Information Society and Media of the European Commission, RAND Europe, TR-334-EC DG,
2005.

Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: How Old and New Media Collide. New York: New York Univer-
sity Press, 2006.

Kroeber, Alfred L., and Clyde Kluckholn. Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions. Cam-
bridge, MA: Peabody Museum, 1952.

Krugman, Paul. Pop Internationalism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.

Larouche, Pierre. “Dealing with Convergence at the International Level.” In The WTO and Global
Convergence in Telecommunications and Audio-Visual Services, edited by Damien Geradin and David
Luff, 390–422. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Levy, David A. L. Europe’s Digital Revolution: Broadcasting and Regulation, the EU and the Nation
State. London: Routledge, 1999.

Liesse, Bruno, and Agnés Maqua, Comparative Study on the Impact of Control Measures on the Tele-
visual Advertising Markets in European Union Member States and Certain Other Countries. Final Re-
port Prepared for the European Commission. Brussels, July 2005.

Longstaff, P. H. “New Ways to Think about the Visions Called ‘Convergence’: A Guide for Business
and Public Policy.” Program on Information Resources Policy, April 2000.

Marsden, Chris, Jonathan Cave, Edward Nason, Andrew Parkinson, Colin Blackman, and Jason Rut-
ter. Assessing Indirect Impacts of the EC Proposals for Video Regulation. Report Prepared for the United
Kingdom Office of Communications, RAND Europe, 2006.

McQuail, Denis. “Commercialisation and Beyond.” In Media Policy: Convergence, Concentration and
Commerce, edited by Denis McQuail and Karen Siune, 107–27. London: Sage, 1998.

Moreau, François, and Stéphanie Peltier. “Cultural Diversity in the Movie Industry: A Cross-National
Study.” Paper Presented at the 6th World Media Economics Conference, Montréal, May 12–15, 2004.

Mueller, Milton L. “Digital Convergence and its Consequences: A Report on the Digital Convergence
and Market Structures,” 1999. http://dcc.syr.edu/miscarticles/rp1.pdf (accessed May 18, 2007).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

EC AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA REGULATION

203

———. “Convergence: A Reality Check.” In The WTO and Global Convergence in Telecommunica-
tions and Audio-Visual Services, edited by Damien Geradin and David Luff, 311–22. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2004.

Negrine, Ralph, and Stylianos Papathanassopoulos. The Internationalisation of Television. London:
Pinter, 1990.

Nihoul, Paul, and Peter Rodford. EU Electronic Communications Law. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2004.

O’Regan, Tom, and Ben Goldsmith. “Making Cultural Policy: Meeting Cultural Objectives in a Dig-
ital Environment.” Television and New Media 7 (2006): 68–91.
O’Reilly, Tim. “What Is Web 2.0?” http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/
what-is-web-20.html (accessed May 18, 2007).

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The Implications of Convergence for Reg-
ulation of Electronic Communications. DSTI/ICCP/TISP(2003)5/final. Paris: OECD, 2004.
———. Digital Broadband Content: Digital Strategies and Policies. DSTI/ICCP/IE(2005)3/FINAL.
Paris: OECD, 2006.
———. The Future Digital Economy: Digital Content Creation, Distribution and Access. DSTI/ICCP/
IE(2006⫽2/ANN, Paris: OECD, 2006.

———. Information Technology Outlook 2006. Paris: OECD, 2007.
———. Participative Web: User-Created Content. DSTI/ICCP/IE(2006)7/FINAL. Paris: OECD, 2007.

Ouilette, Laurie, and Justin Lewis. “Moving Beyond the ‘Vast Wasteland’: Cultural Policy and Tele-
vision in the United States.” Television and New Media 1 (2000): 95–115.

Papathanassopoulos, Stylianos. European Television in the Digital Age. Cambridge: Polity, 2002.

PEW Internet and American Life Project. The Future of the Internet II. Washington, DC: PEW In-
ternet and American Life Project, 2006. http://www.pewinternet.org/ (accessed May 18, 2007).

Pfetsch, Barbara. “Convergence through Privatization? Changing Media Environments and Tele-
vised Politics in Germany.” European Journal of Communications 14 (1996): 427–51.

Romano, Gaetano. “Technologische, wirtschaftliche und kulturelle Entwicklungen der audiovisuellen
Medienmärkte in den letzten Jahren.” In Free Trade versus Cultural Diversity: WTO Negotiations in
the Field of Audiovisual Services, edited by Christoph Beat Graber, Michael Girsberger, and Mira
Nenova, 1–13. Zurich: Schulthess, 2004.

Rössler, Patrick, and Julia Bacher. “Transcultural Effects of Product Placement in Movies.” Zeitschrift
für Medienpsychologie 14 (2002): 98–108.

Rosendorf, Neal M. “Social and Cultural Globalization: Concepts, History, and America’s Role.” In
Governance in a Globalizing World, edited by Joseph S. Nye and John D. Donahue, 109–34. Wash-
ington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2000.

Schlesinger, Philip. “Television Production, Audio-Visual Policy and the Creative Industries.” Paper
presented at the Television; Past, Present and Future Conference, University of Queensland, Bris-
bane, December 3, 2000.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105

204

MIRA BURRI NENOVA

Scott, Joanne. “Mandatory or Imperative Requirements in the EU and the WTO.” In The Law of the
Single European Market: Unpacking the Premises, edited by Catherine Barnard and Joanne Scott, Ox-
ford: Hart, 2002.

Shirkey, Clay. “Power Laws, Weblogs, and Inequality.” In Extreme Democracy, edited by Jon Leb-
kowsky and Mitch Ratcliffe, 46–52, 2003. http://www.extremedemocracy.com/ (accessed May 18, 2007).

Slot, Piet Jan. “Harmonisation.” European Law Review 21 (1996): 378–96.

Smiers, Joost. Arts under Pressure. New York: Zed Books, 2004.

Spaventa, Eleanor. “On Discrimination and the Theory of Mandatory Requirements.” Cambridge
Yearbook of European Legal Studies 3 (2000): 457–78.
Stuyck, Jules. “Annotation on Cases C-34/95, C-35/95 and C-36/95 Konsumentombudsmannen (KO)
v. De Agostini (Svenska) Förlag AB and TV-Shop I Sverige AB, ECR [1997] I-03843.” Common Market
Law Review 34 (1997): 1445–68.

Walden, Ian, and John Angel, eds. Telecommunications Law and Regulation, 2nd ed., Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005.

Webster, Frank. Theories of Information Society. London: Routledge, 1995.

Westphal, Dietrich. “Media Pluralism and European Regulation.” European Business Law Review (2002):
459–87.

Wheeler, Mark. “Supranational Regulation: Television and the European Union.” European Journal of
Communication 19 (2004): 349–69.

World Intellectural Property Organization, Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property
and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, Consolidated Analysis of the Legal Pro-
tection of Traditional Cultural Expressions, WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5/3. Geneva: WIPO, 2003.

Want to Comment on this Article?
Go to www.culturalproperty.org/forum/

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:21:32, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070105


