International Journal of Cultural Property (2010) 17:33–63. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2010 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739110000032

Digital Technologies and Traditional
Cultural Expressions: A Positive
Look at a Difficult Relationship
Mira Burri*

Abstract: Digital technologies have often been perceived as imperilling tradi-
tional cultural expressions (TCE). This angst has interlinked technical and so-
ciocultural dimensions. On the technical side, it is related to the affordances of
digital media that allow instantaneous access to information without real loca-
tion constraints, data transport at the speed of light and effortless reproduction
of the original without any loss of quality. In a sociocultural context, digital
technologies have been regarded as the epitome of globalization forces—not
only driving and deepening the process of globalization itself but also spreading
its effects. The present article examines the validity of these claims and sketches
a number of ways in which digital technologies may act as benevolent factors. It
illustrates in particular that some digital technologies can be instrumentalized to
protect TCE forms, reflecting more appropriately the specificities of TCE as a
complex process of creation of identity and culture. The article also seeks to
reveal that digital technologies—and more specifically the Internet and the
World Wide Web—have had a profound impact on the ways cultural content is
created, disseminated, accessed and consumed. It is argued that this environ-
ment may have generated various opportunities for better accommodating TCE,
especially in their dynamic sense of human creativity.

Digital technologies have often been perceived as imperiling traditional cultural
expressions (TCE). This angst has interlinked technical and sociocultural dimen-
sions. On the technical side, it is related to the affordances of digital media that
allow, among other things, instantaneous access to information without real lo-
cation constraints, data transport at the speed of light, and effortless reproduction
of the original without any loss of quality.1 In a sociocultural context, digital tech-

*World Trade Institute, University of Bern.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Thanks for constructive critique and insightful suggestions for improve-
ment are owed to the two anonymous IJCP reviewers.

33

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

34

MIRA BURRI

nologies have been regarded as the epitome of globalization forces—not only driv-
ing and deepening the process of globalization itself but also spreading its effects.
A frequently made statement in this respect is that “[t]he distinct and diverse qual-
ities of the world’s multiple cultural communities are threatened in the face of
uniformity brought on by new technologies and the globalization of culture and
commerce.”2

Yet, it is fair to say that digital technologies (or for that matter, any technologies)
cannot be “bad” per se. It is the ways in which technologies are applied and the pur-
poses they serve that may have (usually unevenly spread) positive or negative ef-
fects.3 It is also for the law to react to these effects in order to safeguard certain public
interests and the attainment of goals important to society.4 It is one of the objec-
tives of this article to show that in the context of the protection and promotion of
TCE, rather counterintuitively, there are a number of ways in which digital tech-
nologies may act as benevolent factors. We illustrate in particular that some digital
technologies can be instrumentalized to protect TCE forms, reflecting more appro-
priately the specificities of TCE as a complex process of creation of identity and cul-
ture. The article also seeks to reveal that digital technologies—and more specifically
the Internet and the World Wide Web—have had a profound impact on the ways
cultural content is created, disseminated, accessed and consumed. We shall argue that
this environment may have also generated various opportunities for better accom-
modating TCE, especially in their dynamic sense of human creativity.

The article’s argument unfolds in four main parts. Section 1 describes in more de-
tail the salient features of digital technologies. Section 2 analyzes their impact on mar-
kets; consumer and business behavior; and, ultimately, the processes of formation,
production, and expression of culture. Section 3 is intended to put these develop-
ments into the context of protection and promotion of TCE and explores the op-
portunities this newly created information and communication environment may
have brought about. An essential element of this analysis is the legal framework, in
particular those rules related to intellectual property protection, that may function
as both a facilitator and an inhibitor to appropriately accommodating TCE and the
indigenous communities as TCE producers within the global marketplace for cul-
tural content. The final section provides a synthesis of our observations.

1. DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES: SOME SALIENT FEATURES

At the core of the sweeping changes that we are about to describe is the process of
digitization. Digitization allows for the expression of each and every type of con-
tent (be it audio, video or text) in a line of zeroes and ones and thereby creates a
universal code for all information. As a consequence, it is irrelevant to the net-
work whether the data being transferred is the video of the Apache sunrise cer-
emony, a picture of a sacred Aboriginal totem, or the latest hip-hop hit—they will
all be rendered into binary digits.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

35

The ability of digital systems to handle an ever greater amount of multimedia
content at lower and lower cost is a product of the exponential growth in the
processing power and memory of microchips.5 As a third element of this techno-
logical matrix comes the perfection of optical fibers, which has led to enhanced
breadth and capacity of networks6 and allowed the conveyance of digitized infor-
mation at the highest speed possible. On top of this infrastructural layer came the
Internet, as a global, publicly accessible network of interconnected networks, and
the World Wide Web, which builds the logical layer of the Internet as a system of
interlinked, hypertext documents. The latter ultimately allows us to reach the ap-
plication and content layers, exploring web pages and creating, searching, and con-
suming a great variety of content.7

For the purposes of this article, both the affordances of digital technologies in
a narrow technical sense (such as data conversion, transport, and access) and the
impact of these technologies on the broader information and communication en-
vironment, on business and consumer behavior patterns, and on the processes of
cultural creation and expression will be important. Bear in mind that all these
processes, both taken as advances in technology and as societal changes, are never
static but in constant and haphazard flux.

2. DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND THEIR IMPACT ON THE GLOBAL

MARKETS FOR CULTURAL CONTENT

2.1 New Mechanisms, New Diversity

By reducing information to zeroes and ones, digital representation radically mod-
ifies the characteristics of content. For one, it is freed from the need for a tangible
medium, and it can be swiftly distributed at almost no cost. A second salient fea-
ture that has caused much uproar in both the big media conglomerates and small
indigenous communities8 is the ability to make perfect copies. A third, less noted
but perhaps the furthest reaching, characteristic of digital media is that they have
changed the way information is organized and accessed.9

Under the broader category of digitally induced market modifications,10 as the
reproduction, storage, and distribution of digital media products have a marginal
cost close to zero, it becomes economically viable to sell relatively unpopular prod-
ucts. This creates incentives for suppliers to offer a larger and more diverse port-
folio including “nonhit” titles that appeal to smaller niche audiences. This may be
true for indigenous music,11 but it is also more generally applicable to offering
products and services in a greater number of languages: Whereas most web sites
are still in English, it is a fact that as the Internet becomes ubiquitous, people
around the world prefer to read their news, stories, and local gossip in their own
language. So, in parallel to the intensified globalization, one may also observe a

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

36

MIRA BURRI

process of localization.12 In this sense, for example, though most of the articles in
the free online Wikipedia are in English (2,976,299), it contains content in 266
other languages, including Fiji Hindi, Igbo, and Ma¯ori.13

The digital setting may have also reduced the significant entrepreneurial risk
inherent in launching new cultural goods and services14 (at least for some of them)
while making their visibility greater. This is in stark contrast to the substantial
storage and distribution costs in the offline world, where the shelf space (be it TV
prime time or a Christmas cinema weekend) is limited.15

Traditional media companies have also faced (and still face) horrendous pro-
motion costs, which were unbearable for smaller producers or individual artists.
In the digital ecology, however, access to a wider audience is facilitated and made
cheap. Supply and demand are also somewhat more easily “connected” as the In-
ternet allows searching through a single point of entry. This search process is dy-
namic and in addition to the conventional search engines, other methods such as
samples, feedback, and other advanced search tools based on collective intelli-
gence16 enable users to discover even new products, eventually widening the di-
versity of content consumed.17

In the longer run, as consumers become more and more empowered to choose
as we move from a “push” to a “pull” mode of content consumption (e.g., from
classical broadcasting to on-demand),18 it is conceivable that consumer selection
will constantly generate new and/or niche products.19 This would have the effect
of inducing markets to offer new types of content, including, for example, ar-
chived or original works and director’s cuts or performances, be they European,
American, or African.20 This may ultimately lead to a greater share of available
and effectively consumed “good” works, which, if realized, would be a genuine
expression of cultural diversity.21

Another interesting implication relates to the fact that, in the digital environ-
ment, content remains accessible and usable long after its traditional one-off view-
ing at movie theatres, on TV, or through DVD rental or sale.22 Pulling content
individually from a virtually unlimited selection of titles may in effect change the
value attached to cultural content. Romantically put, this value would transcend
the mere one-off use of content and offer incentives for creating good content, be
it original, avant-garde, or traditional, which people would be willing to consume
more than once.

To sum up these implications, digital technologies have fundamentally changed
the conditions for participation in the communications environment as produc-
tion and distribution costs fall and as the notion of scarcity is redefined.

2.2 New Types of Content Production

The second category of changes resulting from the properties and the dynamics of
the digital space has to do with new modes of production of information, knowl-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

37

edge, and entertainment, whereby users become active creators, individually or as
part of the community.

Due to the decreased costs of identifying like-minded groups of individuals and
of communicating and acting together,23 the digital environment has given birth
to multiple virtual communities and social networks.24 These allow for a new type
of community building and facilitate communication both within the said com-
munity and with external parties. In conjunction with these new forms of social
interaction and much more critically for our present context, people online,
equipped with diverse Web 2.0 tools,25 also create content. The idea that anyone
with a computer and Internet connection (without the need of any intermedi-
ary26) can express her- or himself in a variety of ways and communicate with
billions of people is very powerful, and this creative potential should be by all
means accounted for.

Besides the intensified individual creation of content in the digital environ-
ment, a commons-based production of information has emerged, where “individ-
uals band together, contributing small or large increments of their time and effort
to produce things they care about.”27 These changes not only relate to what some
call “amateurs”28 but also profoundly affect how all artists and culture makers
express themselves, how they communicate with one another and with the public,
how cultural content is presented and made accessible, and how it is consumed.29

3. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION

OF TRADITIONAL CULTURAL EXPRESSIONS:

SKETCHING SOME OPPORTUNITIES

Before we consider the possible effects of the above processes on the modes of
TCE protection and promotion, a definition of the notion of TCE is due. Al-
though a number of definitions of TCE exist in national and regional laws and in
international instruments,30 there is presently no internationally settled common
definition. The World Intellectual Property Organization’s (WIPO’s) Draft Provi-
sions on TCE31 do however offer a broad description of what constitutes TCE (but
expressly leave the choice of terms denoting the protected subject matter to na-
tional and regional fora).32 Pursuant to this description, “‘traditional cultural ex-
pressions’ or ‘expressions of folklore’ are any forms, whether tangible and intangible,
in which traditional culture and knowledge are expressed, appear or are mani-
fested.” These may comprise or be combinations of “(i) verbal expressions, such
as: stories, epics, legends, poetry, riddles and other narratives; words, signs, names,
and symbols; (ii) musical expressions, such as songs and instrumental music; (iii)
expressions by action, such as dances, plays, ceremonies, rituals and other perfor-
mances, whether or not reduced to a material form; and (iv) tangible expressions,
such as productions of art, in particular, drawings, designs, paintings (including

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

38

MIRA BURRI

body-painting), carvings, sculptures, pottery, terracotta, mosaic, woodwork, met-
alware, jewelry, baskets, needlework, textiles, glassware, carpets, costumes; handi-
crafts; musical instruments; and architectural forms.”33

This “draft description,” as the WIPO calls it,34 already gives a sense of the stag-
geringly wide range of expressions that qualify as TCE, comprising both “pre-
existing materials dating from the distant past that were once developed by ‘authors
unknown’ through to the most recent and contemporary expressions of tradi-
tional cultures, with an infinite number of incremental and evolutionary adapta-
tions, imitations, revitalizations, revivals and recreations in between.”35 The essential
qualification that sets these expressions apart from any other cultural expression
is the “defining characteristic of ‘traditional’,”36 whereby all creations “identify a
living tradition and a community that still bears and practices it.”37

Despite the preceding guidelines on identifying TCE, it should be noted that
the term “TCE” may often be an ill-suited, somewhat artificially constructed short-
cut to depicting an extremely complex reality whose limits are indefinable and
whose elements may be in themselves complex notions, such as the concept of
“dreaming” of Australia’s indigenous peoples.38 TCE are also not a static but a
highly dynamic, living system, which is constantly in the process of renegotiation,
innovation, and creation.39 Furthermore, and accounting for the indigenous com-
munities’ perspective, it is to be acknowledged that they commonly “regard all
products of the human mind and heart as interrelated, and as flowing from the
same source: the relationships between the people and their land, their kinship
with the other living creatures that share the land, and with the spirit world.”40
The indigenous peoples’ demands for protecting and promoting TCE are ac-
cordingly heterogeneous.41 In a narrow context, which is also the most policy rel-
evant, indigenous communities strive for intellectual property (IP) protection. They
wish to distinguish this “IP protection” “from the ‘safeguarding,’ ‘preservation’ and
‘promotion’ of cultural heritage, which refer generally to the identification, doc-
umentation, transmission and revitalization of tangible and intangible cultural her-
itage in order to ensure its maintenance or viability.”42 At the same time, indigenous
peoples do acknowledge that many of their aspirations relating to TCE may be
addressed by non-IP measures targeted at preservation and promotion of cultural
heritage as well as by other tools, such as those developed under communities’
customary laws.43

In this sense, when talking about “TCE protection,” and although we repeatedly
stress the dynamic character of TCE, it seems that “current disputes center on items
of TK [traditional knowledge] as they now exist.”44 The concrete goals pursued
through the IP protection may, however, differ. On the one hand, some communi-
ties wish to claim and exercise IP in their TCE to enable them to exploit them com-
mercially as a contribution to economic development. On the other hand, some
communities wish to exercise IP rights in order to prevent the use and commer-
cialization of their TCE by others (including culturally offensive or demeaning use,
and use that inaccurately represents their cultures). Finally, many communities are

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

39

concerned with preventing others from gaining or maintaining IP over their TCE.
This would entail defensive mechanisms to block third parties’ IP rights if these are
considered prejudicial to the community’s interests or IP rights obtained without
the consent of the community (the so-called “defensive protection”).45

In the following analysis, we look at both the opportunities for TCE protection
and for TCE promotion and do not follow the strict lines of IP protection as un-
derstood in the work of the WIPO’s Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC).46
Rather, we adopt a broader approach along the lines of the UNESCO Convention
on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions.47 In
the next two sections, we map out some tools that the digital environment has
provided for the protection and promotion of TCE.48 In this inquiry, we do not
discuss in detail the adoption of digital technologies by different indigenous com-
munities. While we do not undervalue the fact that many of them tend to be ma-
terially poor 49 and that the digital divide is a reality, anecdotal and empirical
evidence shows that indigenous peoples have been active users of the Internet for
quite some time.50 Some even argue that “the Internet is an ideal match for Ab-
original tribes, providing the necessary economy of scale to support electronic pub-
lishing for such small constituencies . . . because the Internet can support an
admixture of audio, video, and text, transcending the print medium, it is ideally
suited to the oral story-telling traditions of the Aboriginal Community.”51

Although some communities still reject the Internet as a medium, the contact
of indigenous communities with digital technologies has clearly been intensified
in recent years, both as the network expands and as communities themselves be-
come more willing to enter the digital space. This process has been facilitated by a
growing number of more suitable applications that reduce the media literacy thresh-
old and apply step-by-step learning tools. Beyond these efforts, digitized indig-
enous content enters the globalized digital space through various other channels,
such as museum and archiving activities, nongovernmental organization (NGO)
initiatives, and diverse research and language preservation projects.52

3.1 Tools to Protect

The modern IP system provides for a broad palette of sophisticated53 and flexible
tools that allow us “to protect both traditional and new forms of symbolic value
produced in particular places as they circulate in global commodity markets.”54
At the same time, the IP system is far from perfect and shows substantial deficien-
cies with particular regard to TCE. Most of the limitations are inherent in the
nature and the mechanisms of protection and relate to the centrality of author-
ship, originality, and mercantilism to the “Western” IP model. As a result, numer-
ous non-Western, collaborative, or folkloric modes of production are left outside
the scope of IP protection,55 and there is a sort of a dissonance between the con-
temporary IP rights and TCE as the subject matter of protection. The rise and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

40

MIRA BURRI

spread of global media have only exacerbated this discord, while at the same time
significantly raising the economic stakes in protecting traditional knowledge for
both the indigenous communities and for its nonindigenous, allegedly unlawful,
users.56

With specific regard to copyright, which is the most relevant protection mech-
anism57 as far as TCE are concerned,58 the following limitations have been iden-
tified as especially worrisome:

1. Originality. Copyright protects only original works, and many traditional lit-
erary and artistic productions are not original in this sense. Similarly, tradi-
tional designs are not deemed new or original for industrial designs protection.
At the same time, adaptations of TCE can be protected as original copyright
works and designs, leading to calls for defensive protection.

2. Ownership. Protection of copyright and industrial designs requires the iden-
tification of a known individual creator or creators in order to determine
the holders of rights and identify precisely who might benefit from such rights.
It is difficult, if not impossible, however, to identify the creators of TCE and
hence the right-holders and beneficiaries in TCE, because TCE are commu-
nally created and held, or because the creators are unknown or unlocatable.
The very concept of ownership in the IP sense may also be alien to many
indigenous peoples.

3. Fixation. The fixation requirement existing in many national copyright laws
prevents intangible and oral expressions of culture, such as tales, dances, or
songs, from being protected unless and until they are fixed in some form or
media. Even certain fixed expressions, such as face painting, body painting,
and sand carvings, may not meet the requirement. Yet, rights in recordings
and documentation of TCE vest in the people responsible for these acts of
fixation, such as ethnomusicologists, folklorists, and other researchers, and
not in the TCE bearers.

4. Term of protection. The limited term of protection in copyright, related rights,
and industrial designs is claimed to be inappropriate for TCE. It fails to meet
the need to protect TCE in perpetuity or at least as long as the community ex-
ists. The limited term of protection also requires certainty as to the date of a
work’s creation or first publication, which is often unknown in the case of TCE.
5. Exceptions and limitations. Apart from the limited term of protection for most
IP forms, it has been argued that other exceptions and limitations com-
monly found in IP laws are not suitable for TCE. For example, typical copy-
right exceptions that allow a sculpture or work of artistic craftsmanship
permanently displayed in a public place to be reproduced in photographs or
drawings without permission may seriously disturb indigenous sensibilities
and undermine customary rights.

6. Defensive protection. Indigenous peoples and communities are concerned
about nonindigenous companies and persons imitating or copying their TCE

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

41

or using them as a source of inspiration, and then acquiring IP protection
over their derivative work, design, mark, or other production. Communities
have expressed, for example, concerns over the use by external parties of
words, names, designs, symbols, and other distinctive signs in the course of
trade or over their registration as trademarks.59 Furthermore, neither copy-
right nor industrial design laws protect the style of literary and artistic works
and designs.60

To remedy these deficiencies, a number of efforts are being made under the
auspices of WIPO and others that seek to provide legal protection for TCE and
for traditional knowledge (TK) “as an essential corrective for the international com-
munity as well as individual nations to undertake.”61 Most of these initiatives take
as self-evident the proposition that TCE and TK ought to be protected, and they
explore ways of doing so by either modifying the present IP system or by creating
sui generis rights.62 Yet, there are also strong arguments against taking this path.
In a recent article, Munzer and Raustiala examine existing theories of property63
in search of a basis for TK protection and convincingly argue that “provisions
aimed at the ‘defensive’ protection of TK—that is, at halting the (mis)use of TK
by nonindigenous actors in patents or copyrighted materials—merit the most sup-
port.”64 They find, however, “much less support for ‘offensive’ protection, in which
TK holders would have the right to control TK that would not otherwise be pro-
tected by the existing IP system.”65 Some of the concerns Munzer and Raustiala
share are that while TK advocates may develop a sound justification for the pro-
tection of TK as a form of property, “they must also provide a satisfactory account
of why the TK of indigenous peoples, and not other practices and forms of col-
lective or incremental knowledge of other groups, ought to receive legal protec-
tion”66 and “robust TK protection is in great tension with many core principles of
the existing IP system; it is not merely something that can be tacked on as a new
right . . . [and] TK protection aimed solely at indigenous groups requires a com-
pelling theory of discrimination between indigenous and non-indigenous claims.”67
It is not the purpose of this article to engage in (or let alone solve) the debate of
whether the IP regime or some changes thereof are the best way to respond to the
indigenous peoples’ worries as far as the protection of their knowledge systems is
concerned. Against the backdrop of these discussions and the yet unresolved and
very complex issues,68 we suggest rather that the digital environment presents op-
portunities for tailoring the application of existing IP protection mechanisms and
for using other, not strictly IP avenues of protecting TCE.69 We offer some exam-
ples that support this thesis.
3.1.1 Dynamic Participatory Databases

As noted earlier, in the digital space, information is organized, searched, and ac-
cessed in a new manner. Under these conditions, some technological tools, includ-
ing digital rights management (DRM) systems, may be applied so as to reflect

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

42

MIRA BURRI

better the very different and sometimes conflicting demands of indigenous peo-
ples (e.g., for openness and secrecy, or for different levels of access according to
privileges or skills of different community members). Such technological tools may
enable authorized members to “define and control the rights, accessibility and reuse
of their digital resources; uphold traditional laws pertaining to secret/sacred knowl-
edge or objects; prevent the misuse of indigenous heritage in culturally inappro-
priate or insensitive ways; ensure proper attribution to the traditional owners; and
enable indigenous communities to describe their resources in their own words.”70
Here is a concrete example of utilizing some of these possibilities, and in par-
ticular that of tailoring access to and use of knowledge.71 Kimberly Christen, an
anthropologist, helped recently to create a digital archive containing photos, video,
and audio files, all of which are reproductions of cultural artefacts and documents
of the Mukurtu Wumpurrari-kari, an Australian indigenous group. Although the
system is open to everyone, it asks everyone who logs in for their name, age, sex,
and standing within the community and provides for conditional access accord-
ing to these data, so that the community’s customs regarding what can and can-
not be seen, of what is “proper,”72 are reflected.73

Christen shares her experience in this context, revealing the opportunities of-

fered by digital technologies:

The flexibility and relative low cost of new technologies have allowed
me to work with Warumungu community members in Australia’s North-
ern Territory to create digital projects grounded in their pre-existing, yet
always changing, cultural protocols for non-digital cultural materials.
These projects—a dynamic online space and a locally adaptable and ac-
cessible digital archive—highlight both the processes that anthropolo-
gists can engage in and the creative workarounds that exist for extending
open access paradigm to include local cultural protocols and practices
within the management of cultural and academic knowledge.74

Similarly, the Indigenous Collections Management Project75 has created data-
security software and metadata standards for the dissemination of culturally sen-
sitive materials, restricting certain types of information that are considered sacred,
secret, or of other specific value to the indigenous community.76 Overall, such
initiatives may contribute to overcoming the fears indigenous peoples have of mal-
treatment of sacred values and symbols, which are core to their identity and the
fears of embracing digital media. They may also facilitate the process of register-
ing and compiling data on TCE that is subsequently easily searchable and man-
ageable for purely anthropological purposes, for communities’ own representation
and active participation, or for defensive IP protection.77

It is essential to distinguish such archives from the conventional ones, where
“indigenous voices have had little impact in shaping the information architectures
that underlie how cultural heritage is organized and disseminated online.”78 Kansa
refers to these old archives as “‘top down’ models of cultural heritage dissemina-
tion”79 and notes that “the imposition of a culturally alien database schema dis-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

43

sociates indigenous culture from its context, making it lose much, if not all, of its
meaning. Such attempts at cultural heritage documentation may have little rele-
vance to a local community; worse, it may be seen as an act of appropriation, even
if motivated by a desire to help.”80
3.1.2 Tailored Protective Models

Next to the modifications that the digital environment has brought about, some
of which we have sketched already, the digital space has also substantially in-
creased the economic importance of information, which has correspondingly led
to a magnified value of copyright law81 and to an expansion of its reach.82 At the
same time, the existing copyright models have been put under pressure. Because
they are often too rigid to allow full realization of the possibilities for the produc-
tion and distribution of digital content (or indeed render them illegal), some new
hybrid models of the protection of authors’ rights have emerged. One prominent
model is the Creative Commons (cc) license.83 It allows management of content
under a “some rights reserved” mode, whereby the Creator/Licensor may shape
her or his package of rights applying different conditions to the licensed work.
These conditions are organized under four categories—attribution,84 noncom-
mercial,85 no derivative works,86 and share alike87—and people may distribute their
works combining these depending on the purpose intended.88 Evidence shows that
the availability of such legal constructs feeds positively back to the development
of more user-created content and enhances the diversity of content overall.89

The cc-license is also already well spread and embedded in popular content plat-
forms, such as Flickr and Wikipedia, or in the work of public organizations, such as
universities and museums. This large-scale adoption strengthens the network ef-
fects and, by practically becoming the standard, gives some legal certainty to the
emerging culture of sharing. These softer, less rigid, forms of IP protection may also
prove particularly useful for TCE protection and allow the custodians of TCE to
shape their presentation reserving some rights of importance to the community90
while releasing others and allowing cultural content to be shared, remixed, and re-
used. Such tailored models may also correspond better to some indigenous forms
of creation, where the author as a solitary figure is not central to the creative pro-
cess. The use of such licenses must not be understood as a purely noncommercial
activity: There are options that permit going beyond the cc-licenses (the so-called
CC⫹) not only for commercial purposes91 but also additional permissions or ser-
vices, such as warranty, permission to use without attribution, or even access to per-
formance or physical media.92

The pursuit of appropriate protection tools for TCE should not remain limited
to the cc-license, which cannot reflect all their specificities,93 and attempts should
be made to develop new nonstandard licenses that fit better the complex indig-
enous world of sacred, private, secret, and shared.94 However, the cc-licenses do offer
opportunities that must be explored and tested by indigenous communities.95 They
may also contribute to overcoming the “binary code” in the TCE discussions of ei-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

44

MIRA BURRI

ther IP or public domain96 and allow for “in-between” hybrid solutions. Such op-
portunities are not to be understood as protection tools stricto sensu but also as
promotional ones because they encourage the processes of creation, reformulation,
and distribution of indigenous culture.

Finally, another instrument worth exploring as part of the TCE protection tool-
kit that indigenous communities can resort to in the digital space relates to the
use of protocols. As Brian Fitzgerald and Susan Hedge convincingly argue, “the
development and implementation of protocols for dealing with cultural materials
is becoming an increasingly important means of ensuring that the rights of in-
digenous peoples are recognized.”97 Protocols are deemed to be “appropriate ways
of using Indigenous cultural material, and interacting with Indigenous people and
their communities. Protocols encourage ethical conduct and promote interaction
based on good faith and mutual respect.”98

But what exactly are protocols, and what role can they play under the condi-
tions of the digital environment? Generally, protocols in the specific context of
TCE are meant to function as “ways of actioning”99 principles of prime impor-
tance to indigenous communities. Terri Janke, for the Australia Council for the
Arts, has identified nine principles in this context: respect; indigenous control;
communication, consultation, and consent; interpretation, integrity, and authen-
ticity; secrecy and confidentiality; attribution; proper returns; continuing cul-
tures; and recognition and protection.100 Based on this “framework for respecting
Indigenous heritage,”101 Janke has gone on to elaborate different protocols for dif-
ferent types of media.102 “For example, a cultural protocol to action the underly-
ing principle of respect is to acknowledge the Indigenous custodians of country at
the site of each performance or installation, or in the introductory on-screen text
in a screen-based project.”103 Some of these protocols are valid or even specifically
designed for the Internet.

When online, people commonly use a wide range of services, such as web host-
ing, search engines, and data storage. The use of these services is based on certain
contractual terms that we agree to, most often implicitly (by not opposing to the
Terms of Service [ToS] as announced by the service provider) or through “click-
wrap” agreements, where we click on the “I Agree” or similar icon.104

In search of ways of implementing protocols in the digital space, Fitzgerald and
Hedge have looked at some of the most popular content distribution platforms on
the Internet (YouTube, Google, Flickr, and Wikipedia), web-hosting services, and In-
ternet service providers, as well as at their ToS. They acknowledge “the significant
power that access corporations reserve to themselves under standard user agree-
ments” and find that “while TCE is not explicitly mentioned, words such as (ra-
cially) objectionable, offensive, confidential and discriminatory [contained in the
ToS] provide some level of discretion.”105 However, this potential for implement-
ing protocols for the use of TCE on the Internet, which is reinforced by the possi-
bilities of user participation106 and by the willingness of corporations to adapt,107
coexists with almost complete “ignorance about TCE in the Internet world.”108

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

45

Bearing that in mind, Fitzgerald and Hedge suggest a few paths meant to lead
toward “more consideration and protection of TCE in the Internet world.”109 These
encompass the following: (1) launching education and awareness campaigns to
make access corporations, Internet users, and communities aware of TCE; (2) draft-
ing protocols specifically for the Internet context; (3) adopting ToS expressly men-
tioning TCE; and (4) notice and take-down procedures. These measures would
become active ex ante to prevent the uploading or posting of TCE in inappropri-
ate or offensive ways and ex post to ensure that such material is properly dealt
with once found or notified.110 Overall, protocols could flexibly mediate between
the old and the new, and this mediation could be particularly successful in the
digital environment, where enhanced user participation and industry-audience
communication111 make it more receptive to changes.

3.2 Tools to Promote

While promotion seems to be the less important member of the pair of “protec-
tion and promotion,” if we admit that “culture is organic in nature and in order
for it to survive, growth and development are necessary,”112 the perspective changes.
Creativity and the dynamic aspect of TCE113 come to the fore. This viewpoint
transcends the preservation possibilities that digital technologies have enabled and
means, above all, protection and promotion of the indigenous communities. For,
as Michael F. Brown notes that “if global cultural diversity is preserved on digital
recording devices while the people who gave rise to this artistry and knowledge
have disappeared, then efforts to preserve intangible property will be judged a
failure.”114

In this context, the stress should be on participation. As Eric Kansa accurately
notes, “in many ways, a polarized opposition between public domain advocacy
and TK protectionism misses the point. Access to and participation in the digital
commons (or alternative ‘commonses’) can be empowering for indigenous com-
munities, just as much as thefts and appropriations of indigenous knowledge and
culture can threaten these communities.”115

In view of the salient features of the digital environment sketched in this arti-
cle, we envisage a few scenarios contributing to the promotion of TCE and to that
of indigenous and local communities.

The first scenario unfolds on a commercial level. While “the relationship be-
tween tradition, modernity and the market-place is not always perceived to be a
happy one”116 (and often isn’t117), “it is important too not to make artificial dis-
tinctions between traditional communities and the market-place, as many tradi-
tional communities engage in marketing aspects of their culture.”118 The digital
environment makes such distinctions even more artificial as it fosters knowledge
distribution, regardless of whether it is modern or traditional.119

As discussed earlier, digitization has drastically reduced storage and distribution
costs and has often had a similar impact on production costs, too (e.g., for digital

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

46

MIRA BURRI

videos). Although the repercussions of this have been mostly discussed in the con-
text of nonindigenous media,120 they are equally applicable to TCE. When digi-
tized, TCE become “present” in the online space, whose capacity to generate markets
for niche products offers possibilities for the creation of markets for TCE, both in
the form of physical objects and as fixed digitized performances, stories, and songs.
This is a unique opening for an incredibly wide variety of TCE forms to reach their
audiences. The new demand for TCE could have (at least) a twofold effect. It would
mean new (or multiplied) economic opportunities for the indigenous communi-
ties to market their creations globally and to become actively engaged in global trade.
The financial inflow could further lead to substantial strengthening of the welfare
of the peoples and their identity.121 This empowerment will also feed back posi-
tively and foster “creativity, connectivity, and innovation [which] are probably far
more effective at preserving and enhancing the dynamism and vitality of tradi-
tional knowledge”122 than protectionism.

The second effect of the digital media affordances is that of promoting the
indigenous communities themselves. It is in many ways related to the commer-
cial dimension but could also be singled out as particularly important in its own
right:

Providing an online context for local knowledge systems has the poten-
tial to help marginalized communities express and reassert identity, au-
tonomy and represent themselves and their knowledge to the broader
world community. Communities that have access to vital information
and are better able to coordinate action are much more likely to be able
to assert themselves and guard against cultural misappropriation. There-
fore, development strategies that assist indigenous communities in using
and governing their own digital communications resources should com-
plement TK protection.123

Indeed, it is even argued that many indigenous communities may overcome
isolation through the Internet because it provides “an ideal medium for aboriginal
communications”124 and that it may further prevent the erosion of aboriginal lan-
guages, which feeds positively into reaffirmation of cultural traditions and a re-
newal of traditional relationships with the environment.125

Indigenous communities have often found ways of their own to use digital media,
in particular as prices of hardware have fallen and a wider range of devices, in
particular mobile phones,126 have become connected. These efforts must, how-
ever, be reinforced in order to enable true participation and involvement of in-
digenous peoples in the communicative processes of the digital ecosystem. The
role of the state as a facilitator in this respect—as a provider of infrastructure and
a disseminator of education—could be critical. These efforts would need to be
supplemented by civil society initiatives,127 broader capacity building, and partici-
patory frameworks128 at the national, regional, and global levels with the ultimate
goal of allowing indigenous communities to make informed choices about their
culture, identity, and development.129 On the one hand, in our concrete case, this

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

47

would mean informing indigenous communities about the TCE protection tool-
kit that they can make use of, which comprises a number of IP tools (which are
still, despite the limitations of the current IP system, a powerful instrument130)
and taking some non-IP measures. At the same time, raising the awareness among
traditional communities of the effects of the digital environment and the oppor-
tunities it opens would become vital. On the other hand, initiatives aimed at rais-
ing the awareness of indigenous culture and peoples in the globalized digital
community would also be essential.

3.3 Emerging Concerns

While the digital environment does create opportunities, there are also a number
of emerging concerns. These go beyond the conventional worries that everything
can be copied and put on the net. The issues of access and control over informa-
tion are particularly pertinent and in need of discussion, although they may at
first sight appear somewhat distant from the specific debate on TCE protection
and promotion.

First, in the narrow context of digital preservation, there are still many unset-

tled matters. Digital preservation is an essential but also a precarious process:

Embodying creative works in digital form has the unfortunate effect of
potentially decreasing their usable lifespan. Digital information is ephem-
eral: it is easily deleted, written over or corrupted. Because information
technology such as hardware, software and digital object formats evolves
so rapidly, it can be difficult to access and use digital materials created
only a few years ago. Countless born digital works are created every day,
but countless born digital works are also lost every day as they are re-
moved, replaced, superseded or left, forgotten, in obsolete formats and
media. Digitized and born digital materials are an important part of the
world’s cultural heritage, but unless active steps are taken to preserve
them, they will be lost.131

In this sense, digital sustainability is certainly very important. “Digital sustain-
ability” means ensuring that digitized formats, especially in the field of cultural
heritage, are of high quality and interoperable (both horizontally, i.e., between de-
vices and formats and vertically, i.e., over time).132

As the International Study on the Impact of Copyright Law on Digital Preser-
vation133 recognizes, copyright law could also be an obstacle to digital preserva-
tion projects, because many of the activities involved (such as making multiple
copies of a work, distributing copies among multiple institutions, and migrating
works to new technological formats and media) demand the exercise of exclusive
rights, which in many cases would not fall under the copyright’s exceptions and
limitations.134

In a much broader context, we argue that the sustainability of the digital envi-
ronment as a whole will become vital. In this sense, developments, which can be char-
acterized as purely technical or “foreign” to the system, may seriously influence the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

48

MIRA BURRI

TCE ecology as well. Of particular importance are not only all decisions and devel-
opments that influence the interoperability of networks, software, and content135 but
also questions related to technological and net neutrality.136 In these complex mat-
ters, it is unlikely that straightforward solutions would be found, but the effort should
be directed toward sustaining the generativity of the digital environment,137 cau-
tiously balancing private and public interests and avoiding overregulation.138

The organization of information by search engines—their precision, position-
ing, and ultimately control—may also be critical in this context. Vaidhyanathan
clearly expresses the fears in this regard related to the role of Google as the ubiq-
uitous search engine and asks whether public libraries may be more appropriate
to administer knowledge. He notes:

It is important to remember that Google serves its own masters: its stock-
holders and its partners. It does not serve the people of the State of Mich-
igan or the students and faculty of Harvard University. The real risk of
privatization is simple: companies fail. Libraries and universities last.
Companies wither and crash. Should we entrust our heritage and col-
lective knowledge to a company that has been around for less than a
decade?139

While this skepticism may not be warranted,140 this is a telling example of the
seismic changes occurring in the information environment and how discrete de-
cisions may radically influence the processes within it.141

4. CONCLUSION

The discussions on TCE cannot somehow be placed in a parallel world totally
unlinked to the modern digital networked environment, whose reach will only
grow over time, to its underlying issues, its struggles for innovation, access, and
cultural diversity. Taking this broader view of the relationship between digital tech-
nologies and TCE, the question is not so much whether indigenous communities
use the Internet—a question that would normally lead to a discussion of TCE in
a development context that seeks instrumentalization of information and com-
munication technologies (ICT). The question is above all how the changed (and
changing142) digital environment influences all the complex institutions and pro-
cesses of TCE formation, creation, and expression, and whether (and how) one
could efficiently provide for the protection and promotion of TCE in this
environment.

We hold that the reduced economic thresholds for participation, the new dy-
namics and diversity of content, and the empowerment of users and communi-
ties, as well as some of the purely technical affordances of the digital space, may
have brought about a number of opportunities for more meaningful protection
and promotion of TCE and of their creators—the multiple indigenous commu-
nities scattered throughout the world.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

49

We sketched a few concrete proposals in this regard. Some of them employ dig-
ital tools that tailor access to and use of traditional knowledge reflecting the in-
digenous peoples’ demands for distinctions among secret, sacred, and open. We
also gave instances of customized protective models, which, without prejudicing
the conventional measures for IP protection, make use of innovative (and less bur-
densome) tools, such as the Creative Commons licensing or different protocols. In
terms of TCE promotion, we stressed the importance of sustaining TCE in their
dynamic dimension of human creativity, which also necessarily involves sustain-
ing the community. The opportunities opened up in this respect in the digital
space are multiple. On the one hand, they relate to the facilitation of marketing
and trading of TCE forms that is not controlled by intermediaries, which would
also be a source of profit for the community. On the other hand, the digital space
allows for unprecedented means for participation of indigenous peoples in the pro-
cesses of culture making, for communicating, reasserting, and renegotiating their tra-
ditional values. Certainly, the prospect of a global market for TCE needs to be
balanced against the associated risks of commodification and increased misappro-
priation. Following our analysis, however, the most urgent need appears to be to
make indigenous communities aware of the effects of the digital ecosystem, of the
possibilities it offers, and of the available protective mechanisms. This would en-
able them to make informed choices and ultimately fit together on their own the ele-
ments that would build an individual and working model for protecting and
promoting their TCE, culture, and identity. Fortunately, over the past few years we
have observed various initiatives by international, national organizations and NGOs
that go in this direction, departing from the search for one-size-fits-all solutions.
We only looked at a small fraction of the modifications that the digital tech-
nologies have triggered in the ways cultural content is created, communicated,
and accessed, but it is sufficiently clear that these changes are profound and have
multiple repercussions. They accentuate the interrelatedness of effects within the
complex system of global and local and make regulatory decisions even more pre-
carious. In this sense, for example, the granting of additional IP protection to forms
of TCE cannot be unequivocally assessed as beneficial, because it could have harm-
ful repercussions within the wider system: among other things, reducing creativity
and obstructing the production of new cultural content.143

The need for safeguarding balances is not limited to the IP regime, although it
appears to be the most often named culprit, both in the debates on traditional
knowledge protection and those on creativity and digital media.144 As Madhavi
Sunder aptly puts it:

In the twenty-first century, internal cultural fissures abound. Modern so-
ciety is becoming increasingly homogeneous across cultures and hetero-
geneous within them. Globalization, liberalization, the Internet, and
Diaspora to name only a few of the forces of modernization—are col-
lapsing cultural barriers and facilitating unprecedented culture flows of
people, information, and ideas across traditional cultural boundaries. In-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

50

MIRA BURRI

creased confrontation with modernity and exposure to alternate ways of
life are spurring people within cultures to challenge cultural orthodoxies
and demand more equality and autonomy within their cultural contexts.145

The law has so far remained surprisingly unchanged and “steadfastly commit-
ted to the old-world view of cultural diversity as existing across cultures, but not
within them”146 and to protecting distinct rights of cultural groups, such as the
right to association, religion, or culture meant to function as a defense against the
forces of modernization and change.147 We should be cautious that in the process
of adapting legal rules for the sake of protecting TCE, these rules are not made
too rigid, that is, drawing lines in too resolute a way and reestablishing (rather
than dismantling) cultural boundaries.148 In the meantime, digital technologies as
a toolkit can perhaps provide for some hybrid and practical solutions until the
larger-scale debates on the underlying and often irreconcilable values are settled.

ENDNOTES

1. A clear recognition of these “dangers” is paragraph 31 of General Comment No 17 of the UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which explicitly adds to the obligation to pro-
tect author’s rights the prevention of “unauthorized use of scientific, literary and artistic produc-
tions that are easily accessible or reproducible through modern communication and reproduction
technologies.” (See UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, “General Comment
No 17”).

2. WIPO, Consolidated Analysis of the Legal Protection, para. 4. For examples of appropriation
and misappropriation of TCE, see note 1, UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
Annex, para. 94. See also Janke, Minding Culture.

3. Spar, Ruling the Waves.
4. See, for example, the collection of essays in Brownsword, Regulating Technologies.
5. Mueller, “Digital Convergence,” 11–28. Gordon Moore of Intel postulated in 1965 that the
transistor density on a single integrated circuit microchip would double approximately every 18
months. This rule showing the incredible pace of technological advance is known as Moore’s law
and (unlikely as it may seem) is still valid.

6. Metcalfe’s law holds that the potential value of network increases by the square of the number
of nodes, while the fiber law holds that capacity doubles every nine months. See Marsden et al.,
Assessing Indirect Impacts of the EC Proposals, 72–74. Currently, almost all networks (in developed
and even in developing countries) have become IP-based (OECD, Information Technology Outlook
2006).

7. For a precise explanation of how the World Wide Web functions, see Berners-Lee et al., Ar-

chitecture of the World Wide Web.

8. See, for example, Burri-Nenova, “The Long Tail of the Rainbow Serpent.”
9. Weinberger, Everything Is Miscellaneous.
10. We refer here to the so-called “long tail” theory. The name has to do with the image of a
demand curve that gets longer and longer and covers more niche nonhit products. The long tail
theory was coined by Chris Anderson, chief editor of Wired magazine (Anderson, The Long Tail ) but
builds on previous and parallel economic research. See in particular Brynjolfsson, Hu, and Smith,
“From Niches to Riches”; Brynjolfsson, Hu, and Simester, “Goodbye Pareto Principle, Hello Long
Tail.” For a critique of Anderson’s book, see Wu, “The Wrong Tail.”

11. See, for example, the category “Various Artists—International—North America—American
Indigenous” as offered on Amazon. The search also connects to similar, either wider or narrower,
categories of content (such as “American Indian” or “Tribal Voices”).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

51

12. It seems that virtual worlds are currently the only digital spaces that have resisted this trend
of localizing content. See Reimsbach-Kounatze and Wunsch-Vincent, “Online Games and Virtual
Worlds.”

13. See http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/List_of_Wikipedias (accessed September 1, 2009).
14. Germann argues that this specificity of cultural goods and services is the main one that com-
mands state intervention for the attainment of cultural objectives (Germann, “Culture in Times of
Cholera,” 116).

15. The comparison between the offline and online availability of content may be quite striking:
A large CD shop may hold about 40,000 titles, while an online music store will have about 30–40
times more. A TV station can broadcast only one particular film in the eight o’clock slot, while its
catalogue of digitally stored and distributed films may amount to more than 1,000 titles. Moreover,
one should note that these are contradistinctions relating to only one particular distribution chan-
nel, while in the reality of the digital environment, these are multiple and simultaneously accessible.
16. Also called “wisdom of the crowds.” See Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds. See also Shirky,

Here Comes Everybody.

17. Brynjolfsson Hu, and Smith, “From Niches to Riches”; Brynjolfsson Hu, and Simester, “Good-

bye Pareto Principle.”

18. See Naughton, “Our Changing Media Ecosystem.”
19. Similarly to the Amazon book-selling platform. See Brynjolfsson, Hu, and Smith, “Consumer

Surplus in the Digital Economy.”

20. Horlings et al., Contribution to Impact Assessment, 66.
21. On cultural diversity, see Burri-Nenova, “Trade v Culture in the Digital Environment.”
22. Marsden, Chris, et al. Assessing Indirect Impacts, 22–23.
23. Van Alstyne and Brynjolfsson, “Global Village or Cyber-Balkans?”
24. For data, see Musser, with O’Reilly, “Web 2.0: Principles and Best Practices,” 4.
25. Web 2.0 is a phrase coined by O’Reilly Media (http://www.oreilly.com) in 2004. Proponents
of the Web 2.0 concept say that it differs from early web development (labeled Web 1.0) in that it
moves away from static web sites, the use of search engines, and surfing from one web site to the
next, toward a more dynamic and interactive World Wide Web. See O’Reilly, “What Is Web 2.0?” See
also OECD, Participative Web: User-Created Content.

26. See, for example, Ku, “The Creative Destruction of Copyright.”
27. Benkler, “Freedom in the Commons,” 1261. For data on content creation, see OECD, Partici-

pative Web, 9–12; Pew, Content Creation Online; Weinberger, Everything Is Miscellaneous.

28. For a critical opinion, see Keen, The Cult of the Amateur.
29. Digitization, both as a tool of expression and as a new cultural communication space “affects
the entire spectrum of culture production, distribution and presentation . . . [and] brings with it the
promise of cultural renewal.” See Netherlands Council for Culture, From ICT to E-Culture, 8. See
also O’Regan and Goldsmith, “Emerging Global Ecologies of Production.”.

30. See WIPO, Traditional Knowledge; WIPO, The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions/
Expressions of Folklore: Updated Draft Outline of Policy Options and Legal Mechanisms. See also the
WIPO law database available at http://www.wipo.int/tk/en/laws/folklore.html (accessed September
1, 2009).
31. WIPO, The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions/Expressions of Folklore: Revised Ob-

jectives and Principles, (henceforth the WIPO, Draft TCE Provisions).

32. Article 1(b) of the WIPO, Draft TCE Provisions.
33. Article 1(a) of the WIPO, Draft TCE Provisions.
34. WIPO, The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions: Draft Gap Analysis, (henceforth WIPO,

TCE Gap Analysis), 3.

35. WIPO, TCE Gap Analysis, 3.
36. WIPO, TCE Gap Analysis, 4.
37. WIPO, TCE Gap Analysis, 4. The WIPO Secretariat clarifies further that “even where an in-
dividual has developed a tradition-based creation within his or her customary context, the creation
is not ‘owned’ by the individual but falls within a shared sense of communal responsibility, identity

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

52

MIRA BURRI

and custodianship. This is what marks such a creation as ‘traditional.’ TCEs might well have had an
author at some stage, but that author is now unknown or simply unlocatable.”

38. See Morphy, Aboriginal Art, 67–100.
39. Brown, “Can Culture Be Copyrighted?” See also WIPO, WIPO, Consolidated Analysis of the

Legal Protection, para. 9.

40. Daes, Discrimination against Indigenous Peoples, para. 21.
41. Indigenous communities strive also for the achievement of a number of other objectives, such
as self-determination or restitution of property. See, for example, Coombe, “The Properties of Cul-
ture.” See also United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, adopted by the Gen-
eral Assembly September 13, 2007.
42. WIPO, TCE Gap Analysis, 7.
43. WIPO, TCE Gap Analysis, 7.
44. Munzer and Raustiala, “The Uneasy Case for Intellectual Property Rights,” 48.
45. WIPO, TCE Gap Analysis, 8.
46. WIPO, TCE Gap Analysis, 7.
47. UNESCO, Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expres-
sions, adopted at the 33rd Session of the General Conference of UNESCO, October 20, 2005, entered
into force March 18, 2007. The UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights also applies
a broader notion of protection. In its General Comment No 17 (see note 1, para. 32), it clarified with
specific regard to indigenous peoples that “states parties should adopt measures to ensure the effective
protection of the interests of indigenous peoples relating to their productions, which are often ex-
pressions of their cultural heritage and traditional knowledge. . . . Such protection might include the
adoption of measures to recognize, register and protect the individual or collective authorship of in-
digenous peoples under national intellectual property rights regimes and should prevent the unautho-
rized use of scientific, literary and artistic productions of indigenous peoples by third parties.”

48. We admit, however, that adopting this looser approach to TCE protection and promotion

makes the borderline between the two categories only conditional.

49. See Dutfield, “Promoting Local Innovation,” 72–73; see also Gupta, “From Sink to Source.”
50. Indigenous communities have been “using it to communicate amongst themselves and to oth-
ers, to gain access to resources, to publish and access databases, and to provide alternative perspec-
tives on issues that are not covered in mainstream media” (Coombe, “Preserving Cultural Diversity,”
147).

51. Zellen, “Surf ’s Up!: NWT’s Indigenous Communities”, as referred to by Coombe, “Preserving
Cultural Diversity,” 148. See also Nickerson and Kaufman, “Aboriginal Culture in the Digital Age.”

52. Kansa, “Indigenous Heritage and the Digital Commons,” 221–222.
53. Helfer, “Regime Shifting: The TRIPs Agreement.”
54. Coombe, Schnoor, and Ahmed, “Bearing Cultural Distinction,” 916.
55. Bellagio Declaration, March 11, 1993, Bellagio, Italy (reproduced in Boyle, Shamans, Software,

and Spleens, 196–200, in Discussion section [footnotes omitted]).

56. “The revoked European patent on a neem oil-based fungicide nicely illustrates these criti-
cisms. First, prior to the 1990s, Indians would have been far less likely to know about foreign pat-
ents. The rise of global media and the Internet have changed that. Second, in the past, traditional
users of the neem tree would have had little direct incentive to care about foreign patents. But glob-
alization and the rise of international IP protection have again altered the calculus. The prospect
that a European patentee might profit by selling neem-based products abroad, coupled with the
moral claim that the neem patent was a form of theft, infuriated many Indians. Third, the expansion
of patent rights through international agreements has raised the value of TK as an input into pat-
ents. The availability of patent protection for an enhanced traditional medicinal cure, for example,
raises the value of the TK on which the innovation is based. See Munzer and Raustiala, “The Uneasy
Case for Intellectual Property Rights,” 51. See also Sunder, “The Invention of Traditional Knowl-
edge,” 98.

57. Next to copyright of relevance to TCE protection may also be trademarks and industrial de-

signs protection. On trademarks, see Frankel, “Trademarks, Traditional Knowledge.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

53

58. After yearlong discussions with various stakeholders under the auspices of WIPO’s IGC, it
appears that specific TCE forms are particularly vulnerable to IP-style exploitation. Among these are
“traditional music and songs, visual art (notably painting), traditional musical instruments, hand-
icrafts (including the designs and ‘styles’ embodied in them), performances of TCEs, sacred and
secret TCEs, recordings and documentation of TCEs, and indigenous words, names and symbols.”
See WIPO, TCE Gap Analysis, 4.

59. Exemplary here is the Lego Bionicles case. See Coombe and Herman, “Rhetorical Values.”
60. WIPO, TCE Gap Analysis, 10–11, 19–24. See also WIPO, Consolidated Analysis of the Legal

Protection, paras. 102–144.

61. Munzer and Raustiala, “The Uneasy Case for Intellectual Property Rights,” 38.
62. Munzer and Raustiala, 39. See most notably the work under the auspices of WIPO, Draft TCE

Provisions.

63. Including the new and very interesting “stewardship” theory of property developed with re-
spect to the cultural property claims of indigenous peoples by Carpenter, Katyal, and Riley, “In De-
fense of Property.”

64. Munzer and Raustiala, “The Uneasy Case for Intellectual Property Rights,” 40.
65. Munzer and Raustiala.
66. Munzer and Raustiala, 41.
67. Munzer and Raustiala, 66.
68. See, for example, Brown, “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work”; and the contributions of von Lewin-
ski (ed.), Indigenous Heritage and Intellectual Property; Antons, Traditional Knowledge; and Graber
and Burri-Nenova, Intellectual Property and Traditional Cultural Expressions. For very interesting analy-
sis of TK protection in the broader field of IP reform, see also Sunder, “The Invention of Traditional
Knowledge”; Sunder, “IP3.”

69. The same approach is also adopted by Fitzgerald and Hedge, “Traditional Cultural Expression

and the Internet World.”

70. WIPO, Consolidated Analysis of the Legal Protection, Annex, at para. 245, referring among oth-

ers to Hunter, Koopman, and Sledge, Software Tools for Indigenous Knowledge Management.

71. “Tagging” may be identified as an important Web 2.0 effect. Tagging, which is basically a
process of creating labels for online content by attaching a keyword to a piece of information (a
picture, article or video) is “a kind of next-stage search phenomenon,” whereby online searching
is advanced and personalized and digital material is organized in a tailored manner on top of
existing formally defined classification schemes. See Pew, Tagging; Weinberger, Everything Is
Miscellaneous.

72. See Christen, “Tracking Properness: Repackaging Culture.”
73. “Aboriginal Archive Offers New DRM,” BBC News.
74. Christen, “Access and Accountability,” 4 (references omitted). The two projects mentioned are
available at http://www.vectorsjournal.org/issues/03_issue/digitaldynamics and at http://www.
mukurtuarchive.org; both accessed September 1, 2009.

75. The Indigenous Collections Management Project is an initiative of the Cooperative Research
Centre for Enterprise Distributed Systems Technology and the Smithsonian Institute’s National Mu-
seum of the American Indian Cultural Resources Centre. The objective of this project is to investi-
gate how information technology tools and standards can be refined and extended to enable
indigenous communities to preserve and protect their unique indigenous cultures, knowledge and
artefacts while supporting traditional protocols and facilitating better cross-cultural communication
and understanding. See http://metadata.net/ICM/ (accessed September 1, 2009).

76. See Kansa, Schultz, and Bissell, “Protecting Traditional Knowledge,” 11; Hunter, Koopman,
and Sledge, Software Tools for Indigenous Knowledge Management. There are further projects that
seek to enable active participation of the community. The Open Context project (http://
opencontext.org/) is a prime example in this category. It was created by the Alexandria Archive
Institute and supports a wide range of formally conducted research projects as well as community-
led efforts. Its aim is to provide an easy to use tool that “enables communities to organize and
share cultural heritage collections in ways that are locally meaningful, but without sacrificing the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

54

MIRA BURRI

possibility of interoperability.” See Kansa, “Indigenous Heritage and the Digital Commons,” 235.
See also Kansa and Kansa, “Open Context: Collaborative Data Publication.”
77. WIPO keeps track of existing codes, protocols, and policies for developing best practices
related to safeguarding of, access to, and control over cultural heritage. See http://www.wipo.int/tk/
en/folklore/culturalheritage/ (accessed September 1, 2009).

78. Kansa, “Indigenous Heritage and the Digital Commons,” 223–224. For critique of static data-
bases, see also Brown, “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work”; Brown, Who Owns Native Culture?, 206ff.

79. Kansa, “Indigenous Heritage and the Digital Commons,” 223–225.
80. Kansa, “Indigenous Heritage and the Digital Commons,” 225 (footnote omitted).
81. Brown, “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work,” 44. See also Cohen, “Pervasively Distributed Copy-

right Enforcement.”

Expanded?”

82. Lessig, “(Re)creativity: How Creativity Lives,” 19. See also Netanel, “Why Has Copyright
83. See http://creativecommons.org/. There are also some other types of licenses designed by the
Creative Commons, such as public domain, developing nations, sampling, founder’s copyright, GNU,
Wiki, and music sharing. The “developing nations” license, for example, allows a wide range of royalty-
free uses of a work in developing nations, while retaining full copyright in the developed world.

84. You let others copy, distribute, display, and perform your copyrighted work—and derivative

works based upon it—but only if they give credit the way you request.

85. You let others copy, distribute, display, and perform your work—and derivative works based

upon it—but for noncommercial purposes only.

86. You let others copy, distribute, display, and perform only verbatim copies of your work, not

derivative works based upon it.
87. You allow others to distribute derivative works only under a license identical to the license
that governs your work. For information on all licenses, see http://creativecommons.org/about/
licenses/ (accessed September 1, 2009).

tralasian Commons: Creative Commons Case Studies.

88. See, for example, Kelty, “Punt to Culture,” 549–554.
89. See OECD, Participative Web: User-Created Content, 14. See also Cobcroft, Building an Aus-
90. While Kansa et al. find the cc-license useful for TK/TCE protection, they suggest ways in
which it could be moulded to correspond better to the needs of indigenous communities. See Kansa,
Schultz, and Bissell, “Protecting Traditional Knowledge.” See also Kansa, “Indigenous Heritage and
the Digital Commons,” 239–243.

91. In practical terms, clicking on the CC⫹ “permissions beyond” icon would take you to a
commercial site, which is not run by Creative Commons, where the terms for the rights beyond
those granted by CC licenses could be negotiated. There is no limit to the commercial opportunities
that might be specified beyond those in the CC license. The protocol is a general facility to link
CC-licensed work with commercial opportunities and to enable hybrid creativity.
92. For more information, see http://wiki.creativecommons.org/Ccplus (accessed September 1,

2009).

93. Kansa, Schultz, and Bissell, “Protecting Traditional Knowledge”; Kansa, “Indigenous Heri-
tage and the Digital Commons.” Neither do cc-licenses solve all the problems of the existing copy-
right system: see Niva Elkin-Koren, “What Contracts Cannot Do.”
94. Kansa, Finding Common Ground in the Digital Commons.
95. The Creative Commons Case Studies (Cobcroft; see note 89) offer some good examples of
cc-licenses application in practice. See also Lawrence Lessig, CC as a Global Movement (letter), http://
creativecommons.org/weblog/entry/6155 (November 16, 2006) accessed September 1, 2009.

96. Chander and Sunder, “The Romance of the Public Domain.” For a comprehensive analysis,

see Waelde and MacQueen, Intellectual Property: The Many Faces of the Public Domain.

97. Fitzgerald and Hedge, Traditional Cultural Expression and the Internet World,” 250.
98. Janke, New Media Cultures: Protocols, 2.
99. Janke, New Media Cultures: Protocols, 3.
100. Janke, New Media Cultures: Protocols, 9.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

55

101. Janke, New Media Cultures: Protocols.
102. See these publications of the Australia Council for the Arts: Protocols for Producing Indig-
enous Australian Media Arts; Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Performing Arts; Protocols
for Producing Indigenous Australian Music; Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Writing; Pro-
tocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Visual Arts; all available at http://www.australiacouncil.
gov.au/

103. Janke, New Media Cultures: Protocols, 3.
104. There is substantial practice on these types of contracts also called “browse-wrap” and “click-
through” agreements or licenses. See, for example, Moringiello and Reynolds, “Survey of the Law of
Cyberspace”; Mootz, “After the Battle of the Forms”. For the particular case of virtual worlds and
online games, see Burri-Nenova, “User Created Content in Virtual Worlds.”

105. Fitzgerald and Hedge, Traditional Cultural Expression and the Internet World,” 260.
106. For the different levels of user participation beyond the mere “read” where users tag, com-

ment, flag, or share content, see Flew, New Media: An Introduction, 31–32.

107. A prime example in this regard is Lego, which agreed to negotiate with the Maori people
after having unlawfully used Maori names for its range of toys and computer games called Bionicles.
For details, see Fitzgerald and Hedge, Traditional Cultural Expression and the Internet World,” 260–
263, as well as Coombe and Herman, “Rhetorical Values.”

108. Fitzgerald and Hedge, Traditional Cultural Expression and the Internet World,” 254.
109. Fitzgerald and Hedge, 266.
110. Fitzgerald and Hedge.
111. See Jenkins, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide.
112. WIPO, Consolidated Analysis of the Legal Protection, para. 8.
113. Elizabeth Burns Coleman argues that they may indeed be perceived as more dynamic than mod-
ern cultural production. See Coleman, “The Disneyland of Cultural Rights to Intellectual Property.”
114. Brown, “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work,” 54. See also Dutfield, “Protecting and Revitalising

Traditional Ecological Knowledge,” 109.

115. Kansa, “Indigenous Heritage and the Digital Commons,” 221.
116. WIPO, Consolidated Analysis of the Legal Protection, Annex, para. 13.
117. Tyler Cowen is one of the very few who insist that global monopolies and imported tech-
nologies have also led to promoting local creativity by generating new markets for innovative, high-
quality artistic productions. See Cowen, Creative Destruction; Cowen, In Praise of Commercial Culture,
in particular 15–43.

118. WIPO, Consolidated Analysis of the Legal Protection, Annex, at para. 14. “Developing mar-
ketable uses for third-world cultural products is ‘ultimately perhaps the most effective way to protect
their traditions.’ Increasingly, third-world artisans recognize that ‘except in a museum setting, no
traditional craft skill can be sustained unless it has a viable market.’” Sunder, “The Invention of
Traditional Knowledge,” 111, citing Liebl and Roy, “Handmade in India: Traditional Craft Skills in a
Changing World,” 70 and 67, respectively.

119. “Tradition is cultivated, not discovered. The concept of traditional knowledge, too, is a mod-
ern invention. Those studying poor people’s knowledge warn of the dangers of ‘overdrawing the
distinction between [traditional knowledge] and modern knowledge.’” See Sunder, “The Invention
of Traditional Knowledge,” 110–111, citing Finger, “Introduction and Overview,” 31.

120. Benkler, The Wealth of Networks.
121. An excellent example in this regard is the story of the Seminole tribe, which is commercially
very active and is now the owner of a number of casinos and the Hard Rock Café chain. See Stum-
berger, “Der späte Sieg der Seminolen.”

122. Kansa, Finding Common Ground in the Digital Commons.
123. Kansa, “Indigenous Heritage and the Digital Commons,” 244.
124. Coombe, “Preserving Cultural Diversity,” 148.
125. Coombe, “Preserving Cultural Diversity,” 147–148, referring to Maffi and Skutnabb-Kangas,
“Linguistic Diversity and the ‘Curse of Babel.’” See also Zuckerman, “The Survival of Languages in
a Digital Age.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

56

MIRA BURRI

126. See, for example, Sahlfeld, “How Does ICT Work for Development.”
127. Brown, “Heritage as Property,” 60.
128. Kansa, “Indigenous Heritage and the Digital Commons,” 226–230. See also Dutfield, “Pro-

moting Local Innovation,” 75.

129. Sunder, in “The Invention of Traditional Knowledge” and “IP3,” argues along the same lines
borrowing from the influential theory of Amartya Sen of “development as freedom.” See Sen, De-
velopment as Freedom.

130. Coombe, Schnoor, and Ahmed, “Bearing Cultural Distinction.” Some governments have taken
steps toward informing and educating the indigenous and local communities within their State ter-
ritories. See New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development, Te Mana Taumara Ma¯tauranga, and
the diverse protocols issued by the Australia Council for the Arts in note 102.

131. International Study on the Impact of Copyright Law on Digital Preservation, 1.
132. Netherlands Council for Culture, From ICT to E-Culture. See also Kansa, “Indigenous Her-

itage and the Digital Commons,” 234.

133. The study looks at both the ongoing major digital preservation projects in a number of se-
lected countries (Australia, the Netherlands, United Kingdom, and the United States) and at the
state of copyright law there, and makes some suggestions for improvements.

134. International Study on the Impact of Copyright Law on Digital Preservation, 2. See also Pes-

sach, “Digitization and Copyright Law.”

135. On interoperability, see Gasser and Palfrey, Breaking Down Digital Barriers.
136. The principle of net(work) neutrality or in its broader sense, the end-to-end principle, es-
sentially holds that the network should be neutral to the content being passed and that intermedi-
aries should pass all packets, while the intelligence is located at the edges of the network. See, for
example, Wu, “Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination”; Crawford, “Network Rules.”

137. Zittrain, “The Generative Internet.”
138. Digital technologies have also been employed for less benevolent purposes, such as Internet

filtering. See Deibert et al., Access Denied.

139. Vaidhyanathan, “The Googlization of Everything,” 1220. See also Bracha and Pasquale, “Fed-

eral Search Commission?”

140. For a more optimistic vision of Google’s role, see Kurtz, “Copyright and the Human Con-

dition,” 1250–1251.

141. See a very interesting article in this regard, Pessach, “[Networked] Memory Institutions.”
142. Forecasts predict, for example, that by 2020 a global, low-cost network will be available to

most people worldwide. See Pew, The Future of the Internet II.

143. Gasser and Ernst, “From Shakespeare to DJ Danger Mouse.” See also Coombe, “Protecting

Cultural Industries,” 613.

144. See, for example, Lessig, Free Culture.
145. Sunder, “Cultural Dissent,” 497–498 (emphases in the original; footnotes omitted).
146. Sunder, “Cultural Dissent,” 500.
147. Sunder, “Cultural Dissent.”
148. Sunder, “Cultural Dissent,” 566–567.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

“Aboriginal Archive Offers New DRM,” BBC News. October 22, 2008.

Anderson, Chris. The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is Selling Less of More. New York: Hype-
rion, 2006.

Antons, Christoph, ed. Traditional Knowledge, Traditional Cultural Expressions and Intellectual Prop-
erty Law in the Asia-Pacific Region, Alphen aan den Rijn, Netherlands: Kluwer Law International,
2009.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

57

Benkler, Yochai. “Freedom in the Commons: Towards a Political Economy of Information.” Duke
Law Review 52 (2003): 1245–1276.

———. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 2006.

Berners-Lee, Tim, et al. Architecture of the World Wide Web, Vol. 1, W3C Recommendation.
具www.w3.org/TR/webarch/典 (December 15, 2004) accessed September 1, 2009.

Boyle, James. Shamans, Software, and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information Society.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.

Bracha, Oren, and Frank Pasquale. “Federal Search Commission? Access, Fairness, and Accountabil-
ity in the Law of Search.” Cornell Law Review 93 (2008): 1149–1209.

Brown, Michael F. “Can Culture Be Copyrighted?” Current Anthropology 39, no. 2 (1998): 193–206.

———. Who Owns Native Culture? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.

———. “Heritage as Property.” In Property in Question: Value Transformation in the Global Economy,
edited by Katherine Verdery and Caroline Humphrey, 49–68. Oxford, UK: Berg, 2004.

———. “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work on the Protection of Intangible Cultural Property.” Inter-
national Journal of Cultural Property 12 (2005): 40–61.

Brownsword, Roger, ed. Regulating Technologies: Legal Futures, Regulatory Frames and Technological
Fixes. Oxford, UK: Hart, 2008.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu Hu, and Duncan Simester, “Goodbye Pareto Principle, Hello Long Tail: The
Effect of Search Costs on the Concentration of Product Sales.” MIT Center for Digital Business Re-
search Paper, 2007: 1–40.

———, Yu Hu, and Michael D. Smith. “Consumer Surplus in the Digital Economy: Estimating the
Value of Increased Product Variety at Online Booksellers.” Management Science 49, no. 11 (2003):
1580–1596.

———, Yu Hu, and Michael D. Smith. “From Niches to Riches: The Anatomy of the Long Tail.”
Sloan Management Review 47, no. 4 (2006): 67–71.

Burri-Nenova, Mira. “The Long Tail of the Rainbow Serpent: New Technologies and the Protection
and Promotion of Traditional Cultural Expressions.” In Intellectual Property and Traditional Cultural
Expressions in a Digital Environment, edited by Christoph Beat Graber and Mira Burri-Nenova, 205–
236. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2008.

———. “Trade v Culture in the Digital Environment: An Old Conflict in Need of a New Defini-
tion.” Journal of International Economic Law 12, no. 1 (2009): 17–62.

———. “User Created Content in Virtual Worlds and Cultural Diversity.” In Governance of Digital
Game Environments and Cultural Diversity, edited by Christoph Beat Graber and Mira Burri-
Nenova, 74–112. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2010.

Carpenter, Kristen A., Sonia K. Katyal, and Angela R. Riley. “In Defense of Property.” Yale Law Jour-
nal 118 (2009): 1022–1125.

Chander, Anupam, and Madhavi Sunder. “The Romance of the Public Domain.” California Law Re-
view 92 (2004): 1331–1373.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

58

MIRA BURRI

Christen, Kimberly. “Tracking Properness: Repackaging Culture in a Remote Australian Town.” Cul-
tural Anthropology 21, no. 3 (2006): 416–446.

———. “Access and Accountability: The Ecology of Information Sharing in the Digital Age.” An-
thropology News 50, no. 4 (April 2009): 4–5.

Cobcroft, Rachel, ed. Building an Australasian Commons: Creative Commons Case Studies, Vol. 1,
Creative Commons Clinic. Brisbane, Australia: Australian Research Council, Centre of Excellence for
Creative Industries and Innovation, 2008. Also available at 具http://creativecommons.org.au/
casestudiesvol1典 (2008) accessed September 1, 2009.

Cohen, Julie E. “Pervasively Distributed Copyright Enforcement.” Georgetown Law Journal 95 (2006):
1–48.

Coleman, Elizabeth Burns. “The Disneyland of Cultural Rights to Intellectual Property: Anthropo-
logical and Philosophical Perspectives.” In Intellectual Property and Traditional Cultural Expressions
in a Digital Environment, edited by Christoph Beat Graber and Mira Burri-Nenova, 49–72. Chelten-
ham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2008.

Coombe, Rosemary J. “The Properties of Culture and the Possession of Identity: Postcolonial Strug-
gle and the Legal Imagination.” In Borrowed Power: Essays on Cultural Appropriation, edited by Bruce
Ziff and Pratima V. Rai, 74–96. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1997.

———. “Preserving Cultural Diversity Through the Preservation of Biological Diversity: Indig-
enous Peoples, Local Communities, and the Role of Digital Technologies.” In The Gender of Genetic
Futures, edited by Fiona Miller et al., 132–160. Toronto, Canada: NNEWH Working Paper Series,
2000.

———. “Protecting Cultural Industries to Promote Cultural Diversity: Dilemma for International
Policy-Making Posed by the Recognition of Traditional Knowledge.” In International Public Goods
and Transfer of Technology Under a Globalized Property Regime, edited by Keith E. Maskus and Jer-
ome H. Reichman, 559–614. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005.

———, and Andrew Herman. “Rhetorical Values: Property, Speech, and the Commons on the World
Wide Web” Anthropological Quarterly 77, no. 3 (2004): 559–574.

———, Steven Schnoor, and Mohsen Ahmed. “Bearing Cultural Distinction: Informational Capi-
talism and New Expectations for Intellectual Property.” UC Davis Law Review 40 (2007): 891–917.

Cowen, Tyler. In Praise of Commercial Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998.

———. Creative Destruction: How Globalization Is Changing the World’s Cultures. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2002.

Crawford, Susan P. “Network Rules.” Law and Contemporary Problems 70, no. 2 (2007): 51–90.

Daes, Erica-Irene. Discrimination against Indigenous Peoples: Study on the Protection of the Cultural
and Intellectual Property of Indigenous Peoples (E/CN.4/Sub.2/1993/28). New York: United Nations
Economic and Social Council, Commission on Human Rights, 1993.

Deibert, Ronald J., John G. Palfrey, Rafal Rohozinski, and Jonathan Zittrain. Access Denied: The Prac-
tice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007.

Dutfield, Graham. “Protecting and Revitalising Traditional Ecological Knowledge: Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights and Community Knowledge Databases in India.” In Intellectual Property Aspects of Eth-
nobiology, Perspectives on Intellectual Property, Vol. 6, edited by Michael Blakeney, 103–122. London:
Sweet and Maxwell, 1999.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

59

———. “Promoting Local Innovation as a Development Strategy.” Innovations: Technology, Gover-
nance, Globalization 1, no. 3 (2006): 67–77.

Elkin-Koren, Niva. “What Contracts Cannot Do: The Limits of Private Ordering in Facilitating a
Creative Commons.” Fordham Law Review 74, no. 2 (2005): 375–422.

Finger, J. Michael. “Introduction and Overview.” In Poor People’s Knowledge: Promoting Intellectual
Property in Developing Countries, edited by J. Michael Finger and Philip Schuler, 1–36. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press; Washington, DC: World Bank Publications.

Fitzgerald, Brian F., and Susan Hedge. “Traditional Cultural Expression and the Internet World.” In
Traditional Knowledge, Traditional Cultural Expressions and Intellectual Property Law in the Asia-
Pacific Region, edited by Christoph Antons, 245–272. Alphen aan den Rijn, Netherlands: Kluwer Law
International, 2009.

Flew, Terry. New Media: An Introduction, 3rd ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2008.

Frankel, Susy. “Trademarks, Traditional Knowledge and Cultural Intellectual Property Rights.” In
Trademark Law and Theory: A Handbook of Contemporary Research, edited Graeme B. Dinwoodie
and Mark D. Janis, 433–463. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2007.

Gasser, Urs, and Silke Ernst, From Shakespeare to DJ Danger Mouse: A Quick Look at Copyright and
User Creativity in the Digital Age. Cambridge, MA: Berkman Center for Internet and Society Re-
search Publication No. 05, 2006.
———, and John Palfrey, Breaking Down Digital Barriers. Berkman Publication Series. 具http://
cyber.law.harvard.edu/interop/典 (November 2007) accessed September 1, 2009.

Germann, Christophe. “Culture in Times of Cholera: A Vision for a New Legal Framework Promot-
ing Cultural Diversity” ERA—Forum 6, no. 1 (2005): 109–130.

Graber, Christoph Beat, and Mira Burri-Nenova, eds. Intellectual Property and Traditional Cultural
Expressions in a Digital Environment, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2008.

Gupta, Anil K. “From Sink to Source: The Honey Bee Network Documents Indigenous Knowledge
and Innovations in India.” Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization 1, no. 3 (2006): 49–66.

Helfer, Laurence R. “Regime Shifting: The TRIPs Agreement and New Dynamics of International
Intellectual Property Lawmaking.” Yale Journal of International Law 29, no. 1 (2004): 1–83.

Horlings, Edwin, et al. Contribution to Impact Assessment of the Revision of the Television Without
Frontiers Directive. Cambridge, UK: RAND Europe, 2005.

Hunter, Jane, Bevan Koopman, and Jane Sledge. Software Tools for Indigenous Knowledge Manage-
ment. 具www.archimuse.com/mw2003/papers/hunter/hunter.html典 (September 2002) accessed Sep-
tember 1, 2009.

International Study on the Impact of Copyright Law on Digital Preservation. A Joint Report of the
Library of Congress National Digital Information Infrastructure and Preservation Program, the Joint
Information Systems Committee, the Open Access to Knowledge (OAK) Law Project and the SUR-
Ffoundation. Brisbane, Australia: Queensland University of Technology, 2008.

Janke, Terri. New Media Cultures: Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian New Media. Report
prepared for the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Board of the Australia Council for the Arts.
Sydney: Australia Council for the Arts, 2002.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

60

MIRA BURRI

———. Minding Culture: Case Studies on Intellectual Property and Traditional Cultural Expressions.
Geneva: WIPO, 2003.

Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2006.
Kansa, Eric. Finding Common Ground in the Digital Commons. 具http://www.archive.icommons.org/
articles/finding-common-ground-in-the-digital-commons典 (August 14, 2007) last accessed Septem-
ber 1, 2009.

———. “Indigenous Heritage and the Digital Commons.” In Traditional Knowledge, Traditional Cul-
tural Expressions and Intellectual Property Law in the Asia-Pacific Region, edited by Christoph An-
tons, 219–244. Alphen aan den Rijn, Netherlands: Kluwer Law International, 2009.

———, and Sarah Whitcher Kansa. “Open Context: Collaborative Data Publication to Bridge Field
Research and Museum Collections.” In International Cultural Heritage Informatics Meeting (ICHIM07)
Proceedings, edited by Jennifer Trant and David Bearman. Toronto, Canada: Archives and Museum
Informatics, 2007. 具http://www.archimuse.com/ichim07/papers/kansa/kansa.html典.

Kansa, Eric C., Jason Schultz, and Ahrash N. Bissell. “Protecting Traditional Knowledge and Expand-
ing Access to Scientific Data: Juxtaposing Intellectual Property Agendas via a ‘Some Rights Reserved’
Model.” International Journal of Cultural Property 12 (2005): 285–314.

Keen, Andrew. The Cult of the Amateur: How Today’s Internet Is Killing Our Culture. New York: Dou-
bleday, 2007.

Kelty, Christopher M. “Punt to Culture.” Anthropological Quarterly 77, no. 3 (2004): 547–558.

Ku, Raymond Shih Ray. “The Creative Destruction of Copyright: Napster and the New Economics
of Digital Technology.” University of Chicago Law Review 69, no. 1 (2002): 263–324.

Kurtz, Leslie A. “Copyright and the Human Condition.” UC Davis Law Review 40 (2007): 1233–1252.

Lessig, Lawrence. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture
and Control Creativity. New York: Penguin, 2004.

———. “(Re)creativity: How Creativity Lives.” In Copyright and Other Fairy Tales: Hans Christian
and the Commodification of Creativity, edited by Helle Porsdam, 15–22. Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar, 2006.

Liebl, Maureen, and Tirthanker Roy. “Handmade in India: Traditional Craft Skills in a Changing
World.” In Poor People’s Knowledge: Promoting Intellectual Property in Developing Countries, edited by
J. Michael Finger and Philip Schuler, 53–74. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, and Washington,
DC: World Bank Publications.

Maffi, L., and T. Skutnabb-Kangas. “Linguistic Diversity and the ‘Curse of Babel.’” In Cultural and
Spiritual Values of Biodiversity (United Nations Environment Programme). London: Intermediate
Technology Publications, 2000.

Marsden, Chris, et al. Assessing Indirect Impacts of the EC Proposals for Video Regulation, Cambridge,
UK: RAND Europe, 2006.

Mootz, Francis J., III. “After the Battle of the Forms: Commercial Contracting in the Electronic Age.”
I/S A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society 4, no. 2 (2008): 271–343.

Moringiello, Juliet M., and William L. Reynolds. “Survey of the Law of Cyberspace: Electronic Con-
tracting Cases 2007–2008.” Business Lawyer 64, no. 1 (2008): 199–219.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

61

Morphy, Howard. Aboriginal Art. London: Phaidon, 1998.

Mueller, Milton L. “Digital Convergence and Its Consequences.” Javnost—The Public 6, no. 3 (1999):
11–28.

Munzer, Stephen R., and Kal Raustiala. “The Uneasy Case for Intellectual Property Rights in Tradi-
tional Knowledge.” Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal 27 (2009): 37–97.

Musser, John, with Tim O’Reilly. “Web 2.0: Principles and Best Practices.” O’Reilly Radar, 2006.

Naughton, John. “Our Changing Media Ecosystem.” In Communications: The Next Decade, edited by
Ed Richards et al., 41–50. London: Ofcom, 2006.

Netanel, Neil W. “Why Has Copyright Expanded? Analysis and Critique.” In New Directions in Copy-
right Law, Vol. 6, edited by Fiona Macmillan, 3–34. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2008.

Netherlands Council for Culture. From ICT to E-Culture: Advisory Report on the Digitalisation of
Culture and the Implications for Cultural Policy. Submitted to the State Secretary for Education, Cul-
ture and Science, The Hague, the Netherlands: 2004.

New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development. Te Mana Taumara Ma¯tauranga: Intellectual Prop-
erty Guide for Ma¯ori Organizations and Communities. Wellington, NZ: New Zealand Ministry of Eco-
nomic Development, 2007.

Nickerson, Marcia, and Jay Kaufman. “Aboriginal Culture in the Digital Age.” Policy, Politics and Gov-
ernance 10 (2005): 1–7.

OECD. Information Technology Outlook 2006. Paris: OECD, 2007.
———. Participative Web: User-Created Content. DSTI/ICCP/IE(2006)7/FINAL, 12 April 2007.

O’Regan, Tom, and Ben Goldsmith. “Emerging Global Ecologies of Production.” In The New Media
Book, edited by Dan Harries, 92–105. London: British Film Institute, 2008.

O’Reilly, Tim. “What Is Web 2.0? Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation
Software.” Communications and Strategies 65 (2007): 17–37.

Pessach, Guy. “Digitization and Copyright Law: Taking Stock and Looking Ahead.” Journal of Inter-
national Media and Entertainment Law 1, no. 2 (2007): 253–282.

———. “[Networked] Memory Institutions: Social Remembering, Privatization and its Discon-
tents.” Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal 26, no. 1 (2008): 71–149.
Pew Internet & American Life Project. Content Creation Online. February 29, 2004. 具http://
www.pewinternet.org典.

———. The Future of the Internet II. September 24, 2006.

———. Tagging. January 2007.

Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Media Arts, 2nd ed. Sydney: Australia Council for the
Arts. 具www.australiacouncil.gov.au/典 (2007) accessed September 1, 2009.

Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Music, 2nd ed. Sydney: Australia Council for the Arts.
具www.australiacouncil.gov.au/典 (2007) accessed September 1, 2009.

Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Performing Arts, 2nd ed. Sydney: Australia Council for
the Arts. 具www.australiacouncil.gov.au/典 (2007) accessed September 1, 2009.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

62

MIRA BURRI

Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Visual Arts, 2nd ed. Sydney: Australia Council for the
Arts. 具www.australiacouncil.gov.au/典 (2007) accessed September 1, 2009.

Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Writing, 2nd ed. Sydney: Australia Council for the Arts.
具www.australiacouncil.gov.au/典 (2007) accessed September 1, 2009.

Reimsbach-Kounatze, Christian, and Sacha Wunsch-Vincent. “Online Games and Virtual Worlds:
Business and Policy Developments.” In Governance of Digital Game Environments and Cultural Di-
versity, edited by Christoph Beat Graber and Mira Burri-Nenova, 3–46. Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar, 2010.

Sahlfeld, Miriam. “How Does ICT Work for Development: A Review of the Challenges and Oppor-
tunities.” African Technology Development Forum 4, no. 1 (2007): 22–36.

Sen, Amartya. Development as Freedom. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1999.

Shirky, Clay. Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations. London: Pen-
guin, 2008.

Spar, Debora L. Ruling the Waves: From the Compass to the Internet, a History of Business and Politics
Along the Technological Frontier. Orlando, FL: Harcourt, 2001.

Stumberger, Rudolf. “Der späte Sieg der Seminolen.” Neue Zürcher Zeitung (August 20, 2007).

Sunder, Madhavi. “Cultural Dissent.” Stanford Law Review 54 (2001): 495–567.

———. “IP3.” Stanford Law Review 59, no. 2 (2006): 257–332.

———. “The Invention of Traditional Knowledge.” Law and Contemporary Problems 70, no. 2 (2007):
97–124.

Surowiecki, James. The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and How Col-
lective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, and Nations. New York: Anchor, 2003.

UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. “General Comment No 17: The Right of
Everyone to Benefit from the Protection of the Moral and Material Interests Resulting from Any
Scientific, Literary or Artistic Production of Which He Is the Author.” (Article 15(1)(c)), UN Doc.
E/C.12/2005, November 21, 2005.

Vaidhyanathan, Siva. “The Googlization of Everything and the Future of Copyright.” UC Davis Law
Review 40 (2007): 1207–1231.

Van Alstyne, Marshall, and Erik Brynjolfsson. “Global Village or Cyber-Balkans? Modeling and Mea-
suring the Integration of Electronic Communities.” Management Science 51, no. 6 (2005): 851–868.

von Lewinski, Silke, ed. Indigenous Heritage and Intellectual Property: Genetic Resources, Traditional
Knowledge and Folklore, 2nd ed. The Hague, Netherlands: Kluwer Law International, 2008.

Waelde, Charlotte, and Hector MacQueen, eds. Intellectual Property: The Many Faces of the Public
Domain. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2007.

Weinberger, David. Everything Is Miscellaneous: The Power of the New Digital Disorder. New York:
Henry Holt, 2007.
WIPO. Traditional Knowledge: Operational Terms and Definitions. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/3/9. May 20,
2002.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND TCE

63

———. Consolidated Analysis of the Legal Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions. WIPO/
GRTKF/IC/5/3, Annex. May 2, 2003.

———. The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions/Expressions of Folklore: Revised Objectives
and Principles. (Unaltered in the subsequent WIPO documents WIPO/GRTKF/IC/9/4, January 9,
2006; WIPO/GRTKF/IC/10/4, October 2, 2006; WIPO/GRTKF/IC/11/4(a), April 26, 2007, and WIPO/
GRTKF/IC/11/4(c), December 6, 2007), Annex, at Article 1. April 8, 2005.

———. The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions/Expressions of Folklore: Updated Draft Out-
line of Policy Options and Legal Mechanisms. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/9/INF/4. March 27, 2006.
———. The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions: Draft Gap Analysis. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/
13/4(b) Rev., Annex 1. October 11, 2008.

Wu, Tim. “Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination.” Journal on Telecommunications and High
Technology Law 2 (2003): 141–175.

———. “The Wrong Tail: How to Turn a Powerful Idea into a Dubious Theory of Everything.” Slate,
July 21, 2006. 具http://www.slate.com/id/2146225/典.

Zellen, Barry. “Surf ’s Up! NWT’s Indigenous Communities Await a Tidal Wave of Electronic Infor-
mation.” Cultural Survival Quarterly 21, no. 4 (1998): 148.

Zittrain, Jonathan L. “The Generative Internet.” Harvard Law Review 119, no. 7 (2006): 1974–2040.

Zuckerman, Ethan. “The Survival of Languages in a Digital Age.” My Heart’s in Accra (blog).
具www.ethanzuckerman.com/blog/?p⫽1426典 (May 16, 2007) accessed September 1, 2009.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:14:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000032


