The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 54–74

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2010.00409.x

Access and Benefit Sharing User Measures in
Switzerland

Daniel Kraus

University of Neuchaˆ tel

Markus R ¨ussli

Umbricht Attorneys at Law, Zurich

This article, based on a study commissioned by the Swiss Federal Ofﬁce for the Environment, aims at
identifying what legal, administrative and policy measures could be designed in a country such as Switzerland
to promote compliance by users of genetic resources and traditional knowledge with measures regarding
access and beneﬁt sharing (ABS). The framework of the study is set by the existing international legal system
and the international regime currently being discussed in the negotiations of the Protocol on Access to Genetic
Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of Beneﬁts Arising from their Utilization. This article states the
situation as at June 2010. Stakeholders in Switzerland have already taken numerous measures in order to
comply with the ABS provisions contained in the Convention on Biological Diversity, such as the declaration
of the source of genetic resources and traditional knowledge in patent applications or the development of best
practice guidelines and recommendations. Can more be done? Two basic options for ABS user measures in
Switzerland are examined, depending on the development of the international regime, with or without
international certiﬁcation. Whatever system is ﬁnally chosen, it should not reduce the stimulation in research
and development, ought to be as little intrusive as possible into trade activities and should avoid duplications.

Keywords access and beneﬁt sharing; CBD; genetic resources; traditional knowledge

The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), concluded in Rio de Janeiro on 5 June 1992, was
ratiﬁed by Switzerland in 1994 and entered into force in Switzerland on 19 February 1995. Its main
objective, as described in article 1 CBD, is to ensure the conservation of biological diversity, the
sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of the beneﬁts arising out of
the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources. The CBD
(in particular articles 15 and 16 et seq.) includes a range of provisions on access to genetic resources
and on a balanced sharing of the beneﬁts resulting from the use of these resources, so-called access
and beneﬁt sharing (ABS).

A genetic resource, in the meaning of the CBD, is to be understood as genetic material of
actual or potential value, genetic material being deﬁned as any material of plant, animal, microbial
or other origin containing functional units of heredity (article 2 CBD). This deﬁnition is also used
in the Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the
Beneﬁts Arising out of their Utilization (article 8), and shall be referred to in the present study.

States have the sovereign right over their natural resources (article 3 CBD). As a consequence,
the authority to determine access to genetic resources rests with the national governments, and is
subject to national legislation (article 15.1 CBD). Each Contracting Party must endeavor to create
conditions which facilitate access to genetic resources for environmentally sound uses by other

54

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Contracting Parties and not to impose restrictions that run counter to the objectives of the
Convention. At the same time, access, where granted, shall be on mutually agreed terms (MAT)
and subject to prior informed consent (PIC) of the Contracting Party providing such resources,
unless otherwise determined by that Party, whilst beneﬁts arising out of the use of the genetic
resources shall be shared fairly and equitably with the Contracting Party providing such resources
and based on MAT (articles 15.4, 15.5 and 15.7 CBD).

Generally speaking, a distinction is made between ‘‘provider’’ and ‘‘user’’ countries of genetic
resources,1 the ﬁrst being mainly developing, and the second industrialized countries. However,
industrialized countries might also be providers (e.g. Australia), whilst some developing countries
are providers and users (e.g. Brazil) (United Nations University Institute of Advanced Studies
(UNU-IAS) Report, 2003, p. 18).

Switzerland has mainly been seen as a ‘‘user country’’, although its speciﬁc alpine ecosystems
and agro-ecosystems also provide a source of genetic resources. As a user country, Switzerland
mainly uses genetic resources through private-sector businesses and scientiﬁc research institutions,
be it in the pharmaceutical sector—including biotechnology—the food, cosmetic, and ﬂavor
industries, as well as agriculture. All these sectors are interested in a good access to genetic
resources. In order to ensure this access is provided in respect of the obligations resulting from the
CBD, and in parallel to measures to be taken in the provider countries, the Swiss Federal Ofﬁce for
the Environment (FOEN) has suggested identiﬁcation of what measures could possibly be taken in
a user country such as Switzerland. ‘‘User measures’’ have been deﬁned by the Scoping Meeting on
Capacity Building Approaches for Access to Genetic Resources and Beneﬁt Sharing, as a package
of legal, administrative and policy measures designed to promote compliance by users of genetic
resources and traditional knowledge with obligations regarding PIC, MAT and beneﬁt sharing.
These measures can be applied by either the private or the public sector and may be mandatory or
voluntary (Report of the Scoping Meeting, p. 17).

This issue is the object of the present study, which aims to identify possible measures that could
be implemented in Switzerland. It further seeks to determine to what extent they might be in
Switzerland’s interest, how far they could be institutionalized and under which legal conditions. In
particular, potential checkpoints, at which the respect of the ABS provisions of the CBD could be
controlled, possibly subject to a condition of the existence of an internationally accepted system of
certiﬁcation, are to be identiﬁed. Existing procedures for obtaining marketing and importation
authorizations set the framework of the study.

The study is structured as follows: First, some relevant international agreements are identiﬁed,
which serve as a general framework to the issue of access to, and beneﬁt sharing resulting from the
use of genetic resources. The study then focuses on the current legal situation in Switzerland, in
particular regarding the patent law, research regulations, authorization regimes and import
regulations. A possible future legislation is examined in the next part, which tries to identify in
which ways user measures could be introduced in the Swiss legal system, including potential
checkpoints. Finally, possible sanctions are considered, which would help ensure the respect of the
ABS provisions of the CBD.

International Framework

At the international level, beside the CBD, two instruments have been developed; one is currently
being negotiated to help implement the access to, and beneﬁt sharing from genetic resources.

First, the Bonn Guidelines were unanimously adopted by the CBD Parties in April 2002 as
voluntary guidelines in order to provide input to Parties for the development and drafting of the

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

55

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

legislative, administrative or policy measures on ABS. They embrace all genetic resources and
associated traditional knowledge innovations and practices covered by the CBD, as well as beneﬁts
arising from the commercial and other uses, with the exclusion of human genetic resources (article
9 Bonn Guidelines). They suggest the creation of national focal points for ABS2 and the
elaboration of appropriate legal, administrative or policy measures, to support compliance with
PIC of the Contracting Party providing such resources and MAT on which access was granted.
Measures include, amongst others, preventing the use of genetic resources obtained without the
PIC of the Contracting Party providing such resources and cooperation between Contracting
Parties to address alleged infringements of ABS agreements (article 16.d Bonn Guidelines). Such
measures are also currently being discussed in international negotiations on an international ABS
regime.

The second international

instrument is the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture of 3 November
2001. The objectives of the Treaty are the conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic
resources for food and agriculture and the fair and equitable sharing of the beneﬁts arising out of
their use, in harmony with the CBD, for sustainable agriculture and food security. The Treaty
provides, amongst other things, a multilateral system of ABS (part IV, articles 10–13) with the aim
of facilitating access to plant genetic resources for food and agriculture and to share the beneﬁts
arising out of the use of these resources. It covers major plant genetic resources for food and
agriculture as listed in an annexure. Access is provided on the basis of a standard material transfer
agreement (MTA) of the Treaty. Although the use of the standard MTA is made compulsory by
the Treaty, neither a certiﬁcate nor any checkpoints as discussed under the CBD are foreseen in
order to control its use or its existence in a particular case. However, the Treaty established a third-
party beneﬁciary under its MTA that has the right to request the appropriate information as
required in a number of articles of the MTA (articles 4.3 and 4.4 MTA).

Thirdly, negotiations are currently ongoing between parties to the CBD on a Protocol on
Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of Beneﬁts Arising from their
Utilization. The text being circulated when the present contribution was ﬁnalized had not yet been
negotiated. It, however, reﬂects the efforts by the co-chairs to elaborate the elements of a draft
Protocol. Negotiating parties may still make further amendments and additions to the text (Report
of the First Part of the Ninth Meeting of the Ad hoc Open-ended Working Group on ABS).

The draft stipulates that Parties are to take legislative, administrative or policy measures in
order to ensure the fair and equitable sharing of beneﬁts arising out of the utilization of genetic
resources and associated traditional knowledge, including in derivatives, with the Party providing
such resources or, where applicable, with the indigenous and local community holding such
resources or associated traditional knowledge. It is foreseen that access to genetic resources be in
principle subject to the PIC of the Party providing them. Parties are in particular to take the
necessary legislative, administrative or policy measures to provide for the following:
 Legal certainty, clarity and transparency of their national ABS requirements.
 Easily obtainable information on how to apply for PIC.
 Timely written decisions by a competent national authority.

Issuance of a permit or internationally recognized certiﬁcate as evidence of the decision to grant
PIC.
 Where applicable, national law is to recognize and afﬁrm existing rights of indigenous and local
communities to genetic resources as well as set out criteria for the PIC and involvement of such
communities for access to their genetic resources.

56

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

 Requirement and establishment of MAT at the time of access. Those terms are to be set out in
writing and may include a dispute settlement clause, terms on beneﬁt sharing, including any
ownership of intellectual property rights and terms on subsequent third-party use.
 Ensuring that traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources held by indigenous and
local communities is accessed with the prior informed consent/approval and involvement of
indigenous and local communities, and is based on MAT.

A number of key issues are still to be addressed before the Protocol can be adopted at the tenth

Conference of the Parties in Nagano, Japan, in October 2010, in particular:
 The relationship with other instruments and processes.
 Temporal and geographical application.
 Monitoring, reporting and tracking, including disclosure requirements and checkpoints.
 Dispute settlement and access to justice.
 Deﬁnition of country of origin.
 Utilization of genetic resources in derivatives.
 General beneﬁt sharing and traditional knowledge-related issues,

including appropriate
recognition of the relationship between ABS activities and traditional knowledge associated
with genetic resources.
 Diversity of national circumstances, including cases in which the same genetic resources are
 Recognition by Parties of the existence and role of customary law.

found in situ within the territory of neighboring Parties.

Current Legal Situation in Switzerland

For the time being, Swiss national legislation hardly contains any provisions for the implementa-
tion of the ABS obligations resulting from the CBD. One recent example and, to our knowledge
the only one, is the introduction, as of 1 July 2008, of an obligation to declare the source of genetic
resources and traditional knowledge used in an invention when a patent application is ﬁled.
However, the Swiss legal system incorporates different systems of authorization, on the one hand
for the marketing of certain products and, on the other, for their importation. These procedures
provide for a number of authorities that are competent for the grant of these authorizations. They
may be considered as ‘‘checkpoints’’.

Marketing authorizations are provided on the basis of different systems. Competent autho-
rities may be federal authorities, but can, in certain situations, also be regional (cantonal) ones,
which might complicate the system. Such is the case for example in the food sector, where the so-
called cantonal chemists have their say.

Importations to Switzerland mainly originate from the European Union (EU) or the European
Economic Area (EEA), or, as Switzerland is surrounded by EEA countries, transit from those
countries. For this reason, the Swiss legislation on importation mainly foresees the case of
importations from EEA countries and tends to consider direct importations from third countries
as more of a special issue.

Patent Law
The Swiss law on patents, which dates from 1954, has been recently revised in order to comply with
latest developments, in particular in the ﬁeld of biotechnology. The newest version, which entered
into force on 1 July 2008, now incorporates provisions on information on the source of genetic
resources and traditional knowledge incorporated in inventions which are the object of a patent

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

57

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

application. Article 49a of the Swiss law on patents foresees that the patent application must
contain information on the source of the genetic resource to which the inventor or the patent
applicant had access, provided the invention is directly based on this resource. Information must
also be contained on traditional knowledge of indigenous or local communities of genetic resources
to which the inventor or the patent applicant had access, provided the invention is directly based
on this knowledge. If the source is unknown to the inventor or the patent applicant, the patent
applicant must conﬁrm this in writing.

The concept of source should be interpreted widely. It includes in particular the geographical
place of origin in the meaning of preamble paragraph 27 of the European directive on the legal
protection of biotechnological inventions, the country of origin, the country providing genetic
resources in the meaning of article 2 CBD and other origins, such as gene data banks, botanical
gardens, data banks and scientiﬁc publications. The multilateral system created by the FAO
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture may also be a source of
genetic resources (Notiﬁcation of the Swiss Federal Council, p. 76). The Swiss Government
recognizes that the declaration of source as required by the patent law is not sufﬁcient in itself as it
can only resolve certain aspects of the ABS issue; it expressly recognizes that further measures, in
other ﬁelds of law, need to be adopted (Notiﬁcation of the Swiss Federal Council, p. 75).

The notion of source has been chosen voluntarily, rather than that of origin, the latter being
insufﬁciently deﬁned internationally. Besides, the rationale of this choice was to avoid research
which would go beyond what may be expected from the patent applicant as to the country of origin
of the genetic resources. The source that will be indicated will generally be the country providing
genetic resource. As patent applications are published, this allows the latter countries to check if
their national legislation related to PIC and beneﬁt sharing has been respected and, if that is not the
case, to take the appropriate measures foreseen by their national legal system in order to restore a
situation which is in conformity with the local law and possibly take the appropriate sanctions.
This implies, however, that the user has a subsidiary company or a regional ofﬁce in the providing
country. As of today, and due to the relative novelty of the law, no such case has occurred to our
knowledge.

If a patent applicant does not provide the information relating to the indication of source, the
Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property will set a deadline for the applicant in order to
provide the missing information. If the information is still not provided at the end of that deadline,
the patents will not be granted. Article 81a of the patent law foresees that anyone who willfully
provides false information under article 49a is liable to a ﬁne of up to 100,000 Swiss francs. The
courts may also order the publication of the judgment. As such, the Swiss patent law goes beyond
what is foreseen by paragraph 27 of the preamble of the EU biotechnology directive (Notiﬁcation
of the Swiss Federal Council, p. 77).

Research Regulations and Voluntary Measures
The competence for regulating research in Switzerland is shared between the Confederation and
the cantons (article 64 Constitution of the Swiss Confederation). The Federal Law on Research
aims at encouraging scientiﬁc research, but contains no provisions on the use of genetic resources.
None of the federal laws and regulations dealing with the Federal Institutes of Technology or with
coordination between universities contains provisions on ABS. Such is also the case for schools of
applied sciences.

Although the Swiss Federal Law on Research foresees that the Confederation may link
ﬁnancial aid to the condition that measures be taken to encourage the valuation of results and to
guarantee to the inventors an equitable part of the revenues generated by the commercial

58

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

exploitation of the result, no mention is made of the need to take into account the ABS obligations
as resulting of the CBD.

At university level, which is regulated by cantonal rules, no speciﬁc provisions are found on
ABS either. Nonetheless, universities seem to be more and more aware of the necessity of
respecting the provisions on ABS contained in the CBD. However, obtaining PIC for access to
genetic resources, the elaboration of fair MAT and agreement on beneﬁt sharing seem to be mainly
based on ethical and moral obligations rather than legal ones.

The Swiss Academy of Sciences (SCNAT) has dealt with this topic and developed a set of
recommendations in a brochure entitled ‘‘Access and Beneﬁt Sharing—Good practice for academic
research on genetic resources’’ and addressing the needs of academic research in Switzerland.3
These guidelines, which have been distributed to all research institutions confronted with the issue
of ABS, provides recommendations and checklists for the researchers, allowing them to undertake
their work in conformity with the requirements of the CBD on PIC, MAT and beneﬁt sharing.
This, however, takes place only on a voluntary basis. In 2007, the SCNAT established a new
consulting service, providing assistance to researchers in their administrative, negotiation and, if
necessary, conﬂicting procedures relating to ABS. Hence today, research centers in Switzerland
have access to the necessary tools allowing them to undertake their research in conformity with the
CBD.

Several Swiss botanical gardens are also committed to the respect of the ABS principles
contained in the CBD, in particular by joining the International Plant Exchange Network (IPEN)
and thereby adhering to its code of conduct, which includes regulations for sharing beneﬁts with
countries that provide plant material.4

Authorization Regime in the Pharmaceutical and Biotechnological Field
One important sector in which genetic resources are being used is the pharmaceutical sector. The
introduction of pharmaceutical products onto the market is subject to authorization, which is
granted on the basis of the Federal Law on Medicines and Medical Devices [Law on Therapeutic
Products (LTP)]. The aim of this law is to ensure that quality therapeutic products which are safe
and efﬁcient are put on the market, in order to protect the health of human beings and animals.
The system aims in particular at protecting consumers of therapeutic products against deception
and at ensuring that research and development in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld takes place under
favorable conditions (article 1 LTP).

The authorization system applies to all operations relating to therapeutic products (medicines
and medical devices),
in particular as regards their production and marketing. It covers in
particular pharmaceutical products, which, in the deﬁnition of the law, covers also biological
products, including those containing genetic resources. Production under the LTP includes all
stages, from the acquisition of the basic materials to the conditioning of the end product, including
its preparation and quality control. Production is subject to authorization, which is delivered if
certain conditions (such as professional qualiﬁcations, quality insurance, etc.) are fulﬁled.
Pharmaceuticals have to be produced in conformity with recognized rules of good production
practices. These rules are developed in a Federal Council regulation, which takes into account the
international standards (articles 5–7 LTP). The authorization is given by the Swiss Agency for
Therapeutic Products (SATP; Swissmedic) and is published.

Ready-to-use pharmaceuticals generally need an authorization from the SATP, unless, in
particular, they are prepared in small quantities or if they are produced in order to undertake
clinical trials. In order to obtain the authorization, it is necessary to prove that the products or the
process is of good quality, safe and efﬁcient. The applicant must also show that he is in possession

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

59

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

of an authorization to produce, import or trade which is issued by the competent authority. The
applicant must have its domicile, headquarters or a subsidiary in Switzerland. The SATP controls
that these conditions are fulﬁled. The application for marketing authorization must include a
certain amount of information, including designation of the pharmaceutical product, the name of
the producer, the process of production, composition, quality, therapeutic effects and result of
clinical trials (articles 9–11 LTP). A simpliﬁed procedure is foreseen in certain situations, in
particular when active ingredients of the products are already known, for products of comple-
mentary medicine, and in other cases such as pharmaceutical products produced by a hospital
chemist and covering the needs of the hospital, or in the case of medicine which is important for
rare diseases. The authorization is given by the SATP if the conditions are fulﬁled. The SATP can,
however, link the authorization to further charges and conditions. The authorization, which is
published, is valid for 5 years and can be renewed (articles 9–11, 14 and 16 LTP).

The use of intermediary products is also subject to authorization, linked to security issues

(article 3 paragraph 1 lit. d Ordinance of the SATP).

An authorization from the SATP is also required in order to import ready-to-use medicine.
The Federal Council may also foresee an authorization regime for the importation of products
which are not ready for use (article 18 LTP; Ordinance on Authorizations in the Field of
Medicines).

All clinical trials on human beings must take place under recognized rules of good practices for
clinical trials. These rules are elaborated by the Federal Council (article 53 LTP; Ordinance on
Clinical Trials of Therapeutic Products). Ethics commissions guarantee the protection of the
research subject (article 57 LTP).

Control of the market is ensured jointly by the SATP and the cantons, which share competence

in this matter. Inspections are generally undertaken by the SATP (articles 51–60 LTP).

A system of international administrative assistance is foreseen by the law, which provides that
the services of the Confederation dealing with marketing and import authorizations for medicines
may request information from foreign authorities, as well as provide some information in certain
cases (article 64 LTP).

The SATP can implement a range of administrative, as well as criminal measures in order to
ensure the LTP is respected. Administrative measures may for example include deadlines to re-
establish a situation in conformity with the law; suspension or revocation of authorizations; closing
establishments; seizure and possibly destruction of products; prohibition of advertising; and
publication of decisions. Criminal sanctions may include imprisonment or ﬁnes of up to 100,000
Swiss francs in cases of (professional) fabrication, marketing, import or export of products which
are not in conformity with the pharmacopeia, or of infringement of provisions relating to
advertising, labeling, etc. In the case of use of false certiﬁcates, criminal sanctions are also possible
on the basis of the Federal Law of 6 October 1995 on Technical Barriers to Trade.

Handling of Organisms
In order,
in particular, to protect biological diversity, the introduction into circulation in
Switzerland of genetically altered organisms, pathogenic organisms or non-native invertebrate
animals is subject to authorization; the public has a right to be informed and has access on request
to the information provided by the applicant (articles 12 and 18 Law on Genetic Engineering;
article 7 Plant Protection Ordinance; article 25 et seq. Release Ordinance). The authorization is
given by different federal ofﬁces, according to the type of product concerned, as shown in Table 1.
In addition, information relating to the proprieties of the organisms must be provided to the

recipient (article 15 Law on Genetic Engineering).

60

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Application

Competent authority

Applicable licensing procedure

Table 1: Authorization Procedure

(a) Therapeutic products

(b) Foodstuffs, additives and

processing aids

(c) Plant propagation material
exclusively for use in forests
(d) Plant propagation material

for all other uses

(e) Plant protection products

Swiss Agency for
Therapeutic Products
Federal Ofﬁce of
Public Health (FOPH)
Federal Ofﬁce for the
Environment (FOEN)
Federal Ofﬁce for
Agriculture (FOAG)
FOAG

(f) Fertilizers

(g) Animal feedstuffs

FOAG

FOAG

(h) Immunological products for

veterinary use

(i) Import of harmful organisms

Federal Veterinary
Ofﬁce (FVO)
FOAG

that are not genetically modiﬁed
nor particularly hazardous for
agricultural crops or
horticultural production

(j) Biocide products

(k) All other uses

FOPH

FOEN

Source: Article 26 Release Ordinance.

Therapeutic Products Ordinance

of 17 October 2001

Foodstuffs and Utility Articles
Ordinance of 23 November 2005
Release Ordinance of
10 September 2008

Seeds Ordinance of
7 December 1998

Plant Protection Products

Ordinance of 18 May 2005

Fertilizers Ordinance of

10 January 2001

Animal Feedstuffs Ordinance of

26 May 1999

Therapeutic Products Ordinance of

17 October 2001

Plant Protection Ordinance of

28 February 2001

Biocide Products Ordinance of

18 May 2005

Release Ordinance of
10 September 2008

Established national organizations for the protection of the environment have a right to appeal
authorizations given for the introduction into circulation of genetically altered organisms to be
used in the environment. Criminal sanctions are foreseen in case the law is not respected (articles 28
and 35 Law on Genetic Engineering).

The use of genetically altered and pathogenic organisms in conﬁned areas is subject to an
evaluation of the risks by the person using such organisms. Depending on the degree of risk at
stake, a notiﬁcation or an authorization is required (article 9 and annexure 2 Ordinance on the
Handling of Organisms in conﬁned Areas).

Import Regulations
To date, Switzerland does not provide any special provisions of law relating to the import of
genetic resources. For the protection of humans, animals, plants and the environment, however,
Switzerland generally regulates the import of living plants, animals, animal products and foods of
animal origin into Switzerland. The import of such products (containing genetic resources) is made
dependent on the existence of import documentation and certiﬁcates. The documents enclosed with
the goods are required to provide information concerning the origin of the plants, animals and

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

61

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

animal products. The inspection bodies for the import into Switzerland are, in particular, the
customs administration and the border veterinarian service, but also various ofﬁces of the federal
government. Custom authorities, however, operate on a sampling basis.

In relation to the European Community (EC), trade with agricultural products (plants, plant
products, animals, animal products, etc.) is governed by the Agreement between the Swiss
Confederation and the EC on Trade in Agricultural Products of 21 June 1999; the import
regulations applicable with respect to the EC therefore deviate from those applicable with respect
to third-party states. In connection with the import of plants from third-party states, a plant
protection certiﬁcate must be presented; in connection with goods from the EC, a plant passport is
required. This proves that, based on the inspections at the level of the production and processing,
the plants and plant products conform to the phytosanitary requirements of the EC. Products from
third-party states require a plant protection certiﬁcate as far as the border of the EC. At the border,
they are checked in terms of their conformity with the EC regulations. If the import inspection is
positive, the imported goods receive an EC plant passport. In the absence of a plant protection
certiﬁcate or a plant passport, the import of plants into Switzerland is basically impossible (articles
10 and 12 Plant Protection Ordinance).

In connection with animals and animal products, a distinction is likewise made based on
whether they stem from member states of the EC or from other (third-party) states. Animals and
animal products from member states of the EC are not inspected by the border veterinarian service
when they are brought into Switzerland. The same also applies with respect to animals and animal
products from the EC which originally stem from third-party states, provided that a document and
identiﬁcation inspection as well as a physical inspection was carried out at the outer border of the
EC (article 18 paragraph 1 Ordinance on the Import, Transit and Export of Animals and Animal
Products). If animals and animal products are imported directly into Switzerland from third-party
states by air, a document and identiﬁcation inspection as well as a physical inspection must be
conducted (article 16 Ordinance on the Import and Transit of Animals from Third Party States in
Air Trafﬁc; article 22 Ordinance on the Import and Transit of Animal Products from Third Party
States in Air Trafﬁc).

The importation of microorganisms also needs to respect the provisions of the Plant Protection
Ordinance of 28 February 2001 and requires an authorization, which depends on the provision of
information allowing the Federal Ofﬁce of Agriculture to evaluate the phytosanitary risks/utility
that the (micro)organism represents for Switzerland. Information to be provided includes the
scientiﬁc denomination, the region of origin, possible risks, foreseen use, provider, data relating to
the shipment and address of the claimant.5

Food can—apart from food of animal origin—basically be imported into Switzerland without
certiﬁcates, regardless of whether it stems from the EC or from third-party states; an exception
currently applies only with respect to the import of wild mushrooms from Eastern Europe.
Imported food, however, must conform to the requirements of the Swiss food legislation (article 2
paragraph 3 Food Act). This must be monitored by the food importer by means of self-monitoring
(article 23 Food Act; article 49 et seq. Ordinance on Foodstuffs and Utility Articles). The customs
ofﬁces are responsible for the inspection of food at the border (article 67 et seq. Ordinance on
Foodstuffs and Utility Articles; article 62 et seq. Ordinance of the Federal Department of Home
Affairs (FDHA) on the Enforcement of the Food Legislation); within Switzerland, the inspection is
carried out by the cantons, under the direction of the cantonal chemists (article 40 Food Act; article
56 et seq. Ordinance on Foodstuffs and Utility Articles).

Finally, for the protection of endangered species of wild animals and plants, the import, transit
and export of animals and plants based on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered

62

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (Washington Convention; CITES) is subject to a permit
requirement. Protected species may be imported or pass through Switzerland in transit only if
the permits or certiﬁcates required under the CITES and through the Ordinance for the Protection
of Species are to hand. Permits and certiﬁcates must conform to the requirements of the CITES
and prove without any gap the origin of the dispatch that they accompany (article 7 paragraphs 1
and 2 Ordinance for the Protection of Species). The Protection of Species Inspection Ordinance
lists the animals, plants and products as to which a document and identiﬁcation inspection as well
as a physical inspection must be conducted in each situation. In all other cases, the Federal
Veterinary Ofﬁce (FVO) or an inspection body commissioned by it carried out a document
inspection (article 29 Ordinance for the Protection of Species).

Food and Utility Articles
In the area of food, a distinction is made between imported food and food produced in Switzer-
land.6 Food produced in Switzerland that complies with the requirements of the food legislation
and that are circumscribed in a product-speciﬁc ordinance7 may be introduced into commerce
without any permit. New types of food or functional foods that are not deﬁned in a product-
speciﬁc ordinance, on the other hand, require a permit of the Federal Ofﬁce of Public Health
(FOPH) (article 5 paragraph 1 Ordinance on Foodstuffs and Utility Articles). For the production
of food, ﬂavor might be used as food additive (article 1 paragraph 1 Ordinance of the FDHA
concerning allowed Food Additive). The FOPH publishes periodically a list with the newly
admitted types of food in the Swiss Ofﬁcial Journal of Commerce and on the internet (article 6
paragraph 4 Ordinance on Foodstuffs and Utility Articles). Genetically altered food is not
permitted to be introduced into commerce unless it has been approved by the FOPH (article 21
et seq. Ordinance on Foodstuffs and Utility Articles; Ordinance of the FDHA on Genetically
Altered Food).

Cosmetics belong to utility articles. The FDHA deﬁnes in an ordinance which substances are
allowed in cosmetics and what information has to be provided on the package. Compliance with
the regulations must be monitored by the producer by means of self-monitoring. In addition,
periodical and risk-based ofﬁcial controls will be exercised (articles 35, 49 and 56 Ordinance on
Foodstuffs and Utility Articles; Ordinance of the FDHA on Cosmetics).

Agriculture
Numerous agricultural means of production may be introduced into commerce in Switzerland only
after having passed through an approval procedure (article 160 Law on Agriculture). An approval
procedure is foreseen for seeds (article 10 et seq. Seeds Ordinance), agricultural pesticide (article 4
et seq. Plant Protection Products Ordinance), fertilizer (articles 2, 3, 7 et seq. Fertilizer Ordinance)
and animal feed (article 3 et seq. Animal Feedstuffs Ordinance). The permit takes place either
through inclusion in a list (catalog of seeds, list of fertilizers, list of animal feed) or based on a
permit procedure (agricultural pesticides, fertilizers). The approval authority is the Federal Ofﬁce
for Agriculture (FOAG). The permitted agricultural means of production are published either by
the Federal Department of Economic Affairs or the FOAG.

Other Fields
The protection of new plant varieties is subject to a registration procedure. Besides the material
obligations and in order to obtain the protection, formal obligations also need to be complied with.
According to the Federal Law on the Protection of Plant Varieties and its implementation
regulation, the application for protection of a plant variety must contain a number of indications
and documentation, including (relating to the acquisition of the variety) if the holder is not, or is

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

63

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

not the only, initial breeder or, if multiplication material or product of a harvest has been sold or
transferred in another way with the agreement of the holder or one of its predecessors, the date and
place of transfer (article 9 Law on the Protection of Plant Varieties; articles 7–10 Ordinance on the
Protection of Plant Varieties). A similar regulation is applicable in the case of seeds (article 5
Ordinance on the Production and Circulation of plant multiplication material).

The CBD requires Parties to take measures relating to the ex situ conservation of components
of biological diversity, with a method to complete in situ measures (article 9 CBD). The
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture also stipulates such
measures in the ﬁeld of food and agriculture. In particular, Parties must cooperate to promote the
development of an efﬁcient and sustainable system of ex situ conservation, giving due attention to
the need for adequate documentation, characterization, regeneration and evaluation, and promote
the development and transfer of appropriate technologies for this purpose with a view to
improving the sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture (see in particular
articles 5.1 and 15 International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture).

At the federal level, requirements have been issued in order for an institution to be recognized
as a registered scientiﬁc organization in the meaning of article VII.6 CITES (Ordinance on the
Recognition as a Registered Scientiﬁc Organization by means of the CITES). But generally,
provisions relating to ex situ conservation of biological diversity may be found in a variety of
including on forestry;8 on the release of organisms in the environment (Release
legislation,
Ordinance); on the protection of species; on the protection of plant varieties; on plant multi-
plication material (Law on the Protection of Plant Varieties and its ordinance of application;
Ordinance on the Production and Circulation of plant multiplication material) and on a voluntary
basis,9 as discussed above.

Possible Future Legislation

The Alternative: With or Without International Certiﬁcate of Origin
At the present stage of the international negotiations on the establishment of an international ABS
regime, one alternative becomes apparent: either an international certiﬁcate of origin is established,
or it is not. The choice has consequences at the national level. Before examining this alternative
more closely, choices lying within the international regime relating to the concept of certiﬁcates of
origin, source or legal provenance need to be addressed.

The Concept of Certiﬁcates of Origin, Source or Legal Provenance
There are several options regarding the type of system appropriate for the concept of certiﬁcates of
origin, source or legal provenance: a legally binding system, a voluntary system or a mixed one.
Depending on the system chosen, the provider and/or the user countries would be required to
provide/request a certiﬁcate. In a voluntary system, it would be in the countries’ discretion to do so
(Report of the Meeting of the Group of Technical Experts on an Internationally Recognized
Certiﬁcate of Origin/Source/legal Provenance, pp. 5, 7).

A certiﬁcate of origin, source or legal provenance is considered to be a public document, issued

by a designated national authority and possibly listed in a common international database.

This certiﬁcate could be monitored by speciﬁc checkpoints appointed by the competent national
authority of the user countries and listed in the common international database. These checkpoints
could possibly be the same authorities as the ones issuing those certiﬁcates as a provider. Such
checkpoints could be the registration points for commercial applications (e.g. product approval
processes) or the intellectual property rights ofﬁces (especially patent and plant variety authorities).

64

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

At the international level, a registry containing electronic copies of the certiﬁcate or the unique
identiﬁer of the certiﬁcate could serve as a clearing house mechanism (CHM). The countries and/or
the checkpoints would have to notify this registry when dealing with a certiﬁcate.

A standardized internationally recognized format for certiﬁcates could contain (other than the
codiﬁed unique identiﬁer) information agreed upon, such as the subject-matter (genetic resources,
traditional knowledge) covered by the certiﬁcate, uses permitted and restrictions of use. It could
also contain information on, or a link to, a national database providing non-conﬁdential
information of PIC and MAT (Report of the Meeting of the Group of Technical Experts on an
Internationally Recognized Certiﬁcate of Origin/Source/legal Provenance, pp. 8–11).

The Case in which No International Certiﬁcate Is Introduced
If no international certiﬁcate is introduced, the risk remains that checkpoints will have difﬁculties
in examining whether the legislation of a given Party to the CBD on ABS is respected. Such a
scenario would imply that checkpoints are familiar with the legislation of all 191 Parties to the
CBD. It would also be necessary for those checkpoints to study numerous ABS contracts in the
ofﬁcial languages of the Contracting Parties. In such a case, the control of the existence of PIC and
MAT would therefore prove to be problematic.

If there is no international certiﬁcate, a system of declaration of source could be established in
the framework of existing registration and authorization procedures, as recently established in the
Swiss patent law. Checkpoints would have to limit their examination to the declaration of source,
when the object of the registration or authorization is a genetic resource or is directly based on this
resource, as is the case in the revised patent law. What is directly based on a resource could be
deﬁned in the international regime. The conformity test with the provider country’s national
legislation would be left to the latter. The examination of the existence of a declaration of PIC or
MAT is not recommended, as it would also place the burden of testing its conformity with the law
of the providing country with the Swiss authorities, and the same difﬁculties as described above
would arise. The system based on the declaration of source is only possible if decisions have been
published and are therefore accessible to the public, including in particular providers of genetic
resources, such as, beside the patent system where it already exists, in the case of marketing
authorization for pharmaceutical products, for agricultural means of production and newly
admitted types of food as well as for applications for protection of new plant varieties. However,
in connection with the import of plants, animals, animal products, etc., the import permits are not
published. In these cases, the international regime could determine that such information shall be
published, which would allow for providers to control the respect of their national ABS legislation.
In order to facilitate the work of the provider countries, the published information could be
centralized and made available through the CHM. Moreover, an international understanding of
misappropriation and misuse of genetic resources would make it easier for user and provider
countries to identify cases of infringement of ABS rules and avoid unjustiﬁed allegations of
biopiracy.

Besides, duplications would need to be avoided, that is if a marketing authorization was
required for a patented pharmaceutical product using genetic resources, the source of which would
already have been declared in the patent application. But it has to be noted that, on occasion,
products necessitating an authorization are based partly on resources which are the object of a
patent application and partly on resources which are not. In such cases, the declaration of the
source would be necessary for the resources which have not been the object of the patent, but not
for those of which the source has already been declared in the patent application.

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

65

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

The Case in which an International Certiﬁcate Is Introduced
The introduction of an international certiﬁcation system (the content of which is subject to
negotiation) would probably be most suitable to ensure that ABS measures foreseen in the
legislation of the providing country (such as PIC, MAT and beneﬁt sharing) are respected. For the
same reasons as mentioned in the previous section, it is suggested that checkpoints would limit
their control to the existence of such a certiﬁcate, based on the presumption that its content is in
conformity with the legal obligations set forth in the country having issued the certiﬁcate, and
based on the international regime. In such a way, the system would prove to be most efﬁcient, in
the interest of both providers and users.

If, in a speciﬁc situation, an applicant does not provide the certiﬁcate, the checkpoint could set
a deadline for the submission of the missing certiﬁcate. If the certiﬁcate were not to be provided on
time, the requested authorization (marketing, registration) would not be granted. Willful provision
of a false certiﬁcate could be liable to a ﬁne, and courts could order the publication of the
judgment. The system established in the patent law could be a source of inspiration here.

Neither the CBD nor the Bonn Guidelines are of any help on the issue of timely application of
ABS measures. The legal principle of non-retroactivity of laws basically implies that certiﬁcates
would have to be provided for applications ﬁled as of the date of entry into force of the respective
laws. The date as of which certiﬁcates must be made available would have to be set in the
international regime in order to be applicable in an equitable manner amongst all parties to the
CBD. Here again, the principle of non-retroactivity of laws would imply the application of the
system to new cases, that is genetic resources which would have been accessed to as of the
ratiﬁcation of the international regime/entering into force of the modiﬁed legislation in Switzer-
land, both having to be coordinated.

The principle of non-retroactivity of laws, however, would exclude a number of genetic
resources which are already in circulation. If a new use is found for a genetic resource already in
circulation in Switzerland, the principle of non-retroactivity would also apply: indeed, the principle
of good faith requires that possessors of genetic resources do not have imposed on them new
conditions which were not contractually foreseen or were not foreseen in the decision providing
them the right of use. The timely application of the system should therefore be subject to
negotiation and be provided for in the international regime.

However, bioprospecting is likely to continue in the future due to the development of new
biopharmaceutical compounds, for which ‘‘natural products research is vital to identify novel
products to alleviate human health problems’’ (UNU-IAS Report, 2009, p. 21 and references
included therein). Therefore, even in application of the principle of non-retroactivity, the system
would be justiﬁed and useful.

Conceivable Checkpoints
Patent Law
The Swiss patent law has recently been revised and introduced the obligation to declare the source
of genetic resources and traditional knowledge used in a product or process for which the patent
has been applied for. Some time will be necessary in order to evaluate its efﬁciency. However, it is
noteworthy that the Swiss patent system provides for the ﬁrst checkpoint in Switzerland.

If an international regime for a certiﬁcate of source or of origin for genetic resources was to be
agreed upon between all parties to the CBD, the veriﬁcation by the Swiss Federal Institute of
Intellectual Property could be extended from the declaration of source to the availability and
provision by the applicant of a copy of the certiﬁcate, containing the information agreed upon
internationally (declaration of source, of origin, proof of the existence of MAT, etc.).

66

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Research Regulations and Voluntary Measures
For the time being, respect of the CBD provisions on ABS by universities and research institutions
are based on a voluntary basis. Measures could be taken in Switzerland in order to further
encourage researchers (be it at university or industry level) to respect ABS principles of the CBD on
a voluntary basis, such as is the case with universities, applying the recommendations of the
SCNAT. This would require public awareness measures, which could be ensured by the FOEN in
its capacity as a focal point.

A more binding measure might be introduced in federal laws on research, which would link the
ﬁnancing of research projects including genetic resources by the Confederation to the respect of
CBD as regard ABS. This could also be the case in projects to be funded by the Swiss National
Science Foundation, and in the research principles included in the law on the Swiss Federal
Institutes of Technology.

At the cantonal level, laws or regulations on universities could include a provision either

encouraging or obliging researchers to respect those same provisions.

Authorization Regime in the Pharmaceutical and Biotechnological Field
The SATP (Swissmedic) could also serve as a checkpoint in the process in which a production or a
marketing authorization is required for a pharmaceutical product using genetic resources.

As pharmaceuticals have to be produced in conformity with recognized rules of good
production practices, contained in a Federal Council regulation and taking international standards
into account (articles 5–7 LTP), it could be envisaged including standards relating to ABS in such a
regulation.

Such could also be the case for phytosanitary products, which beneﬁt from a simpliﬁed
marketing procedure. However, if said products and/or molecules on which they are based are
patented, and requirements of declaration of source (in the present legal environment) or of the
existence of a certiﬁcate (in a future system) have been complied with, a multiplication of
procedures needs to be avoided. The requirement of proving the existence of a certiﬁcate could
then be waived at Swissmedic and a copy of the patent documentation would be sufﬁcient.

One important drawback may, however, be the need for Swissmedic to check in each case
where no certiﬁcate is presented, whether the absence of a certiﬁcate is justiﬁed in view of the CBD,
its international implementing regime and the applicable national laws.

Food and Agriculture
The adherence to the ABS provisions of the CBD can be reviewed within the scope of the existing
approval procedure for food, provided that such a procedure is contemplated, and in the approval
procedure for agricultural means of production. By way of analogy to article 49a of the patent law,
it may be foreseen that the application for a permit must contain information concerning the
source of the genetic resource, whereby the certiﬁcate of origin is to demonstrate that the ABS
provisions of the CBD were adhered to. The approval authority that is responsible for the product
(the FOPH, in the case of food, and the FOAG, in the case of agricultural means of production)
must take over the tasks of the checkpoint within the scope of the approval procedure.

Import Regulations
The import of genetic material into Switzerland can be made dependent on proof of a certiﬁcate of
origin, as this is already the case with plant protection certiﬁcates, in connection with the import of
plants, etc. In particular, the customs administration as well as, in the case of animals, the border

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

67

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

veterinarian service, come into consideration as checkpoints; individual federal ofﬁces, such as the
FVO, the FOAG and the FOPH may likewise take over tasks.

Import regulations, however, are only suitable in certain cases. Custom authorities operate on
a sample basis. Besides, it is not feasible to inspect all genetic resources at the border, due to the
characteristics of genetic resources: they are elements of natural products that can be imported as
such, but with the aim of making use of the genetic resources they contain. In addition, import
regulations are of limited value where movements of physical samples is not required because
analysis of the samples may have been done in the country of origin, and only the resulting
information is exported (over, e.g., the internet).10 Import regulations are likewise unsuitable for
the use of traditional knowledge.

For the reasons set out above, the import procedure only comes into consideration as a means
to review compliance with the ABS provisions to a limited extent. A possibility might exist by
deﬁning certain product categories that are to be inspected upon import.

Other Fields
If genetic resources have been necessary for the development of a new plant variety, it could also be
envisaged that the ofﬁce for the protection of varieties, which is competent for the delivery of
protection titles, might examine the existence of a certiﬁcate of source or of origin. Such a
certiﬁcate could be included in the documentation and indications which are requested in order to
obtain the protection of a new plant variety. It could also be applicable in the case of seeds, for
which the FOAG is competent.

As regards ex situ collections, it has been mentioned that provisions relating to biological
diversity may be found in several pieces of legislation, including on forestry, on the release of
organisms in the environment, on the protection of species, on the protection of plant varieties and
on plant multiplication material. The competent ofﬁces in those cases might act as checkpoints.
It also has to be mentioned that ex situ collections, being very often related to scientiﬁc

institutions such as universities, would also be subject to legislation dealing with research.

FOEN as Focal Point
FOEN is the Swiss focal point for ABS. As such, it is responsible for providing information and
national regulations relating to ABS issues. The question of its role arises if an international
certiﬁcation regime is established. Although each authorization procedure has its own particula-
rities and may differ according to the type of procedure involved (right of protection, production,
marketing or importation), collaboration between different ofﬁces within one procedure is
common administrative practice. Such is the case, for example, in the procedures relating to
dissemination of genetically altered organisms, non-native invertebrate animals or pathogenic
organisms or for the use of genetically altered organisms or pathogenic organisms in conﬁned
areas.

It could accordingly be envisaged, in particular in the above-mentioned cases, centralizing the
examination of certiﬁcates from provider countries within FOEN. Such a procedure might
facilitate procedures for applicants, who could directly refer to the focal point for the examination
of the certiﬁcate.

It is also suggested that FOEN, as the Swiss focal point, could be the authority issuing
certiﬁcates in case Switzerland is the providing country. FOEN would also continue being the
appropriate authority for the coordination with foreign authorities (in particular focal points) not
only for negotiations, as is already the case nowadays, but also if coordination is necessary, for

68

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

instance where doubts appear as to authenticity of a certiﬁcate, and more generally, as a point of
exchange of information in the CHM.

Finally, FOEN would also have an important role in building and raising awareness in issues
relating to ABS, thus increasing voluntary application of ABS principles arising in particular from
the CBD and the Bonn Guidelines.

Remedies
Article 27 CBD foresees a dispute settlement procedure between State Parties through negotiation,
mediation and arbitration. However, no procedure is foreseen for a situation in which interests of
users of genetic resources are at stake, such as individuals, research institutions or companies. As a
result, and in the absence of an international agreement providing for the competence of the courts
of a given country and specifying the applicable legislation, remedies are subject to the sovereignty
of each State Party to the CBD.

If no international certiﬁcate is introduced, the need for remedies may be felt in a less stringent
way than in case a certiﬁcate is introduced. In the ﬁrst situation, possibilities of appeal need to be
available in a user country such as Switzerland when a right of protection, commercialization or
circulation is denied to an applicant on the ground of absence of declaration of source.

If an international certiﬁcate is introduced, there may be a number of situations in which an
applicant in a user country such as Switzerland, although he has undertaken all efforts to obtain
the certiﬁcate, cannot provide it. Such situations may include the following:
 The provider country unjustiﬁably refuses to issue a certiﬁcate.
 The administrative procedure for the grant of a certiﬁcate or the judicial procedure (e.g. appeal
 The provider country violates the CBD rules on ABS, such as minimal access standards.
 The certiﬁcate contains false information which is not due to the applicant.

against the administrative decision relating to a certiﬁcate) is unjustiﬁably long.

Generally, in all these cases, the principle of state sovereignty and of territoriality of laws
implies that the applicant would have to take legal action in the providing country. However, in
order to avoid blocking the legitimate use of genetic resources, it is argued that the right of
protection, circulation or commercialization ought not to be refused to the applicant on the
grounds of absence of the certiﬁcate mentioned above, when the existence of these grounds can be
proven by the applicant. The international regime would though have to deﬁne the following
issues:
 Reasonable duration of administrative and judicial procedures for the grant—or refusal—of
 Cases in which a State Party to the CBD may refuse to issue a certiﬁcate.
 Cases in which no certiﬁcate has to be presented.
 Respect of human rights.
 Possibly a deﬁnition of public policy.

certiﬁcates.

The same principles should apply if an applicant fails to present a certiﬁcate, arguing that it
had been refused to him on the basis of reasons contrary to Swiss public policy (e.g. human rights,
violation of the principle of good faith). However, applicants may invoke public policy only
exceptionally; the refusal of a certiﬁcate in the provider country must be in obvious contradiction
with Swiss legal rules.

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

69

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Cases of violation of the international regime could be brought by the Parties (i.e. Switzerland
or the provider country) to the dispute settlement procedure foreseen by article 27 CBD. As an
alternative, the Swiss legislator could provide that, in such situations, no certiﬁcate has to be
presented. However, the applicant would have to present the reasons for which he was unable to
obtain a certiﬁcate in the providing country.

Possible Sanctions

If the user fails to provide the necessary information concerning the source of the genetic resources
or if he provides incorrect, incomplete or misleading information, the question arises as to possible
sanctions. Within the scope of the approval procedure for pharmaceuticals, agricultural means of
production, etc., it can be contemplated that the approval application will be rejected if the
applicant does not provide any explanation as to the source of the genetic resource. If the applicant
provides incorrect information, declaring for instance that no genetic resources were being used, a
revocation of the approval that has been granted would come into consideration, in addition to
criminal law sanctions (ﬁne, monetary penalties).

If a breach of the ABS provisions of the CBD is ascertained within the scope of an import
procedure, the imported goods can be seized, conﬁscated and, as the case may be, destroyed.
Corresponding measures are provided, for example, under the Ordinance for the Protection of
Species (article 33 et seq.).

Conclusion

A number of ABS user measures could be foreseen in Switzerland and be implemented by different
federal ofﬁces acting as checkpoints. Basically, two options would be available, depending on the
existence or not of an international regime which would provide a certiﬁcation system.

If no international certiﬁcation system were to be developed, a requirement of a declaration of
source of the genetic resources used or introduced into Switzerland could be provided, inspired by the
newly implemented requirement in the Swiss patent law. Such a system would have to take place in the
framework of published registration procedures, such as for new plant varieties, as well as of published
production and marketing authorizations, such as for pharmaceutical products, food and agriculture.
Based on the users’ declaration of source in Switzerland, the respect of ABS requirements would be
controlled and ensured by the country providing the genetic resources, after publication of the patent
application or of the grant of protection or authorization, as the case may be, and based on a screening
by the providing country of Switzerland’s decisions. Decisions relating to protection, productions or
marketing authorizations would be refused in Switzerland only if the source has not been declared or if
the declaration has included false information—sanctions could then be foreseen—but not in the event
that ABS measures in the providing country are not complied with, the examination of this question
taking place at a later stage, in the country providing the genetic resources.

Transmission of information relating to granted authorizations or protection through the
CHM could help provider countries have access to the necessary information. Furthermore, an
international understanding of the concept of misappropriation and misuse of genetic resources
would make it easier for user and provider countries to identify cases of infringement of ABS rules
and avoid unjustiﬁed allegations of biopiracy.

If a compulsory international certiﬁcation system is introduced, the examination of the existence
of a certiﬁcate from the provider country, attesting the respect of its national legislation relating to
ABS, would allow for an earlier examination of the respect of said provisions, in the provider
country, before the publication of a patent, or the grant of protection, production or marketing

70

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

right. It is therefore suggested that the existence of said certiﬁcates be controlled at the point of
registration of new protection rights such as patents, and plant varieties not covered by the
multilateral system of the International Treaty of the FAO; at the point at which production rights
are granted; at the point at which marketing rights are granted; and, to a more limited extent, at the
point where genetic resources as such (excluding genetic resources contained in end products) enter
Switzerland. Such a system would ensure that rights relating to the use of genetic resources are
conferred in Switzerland only once ABS principles incorporated in the provider country’s
legislation have been complied with. Decisions relating to protection, production or marketing
authorizations would be refused in Switzerland in the event that no valid certiﬁcate has been
provided, ensuring in that way that the providing country’s ABS legislation has been complied with
already before conferring any rights.

Efﬁciency of the process would be guaranteed by the fact that the certiﬁcate would be issued by
the provider country on the basis of its national legislation, based itself on an international regime;
the examination by the checkpoint in Switzerland would therefore be limited to the existence of the
certiﬁcate.

Checkpoints in Switzerland should be established at a level which would not only ensure the
respect of the CBD’s ABS provisions, but also allow stakeholders in provider countries to enforce
their contractual rights at the earliest possible stage. Such a system should not reduce the
stimulation in research and development, ought to be as little intrusive as possible as regards
trade activities and should avoid duplications.

Unless the international regime establishes a date of retroactive application of the system, in
case genetic resources are already in circulation before the introduction of the certiﬁcation system,
no certiﬁcate will be available or necessary.

Such measures would have to be accompanied by public awareness measures, which could
stimulate stakeholders in Switzerland (including universities, schools of applied science, industry
and distributors) to respect ABS principles on a voluntary basis. This would help ensure respect for
genetic resources which have already been introduced in Switzerland before the entry into force of
the new legal provisions.

Finally, the elaboration of user measures in Switzerland would require the active participation
of experts from the different ofﬁces and ministries involved in order to set up a coherent, efﬁcient
and not burdensome ABS system.

About the Authors

Dr Daniel Kraus, is Professor of innovation law at the University of Neuchaˆ tel, Faculty of Law,
Av. du 1er-Mars 26, 2000 Neuchaˆ tel, Switzerland; e-mail: daniel.kraus@unine.ch—He is also
attorney with Umbricht Attorneys at Law, Spitalgasse 9, P.O. Box 136, 3000 Bern 7, Switzerland;
e-mail: kraus@umbricht.ch

Dr Markus R ¨ussli, is attorney with Umbricht Attorneys at Law, Bahnhofstrasse 22, P.O. Box 2957,
8022 Zurich, Switzerland; e-mail: ruessli@umbricht.ch

Notes

The opinions and points of view expressed in the document are exclusively the authors. In no way do they
necessarily reﬂect the views of the contributors or of the Federal Ofﬁce for the Environment (FOEN).

1 Article 2 CBD deﬁnes the country providing genetic resources as the country supplying genetic resources
collected from in situ sources, including populations of both wild and domesticated species, or taken from

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

71

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

ex situ sources, which may or may not have originated in that country. User countries are not deﬁned in
the CBD.

2 In Switzerland, the focal point for ABS is the FOEN.
3 See hhttp://abs.scnat.ch/downloads/ABS_Brochure.pdfi [Accessed June 2010].
4 See hhttp://www.bgci.org/ﬁles/ABS/IPEN/conduct.pdfi [Accessed June 2010].
5 See hhttp://www.blw.admin.ch/themen/00012/00080/index.html?lang=fri [Accessed June 2010].
6 As to the import provisions for food, see above, ‘‘Current Legal Situation in Switzerland, ‘‘Import

Regulations’’’’.

7 As to these ordinances, see SR 817.022.101–817.022.111.
8 Article 24 of the federal Law on Forests of 4 October 1991 (SR 921.0) gives the competence to the
Confederation to legislate on the origin, the utilization, the trade and the maintenance of forestry plant
and seeds. Certiﬁcation of provenance for species of trees is issued by cantonal authorities according to
the federal Ordinance on Reproduction Material for Forestry (SR 921.552.1); and the federal Ordinance
on Forests (SR 921.01) contains provisions on the production, utilization, import and export of
reproduction material, which are subject to authorization.

9 See the SCNAT Good Practices and IPEN Code of Conduct.

10 Likewise skeptical UNU-IAS Report, User Measures, pp. 26 et seq.

References

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing: Good Practice for Academic Research on Genetic Resources, Swiss Academy of
Sciences, January 2006. Available at hhttp://abs.scnat.ch/downloads/ABS_Brochure.pdfi [Accessed June
2010].

Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Beneﬁts Arising out

of their Utilization, April 2002.

Constitution of the Swiss Confederation of 18 April 1999 (SR 101).
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) of 5 June 1992.
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (Washington

Convention; CITES) of 3 March 1973.

Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection of

biotechnological inventions.

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and

Agriculture of 3 November 2001.

International Plant Exchange Network (IPEN): An exchange system for botanic gardens for non-commercial
purposes according to the CBD, Botanic Gardens Conservation International (BGCI), November 2003.
Available at hhttp://www.bgci.org/ﬁles/ABS/IPEN/conduct.pdfi [Accessed June 2010].

Law on Agriculture of 29 April 1998 (SR 910.1).
Law on Food and Utility Articles (Food Act) of 9 October 1992 (SR 817.0).
Law on Forests of 4 October 1991 (SR 921.0).
Law on Genetic Engineering in the Non-Human Area of 21 March 2003 (SR 814.91).
Law on Medicines and Medical Devices (Law on Therapeutic Products; LTP) of 15 December 2000 (SR

812.21).

Law on Patents of 25 June 1954 (SR 232.14).
Law on the Protection of Plant Varieties of 20 March 1975 (SR 232.16).
Law on Research of 7 October 1983 (SR 420.1).
Law on Technical Barriers to Trade of 6 October 1995 (SR 946.51).

72

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Notiﬁcation of the Swiss Federal Council on the Modiﬁcations brought to the Patent Law, doc. 05.082 of 23

November 2005, federal Gazette No 1 of 10 January 2006, pp. 1–230.

Ordinance on Authorizations in the Field of Medicines of 17 October 2001 (SR 812.212.1).
Ordinance of Biocide Products of 18 May 2005 (SR 813.12).
Ordinance on Clinical Trials of Therapeutic Products (Therapeutic Products) of 17 October 2001 (SR

812.214.2).

Ordinance of the Federal Department of Economic Affairs (FDEA) on Inspections within the Scope of the
Convention for the Protection of Species (Protection of Species Inspection Ordinance) of 16 May 2007
(SR 453.1).

Ordinance of the Federal Department of Home Affairs (FDHA) on Cosmetics of 23 November 2005 (SR

817.023.31).

Ordinance of the Federal Department of Home Affairs (FDHA) on the Enforcement of the Food Legislation

of 23 November 2005 (SR 817.025.21).

Ordinance of the Federal Department of Home Affairs (FDHA) concerning allowed Food Additive of 22

June 2007 (SR 817.022.31).

Ordinance of the Federal Department of Home Affairs (FDHA) on Genetically Altered Food of 23

November 2005 (SR 817.022.51).

Ordinance on Foodstuffs and Utility Articles of 23 November 2005 (SR 817.02).
Ordinance on Forests of 30 November 1992 (SR 921.01).
Ordinance on the Handling of Organisms in conﬁned Areas of 25 August 1999 (SR 814.912).
Ordinance on the Handling of Organisms in the Environment (Release Ordinance) of 10 September 2008 (SR

814.911).

Ordinance on the Import, Transit and Export of Animals and Animal Products of 18 April 2007 (SR

916.443.10).

Ordinance on the Import and Transit of Animals from Third Party States in Air Trafﬁc of 18 April 2007 (SR

916.443.12).

Ordinance on the Import and Transit of Animal Products from Third Party States in Air Trafﬁc of 27 August

2008 (SR 916.443.13).

Ordinance on the Introduction into Commerce of Fertilizers (Fertilizer Ordinance) of 10 January 2001 (SR

916.171).

Ordinance on the Introduction into Commerce of Plant Protection Products (Plant Protection Products

Ordinance) of 18 May 2005 (SR 916.161).

Ordinance on the Production and Circulation of plant multiplication material of 7 December 1998 (SR

916.151).

Ordinance on the Production and the Introduction into Commerce of Animal Feed (Animal Feedstuffs

Ordinance) of 26 May 1999 (SR 916.307).

Ordinance on the Production and Introduction into Commerce of Vegetable Reproduction Material (Seeds

Ordinance) of 7 December 1998 (SR 916.151).

Ordinance on the Protection of Plants (Plant Protection Ordinance) of 28 February 2001 (SR 916.20).
Ordinance on the Protection of Plant Varieties of 25 June 2008 (SR 232.161).
Ordinance for the Protection of Species of 18 April 2007 of 29 November 1994 (SR 453).
Ordinance on the Recognition as a Registered Scientiﬁc Organization by means of the Convention on

International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora of 20 October 1980 (SR 453.3).

Ordinance on Reproduction Material for Forestry (SR 921.552.1).
Ordinance of the Swiss Agency for Therapeutic Products (Ordinance of the SATP) on the Requirements

relating to Marketing of Medicines of 9 November 2001 (SR 812.212.22).

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1

73

Daniel Kraus and Markus R ¨ussli

Access and Beneﬁt Sharing User Measures in Switzerland

Report of the First Part of the Ninth Meeting of the Ad hoc Open-ended Working Group on Access and
Beneﬁt Sharing (Cali 22–28 March 2010) Document UNEP/CBD/WG-ABS/9/3. Available at hhttp://
www.cbd.int/meetingsi [Accessed June 2010].

Report of the Meeting of the Group of Technical Experts on an Internationally Recognized Certiﬁcate of

Origin/Source/legal Provenance (Lima 22–25 January 2007) Document UNEP/CBD/WG-ABS/5/7.
Available at hhttp://www.cbd.int/meetingsi [Accessed June 2010].

Report of the Scoping Meeting on Capacity Building Approaches for Access to Genetic Resources and

Beneﬁt-Sharing (Montreal 2–4 December 2002) Document UNEP/CBD/ABS/EW-CB/1/INF/1.
Available at hhttp://www.cbd.int/meetingsi [Accessed June 2010].

United Nations University Institute of Advanced Studies (UNU-IAS) Report, ‘Beneﬁt Sharing in ABS:

Options and Elaborations’, 2009.

United Nations University Institute of Advanced Studies (UNU-IAS) Report, ‘User Measures: Options for
Developing Measures in User Countries to Implement the Access and Beneﬁt-Sharing Provisions of the
Convention on Biological Diversity’ (2nd edition), 2003.

74

r 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, no. 1


