International Journal of Heritage Studies

ISSN: 1352-7258 (Print) 1470-3610 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjhs20

Examining the memorialscape of occupation and
liberation: a case study from the Channel Islands

Gillian Carr

To cite this article: Gillian Carr (2012) Examining the memorialscape of occupation and liberation:
a case study from the Channel Islands, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 18:2, 174-193,
DOI: 10.1080/13527258.2011.606330
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2011.606330

Published online: 07 Oct 2011.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 381

Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjhs20

International Journal of Heritage Studies
Vol. 18, No. 2, March 2012, 174–193

Examining the memorialscape of occupation and liberation: a case
study from the Channel Islands

Gillian Carr*

St Catharine’s College, Cambridge, UK
(Received 29 May 2011; ﬁnal version received 12 July 2011)

This paper introduces the concept of the ‘memorialscape’ as a tool for studying
the inter-relationship of memorials within a single rural or urban environment or
landscape. Using a case study of the British Channel Islands, where the number
of memorials relating to the German occupation of 1940–1945 has increased
greatly since 1985 (the 40th anniversary of liberation), I examine the active role
these memorials have played in changing the occupation narrative of the islands.
This paper will also explore the importance of memorial marginality and central-
ity; memorial inter-visibility; the difference between the memorialscape of the
capital towns of Guernsey and Jersey and the groups they commemorate; and
the narrative that the resulting memorialscape produces.

Keywords: memorials; memorialscape; occupation; liberation; Channel Islands;
counter-memory

Introducing the memorialscape
Memorial landscapes are found all over the world. The multiple aspects of memori-
als in any one landscape inter-relate in a variety of different ways which has
allowed them to be read as a narrative. Although such cumulative readings have
been recognised before, this paper formalises and explores the complex interplay of
memorials within the concept of the ‘memorialscape’, presented here for the ﬁrst
time as a coherent methodology for reading those narratives.

The idea that memorials within a single landscape can combine to produce (an)
overwhelming impression(s) or reading(s) has been identiﬁed in many case studies
around the world. In Australia, for example, Nugent (2005) has examined how the
memorial landscape of Botany Bay has imprinted a certain reading of history, which
marginalises Aboriginals, upon the landscape. Hamilton (2003), on the other hand,
has discussed how alternative pasts can function as counter-memory to challenge
traditional narratives in Australia, as shown by the work of Bulbeck (1988), who
has considered the counter-hegemonic views of Australian history represented in
memorials to Aboriginals, workers and women. Ashton and Hamilton (2008) have
also taken up this theme, examining how memorial landscapes are being deliber-
ately changed by the use of memorials to groups such as abused children and the
Stolen Generation.

*Email: gcc20@hermes.cam.ac.uk

ISSN 1352-7258 print/ISSN 1470-3610 online
Ó 2012 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2011.606330
http://www.tandfonline.com

International Journal of Heritage Studies

175

Similar themes of race, identity and power have been identiﬁed in other coun-
tries. In America, Norkunas (1993) has examined how the ruling class of Monterey
in California has excluded any but white history from the tourist landscape, impos-
ing its socio-cultural values upon the past. In his consideration of the dominance of
memorials to whites and their deeds, especially in the abolitionist movement, and
the absence or marginalisation of memorials to non-whites and their histories, espe-
cially their invisibility in their own emancipation, Siblon (2009, p. 159) has inter-
preted the selective amnesia in London’s sites of memory both as ‘a gloriﬁcation of
imperial values and as monuments of resistance to these same values’.

While not all memorial spaces are ﬁlled with ethnic or social tension, they must
still often jostle for space and recognition. Others are contested, competitive,
marginalised, replaced, blown up or just criticised. It seems that those that are war-
related often inﬂame public opinion most strongly. Nowhere is this perhaps more
apparent than in conﬂict and post-conﬂict locations (see e.g. Viejo-Rose 2011).

Elsewhere, war memorial spaces can be read in ways other than those which
were originally intended, especially with the passage of time. Muzaini and Yeoh
(2007) have looked at the Kranji war memorial and cemetery in Singapore, a site
maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission and originally intended
to present a British, elite, imperial identity, which excluded local people. Since the
early 1990s, the site has been re-narrated by some Singaporeans to focus upon the
presence of locals within the cemetery and the signiﬁcance of the site in and as a
landscape of Singaporean nationhood. Sometimes, however, the long passage of
time is not necessary to change the reading of a site. Gough (2009, pp. 104, 109)
has argued that the National Memorial Arboretum in Staffordshire is more of a
‘Foucauldian heterotopia’ of poly-vocal, local and private memorials rather than
any kind of grand national shrine, as was the original intention.

The era of commemoration in the Channel Islands
The need for a formalised concept of the memorialscape, as I outline it here, has
gradually come into focus because of the growing density of memorials and monu-
ments in towns and cities. In the case study under examination, the number of com-
memorative stones, statues and plaques erected to the memory of the German
occupation of the Channel Islands has risen rapidly since 1985, the 40th anniversary
of liberation.

A similar ‘memory boom’ on the continent has been highlighted (Rousso 2007,
Winter 2000), although this occurred in the 1970s and 1980s, and came with an
accompanying increase in recognition of the victims of the Second World War.
Prime among the causes of this, Winter argued, was that the post-war narrative
work of the Resistance had, by then, done its job and the transition to post-war
political stability was complete. There was thus room for other victims to come for-
ward with their witness.

For Hamilton (2003, p. 83), our principal mode for understanding the past is
now shaped through commemoration and memorialisation because large numbers of
people now take it upon themselves to conduct this work themselves, rather than
leaving it to professionals. This has contributed to what Nora (1998) describes as
an ‘era of commemoration’. For Nora (1998), this has been prompted by a nostalgic
desire to cling to what was passing away in the face of rapid change, and has mani-
fested itself through an increasing commemorative frequency at lieux de mémoire or

176

G. Carr

‘sites of memory’, which have been the focus of his wider project. While I discuss
such sites here, I also try to avoid the pitfalls and criticism that Nora has received
for his nostalgia, reverence of tone, lack of systematic analysis and exclusion of
counter-memories (e.g. Legg 2005a, Tai 2001, Winter 1995, p. 10).

Both the growth in the acknowledgement of victims of Nazism and, to some
extent, the effects of nostalgia can be evoked as explanations for the rapid increase
in commemoration of the occupation years in the Channel Islands over the last 25
years. The occupation is a time that is beginning to pass out of living memory. Like
the London Blitz, terrible though it was, the occupation is treated as a positive
memory locally. It dominates war memory and historical re-enactment and, for
those born after the event, the occupation is commonly perceived as the most excit-
ing thing ever to happen in the Islands. The dominant war narrative in the Channel
Islands is inextricably bound up in that of Britain rather than its continental cousins,
despite the similarity of its wartime experiences with the latter. For most of the last
65 years, the dominant sites of memory in the Islands have proclaimed a pride in
endurance and survival until victory, and this has often predominated over the nar-
ratives of victims of Nazism (Carr forthcoming). Despite this, these marginalised
voices have been coming to the fore over the last 15 years.

Other reasons for the increase in commemoration are likely to be attributable to
a desire of the occupation generation, who are dwindling in number, to have their
memories cast in stone before it is too late, although sometimes this job has been
completed by their children. Thus, the erection of many memorials has occurred in
recent years, on the cusp of the passing of this generation.

The German occupation has been presented through the selective commemora-
tive lens of liberation, with successive monuments to this event being unveiled on
liberation day every 5 years between 1985 and 2005. This was decided upon by the
Islands’ authorities, who were interested in promulgating an ofﬁcial view which
supported their continuity and evoked a loyalty in the population towards the status
quo (Smith’s ‘authorised heritage discourse’, 2006, pp. 29–43). This aspect of com-
memorative heritage was unchanging, unchallenged and intended to be passively
accepted. Commemoratively speaking, the dissenting heritage discourse was repre-
sented by the victims of Nazism, islanders who began to gain a voice and memori-
als of their own in the mid-1990s, with Jersey leading the way.

Methodology
Memorialscapes are made up of both memorials and monuments, although these
terms are often used interchangeably in the popular sphere. While memorials tend to
be associated with loss and sadness, monuments are associated with triumph, glory
and positive memory. For Rowlands (1999, p. 131), memorials can become monu-
ments as a ‘result of the successful completion of the mourning process’, and where
the ‘temporal gap between mourning and memorial is the outcome of successful
closure.’ The transition of monuments back to memorials is also possible (p. 144).

This has resonance with the situation in the Channel Islands, as will be explored
below, where there was a 40-year period since the end of the war before sites of
memory were marked in this way. Commemorative stones or sculpture associated
with the memory of the act of liberation are invariably called ‘monuments’, while
those erected to victims of Nazism are often ‘memorials’, and carry positive and
negative memory associations respectively.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

177

Sites and events of suffering, death and celebration dating from the German
occupation are not just written into the memorials and monuments of the Channel
there is a wider ‘memory landscape’ of bunkers, museums, streets and
Islands;
houses (see Carr in prep.). The ‘memory landscape’ is a concept translated from the
German Erinnerungslandschaft, used by Koshar (2000, p. 9) to understand the way
that Germans have memorialised or forgotten the last 150 years. For him this term
‘connotes the mnemonic qualities not only of architectural landmarks and monu-
ments . . . but also of street names, public squares, [and] historic sites such as World
War II bunkers or former concentration camps.’

I have developed the concept of the ‘memorialscape’ in response to ﬁeldwork in
the British Channel Islands (which sit in the Bay of St Malo off northwest France),
which has revealed the complex and, indeed, complexity, of memorials in St Peter
Port and St Helier. These have been installed, inaugurated or erected within a rela-
tively small area, with all
the associated implications of competitive memorial
space. They have also mostly been put up within a single generation to commemo-
rate events of the German occupation of 1940–1945.

These memorials respect older monuments unconnected with the occupation and
commemorate events or acts that sometimes deliberately chose certain locations for
their enactment because of their vicinity to an older memorial and earlier events.
These occupation monuments, memorials and plaques also have an inﬂuence upon
how the space within the towns in which they are situated is encountered, experi-
enced and negotiated by the inhabitants. They are mnemonic devices, which act to
constantly remind the casual passer-by or visitor about the importance of the occu-
pation to the existing population. As such, they are powerful and mostly high-pro-
ﬁle objects which play an active role in society;
their combined weight has
frequently acted to spur groups or individuals into erecting yet more memorials,
each dedicated to their own particular group that suffered during the occupation.

These memorials can also be seen as examples of what Billig (1995, p. 6) terms
‘banal nationalism’, that is, reminders or ‘ideological habits’ of nationhood which
enable the nation to be reproduced. Such habits are not ‘removed from everyday life’
but are part of the endemic condition of established nations. In seeing these memori-
als daily, Islanders are reminded of their place in European and world history; how-
ever, these reminders are so familiar that they hardly register as reminders at all.

While most towns and cities contain a number of memorials and monuments, it
is less usual to ﬁnd a large number that record aspects of the same ‘event’ (if a mil-
itary occupation of ﬁve years can be described in this way), and are thus inter-
related. Given the potential unusualness of this phenomenon (and usefulness for
other locations of conﬂict, occupation and liberation), it is appropriate to ﬁnd a new
term to describe it. This phenomenon may be found not only in other formerly
occupied countries, but also in places that have experienced an event or traumatic
period that has had a major impact on the memory and psyche of a population for
several generations.

The concept of the memorialscape refers to a collection of memorials within a
landscape that are inter-related in some way, whether in terms of space, time or
event. The study of the memorialscape considers and incorporates 10 key features:

(a) the relative centrality or marginality of the memorial within the townscape/
landscape; (b) the geographical/spatial/historical relationship to other memorials of
the same ‘event’ or group; (c) the geographical/spatial/historical relationship to
older monuments which commemorate other events;
the inter-visibility of

(d)

178

G. Carr

memorials to each other; (e) the shape, size, form and material chosen for the
memorial; (f), the date at which the memorial was erected; (g) the condition of the
memorial (as a sign of care or abandonment); (h) the use or visitation of the memo-
rial; (i) the instigator of the memorial (which has implications of power and
agency); and (j) the biography of the memorial. These 10 features can together be
read to provide overarching narratives (and counter-narratives) of the memorial-
scape.

Each of the memorials discussed in this paper is an important Channel Island–
speciﬁc site of memory within the townscape of St Helier or St Peter Port. They
represent a desire to remember, at various levels, the events of, and the groups who
suffered during, the occupation, an event that is still such an important part of
Channel Island identity and heritage today. The sheer density of the memorialscape
conspires to ensure that
they commemorate
exclude the possibility of forgetting.

the memories of the event(s) that

The methodology for this paper has involved a detailed historical study of
every occupation-related commemorative memorial or monument
in the capital
towns of Guernsey and Jersey (Figures 1a and 1b) using the 10 features of the
memorialscape as a guide. Fieldwork has involved observation and recording of
memorials, and attendance at annual ceremonies that
feature memorials (and
unveiling ceremonies of new memorials) that have taken place during ﬁeldwork
since the start of 2007. Informal
interviews and discussions with Islanders at
various levels of authority within the Island governments and of interest groups
during the same period have also helped to inform interpretations presented
here.

This paper, then, will explore the memorialscape of St Peter Port and St Helier.
It focuses on case studies of memorials erected to various victim groups, such as
Jews and political prisoners, as well as those put up to commemorate the act of lib-
eration, in order to explore not just the politics behind their erection, but also the
meaning of the continued memory of these groups within the local population
today.

Historical background to the occupation and its victim groups
In the late spring and early summer of 1940, German forces moved swiftly through
Western Europe. Occupying troops entered France, Belgium, Holland and Luxem-
burg on 10 May, and the Channel Islands at the end of June and beginning of July.
25,000 islanders evacuated just before the Germans arrived, although nearly 70,000
stayed behind (Cruikshank 2004, p. 56). The evacuees, who, for the most part,
arrived in Weymouth as homeless refugees, were the ﬁrst victims of the German
occupation.

On 28 June 1940, the harbours of St Peter Port and St Helier were bombed and
machine-gunned from the air by German forces as a precursor to the occupation.
The 44 people who died because of those raids formed the next victim group.

Within the next few months, the Jews of the Channel Islands became the next
group to be targeted by the German authorities. From October 1940 until January
1943, 10 consecutive anti-Jewish orders were enacted in the islands (Cohen 2000).
While around 20 Jews and their families suffered under these orders (Fraser 2000),
in April 1942, three non-British Jewish women were deported from Guernsey to
Auschwitz.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

179

Figure 1a. Map of memorials in St Helier (Ian Taylor).

In September 1942 and February 1943, around 2,200 islanders were rounded up
and sent to civilian internment camps in Germany, where 45 people died from
disease or other natural causes. While the ﬁrst wave of deportations targeted the
English-born (i.e. non-indigenous) male islanders aged between 16 and 70 and their
dependents, the second wave included Jews, Freemasons, WWI ofﬁcers, and ‘unde-
sirables’ (i.e. political prisoners). Both the deportees and political prisoners are other
important victim groups in the Channel Islands.

In 1942, several thousand slave workers arrived in the islands as part of the
Organisation Todt (OT), a paramilitary auxiliary of the German army, to build the

180

G. Carr

Figure 1b. Map of memorials in St Peter Port (Ian Taylor).

concrete fortiﬁcations which still line the coasts of the Channel Islands today. The
slave workers, mostly Eastern European peoples from Poland, the Ukraine, Belarus
and Russia, were treated abysmally by the Germans, given little to eat, and literally
worked to death. They joined other OT labourers who had arrived in the islands the
previous October. These people comprised forced and ‘voluntary’ workers from
other parts of occupied Europe. OT worker numbers in the Channel Islands eventu-
ally numbered 16,000 at their peak (Cruikshank 2004, p. 217 n. 59). These foreign
labourers are another group long recognised in the islands as victims of Nazism.

In June 1944, after the Allied invasion of France, the Channel Islands were
entirely cut off. While food, fuel and raw materials had been scarce before, now
the islanders had to exist only on what was still available in the islands. The
occupied and their occupiers began to starve. Although some islanders had
attempted to escape by boat before the D-Day landings, the number increased in
the second half of 1944, and the names of all escapees are recorded in the
islands today. The D-Day landings also netted a number of British and American
POWs for the Germans, some of whom were brought to Jersey and interned in
camps.

When food, fuel and medical supplies in the islands had almost ceased, a
Red Cross ship,
the SS Vega, arrived from Lisbon in December 1944, and
monthly thereafter, and saved the population from starvation. This ship has
become the most famous in the islands’ history and has acquired almost mythical

International Journal of Heritage Studies

181

status, despite having been scrapped long ago. It, along with the people of the
islands who survived until liberation on 9 May 1945, is collectively remembered
annually.

There are clearly many groups of people in the Channel Islands today who are
commemoratively recognised as victims of Nazism, although this has not always
been the case. In the past, the islands, their museums and the one-time lack of
memorials have received criticism for having remembered and commemorated the
perpetrators at the expense of the victims (e.g. Bunting 1995, pp. 335–356, Lennon
and Foley 2007, p. 76, Vitaliev 1998). However, as I argue elsewhere, the com-
bined domination of the swastika and the German experience of occupation in the
islands’ museums has more to do with factors such as the proud display of battle
scars; honouring of parents’ and grandparents’ experiences of occupation; vicarious
re-experiencing of occupation; and the working-through of psychological traumas of
occupation (Carr 2010a, 2010b).

It is also worth recording here that some of the victims of Nazism might be con-
sidered problematic, in so far as the wartime Island governments could have done
more to protect or help them. The embarrassment that this has subsequently caused
and still has the potential to cause is likely to be a factor in explaining the absence
or late erection of a memorial or monument to various groups.

Remembering the occupation and building the memorialscape: data and inter-
pretation
While the criticism of the mid-to-late 1990s from Bunting, Vitaliev, and Lennon
and Foley drew attention to the lack of memorials to the victims of Nazism in
the Channel Islands,
this was neither strictly accurate nor fair, as can be seen
from Tables 1 and 2 below. The 1990s represented a decade of growth of the
memorialscape of St Helier and St Peter Port, sparked by the 50th anniversary of
liberation in 1995 and, before that, the 40th in 1985, although a few had been
erected earlier.

Broadly speaking, occupation-related memorial and monument erection in the

capitals of the Channel Islands can be divided into three active phases:

bombing-raid dead).

 Phase 1a, 1945–1950: Remembrance of the dead heroes (military war dead,
 Phase 1b, 1950–1985: A time to forget. Virtually no new memorials erected;
 Phase 2, 1985–2005: Focus on living heroes, the occupation generation who
 Phase 3, 1995–present: Additional focus on victims of Nazism (the problem-

experienced liberation (the unproblematic majority of the population).

wreaths laid on existing memorials annually.

atic minority).

Before the 40th anniversary of liberation, the celebration of Liberation Day, a
public holiday in the Channel Islands, had petered out into just another bank holi-
day, with seemingly little relevance to memory surrounding the war years. This
important anniversary became the spur for its reinvigoration in both Guernsey and
Jersey, but as the even larger anniversary loomed in 1995, it acted to remind most
victims of Nazism that they still had not yet been recognised.

182

G. Carr

Table 1. Occupation-related monuments and memorials in St Peter Port and St Helier,
1945–2010, listed by theme.

Group or event

St Helier

St Peter Port

Bombing raid dead
Foreign forced and slave workers

Jews

Political prisoners

Individual resisters
Deportees

Escapees
Evacuees
Liberation

Vega/Red Cross

POWs

Total extant today

y

1990
1960àà
1971
1999
2000
1986
1995
1996
2005
1970à
1985*
y
1986
2003**
1995
2006
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
1985
1994
2005 x2

22

1949
1999*
2001**
2001

–
–

2003à
2010

–
2010
1985
1995
2005

–

–

9

Legend
yMemorials that did not name the victim group involved, but implied their inclusion.
*Memorials that were taken down and amended after public pressure.
**New memorials that replaced those taken down.
àMemorials presented by visiting Germans dignitaries.
ààMemorial presented by visiting Russians.

While a detailed biography of the occupation-related monuments and memorial
plaques of St Helier and St Peter Port are outside the scope of a paper of this length
(although see Carr in prep.), Tables 1 and 2 give an indication of the large number
that have been erected in each town. As a combined group, together, they constitute
the memorialscape of the islands. As I have outlined above, there are various ana-
lytical categories to help us make sense of the memorialscape in both analysing the
importance of individual victim groups and in understanding the narrative of the
memorialscape as a whole. With reference to the maps in Figures 1a and 1b, and
Tables 1 and 2, I will compare and contrast the two competing narratives of memo-
rial-erection phases 2 and 3, exploring how they distanced themselves from phase
1. The theme of endurance and survival, expressed through a celebration of libera-
tion and inﬂuenced by the British war narrative, will thus be compared with the
memorialscape of the victims of Nazism. The ﬁrst occupies the centre stage but
has, in recent years, conceded marginal ground to the counter-memories that com-
pete with ofﬁcial occupation narratives.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

183

Table 2. Occupation monuments and memorials erected in St Helier and St Peter Port,
1945–2010, listed by decade.

Number of memorials
1945–1954
1955–1964
1965–1974
1975–1984
1985–1994
1995–2004
2005–2014
Total

St Helier

St Peter Port

0
1
2
0
7
7
5
22

1
0
0
0
1
4
3
9

The position of the military dead of World Wars I and II occupied prime com-
memorative space in St Peter Port and St Helier until 1995, although the ﬁrst chal-
lenge to their physical dominance came in 1985. At this date, some of the ﬁrst new
memorials for two generations were unveiled, instigated by the local government,
and signalling new sites of memory in the topography of the capitals of the Channel
Islands. Rather than being tied to memories of military valour and ﬁghting overseas,
the ﬁrst tendrils of the memorialscape moved the commemorative attention to places
in the islands where signiﬁcant events of the liberation took place. In Guernsey, this
was the harbour area of St Peter Port, where the liberating army came ashore. In
Jersey, this was the Royal Square in St Helier, where Bailiff Alexander Coutanche
announced the liberation of the island.

Figure 2. The centrality of the 1995 Liberation Monument, St Helier, on Liberation Day
(Ó Jersey Evening Post).

184

G. Carr

Ten years later, by 1995,

the central focus of liberation both in the capital
towns’ geography and in the psyche of the islanders was well and truly estab-
lished. Liberation Square in St Helier, very close the harbour, and the area where
liberating soldiers came ashore, was inaugurated with a commemorative stone in
1990 and completed in 1995, providing the focus for all subsequent Liberation
Day celebrations. In both St Peter Port and St Helier, monumental sculptures cele-
brating the 50th anniversary of liberation, again instigated by local government,
were unveiled by Prince Charles, and both dominate the space of their erection.
St Helier’s is in Liberation Square, and St Peter Port’s is by the harbour. Ten
years later, in 2005, the Queen unveiled another commemorative stone in St Peter
Port and another sculpture in St Helier. The link between the islands’ loyalty to
the Crown, especially in wartime, and the pervading inﬂuence of the British war
narrative of endurance and survival until victory (or liberation) has thus been
repeatedly emphasised by the local authorities to form a ‘master commemorative
narrative’ (Zerubavel 1995, p. 6).1

Since 1995, and before that date in Jersey, victims of Nazism have begun to ﬁnd
a voice in the Channel Islands. The 50-year delay can be explained in many ways.
The 50th anniversary was a catalyst for soul-searching about the events of the occu-
pation2 as those who had experienced it ﬁrst-hand teetered on the edge of living
memory. This in itself was problematic, because at the very time when victims of
Nazism were being given a voice, many had already died, leaving only a few to
agitate for memorials. We must also remember that a memorial culture really only
began in the Channel Islands in 1985, so it may not have occurred to some to ask
for recognition in the form of a memorial before this date. An additional factor at
the 50-year anniversary was the role of Jersey Bailiff, Sir Philip Bailhache, who
proved to be a strong supporter of victims of Nazism; many memorials were erected
during his period of ofﬁce.

By 1995, older narratives were weakening or were secure enough to allow
minority voices to be heard. This prominent anniversary, with the accompanying
large expenditure of public money on monumental sculpture, made islanders from
victim groups wonder why their money was not being spent on projects that repre-
sented their memories and experiences. As these groups reached the end of their
lives, it became increasingly important to them to have their memories engraved in
stone. Controversial publications of this time (e.g. Bunting 1995) challenged the
secure position of established occupation memory and the absence of victims’
voices, and these demanded a response.

In any event, a third phase in memorialisation began, but the ground ‘sancti-
ﬁed’ (as denoted by Foote 2003, p. 8) in 1985 and again in 1995 with a large
monument which overshadowed and dominated the space around it, effectively
blocked the ability of other memorials and alternative discourses to compete on
an equal footing.

While nearly all memorials in the Channel Islands are placed at very speciﬁc
locations for historical reasons, such sites of memory can often be a moveable feast
and are often politically as well as geographically inﬂuenced. This resulting ﬂexibil-
ity of location has been exploited. In St Peter Port, for example, the harbour, now
dominated by the 1995 Liberation Monument, has become the key site of memory
for the narrative of liberation. However, the harbours were also the place where
Jews, political prisoners and deportees were sent from both Guernsey and Jersey;
they were also the place where forced and slave labourers arrived. They are thus

International Journal of Heritage Studies

185

legitimate potential sites of memory for these groups. However, while in Guernsey
space has now been given over to memorials to these groups in the harbour area,
these are marginalised and made to look insigniﬁcant by the Liberation Monument
(Figure 3). The Jewish memorial plaque (instigated by the Jewish community in
Jersey) is small and scuffed (but restored in 2010), and is not part of the main
view-shed of any visitor approaching the memorial area in the harbour. Instead, the
1995 and 2005 memorials to liberation and the 2010 memorial to the evacuees greet
the eye ﬁrst, an unproblematic triumvirate which accord with the dominant war nar-
rative. The memorial plaque to forced workers, ﬁrst erected in 1999 and instigated
by a former forced worker, is not only a long way down the harbour wall and away
from the main thoroughfare and other memorials, but also hidden in a recess in the
wall. It and the large Liberation Monument are scarcely inter-visible, with all the
associated implications for the master commemorative narrative. The memorial to
deportees is, however, closer to the Liberation Monument. Unlike the Jews and the
forced workers, the deportees were islanders who had already endured two years of
occupation. They thus occupy a middle ground between the victims of Nazism and
the ‘ordinary islanders who endured occupation’.

In Jersey, Liberation Square is the focus of commemoration. As this is by the
harbour, memorials to the various victim groups could have been placed within this
general area, as they have in Guernsey. However, in this island, commemorative
plaques to Jews were erected in the island’s synagogue and Jewish graveyard and
on the slave worker memorial, which itself was established on the site of the burial
place of this group (the ‘Strangers Cemetery’) at Westmount, and was instigated by
former forced workers and the Jersey Communist Party. All of these memorials are
on the edge of town, and the synagogue is in another parish.

Figure 3. Memorials by the Liberation Monument, Guernsey (Ó Guernsey Museums and
Galleries).

186

G. Carr

The commemorative stone to deportees was ﬁrst put up in 1985. It is small and
insigniﬁcant, and is around the corner, ‘hidden’ from the Liberation Monument. A
second, dedicated to all
those deported from the island (by implication, Jews,
deportees and political prisoners, although none of these groups are named), was
erected in Howard Davis Park, also on the edge of St Helier, and just outside the
Allied War Cemetery, thus emphasising the marginalisation of these groups from
the dominant war narrative.

In Guernsey, there is no memorial to political prisoners. Instead, or because of
this, the prime site of memory for some of these people has been the graveyard,
the ﬁrst
where their status has been engraved on their headstones. In Jersey,
memorial to political prisoners was put up in 1995 at the instigation of a former
prisoner, Joe Mière, after much struggle with the authorities. It was important to
Mière to place it on the site of Jersey’s occupation prison, now demolished. In
his private correspondence, he reveals that when the local government at
last
acceded to his request to erect a memorial, they initially wanted to place it in a
less-visible location.3 Despite Mière’s complaints,
the local authorities also
decided to give the ofﬁcial unveiling of the memorial
little advance publicity,
because of the ‘perceived sensitivities’ surrounding the belief that ‘many of the
offences [committed] would have been punishable under normal civilian law and
indeed could have been described as criminal’.4 The wording on the plaque, like
all others erected in a public place, had to go through ofﬁcial channels of
approval, and although it is highly likely that Mière would have submitted a text,
this would have been sanitised. The available documents suggest
this
occurred at the highest levels.5 Although Mière got his wish, the memorial is on
the edge of the commercial district of St Helier and is now neglected. It plays no
part in annual commemorative ceremonies, and the lettering is peeling and par-
tially obscured by ivy, making it difﬁcult to read.

that

In 1996, a memorial sculpture was erected in St Helier in the form of a small,
reused lighthouse, and dedicated to the ‘Jersey 22’ who did not return from conti-
nental concentration camps and penal prisons. This is positioned in the harbour,
close to the Maritime Museum that holds the Liberation Tapestry, which features
some of the narratives of the Jersey 22. The location of this inﬂuenced the posi-
tioning of the Lighthouse Memorial (as it became known).6 It is inter-visible with
the Liberation Monument although, ironically, the busy main road, La Route de
la Liberation, separates and demarcates the two areas. The Lighthouse Memorial
is of a comparable size to the Liberation Monument, is the focus for the annual
Holocaust Memorial Day ceremony, and is extremely well attended by islanders
and dignitaries alike bearing wreaths (Figure 4). In Guernsey, a small handful of
islanders and no dignitaries attend the small open-air service on this day. The tiny
Jewish memorial is the focus of the ceremony, and a single posy was placed by
the plaque in 2009 and 2010.

While in Guernsey, the sites of memory of victims of Nazism are not visible
or large enough to challenge the supremacy of the dominant Liberation Monu-
ment, and were erected after it. In Jersey, the erection of the Liberation Monu-
ment made a clear statement about what and where the focus of attention should
be. The sites of memory of victims of Nazism have, in some cases, become foci
or ‘sites of counter-memory’ (Legg 2005b). On Liberation Day, the main celebra-
tions in St Helier take place in the morning in Royal Square and then Liberation
Square. In the afternoon, a small but signiﬁcant ceremony to the slave and forced

International Journal of Heritage Studies

187

Figure 4. The Lighthouse Memorial, Holocaust Memorial Day 2009, Jersey (photo and
copyright: the author).

workers takes place at
the Westmount crematorium, with the memorial as the
focus (Figure 5). In this way, counter-narratives to liberation take place unchal-
lenged. In fact, because this memorial has seen the addition of plaques and
wreaths commemorating other nationalities over the last few years, this memorial
has also been a way for some minority groups in the historically monocultural
Channel Islands to express themselves commemoratively.

188

G. Carr

Figure 5. The Westmount Slave Worker Memorial, Jersey (photo and copyright: the
author).

Location, marginality and intentionality
Historian Paul Sanders has argued that, after the occupation, the war memory of the
into the ‘straightjacket of UK war
Channel Islands was locked, by the British,
memory – the Churchillian paradigm . . . [of] sublime heroism and unwavering
steadfastness’ (2005, p. 256). As this paradigm stated that the British were a nation
of victors, not victims, there was no room to discuss the darker aspects of occupa-
tion. Thus, after memorials were ﬁrst erected to the military war dead, commemora-
tive and memorial attention was given to the ordinary civilian survivors of the
occupation. Had attention been given to the civilian dead, traumatised or injured,
this would have involved acknowledging victims of Nazism, and such acknowl-
edgement would have run counter to the Churchillian paradigm.

That the plight of victims of Nazism has only begun to be addressed in the Islands
since the mid-1990s is reﬂected in the appearance of memorials to these groups from
this date and the difﬁculties and controversies they have faced in their positioning
and their wording. The British war memory has had great longevity and still domi-
nates in the Channel Islands, even if this is now due to the inﬂuence of tradition more
than anything else. It is very clear that there has been a direct link between identity
and war memory, with its focus on endurance and survival until liberation or victory,
and the kinds of memorials (and their size, shape and location) that have been erected
at certain times. Islanders are still learning to embrace an uncomfortable past.

While I have suggested that memorials to victims of Nazism have been deliber-
ately placed in marginal settings, is this a fair assessment? Employees of both Guern-
sey and Jersey museums, which are both major players in the heritage of the islands,

International Journal of Heritage Studies

189

conﬁrm that there is ‘no set system’7 or policy guidelines which determine the precise
situation of memorials in St Peter Port and St Helier. Rather, the process is often
‘very messy’, and decisions are made ‘ad hoc’, ‘over a pint’, ‘at short notice’, ‘on the
phone’, ‘in un-minuted meetings’ and in ‘informal emails’ and are the result of
‘horse-trading’ by all interest groups and stakeholders, including representatives from
heritage, environment and marketing departments, the harbour ofﬁce, the parish con-
cerned, the media, petitioners, politicians and sometimes even the Bailiff.8

When deciding the exact positioning, this is variously dictated by ‘political deci-
sion’9 and ‘aesthetics and practicalities’, such as the avoidance of benches and ‘not
crowding the other plaques.’10 Other factors include association with other relevant
heritage sites11 and the need to ‘maintain a respectful distance’ from other memori-
als12 so as to avoid an ‘unintended political or religious link’13 or, conversely, the
expression of a desire to place memorials within the same area because of ‘appro-
priateness’, due to a perceived link between them.14

Although local stakeholders have suggested to the author that the concept of the
memorialscape ‘reads too much’ into the positioning of memorials,15 at the same
time they also acknowledge locally signiﬁcant concepts of ‘appropriateness’ and
‘suitability’ of situation and the perceived association between memorials caused by
proximity. I propose that it is concepts such as these that allow practitioners to
observe the nuances in memorialscape interpretation.

While the decision-making process is presented as the outcome of horse-trading
and ad-hoc meetings, there is other evidence to suggest that things are less casual
among those who agitate for memorials. Stakeholders who make it their business to
champion the erection of a memorial, perhaps because of personal or family associ-
ation, are much more particular when it comes to location. Three examples from
Guernsey will sufﬁce to illustrate this point.

In the mid-1990s, the Fortress Guernsey Steering Group16 and former Spanish
Republican slave worker, Juan Alarcon, helped to plan a memorial to foreign work-
ers.17 While the Steering Group suggested that the memorial should go next to the
harbour bombing plaque, which had been erected in 1949, the Board of Administra-
tion (BoA)18 was not in favour of such a positioning as it was not an ‘appropriate’
site.19 The BoA also suggested that the proposed memorial was going to be too
large to be appropriate to the site. As the size was in the end not an issue, it is
more likely that the real concern was that the proposed memorial would be bigger
than the harbour bombing plaque, thus eclipsing it and its narrative.

Ultimately, the two memorials did share the harbour wall but the foreign worker
memorial was placed in a recess, shielding it from the other. While this position might
suggest marginalisation, it has also been read locally as being ‘sheltered’, making
remembrance ceremonies ‘more structured and visible’, making it ‘the most elegant
and complete’ of all memorial arrangements in the area, not to mention the ﬁrst memo-
rial that passengers from cruise liners encounter when they arrive in the Island.20

When the Jewish memorial plaque was suggested in March 1999, there was
debate at the Heritage Committee about whether it should be placed in the German
Occupation Museum or at the harbour with the other memorials.21 The Jersey Jew-
ish Congregation was later brought into the discussion and they supported a memo-
rial at the harbour. However, the Heritage Committee received a letter from Mr Van
Grieken, a Dutch former worker who had been instrumental in getting the names
on the foreign worker memorial changed because they included German overseers
(Carrier 2000, p. 4; Locke 2001, p. 3). Van Grieken expressed the opinion that the

190

G. Carr

Jewish memorial should not be placed near the memorial to foreign workers.22
While his reasons are unknown, it seems likely that Van Grieken recognised the
associated meanings and narratives that might be read from both memorials should
their proximity be too close. The association of adjacent memorials and their narra-
tives was also suggested to the author as a reason for the Jewish and forced-worker
memorials to be placed closer together in future so that they would be separate
from the recent memorials erected to both evacuees and deportees in Guernsey in
2010.23 Similar acknowledgement is apparent in the views of a member of the
Guernsey Deportees Association, who told the author that he was happy with the
location of the deportees’ memorial. ‘It was’, he said, ‘quite suitable as it is near
the memorial to the Jewish ladies . . . down the far end [by the forced worker
memorial] would have been very unsuitable.’24

While these three examples will have to sufﬁce within the conﬁnes of this
is to show that even when policies and guidelines are
short paper, my intent
the inﬂuence of the
haphazard or missing, and even when stakeholders reject
principles of the memorialscape, local perceptions and interpretations of ‘appro-
priateness’, and an awareness of shared narratives for memorials in close prox-
imity to each other, will still conspire to shape the resulting memorialscape. The
ﬂexible nature of sites of memory, already discussed, is also an important factor
in allowing the movement of memorials in line with local perceptions of
suitability.

Conclusion: a changing memorialscape
Memorialscapes are highly complex entanglements in space and time of competing
and overlapping narrative layers. By exploring its 10 key features, I hope to have
set out a methodology for successfully penetrating and interpreting these sites of
memory and counter-memory in the landscape, allowing the resulting narratives to
be read.

The Channel Islands have seen three overlapping phases of memorialisation,
each of which has built up the memorialscape and gradually changed the commem-
orative occupation narrative. Despite dominating commemorative and non-com-
memorative space and inscribing its narrative on different parts of the islands’
capitals, the master commemorative narrative of endurance until victory or libera-
tion (as expressed through both 50th-anniversary liberation monuments) has been
increasingly challenged since 1995.

The success of this challenge, and the admission of the memory of victims of Naz-
ism into the master narrative, has varied according to island. In St Peter Port, their
memory has been allowed into the memorial space of the dominant narrative, but it
has not been allowed to challenge it in any serious way. Instead, other memorials are
small, marginalised or hidden away, most especially those relating to non-islander
groups such as forced and slave labourers or Jews. In St Helier, the main sites of
memory of victims of Nazism and of liberation are spatially separate, through histori-
cal accident or design. Despite this, the memorial to the ‘Jersey 22’, who were island-
ers and not foreigners and which, like the Liberation Monument, is now also a centre
of large annual commemorations, has now effectively changed the reading of the
town’s memorialscape. Since 1995, Jersey has indeed been open about its wartime
record and is more ready than its sister island to include victims of Nazism within its
dominant narrative and to embrace them as fellow heroes of the occupation.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

191

While I have chosen my case studies from the memorialscapes of the Channel
Islands, this is a concept that is likely to be especially useful to other conﬂict loca-
tions involving civilians, especially (but not limited to) those that have experienced
occupation and liberation; continental Europe is full of such sites.

While I have focused on monuments and memorials here, any interpretation of
a memorialscape should ideally also examine the wider memory landscape and
other physical and non-physical sites of memory and counter-memory in order to
gain a fuller understanding of how public and private memory works within any
society. We have a tendency to prioritise memorials because of their public visibility
and accessibility. It is all too easy to pass judgement upon a place, as others have
done for the Channel Islands, for the presence or absence of certain memorials and
monuments, but memorialscapes, memorial
landscapes and intangible modes of
commemoration that leave little or no trace, can be complex in their interpretation.
They are linked to other memorialscapes in other places with other narratives
through events such as evacuation and deportation. Untangling a memorialscape is
not easy: many threads of history link plaques, memorial stones and monuments to
the spaces that they inhabit; spaces that have seen other events at other times, and
events that have dominated earlier narratives and have given rise to earlier memori-
als and earlier memorialscapes.

Acknowledgements
The ﬁeldwork for this article was made possible by a grant from the McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research, Cambridge. The author
to the two anonymous
reviewers for their feedback and would like to thank people in the Channel Islands who
helped her with this research. Thanks also to Guernsey Museums and Galleries and the
Jersey Evening Post for permission to reproduce their images.

is grateful

Notes on contributor
Gillian Carr is a university lecturer at the University of Cambridge’s Institute of Continuing
Education and also a fellow at St Catharine’s College. She has been conducting ﬁeldwork in
the Channel Islands since 2007, where she has three research projects. She is currently writing
a book on occupation-related heritage.

Notes
1. This table does not include the towns’ war memorials, as these are not occupation-
related. It also excludes monuments and memorials outside St Peter Port and St Helier,
and those which are not directly related to those present in the Islands during the occu-
pation. Thus, military personnel washed up or shot down in the Islands are excluded.
Memorials which were taken down and later replaced by another to the same victim
group have been counted as one in the total, and the date of their ﬁrst erection is con-
sidered here to be the most important.

2. Email to author from former Bailiff of Jersey, 8 November 2010.
3. My thanks to Joe’s son, Mick Mière, for allowing me access to his late father’s paper-

work.

4. Jersey Archives reference C/C/L/C9/1.
5. Jersey Archives reference C/C/L/C9/1.
6. Email to author from employee of Jersey Museum, 6 June 2011.
7. Email to author from employee of Jersey Museum, 6 June 2011.
8. Email to author from employee of Guernsey Museum, 3 June 2011, and to author from

employee of Jersey Museum, 7 June 2011.

9. Email to author from employee of Guernsey harbour authority, 21 June 2011.
10. Email to author from employee of Guernsey Museum, 3 June 2011.

192

G. Carr

11. Email to author from employee of Jersey Museum, 8 June 2011.
12. Email to author from employee of Guernsey harbour authority, 21 June 2011.
13. Email to author from employee of Guernsey harbour authority, 22 June 2011.
14. Email to author from retired employee of Guernsey harbour authority, 23 June 2011.
15. Email to author from employee of Guernsey Museum, 6 June 2011, and to author from

retired employee of Guernsey harbour authority, 23 June 2011.

16. Heritage Committee minutes (Guernsey), 26 January 1996. (Fortress Guernsey are a
sub-committee of the Channel Islands Occupation Society who concern themselves with
German fortiﬁcations.)

17. Guernsey Evening Press, 19 February 1997.
18. The BoA in Guernsey, now disbanded, had responsibility for the general administration

relating to sites such as the harbour, the airport, the cliffs and common land.

19. Heritage Committee minutes (Guernsey), 8 October 1996, and letter from Committee to

President of the Tourist Board, 10 October 1996.

20. Email from employee of Guernsey harbour authority, to author, 22 June 2011.
21. Heritage Committee minutes (Guernsey), 6 April 1999 and 4 May 1999.
22. Undated letter from former forced worker to Heritage Committee (Guernsey).
23.

Informal conversation between author and employee for Culture and Leisure, Guernsey,
1 April 2010.

24. Phone call between member of the Guernsey Deportees Association, and the author, 5

June 2011.

References
Ashton, P. and Hamilton, P., 2008. Places of the heart: memorials, public history and the

state in Australia since 1960. Public History Review, 15, 1–29.

Billig, M., 1995. Banal nationalism. London: Sage.
Bulbeck, C., 1988. The stone laurel: race, gender and class in Australian memorials.

Institute for Cultural Policy Studies, Division of Humanities, Grifﬁth University.

Bunting, M., 1995. The model occupation. London: BCA.
Carr, G., 2010a. What shall we do with the German bunkers? The ethics of bunker

restoration in the Channel Islands. Public Archaeology, 9 (2), 65–86.

Carr, G., 2010b. The slowly healing scars of occupation. Journal of War and Culture

Carr, G., forthcoming. Occupation heritage, commemoration and memory in Guernsey and

Studies, 3 (2), 249–265.

Jersey. History and Memory, 24 (1).

Carr, G., in prep. The legacy of occupation: archaeology and heritage in the Channel Islands.
Carrier, D., 2000. Take the German bosses off the workers’ memorial. Guernsey Evening

Cohen, F., 2000. The Jews in the Channel Islands during the German occupation 1940–

Press, 27 December 2000, 4.

1945. Jersey: Jersey Heritage Trust.

Cruikshank, C., 2004 [1975]. The German occupation of

the Channel Islands. Stroud:

Sutton [London: Oxford University Press].

Foote, K.E., 2003. Shadowed ground: America’s landscapes of violence and tragedy. Austin:

University of Texas Press.

Fraser, D., 2000. The Jews of

Brighton: Sussex Academic Press.

the Channel Islands and the Rule of Law, 1940–1945.

Gough, P., 2009. ‘Garden of Gratitude’: the National Memorial Arboretum and strategic
remembering. In: P. Ashton and H. Keane, eds. People and their pasts: public history
today. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 95–112.

Hamilton, P., 2003. Memorial studies and cultural history. In: H. Teo and R. White, eds.

Cultural history in Australia. Sydney: University of New South Wales Press, 81–97.

Koshar, R., 2000. From monuments to traces: artifacts of German memory, 1870–1990. Los

Angeles: University of California Press.

Legg, S., 2005a. Contesting and surviving memory: space, nation, and nostalgia in Les

Lieux de Mémoire. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 23, 481–504.

Legg, S., 2005b. Sites of counter-memory: the refusal to forget and the nationalist struggle

in colonial Delhi. Historical Geography, 33, 180–201.

International Journal of Heritage Studies

193

Lennon, J. and Foley, M., 2007. Dark tourism: the attraction of death and disaster.

Locke, J., 2001. ‘Nazi names’ will be erased from memorial. Guernsey Evening Press, 16

Londons: Thomson.

January 2001, 3.

Muzaini, H. and Yeoh, B., 2007. Memory-making ‘from below’: rescaling remembrance at
the Kranji War Memorial and Cemetery, Singapore. Environment and Planning A, 39,
1288–1305.

Nora, P., 1998. The era of commemoration. In: P. Nora, ed. Realms of memory: the con-
the French Past. Volume III: Symbols. New York: Columbia University

struction of
Press, 609–637.

Norkunas, M.K., 1993. The politics of public memory: tourism, history and ethnicity in

Monterey, California. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Nugent, M., 2005. Botany Bay: where histories meet. Crows Nest, NSW: Allen and Unwin.
Rousso, H., 2007. History of memory, policies of the past: what for? In: K.H. Jarausch and
T. Lindberger, eds. Conﬂicted memories: Europeanizing contemporary histories. New
York: Berghahn Books, 29–31.

Rowlands, M., 1999. Remembering to forget: sublimation as sacriﬁce in war memorials. In:

A. Forty and S. Küchler, eds. The art of forgetting. Oxford: Berg, 129–145.

Sanders, P., 2005. The British Channel Islands under German Occupation 1940–1945. Jersey:

Jersey Heritage Trust and Société Jersiaise.

Siblon, J., 2009. ‘Monument mania’? Public space and the Black and Asian presence in the
London landscape. In: P. Ashton and H. Keane, eds. People and their pasts: public his-
tory today. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 146–162.
Smith, L., 2006. The uses of heritage. London: Routledge.
Tai, H.H., 2001. Remembered realms: Pierre Nora and French national memory. The

American Historical Review, 106 (3), 906–922.

Viejo-Rose, D., 2011. Destruction and reconstruction of heritage: impacts on memory and
identity. In: H. Anheier and Y.R. Isar, eds. Heritage, memory and identity. London: Sage,
53–69.

Vitaliev, V., 1998. Showing off the sites of shame. The Guardian, 10 December, p. 4.
Winter, J., 1995. Sites of memory, sites of mourning: the Great War in European cultural

history. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Winter, J., 2000. The generation of memory: reﬂections on the ‘memory boom’ in contem-

porary historical studies. Bulletin of the German Historical Institute, 27, 69–92.

Zerubavel, Y., 1995. Recovered roots. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.


