International Journal of Cultural Property (2013) 20:257–288. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2013 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S094073911300012X

A Presence of the Past: The Legal
Protection of Singapore’s
Archaeological Heritage
Jack Tsen-Ta Lee*

Abstract: Singapore is not well known for its archaeological heritage. In fact,
chance finds in the early twentieth century and systematic archaeological
excavations since the 1980s conducted at sites around the Singapore River have
unearthed artifacts shedding light on the island’s early history. In addition, the
value of archaeology for a deeper knowledge of Singapore’s British colonial
past is increasingly being recognized. Nonetheless, Singapore law provides only
a rudimentary framework to facilitate archaeological investigations and protect
cultural artifacts. This article considers how the National Heritage Board Act
(Cap. 196A, 1994 Rev. Ed.), the Planning Act (Cap. 232, 1998 Rev. Ed.), and
the recent Preservation of Monuments Board Act 2009 (No. 16 of 2009, now
Cap. 239, 2011 Rev. Ed.) may be strengthened in this regard.

Most people are surprised to hear that there are archaeologists working in Sin-
gapore. In fact, systematic archaeological projects have been taking place in this
diminutive Southeast Asian island-state since the 1980s, and have uncovered ar-
tifacts dating back to the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Because of the dearth
of written records, it is such finds that have enabled scholars to fill in the blanks
in Singapore’s precolonial history and conclusively situate Singapore as a port at
the confluence of trade routes between China and the Malay world. Increasingly,
archaeological digs have been conceptualized and executed to shed light on
Singapore’s more recent history—its World War II experience and period of rapid
industrialization.

*School of Law, Singapore Management University, 60 Stamford Road, #04-11, Singapore 178900.
Email: jacklee@smu.edu.sg.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers of this article whose com-
ments contributed significantly to its improvement.

257

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

258

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

These projects have largely taken place in the absence of a comprehensive legal
regime. Although provisions exist in the National Heritage Board Act1 allowing
the Board to enter upon land to carry out an archaeological investigation, an
examination of them soon reveals their shortcomings. The occupier of the land
may deny permission for anything more intrusive than a surface survey, and can
block any investigation relating to a dwelling-house or its surrounding land. There
is no obligation on people intending to carry out works on land to conduct
heritage impact assessments and submit them to the authorities when applying
for development permission. In addition, it is submitted that the law relating to
ownership of relics is unclear and may in fact deem such items to be private
property, which may then be sold abroad and thus lost to the nation. This article
seeks to examine these issues and propose legal reforms. By way of background,
Part I describes key archaeological projects that have been conducted in Singa-
pore and the effect they have had on our knowledge of Singapore’s history. Part
II traces the development of the legal regime facilitating archaeology, looking at
the original Preservation of Monuments Act 1970,2 the National Heritage Board
Act 1994,3 the recent Preservation of Monuments Act 2009,4 and the Planning
Act.5 I then examine the deficiencies of the current law and propose reforms in
Part III.

I. SETTING THE SCENE: ARCHAEOLOGY IN SINGAPORE

The venerable Oxford English Dictionary defines archaeology as “[t]he scientific
study of the remains and monuments of the prehistoric period,”6 but in modern
usage, the word is applied not only to research into the distant past but the con-
temporary era as well. For example, those engaged in industrial archaeology seek
to document and understand physical remains of the Industrial Age such as fac-
tories and the equipment and machinery associated with them; mills and mines;
canals, railways, roads, and other systems of communication.7 About 50 km north-
west of Birmingham, England, where I engaged in doctoral studies, is Ironbridge
Gorge. Named after the world’s first cast-iron bridge constructed at Coalbrookdale
in 1779 over the River Severn, Ironbridge is billed as the “birthplace of industry,”8
as it was in Coalbrookdale that Abraham Darby discovered how iron could be
smelted from its ore using coke, thus making it cheaper to extract the metal. This
contributed significantly to the Industrial Revolution. With the assistance of ar-
chaeological and conservation work,9 in 1967 the Ironbridge Gorge Museums Trust
was established to preserve and interpret remaining traces of the Industrial Rev-
olution in the area. Ironbridge Gorge was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage
Site in 1986,10 and currently encompasses Blists Hill Victorian Town and a num-
ber of museums, including the Broseley Pipeworks, Coalbrookdale Museum of
Iron, Coalport China Museum, and Jackfield Tile Museum, which showcase prod-
ucts manufactured in the region in past decades.11

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

259

I highlight this to make the point that archaeology, while traditionally associated
with unearthing material heritage from beyond recorded history, is equally impor-
tant for the understanding and preservation of the recent past. But let us first turn
the clock back several centuries. In the Singapore context, the practice of archaeol-
ogy may be traced to a 1949 excavation on Pulau Ubin, a small island northeast of
the main landmass of Singapore, which was prompted by the casual finding of Ne-
olithic stone tools; however, nothing else was turned up.12 It would be another 35
years before systematic excavations were carried out again. In 1984, a project at Fort
Canning Hill proved more successful, leading to the recovery of about 30,000 arti-
facts from the fourteenth century, including Chinese porcelain sherds; glass beads,
fragments of glass vessels and molten lumps of glass; and 16 partial or whole coins,
the oldest dating to the Tang Dynasty of China (618–906 ce).13 Excavations were held
at the Parliament House and Empress Place complexes, both by the Singapore River,
in 1994 and 1998 respectively. These yielded sherds of blue-and-white ceramic ware
dating from the fifteenth century imported from Vietnam; Sawankhalok celadons,
underglazed ceramic boxes and lids from Thailand dating from the late fourteenth
century; and Chinese stoneware jars thought to have been used to store mercury.14
Large amounts of copper, bronze, and other metal artifacts were also found, includ-
ing bells, fishhooks, projectile points, and wires. The presence of metal slag and over
a hundred Chinese coins, mostly from the Northern Song (960–1126 ce) period, at
the Parliament House site suggested metal production and some form of market ac-
tivity there.15 A particularly intriguing find was a small, flat lead figure of a man wear-
ing a sarong on what appears to be a winged horse. It is the first ancient lead statue
to have been found in Southeast Asia.16

Other archaeological digs in the 1990s and 2000s have continued to turn up sim-
ilar ancient remains and—significantly—the detritus of colonial-era (nineteenth-
and twentieth-century) Singapore as well. Between November 1998 and March 1999,
a surface survey of Pulau Saigon, an islet in the middle of the Singapore River that
has since been reclaimed, resulted in the finding of items made of ceramics, glass,
bone, metal, wood, stone, plastic, and rubber, as well as faunal and floral remains.17
The redevelopment of Istana Kampong Glam, the former palace of the Sultan of Sin-
gapore, into the Malay Heritage Centre enabled excavation works to be carried out
between 2000 and 2003. The oldest dated artifacts were coins issued by the Vereenigde
Oost-Indische Compagnie (VOC, or Dutch East Indies Company), which operated
between 1602 and 1798, and other Chinese coins minted in the middle of the Qing
Dynasty (1644–1912). There were also nineteenth- and twentieth-century locally
made Malay earthenware, European transfer print ceramic and porcelain wares, local
and imported Chinese-style porcelain and stoneware, Japanese ceramics, local and
imported glassware, metal tools and slag, and the remains of land and sea animals
and shellfish.18 Among the items discovered during an excavation in the grounds of
Saint Andrew’s Cathedral held between September 2003 and September 2004 were
intact stoneware vessels and porcelain celadon jarlets, which are believed to be the
first undisturbed fourteenth-century artifacts yielded by a controlled archaeologi-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

260

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

cal excavation in Singapore.19 Much colonial-period and modern material was also
found, originating from what appeared to be World War II middens (domestic re-
fuse pits) and an air raid trench. This included a large number of empty tin cans and
can opener keys, and intact crockery from the Adelphi Hotel, which was across the
road from the Cathedral at the time. It is speculated that the crockery may have been
intentionally buried to prevent them from falling into the hands of the invading Jap-
anese army or looters.20

The aim of the 2004–2005 archaeological investigation of Fort Tanjong Katong
was to discover more about a late-nineteenth-century defensive structure built by
the British but later partially demolished and filled in between 1906 and 1928 to cre-
ate a public park. The project uncovered portions of the fort, apparently the first in
the former British Malaya to be excavated, that had not been reduced to rubble. Ar-
tifacts found in the site were mostly modern fill material deposited during land rec-
lamation for the nearby East Coast Parkway, but it has been noted that even items
such as bottles and bricks might be studied for information about consumer pat-
terns and trends of the 1960s and 1970s, and construction methods as an element
of postindependence21 industrialization of Singapore.22 In 2005, representatives of
the Foot Tet Soo Khek Temple (also known as the Wang Hai Da Bo Gong Temple)
at Palmer Road just off Shenton Way approached archaeologists with a proposal to
carry out excavations in the building’s compound and the vicinity. The temple is the
oldest Hakka institution in Singapore, and is said to predate the arrival of Sir
Stamford Raffles on the island in 1819.23 Notable finds included British-
manufactured glass bottles and ceramics, particularly a large number of teacups bear-
ing a Navy, Army, Air Force Institute (NAAFI) mark; and plastic tubes containing
antimalarial medication and packets of chemical decontaminant paste bearing Jap-
anese texts, presumably issued to Japanese troops present during their 1942–1945
occupation of Singapore. These finds raised interesting questions about possible as-
sociations between the temple and the military during the World War II period.24
January 2009 saw the launch of the Adam Park Project, a collaboration led by
Jon Cooper of the Centre for Battlefield Archaeology of the Faculty of Arts, Uni-
versity of Glasgow, and involving the National University of Singapore and the
Singapore Heritage Society. The project, which is ongoing, involves excavations
at Adam Park, the scene of one of the most intense periods of fighting during
the World War II Battle of Singapore. Traces of foxholes and trenches have been
found, as well as badges and buttons from military uniforms, military equip-
ment, bullets and cartridges, and coins.25 In response to news that railway lines
formerly owned by Keretapi Tanah Melayu (KTM, or Malayan Railways) run-
ning through Singapore might be removed to permit land redevelopment after
the relocation of Malaysian customs, immigration and quarantine facilities away
from the Tanjong Pagar Railway Station in the city, Cooper called for a study
into preserving the section of the line at the west end of Bukit Timah Road
including the defunct Bukit Timah Railway Station and a girder bridge as it is
“perhaps the most iconic and best preserved section of the World War II battle-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

261

field in the area.” In his view, before any redevelopment decisions are made, the
“full historical significance” of the area—where “World War II heritage may well
be remarkably preserved just a few centimetres under the surface”—should be
understood and “Singapore’s industrial and military heritage . . . duly protected
and shared with the people.” This location was the furthest point of advance of
the only British counterattack during the Battle of Singapore, during which three
battalions (Tomforce) under Lieutenant-Colonel Lionel Thomas advanced up Bukit
Timah Road and dug around Bukit Timah Village on 11 February 1942 to try
and halt the Japanese Army advancing on the city.26 On 27 May 2011, the Bukit
Timah Railway Station was gazetted by the Urban Redevelopment Authority as a
conserved building.27 A short portion of the rail tracks adjacent to the station
and two steel bridges at Dunearn Road and Upper Bukit Timah Road were also
retained. Pursuant to an agreement between the Governments of Malaysia and
Singapore, the remaining tracks and associated structures of the KTM railway
were dismantled and returned to Malaysia by 31 December 2011.28

The archaeological projects conducted to date have enabled theories to be devel-
oped about the precolonial history of Singapore. Fort Canning Hill was likely the
site of the ritual center and palace precinct of Temasek,29 a port-settlement existing
on Singapore island between the late thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.30 The large
amount of glass found here suggests glass-making by artisans in the palace pre-
cinct.31 The main settlement area of Temasek was the north bank of the Singapore
River, and concentrations of archaeological finds have enabled postulations as to the
use of different locations. Thus, as indicated earlier, iron and copper remains at the
Parliament House site suggest metalworking; while relatively large quantities of
sherds of storage jars at the Empress Place and Old Parliament House sites, both near
the river edge, may indicate the unloading of trade goods from ships and their stor-
age. Higher concentrations of coins at Parliament House, the Singapore Cricket Club
on the Padang, and Saint Andrew’s Cathedral suggest that trading activity took place
further inland from the river.32 Finally, the significant quantities of foreign coins and
sherds from imported ceramics evidence mercantile links between Temasek and
communities in present-day China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam.33
The authors of Singapore: A 700-Year History (2009) note:

Today, archaeological data forms one of the most important sources of
information for the reconstruction of the port-city of Temasek. While
the nature of the archaeological artifacts, which are composed entirely
of small finds, has made it impossible to deduce any physical features of
the port-city, the data does provide us with possible glimpses of such
features as the location of specific economic activities and the links be-
tween the social hierarchy and the location of habitation, as well as ex-
ternal characteristics as Temasek’s economic links with foreign markets,
and the extent of the Temasek polity and its sphere of influence in the
immediate region.34

In addition, the projects at Fort Tanjong Katong, Saint Andrew’s Cathedral, Palmer
Road, and Adam Park indicate that archaeology may shed light on Singapore’s co-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

262

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

lonial and World War II period. Local archaeologist Lim Chen Sian has called at-
tention to the fact that archaeology is valuable for a deeper knowledge of Singapore’s
colonial military history, immigrant communities, and industrialization and its so-
cial and environmental impact.35

II. THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR FACILITATING ARCHAEOLOGY

The Preservation of Monuments Act 1970

A legal provision facilitating archaeological investigations appeared for the first
time in the Preservation of Monuments Act 1970 (PMA 1970),36 which came into
force on 29 January 1971. As the long title of the Act indicates, the purpose of the
statute was to create a body called the Preservation of Monuments Board (PMB)
“to preserve for the benefit of the nation, monuments of historic, traditional, ar-
chaeological, architectural or artistic interest.”37 The provision in question was
section 7 of the PMA 1970, which was adapted from section 9 of the Ancient Mon-
uments Act 1931 (UK):38

Power to enter upon lands.

7.—(1) Any person specifically authorised in writing by the Board after
giving not less than 14 days’ notice in writing to the occupier of
his intention to do so and on production of his authority, if so
required by or on behalf of the occupier, may enter for the pur-
poses of investigation at all reasonable times upon any land
which the Board may have reason to believe contains any mon-
ument and may make excavations on the land for the purpose
of examination:

Provided that —

(a) no person shall under any power conferred by this subsection enter
any dwelling-house or any building, park, garden, pleasure ground
or other land used for the amenity or convenience of a dwelling-
house except with the consent of an occupier; and

(b) no excavation shall be made under the power conferred by this sub-
section except with the consent of every person whose consent to
the making of the excavation would, apart from this subsection, be
required.

(2) If any person willfully obstructs or hinders any person in the exer-
cise of the powers conferred by subsection (1) he shall be guilty of
an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
$200.

The power was essentially to enable the Preservation of Monuments Board to
conduct an investigation for the purpose of determining if land contained what it
believed to be a monument, and if the monument was worth preserving as a na-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

263

tional monument. The scope of such investigations was limited by the definition
of monument in section 2(1) of the Act, which included:

(a) any building, structure, erection or other work whether above or
below the surface of the land, any memorial, place of interment
or excavation and any part or remains of a monument; and

(b) any land comprising or adjacent to a monument which in the
opinion of the Board is reasonably required for the purpose of
maintaining the monument or the amenities thereof or for pro-
viding or facilitating access thereto or for the exercise of proper
control or management with respect thereto,

which is considered by the Board to be worthy of preservation by reason
of its historic, traditional, archaeological, architectural or artistic interest.39

It is immediately obvious that the definition is erroneously arranged. Certainly it
could not have been Parliament’s intention to require the land referred to in sub-
section (b) to be worthy of preservation due to its historic or other interest. None-
theless, this mistake remained uncorrected until the Act was repealed and replaced
by the Preservation of Monuments Act 2009 (PMA 2009).40 More pertinently for
our purposes, because the power to enter upon land and conduct an investigation
was contingent on the PMB having reason to believe that the land contained a
monument, the power could only be exercised if there was any “building, struc-
ture, erection or other work whether above or below the surface of the land, any
memorial, place of interment or excavation” that was “worthy of preservation by
reason of its historic, traditional, archaeological, architectural or artistic interest.”
If there was no preexisting work of some kind on the land, it seems that the power
could not be exercised. In this connection, it is to be noted that the word excava-
tion obviously referred to a preexisting excavation (e.g., a storage cavern hollowed
out of rock, an underground burial chamber, or a buried cache of valuables) and
not an excavation resulting from the exercise of the power. Thus, section 7 did not
authorize archaeological excavations of sites lacking evidence of structures having
been put up, such as a beach where goods were landed or a public thoroughfare.
The power to conduct archaeological digs pursuant to section 7 was also re-
stricted in two other ways. First, if the PMB’s representatives wished to conduct
the dig at a dwelling-house or land used for the amenity or convenience of a
dwelling-house, the occupier had an absolute right to refuse.41 Second, although
the chapeau of section 7(1) appeared to empower excavations to be carried out,
the effect of subsection (b) was that the representatives had to obtain “the con-
sent of every person whose consent to the making of the excavation would, apart
from this subsection, be required.”42 The relevant individual would be the per-
son entitled to sue for trespass to the land,43 that is, the lawful occupier of the
land.44 In addition, section 7 said nothing about the disposition of movable items
that might be found in the course of an excavation, in which case common law
rules relating to the law of finders and, possibly, treasure trove, applied. This is
explored below.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

264

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

The power conferred on the PMB by section 7 only needed to be invoked if the
occupier or owner of the land refused to permit an investigation of the land. How-
ever, the consequence of any willful obstruction or hindrance of the PMB’s rep-
resentatives was a paltry fine of S$200 (about US$160 as at 26 February 2013).45 It
is not known whether the PMB ever exercised its power under section 7.

The National Heritage Board Act 1993

In 1993, Parliament enacted the National Heritage Board Act46 (NHBA) to con-
solidate the National Museum, the National Archives, and the Oral History De-
partment, and certain heritage departments of the Ministry of Information and
the Arts47 together under a single statutory board.48 During the Second Reading
of the bill which led to the Act, the Minister for Information and the Arts in-
formed Parliament that the National Heritage Board (NHB) would be “empow-
ered to conduct archaeological investigations of land under development which
the Board believes may contain artifacts of historical or heritage value. In exercis-
ing this power, the Board will be careful to minimise inconvenience to the owners
of the affected premises.”49

The provision of the Act that eventually conferred the power on the NHB was
section 46. Entitled “Power to enter upon lands to conduct archaeological inves-
tigation,” the provision is significant because it is currently in force. As amended
by the PMA 2009,50 it states:

46.—(1) Subject to this section, any person specifically authorised in
writing by the Board, after giving not less than 24 hours’ no-
tice in writing to the occupier of the land of his intention to
enter the land and on production of his authority, if so re-
quired by or on behalf of the occupier, may enter for the pur-
poses of archaeological investigation or examination at all
reasonable times upon any land which the Board has reason
to believe contains any ancient monument and may make ex-
cavations in the land.

(2) No person shall, under any power conferred by subsection (1),
enter any dwelling-house or any building, park, garden, plea-
sure ground or other land used for the amenity or convenience
of a dwelling-house except with the consent of the occupier.

(3) No excavation shall be made under the power conferred by
subsection (1) except with the consent of every person whose
consent to the making of the excavation would, apart from that
subsection, be required.

(4) Any power of entry under this section shall be construed as
including power for any person entering any land in exercise
of the power of entry to take with him any assistance or equip-
ment reasonably required for the purpose to which his entry
relates and to do there anything reasonably necessary for car-
rying out that purpose.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

265

(5) Without prejudice to subsection (4), where a person enters
any land in exercise of any power of entry under this section
for the purpose of carrying out any archaeological investiga-
tion or examination of the land, he may take and remove such
samples of any description as appear to him to be reasonably
required for the purpose of archaeological analysis.

(6) Where a person enters any land in exercise of any power of
entry under this section for the purpose of carrying out any
archaeological investigation or examination of the land, he
may take temporary custody of any object of archaeological
or historical interest discovered during the course of the ex-
cavations carried out for that purpose, and remove it from
its site for the purpose of examining, testing, treating, record-
ing or preserving it.

(7) The Board or other person by or on whose behalf the power
of entry was exercised may not retain the object without the
consent of the owner beyond such period as may be reason-
ably required for the purpose of examining and recording it
and carrying out any test or treatment which appears to the
Board or to that person to be desirable for the purpose of
archaeological investigation or analysis or with a view to re-
storing or preserving the object.

(8) Nothing in this section shall affect any right of the Govern-

ment in relation to treasure trove.

(9) Any person who wilfully obstructs or hinders any person in
the exercise of the powers conferred by this section shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine
not exceeding $5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not ex-
ceeding one year or to both.

(10) In this section —

“ancient monument” means any monument which, in the
opinion of the Board, is of public interest by reason of the
historic, cultural, traditional, archaeological, architectural, ar-
tistic or symbolic significance attaching to it;

“monument” means the whole or any part of, or the remains
of —

(a) any building, structure, erection, statue, sculpture or
other work, whether above or below the surface of the
land, and any cave or excavation;

(b) any site comprising the remains of any such building,
structure, erection, statue, sculpture or other work or
of any cave or excavation; or

(c) any site comprising, or comprising the remains of, any
vehicle, vessel, aircraft or other movable structure
or part thereof which neither constitutes nor forms
part of any work which is a monument within para-
graph (a),

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

266

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

and includes any machinery attached to or forming part of
a monument which cannot be detached from the monu-
ment without being dismantled.

(11) For the purposes of this section, “archaeological investiga-
tion” means any investigation of any land, objects or other
material for the purpose of obtaining and recording any in-
formation of archaeological or historical interest and includes
in the case of an archaeological investigation of any land —

(a) any investigation for the purpose of discovering and re-
vealing and (where appropriate) recovering and remov-
ing any objects or other material of archaeological or
historical interest situated in, on or under the land; and

(b) examining, testing, treating, recording and preserving any
such objects or material discovered during the course of
any excavation or inspection carried out for the pur-
poses of any such investigation.

(12) For the purposes of this section, an archaeological examina-
tion of any land means any examination or inspection of the
land (including any buildings or other structures thereon) for
the purpose of obtaining and recording any information of
archaeological or historical interest.

Section 46 appears to be based upon section 7 of the PMA 1970. In a manner
similar to section 7(1), section 46(1) confers on the NHB a power to “enter for
the purposes of archaeological investigation or examination . . . upon any land which
the Board has reason to believe contains any ancient monument and may make
excavations in the land.” Section 46(10) defines ancient monument as “any mon-
ument which, in the opinion of the Board, is of public interest by reason of the
historic, cultural, traditional, archaeological, architectural, artistic or symbolic sig-
nificance attaching to it.”51 Oddly, this definition does not expressly require an
“ancient monument” to be ancient—perhaps this is to be implied. If we take the
ordinary meaning of ancient to refer to something “[w]hich existed in, or be-
longed to, times long past, or early in the world’s history; old,”52 the scope of the
power of entry and excavation is significantly limited as it excludes the archaeol-
ogy of nineteenth- and twentieth-century Singapore.

I will shortly be focusing on particular shortcomings of section 46, but before
that I wish to point out a few more salient features of the provision and compare
them with section 7 of the PMA 1970. First, the minimum notice period that must
be given to an occupier of land is 24 hours, rather than the 14 days mentioned in
the PMA 1970. This enables an archaeological investigation and excavation to be
commenced swiftly when there is risk of damage to a site. Second, to facilitate
work, section 46(4) of the NHBA usefully explains that the power to enter land
includes the power for an authorized representative of the board to take any as-
sistance or equipment reasonably required, and to do anything reasonably neces-
sary for carrying out purpose for entry. Finally, the penalty for wilfully obstructing

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

267

or hindering a person in the exercise of powers conferred by the section is a fine
not exceeding S$5,000 (about US$4,000) or imprisonment not exceeding one year
or both,53 a significant increase from the S$200 fine imposed by the PMA 1970.

The Planning Act

The rules governing the development of Singapore’s built environment are laid
down in the Planning Act.54 This statute does not deal directly with archaeologi-
cal investigations, but has a significant impact on how successful they are likely to
be. The Act mandates that a master plan be reviewed every five years55 by the
chief planner of the Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA),56 a government
agency. Included in the master plan are approved maps and a written statement
intended to aid interpretation of the master plan by summarizing its main pro-
posals and providing descriptive matter illustrating the proposals.57 The current
plan is the Master Plan 2008, and its written statement encompasses matters such
as zoning, plot ratios, and factors to be considered by the URA when approving
development applications.58 The URA is empowered to prepare certified interpre-
tation plans on a scale larger than the maps in the master plan to provide detailed
interpretation of the latter.59

Of particular note is the fact that the Minister for National Development may
designate in the master plan “any area . . . of special architectural, historic, tradi-
tional or aesthetic interest” as a conservation area, which may comprise a whole
area, a group of buildings, or a single building.60 While the term historic interest is
arguably broad enough to include areas of archaeological interest, to date the gov-
ernment has only applied its power to designate buildings, structures (such as
bridges, parks and reservoirs), and precincts regarded as having largely architec-
tural merit as conservation areas.61 The URA issues guidelines for the conserva-
tion of buildings or land within a conservation area and for the protection of their
settings.62

Public consultation is required whenever the master plan is amended. Such
amendments are proposed by the URA and approved by the minister.63 Proposals
for material64 amendments must be advertised in the Government Gazette and in
one English, Chinese, Malay, and Tamil newspaper circulating in Singapore, giv-
ing the public not less than two weeks to make objections and representations
concerning it.65 The minister must give objectors and representers an opportunity
to appear before a hearing or a public inquiry, and must take into account such
objections and representations and the findings of the hearing or public inquiry
when deciding whether to approve or reject the proposal.66 No comparable
procedure applies when the URA issues or amends certified interpretation plans.
The Planning Act requires67 people to apply for and obtain planning permis-
sion before land is developed,68 and conservation permission before work is car-
ried out in conservation areas.69 The URA generally processes such applications,70
though the minister may instruct the Authority to refer specific applications or a

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

268

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

class of applications to him.71 Applications must generally be determined in con-
formity with the master plan and any relevant certified interpretation plan,72 though
the minister may depart from them in defined circumstances.73 Permission can be
granted unconditionally or subject to conditions that the minister sees fit to im-
pose.74 Those familiar with planning law in other jurisdictions may be surprised
to learn that the Act neither requires applicants for planning or conservation per-
mission to assess the impact of the proposed work on the environment or heri-
tage, nor provides any procedure for third parties to object to the granting of the
permission.

III. DIFFICULTIES WITH THE EXISTING FRAMEWORK AND

PROPOSALS FOR REFORM

On 1 July 2009, the Preservation of Monuments Act 2009 came into force. By re-
pealing the PMA 1970, the Act dissolved the PMB and transferred its functions to
the NHB, a move that the Acting Minister for Information, Communications, and
the Arts described in Parliament as a “merger” that will “enhance the impact of
our overall heritage promotion efforts, and enable us to reap natural synergies
and economies of scale.”75 The Act contains no clause equivalent to section 7 of
the PMA 1970, which means that at present the sole provision facilitating archae-
ological investigations in Singapore is section 46 of the NHBA.

The PMA 2009 strengthened the protection for national monuments accorded
by the law. It imposes a new duty on the owners of monuments to maintain them,76
and empowers the NHB to require owners of monuments to provide information
on works carried out on them,77 and to order owners to cease such works or re-
store monuments that have been altered without the Board’s permission.78 Pen-
alties for offences have generally been increased. However, it is a pity that no changes
were wrought to the regime laid down in section 46 of the NHBA. The powers
enabling entry on to land for archaeological investigations remain extremely lim-
ited, and there is no scheme in place for identifying and protecting potential sites
from being damaged by urban development. The current system of planning law
provides little assistance in this regard. Furthermore, there is still no coherent frame-
work dealing with the ownership of archaeological finds.

Powers Facilitating Archaeological Investigations

Singapore is a highly built-up city. Because most land is covered by buildings, roads,
and other structures, especially in the city center and southern coastal areas,79 it
will usually be practical for archaeological excavations to be carried out only when
a piece of real estate is slated for redevelopment. This ensures that disruption to
the use of the land is minimized. Less expense is also involved as agreement may
be reached on the deployment of the developer’s earth-moving equipment, and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

269

the costs of reinstatement are obviated. However, section 46 of the NHBA im-
poses no duty on landowners, occupiers or employees of construction companies
to notify the NHB of proposals to redevelop sites, enabling it to arrange for ar-
chaeological investigations.

It might be thought that this shortcoming is alleviated by the requirement that
permission be obtained before development works can take place. However, there
is no indication in the Planning Act or any other legislation that the URA or Min-
ister for National Development works together with the NHB to ensure that the
archaeological value of land is taken into account when development applications
are considered. First, when the URA proposes that land should be designated as a
conservation area, or that such a designation should be rescinded, it is unclear
that the NHB is consulted. The Planning Act also lacks a formal procedure en-
abling interested persons to request that the URA considers proposing to the min-
ister that a particular piece of land be granted a conservation designation. Second,
as noted earlier, there is no requirement that applicants for development permis-
sion carry out any environmental or heritage impact assessment, making it un-
likely that the archaeological value of the land in question is considered. Third,
unlike when the master plan is amended, since there is no opportunity for public
consultation when development permission is sought, it is difficult to see how the
NHB or third parties can conveniently find out about such applications or make
representations against them. It is theoretically possible for aggrieved persons to
seek judicial review of decisions whether or not to designate land as conservation
areas and grants of development permission, but applicants might be put off by
the expense. They would also have to overcome various difficulties such as prov-
ing that they have sufficient standing, and that the URA or minister has breached
one or more grounds of review in administrative law—hardly a straightforward
task.

The restrictions that existed in sections 7(1)(a) and (b) of the PMA 1970 were
largely carried over into sections 46(2) and (3) of the NHBA, and no changes
were made to the latter provisions by the PMA 2009. As noted earlier in our dis-
cussion of the PMA 1970, these provisions made the consent of the occupier of
land a condition for entry into a dwelling-house and land used for the amenity or
convenience of a dwelling-house, and for carrying out excavations. Consequently,
even if a redevelopment project has come to the NHB’s attention and it takes the
view that an archaeological excavation is warranted, it is within the occupier’s right
to refuse. The NHB is entirely dependent on the goodwill and sense of responsi-
bility of the occupier.

Neither does the NHBA require the discovery of any artifacts potentially having
archaeological value to be reported, nor work to be halted to avoid damaging them.
Indeed, the contractual penalties imposed by building and construction contracts
for delays deters such reporting or work stoppage. A concern along these lines was
raised in Parliament before the enactment of the NHBA during debates on the
annual budget of the Ministry of Information and the Arts in 1992. Yatiman Yusof,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

270

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

parliamentary secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, suggested that a law be
passed to require a developer involved in developing land which might contain
national heritage such as sites near the Singapore River, Chinatown, Kampong Glam,
or nearby seas, to consult the National Museum before proceeding.80 The Minis-
ter for Information and the Arts George Yeo responded thus:

The present law does require the discovery of such objects to make a
report, either to MITA or to the receiver of wrecks. But of course the
moment you make such a report, then a general survey will be con-
ducted, excavation work may be done, and their project will be delayed.
So even though the law requires it, there is often an economic incentive
not to report such findings. We will seriously consider the possibility of
changing the law to enable the National Museum to conduct surveys of
sites which are of suspected archaeological interest. But we must do it
with a sense of balance because we cannot, in our enthusiasm to pre-
serve the past, impose too heavy a burden on the present and the living.
We must find an appropriate balance here.81

The Merchant Shipping Act82 imposes a duty on a person who finds or takes pos-
session of any wreck83 within the limits of Singapore that he or she is not the
owner of, or brings such a wreck within the limits of Singapore, to deliver the
wreck to the receiver of wreck.84 However, where archaeological finds on dry land
are concerned, it is not clear what “present law” the minister was referring to as
neither the PMA 1970 nor any other statute in force at that time or now contains
any reporting requirement. It may be that the minister was alluding to the law
relating to treasure trove; this is discussed in the next section. Regrettably, Mr.
Yatiman’s proposal was not incorporated into the NHBA which was enacted the
following year.

The improvements needed to ameliorate the disadvantages of the present legal
regime are fairly obvious. It is submitted the Planning Act should be amended to
require persons seeking consent to develop land to carry out and submit heritage
impact assessments as part of their applications. In addition, there should be a
procedure for publicizing applications and allowing third parties to make repre-
sentations opposing or supporting them. Such reports and representations will
better position the URA or minister to decide if the applications should be ap-
proved, and whether any protective conditions should be imposed if the works are
authorized. Information indicating that a piece of land possesses archaeological
value would also equip the URA to have the land earmarked as a conservation
area, which would determine how future applications to develop land in the area
ought to be dealt with. The URA and the minister should be required to consult
the NHB before reaching decisions on these issues.

In this respect, the laws of other jurisdictions may prove to be useful models.
The Town and Country Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regula-
tions 201185 of the United Kingdom, for example, enjoin relevant authorities from
granting planning permission unless they have first taken into account “environ-
mental information.”86 Such information includes “[a] description of the aspects

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

271

of the environment likely to be significantly affected by the development, includ-
ing, in particular, population, fauna, flora, soil, water, air, climatic factors, material
assets, including the architectural and archaeological heritage, landscape and the inter-
relationship between the above factors.”87 This approach of requiring the impact
of proposed development to be holistically assessed, taking into account factors
relating to both heritage and the natural environmental, has been adopted else-
where as well, such as under New Zealand’s Resource Management Act 199188
and the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, 2012.89

It remains to be seen whether the Singapore Parliament is prepared to enact a
law to such effect. Academics have been calling for mandatory environmental im-
pact assessments to be legislated for almost two decades.90 Yet, to date, the gov-
ernment has resisted introducing such a measure, asserting that Singapore’s small
geographical size, large population, and high level of economic growth require
developmental needs to be prioritized over ecological preservation.91 It has been
suggested that “[p]olitical expediency in the desire to get things done to meet de-
velopment needs has tended to override the longer-term goals of protecting the
environment for the benefit of future generations.”92

It is undeniable that the comprehensive preservation of heritage sites stands in
the same position as ecological conservation, and raises the same fraught issue of
how it should be balanced with development. This is illustrated by the contro-
versy engendered by the government’s plan to build a four-lane road across part
of Bukit Brown Cemetery to alleviate traffic congestion in the area,93 and even-
tually to turn the burial ground into a housing estate.94 Bukit Brown is the largest
Chinese cemetery outside China, with some 100,000 graves laid between 1922 and
1973.95 The Singapore Heritage Society has highlighted various facets of its value.
The gravestone epigraphs are an invaluable source of genealogical and historical
information about prominent pioneers and ordinary people of Singapore; and the
design, ornamentation, and orientation of the tombs according to feng shui prin-
ciples, as well as annual rituals conducted at the cemetery to honor the deceased,
provide insights into community cultural practices.96 Rich in biodiversity, Bukit
Brown is home to 66 resident species of birds, 11 of which are regarded as criti-
cally endangered, endangered, or vulnerable. It also serves as a resting and forag-
ing site for the fauna of Singapore’s Central Catchment Area; a protective buffer
zone between the Area and Lornie Road, a busy highway;97 and a “sink” to absorb
rainfall, which recharges reservoirs and prevents flooding.98 Given its potential as
a tourist attraction and the intangible sense of belonging it promotes among cit-
izens to the land and the past, the society has recommended that the cemetery be
fully documented, gazetted as a heritage site, and retained as a park.99 However,
responding to letters to the press calling for its preservation, the URA said: “Plan-
ning for the long-term in land-scarce Singapore does require us to make difficult
trade-off decisions. While we cater for conservation, we also need to balance it
against other needs in the community, such as housing for people. Bukit Brown is
needed in the future for housing.”100

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

272

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

Without downplaying the importance of preserving certain heritage sites in-
tact, in some cases the needs of archaeological research are more modest. If ar-
chaeologists are given sufficient time to research, record, and excavate a site, it can
be released for development thereafter. Thus, when a heritage impact assessment
indicates that a site has or may have archaeological value, it may be sufficient for
the URA or minister to grant planning or conservation permission on condition
that the NHB (or its nominee) has a specified period within which to conduct a
full investigation. If an excavation is found to be warranted, the NHB can notify
the developer that it requires additional time. The Planning Act should set out
what the maximum time periods are to enable property developers to make suit-
able accommodation in their project schedules so that developments are not de-
layed unforeseeably. In this way, there should not be “too heavy a burden on the
present and the living.”101 Archaeologists will also have sufficient time to carry
out their investigations. It has been noted:

The majority of the excavations in Singapore have been salvage opera-
tions, and the archaeological crews were often granted merely weeks or
even days to explore a site. It is inevitable that a system of prioritisation
be implemented to recover as large a sample of the archaeological data
as possible on the comparative[ly] little understood pre-colonial Te-
masek period, at the expense of the remains from the colonial period. It
is under such conditions that colonial period archaeology is often side-
lined and relegated to a lower level of priority.102

The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979 of the United
Kingdom contains comparable provisions. Pursuant to the Act, the secretary of
state for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport may designate an area as one of
archaeological importance.103 Once an area has been so designated, a specified
investigating authority is entitled to serve an “operations notice” on a developer
intending to carry out operations in the area that disturb the ground, or that
involve flooding the land or tipping any materials on to it.104 This confers on the
investigating authority a right to enter the site of the operations to inspect for
the purpose of recording any matters of archaeological or historical interest and
determining if excavations are desirable, and to observe the operations so that
any objects or other material of archaeological or historical interest that are dis-
covered can be recorded.105 If the investigating authority wishes to excavate, it
must notify the developer within four weeks of the service of the operations
notice, and having done so it has a period of four months and two weeks start-
ing six weeks after the date the operations notice was served to carry out the
excavation.106 The investigating authority and the developer may also agree on
an earlier date.107

The changes to the Planning Act proposed above work in tandem with section
46 of the NHBA. While the Planning Act will facilitate archaeological investiga-
tions when applications are made for land to be developed, section 46 empowers
the NHB to carry out investigations in the absence of such applications. Such in-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

273

vestigations may reveal the heritage value of sites, which can then be designated as
conservation areas under the Planning Act. Certain aspects of section 46 can be
improved. For one, the requirement for the NHB to show it has reason to believe
that land contains an ancient monument before it can enter upon it to conduct an
investigation is unduly narrow. The section should be recast to confer upon the
NHB a general power to carry out archaeological investigations and excavations.
In addition, the ability of an occupier of land to block exploration simply by re-
fusing consent for excavation should be removed. As regards entry upon and ex-
cavation of a dwelling-house and land appurtenant to it, the aim of section 46(2)
of the NHBA is no doubt to protect the occupier from intrusion into his or her
private life that may cause inconvenience. Nonetheless, it is submitted that the
Board should be permitted to carry out an archaeological excavation if the owner
embarks on a redevelopment project of the dwelling-house or its appurtenant land
that itself involves operations that disturb the ground.

Ownership of Archaeological Finds

The other major shortcoming of the present legal regime in Singapore is the lack
of a clear framework dealing with the ownership of relics that are unearthed in
the course of archaeological excavations. It will be recalled that while section 46 of
the NHBA empowers a person exercising a power of entry on to land to remove
(and presumably retain) “samples . . . reasonably required for the purpose of ar-
chaeological analysis,”108 he or she may only take “temporary custody” of objects
of archaeological or historical interest discovered during an excavation and re-
move it from the site “for the purpose of examining, testing, treating, recording or
preserving it.”109 That person and the National Heritage Board are expressly pro-
hibited from retaining the object “without the consent of the owner beyond such
period as may be reasonably required for the purpose of examining and recording
it and carrying out any test or treatment which appears . . . to be desirable for the
purpose of archaeological investigation or analysis or with a view to restoring or
preserving the object” (emphasis added).110

Thus, section 46 studiously avoids dealing with the issue of ownership of ob-
jects of archaeological or historical interest, which for convenience I will term ‘rel-
ics,’ leaving this to the common law. Intriguingly, section 46(8) goes on to state:
“Nothing in this section shall affect any right of the Government in relation to
treasure trove.” It would appear that ownership of relics is left up to the common
law of finders and, possibly, treasure trove.

Section 46(8) seems to imply that common law rules relating to treasure trove
apply in Singapore. This is possibly buttressed by the comment made by the Min-
ister for Information and the Arts in Parliament in 1992 that the law requires per-
sons discovering relics to report the find to his Ministry.111 The common law laid
a duty on finders of treasures trove, or persons with knowledge of the finding, to
report the matter to the coroner of the district in which the discovery occurred.112

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

274

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

However, I previously expressed some doubt about the effect of the section, stat-
ing that it appeared to have been inserted out of caution rather than after con-
sidered thought.113 I will not rehearse the details here, but essentially there is
disagreement among academics over whether Crown prerogatives such as treasure
trove can properly be regarded as having been transferred to the Yang di-Pertuan
Agong (the Supreme Head of the Federation of Malaysia) at the federal level and
to the rulers of the States of Malaysia at the state level following Malaysia’s inde-
pendence from the British Empire in 1957 and the introduction of a new consti-
tution.114 This is relevant to Singapore because it joined the Federation of Malaysia
in 1963, before becoming a fully independent republic two years later. I am in-
clined to agree with Andrew Harding that the wording of the Malaysian Consti-
tution and the Civil Law Act 1956115 did not unambiguously confer the prerogatives
of the Crown on the Agong, which was a novel office created by the Constitution.
If the prerogative did not devolve upon the Agong, then it could not have vested
in Singapore’s head of state, its President, upon Singapore’s independence from
Malaysia in 1965.116

If I am mistaken on that count, it should be noted that in 1965 Singapore law

provided that

. . . all existing laws shall continue in force on and after Singapore Day
[9 August 1965], but all such laws shall be construed as from Singa-
pore Day with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and ex-
ceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with this
Act and with the independent status of Singapore upon separation from
Malaysia.117

Moreover, section 3(2) of the Application of English Law Act118 enacted in 1994
states that the common law of England continues to be in force in Singapore “so
far as it is applicable to the circumstances of Singapore and its inhabitants and
subject to such modifications as those circumstances may require.” The language
of prerogative rights does not sit well with the fact that Singapore has an elected
president rather than a monarch, and it may well be that English common law
rules relating to treasure trove should be regarded as inapplicable to these modern-
day circumstances.119

Is the concept of bona vacantia of assistance? Broadly speaking, bona vacantia
refers to property that has no owner, and under some circumstances such prop-
erty may be claimed by the government. Under Scots law, the applicable rule is
quod nullius est fit domini regis (“that which belongs to nobody becomes our Lord
the King’s [or Queen’s]”). In Lord Advocate v. University of Aberdeen,120 the Inner
House of the Court of Session held that a porpoise bone found together with
items such as brooches, bowls, and other metal work in a wooden box (known
collectively as the “Saint Ninian’s Isle Treasure”), though not qualifying as treasure
trove unlike the metal objects, could be claimed by the Crown as bona vacantia.121
Conversely, the English common law—applicable in Singapore by virtue of the
Application of English Law Act—does not apply the concept of bona vacantia so

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

275

widely. Property is only regarded as bona vacantia in specific circumstances, such
as when a person dies intestate without next of kin,122 or when a trust fails.123
Controversy exists as to whether treasure trove is a species of bona vacantia;124
one scholar regards it as a distinct form of the royal prerogative.125 The point is
that English law does not recognize any general right of the Crown to mislaid
property: “[O]nly certain classes of property whose owner is unknown can be
claimed as bona vacantia. Thus, lost property in general cannot be claimed, it is
only if it falls. . . within one of the. . . heads of the royal prerogative that it can be
claimed by the Crown.”126

It is submitted that a more tenable option may be for the court to advance the
common law of Singapore by recognizing, as the Supreme Court of Ireland did
in Webb v. Ireland,127 that “a necessary ingredient of sovereignty in a modern
state. . . should be an ownership by the State of objects which constitute antiqui-
ties of importance which are discovered and which have no known owner.”128
There is precedent for a judicial holding of this nature in Singapore: in 1998, the
Court of Appeal held in Public Prosecutor v. Taw Cheng Kong129 that when Sin-
gapore gained independence in 1965 it acquired the attributes of sovereignty,
and that it was inherent in the nature of a sovereign republic that its legislature
has plenary powers of legislation, including the power to enact extraterritorial
laws.130 Article 23(1) of the Singapore Constitution vests the “executive author-
ity of Singapore” in the President and makes it “exercisable subject to the provi-
sions of this Constitution by him or by the Cabinet or any Minister authorised
by the Cabinet.” The Constitution does not set out the ambit of executive au-
thority. It is conceivable that a court might hold that, following Webb, the exec-
utive authority of Singapore includes the ownership of relics unearthed during
archaeological digs.

The extent of such a principle is important. In Webb, three of the five judges
who heard the case were of the view that the scope of the state’s “right or prerog-
ative of treasure trove” was the same as the prerogative of treasure trove at com-
mon law.131 It is submitted that such a rule would be of limited utility in Singapore.
In order to qualify as treasure trove, an object must be substantially—that is, more
than 50%132—gold or silver and must have been concealed with an intention that
it be recovered later.133 An item accidentally lost or deliberately left behind (for
instance, buried in a grave) is not treasure trove.134 However, virtually all the rel-
ics unearthed in Singapore to date have been composed of base metals or non-
metallic materials. In fact, it appears that only one cache of gold objects has ever
been found in Singapore. On 7 July 1926, workers carrying out an excavation for
a reservoir on Fort Canning found a number of gold artifacts135 believed to be of
Javanese origin. These included clasps, clips, and jewelled rings, including one in-
cised with a bird, possibly a goose, which is one of the regalia of the royal house of
Surakarta in Central Java and the Hindu symbol of the vehicle of Brahma. There
were also two magnificent armlets, one intact and one slightly damaged, with a
kala head design. The kala are demonic beasts who are the sons of the Hindu

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

276

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

goddess Durga in destructive mood,136 and their use as decoration is consistent
with a fourteenth-century date.137 In 1926 common law rules relating to treasure
trove applied in Singapore as it was one of the Straits Settlements, which were
collectively a Crown colony. However, I have not been able to locate any evidence
that the ornaments were formally declared to be treasure trove by a court. Perhaps
this was unnecessary because their ownership was never in doubt, the Fort Can-
ning site presumably having been government land. It is worth noting that one of
the judges in Webb went further than his brethren by expressing the view that
since most archaeological finds in Ireland were not of gold or silver, the right of
the state to ownerless antiquities should extend beyond items traditionally con-
stituting treasure trove.138

If relics do not qualify as treasure trove, their ownership depends on the com-
mon law rules of finders. The Singapore courts have yet to pronounce upon this
matter, but they are likely to apply the English common law position. Basically, if
an object is embedded in the realty it belongs to the landowner and not to the
finder. If, however, it is found on the surface it belongs to the finder (assuming the
true owner cannot be located), unless the landowner has manifested an intention
to control the land and objects that may be found on it.139 It is submitted that this
is not a satisfactory way for the ownership of objects of archaeological or histor-
ical importance to be determined. The combined effect of the common law rules
relating to treasure trove and finders is that if a number of objects are discovered
together on privately owned land, those not substantially gold or silver may have
to be separated from those that are, thus diminishing the value of the find. Own-
ership of these items may then be in the hands of either the landowner or the
finder, who is free to deal with them as he or she wishes.140 In the United King-
dom, the common law regime has been replaced by the Treasure Act 1996.141

It is submitted that the shortcomings of the present law should be remedied by
adopting a comprehensive regime protecting relics and vesting ownership of them
in the state.142 An important preliminary issue that the regime must address is
what objects are to be regarded as relics. Given the significance of modern-era
archaeology to Singapore, a definition is unhelpful if it declares to be relics only
objects of historical value that are of a certain age, for example, at least 50 or 100
years old.143 Instead, I would suggest a provision akin to the definition of archae-
ological object in the National Monuments Act 1930144 of Ireland: “any chattel
whether in a manufactured or partly manufactured or an unmanufactured state
which by reason of the archaeological interest attaching thereto or of its associa-
tion with any Irish historical event or person has a value substantially greater than
its intrinsic (including artistic) value, and the said expression includes ancient
human and animal remains. . .”145

The subsequent National Monuments (Amendment) Act 1994146 of Ireland con-
tains provisions that have much to commend them. First, they deter uncontrolled
searches for and removal of relics from archaeological sites by prohibiting their
unauthorized possession, acquisition, sale, or disposal;147 and empowering the po-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

277

lice to seize devices such as metal detectors.148 Second, the Act requires chance
finds of relics to be reported and transferred into state custody.149 To encourage
finds to be reported, it establishes a system for rewarding finders and private land-
owners.150 Finally, it prevents relics valuable to the nation’s heritage from being
exported.151 A detailed examination of such export restrictions is beyond the scope
of this article, but it is worth noting that a number of jurisdictions have similar
laws that also provide the state an opportunity to acquire such relics if it desires.152

IV. CONCLUSION

In a sense, the Preservation of Monuments Act 2009 was a missed opportunity.
When strengthening protection for national monuments—and, in the process, mak-
ing consequential changes to the National Heritage Board Act—thought could have
been given to overhauling section 46 of the latter statute by giving wider power to
the Board to identify sites likely to be of archaeological value. The present provi-
sion is too timid: It allows the Board and its authorized representatives to enter
upon land and conduct a surface investigation, but effectively confers on occupi-
ers the absolute right to refuse permission for an archaeological excavation. Where
a dwelling-house and the land appurtenant to it are concerned, the right extends
even to preventing entry.

In addition, the provision appears intentionally silent as to the ownership of
relics unearthed during excavations, as it expressly states that the Board and its
representatives may only take temporary custody of them for examination, test-
ing, treatment, recording, or preservation, and may not retain them beyond a rea-
sonable period without the owner’s consent. There is an unclear reference to treasure
trove, which raises the issue of whether the common law principles relating to this
Crown prerogative apply in Singapore today.

It might be thought that the Planning Act enables the URA and the Minister for
National Development to protect sites with potential archaeological value by pre-
venting irreparable damage caused by uncontrolled redevelopment, and to facili-
tate the investigation of such sites by the NHB. However, while the current regime
mandates permission to be sought before development works are carried out on
land, there is no requirement for heritage impact assessments to be conducted
and submitted to the URA. Neither is there any procedure for interested members
of the public to be notified of applications for permission, nor for their represen-
tations on such applications to be received and considered.

The practical effect of the present state of the law is that it is far better for
archaeologists from educational institutions and the NHB to enter into agree-
ments with landowners and occupiers for excavations to be conducted than for
the NHB to assert its statutory rights. It could be said that, in any case, conduct-
ing an archaeological excavation by agreement is always preferable to doing so
by force of law in the face of opposition. However, the present law places those

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

278

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

seeking to conduct archaeological investigations in a weak negotiating position,
with the result that permission for excavations may be granted by landowners as
an act of grace with less-than-ideal conditions such as very short project peri-
ods. The historical information gleaned from such a project can only be sketchy
and incomplete.

It is submitted that the legal frameworks in jurisdictions such as Ireland and
England and Wales are useful in providing inspiration for how Singapore law might
be reformed. Among other things, there should be a duty on persons planning to
redevelop land to submit heritage impact assessments as part of their application
for development permission. Such assessments will enable the URA or minister to
determine, in consultation with the NHB, whether the land is likely to be archae-
ologically significant. If it is, development permission can be granted subject to
conditions allowing for a proper archaeological investigation to be carried out for
a reasonable, specified period. Furthermore, an occupier should not be able to
prevent the NHB from carrying out excavations simply by refusing consent. There
should also be a power to conduct an excavation in a dwelling-house or its sur-
rounding land if the homeowner plans work that involves disturbing the ground.
And to preserve for posterity relics discovered during excavations, it is submitted
that ownership in them should be vested in the state, and suitable incentives pro-
vided for such finds to be reported to the NHB. In connection with the foregoing,
thought will need to be given to whether the NHB is sufficiently resourced and
has staff qualified to conduct archaeological investigations.

Strengthening the law along the lines proposed is probably not high on the
government’s legislative agenda, but my hope is that Parliament will not tarry too
long before acting. As Lim Chen Sian warns: “It cannot be further emphasised
that, faced with the exuberant pace of development, the archaeological reservoir
of colonial period Singapore diminishes with each passing day.”153

ENDNOTES

1. See note 46.
2. See note 36.
3. See note 46.
4. See note 40.
5. See note 54.
6. Or at least its upstart child, the OED Online, does: “archaeology, n.,” OED Online, Oxford
University Press, November 2010, http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/10286 (accessed 23 March 2011).
The word is derived from the Greek (cid:2)ρ(cid:4)αϊ(cid:7)ς (archaios: “ancient, primitive”), itself from (cid:2)ρ(cid:4)(cid:9) (arche:
“beginning”), and λ(cid:7)γ(cid:12)α (logia: “discourse”): ibid, and “archaeo-, comb. form,” OED Online, Oxford
University Press, November 2010, http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/10273 (accessed 23 March 2011).
7. McIntosh, The Practical Archaeologist, 96.
8. See the Ironbridge Gorge Museums website, http://www.ironbridge.org.uk (accessed 24 March

2011).

9. See, e.g., Hayman et al., Archaeology and Conservation in Ironbridge; Blockley, “The Iron-

bridge Gorge.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

279

10. “Ironbridge Gorge,” United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/371/, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/5xP6IQUk2
(accessed 24 March 2011).

11. Ironbridge 2010/2011. See also Muter, The Buildings of an Industrial Community; Hayman and

Horton, Ironbridge.

12. Avieropoulou Choo, Archaeology, 6 and 13.
13. Miksic, “14th-Century Singapore,” 49–50. See also Miksic, Forbidden Hill; Avieropoulou Choo,

Excavation at Fort Canning Hill; Miksic, “Fourteenth Century Chinese Glass.”

14. Low, “Singapore from the 14th to 19th Century,” 20–31; Miksic, “14th-Century Singapore,”

51. See also Chen, “Ancient Singapore Earthenware Pottery,” 55–72.

15. Low, “Singapore from the 14th to the 19th Century,” 31; Miksic, “14th-Century Singapore,”

50. See also Zaini, Metal Finds; Heng, “Export Commodity and Regional Currency.”

16. Miksic, “14th-Century Singapore,” 51. See also Miksic, “Sebuah arca timah hitam.”
17. Barry, Pulau Saigon.
18. “Istana Kampong Glam 2000–2003,” Southeast Asian Archaeology, http://www
.seaarchaeology.com/v1/html/sg/kampong_galm.html, archived at http://replay.waybackmachine.org
/20090411031922/http://www.seaarchaeology.com/v1/html/sg/kampong_galm.html (accessed 26
March 2011). See also Barry, Istana Kampong Glam (2007); Barry, Istana Kampong Glam (2009).

19. Miksic and Lim, Archaeological Research on the Padang and in the St. Andrew’s Cathedral, 3.
20. Lim, “Archaeology as a Critical Source,” 130.
21. Singapore became an independent republic on 9 August 1965, after having ceased to be part
of the British Empire on 16 September 1963 when it joined the Federation of Malaysia, and leaving
the Federation about two years later.
22. Lim Chen Sian, “Fort Tanjong Katong Raising History Planting Roots Project: Prelimin-
ary Site Report version 1.2,” 17 May 2007 http://www.seaarchaeology.com/v1/html/sg/pdfs/ftk
_preliminaryreport1.pdf, archived at http://replay.waybackmachine.org/20070927234205/http://
www.seaarchaeology.com/v1/html/sg/pdfs/ftk_preliminaryreport1.pdf (accessed 27 March 2011). The
report is not paginated.
23. Lim Chen Sian, “Palmer Road Foot Tet Soo Khek Temple Archaeological Research Project: Pre-
liminary Site Report version 1.4,” 9 March 2006, http://www.seaarchaeology.com/v1/html/sg/pdfs
/Palmer_Site_Report_version_1.4.pdf, archived at http://replay.waybackmachine.org/20090205073050
/http://www.seaarchaeology.com/v1/html/sg/pdfs/Palmer_Site_Report_version_1.4.pdf, 1–2 (ac-
cessed 27 March 2011).

24. Lim, “Palmer Road Foot Tet Soo Khek Temple,” 3–9.
25. Jon Cooper, “Park Life: Revealing a Hidden Battlefield from the Fall of Singapore,” Britain at
War Magazine, issue 43, November 2010, 75–77, http://www.gla.ac.uk/media/media_179181_en.pdf,
archived at http://www.webcitation.org/5ywxRgr8n (accessed 26 May 2011); Jon Cooper, “Making
the Most of It,” Britain at War Magazine, issue 46, February 2011, 79–81, http://www.gla.ac.uk/media
/media_194440_en.pdf, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/5ywxmR3mX (accessed 26 May 2011).
See generally “Tigers in the Park: A New Project in Singapore,” Centre for Battlefield Archaeology,
Faculty of Arts, University of Glasgow, 2011, http://www.gla.ac.uk/departments/battlefieldarchaeology
/centreprojects/singaporewwiiproject/, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/5ywyA4XKQ (ac-
cessed 26 May 2011).
26. Jon Cooper, “Significance of ‘Green Corridor’: Heritage Should be Understood and Protected
in Making Redevelopment Plans,” Today, 19 May 2011, 20, http://www.todayonline.com/Voices
/EDC110519-0000242/Significance-of-Green-Corridor, archived at http://www.webcitation.org
/5ywzR53Ma (accessed 24 May 2011).
27. “Bukit Timah Railway Station Conserved,” Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA), 27 May
2011, http://www.ura.gov.sg/pr/text/2011/pr11-62.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org
/65fnM2Oa1 (accessed 24 February 2012); Grace Chua, “Parts of KTM Railway to be Retained,” The
Straits Times, 23 July 2011. The intention to conserve the station, as well as the gazetting of the
Tanjong Pagar Railway Station as a national monument on 8 April 2011, were announced on the
latter date: “Historic Railway Stations to be Kept for Future Generations,” URA, 8 April 2011, http://

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

280

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

www.ura.gov.sg/pr/text/2011/pr11-40.html, archived at http://www. webcitation.org/65fo6tOk0 (ac-
cessed 24 February 2012).
28. Jolene Hoon, “Draw of the Railway,” Skyline, July–August 2011, http://www.ura.gov.sg/skyline
/skyline11/skyline11-04/article-02.html, archived at http://www.webcitation.org/65foniPFH (ac-
cessed 24 February 2012); “Stripping of KTM Railway Track Completed,” Channel NewsAsia, 31
October 2011, http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/singaporelocalnews/view/1162591/1/.html
(accessed 24 February 2012).

29. Kwa et al., “Reconstructing the Lion City,” 39. Temasek, or Tumasik, means “sea town,” and is
mentioned in the Javanese Nagarakretagama of 1365: Turnbull, A History of Modern Singapore, 20.
30. Kwa et al., “The Lure of the Chinese Market,” 19: “That a port-settlement called Temasek did

exist in Singapore between the late thirteenth and fourteenth centuries is without doubt.”

31. Miksic, “14th-Century Singapore,” 51–52; Kwa et al., “Reconstructing the Lion City,” 39–40.
32. Miksic, “14th-Century Singapore,” 52; Kwa et al., “Reconstructing the Lion City,” 43 and 51.
33. Kwa et al., “Reconstructing the Lion City,” 44–46.
34. Kwa et al., “Reconstructing the Lion City,” 37.
35. Lim, “Archaeology as a Critical Source,” 130–131.
36. No. 45 of 1970 (hereinafter PMA 1970), later Cap. 239, 1985 Rev. Ed. For some background

on the genesis of the Act, see Cai, “Law and Its Impact on Singapore’s Built Heritage,” 105–107.

37. See also section 5(a) of the Act, which stated that this was one of the objects of the PMB.
Today, one of the National Heritage Board’s objects is similar: Preservation of Monuments Act 2009
(see note 40), sec. 4(a).
38. 21 & 22 Geo. 5, c. 16, now section 26 of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas
Act 1979 (UK) (1979 c. 46), http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1979/46 [hereinafter AMAAA (UK)]
(accessed 21 May 2011).

39. The definition of monument specifically contemplated that excavations of historic or archae-
ological interest might be gazetted as national monuments. However, since the PMB began its
work, no sites of this nature, which are not also buildings or structures of some kind in current
use, have been so designated. The current list of national monuments may be viewed at the web-
site of the National Heritage Board at http://www.nhb.gov.sg/NHBPortal/Sites&Monuments (ac-
cessed 13 November 2013).
40. No. 16 of 2009 (hereinafter PMA 2009), available from Singapore Statutes Online, http://
statutes.agc.gov.sg/non_version/cgi-bin/cgi_legdisp.pl?actno⫽2009-ACT-16-N, archived at http://
www.webcitation.org/5xTnjoyK9 (accessed 27 March 2011). The current version is Cap. 239, 2011
Rev. Ed.

41. PMA 1970, sec. 7(1)(a).
42. PMA 1970, sec. 7(1)(b).
43. Interference with the subsoil amounts to trespass to land: Cox v. Glue (1848) 5 C.B. 533, 136

E.R. 987 (holes dug into subsoil).

44. Trespass to land is a tort against the lawful possessor rather than the owner of land: Jones v.
Chapman (1849) 2 Ex. Ch. 803 at 816, 154 E.R. 717 at 722 (“The action of trespass quare clausum
fregit [‘why he broke the close,’ that is, trespass on land that is visibly enclosed] is founded upon
actual possession by the plaintiff, who will make out a prima facie case if he proves possession in
himself and entry by the defendant. He need not give any proof whatever of title or of right to the
possession.”). In fact, the landowner has no standing to sue if some other person such as a tenant is
in lawful possession of the land: Wallis v. Hands [1893] 2 Ch. 75. However, there is a presumption
that the holder of title to the land has possession in the absence of contrary evidence (Herbert v.
Thomas (1835) 1 Cr. M. & R. 861, 149 E.R. 1329), and where there are competing claims to posses-
sion (Jones v. Chapman, id.; Lows v. Telford (1876) 1 App. Cas. 414 at 426; Canvey Island Commis-
sioners v. Preedy [1922] Ch. 179). See Lunney, “Trespass to Land,” 489–490 and 511, paras. 10.7 and
10.35. It may be noted that the tort of private nuisance is not applicable, as a private nuisance is “an
unlawful non-trespassory interference with the private use and enjoyment of land or rights over land”:
Nolan, “Nuisance,” 1108 and 1116, paras. 22.9 and 22.16 (emphasis added). Entering upon land and
excavating it unambiguously amounts to a trespass.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

281

45. PMA 1970, sec. 7(2).
46. No. 13 of 1993 (hereinafter NHBA), later Cap. 196A, 1994 Rev. Ed.
47. Renamed the Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts in 2001. Following a
reorganization of ministries, with effect from 1 November 2012 heritage matters were taken over by
a new Ministry of Culture, Community and Youth.

48. George Yong-Boon Yeo (Minister for Information and the Arts), speech during the Second
Reading of the National Heritage Board Bill, Singapore Parliamentary Debates, Official Report, 13
April 1993, vol. 61, col. 137.

49. Yeo, Second Reading of the National Heritage Board Bill, col. 140.
50. PMA 2009, sec. 37(5), which inserted a new version of sec. 46(10) containing definitions of

the terms ancient monument and monument.

51. Section 46(10) also contains a definition of the word monument more detailed than that con-

tained in sec. 2(1) of the PMA 1970.

52. This is the definition of ancient set out in the OED Online, which also defines an ancient mon-
ument as “a monument made or set up long ago.” The term ancient is also specifically applied to “the
period of history before the fall of the Western Roman Empire,” that is, prior to about the fifth century
ce—the last Western Roman emperor was Romulus Augustus, who was deposed on 4 September 476
at the age of about 13 to 15 years after a 10-month reign. However, adopting this latter definition in
the Singapore context is meaningless, since there is no historical evidence of human settlement on the
island of Singapore before the fourteenth century. See “ancient, adj. and n.1,” OED Online, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, March 2011, http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/7250 (accessed 14 April 2011).

53. NHBA, sec. 46(9).
54. Cap. 232, 1998 Rev. Ed. (hereinafter PA).
55. PA, sec. 8.
56. Appointment of Competent Authority (Cap. 232, N 7, 2007 Rev. Ed.), para. 1(b).
57. PA, sec. 2 (definition of written statement) and sec. 6.
58. “The Planning Act: Master Plan Written Statement 2008,” URA, http://www.ura.gov.sg/MP2008
/written_statement.htm, archived at http://web.archive.org/web/20110605235315/http://www.ura.gov
.sg/MP2008/written_statement.htm (accessed 5 January 2013).

59. PA, sec. 7.
60. PA, sec. 9.
61. See “Listing of Conservation Areas & Maps,” URA, https://www.ura.gov.sg/conservation
/mod2.htm, archived at http://web.archive.org/web/20120624172253/https://www.ura.gov.sg
/conservation/mod2.htm (accessed 1 February 2013).

62. PA, sec. 11(1).
63. PA, sec. 8.
64. The Planning (Master Plan) Rules (Cap. 232, R 1, 2000 Rev. Ed.) (hereinafter PMPR), r. 6(3),

exempts nonmaterial amendments from compliance with the procedure described in the text.

65. PMPR, r. 2 (definition of notice by advertisement) and r. 4.
66. PMPR, r. 6.
67. PA, sec. 12.
68. A lengthy definition of the term development appears in the PA, sec. 3.
69. The term works within a conservation area extends beyond development of land to “any dec-
orative, painting, renovation or other works (whether external or internal) to any building within a
conservation area which may affect its character or appearance”: PA, sec. 2.

70. PA, sec. 13.
71. PA, sec. 21.
72. PA, sec. 14(1).
73. PA, sec. 14(2).
74. PA, secs. 14(4)(a) and 15.
75. Rear Admiral (NS) Lui Tuck Yew (Acting Minister for Information, Communications and the
Arts), Second Reading of the Preservation of Monuments Bill, Singapore Parliamentary Debates, Of-
ficial Report, 13 April 2009, vol. 85, cols. 3645–3651 at 3651.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

282

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

76. PMA 2009, sec. 13.
77. PMA 2009, sec. 16.
78. PMA 2009, secs. 18–20.
79. In 1992, it was noted in Parliament that almost 60% of the island of Singapore consisted of
built-up areas, and that this figure rose to 90% in the city center and the southern coastal areas that
were of particular historical significance because these coastal areas and seas were strategic trade
routes: Yatiman Yusof (parliamentary secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs), “Estimates of
Expenditure for the Financial Year 1st April, 1992 to 31st March, 1993,” Singapore Parliamentary
Debates, Official Report, 17 March 1992, vol. 59, col. 1115.

80. Yatiman Yusof, “Estimates of Expenditure,” col. 1116.
81. Brig.-Gen. George Yong-Boon Yeo (Minister for Information and the Arts), “Estimates of Ex-
penditure for the Financial Year 1st April, 1992 to 31st March, 1993,” Singapore Parliamentary De-
bates, Official Report, 17 March, 1992, vol. 59, cols. 1116–1117.

82. Cap. 179, 1996 Rev. Ed.
83. Wreck is defined in the Merchant Shipping Act, sec. 145, as including jetsam (parts of a ship,
its equipment or cargo that are intentionally jettisoned to lighten the vessel when it is in distress,
and that sinks or is washed ashore), flotsam (floating wreckage of a ship or its cargo), lagan (cargo
lying on the ocean floor, sometimes marked by a buoy, that can be reclaimed), and derelict (cargo
lying on the ocean floor that cannot be reclaimed) found in or on the shores of the sea or any tidal
water.

84. Merchant Shipping Act, sec. 153(1). Failing to do so without reasonable cause is a criminal
offence and causes the finder of the wreck to forfeit any claim to salvage and to be liable to pay
double the value of the wreck to the owner of or the person entitled to the wreck: sec. 153(2).
85. S.I. 2011 No. 1824 (UK), http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2011/1824/contents/made (ac-

cessed 28 February 2013) [hereinafter EIA Regs (UK)].

86. EIA Regs (UK), reg. 3(4).
87. EIA Regs (UK), Schedule 4, pt. 1, para. 3 (emphasis added); see also sec. 2(1) (definitions of

environmental information and environmental statement).

88. 1991 No. 69 (reprint as at 1 February 2013) (NZ), secs. 9(4) and 193, and Schedule 4, para.
2(d) (“Subject to the provisions of any policy statement or plan, any person preparing an assess-
ment of the effects on the environment should consider the following matters: . . . (d) any effect on
natural and physical resources having aesthetic, recreational, scientific, historical, spiritual, or cul-
tural, or other special value for present or future generations. . .” [emphasis added]).
89. S.C. 2012, c. 19, sec. 52 (current to 6 February 2013) (Canada), http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca
/eng/acts/C-15.21/index.html; see, for example, sec. 5(2)(b)(iii) (“[I]f the carrying out of the phys-
ical activity, the designated project or the project requires a federal authority to exercise a power or
perform a duty or function conferred on it under any Act of Parliament other than this Act, the
following environmental effects are also to be taken into account: . . . (b) an effect. . . of any change
referred to in paragraph (a) on . . . (iii) any structure, site or thing that is of historical, archaeological,
paleontological or architectural significance” [emphasis added]), secs. 6–8, sec. 19(1)(a).

90. Foo et al., “Environmental Protection,” 87; Koh, “The Garden City and Beyond,” 166–167;
Lye, “Legal Protection of the Natural Environment,” 89–90; Chun, “Reclaiming the Public Trust in
Singapore,” especially 715, para. 5, 725–736, paras. 21–45, and 745–746, para. 70; Chun, “Beyond
Real Estate,” 16–20 and 28–33; Lye, “A Fine City in a Garden,” 109–112; Lye, “Land Law and the
Environment,” 219–225, paras. 47–60.

91. Briffett and Mackee, “Environmental Assessment in Singapore,” 116–118.
92. Briffett and Mackee, “Environmental Assessment in Singapore,” 119.
93. “LTA Finalises Alignment of New Road across Bukit Brown: Fewer Graves Affected than Ear-
lier Estimated; More Time for Next-of-kin to Register Claims; Preliminary Documentation for Af-
fected Graves Completed,” URA, 19 March 2012, http://www.ura.gov.sg/pr/text/2012/pr12-26.html,
archived at http://web.archive.org/web/20121001071635/http://www.ura.gov.sg/pr/text/2012/pr12
-26.html (accessed 27 February 2013). The proposed road also affects Seh Ong Cemetery, an adjoin-
ing cemetery.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

283

94. Bukit Brown was zoned for residential use in the URA’s 1991 Concept Plan, but still desig-
nated a cemetery in the 2008 Master Plan. On 30 May 2011, the URA announced that the cemetery
would eventually be developed into a housing estate: Terence Chong, “Position Paper on Bukit Brown,”
Singapore Heritage Society, 2012, 11 and 16 http://www.singaporeheritage.org/wp-content/uploads
/2011/11/SHS_BB_Position_Paper.pdf, archived at http://web.archive.org/web/20121022225529
/http://www.singaporeheritage.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/SHS_BB_Position_Paper.pdf (ac-
cessed 27 February 2013). See also A High Quality Living Environment for All Singaporeans: Land Use
Plan to Support Singapore’s Future Population (Singapore: Ministry of National Development, 2013),
19, para. 3.4.6., http://www.mnd.gov.sg/landuseplan/homes_more_homes_in_the_central_region.htm
(accessed 27 February 2013).

95. Chong, “Bukit Brown as Contested Space” in “Position Paper on Bukit Brown,” 20–24.
96. Chong, “Position Paper on Bukit Brown,” 4–6.
97. Ho, “Bukit Brown: Nature in an Old Cemetery,” 104 and 109.
98. Lim Han She, “Bukit Brown: A Hydrological Perspective” in “Position Paper on Bukit Brown,”

note 94, 25.

99. Chong, “Position Paper on Bukit Brown,” 13 and 18–19.
100. Ler Seng Ann (Group Director [Conservation & Development Services], URA), “Tough De-
cision in Face of Housing Needs, Says URA [letter],” The Straits Times, 11 June 2011, http://www
.ura.gov.sg/pr/forum/2011/forum11-06.html, archived at http://web.archive.org/web/20121001071619
/http://www.ura.gov.sg/pr/forum/2011/forum11-06.html (accessed 27 February 2013); see also Tan
See Nin (Director [Physical Planning], URA), “Why Bukit Brown Is Needed for Housing [letter],”
Today, 18 June 2011, http://www.ura.gov.sg/pr/forum/2011/forum11-07.html, archived at http://
web.archive.org/web/20121001071547/http://www.ura.gov.sg/pr/forum/2011/forum11-07.html (ac-
cessed 27 February 2013).

101. Yeo, “Estimates of Expenditure for the Financial Year 1st April, 1992 to 31st March, 1993.”
102. Lim, “Archaeology as a Critical Source,” 129.
103. AMAAA (UK), sec. 33(1).
104. The AMAAA (UK), sec. 61(1), defines flooding operations as “covering land with water or
any other liquid or partially liquid substance” and tipping operations as “tipping soil or spoil or de-
positing building or other materials or matter (including waste materials or refuse) on any land.”

105. AMAAA (UK), sec. 38(1).
106. AMAAA (UK), secs. 38(2), (3) and (4)(a). Where the operations stated in the operations
notice are to be carried out after clearance of the site, the excavation period starts from the date
when notification of the site clearance is received or with the date mentioned in sec. 38(4)(a), which-
ever occurs last: sec. 38(4)(b). Proceeding with operations while an investigating authority has the
right to excavate a site renders a developer criminally liable: sec. 38(7) read with sec. 35.

107. AMAAA (UK), sec. 38(4)(c).
108. NHBA, sec. 46(5).
109. NHBA, sec. 46(6).
110. NHBA, sec. 46(7).
111. Yeo, “Estimates of Expenditure for the Financial Year 1st April, 1992 to 31st March, 1993.”
112. Simonds, Halsbury’s Laws of England, 540, paras. 1161–1163. It is notable that the Coroners
Act 2010 (No. 14 of 2010, now Cap. 63A, 2012 Rev. Ed) of Singapore deals entirely with the duty of
coroners to hold inquiries into deaths, and is silent on any jurisdiction as regards treasure troves.

113. Lee, “Treaties, Time Limits and Treasure Trove,” 259.
114. Contrast Hickling, “The Prerogative in Malaysia,” with Harding, “Monarchy and the Prerog-

ative in Malaysia”: see Lee, “Treaties, Time Limits and Treasure Trove,” 259–261.

115. Act 67 (1999 Reprint) (Malaysia).
116. By virtue of the Republic of Singapore Independence Act 1965 (No. 9 of 1965, 1985 Rev.
Ed.) (hereinafter RSIA), sec. 3: “The Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia shall with effect from Sin-
gapore Day cease to be the Supreme Head of Singapore and his sovereignty and jurisdiction and
power and authority, executive or otherwise, in respect of Singapore shall be relinquished and shall
vest in the Head of State.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

284

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

117. RSIA, sec. 13(1). The present Constitution of the Republic of Singapore (1985 Rev. Ed., 1999
Reprint) contains an equivalent provision, Art. 162: “Subject to this Article, all existing laws shall
continue in force on and after the commencement of this Constitution. . . but all such laws shall,
subject to this Article, be construed as from the commencement of this Constitution with such mod-
ifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into con-
formity with this Constitution.”
118. Cap. 7A, 1994 Rev. Ed.
119. Lee, “Treaties, Time Limits and Treasure Trove,” 262–263.
120. 1963 S.C. 533.
121. Lord Advocate v. University of Aberdeen, 559 per Lord Mackintosh; see also 554 per Lord Patrick.
122. Bell, “Bona Vacantia,” 216–220. In the Singapore context, see the Intestate Succession Act
(Cap. 146, 1985 Rev. Ed.), sec. 7, r. 9; and the Civil Law Act (Cap. 43, 1999 Rev. Ed.), sec. 27(1):
“When a right to the personal estate of any person who dies intestate without next of kin has ac-
crued to the Government, such personal estate or the proceeds thereof shall form part of the Con-
solidated Fund and shall be appropriated as part of such revenue to such public purposes as Parliament
may from time to time think proper and direct.” However, the relevant minister may “order the
transfer of the whole or any part of such personal estate, or the proceeds thereof, to any person or
persons who shall establish to the satisfaction of the Minister any equitable or moral claim thereto”:
sec. 27(2).

123. Bell, “Bona Vacantia,” 223–226.
124. Blackstone, Commentaries, 298; see also Chitty, A Treatise on the Law of the Prerogatives of
the Crown, and the dicta of Finlay C.J. in Webb v. Ireland [1988] I.R. 353 at 381, S.C. (Ireland):
“Treasure trove . . . is part of the more general right of bona vacantia.”

125. Ing, Bona Vacantia, 8–9: see Bell, “Bona Vacantia,” 208.
126. Bell, “Bona Vacantia,” 212.
127. Above, note 124.
128. Webb, 383 per Finlay C.J.
129. [1998] 2 S.L.R.(R.) 489.
130. Webb, 499–500, paras. 30 and 32.
131. Webb per Finlay C.J., Henchy and Griffin JJ. concurring at 394.
132. Attorney-General of the Duchy of Lancaster v. G. E. Overton (Farms) Ltd [1982] Ch. 277 at

292, C.A.

133. Chitty, A Treatise on the Law of the Prerogatives of the Crown, 152, cited with approval in
Attorney-General v. Moore [1893] 1 Ch. 676 at 683 and Attorney-General v. Trustees of British Mu-
seum [1903] 2 Ch. 598 at 608.

134. A.-G. v. Trustees of the British Museum, 608–609.
135. “Treasure Trove: Discovery at Fort Canning,” The Singapore Free Press and Mercantile Adver-
tiser, 19 July 1928, 9; “Treasure Trove at Fort Canning,” The Straits Times, 19 July 1928, 8; Winstedt,
“Gold Ornaments.”

136. Miksic, Forbidden Hill, 43.
137. Miksic, Old Javanese Gold, 50; Miksic, Forbidden Hill, 42–43. Some of the gold ornaments,
including the “goose ring,” were found to be missing after World War II (Forbidden Hill, 43, caption
of fig. 3); the remainder have pride of place in the collection of the National Museum of Singapore.
138. Webb, 391 per Walsh J. The remaining judge, McCarthy J., expressed no view on this issue.
139. Parker v. British Airways Board [1982] Q.B. 1004; Waverley Borough Council v. Fletcher [1996]

Q.B. 334.

140. See, e.g., Palmer, “Treasure Trove and Title to Discovered Antiquities,” 308–309; Bland, “Trea-

sure Trove and the Case for Reform,” 16–18.

141. 1996 c. 24 (UK).
142. Though cogent arguments have been made against attempts by nations to retain cultural
property within their borders (see, for example, Merryman, “The Retention of Cultural Property”),
it might be said that the vesting of ownership of relics in the state is not unfair to finders or land-
owners since the presence of a relic on a person’s land and its subsequent discovery are entirely

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

285

fortuitous events, and that the finder can be financially compensated for any effort expended in
locating the relic.

143. See, e.g., the National Heritage Act 2005 (Act 645, 2006 Reprint) (Malaysia) [hereinafter NHA
(M’sia)], sec. 2(1) (definitions of antiquity and archaeological relic); Treasure Act 1996 (c. 24) (UK)
[hereinafter TA (UK)], sec. 1(1) (definition of treasure).
144. No. 2 of 1930, http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1930/en/act/pub/0002/print.html (accessed 26

May 2011) [hereinafter NMA 1930 (Ireland)].

145. NMA 1930 (Ireland), sec. 2.
146. No. 17 of 1994, http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0017/print.html (accessed
26 May 2011) [hereinafter NMA 1994 (Ireland)]. By secs. 24(2) and (3) of that Act, it is to be con-
strued together with the National Monuments Act 1930 and the National Monuments (Amend-
ment) Act 1987 (No. 17 of 1987), http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1987/en/act/pub/0017/print.html,
as one Act (accessed 26 May 2011).

147. NMA 1994 (Ireland), sec. 4. Compare the NHA (M’sia), secs. 86 and 113.
148. NMA 1994 (Ireland), sec. 7. The use of such a device in a protected area is prohibited by the

National Monuments (Amendment) Act 1987, sec. 2.

149. NMA 1930 (Ireland), sec. 23; NMA 1994 (Ireland), sec. 5. Compare the NHA (M’sia), sec. 74,

and the TA (UK), sec. 8.

150. NMA 1994 (Ireland), sec. 10; Compare the NHA (M’sia), sec. 79.
151. NMA 1930 (Ireland), sec. 24.
152. NHA (M’sia), sec. 83; Cultural Property Export and Import Act (R.S. 1985, c. C-51) (Can-
ada); Antiquities Act 1975 (1975 No. 41) (NZ), secs. 5–10; Protection of Movable Cultural Heritage
Act 1986 (No. 11 of 1986) (Cth., Australia), Pt. II, Div. I, secs. 7–13.

153. Lim, “Archaeology as a Critical Source,” 132.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Avieropoulou Choo, Alexandra. Archaeology: A Guide to the Collections, National Museum Singapore.
Singapore: National Museum, 1987.

———. Report on the Excavation at Fort Canning Hill, Singapore. Singapore: National Museum, 1986.

Barry, Jennifer. Istana Kampong Glam: Archaeological Excavations at a Nineteenth Century Malay Pal-
ace in Singapore. Stamford, Lincolnshire, UK: Rheidol Press, 2009.

———. Istana Kampong Glam: European Ceramic from Archaeological Excavations at a Nineteenth
Century Malay Palace in Singapore. Stamford, Lincolnshire, UK: Rheidol Press, 2007.

———. Pulau Saigon: A Post-Eighteenth Century Archaeological Assemblage Recovered from a Former
Island in the Singapore River. Stamford, Lincolnshire, UK: Rheidol Press, 2000.

Bell, Andrew. “Bona Vacantia.” In Interests in Goods (2nd ed.), edited by Norman Palmer and Ewan
McKendrick, 207–26. London: LLP, 1998.

Blackstone, William. Commentaries on the Laws of England (14th ed.), vol. 1. London: T. Cadell and
W. Davies, 1803.

Bland, Roger. “Treasure Trove and the Case for Reform.” Art, Antiquity and Law 1 (1996): 11–26.

Blockley, Marion. “The Ironbridge Gorge: Preservation, Reconstruction, and Presentation of Indus-
trial Heritage.” In The Reconstructed Past: Reconstructions in the Public Interpretation of Archaeology
and History, edited by John H. Jameson, Jr., 177–98. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2004.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

286

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

Briffett, Clive, and Jamie Mackee, “Environmental Assessment in Singapore: An Enigma Wrapped
Up in a Mystery!” Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal 20, no. 2 (2002): 113–25, doi:
10.3152/147154602781766780.

Cai, Yunci. “Law and Its Impact on Singapore’s Built Heritage.” In Encounters with Singapore Legal
History: Essays in Memory of Geoffrey Wilson Bartholomew, edited by Kevin Y[ew] L[ee] Tan and
Michael Hor, 87–125. Singapore: Singapore Journal of Legal Studies, 2009.

Chen, Omar. “Ancient Singapore Earthenware Pottery.” In Early Singapore 1300s–1819, edited by John
N. Miksic and Cheryl-Ann Low Mei Gek, 55–72. Singapore: Singapore History Museum, 2004.

Chitty, Joseph. A Treatise on the Law of the Prerogatives of the Crown and the Relative Duties and the
Rights of the Subject. London: J. Butterworth, 1820.

Chun, Joseph. “Beyond Real Estate: Sowing the Legal Seeds for an Ethical Public Land Stewardship
in Singapore.” Macquarie Journal of International and Comparative Environmental Law 3 (2006): 1–34.

———. “Reclaiming the Public Trust in Singapore.” Singapore Academy of Law Journal 17 (2005):
717–46.

Foo, Kim Boon, Lye Lin Heng, and Koh Kheng Lian. “Environmental Protection: The Legal Frame-
work.” In Environment and the City: Sharing Singapore’s Experience and Future Challenges, edited by
Ooi Giok Ling, 47–99. Singapore: Institute of Policy Studies; Times Academic Press, 1995.

Harding, A.J. “Monarchy and the Prerogative in Malaysia.” Malaya Law Review 28 (1986): 345–65.

Hayman, Richard, and Wendy Horton, Ironbridge: History & Guide. Stroud, Gloucestershire: Tem-
pus, 1999.

Hayman, Richard, Wendy Horton, and Shelley White. Archaeology and Conservation in Ironbridge
(CBA research report; 123). York: Council for British Archaeology, 1999.

Heng, Derek Thiam Soon. “Export Commodity and Regional Currency: The Role of Chinese Cop-
per Coins in the Melaka Straits, Tenth to Fourteenth Centuries.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies
37 (2006): 179–203, doi: 10.1017/S0022463406000518.

Hickling, R.H. “The Prerogative in Malaysia.” Malaya Law Review 17 (1975): 207–32.

Ho, Hua Chew. “Bukit Brown: Nature in an Old Cemetery.” In Spaces of the Dead: A Case from the
Living, edited by Kevin Yew Lee Tan, 100–13. Singapore: Ethos Books, 2011.

Ing, Noel D. Bona Vacantia. London: Butterworths, 1971.

Ironbridge 2010/2011. Coalbrookdale, Telford, West Midlands: Ironbridge Gorge Museums Trust, 2010,
http://www.ironbridge.org.uk/uploadedfiles/Ironbridge_lflt_10.pdf, archived at http://www.webcitation
.org/5xP7baQvz (accessed March 24, 2011).

Koh, Kheng Lian. “The Garden City and Beyond: the Legal Framework.” In Environment and the
City: Sharing Singapore’s Experience and Future Challenges, edited by Ooi Giok Ling, 148–70. Singa-
pore: Institute of Policy Studies; Times Academic Press, 1995.

Kwa, Chong Guan, Derek Heng, and Tan Tai Yong. “The Lure of the Chinese Market.” In Singapore:
A 700-year History: From Early Emporium to World City, 19–32. Singapore: National Archives, 2009.

———. “Reconstructing the Lion City.” In Singapore: A 700-Year History: From Early Emporium to
World City, 33–52. Singapore: National Archives, 2009.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF SINGAPORE’S ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE

287

Lee, Jack Tsen-Ta. “Treaties, Time Limits and Treasure Trove: The Legal Protection of Cultural Ob-
jects in Singapore.” Art, Antiquity and Law 9 (2004): 237–80.

Lim, Chen Sian. “Archaeology as a Critical Source for Reconstructing the Colonial Past.” In New
Perspectives and Sources on the History of Singapore: A Multi-disciplinary Approach, by Derek Heng
Thiam Soon, 125–33. Singapore: National Library Board, 2006.

Low, Cheryl-Ann Mei Gek. “Singapore from the 14th to 19th Century.” In Early Singapore 1300s–
1819, edited by John N. Miksic and Cheryl-Ann Low Mei Gek, 14–40. Singapore: Singapore History
Museum, 2004.

Lunney, Mark, “Trespass to Land.” In The Law of Tort (2nd ed.), edited by Ken Oliphant, 485–534.
London: LexisNexis Butterworths, 2007.

Lye, Lin Heng. “A Fine City in a Garden—Environmental Law and Governance in Singapore.” Sin-
gapore Journal of Legal Studies (2008): 68–117

———. “Land Law and the Environment: Re-examining the Concept of Ownership and Forging
New Rights and Obligations in a Changed World.” Singapore Academy of Law Journal 22 (2010):
219–25.

———. “Legal Protection of the Natural Environment.” In State of the Natural Environment in Sin-
gapore, edited by Clive Briffett and Ho Hua Chew, 83–95. Singapore: Nature Society, 1999.

McIntosh, Jane. The Practical Archaeologist: How We Know What We Know about the Past. London:
Thames & Hudson, 1999.

Merryman, John Henry, “The Retention of Cultural Property.” University of California, Davis, Law
Review 21 (1988): 477–513, reprinted in John Henry Merryman. Thinking about the Elgin Marbles:
Critical Essays on Cultural Property, Art and Law (2nd ed.). Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands:
Kluwer Law International, 2009: 170–203.

Miksic, John N. Archaeological Research on the “Forbidden Hill” of Singapore: Excavations at Fort Can-
ning, 1984. Singapore: National Museum, 1985.

———. “Fourteenth Century Chinese Glass Found in Singapore and the Riau Archipelago.” In South
East Asia and China: Art, Interaction and Commerce: Colloquies on Art and Archaeology in Asia, No.
17, Held June 6th–8th, 1994, edited by Rosemary Scott and John Guy, 252–73. London: University of
London; Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art, 1995.

———. “14th-Century Singapore: A Port of Trade.” In Early Singapore 1300s–1819: Evidence in Maps,
Text and Artefacts, edited by John N. Miksic and Cheryl-Ann Low Mei Gek, 41–54. Singapore: Sin-
gapore History Museum, 2004.

———. Old Javanese Gold. Singapore: Ideation, 1990.

———. “Sebuah arca timah hitam dari Tebing Sungai Singapura [A Lead Statue Recently Discov-
ered at a Majapahit-Period Site in Singapore]” (paper presented at the 8th Scientific Archaeology
Conference, 15–18 February 1999, Yogyakarta, Indonesia). In Kumpulan Makalah Pertemuan Ilmiah
Arkeologi VIII [Collected Papers of Scientific Archaeology Conference VIII ], 425–28. Jakarta: Ikatan
Ahli Arkeologi Indonesia, 2002.

Miksic, John N., and Lim Chen Sian. Archaeological Research on the Padang and in the St. Andrew’s
Cathedral Churchyard: St. Andrew’s Cathedral Archaeological Research Project Progress Report Sum-
mary September 2003—June 2004. Singapore: Asia Research Institute, National University of Singa-
pore, 2004, http://www.seaarchaeology.com/v1/html/sg/pdfs/ARI_Project_Report_version_1.5.pdf,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X

288

JACK TSEN-TA LEE

archived at http://replay.waybackmachine.org/20070818192606/http://www.seaarchaeology.com/v1
/html/sg/pdfs/ARI_Project_Report_version_1.5.pdf (accessed 26 March, 2011).

Muter, W. Grant. The Buildings of an Industrial Community: Coalbrookdale and Ironbridge. London:
Phillimore for the Ironbridge Gorge Museum Trust, 1979.

Nolan, Donal. “Nuisance.” In The Law of Tort (2nd ed.), edited by Ken Oliphant, 1101–98. London:
LexisNexis Butterworths, 2007.

Palmer, Norman. “Treasure Trove and Title to Discovered Antiquities.” In Interests in Goods, edited
by Norman Palmer and Ewan McKendrick, 305–44. London: Lloyd’s of London Press, 1993.

Lord Simonds, ed. Halsbury’s Laws of England (3rd ed.), vol. 7. London: Butterworths, 1954.

Turnbull, C.M. A History of Modern Singapore, 1819–2005 (3rd ed.). Singapore: NUS Press, 2009.

Winstedt, R.O. “Gold Ornaments Dug Up at Fort Canning, Singapore.” Journal of the Malayan Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society 6(4) (1928): 1–4, reprinted in the Journal of the Malayan Branch of the
Royal Asiatic Society 42(1) (1969): 49–52.

Zaini, Shah Alam M. Metal Finds and Metal-Working at the Parliament House Complex, Singapore.
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, 1997.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:10:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911300012X


