 

Frozen in Time: Orphans and Uncollected 
Objects in Museum Collections
Janet Ulph*

 

Abstract: The focus of this article is upon objects in museum collections where 
legal title is uncertain (“orphans”), where the owner is unknown (deposited 
objects), or where the owner cannot be found (uncollected loans). Museums 
may have little choice but to continue to care for these objects even where they 
are unsuitable to be retained within the permanent collections. It is argued that 
the current law in the United Kingdom prevents museums from managing their 
collections properly and rationalizing them where necessary. New legislation has 
been proposed that would assist Scottish museums. It is argued that all museums 
in the United Kingdom need new legislation that would enable them to manage 
their collections more effectively and to approach the review of collections and 
the disposal of unsuitable objects in a proper and balanced manner, acting for the 
benefit of the public.

INTRODUCTION

There is an expectation in the United Kingdom (UK), as elsewhere, that museums 
should  be  sustainable  and  trusted  organizations.  A  museum’s  sustainability 
will depend not only upon continuing to attract visitors and supporters but also 
in acting in a financially efficient manner.1 In these austere times, when most  
museums are suffering severe cuts to their budgets, there may be pressure upon 
them to identify and dispose of objects in their permanent collections that are not 
being engaged with by the public or that are otherwise not suitable for retention.2 

*School of Law, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom; Email: ju13@le.ac.uk.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:  The  author  is  grateful  to  the  Arts  and  Humanities  Research  Council 
(AHRC) for supporting this research with an AHRC fellowship. This research was first presented in 
the Property and Trusts section at the Society of Legal Scholars’ annual conference at the University 
of York in 2015.

3

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

International Journal of Cultural Property (2017) 24:3–30. Printed in the USA.Copyright © 2017 International Cultural Property Societydoi:10.1017/S09407391160003454 

JANET ULPH

The process of removing unwanted objects, following from a review of the col-
lections, is often referred to in the UK as a “curatorially motivated disposal.” This 
phrase indicates that the decision to dispose has not been made with a view to 
raising money from the sale of these objects but, rather, has been made for other 
reasons.3

Although the deaccessioning and disposal of objects still divides opinion,4 it is 
now generally accepted that it is part of good collections management, as long as 
it is curatorially motivated (rather than being for the purpose of financial gain), 
properly resourced, and carefully conducted.5 Even so, there are risks associated 
with rationalizing collections. Great care needs to be taken to avoid situations where 
objects are withdrawn on the false assumption that they are not culturally significant 
when, in fact, their importance has not been properly understood.6 This process 
of refining a collection, if carried out properly, is therefore time-consuming. But 
responsible disposal can be beneficial.7 The objects earmarked for removal may be 
transferred to other museums where they can be enjoyed by the public in a new set-
ting. Their disposal should make existing collections easier to manage.8 Moreover, 
if unwanted objects are transferred elsewhere, there will no longer be any need 
to  pay  for  their  care.  The  process  should  encourage  museums  to  take  a  holistic 
approach towards their collections because it acts as a valuable reminder that every 
new acquisition will have resource implications, as the new addition may need to 
be analyzed and preserved indefinitely.9

There can be a variety of reasons why there are unsuitable objects in perma-
nent collections.10 For example, some museums have collected indiscriminately 
in the past because their collection policies were ill defined or because their staff 
accepted objects of doubtful cultural value in order to avoid upsetting donors. As 
a backdrop, there may be a more general problem of storage and care caused by 
the regular acquisition of cultural items over many years.11 For example, social 
history museums may have amassed a large number of objects in order to save 
them from oblivion and in the hope that they will be valued by future genera-
tions.12 Managing the agglomeration of so much cultural material has proven to 
be a challenge in many countries. In relation to archaeological collections in the 
United States, Morag Kersel has observed that

[s]torage  (here  implying  curation  and  permanent  care)  is  one  of  the 
most  pressing  issues  facing  archaeology  today.  As  collections  pile  up, 
space is saturated, cataloging lags, and budget and staff capabilities are 
stretched beyond their limits; repositories and museums are unable to 
cope with the burgeoning rates of acquisition, curation, excavation, and 
retention.13

Although the problem of storage may be universal, not every country faces the same 
challenges. In relation to finding repositories for bulky archaeological material in 
the United States, Raz Kletter has argued that it is the financial costs that pose 
problems in relation to storage, and there are few difficulties with technology, 
ethics, or the law.14 But this article will demonstrate that this is not true in relation 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

5

to museum collections in the UK. There are significant legal obstacles regarding 
managing and rationalizing not only archaeological material but also works of art, 
sculptures, and other types of cultural property.

Most museums in the UK will have objects in their collections that they cannot 
confidently  say  that  they  own.  These  are  sometimes  referred  to  as  “orphan  col-
lections.” It is also typical to find some objects that were left on loan many years 
ago and for whom the owners cannot be traced. In order to avoid the risks of 
a  legal  action  and  reputational  damage,  museums  may  decide  to  retain  these 
objects  despite  the  fact  that,  with  each  passing  year,  the  likelihood  of  possible 
owners finally claiming them becomes increasingly remote. Furthermore, a lack 
of knowledge in relation to whether an object is held on loan and, if so, its pre-
cise terms, affects their management even in storage. In particular, a lower duty 
of  care  is  owed  in  relation  to  uncollected  loans.15  However,  where  a  museum 
does not know whether the object is an uncollected loan or not, it cannot say 
with certainty, for example, whether it is appropriate to transfer the object to an 
off-site storage facility that might be less secure than if it was retained within the 
museum’s main buildings.

Museum professionals might ask why, if they have not heard from any possible 
owner  for  50  years  or  more,  the  law  does  not  provide  that  the  passage  of  time 
has given museums unfettered rights of ownership. Are these unwanted objects to 
remain “frozen” in perpetuity, to be retained despite the fact that they are occu-
pying much needed storage space and wasting scarce resources? Are any attempts 
to refine collections to be carried out in a lopsided manner, with orphan objects 
and uncollected loans excluded from consideration?

This article explores why the current law gives the governing bodies of museums 
little choice but to retain and care for unwanted items. It discusses proposed new 
legislation for Scotland, which should resolve many of the problems posed where 
title  to  an  object  is  uncertain  or  where  the  owner  of  an  uncollected  loan  object 
cannot be found. It will be argued that all museums in the UK need new legislation 
that  enables  them  to  manage  their  collections  more  effectively  and  to  approach 
the  review  of  collections  and  the  disposal  of  unsuitable  objects  in  a  proper  and 
balanced manner, acting for the benefit of the public.

THE LAW OF ENGLAND, WALES, AND NORTHERN IRELAND

No Acquisition Records

Risks Associated with Objects That Have No Acquisition Records
Most museums have some acquisition records from the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries  that  provide  little  or  no  information  about  how  an  object  came  to  be 
in their collections. Sometimes objects were transferred by societies that are now 
defunct  and  where  ownership  was  unclear.16  Some  objects  have  been  deposited 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

6 

JANET ULPH

anonymously by members of the public who have either sent objects through the 
post or quietly left them in the museum before departing. Furthermore, museums 
have many objects for which, although it is known that they were originally trans-
ferred on loan, the lenders cannot be found.

It is possible that an object was transferred to the museum on trust for charitable 
purposes (such as educational purposes). If so, there is little risk of any breach of 
the  law.  The  Charity  Commission  encourages  museums  to  root  out  any  objects  
that do not have merit.17 If the governing body is acting in the best interests of the 
museum and for the benefit of the public in transferring objects to another museum, 
or selling them and using any proceeds of the sale for charitable purposes (such as to 
acquire new objects or to care for the remaining collections), it is highly unlikely that 
there will be a breach of charity law. In contrast, dealing with objects that may have 
been transferred on loan is hazardous. The lender may have been negligent in failing 
to remind the museum that the object was being lent rather than being given and in 
making no effort to let the museum know of his or her whereabouts, but this care-
lessness with his own property will not usually affect a museum’s liability in con-
version.18 Similarly, all of the efforts that a museum may have made to discover 
whether the object was on loan or not (such as searching through its acquisition 
records) will normally be irrelevant. In law, the general rule is that the defendant is 
strictly liable – there is no defense of good faith.19 This potential liability will cause 
any museum to hesitate in transferring an object elsewhere.

Objects on Loan and the Tort of Conversion
If a museum sells an object that was on loan, the claimant will use the tort of con-
version to recover it or to obtain compensation for its loss.20 In law, the claimant 
merely has to show that the defendant deliberately treated the object in a way that 
was inconsistent with the rights of the owner and that the defendant’s conduct was 
so extensive that the owner was excluded from possession of it.21 A claimant is not 
obliged to show that the museum was at fault. Museums are therefore at risk if they 
assume that they own their collections where there are no records to substantiate 
this fact.

The legal principles that form the basis for the action in conversion are derived 
from decisions made in cases centuries ago. The law is complex because it requires 
an understanding of subtle issues relating to possession and mental control. For 
example, the claimant does not need to prove that he is the owner;22 he only needs 
to demonstrate that he has a legal right to immediate possession of the object.23 
This would be the case where he has transferred the object on loan but where the 
loan can be brought to an end at any time. It is sufficient if the claimant can show 
that he has a right to possess the object that is superior to the defendant’s right. 
Thus, a possessor (such as a finder), who exercises control over the object, may 
have rights that are good against everyone apart from an earlier owner.24 By per-
mitting a claimant to assert his possessory rights against anyone who later inter-
feres with his enjoyment of the property,25 the law provides a pragmatic solution 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

7

that avoids social disorder.26 Furthermore, by recognizing different degrees of pos-
session, the tort is sufficiently flexible to identify who has the better right to an 
object in the context not only of sales and loans but also of more elaborate transac-
tions. In Kuwait Airways Corp. v. Iraqi Airways Co., Lord Nicholls observed that, as 
conversion could take place in such widely differing circumstances, it was difficult 
to formulate a precise test.27 As Sarah Green and John Randall have remarked, the 
courts have tended to look backwards to decided cases over the centuries rather 
than to look forward with a view to producing guidance that will help with new 
situations.28 As we will see, the lack of a clear legal “map” can create the risk of 
overhasty decisions.

The normal remedy sought will be financial compensation.29 It is possible to 
ask the court to make an order at its discretion for the return of the object itself 
where it is unique, as cultural objects often will be.30 Where the loan object has 
been given away or sold by a museum, the claimant has a choice of defendants; as 
successive possessors will have deprived him of his property, in turn, the claimant 
may sue each one and require them to account for the benefits that they have 
received.31  In  Kuwait  Airways,  Lord  Nicholls  appeared  critical  of  the  principle 
that each person along a chain of transactions will be held strictly liable to pay 
compensation, regardless of fault and regardless of whether their possession was 
for a short period before the object was transferred to another.32 However, his 
Lordship went on to acknowledge that the principle of strict liability was “deeply 
ingrained in the common law.”33

The Law Reform Committee had considered this issue in 1971. Its report was 
the precursor to the Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977, which amended 
and largely unified the old forms of action to produce the modern action in con-
version.34 The committee thought that, if the principle of strict liability was altered, 
the claimant might face insuperable difficulties in attempting to establish that a 
defendant in a chain of disposals (such as an auctioneer or dealer) was at fault. 
The committee suggested that, as most handlers of goods were professionals who 
were insured, the advantage of strict liability was that it was clear and certain; it 
meant  that  claims  could  be  made  on  insurance  policies  without  difficulty.35  As 
Lord Denning had noted in R.H. Willis and Son v. British Car Auction Ltd., auc-
tion houses will normally charge a buyer’s premium on every sale and will use this 
money to pay for insurance to protect not only themselves but also the purchasers 
from potential third party claims.36 Thus, if a trader or auctioneer does not have 
the time or inclination to act as a detective to check the ownership history of an 
object, he can take out insurance to cover the risk of being sued by a third party. 
Lord Denning described this system as one of “doing justice between the parties” 
so that they are all protected.37 It is therefore difficult to understand why judicial 
concern to protect commercial people, such as auctioneers, persists when they are 
so easily able to protect themselves.38

The fact that a claimant can sue successive possessors makes it very difficult for 
museums to find a solution when they wish to transfer or sell (or perhaps destroy) 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

8 

JANET ULPH

objects from their collections but where there are no records in relation to how 
they came to be acquired. Not only the museum, but also any recipient, could be 
sued in conversion if the object turns out to have been originally transferred on 
loan. Good faith is no defense. Taking out insurance, even if it was possible, would 
not necessarily be an answer. Museums are concerned to avoid any injury to their 
reputations because they depend upon public trust.39 If a person complains that 
the museum has sold an object on loan, this action is likely to attract the attention 
of the media, and the museum will be seen to be highly irresponsible by members 
of the public, who expect museums to care for their collections in the long term and 
to consult donors before transferring them elsewhere. A further concern is that it is 
common for the value of cultural objects to fluctuate, making it difficult to anticipate 
the size of any claim for compensation if the object cannot be returned.40 Museums 
with unwanted objects may not be able to take out insurance to cover the financial 
risks of anyone coming forward to claim an object that they have transferred or 
sold elsewhere. And no museum can insure against reputational damage.

Museum Ethics and Stewardship of Collections
There are a wide variety of museums in the UK. They include national museums, 
independent museums, and local authority museums. National museums and some 
independent museums are charitable.41 Legal title to the collections will normally 
be vested in the governing body, which may be a board of trustees, a company, or 
a local authority. All of those who work in these museums, and their governing 
bodies, are expected to adhere to the Museum Association’s Code of Ethics.

Both the current Code of Ethics and its predecessor, published in 2015 and 2007 
respectively by the Museums Association, emphasize that museums and their gov-
erning bodies act as stewards (or guardians) of their collections. The 2015 Code 
of Ethics, under the heading “2. Stewardship of Collections” states:

Museums and those who work in and with them should:

 

	 •	 	maintain	and	develop	collections	for	current	and	future	generations
	 •	 	acquire,	care	for,	exhibit	and	loan	collections	with	transparency	and	
competency in order to generate knowledge and engage the public 
with collections

	 •	 	treat	museum	collections	as	cultural,	scientific	or	historic	assets,	not	

financial assets.

 
The key principle of stewardship is developed further at a later point in the new 
Code of Ethics, which speaks of museums “safeguarding items for the benefit of 
future audiences with its obligation to optimise access for present audiences.”42

Sales and Conversion
Both charity law and museum professional practice encourage museums to review 
their collections and to deaccession and dispose of objects that are not being engaged 
with by the public.43 If an object is unwanted, museums are expected to try and 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

9

keep the object within the public domain by transferring it to another museum if 
they can. The thinking is that a transfer to another museum will benefit the public 
because there is the opportunity for different visitors to enjoy the object in its new 
location.

In normal circumstances, museums will only sell an object to a private buyer if 
it cannot be rehoused in another museum. This occasionally happens when either 
the object has relatively little cultural value or when there is a surfeit of such objects. 
The classic examples are things from the Victorian era, such as bed pans and coal 
scuttles, which may still be of some interest to private purchasers. However, if there 
is no record of an object’s history and if it was in fact transferred on loan, any sale 
would be a conversion of the object. The lender could therefore sue the museum. 
The purchaser could also sue the museum demanding the return of the price paid, 
on the basis that there has been a breach of an implied term in the sale agreement 
that the museum had a right to sell.44 A museum may therefore be advised that it is 
safer to keep the object, rather than selling it, in order to avoid any risk of litigation 
and damage to its reputation.

Stewardship: Transfers, Loans, and Conversions
Although museums will avoid selling objects that have no acquisition records, are 
they on safer ground if they transfer or lend them to other museums? Museums are 
encouraged by the Code of Ethics to transfer unwanted objects to other museums. 
If there is doubt over legal title, the recipient museum could be informed of this 
risk and the fact that it may be obliged to surrender the object if someone can prove 
that she is the owner. In these circumstances, could the museums deny that they 
were converting the object by claiming that they were merely acting as stewards of 
cultural property? Their argument would be that there had been merely a transfer 
of physical possession so that the object, although available to be reclaimed, was 
now to be found in a different location. Both museums would rely upon the guid-
ance in the Code of Ethics to make the point that they held the cultural object as 
stewards for the benefit of the general public and future generations. They could 
argue that a transfer would not be asserting any rights to the exclusion of the true 
owner; it would be simply a matter of swapping one steward for another. If this 
argument was accepted, museums could feel free to transfer their “orphan collec-
tions” between each other, and there would be a partial solution to the problem of 
long-term care and storage of unwanted objects.

In  order  to  decide  whether  the  transferring  museum  or  receiving  museum  is 
acting in a manner that is inconsistent with the rights of the owner, a court would 
consider whether they have consciously interfered with the owner’s rights. It is a 
matter of determining whether the defendant has exercised control over the object 
with the intention of asserting dominion over it. This will normally be the case 
when someone purchases stolen goods for their own use.45 In contrast, a defendant 
will not be liable if he merely has physical possession of the goods but has no power 
to deal with them, as may happen when intermediaries transport or store goods.46  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

10 

JANET ULPH

The  courts  have  struggled  at  times  to  determine  the  liability  of  intermediaries. 
However, auctioneers and dealers who have carried out instructions from the  
apparent owners of goods to sell them have been held liable.47 This approach would 
have made good commercial sense in the nineteenth century when it was not 
uncommon for dealers to agree to buy goods that might be for their own purposes 
(to buy and then resell) or with the intention of acting as an agent for another.48

The courts have been less willing to impose liability where the intermediary has 
not been directly involved in selling the object in question. In National Mercantile 
Bank v. Rymill, it was decided that an auctioneer was not liable because he had not 
effected a sale but had only introduced the seller to the purchaser.49 Similarly, in 
Marcq v. Christie Manson and Woods Ltd., the Court of Appeal held that Christie’s  
was not liable where, having innocently attempted and failed to sell a stolen painting, 
it returned the painting to the apparent owner. The claimant was the victim of the 
theft and sued Christie’s, arguing that it was guilty of conversion because it had 
asserted control over the painting by cataloguing it, offering it for sale, keeping it 
in its possession for five months, and having a contractual lien over it. However, 
Christie’s responded that it had not asserted dominion over the painting: it had 
not sold the painting and neither had it exercised its lien.50 Christie’s argument 
was accepted, and it was held that Christie’s was not liable for conversion where, 
having failed to sell the painting, it redelivered the painting to the person who it 
believed in good faith to be the owner.51 Lord Justice Tuckey, with whom Lord 
Justices Keene and Peter Gibson agreed, stated that Christie’s had, “in the event, 
merely changed the position of the goods and not the property in them.”52 Relying 
upon the decision in Marcq, one could argue that a museum that transfers a cul-
tural object to another museum where it can be better displayed and enjoyed is 
merely changing the location of the object. Unfortunately, the recent decision in 
London Borough of Tower Hamlets v. London Borough of Bromley suggests other-
wise. Indeed, it goes further and raises doubts over the wisdom of a short-term 
loan of a cultural object between museums (such as for a special exhibition) where 
the ownership history is unknown.

The Decision in Tower Hamlets
The question of whether lending a cultural object to a museum would be seen as 
an act of conversion was one among a number of issues that arose for decision in 
the Tower Hamlets case.53 The case concerned a dispute between two local author-
ities over the ownership of a valuable bronze sculpture created by Henry Moore in 
1957. Moore drew on his wartime experiences in London in creating the sculpture. 
He sold it to the London County Council in 1962, believing that it would benefit  
Londoners. The sculpture was placed on the Stifford Estate in what is now the 
London Borough of Tower Hamlets. It was formally titled “Draped Seated Woman” 
but eventually became known affectionately as “Old Flo.” The background to the 
dispute between the two local authorities was that a now disgraced former mayor 
of Tower Hamlets declared in 2012 that the sculpture would be sold at Christie’s 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

11

and the proceeds used to fund social housing projects. Bromley objected to the sale 
and maintained that the sculpture should stay in the public sector, safeguarded for 
the benefit of the people of London.

When the London County Council was abolished in 1965, its powers were trans-
ferred  to  the  Greater  London  Council  (GLC).  When  the  GLC  was  abolished  in 
1986, its powers passed to the London Residuary Body before being distributed 
among various local authorities. Tower Hamlets assumed that it owned the sculp-
ture because it owned the land on which the sculpture had originally been placed. 
One issue, therefore, was whether the sculpture was a fixture; if it was, Tower  
Hamlets would own it because it owned the land. However, Justice Norris ruled 
that the sculpture was a chattel. The ownership of the sculpture therefore depended 
upon an analysis of the statutory powers under which it had been acquired54 and 
retained55 to determine which local authority could claim ownership as successor 
in title to the London County Council. Norris J concluded that the relevant stat-
utory powers were the ones concerned with providing works of art for the com-
munity  as  part  of  an  arts  education  program  (rather  than  the  statutory  powers 
available in connection with housing functions). He decided that title to the sculp-
ture had passed from London County Council to the GLC, then to the London 
Residuary Body, and finally to Bromley.

But  this  was  not  the  end  of  the  story.  When  Henry  Moore  died  in  1986,  the 
local press described Tower Hamlets as the owner, believing that this was the case 
because of the location of the sculpture. Tower Hamlets accepted that this was the 
position, and, in 1992, it made arrangements for the sculpture to be restored after 
it was damaged by graffiti. In 1996, it lent the sculpture to the Yorkshire Sculpture 
Park for a three-year period. Neither the London Residuary Body nor Bromley made 
any objections. Indeed, the only reason for Bromley’s intervention more recently 
was to prevent Tower Hamlets from selling the sculpture and dissipating the pro-
ceeds. It was held that Tower Hamlets had acted inconsistently with the rights of 
Bromley as owner. Norris J explained that,

[f]ocusing  solely  upon  the  events  of  1997–2002,  the  removal  of  the 
sculpture from its site, the contractual loan to the Yorkshire Sculpture 
Park for three years, the undertaking of further restoration of the sculp-
ture (in addition to the new plinth provided in 1992) and the exercise of 
control over what work was done, the decision to entrust the insurance 
of the sculpture to others, the decision to leave the sculpture where it 
was rather than to bring it back to Tower Hamlets (certainly deliberate 
by 2002) were all assertions of rights of dominion over the sculpture 
inconsistent with the ownership rights of Bromley.56

Norris J decided that the conduct of Tower Hamlets was deliberate and was suf-
ficient to exclude Bromley from its use and possession of the sculpture.57 Since 
Bromley had not asserted its rights within six years by bringing an action in con-
version, its legal title was extinguished by the Limitation Act 1980.58 As a result, 
Tower Hamlets owned the sculpture.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

12 

JANET ULPH

Norris J rejected Bromley’s argument that Tower Hamlets had not exercised 
any rights of dominion over the sculpture but had merely been safeguarding it. 
Bromley had relied upon Fouldes v. Willoughby,59 and Norris J noted that it had 
been held in that case that a “simple asportation of a chattel, without any intention 
of making any further use of it, was not sufficient to establish conversion.”60 But 
Norris J added that it was also clearly decided in that case that

[a]ny  asportation  of  a  chattel  for  the  use  of  the  defendant,  or  a  third 
person, amounts to a conversion; for this simple reason, that it is an act 
inconsistent with the general right of dominion which the owner of the 
chattel  has  in  it,  who  is  entitled  to  the  use  of  it  at  all  times  and  in  all 
places. When, therefore, a man takes a chattel, either for the use of him-
self or of another, it is a conversion.

Norris J added:

When  Tower  Hamlets  took  the  sculpture  for  restoration  (its  own  pur-
poses) and for contractual loan to the Yorkshire Sculpture Park (the use 
of a third person) it was not merely moving the sculpture out of harm’s 
way but otherwise permitting the owner to exercise dominion over it; it 
was acting inconsistently with the general right of dominion of Bromley, 
inconsistently with Bromley’s entitlement to use the sculpture at all times 
and in all places.

Norris J assumed that Tower Hamlets was acting for “its own purposes” and did not 
explore  Bromley’s  argument  regarding  safeguarding  the  sculpture  and  steward-
ship further.  Yet,  if  one  considers  the  conduct  of  Tower  Hamlets  during  the 
events of 1992–2002, it is clear that it cared for the sculpture in the same manner 
as a museum curator would care for a sculpture in a museum collection. After 
the sculpture had been vandalized, Tower Hamlets liaised with the Henry Moore 
Foundation, which paid for its cleansing and replaced the plinth. It then lent the 
sculpture to the Yorkshire Sculpture Park, making the type of arrangement that, 
in this writer’s experience, is not uncommon between museums – the loan is free 
and one party pays for the costs of transport and installation costs (Tower Hamlets 
in this case) and the other party (the Yorkshire Sculpture Park) agrees to pay for 
the transport and installation costs upon its return. The Henry Moore sculpture is 
worth millions of pounds; any private individual or company who owned it might 
restore it in order to obtain a financial return, such as by selling it or leasing it. How-
ever, the evidence in this case suggests that Tower Hamlets was acting as a steward 
of cultural property, caring for this cultural object for the public benefit. It is clear 
that the Henry Moore Foundation would have taken this view; the foundation is a 
charity and would not have used its own charity funds to restore the sculpture and 
to pay for its insurance during the loan if Tower Hamlets was acting for private 
commercial purposes.

The judgment in Tower Hamlets reveals the difficulties of applying the legal 
principles in conversion to the actions of bodies that have public purposes and that 
may not be acting for commercial gain. Although Tower Hamlets was described by 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

13

Norris J as acting for its “own purposes,” the reality is that the repair or restoration 
of a cultural object by a public body is carried out on the basis of its importance 
to the public. Recently, I discussed the judge’s reasoning at a workshop in London 
for museum curators. I was informed that museums will pay substantial sums of 
money towards the restoration of “orphan” objects when they are of sufficient cul-
tural importance. The work will be done on the basis that the object deserves to 
be preserved for the sake of humankind and with a view to making it accessible to 
members of the public, both in this country and worldwide.

Norris J’s view that the restoration of a cultural object can amount to conversion 
is important because it now seems that museums that have repaired orphan objects 
will be viewed as having converted them; it may also mean that these museums 
may well have title to these objects due to the expiration of the limitation period. 
Unfortunately,  this  result  provides  little  satisfaction  to  museum  professionals, 
who desire certainty in dealing with their collections. Given that there are a large 
number of objects that may or may not be on loan, for which conditions may or 
may not have been attached, it is little comfort to know that a repair to an object in 
the past may end up being significant in providing a limitation period defense to 
any possible legal claim.

The most disquieting aspect of Norris J’s judgment is the ruling that the loan of 
a cultural object to the Yorkshire Sculpture Park amounted to a conversion. This 
ruling presents a significant dilemma for all museums and their governing bodies. 
If there is a desire to avoid committing a conversion of an object, then it would 
appear  that  museums  should  avoid  lending  objects  to  other  museums  for  exhi-
bition purposes where there are no acquisition records relating to these objects.  
But there are so many objects that lack acquisition records that this solution is 
impractical. Museums may very well choose to ignore the risk that they may be 
converting an object because it is a core value within the museum sector that 
collections should be accessible and enjoyed by all.61 The Charity Commission 
expressly encourages loans of cultural objects in order to promote public access.62 
The national museums typically have tens of thousands of objects on loan to 
museums, other public bodies, and researchers.63 It is unsatisfactory to find a 
decision that affects cultural property management in which the real world of pro-
fessional practice has not been taken into account.

The decision in Tower Hamlets might also be viewed as flawed in so far as it 
failed to fully discuss the reasoning in the case law as it might be applied to public 
bodies dealing with cultural property. In Hollins v. Fowler, Justice Blackburn sug-
gested that,

[i]t is generally laid down that any act which is an interference with 
the dominion and right of property of the plaintiff is a conversion, 
but this requires some qualification. From the nature of the action … 
it follows that it must be an interference with the property which would 
not,  as  against  the  true  owner,  be  justified,  or  at  least  excused,  in  one 
who came lawfully into the possession of the goods. And in considering  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

14 

JANET ULPH

whether  the  act  is  excused  against  the  true  owner  it  often  becomes 
important to know whether the person, doing what is charged as a con-
version, had notice of the plaintiff’s title.64

Bromley would have had no objection to the Henry Moore sculpture being lent to 
the Yorkshire Sculpture Park, where it would be safe and where the public would 
enjoy it. Applying Blackburn J’s guidance, Tower Hamlet’s conduct could be jus-
tified or at least excused. In contrast, Bromley strongly objected to the proposed 
sale at a public auction where the sculpture was likely to be purchased by a private 
collector and where the proceeds of the sale would be spent on social housing. It is 
surely at this point, where Tower Hamlets could not justify or excuse its actions to 
the true owner, that there would have been a conversion. If so, Bromley was well 
within the six-year limitation period in bringing its claim.

There are certain key characteristics of conversion that are emphasized in the case 
law but which cannot be found in the case involving Tower Hamlets. The actions 
taken by a defendant must be such that the claimant is “deprived” of his property and 
that he is “excluded” from enjoying it. As Lord Nicholls stated in Kuwait Airways,

[f]or the purposes of this tort an owner is equally deprived of possession 
when he is excluded from possession, or possession is withheld from him 
by the wrongdoer … mere unauthorised retention of another’s goods is 
not conversion of them. Mere possession of another’s goods without title 
is not necessarily inconsistent with the rights of the owner. To constitute 
conversion detention must be adverse to the owner, excluding him from 
the goods. It must be accompanied by an intention to keep the goods.65

If a statue, painting, or other work of art or antiquity is lent by one museum to 
another, it is difficult to see how a claimant is “deprived” of it; the work of art 
or antiquity is there, ready to be reclaimed. In the meantime, it is accessible to the 
public, which in most, if not all, cases will be in tune with the true owner’s wishes.
The principle that the “use” made of the object must be adverse to the rights of the 
true owner can also be found in the earlier Fouldes case, upon which Bromley had 
relied. For example, Lord Abinger stated: “In order to constitute a conversion, it is 
necessary either that the party taking the goods should intend some use to be made 
of them, by himself or by those for whom he acts, or that, owing to his act, the goods 
are destroyed or consumed, to the prejudice of the lawful owner.”66 In the same case, 
Rolfe B expands on this point by asking: “[S]uppose I, seeing a horse in a ploughed 
field, thought it had strayed, and, under that impression, led it back to pasture, it is 
clear that an action of trespass would lie against me; but would any man say that this 
amounted to a conversion of the horse to my own use?”67

The idea that the “use” made of the chattel must be in some way adverse to 
the rights of the owner is a difficult principle to apply to public bodies, such as 
local authorities or charities caring for works of art and other cultural property for 
the common good. The courts are accustomed to dealing with cases that involve 
determining  whether  the  defendant  has  received  a  personal  benefit  by  using  
or selling the property.68 For example, if a thief (A) takes a car belonging to another 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

15

and then lends it to X, this will be a conversion by both A and X. It is easy to see 
why. The owner may need the car to transport him from one location to another, 
and the fact that the car is missing therefore deprives him of the opportunity to use 
it and forces him to pay to find some other way of travelling. But this reasoning 
cannot be automatically expanded into a principle that a loan in any circumstances 
will amount to a conversion.

The Impact of the Tower Hamlets decision
In Tower Hamlets LBC v. Bromley LC,69 there was a fresh hearing before Norris J in 
which Bromley sought his permission to appeal his decision regarding the conver-
sion of the sculpture. Norris J refused permission, noting that Bromley wished to 
appeal on the basis that

I have held that a public body can acquire by conversion a sculpture that 
had been acquired by public funds for a purpose broader than can be 
given by Tower Hamlets. I do not accept this. My judgment considers 
ownership: it does not contemplate a “purpose trust”, and the case was 
not so argued. The only question is whether the sculpture should be in 
the ownership and control of one local authority or the other. They may 
have differing ideas about how it should be dealt with and what moral 
limits should be placed on their statutory powers having regard to the 
history of the sculpture. But that is not a legal question.70

I  would  suggest,  in  response,  that  the  purpose  of  possession  is  relevant  as  an 
evidentiary tool in determining whether the claimant is being excluded from the 
enjoyment of his property. As Lord Nicholls stated in Kuwait Airways,

Whether the owner is excluded from possession may sometimes depend 
upon whether the wrongdoer exercised dominion over the goods. Then 
the intention with which acts were done may be material. The ferryman 
who turned the plaintiff’s horses off the Birkenhead to Liverpool ferry 
was guilty of conversion if he intended to exercise dominion over them, 
but not otherwise: see Fouldes v. Willoughby (1841) 8 M & W 540.71

In the Tower Hamlets case, Bromley was arguing that Tower Hamlets had held 
the sculpture for a public purpose, enabling the public to have access to it. The fact 
that Tower Hamlets was not making decisions for its own benefit was arguably a 
factor that needed to be taken into account in determining whether Tower Ham-
let  had  exercised  sufficient  dominion  over  the  object  to  exclude  the  true  owner 
(Bromley) from the enjoyment of its property. This aspect of the decision by Nor-
ris J has a potentially wide impact upon the whole of the museum sector. It would 
suggest  that  all  museums  dealing  with  orphan  objects  may  be  converting  them 
by  lending  them  to  other  museums.  This  is  surely  quite  unsatisfactory,  and  the 
decision is not on all fours with established principles in the law of conversion.

Yet it appears that Norris J viewed his decision as one that was limited to an 
analysis  of  the  statutory  powers  of  local  authorities.  In  rejecting  the  request  for 
leave to appeal, Norris J stated:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

16 

JANET ULPH

They argue that I found that the sculpture had been acquired and pur-
chased “for London” and to conclude that it can now be treated as the 
property  of  a  particular  London  Borough  is  contradictory  and  cannot 
be correct as a matter of law, because local authorities are expected to 
safeguard  property,  not  appropriate  it,  and  authorities  have  no  power 
to acquire property otherwise than by a Deed of Gift or through another 
lawful channel. I believe I simply applied the words of the statute and  
I do not consider that this argument has a real prospect of success.72

Local authorities operate in accordance with a raft of legislation that governs them, 
some  of  which  is  commercial  in  character,73  while  other  legislation  encourages 
local authorities to act to benefit their local communities.74 In 1959, the Court of  
Appeal  decided,  in  Re  Endacott,  that  the  functions  of  local  authorities  were  not 
charitable.75 Although the powers and duties of local authorities focus upon serving 
the local community, this is not enough to achieve charitable status. A body will 
only be charitable if it benefits the community in a way that the law regards as 
charitable.76 Local authorities have “public” purposes, but these are too vague and 
wide to fall within the narrow legal definition of charity.77 It could therefore be 
argued that the notion of “stewardship” is weaker when applied to local authorities 
because,  unlike  charitable  museums,  they  are  not  currently  under  any  statutory 
obligation to hold cultural property on trust for the benefit of the public.

However, museums controlled by local authorities are treated as “stewards” of 
cultural  property  in  the  same  way  as  other  museums  by  the  Museums  Associa-
tion, the Arts Council England, and other public bodies. The Code of Ethics places 
severe  restraints  upon  the  sale  of  an  object  from  a  museum  collection  where  a 
reason for the sale is to raise money.78 These restraints are designed to force the 
governing body (including a local authority) to demonstrate that it is acting for 
the public benefit. If the Code of Ethics is flouted, the museum may be stripped 
of  its  accreditation  by  the  Arts  Council  for  a  lengthy  period.  This  sanction  will 
mean that the museum is ineligible to apply for public grants. When Northampton 
Borough Council sold the Egyptian Sekhemka statue at Christie’s in 2014 without 
complying with the guidance in the Code of Ethics, its museums were stripped of 
their accredited status.79 If “Old Flo” had been sold, Towers Hamlets would not 
have been subject to any sanctions because the sculpture was not part of a museum 
collection; even so, the Arts Council would no doubt have expressed its deep dis-
appointment, and Tower Hamlets would have been criticized for treating a cultural 
object as a financial asset.

By  the  time  that  Norris  J  had  handed  down  his  judgment,  the  new  mayor  of 
Tower Hamlets had declared that Old Flo would not be sold.80 Bromley neverthe-
less attempted to obtain a review of Norris J’s decision, arguing that Tower Hamlets 
had not converted the statue either when it was restored or transferred on loan. 
The Court of Appeal will only grant permission to appeal a lower court’s decision 
if it considers that there is a reasonable prospect of success or if there is otherwise 
a compelling reason for an appeal to be heard. Norris J’s decision arguably did not 
reflect the finer nuances that one can find in decided cases concerning conversion, 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

17

and it did not pay sufficient attention to the argument that Tower Hamlets was 
not acting as an owner but was merely caring for the sculpture in accordance with 
ethical norms applicable to stewards of cultural property. Consequently, one might 
have expected Bromley to have been given leave to appeal. However, the Court of 
Appeal rejected the application.

It is unfortunate that the legal principles to be applied in relation to the con-
version  of  cultural  property  by  public  bodies  has  not  been  explored  further. 
The  decision  in  Tower  Hamlets  presents  dilemmas  for  museums.  In  order  to 
serve the public, museums are expected to lend objects from their collections for 
special exhibitions. They are also expected to repair them where appropriate. 
Yet, according to the decision in Tower Hamlets, these are acts of conversion. 
Equally, it is part of good collections management to dispose of unwanted items 
from collections, giving priority to transfers to other museums and, in partic-
ular, accredited museums. Yet it now seems clear that a permanent transfer to 
another museum would also be an act of conversion by the transferring museum, 
regardless of the fact that the museum did not intend to deny any rights of a third 
party that might exist.81

As a result of the decision in Tower Hamlets, someone who has lent an object 
to a museum should be able to confidently assert that there has been a conver-
sion of his property where it has subsequently been lent or transferred to another 
museum. The basis of the claim would be that these actions have interfered with 
his ownership rights.82 However, can a museum that has lent an orphan object  
(or repaired it) more than six years ago rely upon the Limitation Act 1980 to argue 
that the claimant’s action is now time barred? This should be the case. Even so,  
I  would  suggest  that  the  decision  in  Tower  Hamlets  creates  considerable  uncer-
tainty and may lead to litigation. This is why new legislation is needed that would 
allow  museums  to  deal  with  objects  with  no  acquisition  records  after  they  have 
been in the continuous possession of a museum for a specified number of years.

Uncollected Loans

Loans for a Definite Period
A number of museums may have had objects transferred on loan many years ago, 
but whose owners cannot be traced. If the loan is for a stated period of years and 
this period has come to an end, the lender will be in breach of the loan agreement 
in failing to collect the object. There may be a contract clause that entitles the 
museum to dispose of the object as it thinks fit, but, even if that is not the case, 
a museum will eventually be entitled to dispose of it,83 provided that it has acted 
in a way that is “right and reasonable” beforehand.84 Admittedly, the law provides 
relatively little guidance on what conduct is reasonable because there are so many 
types of situation where a person ends up unwillingly in possession of an object 
(which could be a landlord, a mortgagee, or a storage company, for example).85 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

18 

JANET ULPH

However, a museum that has given the owner a number of warnings and waited for 
a substantial period of time to elapse before finally disposing of the objects should 
be viewed as having acted reasonably.86

Loans for an Indefinite Period
In contrast, museums are in an impossible position where loans have been made 
for an indefinite period, as has frequently occurred in the past. If the loan objects 
are given to another museum or destroyed, this will be a conversion. There is a 
statutory procedure for disposal of uncollected goods set out in the Torts (Inter-
ference with Goods) Act 1977, which might appear at first sight to be helpful.87 
However, the procedure involves the service of notices for each uncollected object. 
The procedure is complex, not least because it appears that the notice bringing 
the loan agreement to an end must actually be received by the owner.88 It is there-
fore of little use to museums for this reason alone. It is also problematic in other 
respects. It is concerned with sales, enabling a purchaser to obtain a good legal title, 
whereas museums are keen to transfer objects to other museums where they can. 
And the object in question might not be easily sellable. The procedure seems to be 
geared toward commercial transactions, such as between a landlord and a tenant. 
Instead of using the notice procedure, a museum could choose instead to apply to 
the court for an order directing sale.89 However, this route is not popular because it 
may mean that certain information, such as the poor state of the museum’s entries 
in relation to loans, becomes a matter of public record.

Could a museum dispose of an object in the hope that it could rely if necessary 
upon the argument that it had acted as an “agent of necessity”? This defense has 
a narrow scope. It is only available if there is an emergency, and it is reasonable 
to dispose of the property, taking account of the interests of the owner and of the 
museum90 and if the museum acted in good faith91 and cannot find the owner or 
the owner refuses to respond with instructions.92 One difficulty is that the museum 
would need to show that there was an emergency in the sense of a real necessity to 
dispose of the object.93 Where an object could be seen as a threat to health (such as 
a stuffed bird containing arsenic), which was not covered by insurance, this might 
be  viewed  by  the  courts  as  an  emergency.  However,  the  scope  of  the  defense  of 
agency of necessity is uncertain.

If a museum has sold or transferred an uncollected loan object more than 
six years before any claim, could it rely upon the decision in Tower Hamlets to 
argue that, because the claimant failed to act for more than six years after the con-
version, his title has been extinguished by the Limitation Act 1980? The answer 
will partly depend upon the terms of the original loan agreement, which might, 
for example, permit short-term loans. However, it is not clear that the museum could 
rely upon the decision in Tower Hamlets because, in that case, Tower Hamlets 
thought it had legal title to the sculpture when it arranged to lend it. In contrast, in 
relation to an uncollected loan, the museum will be aware that it has no legal 
title. Any sale might even be viewed as theft of the object, and thieves can never 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

19

gain title to a stolen object.94 The law is therefore uncertain in relation to uncol-
lected loans. Unsurprisingly, therefore, museums may feel forced to retain their 
uncollected loans forever. Although they would like to dispose of many of them, 
there seems to be no safe route to do so. A new statute is needed to give museums the 
power to dispose of objects that are unsuitable to be retained.

Where There Is a Record That the Object Was Deposited 
Anonymously

Objects Acquired in the Past
It is not uncommon for people to donate objects to museums anonymously, either 
by sending things through the post or simply leaving them at an unattended desk. 
Lay people, such as museum staff, may well assume that deposited objects have 
therefore been abandoned by their owners. This analysis is attractive; if someone 
abandons an object on someone’s land or in their buildings, the landowner (such 
as a museum) is entitled to deal with it as it pleases. However, it is only in rare cases 
that an object has been abandoned in the eyes of the law. An object that has been 
mislaid is not one that has been abandoned.95 In order to establish that an object 
has been abandoned, there would need to be evidence that the owner intended to 
give up his rights to the object and had physically relinquished it.96 The challenge 
will be to find evidence that shows that, on the balance of probabilities, the pre-
vious owner intended to give up all legal rights to the object and did not care who 
took possession and control of it.97 If the deposited object is of a type collected by 
the museum (such as a rare book left in the British Library), it is easier to infer 
that the owner intended to make a gift of it. Visitors to a museum may take great 
enjoyment out of engaging with its collections, and it may prompt them to donate 
something of their own as a gift in the hope of giving pleasure to others.

If a museum accepts a gift, it will be free to deal with it as it chooses. Although 
gifts can be made formally, by executing a deed of gift or by making a declaration 
of trust, this is not essential. Gifts can be made quite informally,98 by delivering 
an object99 with an intention to give.100 Where one person delivers an object to  
another person without any explanation, the courts will look objectively at the words 
or conduct to determine what that person intended.101 Thus, where an object has 
been delivered anonymously, either by being left in the museum or sent through 
the  post,  it  should  be  easy  to  infer  that  the  original  owner  intended  to  give  the 
object to the museum and had done his best to deliver it.102 This is one situation 
where the position seems clear cut. The museum has accepted the gifts, and it is the 
owner; it is therefore free to remove and dispose of any unwanted objects.

A Dilemma for Museums: Objects Left by Mistake
Objects that have been deposited anonymously in recent times cause significant 
problems. One fear is that an object may have been left by mistake. If the museum 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

20 

JANET ULPH

simply assumes that it is a gift, which it can deal with freely, it would be an uncon-
scious bailee. If so, the museum would not be strictly liable for conversion, but, as 
an exception to this general rule, it would only be liable if it could be shown that 
it  was  negligent.  This  principle  was  applied  in  AVX  Ltd.  v.  EGM  Solders  Ltd.103 
In this case, the claimants had returned a quantity of solder spheres, which they 
had purchased from the defendants. Unfortunately, the carriers mixed 21 boxes of 
capacitors belonging to the claimants with the spheres, and, after they were deliv-
ered, the defendants destroyed the whole delivery without making any checks. The 
defendants had been negligent because the capacitors were easy to distinguish from 
the solder spheres. Justice Staughton held that the defendants were liable to com-
pensate the claimants for the value of the capacitors because an unconscious bailee 
owed  a  duty  to  care  to  ascertain  that  the  goods  were  his  own  before  destroying 
them. But the position is different where the bailee has acted with due diligence.  
In Robot Arenas Ltd. v. Waterfield, the claimant had left property on land that was 
purchased by the defendant. After making enquiries without success, the defendant 
destroyed the property because he wrongly assumed that it had been abandoned. 
Deputy Judge Edelman QC decided that if a possessor makes reasonabe enquiries 
and cannot discover if anyone owns the thing in question, he will not be liable for 
conversion to the true owner if he destroys it.104

The decision in Robot Arenas gives some comfort to museums by suggest-
ing that they are able to dispose of unwanted objects provided that they make 
reasonable enquiries before disposal to ensure that there has been no mistake. 
However,  there  is  little  guidance  in  relation  to  what  checks  should  be  made. 
Edelman  QC  thought  that  it  would  depend  upon  the  circumstances;105  he  sug-
gested that the “more valuable (whether in monetary terms or as a personal item) 
the property might possibly be, the more … might reasonably be required.”106 There 
is no guidance regarding how long a museum must wait before disposing of the 
object. It may be the case that, if an object is small and easy to store, such as a 
small box containing jewelry or medals, the museum would be expected to keep 
it for quite a long period of time, while continuing to try to contact the owner. 
In contrast, if the object is hazardous in some respect (such as where it is infested 
with pests), it would no doubt be reasonable to dispose of it far more quickly.

A Dilemma for Museums: Refusal to Accept a Gift
A more significant dilemma for museums is that, even if there was an intention to 
make a gift, the museum must accept that gift before legal title will pass and it is 
able to deal with the object as the owner. This principle is illustrated by the decision 
in R. (Ricketts) v. Basildon Magistrates’ Court.107 In this case, Ricketts had appropri-
ated items of clothing from bags deposited on the ground outside a British Heart 
Foundation (BHF) charity shop. Basildon Magistrates’ Court committed Ricketts 
for trial at the Crown Court on two charges of theft. Rickets appealed against this 
decision, arguing that he had taken property that had been abandoned; one cannot 
steal an object if it belongs to no one. A person can only be charged with theft if 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

21

he dishonestly appropriates property “belonging to another” with the intention of 
permanently depriving the other of it.108 This argument was rejected by the Divi-
sional Court. In regard to the bags left outside the BHF shop, it was held that the 
obvious inference was that an anonymous person had intended to make a gift and 
had done his best to deliver the bags. At the time that Ricketts took things out of 
the bags, the BHF shop had not taken the bags under its control and, therefore, 
could not be said to have accepted them. The bags therefore belonged to the person 
who was attempting to donate them. Ricketts could therefore be charged with theft 
because the items belonged to someone and were not ownerless.

One might assume that a museum would automatically accept any anonymously 
deposited  gifts  to  enable  it  to  deal  with  them  as  the  owner.  Unfortunately,  it  is 
not as simple as that. If a museum accepted a donation, then disposed of it a few 
months later, and this became known, there could be a public outcry. For example, 
the Combined Military Services Museum accepted a donation of medals and then 
sold them a few months’ later. When the donor discovered that the medals had 
been sold, she was horrified because the medals had been bestowed upon her 
father, and she had understood that they would be kept by the museum forever. 
This story was splashed across some national newspapers, and the museum was 
roundly condemned.109

Museums now take great care when they receive offers of gifts for their collec-
tions. For example, Principle 2.2 of the 2015 Code of Ethics states that museums 
“[c]ollect according to detailed, published and regularly reviewed policies that state 
clearly what, how and why the museum collects.” Museums are now determined to 
avoid collecting objects that do not fit within their acquisitions policy or that will 
not be of interest to the public. If an object is offered and accepted, museums are 
increasingly ready to spell out to the donor that the object may be disposed of at 
a later date. Yet this type of conversation cannot occur where the donation is sent 
or deposited anonymously. A museum is not forced to accept a gift, but, if it does 
not, the object continues to belong to the benefactor.110 Unfortunately, this means 
that a museum that refuses to accept an object, attempts unsuccessfully to find the 
owner, and then disposes of it may be held liable in conversion if the true owner 
then brings a legal action. In short, museums are placed in an almost impossible 
position by the law in attempting to satisfy their ethical professional standards. In 
my view, new legislation allowing museums to obtain legal title to lent or deposited 
objects after a set period of time (as the Scottish Law Commission has suggested 
for Scottish museums) would be the best way to resolve the museums’ difficulties.

SCOTTISH LAW

Introduction

Scottish museums suffer the same dilemmas as their English counterparts at the 
moment. They have objects in their collections that are “frozen in time” because, 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

22 

JANET ULPH

for example, they lack acquisition records or because they are uncollected loans. 
The Scottish Law Commission (SLC) has put forward proposals recommending that 
Scottish law relating to the acquisition and loss of title to moveable objects should 
be changed.111 These reforms will have a particular impact upon the museum 
sector but are not limited to that sector; they will apply to any moveable object 
in Scotland. The SLC has produced a Prescription and Title to Moveable Property 
(Scotland) Bill and the Scottish government has consulted the public further 
in 2015.112

The SLC’s proposals are wide-ranging. In particular, it has proposed to change 
the  underlying  basis  of  the  existing  law  so  that  anyone  can  obtain  legal  title  to 
any type of moveable object by way of positive prescription. It has put forward a 
“20-year positive prescriptive rule” whereby a possessor of a moveable object who 
believes that he is the legal owner would obtain the legal title to it after a period 
of 20 years if he has acted in good faith and without negligence throughout that 
period.113 Innocent recipients of stolen property could take advantage of this rule, 
but thieves and those who recklessly or negligently fail to carry out enquiries would 
not be able to do so. In developing fresh principles to deal with title conflicts, the 
SLC faced a fine balancing act. If the rules were too generous to possessors, it would 
encourage theft and careless dealings with objects where recipients had shut their 
eyes to suspicious circumstances. On the other hand, it is important to support the 
marketability of goods by offering some protection to purchasers. The SLC therefore 
provided rules that went some way toward protecting those who were careful and 
that encouraged the true owners to publicize their loss.

Lent or Deposited Property

The 20-year positive prescription rule will not help museums that know or fear 
that they possess objects on loan because they cannot say in good faith that they 
believe that they are the owner. However, the Bill contains a second set of provi-
sions that would assist museums significantly. It would enable possessors to obtain 
ownership of objects that were deposited with them or lent to them. This would 
be possible where the original owners (or their successors) have not asserted their 
proprietary rights at any time during a 50-year period and are untraceable despite 
the exercise of reasonable diligence to locate or communicate with them.114 The 
question of whether the possessor has satisfied the test of “reasonable diligence” 
will depend upon the nature and value of the object; more effort would be expected 
where the object has a high cultural and financial value.115

Professional staff at Scottish museums have welcomed these recommendations 
because they are seen as eventually bringing clarity and certainty in relation to title. 
The proposals strike a chord, as many professional staff consider that museums 
should obtain legal title where they have taken care of objects for a long period of 
time without knowing who owned them (despite making efforts to discover the 
truth). As the SLC observes, “[t]he Bill’s proposals would allow the item to become 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

23

part of the collection permanently, or for the item to be disposed of in the appro-
priate way, such as through transfer to a museum with a more suitable collection or 
by disposal.”116 There are further provisions to cover the situation where museums 
(or other possessors) transfer or sell such objects, enabling their successors to rely 
in due course on the 50-year period.117

However,  some  museum  staff  have  suggested  that  a  50-year  period  is  too 
great.  They  have  argued  that,  since  there  are  no  acquisition  records  for  various 
objects,  it  will  be  a  matter  of  interrogating  long-serving  employees  to  find  evi-
dence of how long the museum can confidently say that it has been in possession of  
an object. There may only be evidence of possession for 20 years so that, even if 
the Bill becomes law, professionals will be counting down for a further 30 years. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  accepted  that  the  law  must  balance  the  need  to  allow  
museums the freedom to deal with their collections by way of loans, transfers, or 
other transactions, with the need to protect the original owner’s rights. A shorter 
period, such as a 30-year period suggested by some museum professionals when 
consulted earlier by the commission, might be seen in some quarters as being too 
generous to mere possessors. A long period of 50 years seems desirable once one 
appreciates  that  this  period  could  begin  to  run  from  when  the  object  was  first 
lent, if this date is known.118 However, since many objects do not have acquisition 
records, time will normally run from when there is a record that the object was 
in the possession of a museum. A lengthy period such as 50 years makes it very 
difficult for an owner to argue that the new law would violate his human right to 
peaceful enjoyment of his property.119

The proposed reforms to Scottish law garnered widespread approval in the 
museum sector. Yet, since the changes in the law are so fundamental to society 
and cover every type of moveable property, there may be cause for hesitation. 
For example, the proposals relating to the 20-year and 50-year periods would 
apply to dealings in all objects. No exception has been made for property looted 
from the Jewish community during the Nazi era (1933–45). The SLC thought 
that their proposals would be unlikely to affect victims.120 First, in regard to the 
20-year positive prescriptive rule, a possessor could only gain good title if he was  
in good faith and had acted without negligence. Second, in regard to the 50-year 
period in relation to lent and deposited objects, UK museums would still need to 
consider moral claims even if legal title had been lost. Moral claims are referred to 
the Spoliation Advisory Panel, which may recommend that the museum should 
return the object to Holocaust victims or their heirs. It should also be said that legal 
title to looted objects will normally have been lost many years ago. Most countries 
in Europe offer little protection to the original owner where goods are stolen 
or  misappropriated;  it  is  easy  for  a  good  faith  purchaser  to  obtain  title  after  a 
short period of time.121 But this issue illustrates the fact that caution is needed in 
changing any aspect of personal property law. A rule that applies to all personal 
(moveable) property may be clear and fair in general, but, even so, an exception for 
Holocaust property may be needed.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

24 

JANET ULPH

CONCLUSIONS

The  current  law  creates  significant  problems  for  museums.  Museum  ethics  and 
charity law encourage these institutions to reach out to the public in this country 
and abroad, by lending or transferring works of art and antiquities from their col-
lections. Yet a lawyer may well hesitate to advise a museum that it is entitled to lend 
an object from a collection where there is uncertainty over ownership because, in 
the light of Tower Hamlets, the museum may be viewed as converting it. The law 
also puts pressure upon museums to care for and retain orphan objects and uncol-
lected loans, regardless of whether these objects are of any interest to the public or 
whether they possess any significant cultural value.

Lord Donaldson observed in Parker v. British Airways Board that “[o]ne of the 
great merits of the common law is that it is usually sufficiently flexible to take 
account of the changing needs of a continually changing society.”122 In principle, 
the law of conversion ought to be flexible enough to take account of the ethical 
notion of stewardship and the particular position of public bodies caring for works 
of art and antiquities. However, the decision in Tower Hamlets casts doubt upon 
this possibility. Simon Douglas has observed:

Conversion remains misunderstood and ignored in many quarters. The 
tort rarely appears on an undergraduate syllabus … More worrying is the 
position of litigants. It remains an almost impossible task for a lawyer to 
advise a client on the merits of a possible claim when the facts fall outside 
one of a few well established categories of conversion.123

Uncertainty in the law is unsatisfactory. It is suggested that the problems that con-
front  museums  in  dealing  with  orphan  objects  and  uncollected  loans  should  be 
dealt with in a comprehensive fashion. The obvious solution would be legislation 
that only applies to museums and galleries and that provides that they will obtain 
legal title to objects in their collections after a set period of years, provided that 
they have made reasonable efforts to contact the true owner. An exception could 
be made in relation to spoliated objects to ensure that the new law does not deprive 
Holocaust victims of any legal rights that they might have. However, the aim would 
be to ensure that governing bodies of museums would be in a position to confi-
dently lend, transfer, restore, or otherwise deal with the objects in their collections 
while acting in the public interest.

ENDNOTES

1. Merriman  2006,  4.  Sustainability  is  concerned  with  the  management  of  resources:  Dresner 

2. Hadfield 2011, 89.
3. By way of contrast, the Disposal Toolkit 2014 defines a “financially motivated” disposal as one 

 
2002, 30–37; Merriman 2006, 28.
 
 
where “a primary reason” for disposal is to raise funds by way of sale. Museums Association 2014.
 
Stephens 2011–12, 119.

4. Robertson, 1995, 168; Sonderman 1996; Ainslie 2004, 235; Heal 2006, 32; Jenkins 2011, 72; 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

25

5. National Museum Directors’ Council 2003, 14; Brown 2011, 111; Vecco and Piazzai 2015, 221.
6. Brown 2011, 109; Grosvenor 2011, 63–64.
7. See the thoughtful article by Spalding 2005, 34.
8. Merriman 2006, 7.
9. Green 2015, 63; Kersel 2015a, 77; 2015b, 44; Silberman 2015, 61.

 
 
 
 
 
  10. See the “Why Dispose?” section of the Disposal Toolkit in Museums Association 2014, 8–11.
  11. Merriman 2006, 24, 41; Hadfield 2011, 86. Vecco and Piazzai suggest that typically museums 
“increase the size of their collection by 1–2% per year from the moment of their creation.” Vecco 
and Piazzai 2015, 224. See further Lord, Lord, and Nicks 1989.
  12. For discussion of the moral obligation owed to future generations and the concern to collect on 
the basis of “inter-generationality,” see Dresner 2002, 2; Besterman 2006, 435; Alistair Brown, “Out of 
Sight: Unseen Public Collections,” The Apollo, 2 November 2015, http://www.apollo-magazine.com/
out-of-sight-unseen-public-collections/ (accessed 19 September 2016)
  13. Kersel 2015b, 44. For discussion of over-collecting and long-term curation of archaeological 
material in the United Kingdom, see Owen 2004, 179.
  14. Kletter 2015, 60.
  15. Marcus v. Official Solicitor, (1997) 73 P & CR D46 (CA); J.J.D. S.A. v. Avon Tyres Ltd., 23 February  
2000 (CA), unrep.; Pedrick v. Morning Star Motors Ltd., 14 February 1979 (CA), unrep.; Taylor v. 
Diamond, [2012] All ER (D) 213 (Oct.) EWHC 2900; Davis v. Henry Birks & Sons Ltd., (1983) 142 
DLR (3d) 356. See Palmer 2009, paras. 13-012–13-014.
  16. Scottish Law Commission 2012, para. 4.7.
  17. Charity Commission 2002.
  18. There is no defence of contributory negligence generally available in relation to an action in 
conversion. Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977, 1977, c. 32, s. 11(1). See R.H Willis & Son v. 
British Car Auctions Ltd., [1978] 1 WLR 438, 441–3 (CA).
  19. Marfani & Co. Ltd. v. Midland Bank Ltd., [1968] 1 WLR 956, 970 (CA).
  20. Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977, s. 3.
  21. Kuwait Airways Corp. v. Iraqi Airways Co. (Nos. 4 and 5), [2002] UKHL 19, [2002] 2 AC 883, 
para. 39 (HL).
  22. The  common  law  tort  of  conversion  has  been  amended  and  encapsulated  in  the  Torts 
(Interference with Goods) Act 1977, which does not define either proprietary title or possessory 
title. Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran v. The Barakat Galleries Ltd., [2007] EWCA 1374, 
[2009] QB 22, para. 15 (CA).
  23. Iran  v.  Barakat  Galleries;  R.  H.  Willis  v.  British  Car  Auctions;  Webb  v.  Chief  Constable  of 
Merseyside Police, [2000] QB 427 (CA); Union Transport Finance Ltd. v. British Car Auctions Ltd., 
[1978] 2 All ER 385 (CA); MCC Proceeds Inc. v. Lehman Brothers International (Europe), [1998] 4 
All ER 675 (CA).
  24. Armory v. Delamirie, (1722) 1 Strange 505, 93 ER 664; Parker v. British Airways Board, [1982] 
QB 1004 (CA).
  25. Costello v. Chief Constable of Derbyshire, [2001] 1 WLR 1437 (CA).
  26. Parker v. British Airways Board, 1009.
  27. Kuwait Airways Corp. v. Iraqi Airways Co. and Others, [2002] 2 WLR 1353, para. 39.
  28. Green and Randall 2009, 45.
  29. Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977, s. 3.
  30. Torts  (Interference  with  Goods)  Act  1977,  s.  3(2)(a).  See  Somerset  v.  Cookson,  (1735)  3  P 
Wms 390, 24 ER 1114; Fells v. Read, (1796) 3 Ves 70, 30 ER 899; Lady Arundell v. Phipps, (1804) 13 
Ves 95; Howard Perry & Co. v. British Railways Board, [1980] 1 WLR 1375. But the property must be 
special or unique rather than ordinary stock. Cohen v. Roche, [1927] 1 KB 169; Whiteley Ltd. v. Hilt, 
[1918] 2 KB 808 (CA).
  31. Hollins v. Fowler, (1875) LR 7, 757 (HL); Moorgate Mercantile Co. Ltd. v. Twitchings, [1977] 
AC 890 (HL).
  32. Kuwait Airways Corp. v. Iraqi Airways Co., para. 79.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

26 

JANET ULPH

  33. Kuwait Airways Corp. v. Iraqi Airways Co., para. 80.
  34. The main provisions of the Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977 apply to England, Wales, 
and Northern Ireland but not to Scotland.
  35. Law Reform Committee 1971, para. 48, n. 2.
  36. R.H. Willis v. British Car Auctions, 442–43.
  37. R.H. Willis v. British Car Auctions, 443.
  38. Marcq v. Christie Manson and Woods Ltd., [2003] EWCA Civ 731, [2004] QB 286 (CA).
  39. Museums Association 2015. Key Principles, Individual and Institutional Integrity, reprinted in 
Museums Association 2013, 3: “Museums hold a unique position of being trusted.” For discussion of 
the importance of public trust for the museum sector, see Finch 2011; Ulph 2016.
  40. For a case involving the destruction of a cultural object (“Hole and Vessel II” by Anish Kapoor), 
which had risen in value by the time of the trial, see Ofir Scheps v. Fine Art Logistic Ltd., [2007] 
EWHC 541.
  41. See further Ulph 2015, 179–86.
  42. Museums Association 2015, Principle 2.1.
  43. In relation to guidance from the Charity Commission 2002, Annex A.25–A.27.
  44. Sale of Goods Act 1979, 1979, c. 54, s. 12; Consumer Rights Act 2015, 2015, c. 15, s. 17.
  45. Kuwait Airways Corp. v. Iraqi Airways Co.; R.H. Willis v. British Car Auctions; Cochrane v. 
Rymill, (1879) 40 LT 744 (CA).
  46. Marcq v. Christie Manson & Woods Ltd., [2004], para. 24; Hollins v. Fowler, 766–67; Consol-
idated Co. v. Curtis & Son, [1892] 1 QB 495, 498.
  47. R.H. Willis v. British Car Auctions; Consolidated Co. v. Curtis & Son; Cochrane v. Rymill.
  48. Whether the defendant is purchasing for himself or acting for another may require a careful 
sifting of the evidence—for example, see the extensive discussion in Hollins v. Fowler, 757, 761–62, 
773–74, 776–78, 786, 789–90, 793, 799–800.
  49. National Mercantile Bank v. Rymill, (1881) 44 LT (NS) 767 (CA). The decision was criticized 
as being too generous to the auctioneer by the Court of Appeal in R.H. Willis v. British Car Auctions, 
443 (per Lord Denning MR), 444 (per Roskill LJ).
  50. Marcq v. Christie, para. 36. In contrast, the creation of a lien – if done without authority – will 
normally be viewed as a conversion where the owner can only recover the goods by paying storage 
charges. Syeds v. Hay (1791) 4 Term Reports 260; Sang Stone Hamoon Jonoub Co. Ltd. v. Baoyue 
Shipping Co. Ltd., [2015] EWHC 2288.
  51. For criticism, see Hudson 2005, 201.
  52. Marcq v. Christie, para. 24.
  53. London Borough of Tower Hamlets v. London Borough of Bromley, [2015] EWHC 1954.
  54. Local Government Act 1939, 1939, No. 9, s. 157.
  55. London Government Act 1963, 1963, c. 33, Sch. 2(16), s. 84.
  56. Tower Hamlets v. Bromley, para. 49.
  57. Tower Hamlets v. Bromley, para. 48, citing Kuwait Airways Corp. v. Iraqi Airways Co., paras. 
39–43, 119.
  58. Limitation Act 1980, 1980, c. 58, s. 3(2). An action must be brought within six years of the 
conversion (s. 2).
  59. (1841) 8 M&W 540, 151 ER 1153 (Fouldes v. Willoughby).
  60. Tower Hamlets v. Bromley, para. 50.
  61. Museums Association 2015, Principle 1 on “public engagement and public benefit.”
  62. Charity Commission 2002, Annex A.25, “Public benefit and public access.”
  63. National Museum Directors’ Council 2003, 11.
  64. Hollins v. Fowler, (1875) LR 7 757 (HL), 766 (emphasis added).
  65. Kuwait Airways Corp. v. Iraqi Airways Co., paras. 40, 42 (emphasis added).
  66. Fouldes v. Willoughby, 548.
  67. Fouldes v. Willoughby, 551, 1157.
  68. Douglas 2009, 207.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

27

  69. [2015] EWHC 2271 (Tower Hamlets v. Bromley).
  70. Tower Hamlets v. Bromley, para. 10.
  71. Kuwait Airways Corp. v. Iraqi Airways Co., para. 41. See further Green and Randall 2009, 67–68.
  72. Tower Hamlets v. Bromley, para. 11.
  73. See, for example, Local Government Act 1999, 1999, c. 27.
  74. See, for example, Local Government Act 2000, 2000, c. 22, s. 2; Public Services (Social Value) 
Act 2012, 2012, c. 3, s. 1(3).
  75. [1960] Ch 232 (CA) (Re Endacott).
  76. Williams’ Trustees v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1947] AC 447 (HL).
  77. Re Endacott, 243–44. See Blair v. Duncan, [1902] AC 37 (HL); Houston v. Burns, [1918] AC 
337 (HL). Contrast Re Spence’s Estate, Barclays Bank Ltd. v. Stockton-on-Tees Corp., [1938] Ch 96.
  78. Museums Association 2015, para. 2.9.
  79. “Sekhemka Statue: Northampton Museum Loses Art Council Accreditation, BBC News, 1 August 
2014,  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-northamptonshire-28602849  (accessed  19  September 
2016).
  80. Rebecca  Atkinson,  “Old  Flo  Sale  Could  Be  Dropped  by  New  Mayor,”  Museums  Journal,  
22  June  2015,  http://www.museumsassociation.org/museums-journal/news/19062015-old-flo-sale- 
could-be-dropped (accessed 19 September 2016).
  81. Caxton Publishing Co. Ltd. v. Sutherland Publishing Co., [1939] AC 178, 201 (HL) (per Lord 
Porter).
  82. However, a museum is entitled to retain the item while it makes its own enquiries regarding the 
claimant’s assertion of ownership. Clayton v. Le Roy, [1911] 2 KB 1031 (CA).
  83. Jones v. Gospel & White, (1988) 76 P&CR D 43 (CA).
  84. Campbell v. Redstone Mortgages Ltd., [2014] EWHC 3081; Da Rocha-Afodu v. Mortgage 
Express  Ltd.,  [2014]  EWCA  454,  [2014]  2  P&CR  D25;  Mputu-Mayele  v.  London  Borough  of 
Redbridge Council, (2012) EWCA 213; Elvin & Powell Ltd. v. Plummer Roddis Ltd., [1933] Solicitors 
Journal 48; Scotland v. Solomon, [2002] EWHC 1886. The museum will be an “involuntary bailee” 
in these circumstances.
  85. Houghland v. R.R. Low (Luxury Coaches) Ltd., [1962] 1 QB 694, 698 (CA); Da Rocha-Afodu v. 
Mortgage Express, para. 50.
  86. Campbell v. Redstone Mortgages; Da Rocha-Afodu v. Mortgage Express Ltd.
  87. Torts  (Interference  with  Goods)  Act  1977,  Sch  1,  s.  12,  13.  See  Palmer  2009,  paras. 
13-025–13-059.
  88. Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977, Sch. I, Part I, s. 12(2). It is suggested in Palmer 2009, 
para. 13-055, that, as Schedule 1 of the 1977 Act uses the phrase “given to the bailor,” the notice must 
actually be received and that “mere proof of posting would be insufficient.”
  89. Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977, s. 13.
  90. Springer v. Great Western Rly Co., [1921] 1 KB 257 (CA); Sims & Co. v. Midland Rly Co., 
[1913] 1 KB 103.
  91. Prager v. Blatspiel, Stamp and Heacock Ltd., [1924] 1 KB 566.
  92. This could include a situation where the owner refuses to respond and where time is running out. 
Laurence George Ridyard v. Kenneth Roberts and David Roberts, 16 May 1980, WL 612950 (CA).
  93. Sachs v. Miklos, [1948] 2 KB 23 (CA).
  94. Limitation Act 1980, s. 4(3).
  95. Moffatt v. Kazana, [1969] 2 QB 15.
  96. Robot Arenas Ltd. v. Waterfield, [2010] EWHC 115, para. 14; Arrow Shipping Co. Ltd. v. Tyne 
Improvement Commrs (The Crystal), [1894] AC 508, 532 (HL).
  97. This has been described as “divesting abandonment” in Palmer 2009, para. 26-021; see Robot 
Arenas Ltd. v. Waterfield, para. 13.
  98. Day v. Harris, [2013] EWCA Civ 191, [2014] Ch 211 (CA).
  99. Delivery is essential. Cochrane v. Moore, (1890) 25 QBD 57 (CA); Re Cole, [1964] Ch 175 (CA).
  100. Thomas v. Times Books, [1966] 1 WLR 911.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

28 

JANET ULPH

  101. Day v. Harris.
  102. R. (Ricketts) v. Basildon Magistrates’ Court, [2010] EWHC 2358 (Admin), [2011] 1 Cr App R 15.
  103. AVX  Ltd.  v.  EGM  Solders  Ltd.  (The  Times,  7  July  1982)  (QB),  unrep.;  Palmer  2009,  paras. 
6-004–6-022.
  104. Robot Arenas Ltd. v. Waterfield, paras. 17–19, 90–91.
  105. Robot Arenas Ltd. v. Waterfield, at para. 91.
  106. Robot Arenas Ltd. v. Waterfield, at para. 22.
  107. [2011] 1 Cr App R 15; noted with approbation by Ormerod 2011, 505.
  108. Theft Act 1968, 1968, c. 68, s. 1(1).
  109. See, for example, Dan Townend, “Heartbreak as Hero’s Medals Given to Museum in Tribute 
Only to Have Them Sold on Ebay,” The Daily Express, 10 August 2015, http://www.express.co.uk/
news/uk/597203/Hero-s-medals-given-museum-sells-them-on-eBay.
  110. Day  v.  Harris,  para.  71.  See  further  R.  (Ricketts)  v.  Basildon  Magistrates’  Court;  Dewar  v. 
Dewar, [1975] 1 WLR 1532.
  111. Scottish Law Commission 2012.
  112. Scottish Law Commission 2015.
  113. Prescription and Title to Moveable Property (Scotland) Bill, 1 July 2015, s. 1.
  114. Prescription and Title to Moveable Property (Scotland) Bill, s. 2.
  115. Scottish Law Commission 2012, para. 4.19.
  116. Scottish Law Commission 2015, para. 2.25.
  117. Prescription and Title to Moveable Property (Scotland) Bill, s. 2(2)(3). Scottish Law Commis-
sion 2012, paras. 4.23–4.24.
  118. Prescription and Title to Moveable Property (Scotland) Bill, s. 2; Scottish Law Commission 
2012, para. 4.15.
  119. Scottish Law Commission 2012, para. 1.5; European Convention on Human Rights, 4 November 
1950, 213 UNTS 221, Art. 1 of the First Protocol.
  120. Scottish Law Commission 2015, paras. 2.09–2.15.
  121. Scottish Law Commission 2010, Part 5. In England and Wales, title to a stolen object will be 
extinguished after a good faith purchaser has possessed it for a period of six years. Limitation Act 
1980, s. 2, 4(2).
  122. [1982] QB 1004, 1017 (CA).
  123. Douglas 2009, 198. See also Green and Randall 2009, 61–62.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ainslie,  Patricia.  2004.  “Deaccessioning  as  a  Collections  Management  Tool.”  In  Museums  and  the 
Future of Collecting, edited by Simon J. Knell, 235–41. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Besterman, Tristram. 2006. “Museum Ethics.” In Blackwell Companion to Museum Studies, edited 
by Sharon Macdonald, 431–40. Oxford: Blackwell.

Brown, Mychal. 2011. “Disposal as an Essential Management Tool: The Legal, Ethical and Practical 
Case for Deaccessioning in the United States.” In Museums and the Disposal Debate, edited by Peter 
Davies, 104–17. Edinburgh: Museums Etc. Publishing.

Charity Commission. 2002. Museums and Art Galleries Report, R10 (Version 08/02). https://www.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/358894/rr10text.pdf (accessed 2 February 
2017).

Douglas, Simon. 2009. “The Nature of Conversion.” Cambridge Law Journal 68, no. 1: 198–223.

Dresner, Simon. 2002. The Principles of Sustainability. Sterling, VA: Earthscan Publications.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

FROZEN IN TIME 

29

Finch, Derek. 2011. “Deaccession of Art from the Public Trust.” Art Antiquity and Law 16: 1–37.

Green,  Jack.  2015.  “Building  Capacity,  Sharing  Knowledge.”  Journal  of  Eastern  Mediterranean 
Archaeology and Heritage Studies 3, no. 1: 63–71.

Green, Sarah, and John Randall. 2009. The Tort of Conversion. Oxford: Hart Publishing.

Grosvenor, Bendor. 2011. “Deaccessioning in Practice: How to Make Sure We Get It Right.” In Museums 
and the Disposal Debate, edited by Peter Davies, 57–71. Edinburgh: Museums Etc. Publishing.

Hadfield, Jessica. 2011. “Deaccession and Disposal: The Theory in Context.” In Museums and the 
Disposal Debate, edited by Peter Davies, 85–97. Edinburgh: Museums Etc. Publishing.

Heal, Sharon. 2006. “The Great Giveaway.” Museums Journal 106, no. 10: 32–35.

Hudson, Anthony. 2005. “Auctions and Conversion” Art Antiquity and Law 10: 201–14.

Jenkins, Tiffany. 2011. “Just Say No: You Cannot Be Too Careful in Embracing Disposal.” In Museums 
and the Disposal Debate, edited by Peter Davies, 72–82. Edinburgh: Museums Etc. Publishing.

Kersel, Morag. 2015a. “An Issue of Ethics? Curation and the Obligations of Archaeology.” Journal 
of Eastern Mediterranean Archaeology and Heritage Studies 3, no. 1: 77–80.

Kersel, Morag. 2015b. “Storage Wars: Solving the Archaeological Curation Crisis.” Journal of Eastern 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Heritage Studies 3: 42–54.

Kletter, Raz. 2015. “Storage Wars 1, Curation 0.” Journal of Eastern Mediterranean Archaeology 
and Heritage Studies 3: 55–60.

Law Reform Committee. 1971. Eighteenth Report on Conversion and Detinue, Cmnd 4774. London: 
Stationery Office.

Lord,  G.,  B.  Lord,  and  J.  Nicks.  1989.  The  Cost  of  Collecting.  London:  Museums  and  Galleries 
Commission.

Merriman, Nick. 2006. “Museum Collections and Sustainability.” Cultural Trends 17, no. 1: 3–21.

Museums  Association.  2013.  Britain  Thinks:  Public  Perceptions  of—and  Attitudes  to—the  Purposes 
of  Museums  in  Society.  London:  Museums  Association.  http://www.museumsassociation.org/
download?id=954916 (accessed 19 September 2016).

Museums Association. 2014. Disposal Toolkit Guidelines for Museums. London: Museums Association. 
https://www.museumsassociation.org/download?id=1075416 (accessed 19 September 2016).

Museums  Association.  2015.  Code  of  Ethics,  6th  edition.  London:  Museums  Association.  http://
www.museumsassociation.org/download?id=1151400 (accessed 19 September 2016).

National Museum Directors’ Council (NMDC). 2003. “Too Much Stuff? Disposal from Museums.” 
London:  NMDC.  http://www.nationalmuseums.org.uk/resources/press_releases/pr_too_much_stuff/ 
(accessed 19 September 2016).

Ormerod, David. 2011. “Theft: Committal Proceedings: Claimant Taking Goods from Outside Two 
Separate Charity Shops.” Criminal Law Review 6: 505–6.

Owen, Janet. 2004. “Who Is Steering the Ship? Museums and Archaeological Fieldwork.” In Museums 
and the Future of Collecting, edited by S. J. Knell, 179–84. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345

30 

JANET ULPH

Palmer,  Norman.  2009.  In  Palmer  on  Bailment,  edited  by  N.  Palmer.  3rd  ed.  Sweet  and  Maxwell, 
London.

Robertson, Ian. 1995. “Infamous Deaccessions.” In Collections Management, edited by Anne Fahy, 
168–81. London: Routledge.

Scottish Law Commission. 2010. Prescription and Title to Moveable Property. Discussion Paper No. 144. 
Edinburgh: Scottish Law Commission.

Scottish Law Commission. 2012. Prescription and Title to Moveable Property. Report No. 228. Edin-
burgh: Stationery Office.

Scottish Law Commission. 2015. Prescription and Title to Moveable Property (Scotland) Bill: Consulta-
tion. Edinburgh: Scottish Law Commission.

Silberman, Neil. 2015. “Is Every Sherd Sacred? Moving beyond the Cult of Object-Centred Authen-
ticity.” Journal of Eastern Mediterranean Archaeology and Heritage Studies 3, no. 1: 61–63.

Sonderman, R. C. 1996. “Primal Fear: Deaccessioning Collections.” Common Ground 1, no. 2. https://
www.nps.gov/archeology/cg/vol1_num2/fear.htm (accessed 19 September 2016).

Spalding, Vicky. 2005. “Wanted: A Good Home for These Vessels …” Te Ara: Journal of Museums 
Aotearoa  30,  no.  1:  34–35.  http://www.museumsaotearoa.org.nz/sites/default/files/te_ara/3312_-_
vicky_spalding_-_deaccessioning_101.pdf (accessed 19 September 2016).

Stephens,  H.  H.  2011–12.  “All  in  a  Day’s  Work:  How  Museums  May  Approach  Deaccessioning 
as a Necessary Collections Management Tool.” De Paul Journal of Art, Technology and Intellectual 
Property Law 22: 119–81.

Ulph,  Janet.  2015.  “Dealing  with  UK  Museum  Collections:  Law,  Ethics  and  the  Public/Private 
Divide.” International Journal of Cultural Property 22, no. 2–3: 177–204.

Ulph,  Janet.  2016.  “The  Museum  Association’s  Code  of  Ethics  2015.”  Art  Antiquity  and  Law  21,  
no. 2: 143–56.

Vecco, Marilena, and Michele Piazzai. 2015. “Deaccessioning of Museum Collections: What Do We 
Know and Where Do We Stand in Europe?” Journal of Cultural Heritage 16, no. 2: 221–28.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 20 Dec 2018 at 18:03:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000345


