ARTICLES

White Law, Black Art

 *

This article examines the issues surrounding the appropriation of indigenous culture, in particular
art. It discusses the nature and context of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander art in Australia
in order to establish why appropriation and reproduction are important issues. The article outlines
some of the ways in which the Australian legal system has attempted to address the problem and looks
at the recent introduction of the Label of Authenticity. At the same time, the article places these issues
in the context of indigenous self-determination and examines the problematic use of such concepts as
“authenticity.” Finally, the article looks beyond the Label of Authenticity and existing law of intel-
lectual and cultural property, to sketch another possible solution to the problem. 

1 

Appropriation occurs when someone else speaks for, deﬁnes, describes,
represents, uses or recruits the images, stories, experience and dreams of
others for their own. Appropriation also occurs when someone else becomes
the expert on your experience and is deemed more knowledgeable about who
you are than you yourself. 1

The appropriation and unauthorised reproduction of aspects of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander culture is an area of great concern and importance for in-
digenous peoples.2 In recent years, such issues have gained increasing attention
from indigenous artists and organisations, as well as academic and social com-
mentators. The issues covered by this broadly deﬁned area are wide-ranging and in-
terlinked. They  range  from  repatriation  of relics  and  remains  from  museums,
through protection of heritage sites, to cheap tourist tee shirts and traditional bio-
diversity knowledge. As a whole, the area has engendered much debate in the past
few years, particularly in relation to the law’s response to such problems, and a
number of solutions have been proposed. This article hopes to add both to the de-
bate and to the solutions.

*The author is employed as a Solicitor at Clayton Utz Lawyers, Sydney, Australia. This article does not
reﬂect the views of the ﬁrm. It is based largely upon a thesis written as a requirement for the Bachelor
of Laws with Honours from the Australian National University. The author would like to thank
Professor Larissa Behrendt for her supervision and advice. 

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 10, No. 2, 2001, pp. 185– 216
© 2001 International Cultural Property Society

185

186  

Issues concerning indigenous art cannot be unlocked from more “unpalat-
able” issues, such as native title, indigenous rights, and recognition of the extreme
socioeconomic disadvantages indigenous peoples suffer. The signiﬁcance of an ex-
amination  of appropriation  of indigenous  culture  lies  in  its  relationship  to
colonising practices. “Appropriate” means to “make one’s own.”The colonisers of
Australia appropriated the land of the indigenous inhabitants and claimed sover-
eignty, they appropriated children of mixed parentage and placed them in homes,
they appropriated traditional law and replaced it with the Anglo-Australian legal
system, and they appropriated moveable cultural objects and placed them in mu-
seums and art galleries. Appropriation of art must be viewed within this larger
context of systemic colonisation.

This thesis will focus on the particular problems raised by unauthorised re-
production of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander art,3 and the recently intro-
duced response to these problems: the Label of Authenticity. Section 2 will exam-
ine  unauthorised  reproduction  and  its  signiﬁcance  to  indigenous  peoples  and
artists in particular. It will identify concerns and needs of indigenous peoples with
respect to protection of their culture in the context of self-determination and will
survey the current legal mechanisms that have addressed the problem. Section 3
will ﬁrst discuss the Label of Authenticity. It will then look beyond the Label, tak-
ing into account the implications of the Mabo & Others v. State of Queensland decision,
to sketch a broadly conceived model that attempts to address issues of appropri-
ation and unauthorised reproduction in a way that will further indigenous self-
determination.

2    
   

2.1      
  

2.1.1 Concerns and Needs of Indigenous People
The concerns and needs of indigenous people as regards their intellectual and cul-
tural property vary, depending both on the people involved and the nature of the
property or interest. The term intellectual and cultural property is itself problematic, re-
liant as it is on Western notions of property and the legal regimes thereby implied.
It is therefore useful to recognise this, and accept that it is merely a blanket term
encompassing a range of concepts.

The difference between Western notions of intellectual and cultural property
and those of indigenous peoples is highlighted by the deﬁnition arrived at in the
Our Culture: Our Future report.4 This report, by Terri Janke, provides an excellent
and extensive coverage of indigenous cultural and intellectual property rights in all

 ,   187

their manifestations. This report was commissioned by the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC) and the Australian Institute of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS) and involved widespread consulta-
tion  with  indigenous  and  nonindigenous  people,  communities,  and  advocacy
groups. The deﬁnition is as follows:

“Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights” refers to Indigenous
Australians’ rights to their heritage. Such rights are also known as
“Indigenous Heritage Rights.”

Heritage consists of the intangible and tangible aspect of the whole

body of cultural practices, resources and knowledge systems that have been
developed, nurtured and reﬁned (and continue to be developed, nurtured
and reﬁned) by Indigenous people and passed on by Indigenous people as
part of expressing their cultural identity. . . . The heritage of an Indigenous
people is a living one and includes items which may be created in the future
based on that heritage.5

Based on this deﬁnition, Our Culture: Our Future compiles a general list of the major
concerns for indigenous people. This thesis will focus on the appropriation of in-
digenous art and cultural expression; however, other related concerns include unau-
thorised use of secret/sacred material; appropriation of indigenous languages and
spirituality; appropriation of indigenous biodiversity knowledge; collection of nat-
ural resources; lack of control over human genetic material; access to and manage-
ment of land sites; documentation of indigenous peoples’ cultures; and the high
resale value of artworks from which indigenous artists do not proﬁt.6

These issues stem from concerns about the place of indigenous culture in
wider Australian culture and its particular importance to indigenous people. The
need for indigenous people to have control over their intellectual and cultural
property is part of an ongoing struggle for self-determination.

2.1.2 Art and the Dreaming
In 102, Jean-Baptiste Lescenault, botanist on French explorer Nicolas Baudin’s
Tasmanian expedition, came across a pile of bark, which appeared to him to be a
knocked-down hut. Upon examining it he realised it was a carefully arranged mass
of bark covering a mound. The bark was covered with deliberately drawn lines,
similar to the tattoos of the Tasmanian Aborigines. When he found pieces of bone
in the mound, Lescenault realised he had found a burial place, and carefully re-
arranged  the  bark.  Lescenault  had  “discovered” Aboriginal  “art” but,  in  the
process, he had disturbed a burial ground, which no doubt would have distressed
greatly the group whose burial place it was.7

Lescenault’s brush with Aboriginal culture represents the continuing failure of
the West to grasp the complex relationship between art and spirituality in indige-

188  

nous cultures. In order to understand much traditional art, it is ﬁrst necessary to
understand the concept of the Dreaming.8The words Dreaming and Dreamtime refer
to an elaborate religious concept shared by all Aboriginal peoples, although it may
be differently expressed or named. The Dreaming is as much a dimension of real-
ity as a period of time. It exists in the past, present, and future, and refers to ori-
gins and powers located in places and things.9 It focuses on the activities and jour-
neys of the supernatural beings and creator ancestors, who travelled across the
world, creating landscapes and laying down the laws of social and religious be-
haviour. The all-pervasive powers of the ancestral beings are present in the land,
animals, and individuals. They are activated by ceremonies and art.10

The events of the Dreamtime provide the great themes of indigenous art.11 Art
is an expression of knowledge in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander societies
and hence is a statement of authority. The use of traditional inherited designs al-
lows artists to assert their identity, rights, and responsibilities. Traditional societies
are organised in complex kin groups and moieties, which vary from group to
group. These afﬁliations determine conduct and carry differing rights and re-
sponsibilities to land, ceremonies, and Dreamings. These are carried over into the
making of art for the public domain, and regulate the ways in which artists can use
certain designs.12 For example, well-known artist Lili Hargraves Ngarrayi is per-
mitted to paint only the desert budgerigar. If she dares to paint a different Dream-
ing, she states her people will “sing [her] to death.”13 Interpretations of the paint-
ings may vary, depending on which clan or moiety has produced it. Each clan has
its own paintings which reﬂect its unique relationship with the ancestral beings
who created the landscape.14

2.1.3 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Art and White Australia
The above is a very brief outline of the signiﬁcance of indigenous art and fails to
do justice to its complexity and importance. However, it should be clear that art
is more to indigenous culture than decoration or creativity; rather, it is inextricably
interwoven into religion, the land, and social structure. Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander art has also played an important mediatory role since contact with
white settlers. During the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, several leaders of mis-
sion stations, as well as anthropologists, encouraged the Aboriginal people of their
areas to produce art that they could then sell or collect.15 Trade of objects, partic-
ularly of weapons, began upon the arrival of the First Fleet; indigenous artists were
in  turn  inﬂuenced  by  colonial  experiences  and Western  techniques  and  styles.
Western attitudes towards art have similarly evolved. By applying Western values
to art production, indigenous artists have become well known as individuals, even
though art has traditionally been a communal activity. Indigenous art collectors
began by classifying works as “primitive” art, and the labels of “Aboriginal” and
“authentic” were applied to art that was, or appeared to be, precontact. Living

 ,   189

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people were thought to produce an inau-
thentic assimilated art.16

Interest in indigenous art continued to grow between the wars, and craft pro-
duction became an important source of income for some indigenous people. Arte-
facts were produced primarily for tourist markets.17 It is now recognised that most
of the “traditional” art in Western museums and galleries was produced for sale by
indigenous people affected by colonisation and contact with Europeans.18 By the
1970s, the labelling of indigenous art in the “ﬁne art” context as “primitive” was
beginning to break down, and a new category of “contemporary Aboriginal art”
emerged. Another label of “urban Aboriginal artist” was also created for southeast
Aboriginal artists.19

As the market for indigenous art grows among nonindigenous Australians and
overseas buyers and tourists, art has become both an economic and a cultural re-
lationship between indigenous and nonindigenous Australians. In 1997, ATSIC’s
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Cultural Industry Strategy esti-
mated the indigenous arts and crafts market to be worth almost $200 million per
year.20

For the Western coloniser, indigenous cultural objects, paintings, and designs
fall into a category of “art,” which shifts with the fashion of the day. For indige-
nous peoples, art is part of the land, religion, and relationships. For both it has be-
come an important economic relationship. Consequently, indigenous art lies at the
crossover point of two cultures, and hence is a powerful site of conﬂicting dis-
courses. Once this conﬂict is identiﬁed, its potential to be a tool of decolonisation
can be explored.

2.2 , ,  -
As Aboriginal art gained increasing attention in both ﬁne art and tourist markets,
two interconnected issues emerged: authenticity and appropriation. Appropriation
and reproduction of Aboriginal artworks and designs can arise in a number of
contexts. The most immediately apparent example is the boomerang, which has
been featured in advertising for Expo , has appeared in airline advertising, and
formed the major part of the Olympic logo. Other examples are fraudulent rep-
resentations that art works are by particular artists; the unauthorised use of Abo-
riginal designs in the tourist market, such as on tee shirts or tea-towels; and the
bastardisation of Aboriginal designs (such as the x-ray koala). In each of these
cases, producers (usually non-Aboriginal) make use of Aboriginal motifs and de-
signs for economic gain. In some situations this may be inappropriate; in others
it may be misleading and deceptive. Most importantly, it may be in breach of tra-
ditional indigenous customary law. 

Issues of appropriation are inextricable from issues of authenticity. At the
tourist or popular art end of the market, unauthorised reproductions, “rip-offs,”

190  

and bastardised designs may carry misleading swing tags that claim the work is
“inﬂuenced” or inspired by Aboriginal designs. These allow unscrupulous dealers
to reap a proﬁt from elements of Aboriginal heritage and devalue it along the way.
At the “ﬁne art” end of the market, authenticity represents the concern of buyers
that they are getting the “real thing.” In this context, the problem of authenticity
may be related to the practices of making the artwork. Western conceptions re-
garding the creation of a work will often not apply to Aboriginal artists. In the
West one artist may hold the rights to an image and then allow other people to
manufacture or paint it. For indigenous people art is often a communal activity,
and a group may work on a particular piece. Problems then arise for Western no-
tions of authenticity when the work is attributed to one artist or particular mem-
bers of the group who may not have put paintbrush to canvas, or when the paint-
ing  is  later  “touched  up” by  other  people  or  non-Aboriginal  collaborators.21
However, under Aboriginal law it is entirely appropriate for senior artists and cus-
todians of the Dreaming to allow other artists to work under their supervision.22
Indeed, it may be contrary to Aboriginal law to attach the name of the person who
did most work on the painting, as it would be to bestow Dreaming rights upon
that person, which cannot be done without the consent of other holders of the
Dreaming.23

Other related issues include works that are sold as possessing spiritual or
mythological signiﬁcance but do not; works of inferior quality, which are genuinely
by major artists; paintings not painted in areas where they are identiﬁed as having
originated; works by nonindigenous people claiming to be indigenous; and—the
most extreme example—works that deliberately counterfeit the works of a famous
artist by adopting his or her style. 

Two examples of the problematic nature of Aboriginal art and ownership may
be found among the prominent Utopia group of artists. Kathleen Petyarre became
involved in controversy after winning the 1996 Telstra National Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Art Award. Her non-Aboriginal former de facto husband,
Ray Beamish, claimed authorship of the work. An ofﬁcial enquiry found that, al-
though Beamish had assisted Petyarre, Petyarre remained the owner and author of
the design.24 Journalist Susan McCulloch describes in the Weekend Australian how
Emily Kam Kngwarreye has become embroiled in similar controversy.25 During the
peak of Kngwarreye’s career in the early 1990s, between two hundred and four hun-
dred works were going out to dealers in her name. Alice Springs art adviser Rod-
ney Gooch believes that only a half to two-thirds of these works were actually pro-
duced by her. Some of these “Emily school” paintings were produced by highly
talented artists and were approved of by Kngwarreye. Others were simply fabri-
cated. Gooch understands the motivation of those people who are good at what
they do but can make more money pretending the paintings are Kngwarreye’s. “It’s
a tough life out there” he told the Weekend Australian, “and if you can put colour

 ,   191

on canvas and make them look like Emily’s for food or grog, you’ll do it.” “Touch-
ing up” and collaboration by non-Aboriginals is particularly prevalent in the case
of senior artists, who may no longer have the ability to produce works of their for-
mer quality.26

2.2.1 Self-Determination
Indigenous cultural issues are inextricably tied to issues of self-determination.
ATSIC explicitly links the two, stating as follows:

ATSIC’s approach to culture and heritage is grounded in the principle of
self-determination. Rights of ownership, control over management of the
various expressions of cultural heritage, and ﬁnancial returns which may
ﬂow from the use of cultural or intellectual property should be in the hands
of those to whom the culture belongs.27

In  recent  decades  the  impetus  towards  self-determination  in  the  international
sphere has been growing at an ever-hastening rate. In international law, self-deter-
mination is recognised in Article 1 of both the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). Australia is signatory to both agreements. Two
major documents of the past few years have advocated that indigenous cultural is-
sues be dealt with by colonising nations. The UNESCO Report on the Protection
of the Cultural and Intellectual Property of Indigenous Peoples of 1993 is one. The
other is the United Nations Draft Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peo-
ples. Article 31 of the Draft Declaration states, “Indigenous peoples, as a speciﬁc
form of exercising their right to Self-Determination, have the right to their inter-
nal and local affairs, including culture, religion, education, [and] information.”
This is linked to culture in Article 12: “Indigenous peoples have the right to prac-
tice and revitalize their cultural traditions and customs. This includes the right to
maintain, protect and develop the past, present and future manifestations of their
cultures.” An essential aspect of self-determination is self-government. Article 33
characterises the “right to self-government or autonomy in matters relating to in-
ternal and local affairs, including culture, religion, education, information, media,
health,  housing,  employment,  social  welfare,  economic  activities,  land  and  re-
sources management, environment and entry by non-members” as a speciﬁc form
of exercising indigenous peoples’ right to self-determination. 

At present, the Draft Declaration represents the views of its leading indige-
nous drafters. As it makes its way through UN treaty processes it can be expected
to change and its more strongly expressed sentiments to be diluted. In 199, Cab-
inet decided to downgrade support for the Draft Declaration to support for “self
management,” rather  than  self-determination. There  was  no  consultation  with
ATSIC over this change in terminology.28 In addition, Australia’s recent rejection

192  

of the UN treaty process suggests that this treaty will not be implemented in the
foreseeable future. Notwithstanding this negative prognosis, it can be argued that
the multilateral discussion of indigenous rights that has continued since the 1970s
in the UN and other authoritative international venues has created an emergent
customary norm concerning indigenous rights, regardless of treaty ratiﬁcation.29
E. I. Daes states, “Nowadays it is almost impossible to deny that the right of self-
determination has attained true legal status.”30 It is this emergent norm that will
compel the Australian government to take notice of indigenous rights. 

One of the most useful examinations of the principle of self-determination is
that of indigenous scholar S. James Anaya. Anaya rejects as misguided the wedding
of self-determination and independent statehood, particularly in the context of
indigenous peoples.31 He sees self-determination as “a universe of human rights
precepts  concerned  broadly  with  peoples,  including  indigenous  peoples,  and
grounded in the idea that all are equally entitled to control their own destinies.”32
As a concept it “derives from philosophical afﬁrmation of the human drive to
translate aspiration into reality, coupled with postulates of inherent human equal-
ity.”33 There are two aspects to self-determination as it relates to indigenous peo-
ples: substantive and remedial. The remedial aspect of self-determination focuses
upon remedying the harms of colonisation, and thus is manifested by processes
of decolonisation.34 The substantive side of self-determination consists of two
phenomenological aspects: constitutive and ongoing. Constitutive self-determina-
tion requires participation, consent, and a political order that reﬂects the collective
will of the peoples concerned. Ongoing self-determination requires a governing
order in which people and groups can make meaningful choices in all spheres of
life, and can live and freely develop on a continuing basis.35

Mick Dodson, in his ﬁrst report as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander So-

cial Justice Commissioner, echoed these principles: 

Correctly understood, every issue concerning the historical and present
status, entitlements, treatment and aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples is implicated in the concept of self-determination.
The reason for this is that self-determination is a process. The right of self-
determination is a right to make decisions. These decisions affect the
enjoyment and exercise of the full range of freedoms and human rights of
Indigenous peoples.36

.     
Before turning to the Label of Authenticity and other possible solutions to the
problems and concerns raised above, we must examine the ways in which the legal
system currently protects indigenous art from unauthorised reproduction and ap-
propriation. The most useful are intellectual property regimes and, in particular,
the law of copyright. 

 ,   193

2.3.1 Intellectual Property
In recent decades a number of cases have been litigated successfully. In 199
Johnny Bulun Bulun brought an action against tee shirt manufacturers who had pi-
rated his artworks under the Copyright Act 196 (Cth), and the Trade Practices
Act 1974 (Cth). The matter was settled in his favour.37 Terry Yumbulul was not so
successful in his claim against the agent who negotiated an agreement to use his
artistic work “Morning Star Pole” on the ten-dollar bank note.38 Yumbulul com-
plained that he had not given permission to reproduce his work in that context and
that he had no such authority to do so, because permission to reproduce the work
lay with the relevant tribal owners. The judge found copyright subsisted in the
work but rejected his argument that the permission did not extend to the partic-
ular use of the work by the Reserve Bank of Australia. 

George  Milpurrurru  and  other  artists  were  also  successful  in  their  claim
against a company involved in reproducing artworks, or parts of artworks, by well-
known artists onto woolen carpets.39 Johnny Bulun Bulun also brought another ac-
tion against a textiles company reproducing his artworks.40These two cases are no-
table for the judicial creativity of the decisions. In the former case, Milpurrurru v.
Indofurn, Justice von Doussa in the federal court emphasised that trial evidence ex-
plained the importance of creation stories and dreamings and their secret or sacred
nature. He also recognised that the rights to paintings and techniques will often re-
side in traditional owners or custodians on behalf of the community.41 Justice von
Doussa acknowledged the signiﬁcance of the Aboriginal custom of holding the
artist responsible for any breach of traditional law that may occur through unau-
thorised reproduction,42 and he emphasised the seriousness of the present breach,
in which the reproduction of the image was in a context totally opposed, and of-
fensive, to its cultural use.43

However, as the judge decided the case solely on the principles of copyright
law, the real signiﬁcance of this recognition of Aboriginal customary law lay in the
remedies awarded: a lump sum to be held communally and divided up as the ap-
pellants saw ﬁt. Equal damages were awarded to all the living artists, as requested,
and extra damages, reﬂecting the “cultural damage,” were also awarded.44

The most recent of these cases sought to extend the principles yet further. In
Bulun Bulun v. R & T Textiles counsel for Bulun Bulun argued that the work incor-
porated matter sacred to the Ganalbingu people and that the Ganalbingu people
held copyright in the work either as a ﬁduciary or on trust, because they had power
under customary law to control the production of the corpus of ritual knowl-
edge.45 Justice von Doussa, again on the bench, rejected the existence of a trust but
found a ﬁduciary relationship to exist between Bulun Bulun and the Ganalbingu
people. However, this relationship gave the Ganalbingu rights against only the
copyright owner and did not vest equitable ownership of the copyright in the clan.
These cases appear to represent successful attempts to extend the principles of
copyright to indigenous art. The growing judicial recognition of issues speciﬁc to

194  

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander art and an increased willingness to address
these issues with some degree of creativity are positive steps. However, there are
many problems involved in applying copyright law and other aspects of intellec-
tual property rights to indigenous artists, problems which have been extensively
critiqued.46

One major difﬁculty is the difference between indigenous attitudes towards
property and art and those European attitudes that inform the law of intellectual
property. Brieﬂy, where Aboriginal people see cultural heritage and art as “collec-
tively owned [and] socially based,”47 the legal system characterises “property” as
ﬁercely individualistic and economically constituted. Intellectual property law bal-
ances the interests of the individual author against those attributed to the univer-
sal public domain. It is fundamental that ideas remain in the public domain, and
are incapable of ownership.48 It is only the expression of these ideas that the law
protects. In indigenous communities, rights to images may be distributed among
several individuals or groups and may encompass ephemeral manifestations, such
as body painting or oral traditions. Thus, the case of indigenous art—in which
the idea itself is as essential, if not more so, as its visual expression—falls outside
the conceptual parameters of the law.

The law of copyright is inherently unsuitable for indigenous peoples. Speciﬁc
problems are the requirements of originality, ﬁxation, and duration of term. For
works that have been achieved communally, and for pre-existing traditional de-
signs, there may also be difﬁculty in identifying an owner. The recently passed
“moral rights” legislation may overcome some of these difﬁculties,49 but it extends
only to individual, not community, interests.50 Nor does it address oral, ceremo-
nial, or other nonﬁxed forms of heritage.

Even where the requirements are satisﬁed and copyright is found to subsist
and be infringed, as in the cases described above, problems remain in the discursive
limitations of the legal system. The acceptance of evidence of traditional practice
and custom is a progressive step for the judiciary to have taken. However, the use
made of this evidence forms part of a continuing colonial narrative, informed by
colonial mentality and enshrined in the law. Although evidence concerning in-
digenous custom formed a substantial part of Justice von Doussa’s decision in 
R & T Textiles, Justice von Doussa explicitly states that the recognition he accorded
these laws and customs in ﬁnding a ﬁduciary relationship was to treat those laws
not as part of the legal system but as part of the factual relationship.51 Thus, in-
digenous participants are required to phrase their claims in terms the legal system
can understand in order to gain relief. Indigenous practice and law are incorpo-
rated into the court’s analysis, but only to describe victimisation and damage,
against which the legal system can provide relief.52 In R & T Textiles, Justice von
Doussa explicitly introduces paternalistic strategy, claiming he has “no hesitation
in holding that the interest of the Ganalbingu people in the protection of that rit-

 ,   195

ual knowledge from exploitation which is contrary to their law and custom is de-
serving of the protection of the Australian legal system.”53

A second strategy evident in the cases is the restricted reading given to “in-
digenous art.”The notion of “art” is a Western cultural construction.54The law of
copyright protects Western conceptions of “art” and identiﬁes it as an individual
endeavour. In Indofurn, the artists were able to fulﬁll the requirement by being fa-
mous, exhibited, and published in the nonindigenous world. In R & T Textiles,
much emphasis was placed on Bulun Bulun’s description of the link between art
and the land. As the argument based on a native title claim was not seriously con-
sidered in the case, it appears that this evidence was included merely for illustrative
purposes. Hence, the characterisation of indigenous artworks, coupled with a lack
of authority attributed to indigenous law, continues the narrative of primitivism
and victimisation. The “success” of these cases may be viewed as another pater-
nalistic strategy, by which the white knight of the Australian legal system saves in-
digenous culture from exploitation. In the process it reconﬁgures indigenous prac-
tice into a narrative of law and culture which is itself an appropriation.55

Other avenues in intellectual property law have been canvassed. The Designs Act
1906 protects artistic works made into three-dimensional articles or objects. This
protection is limited in use for Aboriginal peoples, as the design must be registered
and the duration of protection is only sixteen years.56 The breach-of-conﬁdence
action, as was used in Foster v. Mountford,57 has also been suggested as providing re-
dress for revealing or reproducing secret or sacred information.58 However, this ac-
tion protects only information that has not yet reached the public domain.59 On
a more practical note, even where intellectual property rights are found to subsist,
it does not mean that they can be enforced. The costs of litigation, both ﬁnancial
and otherwise, are high; and the results, uncertain.60

Under intellectual property law, and as far as economic interests go, indige-
nous artists are as well protected as nonindigenous Australians. However, spiritual
and cultural interests are another matter altogether and need to be accommodated
differently. Another solution that has been suggested is to achieve this through
changes to heritage legislation.61

2.3.2 Statutory Protection
Cultural heritage legislation has been enacted in each of the Australian states and
the Northern Territory. Legislation has also been enacted at the federal level, in the
form of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act 194
(Cth) (ATSIHPA). This act is concerned with the preservation and protection of
areas and objects of particular signiﬁcance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Is-
landers, in accordance with their tradition.

The main concern of indigenous people is the failure of the federal legisla-
tion, and most of the states’ legislation, to recognise indigenous peoples as own-

196  

ers of their own heritage. Another problem is the emphasis on items’ being “sig-
niﬁcant” and “in accordance with Aboriginal tradition.”62This has a stultifying ef-
fect on cultural heritage regimes, by continuing to place conceptions of indigenous
people in an unchanging and dying culture, denying their dynamic potential for de-
velopment. The burden of proving the existence of a tradition may be especially
difﬁcult for urbanised Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders and effectively divides
indigenous people into categories of traditional or urban, denying authenticity to
the latter group.63

In addition to the discursive undermining of indigenous voice, bureaucratic
structures interfere with the operation of the federal Act. Designed as the last bul-
wark against the desecration of sacred objects and sites, no declaration made under
the Act has withstood judicial review, and the Act has failed to save a single her-
itage site when faced with determined opposition by a state or territory govern-
ment.64 The Hindmarsh Island case provides a potent example of how the admin-
istrative procedures of the Act, and Commonwealth interference, may be used to
undermine preservation decisions.65

Although there have been some positive results from cultural heritage legisla-
tion,66 the legislative regime remains ﬂawed. By establishing a mode of protection
based on Anglicised views of the value of heritage and the means of its adminis-
tration, the regulating legislation creates a narrative that forces indigenous people
to represent their beliefs in a way that can be understood by the system. The sig-
niﬁcance of indigenous law is reduced to evidentiary status, and there is no struc-
ture for indigenous input into decision making. 

The minister may compulsorily acquire Aboriginal cultural property under
threat, but this property is vested in the Aboriginal community only for the pur-
pose of being held on trust for it. No outright vesting of ownership is contem-
plated by the act, which continues to assume that preservation and protection by
the Crown is the most desirable end. The legislation posits its own authority and
cannot address claims to authority that fall outside the sovereignty recognised by
the legal system.67 Consequently, the extension of the legislation to protect spiri-
tual and cultural aspects of cultural works, both traditional and contemporary,
would merely be stretching an already imperfect model.

   -

3.1    
Proposals to develop an indigenous “authenticity trade mark” were ﬁrst made in
the 190s, and many submissions to Our Culture: Our Future supported this idea.
Our Culture: Our Future recommended implementing such a mark, and at the same
time the National Indigenous Arts Advocacy Association (NIAAA) began to de-

 ,   197

velop an authenticity mark. NIAAA launched its Label of Authenticity in No-
vember 1999, for implementation in January 2000. The Label of Authenticity is a
national certiﬁcation trade mark that can be placed on art or cultural products
produced by Aboriginal people.68 NIAAA envisages that the mark will help pro-
mote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander art and cultural products, as well as
deter production and sales of “copy-cat” and “rip-off ” designs and products.69

NIAAA is a nonproﬁt national arts and cultural services and advocacy asso-
ciation. It has developed the label with the assistance of ATSIC and the support
of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Arts Board of the Australia Council.
NIAAA will be the registered owner of the label trade mark until an independent
nonproﬁt national organisation is established to manage the label.70

3.1.1 How will the Label of Authenticity operate?
Indigenous artists who want to sell and market their work will apply to the Label
of Authenticity Registry for permission to use the label. They will have to declare
that their products were made by an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person
or group who, identified as an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander, could claim a be-
longing to the story, had knowledge of, and respect for, the culture, and took responsibil-
ity for what was created. The Label of Authenticity will usually be attached to an-
other label, which bears a trading or business name, indicating the source of the
product and quality of “authenticity.” The other label or promotional materials
utilising the Label of Authenticity will need to include a description of the work
of art and product (or service) on which it is reproduced; the name of the artist or
artists; and the country, language, or place of residence of the artist or artists.71
The Label of Authenticity will guarantee that the work is derived from a work of
art created by an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander person or people and has
also been reproduced or produced and manufactured by Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people who satisfy the deﬁnition of “authenticity.”

3.1.2 What are the Beneﬁts?
NIAAA believes that the label will assist artists to receive a fair and improved re-
turn on sales from arts and cultural products. It hopes that consumers will learn
more about traditional and contemporary styles of art and stories from across
Australia, recognise products from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
speaking in the proper way about their stories, and identify goods and services of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander origin in preference to “copy-cat” products.
It further hopes that wholesalers, retailers, manufacturers, and distributors will be
encouraged to buy, sell, and enter into licensing arrangements for authentic prod-
ucts created by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.72

Marianna Annas believes that the label will give indigenous people a “mar-
keting advantage.” The object is to  “assist consumers to buy authentic cultural

198  

products and thereby improve the economic beneﬁts ﬂowing to Indigenous people
from the commercial use of their culture.”73 Annas points out that the label is not
intended to address the shortcomings of the Copyright Act, but rather to deter
misleading and deceptive conduct and passing off. The label will provide an im-
mediate indication of the product’s authenticity at the market level, in contrast to
lengthy and costly litigation procedures.74 Moreover, even if there is infringement
to  be  litigated,  this  will  be  carried  out  by  the  registering  authority  (currently
NIAAA),  which  has  greater  resources  and  better  information  than  individual
artists or communities. Education is an essential aspect of the label’s introduction,
to promote the use of the mark by eligible suppliers. Annas claims that the label
will be at its most effective when only nonauthentic goods lack it.75

Another positive development is that the deﬁnition of “authenticity” that will
be used to determine eligibility for the label is determined entirely by reference to
standards developed within Aboriginal communities. The purpose of the marks
is to indicate “quality, accuracy, or other characteristics including (in the case of
goods) origin, material or mode of manufacture.”76 According to the legislation,
distinguishing a product by reference to the racial origin or community origin is
not workable because the certiﬁable quality must be identiﬁable in the product.
Hence, “authenticity” must be the quality being certiﬁed.77

The deﬁnition of authenticity that will prescribe eligibility has been formu-
lated in consultation with individuals and communities across Australia. This re-
search indicated that authenticity is a declaration by indigenous Australian artists
of identity with, belonging to, knowledge about, respect for, and responsibility to-
wards the works of art they create. According to the draft discussion paper by
Kathryn Wells, the research consultant appointed by NIAA, it is important not to
confuse “‘authentic’” with ideas about what is “‘real,’” “‘traditional,’” or modern.
The deﬁnition is based in a work of art created by an indigenous person who
claims a belonging to a story, based on respect and responsibility for that culture.78
Annas points out that, because the traditional custodians have the authority to de-
termine who may use, create, see and reproduce designs and images, the applica-
ble criteria are “inextricably bound to a complex cultural structure.”79

The ﬁve key words, identity, belonging, knowledge, respect, and responsibil-
ity, allow communities an important autonomy within which the cultural structure,
with its customary laws and relationship, may operate in force. That the criteria for
the label do not distinguish between different “types” of art based on their con-
sumers is also positive. Distinctions of “ﬁne” and “tourist” art are based on Eu-
ropean notions of what constitutes art, whereas indigenous peoples are unlikely
to make these distinctions.80

3.1.3 Unresolved Problems
Despite the attractions of the Label of Authenticity, it fails to provide a complete
solution to the issues raised by appropriation. The ﬁrst problem with the label is

 ,   199

its compulsory aspect. The label will be of little use until all artists, producers, and
manufacturers of indigenous art and cultural products are using the same label to
denote authenticity. However, indigenous artist Brenda L. Croft likens this to the
“Dog Tag” system, a government pass that indigenous peoples once needed to hold
while travelling, stating that they were not full citizens. It is her belief that the label
carries similar connotations, particularly in its association with the concept of
“authenticity.” Croft points out that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artists
have worked hard to explode notions of what constitutes “authentic” art, because
of its implications of conﬁnement and inclusion/exclusion. The Label of Au-
thenticity conﬂates identiﬁable authorship with authenticity, and in doing so it
plays into nonindigenous notions of what constitutes “Aboriginality.”

The label creates a generic, homogenous notion of Aboriginality and encour-
ages both a belief in a single “authentic” indigenous experience and a reliance on
swing-tags to denote this. Another effect is to label as “inauthentic” the indige-
nous artist or producer who refuses to buy access to the label.

Croft also believes that the failure of the label to distinguish between ﬁne art
and tourist or merchandise art, although previously noted as a positive aspect, has
drawbacks. She points out that reputable dealers and art and craft centres provide
documentation authenticating works, which may even include video tapes. There-
fore, the ﬁne art end of the market has far less need of the label than the mer-
chandising end.81

There have, however, been incidents of forgery at the ﬁne art end of the mar-
ket. In cases such as the previously mentioned example of Emily Kam Kngarrreye,
and more recently, Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri, the Label may be of assistance in
inhibiting unscrupulous dealers and preventing forgery. Nonetheless, it is less likely
that the label could have protected Kathleen Petyarre from the accusations of
Beamish. Vivien Johnson believes that the label is more likely to represent restric-
tions on artists to sell paintings done or approved by them, and that nothing is
more unlikely than that artists, such as Clifford Possum, will be prepared to brook
interference in their business, however well meaning.82

At the merchandising end of the market the label will do little to assist in the
case of images like the boomerang, which have long ago been absorbed into main-
stream culture. In cases such as Indofurn and R & T Textiles it may be of some as-
sistance in preventing customers from buying goods without the label, but only
after extensive consumer education and only if the label becomes ubiquitous. 

Another problem is the criteria required to gain use of the label. Any Aborig-
inal and Torres Strait Islander person may obtain a licence to use the label, re-
gardless of the cultural integrity of the product. This is beneﬁcial in that it does
not require certain qualities in products, which might have served to trap indige-
nous culture in traditional styles and designs, but rather allows art and culture to
develop diffusely. However, it does allow indigenous peoples to appropriate im-
agery that does not belong to them, or to create generic designs for use on mer-

200  

chandise with adverse effects on cultural integrity.83 The proposition that indige-
nous people may rip off other indigenous people is a contentious and sensitive
issue, yet it should be addressed. The lack of willingness to deal with such issues
perpetuates the view that there is a homogenous indigenous community with com-
mon ideals and interests. However, NIAAA goes some way to recognising the po-
tential problem and warns against it in the guidelines for the label.84

Other underlying assumptions are particularly problematic. The legal actions
supporting certiﬁcation marks are the tort of passing off, or misleading and de-
ceptive conduct under section 52 of the Trade Practices Act. Thus, the mark pro-
tects the consumer or purchaser of the good against being “ripped off.” For a pol-
icy that declares itself aimed at the protection of indigenous interests, the legal
solution is addressing the problem from the wrong angle. The legal wrong is done
to the consumer and to the marketplace, not to the artists, who may be culturally
and economically harmed by the fraud. 

The creation of a registry body which can bring actions on behalf of artists
when the mark is copied, or fraudulent or appropriated works are discovered be-
fore they reach the marketplace, has the advantage of easing many of the burdens
of litigation. However, the negative aspect of this body is to remove individual au-
tonomy from the artist, who must get his or her work licensed to become part of
a legally recognised entity. Although it is true that other forms of protection such
as copyright will continue to operate, the effect of creating a legal entity for the
speciﬁc purpose of protecting against appropriation may act to invalidate claims
brought outside that structure. Also, remedies will continue to address economic
damage, not spiritual or cultural harms. 

Moreover, just as in the case of copyright and heritage protection law, the ex-
tension of existing legal categories to accommodate indigenous interests incor-
porates artists into the colonial legal system and denies legitimacy to indigenous
laws that may govern the use of particular designs or styles. “Authenticity” is dic-
tated by whether a product carries a label, not by its own inherent characteristics
and symbolism. If artists’ works are appropriated, they become victims, in the
legal narrative, and only the certiﬁcation authority can save them. In this way, 
the legal system reconﬁgures the claims of indigenous peoples into a narrative of
paternalism. 

These criticisms do not mean to suggest that the indigenous organisations
that have worked hard at introducing the Label of Authenticity are labouring
under some kind of “false consciousness,” or that they have not selected the best
of the currently possible solutions to the problem of appropriation. The Label of
Authenticity is an innovative approach to making the legal system work for in-
digenous peoples. It is hoped that the Label will assist in reducing the number of
cheap imitations on offer at tourist outlets and will provide invaluable assistance to
people, both foreigners and nonindigenous Australians, who do not wish to sup-

 ,   201

port the “rip-off ” industry by buying their wares, and who do wish to support the
art and culture of indigenous Australians. However, it suffers from a number of
limitations and ﬂaws, as does every other attempt to apply existing legal constructs
to the issue of appropriation. It is simply impossible to address the problem in a
meaningful and lasting way in the context of the Anglo-Australian legal system as
it stands. Issues of art and appropriation must be dealt with in the context of self-
determination.

3.2     
   
Recognising the limitations of the Label of Authenticity leads logically to the
search for a system of protecting and controlling the use of indigenous art and im-
ages that accords with the ideals of self-determination. One suggestion has been
to use the landmark decision of Mabo v. State of Queensland.85

3.2.1 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Rights and the Mabo Decision
In 1992 the High Court of Australia recognised the native title of the Meriam peo-
ple to areas of the Murray Island. Stating that native title survived the Crown’s ac-
quisition of sovereignty, the Court held that the Crown had radical title to the
land, burdened by continuing rights of Aboriginal people.86 Justice Brennan’s lead-
ing judgment characterised native title as being ascertained according to the laws
and customs of indigenous people who, by those laws and customs, have a “con-
nexion” to the land.87 The rights of native title can be possessed only by inhabi-
tants or their descendants and are dependent on these people’s remaining identi-
ﬁable as a community living under its own laws and customs.88 Native title can also
be extinguished if a clan or group loses its connexion to the land by ceasing to ac-
knowledge their own laws and customs.89

The application of the Mabo decision to issues of appropriation of indigenous
imagery would require it to be extended beyond land. Former Aboriginal and Tor-
res Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner Mick Dodson characterises the de-
cision as a positive step towards the recognition of indigenous culture. He states
that, “native title is an opportunity to create a less intrusive system, because instead
of creating criteria and making the Aboriginal system of law ﬁt into them, native
title is a recognition of indigenous law.”90

Despite positive reactions to Mabo, there are serious problems with using these
decisions to protect against appropriation. The view that art comes under native
title as an “incident” in land leads to the logistical problem that, if indigenous
rights to designs are conﬁned to indigenous territories, then they are of little use
in combating unauthorised reproduction in national and international markets.91
More fundamentally, the Mabo decision fails to overcome problems of euro-
centrism and paternalism found in other legal solutions. The concept of native

202  

title is based on precontact “connexion” with the land and descent from precon-
tact owners. Native title will no longer exist where the tide of history has “washed
away any real acknowledgment of traditional law.”92 The result is to reify the char-
acterisation of Aboriginal authenticity as existing in a precontact and primitive
model. As well as “freezing” indigenous culture, the decisions, although based on
the recognition of indigenous law and culture, do not attribute any authority to
such structures except insofar as the legal system recognises them as existing facts.
Moreover, native title rights will be recognised only to the point that they do not
“fracture the skeleton of principle which gives the body of our law its shape and
internal consistency.”93 Even if such rights did once exist, they may have since been
extinguished by inconsistent legislation.94

This is illustrated in the R & T Textiles decision. Bulun Bulun claimed in his
statement, on behalf of the Ganalbingu people, that the Ganalbingu were the tra-
ditional owners of the land at the time of sovereignty and that his right to paint
and reproduce his work was an incident of this traditional ownership.95 However,
Justice von Doussa rejected the argument:

The principle that ownership of land and ownership in artistic works are
separate statutory and common law institutions is a fundamental principle
of the Australian legal system which may well be characterised as “skeletal”
and stands in the road of the foreshadowed argument.96

Justice von Doussa added that even if customary laws regarding ownership had ex-
isted at the time of the Crown’s assertion of sovereignty, they had since been
amended by the Copyright Act 196.To concede ownership of the copyright to the
Ganalbingu people would “involve the creation of rights in indigenous peoples
which are not otherwise recognised by the legal system of Australia.”97

The Court’s treatment of the native title argument in R & T Textiles illustrates
two important points. The ﬁrst is that the tool of legislative extinguishment is one
of the legal system’s strongest tools for denying indigenous rights. By relying on
sovereignty and precedent, the legal system invokes its very foundations to reject
present-day claims. Consequently, it is clear that whatever steps forward Mabo has
made, the techniques and rhetoric of the High Court’s decision will be more use-
ful in refusing indigenous rights than they will be in developing them. Secondly,
the justice’s attitude illustrates a major sticking point for the creation of indige-
nous rights in art and culture: namely, the perception that this would give Abo-
riginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples advantages not enjoyed by nonindigenous
Australians. 

Equality before the law is a fundamental tenet of the Australian legal system
and is, as it should be, jealously guarded. However, equal treatment does not con-
stitute equal justice in the context of indigenous rights. Rather, it is important to
recognise that, although all Australians have the same rights before the law, they ex-

 ,   203

ercise them differently. The question of indigenous rights is not about a demand
made of “the law” by a special interest group, but an “interaction between legal
systems with different organising systems.”98 The conﬂict is not who owns what,
but a clash of world views.99

3.2.2 A Role for Mabo?
Mabo’s limitations mean that neither the common law approach to native title rights
nor the statutory avenue is likely to be of much assistance in laying the foundations
for indigenous peoples’ rights to control the use of their culture. Indigenous sov-
ereignty and international norms of self-determination were not referred to in the
judgments, and, although the doctrine of terra nullius was exploded with respect to
property, the Court did not question the legality of the Crown’s acquisition of
sovereignty.100 However, by recognising the ﬁctitious nature of terra nullius and,
hence, the continuance of indigenous sovereignty in relation to land, the High
Court, albeit unintentionally, has laid the foundations of indigenous sovereignty
and the right to self-determination in the common law. The next steps will be
highly political and hence must come from the legislative and executive arms of
government.

3.2.3 The Road to Decolonisation and Self-Determination
Decisions  such  as  Mabo and  the  copyright  cases  have  paved  the  ﬁrst  stones  in
Anaya’s model of remedial self-determination. The next steps must be substantive.
The constitutive aspect should include not only the recognition of the laws and
customs of different communities, clans, and moieties for dealing with their cul-
tural heritage and its contemporary manifestations but should also include deci-
sions on how to apply them in contemporary society. The ongoing aspect would
be the implementation of these laws and customs, direct enforceability against in-
fringers, and the ability to change and adapt these rules and customs in accordance
with changes and adaptations of indigenous cultures. This section will formulate
one way in which substantive self-determination could be realised.

The recognition of customary law was examined in extensive detail in 196
by the Australian Law Reform Commission.101 The commission’s report (here-
inafter ALRC Report) focussed on substantive and procedural matters in the areas
of family law and criminal law, not addressing heritage and art. It concluded that
Aboriginal  customary  laws  should  be  recognised,  in  appropriate  ways,  by  the 
Australian legal system, against the background and within the framework of the
general law. The ALRC Report was comprehensive and made a great many rec-
ommendations, none of which have been ofﬁcially adopted by the legislatures.
However, it was made prior to Mabo and so does not take into account the shift-
ing landscape of indigenous rights in the courts. 

The question that arises from this is, how might customary law play a role in

204  

allowing indigenous peoples greater control over their art? Clearly, recognition of
customary law as it relates to art and culture is but one part of developing self-gov-
ernment procedures for indigenous peoples. Anaya characterises self-government
as “allowing indigenous peoples to achieve meaningful self-government through
political institutions that reﬂect their speciﬁc cultural patterns and permit them to
be genuinely associated with all decisions affecting them on a permanent basis.”102
Leaving aside the current debate over self-government through a treaty, the focus
of this section will be upon methods of self-determination as they relate speciﬁ-
cally to indigenous art and culture, while recognising the need for self-determina-
tion in the wider context of indigenous self-government. 

This article submits a “working model,” painted in broad brush strokes, for
the purposes of encouraging discussion and argument. The ﬁrst step of the model
will be recognition by the general law that rights to control the ways in which in-
digenous art is used attach to those particular artworks and are based in custom-
ary laws. The second step will be the establishment of a special nonadversarial
process to enforce those rights. For ease of reference this process will be termed a
“tribunal.” Although this suggestion of a tribunal to be set up speciﬁcally to deal
with a certain type of indigenous issue may appear radical, similar suggestions have
been made before. Lowitja O’Donohue, former Chair of the Aboriginal and Tor-
res Strait Islander Commission, has suggested using tribunals in the context of
community justice.103 More recently, the Senate Legal and Constitutional Refer-
ences Committee in its Inquiry into the Federal Government’s Implementation of
the Stolen Generations Report, Bringing Them Home, has advocated establishing a 
tribunal to settle disputes brought by so-called stolen children.104 The Senate Ref-
erence Committee received a great number of submissions regarding the estab-
lishment of a tribunal to compensate victims of the past government policy of in-
digenous child removal and ended by endorsing such a tribunal.105 The Minority
Report of the Australian Democrats Party also endorsed the establishment of a
tribunal.106

This Senate Reference Committee Report was handed down in November
2000. Consequently, its discussion of the merits and demerits of compensating in-
digenous peoples through a tribunal is of particular use in framing the outlines of
the model proposed in the context of indigenous art. There are obvious differences
between the situation of the stolen children and the problem of appropriation of
indigenous art. The latter will usually involve disputes between private individuals
or companies and is not a matter of governmental compensation. Financial harm,
as well as cultural harm, will often be at issue. Yet there is a central similarity in that
both the appropriation of children and the appropriation of art involve loss and
dispersal of indigenous culture and assimilation to nonindigenous culture. Both
situations involve a dawning recognition of this assimilation as constituting dam-
age or harm. Moreover, insofar as both involve contemporary conﬂict between in-

 ,   205

digenous and nonindigenous cultures, the model of the tribunal proposed by the
Senate Reference Committee and the discussion of issues surrounding it are of
value for informative and comparative purposes, as well as for illuminating the cur-
rent position of an important Senate committee.

It must be emphasised at the outset that this is merely an example of a possi-
ble response and obviously requires a great deal of thought, discussion, and con-
sultation with artists and communities before it could be put into practice. As the
ALRC Report points out, there is no point in suggesting or implementing solutions
that do not have the acceptance and endorsement of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples.107 Furthermore, for any solution to promote self-determination,
it must have been developed by indigenous people themselves. The role of non-
indigenous people is to make a space for indigenous autonomy within the exist-
ing system.

3.2.4 Tribunal for Resolving Disputes Concerning Indigenous Art and Culture: Role and Powers
The proposed tribunal’s jurisdiction would be triggered whenever the rights at-
taching to a particular artwork or design were appropriated or otherwise misused.
For the tribunal to be effective, appearance at the tribunal would need to be com-
pellable by the general law and its decisions binding under the general law. 

The tribunal would have a number of roles. A central aim would be to pro-
mote dialogue and coordination among claimants, offenders, and other relevant
parties.108 The tribunal should have the power to order or recommend all forms of
reparation, including monetary damages, acknowledgment and apology, guarantees
against repetition, and measures of restitution.109 Monetary damages would recog-
nise the breach of customary law and compensate the victim in the usual manner
of the law. However, other remedies may provide more appropriate solutions. The
tribunal could recommend that an apology be made, or that certain artists or com-
munities be acknowledged as owners of the design and that royalties be paid.
Guarantees against repetition could operate in conjunction with interim injunc-
tions. Claims for restitution, in the present context, could include funding to lan-
guage, cultural, and history centres; funding to reestablish indigenous identity;110
educational programmes, or advertising campaigns. Of course, restitutionary mea-
sures would depend entirely on the type of damage suffered and may rarely be
called into use.

A particularly important consideration is who would make the decisions and
upon what basis. Anaya emphasises that self-determination measures should “re-
ﬂect speciﬁc cultural patterns.”Traditional punishments for misuse of tribal de-
signs vary greatly. As was noted in Indofurn, punishment could be as severe as spear-
ing or banishment,111 or in the case of artist Lili Hargraves Ngarrayi, her people
could “sing her to her death.”112 However, it is more likely that such issues would
come to the tribunal when they involved a conﬂict between indigenous and non-

206  

indigenous use of an artwork or design. Consequently, tribunal members should
be neutral and specially trained. There should be both indigenous and nonindige-
nous members, either in equal numbers, or with a greater number of indigenous
members. Elders, and those with the appropriate authority and knowledge from
relevant communities, would have special roles as advisers on the relevant custom-
ary law applying to that design or art work. The tribunal would then apply cus-
tomary rules and procedures to characterise the damage that had occurred and to
ﬁnd an appropriate response. 

The proposed tribunal method adopts customary law as a regulating norm on
its own terms, not as legal pluralism to be ﬁxed in legislation or interpreted by the
common law courts. It recognises that traditional indigenous punishments and
dispute-resolving mechanisms may not follow Western conceptions of the admin-
istration of justice. As the ALRC Report points out, indigenous communities may
not adopt the concept of “punishment” for wrongdoers, but rather one of “con-
sequences.”113 The tribunal method also allows for interaction between indigenous
and nonindigenous communities. The tribunal would be able to apply customary
law to decide the nature of the wrong, such as the spiritual or cultural harm that
has been done. However, sanctions would be those appropriate to the culture of
the wrongdoer, such as an injunction or a ﬁne for nonindigenous Australians. It
could also be a role of the tribunal to negotiate between claims of archaeologists
and communities in the case of relics, rock paintings, and secret/sacred places.

It is essential that the tribunal be highly ﬂexible. By refusing to apply a single
standard and procedure to all indigenous groups, but rather allowing communities
to develop their own, it would be able to accommodate and respect cultural and
linguistic needs. A further advantage would be the ability to address the issue of
standing, allowing a group to claim ownership of a design, contrary to common law
principles. This would be useful in the case of unauthorised reproduction of tra-
ditional ﬁgures, such as Mimi, Wandjina, and Quinkin.114 Although much of the
discussion so far has implicitly related to preexisting or traditional designs, it is im-
portant to recognise that many indigenous artists do not live in traditional com-
munities and do not work only with traditional media and styles. By failing to
recognise these artists, we risk “reifying or ‘fossilising’” indigenous art through a
concern with traditional “authenticity.”115 Hence, any solution must also extend to
these artists. The speciﬁc concerns of damage and harm may be closer to those of
nonindigenous artists, but they ought to be addressed in the same arena as those of
traditional artists, so as not to “ghettoise” such artists between cultures. 

Where existing common and statute laws, such as copyright or trade mark law,
would apply in relation to an artwork, the tribunal should not displace the oper-
ation of such laws. The tribunal should not become a means of depriving indige-
nous artists of their rights under the general law. Rather, it should ensure that the
strict  legal  requirements  of such  laws  do  not  discriminate  against  indigenous

 ,   207

claims, and that the remedies offered are sufﬁcient and appropriate to the types of
harm suffered.

Many further questions arise from this working model. If tribunal members
are applying laws other than those of the common law, constitutional issues could
arise. There is no constitutional provision to apply laws other than the common
law and legislature. In the narrow context of this speciﬁc tribunal, it would be nec-
essary for the federal court to make provision for a quasi-judicial body. In the
broader,  aspirational,  context  of
indigenous  self-government,  constitutional
amendment would be essential. 

3.2.5 Other Tribunal Issues: Authority and Evidence
Other issues to be addressed include the burden of proving the existence of cus-
tomary law, ascertaining who has knowledge and authority to speak,116 and over-
coming or respecting the secrecy of certain matters.117 Giving authority to the rel-
evant elders of the community as tribunal advisers might avoid some of these
problems, yet issues still remain. The ﬁrst is the dispersal of control over art among
different groups, as this presents difﬁculties in identifying and locating the relevant
traditional Aboriginal owners.118 Intellectual Property lawyer Dean Ellinson points
out that there are often several groups that own and have rights and responsibili-
ties in respect of one preexisting design, and the views of the different groups may
not be uniform.119 Another problem is that traditional customary law is not ho-
mogenous in strength or context, and it is constantly in a state of change. Some
Aboriginal owners may be prepared to breach the customary law to improve their
desperate economic position; some may accept alteration or additions to designs,
whereas others may not.120 These are important issues any new system would need
to address. 

In the context of the Stolen Generations tribunal, both the Public Interest Ad-
vocacy  Commission  (PIAC)  and  the  Human  Rights  and  Equal  Opportunity
Commission (HREOC) submitted that the tribunal should adopt relaxed rules of
evidence in an attempt to avoid “unfairness” that results from requiring claimants
to prove events on the basis of availability and accuracy of written records and
ﬁrsthand oral evidence.121 PIAC further submitted that claimants be allowed to give
evidence in their own language, that the tribunal engage interpreters, and that
claimants have the option of having the application heard in camera or in public.122
The Minority Report of the Australian Democrats looks at section 119 of the
Veterans’ Entitlement Act 196 (Cth) as an analogous situation to removal of chil-
dren. This statute establishes a Repatriation Commission which, under section 119,

(a) is not bound to act in a formal manner and is not bound by the rules of

evidence, but may inform itself on any matter in such manner as it
thinks just;

208  

(b) shall act according to substantial justice and the substantial merits of

the case, without regard to legal form and technicalities; and 

(c) without limiting the generality of the foregoing, shall take into account
any difﬁculties that, for any reason, lie in the way of ascertaining the ex-
istence of any fact, matter, cause or circumstance, including any reason
attributable to:
(i) the effects of the passage of time, including the effect of the

passage of time on the availability of witnesses; and

(ii) the absence of, or the deﬁciency in, relevant ofﬁcial records.123

The Minority Report recommended a similar ﬂexibility for the Stolen Genera-
tions tribunal, and it is equally applicable to the tribunal proposed here.124

The relaxation of normal evidentiary requirements has its risks. One such risk
is to the validity of claims, as many fear that nondeserving claimants will manip-
ulate the system to their own advantage. However, in the context of the veterans’
compensation scheme such objections were not allowed to defeat the public policy
purpose of such schemes.125 Evidentiary requirements and due process safeguards
of the Australian general law embody essential tenets of equality before the law,
fairness, and human rights guarantees. If these were to be abandoned to give mean-
ing and authority to customary law, it would be essential that other safeguards be
put in their place. One such safeguard is the availability of administrative review
on questions of law, including whether the requirements of natural justice or pro-
cedural fairness were met.

3.2.6 Mediation and Alternate Dispute Resolution 
Another possibility is the inclusion of a mediation process in the operation of the
tribunal. This was recommended by the Australian Democrats and canvassed by
the Senate Reference Committee Report. The National Sorry Day Committee
submitted that an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Mediation Commission be
established as a statutory body, to hear the grievances of the indigenous people.126
Its commissioners would be both indigenous and nonindigenous, and decisions of
the commission would be binding unless overturned by a vote of Parliament. 

The  Democrats’ Minority  Report  looks  at  processes  of alternate  dispute 
resolution (ADR) used in conjunction with court-based adjudication. ADR tech-
niques include conﬁdential prehearing conferences and mediation. Common char-
acteristics of ADR include an emphasis on ﬂexibility, collaboration, and consen-
sual outcomes, assisted but not imposed by a neutral third party.127 Although risks
associated with ADR include possible imbalances of power and limited enforce-
ability of outcomes, ADR processes may be useful in reducing costs and settling
cases without public, more time-consuming hearings. The Minority Report points
out that the Canadian government is piloting ADR schemes to resolve claims

 ,   209

made by former Indian residential schools against the government for physical and
sexual abuse.128

ADR processes may also be of use in the proposed indigenous art tribunal.
Negotiated or mediated outcomes may be more appropriate, as well as time and
cost saving, when an infringement is imminent but has not yet occurred, or when
solutions more ﬂexible than damages are appropriate. An ADR body would need
to be empowered to negotiate different forms of compensation and other agree-
ments, like acknowledgment of ownership or access to designs or sites of signiﬁ-
cance.129

It will be necessary to take care that any new system does not set up an alter-
nate form of authority to traditional patterns, so as to remove autonomy and not
add to it. The proposed tribunal would incorporate procedures for determination
and decision making by tribunal members, albeit in a less formal and more ﬂexi-
ble manner than existing courts and tribunals permit, allowing for discussion of
particular harms and for the application and enforceability of customary laws and
appropriate responses. In addition, there could be ADR and mediation proce-
dures, should they be more appropriate for resolution of the issues.

The establishment of bodies developed and administered by indigenous peo-
ple applying customary law in accordance with that custom is fraught with com-
plex issues and possible conﬂicts. Such a tribunal would also be expensive to es-
tablish and run. However, the difﬁculties of bridging the gap between world views
does not mean it ought not to be attempted. This article submits that a system of
this kind is the only way that indigenous peoples will be able to control the use of
their culture in a way that meaningfully furthers self-determination. It could exist
apart from negotiated self-government agreements but would be a much more
powerful tool of self-determination if it were combined with it. Such a method
does not mimic customary law in the common law, or replicate it in legislation. It
offers the opportunity not only to listen to indigenous voices, but also to treat
them as authoritative and to respect indigenous laws as an alternate legitimating
norm. 

 

[A]ccepting the reality of being a coloniser means agreeing to be a non-
legitimate privileged person, that is, a usurper. To be sure, a usurper claims
his place and, if need be, will defend it by every means at his disposal. This
amounts to saying that at the very time of his triumph, he admits that what
triumphs in him is an image which he condemns. His true victory will never
be upon him: now he need only record it in the laws and morals.130

210  

The growing recognition of indigenous art and traditions within the broader Aus-
tralian community was recently demonstrated in the opening and closing cere-
monies of the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games, as well as in the large number of in-
digenous art exhibits that formed part of the Olympics cultural package. Yet,
unauthorised reproductions in the tourist market continue, as do “authenticity
scandals” in the ﬁne art market. The lack of understanding of, and respect for, in-
digenous culture that perpetuates this is reﬂected in the legal structures that con-
tinue to be informed by a colonial mentality. Tony Davies states, “Law fails to deal
with appropriation because it does not address the basic conditions of appropri-
ation.”131 This is because Anglo-Australian law is premised on nonrecognition of
indigenous sovereignty.132 By responding only to those aspects that fall into legal
categories, the legal system rewrites indigenous art as a Western construction, and
its peculiarly indigenous aspects are ignored. The legal system engages in appro-
priation of its own by becoming the “expert” and sole manner of recourse.133

The law must make a space for indigenous voices to act upon their concerns
and implement their right to self-determination. “Accommodation” of indigenous
peoples within existing structures is not enough. The change this article advocates
is radical. It involves more than tweaking legislation, expanding common law ac-
tions, and reeducating judges. It goes beyond the admission of oral testimony or
the awarding of damages based on “cultural harm.”The “working model” is not
offered as a perfect solution. It is merely the beginning of a search that goes be-
yond the presently existing legal system to address the concerns of indigenous peo-
ples. The aim is not to prevent nonindigenous people from dealing with indige-
nous art, but rather to negotiate, so far as possible, mutually agreeable terms on
which this can be done.

As issues regarding indigenous/nonindigenous relations continue to arise in
the courts, legislature, executive branch, and media, they are invariably charac-
terised as “Aboriginal problems” rather than “White problems.”134 The issue is
usually  cast  aside  as  too  politically  “hot.” Yet,  the  indigenous  search  for  self-
determination, whether through culture, land, human rights, or any other avenue,
is never just an “Aboriginal problem,” nor just a “White problem.”

In the past, cultural appropriation has been central to colonisation. For in-
digenous peoples, art is more than an aesthetic endeavour with economic conse-
quences. It expresses a relationship to land and to other people. It is central to re-
ligious expression in its ceremonial signiﬁcance. It is a product of the law and
often portrays the law. This is why addressing the conditions of cultural appro-
priation must now be central to decolonisation.

An examination of cultural appropriation and unauthorised reproduction of
indigenous art can reveal the ways in which the legal system continues to fail in-
digenous  people. These  concerns  cannot  be  separated  from  more  contentious 
issues, such as land rights and extreme socioeconomic disadvantage. However, an
examination of the issues surrounding art can also lead to a more positive recog-

 ,   211

nition that the Western manner of regarding art, culture, land, and property is nei-
ther the only nor the most constructive way to do so. Responsibility towards the
artworks created and the dreamings which they depict is a central aspect of in-
digenous art. It is not a central tenet of the Anglo-Australian legal system of in-
tellectual property, which is about apportioning blame, and converting it into an
economic relation. In this respect alone, Western society could learn a great deal
from indigenous culture.

It is to be hoped that these issues can also lead us to an understanding of
where other cultures and world views differ from our own, and how we can share
them to the beneﬁt of both cultures. In addressing the conditions of appropria-
tion, we must evolve a new legal system, one to which peoples beyond the colo-
nial relation can relate and which gives a voice to those groups hitherto excluded
from its processes. The legal system both informs and is informed by the norms of
contemporary society. It is not the only tool that will accomplish the shift in per-
ception necessary for decolonisation and indigenous self-determination, but it is
a powerful one. Education, discussion, trust, and respect will also play important
roles. This is our responsibility.



1. Loretta Todd, Notes on Appropriation, 16:1 Parallelogramme 24, 24 (1990).
2. I will use indigenous in its generic meaning to refer both to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Is-
lander peoples of Australia and, in other contexts, the indigenous peoples of the world. I will
use Aboriginal to refer to indigenous Australians from the mainland. 
3. The deﬁnition of indigenous art in this paper is intended to cover a broad range of cultural
expression, including artistic works, designs, images, rock art, bark painting, sand painting,
song, dance, story, and ceremony.
4. Terri Janke, Our Culture: Our Future—Report on Australian Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights (Michael Frankel & Company, Melbourne 199).
5. Id. at 11– 12.
6. Id. at 19– 42.
7. Howard Morphy, Aboriginal Art 322 (Phaidon, London 199).
. Id. at 67.
9. Id. at 6– 72.
10. Wally Caruana, Aboriginal Art 10 (Thames & Hudson, Singapore 1993).
11. Id. at 10.
12. Id. at 15.
13. Ali Gripper, Tribal Law That Keeps Lili’s Dots in Check, Sydney Morning Herald, 26 Septem-
ber 2000, at 5.

212  

14. Morphy, supra note 7, at 154.
15. Judith Ryan, Spirit in Land: Bark Paintings from Arnhem Land 10 (National Gallery of Victoria,
1990).
16. Morphy, supra note 7, at 320.
17. Id. at 366.
1. Id. at 321.
19. Id. at 30.
20. Janke, supra note 4, at 13.
21. Susan McCulloch, Authentic Forgery: The Faking of Aboriginal Art, Weekend Australian, 7–
October 1995, “Review,” at 1.
22. C. Nicholls, What Is Authorship? 25:4 Australian Law Journal 17, 17 (2000).
23. Vivien Johnson, The “Aboriginal Art Scandals” Scandal 20:1 Artlink 32 (2000).
24. Morphy supra note 7, at 309.
25. McCulloch, supra note 21, at 1.
26. Id. at 1.
27. Recognition, Rights, Reform: A Report to Government on Native Title Social Justice Measures 6.3 (ATSIC
Homepage, <www.atsic.gov.au> 1995).
2. ATSIC Media Release, 9 May 2000.
29. S. James Anaya, Indigenous Peoples at International Law 49– 5 (Oxford University Press, New
York 1996).
30. Erica Irene Daes, Some Considerations on the Right of Indigenous Peoples to Self-Deter-
mination, 3 Transnational Law and Contemporary Problems 1, 3 (1993).
31. Anaya, supra note 29, at 0.
32. Id. at 75.
33. Id. at 75.
34. Id. at 3.
35. Id. at 2. See also L. June McCue, Treaty Making from an Indigenous Perspective: A Ned’u’ten Cana-
dian Treaty Making Model (LL.M. Thesis, Faculty of Law, University of British Columbia 199).
36. ATSIC Media Release, supra note 2.
37. Bulun Bulun v. Nejlam Pty. Ltd. (unreported, Federal Court, NT, 199); C. Golvan, Abo-
riginal Art and the Protection of Indigenous Cultural Rights, [1992] 7 EIPR 227.
3. Yumbulul v. Reserve Bank of Australia and Others [1991] 21 IPR 41.
39. Milpurrurru & Ors v. Indofurn Pty. Ltd. & Ors. (1994) 30 IPR 209.
40. John Bulun Bulun & Anor. v. R & T Textiles Pty. Ltd. (199) 41 IPR 513.
41. Indofurn, (1994)  IPR at 214.
42. Id. at 214.

 ,   213

43. Id. at 215.
44. Id. at 247.
45. R & T Textiles, (1998) 1 IPR at 513.
46. See Cecilia O’Brien, Protecting Secret-Sacred Designs—Indigenous Cultural and Intellec-
tual Property Law, 2 Media & Arts Law Review 57 (1997); Jill McKeough and Andrew Stewart, In-
tellectual Property and the Dreaming, Indigenous Australians and the Law (E. Johnson et al., eds.,
Cavendish, Sydney 1996); Kamal Puri, Cultural Ownership and Intellectual Property Rights
Post-Mabo: Putting Ideas into Action, 9 Intellectual Property Journal 293 [1995]; Colin Golvan, Abo-
riginal Art and Copyright—An Overview and Commentary Concerning Recent Develop-
ments, 1 Media & Arts Law Review 151 (1996); Colin Golvan, Aboriginal Arts and the Protection
of Indigenous Cultural Rights, 2:56 Aboriginal Law Bulletin 5 (1992); Dean Ellinson, Unautho-
rised Reproduction of Traditional Aboriginal Art, 17:2 University of New South Wales Law Journal
327 (1994); Amanda Pask, Cultural Appropriation and the Law: An Analysis of the Legal
Regimes Concerning Culture,  Intellectual Property Journal 57 [1993]; Nicholas Blackmore, The
Search for a Culturally Sensitive Approach to Legal Protection of Aboriginal Art, 17:2 Copyright
Reporter 57 (1999).
47. O’Brien, supra note 46, at 5.
4. Id.
49. Copyright Amendment (Moral Rights) Act 2000.
50. McKeough and Stewart, supra note 46, at 70.
51. R & T Textiles, (1998) 1 IPR at 530.
52. Tony Davies, Aboriginal Cultural Property? 14 Law in Context 1, 12 (1996).
53. R & T Textiles, (1998) 1 IPR at 530-31.
54. Clifford argues that “art and culture emerged after 100 as mutually reinforcing domains
of human value, strategies for gathering, marking off, protecting the best and most interest-
ing creations of ‘Man.’” James Clifford, The Predicament of Culture 234 (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 19).
55. Davies, supra note 52, at 5.
56. Puri, supra note 46 at 320; McKeough and Stewart, supra note 46, at 73.
57. Foster v. Montford (1976) 14 ALR 71.
5. Puri, supra note 46, at 325– 26.
59. McKeough and Stewart, supra note 46, at 72.
60. Id. at 67.
61. Golvan, Aboriginal Art and the Protection of Indigenous Cultural Rights, supra note 46,
at 7–.
62. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act (ATSIHPA), section 4. 
63. Henrietta Fourmile, The Need for an Independent Inquiry into State Collections of Abo-
riginal and Torres Strait Islander Cultural Heritage, 56:2 Aboriginal Law Bulletin 3, 5 (1992).
64. Russell Goldﬂam, Between a Rock and a Hard Place: The Failure of Commonwealth Sa-
cred Sites Protection Legislation, 74:3 Aboriginal Law Bulletin 13, 13 (1995).

214  

65. This situation arose when a private company and the local council sought to build a bridge
in Ngarrindjeri country. The Ngarrindjeri urged the Minister to exercise his power to make a
declaration under the ATSIHPA, and he requested a report. Subsequently, claims were made of
“secret women’s business” at the site. On the basis of the ﬁrst report, the minister made a dec-
laration, but it was quashed by the federal court on grounds of the Minister’s failure to com-
ply with administrative requirements. The South Australian government appointed a Royal
Commission to investigate, which found the “women’s business” to be a fabrication. The Com-
monwealth Minister then appointed Justice Mathews to prepare a second report, but the High
Court held that the act did not authorise the appointment of a judge. Wilson v. Minister for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, (1996) 13 Australian Law Journal 220. See Mau-
reen Tehan, A Tale of Two Cultures, 21:1 Australian Law Journal 10 (196); N. Hancock, Disclo-
sure in the Public Interest, 21:1 Australian Law Journal 19 (1996).
66. Janke, supra note 4, at 3.
67. Davies, supra note 52, at 15.
6. Trade Marks Act 1995 (Cth), Part 16.
69. Label of Authenticity (para 5, NIAAA, <http://www.niaaa.com.au/label.html>, cited 2
August 2000).
70. Id. at para. 2.
71. Id. at paras. 17– 20.
72. Id. at paras. 7– 14.
73. Marianna Annas, The Label of Authenticity: A Certiﬁcation Trade Mark for Goods and
Services of Indigenous Origin, 3:90 Aboriginal Law Bulletin 4, 4 (1997).
74. Id. at 5.
75. Id. at .
76. Trade Marks Act 1995 (Cth) §169.
77. Annas, supra note 73, at 7.
7. Kathryn Wells, Draft Discussion Paper on the Proposed Authenticity Trade Mark (Pro-
moting and Marketing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Culture), October 1996, quoted in
Annas, supra note 73, at 6.
79. Annas, supra note 73, at 6.
0. Shelly Wright, Intellectual Property and the “Imaginary Aboriginal,” in Indigenous Peoples and
the Law 129, 146 (G. Bird, G. Martin, and J. Nielsen eds., The Federation Press, Sydney 1996).
1. Brenda L. Croft, Labelled—Buyer be Aware, 20:1 Artlink 4, 5 (2000).
2. Johnson, supra note 23, at 35.
3. Croft, supra note 1, at 5.
4. Copyright: Questions and Answers, para. 5 (NIAAA, <http://www.niaaa.com.au/copy-
right_qa_sheet.html>).
5. Mabo & Others v. State of Queensland [No. 2] [1991– 1992] 175 CLR 1.
6. Id. Brennan C.J. at 4– 50, Deane and Gaudron JJ. at 1, Toohey J. at 13.

 ,   215

7. Id. per Brennan C.J. at 70.
. Id. per Brennan C.J. at 5.
9. Id. per Brennan C.J. at 60.
90. Michael Dodson, Indigenous Culture and Native Title, 21:1 Australian Law Journal, 2 (1996).
91. Sally McCausland, Protecting Aboriginal Culture in Australia: Looking for Solutions in 
the Canadian Experience, 140 (LLM thesis, Faculty of Law, University of British Columbia
1997).
92. Mabo, [1991– 1992] 1 CLR 1, per Brennan C.J. at 60.
93. Id. per Brennan C.J. at 29.
94. Id. per Brennan C.J. at 6.
95. R & T Textiles, (1998) 1 IPR at 522– 23.
96. Id. at 524.
97. Id. at 525.
9. Pask, supra note 46, at 64– 65.
99. Id. at 64.
100. Henry Reynolds, Aboriginal Sovereignty 3 (Allen & Unwin, Sydney, 1996).
101. Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Law, Report No.31, The Law Reform Commission, Aus-
tralian Government Publishing Service, Canberra, 196. The ALRC Report takes “Aboriginal
customary laws” to comprise the body of rules, values, and traditions, more or less clearly de-
ﬁned, that were accepted as establishing standards or procedures to be followed and upheld in
traditional societies and that continue to exist in various forms today (76). 
102. Anaya, supra note 29, at 112.
103. Lowitja O’Donoghue, Customary Law as a Vehicle for Community Empowerment, Indige-
nous Law Forum 60 (Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra 1995).
104. This  refers  to  Aboriginal  and Torres  Strait  Islander  children  and  children  of mixed
parentage who were removed from their parents and communities and placed in homes under
government policy, which peaked between 1910 and 1970. There has been much historical and
sociopolitical debate in recent times as to the extent of this policy, the number of people af-
fected, and whether the government should today compensate those children who were re-
moved. 
105. Senate Legal and Constitutional References Committee, Healing: A Legacy of Generations—The
Report of the Inquiry into the Federal Government’s Implementation of Recommendations Made by the Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission in “Bringing Them Home” 261 (Parliament of the Common-
wealth  of Australia,  ATSIC  Homepage,  <www.atsic.gov.au/issues/bringing-them-home/
bringhome/main-page.htm> Nov. 2000).
106. Id. at 311.
107. ALRC Report, supra note 101, at vol. 1, 14; and at vol. 2, chapter 39.
10. Healing: A Legacy of Generations, supra note 105, at 240 (Public Interest Advocacy Centre’s Sub-
mission to Committee).

216  

109. These functions of a tribunal were suggested in the context of Stolen Generations (see
Healing: A Legacy of Generations, supra note 105, at 240– 41) but may be adapted for use in the pres-
ent context. 
110. Suggested in context of Stolen Generations; id. at 241.
111. Indofurn, (1994)  IPR at 215, per von Doussa J.
112. Gripper, supra note 13.
113. ALRC Report, supra note 101, at vol. 1, 366.
114. Stephen Gray, Freedom or Fossilisation: Proposed Legislative “Protection” for the Work
of Aboriginal Artists, Paper delivered at the Fiftieth Anniversary Conference, Australasian Law
Teachers’ Association, Cross Currents: Internationalism, National Identity and Law, para. 21 (1995) (at
Australian Legal Information Institution Website <http://www. austlii.edu.au>, last updated
26 July 2001).
115. Id. para. 2.
116. ALRC Report, supra note 101, at vol. 1, 479.
117. Id. at 43.
11. Dean Ellinson, Unauthorised reproduction of traditional Aboriginal art, 17:2 University of
New South Wales Law Journal 327, 335 (1994).
119. Id. at 337.
120. Id. at 33.
121. Healing: A Legacy of Generations, supra note 105, at 242.
122. Id. at 242– 243.
123. Id. at 319– 20.
124. Id. at 320.
125. Id. at 320.
126. Id. at 246.
127. Id. at 323.
128. Id. at 323.
129. See id. at 242.
130. Albert Memmi, The Colonizer and The Colonized 52 (Beacon Press, Boston 1965).
131. Davies, supra note 52, at 25.
132. Id. at 25.
133. Todd, supra note 1, at 24.
134. J. Frideres, A New Perspective on an Old Problem: The Macro-Model, Native People in
Canada: Contemporary Conflicts 301 (J. Frideres ed., Prentice-Hall Canada, Scarborough 1983).


