International Journal of Cultural Property (2010) 17:519–546. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2010 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739110000251

Intellectual Property for Mystics?
Considerations on Protecting Traditional
Wisdom Systems
Rosanne Trottier*

Abstract: Efforts to protect, if not revitalize, intangible cultural heritage in its
traditional communities, cannot succeed without due attention to issues of
ownership—cultural, environmental, intellectual, economic . . . “intellectual
property” categories in a wisdom system such as that of the Baul of Bengal
show that Traditional Knowledge, Customary Law and Traditional Cultural
Expressions are inseparable “property,” and that “ownership” should be
understood on traditional terms. Within such an integrated continuum,
knowledge itself is not limited to it modern meaning.

Is it possible to bring about a true and equitable dialogue between radically
antagonistic intellectual property universes—the modern one driven by profit,
and traditional ones rooted in complex systems of multiple values?

The death of a wise old one is the loss of a whole library

—L. S. Senghor

INTRODUCTION

The trigger for this article was a call for comments in 2007 by the World Intellec-
tual Property Organization (WIPO) on intellectual property (IP) protection for
traditional knowledge (TK) and traditional cultural expressions (TCEs). Unlike
its original draft, this version is not an attempted response to the questions asked
at the time by WIPO. The pioneering efforts of WIPO to recognize IP status for

*Anthropologist, traditional knowledge heritage project developer. Email: rosanne@sawangboran.com

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: This article is informed by the author’s experience in a grassroots wis-
dom tradition of Bengal and in cultural community projects celebrating traditional material, intan-
gible, and knowledge heritage. The author is currently in charge of a silk-weavers’ project in rural
Thailand, for a culture-in-development project using cultural wealth, information technology re-
sources, fair trade, and social-cultural entrepreneurship, to restore something of what used to be a
female spiritual economy.

519

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

520

ROSANNE TROTTIER

such marginalized but immense forms of knowledge are commendable, including
the acknowledgment that modern IP laws, originating in Western capitalistic un-
derstandings of knowledge and IP, may be of limited use. Also commendable is its
joint work with organizations such as UNESCO to address a complex challenge.
There is a sense that making real space for those TK paradigms not just to survive,
but to flourish again on their own terms, is a matter of urgency in this world in
crisis—after all, for millennia they held the real keys to the now-so-elusive sub-
stance of sustainability and holism.

Holistically speaking, the fundamental lesson in those systems is that elements
now separately labeled TK, TCEs, genetic resources (GRs), customary law, and in-
tangible and tangible heritage cannot be conceptually segmented. In traditional
cognitive systems, they make up a continuum or a totality both in the mind and
in concrete reality, with none of the cognitive boundaries that modern education,
science, religion, production, and consumption have erected in the mind and in
reality. The intellectual and the cultural cannot be separated, nor can “culture”
and “nature.” Specific objects or inventions of creativity cannot be separated from
their roots in communities, places, and ecosystems; in lineages of transmission;
and in realms of spirit. In such systems where everything is in everything, con-
ventional terminology misrepresents the real significance of so-called cultural goods
(in French) and intellectual “property.”1 Modern European languages are ill-
equipped for even a respectful and informed scholar to do justice to those reali-
ties2 of the “other.” For want of better terminology, in this article the phrase
“traditional knowledge systems” is a generic way of naming these cognitive totalities.
Thematic boundaries have resulted (in an organization such as UNESCO) in a
proliferation of international cultural law making, as tangible cultural property
eventually had to be supplemented with the intangible, world cultural heritage
sites had to extend into their natural environments, and natural sites also needed
heritage recognition. Boundaries need to be further stretched when successfully
protected heritage and local people lose their soul to commercial commodifica-
tion, and when it is belatedly realized that intangible heritage involves complex
functions and a whole way of life. The dominance of economic considerations in
protecting the survival of heritage—with budgets to protect, and the commercial
returns from, a given expression or heritage property—results in only temporary
reprieve from extinction, as the heritage becomes a frozen, reified object, while its
local holders or communities lose the living ability to further evolve a tradition’s
creative potential.

Consequently, if TK systems, and the broader agenda of desirable cultural di-
versity, are to be preserved both for their own sake and for a sustainable future,
preservation ideally should not be about segmented and decontextualized pieces
or achievements of those systems; it should rather enable their systemic ability to
live on, precisely, as interconnected systems of human and natural vitality and
creativity. They should be able to operate both according to their own dynamics
and somehow within the dynamics of an increasingly standardized and globalized

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

521

world operating under intellectual and economic rules that are radically different
from, and largely hostile to, their interconnectedness.

Modern minds turn most obviously to economic and legal means to address
preservation. Fair enough, TK systems cannot be allowed to remain on the mar-
gins of value creation, especially if there is to be any hope of reconnecting dis-
enfranchised youth with older knowledge holders before it is too late. Many
projects now seek to ensure livelihoods, or fair trade, for traditional heritage-
related communities, but the vision seldom encompasses more than segmented
or often frozen bits of what is or was an otherwise complex and interconnected
living system. Approaches that seek to bring some element (a useful piece of
plant knowledge, a craft, or an artistic form) of TK systems from the margins to
the mainstream of intellectual creativity go further as they variously try to com-
bine economic benefits, some kind of intellectual recognition, and relevant en-
vironmental resources. While such combinations still fall short of the reality of
TK systems as complexities whose elements cannot validly be isolated, their ef-
fectiveness under the present economic and intellectual order is necessarily con-
strained by the rigid boundaries of modern law—in particular considering the
predictable difficulty in applying complicated, artificial constructs of IP and non-IP
mixes that they seem to require.

Theoretically, a fairness-minded global market economy would have to rescue
and value TK systems out of multiple ghettoes—the cheap knowledge ghetto (pub-
lic domain), the cheap labor ghetto (low or zero wages to local people), the cheap
resources ghetto (“commons” and communities’ natural resources)—all of which
would go hand in hand with proper valuation of environmental services pre-
served by local cultures. If this improbable scenario were to be implemented, the
dominance of economic value would have the probable consequence of overall
commercialization of tremendous fields of complex (cultural, natural, social, spir-
itual) value that never could be reduced to the monetary in traditional minds.
The further transmission of traditional interconnectedness values to youth who
inevitably belong in the modern world more than their elders then becomes to-
tally impossible—which in turn means extinction of their TK systems.

In real terms, that impossible scenario—amounting to an economic package be-
yond calculation—goes beyond the cognitive abilities of a market economy that has
always relied on consistent cheapness, predicated on segmentation and disempow-
erment of labor, resources, and local knowledge, to produce profits far away from
these sources. The correlated intellectual package is also beyond the abilities of sys-
tems of law that operate on a cognitive continuum with the market economy—
segmented, individual ownership of things and of ideas. The whole paradigm of
(under)development is rooted in the global predominance of those economic and
legal systems, and the world is in no hurry to act on the call of indigenous groups
for that paradigm to shift away from the “values” upheld by those systems.

Exploring possible forms of IP recognition for hitherto neglected knowledge
wealth, largely under WIPO’s auspices, has sensibly resulted in a first achieve-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

522

ROSANNE TROTTIER

ment: mapping the fundamental differences between modern and TK paradigms.
WIPO efforts seem to give hope that systems of modern law can be somewhat
creative or afford mixes with non-IP devices. But can modern IP categories ac-
quire more complex meanings of value from other knowledge systems beyond
their limited intellectual and property concepts, away from their fundamental focus
on individualistic economic and commercial interests? Would this in turn mean
further unwieldy proliferation of already enormous bodies of law and hence un-
enforceability? Conversely, would TK systems be able to preserve themselves if they
were more deliberately to uphold their customary rules and shun IP law wholly or
partially, as do certain professional communities successfully operating in the mod-
ern economy? And do they have the power to make such a decision, when they
must exist within states that are increasingly appropriating powerful roles in IP
protection for TK and genetic resources?

An anthropologist with no legal expertise can only try to highlight a few essen-
tial points that are still too vaguely addressed in the ongoing debate, even though
they are consistently present in traditional communities’ discourse and practice.
Customary law and knowledge systems, where the law is organically and fluidly
close to human life, reveal deeper layers in concepts such as knowledge, profit,
ownership, rights, and duties. The case study to introduce the discussion here en-
compasses all the components—traditional form of (artistic) expression, tradi-
tional science, genetic resources, and customary law—that make up a veritable
wisdom tradition that is very specific, yet on a cognitive continuum with indig-
enous and traditional cultures of the world. Its sheer complexity and connected-
ness illustrate the possibly hopeless challenge of protecting such traditions to restore
them to their true creative and sustainable values—or the challenge for us of al-
lowing them to protect us.

CASE STUDY—THE BAUL OF BENGAL AND THE SOUTH ASIAN

CONCEPT OF SADHANA

A Grassroots Wisdom Tradition

The Baul of Bengal3 are a surviving grassroots wisdom tradition, akin to others
across South Asia that are now largely extinct; it is characterized by a religiously
syncretic, noncommunalist spirit of humanism that refuses caste-based differen-
tiation and upholds a path of life celebration, human salvation and self-realization
for the “little people.” Its initiates claim universalism, in the sense that it is a human
path—and it does indeed seek to go to the core of reality that is experienced by
deep initiates of all the major esoteric traditions. It is deeply esoteric,4 yet no less
deeply embedded in real and material life, and it thus informs every aspect of
initiates’ life, linking up the mundane and the lofty. Initiates were, and sometimes

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

523

still are, a kind of village elite providing various sorts of guidance, teaching, dis-
pute settlement, and healing services.

Its chief transmission vectors are oral, made up of master–disciple dialogues,
initiate debates, and a vast repertoire of signature esoteric songs, all rooted in the
creative ingenuity of a formerly illiterate society. These oral vectors are in turn
totally embedded in practices, chiefly esoteric and secret (they belong to the South
Asian continuum of unorthodox tantra), without the embodied benefit of which
the oral vectors are ineffective. For Baul initiates it is inconceivable to separate TK
(the wisdom knowledge pervading all of life, material and spiritual) and TCE (the
songs), both of which share a special coded language that is “Bengali” yet incom-
prehensible to noninitiate Bengalis and embodied practices inseparable from the
cognitive content.

Creatively Embodied Spirituality

The Baul path belongs to the vast spiritual category of South Asian sadhana
(“quest” can be a shorthand equivalent), a term that denotes the cultivation by a
person called a sadhu of self-improving effort (be it spiritual, artistic, creative,
service to others, or any deeply ethical or aesthetic pursuit) over a long period.
Whatever the chosen form and theme of the effort, the aim is always spiritual in
essence; as in traditional societies elsewhere, spirituality informs all domains of
life and is inseparable from materiality and embodiment. This category of sadhana,
severely endangered in the rapid changes of modernization and globalization,
used to belong to various degrees to holy people (explicitly) and to ordinary
people (implicitly) as a shared behavioral and cognitive value system shaping
harmonious human individuality and collectivity. Sadhana was the foundation
of indianity’s great and numerous contributions to intellectual, scientific, artis-
tic, and artisanal heritage—an all-pervasive category of elites’, as well as common
people’s, sustained creativity.

Scientific Knowledge

In the case of the Baul, sadhana underpinned the cultivation of a remarkable
body of illiterate esoteric and mundane wisdom, with unique grassroots scien-
tific knowledge—especially in natural science and medicine. The medical knowl-
edge of Baul people would be applied differently when healing ordinary people
(to whom largely plant medicine would be administered) and helping initiates
(for whom more esoteric drugs and practices would be prescribed).

Overall, and like other “little traditions” of South Asia, Baul medical wisdom is,
in the grassroots realm, on an intellectual continuum with the codified traditions
of Ayurveda5 and Yunani. But it is not specialized in medicine, for its knowledge
is considered medicine to multiple domains of human life—given that in indig-
enous and peasant societies, knowledge circulates between categories, and the cir-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

524

ROSANNE TROTTIER

culating or encompassing agent is spirituality as the celebration and meaning of
all life, knowable and unknowable (i.e., partly attainable through esoteric cogni-
tion). Like other domains of cognitive excellence, it demands lengthy studies, where
theory and practice are mutually reinforcing.

Secrecy

Like other systems of deep knowledge, the more advanced one’s level of esoteric
practice, the more secrecy is required. Secrecy is a form of responsibility, both
inwardly and outwardly oriented—to protect overenthusiastic novices from dan-
gerous effects of uninformed use, to protect the core essence of the knowledge
from abuse by wrongly intentioned acquisitiveness, and simply to protect Baul
people as unorthodox minorities within mainstream societies that have histori-
cally inflicted persecution on them out of orthodoxy, caste mentality, and power-
seeking motivations.

While there is a rule of secrecy, much of the confidentiality surrounding the
core wisdom is self-generated by the very language used for expressing esoteric
teachings and tenets, in particular in the songs. Indeed, the songs can be heard
strictly at an exoteric level by ordinary Bengali speakers, while initiates can also
hear the deeper messages encrypted in coded terminology and phrases (much of
which is derived and bengalized from Sufi and Tantric heritage).

Customary Law

The Baul system has its built-in customary law, by now vestigial and no longer
enforced. Major Baul saints contributed to its evolution, particularly with respect
to gender relations, moral and behavioral standards, types and grades of practi-
tioners, and esoteric practices.

There would be specific laws governing forms of marriage, status and roles of
women and men in their esoteric and ordinary life activities, and issues of property—
all inspired from esoteric wisdom to govern both esoteric and ordinary life. There
would be lineage-related rules. Overall such a system ensured respect for knowl-
edge holders and protection of core wisdom goods, while also affording very sen-
sible ethical guidance for day-to-day human relations.

Failure to pass tests in esoteric practice would lead to irrevocable exclusion
from the community of deep initiates. The failed seeker would return into ordi-
nary society, either by entering into the orthodox mainstream or exploring some
alternative path, or by retaining the Baul title and some of the practices as a
householder engaged in normal livelihood activities (householders nowadays make
up the majority of the Baul movement). To this day, many Baul frown upon
brethren, male and female, whose behavior deviates from a certain standard. On
the whole, Baul customary rules of conduct were organically rooted in proper
practice of the esoteric doctrines. Baul householders were generally known to be

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

525

self-reliant and law-abiding good citizens, while wise Baul would be called upon
to offer guidance to ordinary villagers or to settle disputes. Customary rules were
not codified as law, since they would be constantly repeated and commented in
the songs.

Gendered Knowledge-Power

Baul wisdom, like other traditions, had plenty to do with knowledge as a special
form of power, and especially with gendered specializations as the necessary
spiritual-and-material complementarity of male and female knowledge-and-agency
characteristic in peasant societies. In particular, female knowledge-power was cru-
cial in agriculture (especially in seed management, deemed to inhere in women),
the multiple abilities of caring for others, and the life-promoting processes of family-
based subsistence economies. Most of the esoteric Baul knowledge, more intellec-
tually cultivated by males, revolved around such female knowledge-power, the latter
being cognitively on a continuum with life, nature, subsistence prosperity, and the
Mother Goddess. Women, as embodiments of the Mother Goddess, were bearers
of traditional life-wealth and knowledge of nature, now wiped out by poverty,
resource depletion, drastic changes in economic production, and consumption
processes.

The importance of the feminine survives vestigially in now frozen tenets of
doctrine and songs, in coded language that most Baul no longer understand.
While it is still acknowledged that initiate women are the best teachers of the
path, many women intuitively attracted to the path find no real teachers, male or
female.

A Not-So-Little “Little Tradition”

In its own lands, Baul wisdom’s anchorage in the lower classes does not relegate
it to the position of a minor tradition. It has been cultivated across the territo-
rial breadth of Bengal. The name Baul appears in written sources as of the early
sixteenth century,6 but the origins of the path are much older. In spite of much
high-caste and mainstream contempt as well as outright persecution over the
past two centuries, and even though the essence of the tradition is now severely
endangered, the name “Baul” is still invoked and cherished by countless Bengalis
through both East and West Bengal. This humble grassroots path was possibly
the single most important influence on Nobel Prize winner Rabindranath Tagore,
scion of a wealthy and refined family, who found in its “rustic philosophy the
true roots of the Bengali soul and mind.” The Baul as a figure has been emblemati-
cally invoked in the constitution of a national Bengali identity, a figure cel-
ebrated as free-minded mystic minstrel who refuses hierarchies of castes and
conflicts of religions.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

526

Baul Songs

ROSANNE TROTTIER

In relation to that identity-building role, Baul songs with their distinctive style
have become highly popular in Bengal as one of the chief Bengali musical
genres. Beyond Bengal and India, world music enjoys their dynamic musical
texture, and new-age seekers want their tantric spirituality as (mis)understood
by Western audiences. By now, a majority of consumers—and, alarmingly,
of performers—of Baul songs have little or no idea of the meanings they
convey. In other words, the songs have become divorced from the wisdom
largely due to their popularity, which then contributes to erosion of the wisdom
itself.

The wisdom and sadhana that had successfully survived many disruptive evo-
lutions in history, including the colonial period, are being torn apart by the dis-
proportionate forces of economic and cultural globalization commodifying a local
practice that is now, at best, artistic. The songs are now more often heard per-
formed by artists and noninitiates on large stages or in recordings than by genu-
ine holders of the wisdom under a tree. They have fed into musical fusion. Carelessly
distorted lyrics are perverting the language and meanings. As the songs are also
increasingly professionalized and appropriated by polished urban artists, villagers
grow self-conscious about their rustic voices and stay quiet or disastrously imitate
the artists’ amplified effects.

In Bangladesh there has been talk of introducing the songs into school
curricula—a seemingly virtuous plan fraught with the risks of mainstreaming
and sterilizing their real living content.7 Bangladesh has obtained the listing of
Baul songs as one of UNESCO’s Intangible Heritage Masterpieces—as the legacy
of mystic minstrels but with no reference to the underlying body of knowledge.
The listing, and the misleadingly superficial description given for the songs as
heritage, has little to do with promoting the effective ownership of the songs by
the people who still cultivate (or might cultivate) their meanings—arguably, it
further undermines potential for such ownership as it rather encourages artistic
appropriation.

Without such ownership, the underlying wisdom can hardly be expected to
survive, which of course means that the songs themselves can only become the
empty shells of masterpieces that depend on the perpetuation of living mean-
ings. This is tragic for the Baul themselves, but also for the many disorientated
Bengalis who still, intuitively at least, perceive that there is fundamental value in
those meanings8 and have trouble deciphering the songs, be they correctly or
incorrectly performed. Indeed, would-be seekers consistently complain about the
dearth of authentic Baul masters.

Formerly at the center of the Baul cognitive quest, women are now utterly mar-
ginalized from residual male wisdom and circles of transmission. Indeed, it is eas-
ier for women to claim a Baul identity as (preferably successful) singers, and women
seeking Baul wisdom are utterly on their own.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

527

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ISSUES

Who Makes Up the Community and Who Are Its Authoritative
Leaders?

Wise old Baul lament the loss of real power of the songs and are all too aware that
nowadays an artistic career, earnings, and celebrity are more attractive than a path
that remunerates more deeply but more demandingly. Their greatest grief is to
lose to the stage even their best disciples, for whom spiritual exclusion from ini-
tiate ranks is no longer a major spiritual price to pay.

While in the past, wise Baul would locally have ethical leadership roles, indi-
vidually or as small councils, they never seem to have established a central body of
customary authority. Historically, the Baul did not organize as a deliberately struc-
tured broader community (although there would be small communities living
around a revered master or in particularly holy locations). This is largely because
they were/are esoterically inclined individuals living among more exoterically
minded people on a shared social-economic-cultural continuum. They did not
create a specifically delineated secret society, as they were not intrinsically differ-
ent from their neighbors, but differed only in the depth of their personal com-
mitment as seekers. In grassroots society where most people would be farmers
and artisans, there was no boundary (ethnic, geographic, social) to demarcate the
Baul from their non-Baul neighbors. Even in linguistic terms, the coded language
they use(d) is still Bengali, with added layers of esoteric idiom. Traditionally, there
would just be degrees of Baulness to differentiate a deep initiate from lesser ones
or orthodox people, and this diversity rather contributed to neighborly exchange
and mutual interest. Because Baulness was fluidly ubiquitous across the grassroots
fabric of Bengal, it never needed to establish itself as a separate identity—rather, it
eventually contributed to national identity building!

Thus we have a paradoxical situation: a whole nation (both East and West Ben-
gal) somehow owning a vanishing Baul identity, a whole nation where the super-
ficial success of the identity betrays its own deeper reality and those few people
who still have access to it. Unlike endangered traditional communities across the
world, the strange feature in this case is that these few wise people are not con-
stituted as a leadership group of elders who would be the authoritative represen-
tatives of the community and the recognized role models and teachers for the next
generation of leaders, as well as the interlocutors for negotiating Baul affairs.

Art and Wisdom in Spiritual Cultural Expressions

In a leaderless and indefinable community, Baul songs raise difficult questions in
terms of ownership and authenticity of an oral tradition where the songs as cul-
tural expression are in principle inseparable from the underlying body of knowl-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

528

ROSANNE TROTTIER

edge as spiritual and wisdom based. Only initiates can adjudicate the extent to
which performers of the heritage own it as wisdom or only as expression, while
widespread secularization and mainstreaming of esoteric wisdom songs generate
two diverging strands, the more spiritually informed strand now being the loser.
Around the world, spiritual songs are public domain that can legitimately be
rendered by laypersons—but there are sensible norms for venues, timings, and
performers’ qualifications for public performance. Negro spirituals, for instance,
are best sung by people with the right voices, personal backgrounds, and deep
faith, for like-minded listeners, but nonbelievers can also sing (and listen to) them
nicely enough because the power of inspiration in these songs is direct, hence rel-
atively unproblematic. Here the spiritual dimension is a matter of faith, and faith
is not the same as the spiritual in wisdom so characteristic of most endangered
traditional systems.

Faith is very much a concept of monotheistic religions, for which there is no
equivalent in other religious systems that do not have a duality of believing versus
not believing. In the Baul wisdom tradition, seekers are encouraged specifically
not to take anything on faith, but to build up their ability to know deeper. In tra-
ditional wisdom systems, it is not just faith but the cultivation of deep knowledge
that produces spirituality capable of interconnecting all the components of life.
Faith can be kept quite separate from everyday life, as churches can keep separate
from states—but wisdom spirituality is everywhere in life. This distinction be-
tween knowledge wisdom and faith—not found in the IP literature where it does
acknowledge TK as spirituality informed—is crucial to the meaning of spirituality
as part and parcel of TK systems, and consequently to possible IP approaches to
them.

In the case of Baul songs, the initiate knows that the uninitiated singer is nec-
essarily distorting the meaning out of ignorance, that is, lack of wisdom (not a
matter of faith), and should normally be corrected. Sincere masters of sincere dis-
ciples are very strict about this correct knowledge and the demanding learning
curve that it entails. They are helpless to impose their rules against the sheer num-
ber of increasingly artistic singers whose ignorance is contributing to wiping out
the whole way of life that created the songs and kept their transmission alive
through generations. The lay person and their audience derive their own level of
enjoyment from the performance, but their narrow scope diminishes the true deep
value that the song has when performed by an initiate. The tradition is acutely
endangered when audiences enjoy that performance more than the rendition of
the same songs by a true initiate. At issue then is the legitimacy of mainstream
enjoyment when it creates higher value for superficial derivatives that distort the
inventions of wiser minds.

Noninitiates never were denied the right to sing such songs, deemed to be all-
Bengali heritage, especially since the songs are or were vectors of awakening and
transmission. However, with the repertoire being layered with more or less esoteri-
cally oriented songs and more or less esoterically layered meanings in the deeper

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

529

level songs, only initiates can truly differentiate between the layers—each song could
be said to belong to the Bengali public domain in its cognitively most accessible
layer of meaning, while the crucially significant esoteric layers belong solely to the
public domain of those who are, were, and will be conversant with them. This
layering involves a factor akin to trade secrets, the secrecy being inherent in the
coded language of esoteric layers, thus producing a kind of de facto defensive copy-
right, for hidden IP that is nevertheless a public domain awaiting any seeker’s wise
appropriation. Respectful people would not, in principle, sing a song beyond their
understanding unless the riddle in the song was being cultivated precisely for heu-
ristic purposes by a seeker, in which case, it would be sung only in private. Now-
adays lay people lack humility in acquiring such songs to add to their repertoire—
something of the artist’s acquisitive greed for an artifact known to hold some
mysterious and desirable special power. In terms of power then, the undigested
charge of such songs and their inevitably erroneous rendition are offset by the size
of audiences and loudness of amplification, abundant musical effects, and the mul-
tiplying power of recordings. The charge of secret meanings is drowned out and
lost in erroneous rendition.

Another important copyright aspect that uninformed performers naturally ne-
glect is the tradition of authorship attribution that normally reinforces the value
of correct rendition of a song’s text. Sincere disciples always make the right attri-
bution of songs to their authors, whose names are usually inserted more or less
overtly toward the end of the song. A further layer of respect that was quite fre-
quent in the past was for disciples to attribute their own compositions to their
masters, in which case only people truly in the know could decipher authorship.
The point here was not just reverence to masters but also the acknowledgment
that a seeker’s main job prior to becoming truly creative within the tradition was
to cultivate the existing wealth of knowledge of masters and that of nature as mis-
tress of all masters. A great many composers of Baul songs would feel no desire to
insert their signature. There is thus plenty of scope today for dubious or errone-
ous attributions, as well as Baul singers copyrighting their own artistic renditions
of the songs of others’ deeper inspiration.

The Baul case shows a further layer of fluidity in authorship and ownership—a
master’s song is his gift that belongs to the whole Baul movement (or even to the
whole of humankind) as an inspirational contribution, and what he owns is noth-
ing more, and nothing less, than his own life-path of quest that resulted in that
song. The deep truths that masters can successfully utter are those of the universe,
which cannot possibly belong to them; rather they celebrate the masters’ belong-
ing to the universe, and their invitation to others to join them!9 In this sense,
ownership of the songs is for all who aspire for such belonging. Yet the deeper
esoteric layers of the songs, as layers of knowledge, can only really belong to those
who have reached those layers tangibly—in this sense they could be deemed pro-
prietary. The tangibility of such levels of attainment is clearly perceived only by
other true initiates.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

530

ROSANNE TROTTIER

The sui generis copyright system and the rule of correct rendition of masters’
songs might be construed as imposing an undesirable freezing of those particu-
lar artifacts, hence a limitation on others’ creativity. This is not so. If masters’
authoritative songs are not to be modified it is precisely because they are expert
teachings, powerful riddles10 that open gateways of the mind to prod the quest
along, and this very power would be diminished by a change in the words. As
such, they are a compelling stimulus to the seeker’s eagerness to seek, which makes
the seeker in turn compose more songs.11 Many songs are in fact responses—
and further questions—to others’ songs. In the past, there used to be a practice
of initiate sessions where knowledge holders would challenge each other through
improvised songs charged with such questions and answers. Baul creativity was
thus cumulative, a constantly growing body of composition exploring a shared
esoteric core.

The Baul IP system, involving the songs as included in the overall wisdom, was
the most appropriate to the realities of a knowledge system where authorship pro-
tection was of a different order altogether. The all-powerful wisdom of the uni-
verse had no need for protection (such a need being eventually generated only by
the foolishness of humans!). Baul copyright with trade secrets never prohibited
anyone trying to sing or to decipher a powerful song belonging to a sui generis
public domain, but it had built-in defenses that remain operational today, since
the deeper meanings remain inherently inaccessible to noninitiates.

Importantly, copyright never entailed monetary gain to the rights holder—
authorship attribution rather celebrated the holder’s gift of the song to the com-
munity, adding a gain of authoritative prestige for the holder, and it celebrated
what was the latter’s true profits: wisdom.

The embodied spiritual cognitivity of the Baul as an age-old deep exploration
of the frontiers of human wisdom knowledge is an invention that the collective
Bengali mind (and humankind’s intellectual heritage) can perhaps ill afford to
lose. Having contributed to Bengali cultural and national identity building, it could
also, ideally, have tremendous potential for a highly relevant agenda of human
rights, poor people’s dignity, gender, and environmental cultural sustainability.

PARALLEL CASES

What insights are there to be gained from other IP situations that partly overlap
with Baul features?

The Case of Yoga

Authentic yoga is an immense and diverse knowledge system of the Indian sub-
continent. It is one of the best known types of spiritually informed sadhana, which

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

531

is a fundamental part of deep South Asian culture, broadly on an ethical contin-
uum of constructions of “virtuous living” in traditional cultures.

Commercial yoga12 is, to many people, a shocking case of segmenting off
and rearranging for commercial purposes selected pieces of the vast heritage of
yoga, in itself a whole/holistic and interconnected TK system. It claims to do
customers a lot of good, while in fact it may well make it impossible for such
customers to attain the wholeness that yoga is really all about. By segmenting
what is a total knowledge system, it evidently attacks the systemic integrity of
yoga. It further consolidates its conquests through the patenting and branding of
yoga.

The customary law inherent in sadhana pursuits gives a direct and unambigu-
ous response to such IP appropriations. In the ethical regime of teacher–disciple
interactions in all types of sadhana, the intrinsic value of teachings is so great as
to reside beyond the realm of monetary transaction: Customary rules of gurus
preclude any direct payment, and greed is foolishness that disqualifies greedy mas-
ters on substance. With the invasion of that universe, formerly congruent with the
surrounding material economy, by the powerful dynamics of the monetarized mar-
ket economy, and with the worldwide export of yoga’s promises, such a straight-
forward rule of ethics is conveniently ignored. New-age and well-being services
now intensely compete in a spirituality-hungry market. They brand as “authentic”
certain yoga creations that are at best appropriations of instrumentalized authen-
tic material. IP tools are evidently used for rich profit in clear violation of tradi-
tional rules.

A recent legal battle in the United States involved copyrights and trademarks of
the Bikram Yoga College of India on a yoga-derived well-being commercial ser-
vice. It appears to have ignored both the customary prohibition of profit seeking
and the intellectual illegitimacy of an individual’s extracting, appropriating, brand-
ing, and copyrighting a segment of an encompassing knowledge system. In the
intellectual logic of yoga, there can be no individual gainful ownership of a part of
it as an invention—historically, great contributors to yoga gained far higher rec-
ognition as saints whose sole profit taking was in the ineffable benefits of their
own practice and in the preference for profit sharing, that is, free dissemination of
access to such benefits.

In this sort of case, ethically minded IP lawyers could turn to the source heri-
tage for clear and unambiguous customary law guidance on nonpayment, and the
latter should have precedence over modern IP considerations.

An extension of the profit-related contradiction is the further contradiction re-
siding in advertising practices necessary for providers of new-age and exotic well-
being services to compete in the modern market. Self-advertising is frowned upon
in customary law, traditional healing, and traditional attitudes in general—the large-
scale costly publicity that bolsters branding as IP and image is an alien phenom-
enon to them. Not only is authentically effective TK not advertised, it is often
deliberately concealed by secrecy and initiation, while the grapevine affords suf-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

532

ROSANNE TROTTIER

ficient publicity for a master’s skills. The fact that IP-protected TK derivatives use
modern publicity budgets and tools would thus, in customary law terms, be an
unambiguous indication of disqualification as TK on ethical grounds. It would
actually reveal the substance of their performance as fake and fraudulent (e.g.,
ineffective or possibly harmful to users).

Ethical customary rules show the deeper contradiction: The dominance of mod-
ern individual profit seeking, namely, greed, deemed a necessary condition for
promoting human inventiveness, is the denial of the far larger (historically and
geographically) reality of inventiveness motivated by all sorts of other profits
including the wide distribution of benefits. Logically, nothing but patterns of
ignorance and narrow self-interest precludes IP law from opening its intellectual
interests to the broader forms of equity and diversity of human creativity.

Yogic practices are variously found in Baul masters’ paths, including certain more
esoteric layers of yoga. Baul mind–body practices amount to a considerable wealth
of grassroots unorthodox medicine that is remarkably effective, economical, and
self-contained. Its unorthodoxy makes it off-limits for noninitiate consumption,
let alone any form of product development or IP. Yet the greed factor under eco-
nomic market conditions has kicked in: Some initiates sell esoteric medicine at
exorbitant prices—such items, tainted by indiscriminate distribution and per-
sonal greed, are said to be ineffective if not harmful.

A different form of modern inventiveness in yogic Baul know-how takes the
other route—distribution of benefits rather than greed. Some practitioners in
recent decades have pragmatically isolated a particular body-based discipline from
the overall regime of practices and taught it to ordinary villagers for purposes of
birth control. Many of the latter are said to have taken superficial initiation for
this purpose of acquiring an objectively useful skill, contraception without chem-
icals, operations, or costs, and with a reputed psychological benefit for couples.
None of this happened through outside interference or advice—Baul people and
their neighbors simply found their own cheap method to deal with overpopula-
tion. That the authorities ignore this valuable piece of Baul TK in these regions
could be viewed as a missed opportunity,13 compared with the cost, effort, and
partial success of official population control programs. Grassroots low-tech sex-
uality methods are of course unorthodox in the eyes of all the dominant
orthodoxies—religious, political, economic, scientific, medical, gendered, and the
like—so the people are well advised to keep such ingenious TK know-how in a
deliberately negative IP space!

From the perspective of serious practitioners, however, the spontaneous adap-
tation to modern grassroots needs of a useful pro-poor piece of Baul TK is erro-
neous in terms of true sadhana, a utilitarian distortion of authentic salvation
purposes,14 pretty much as serious tantric initiates might dismiss new-age ver-
sions of tantric sexuality. Arguably, this position of elders would deserve discus-
sion in the community—is their position a freezing that prevents the traditional
heritage from recreating its resources in tune with social change?

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

533

Should the State Step In?

Yoga (among other sadhana) collectively and individually belongs to many schools
and lineages and to all its practitioners. It requires recognition of moral rights,
inseparably collective and individual, embedded in generational continuity since
time immemorial, and prohibiting apportionment in the present in a way detri-
mental to future integrity potential.

Arguably, there can be no rights holders since no single individual or group can
legitimately represent the whole. Yoga is not one invention, but a continuum across
time and space of multiple invention using a huge range of techniques and inter-
pretations, where each practitioner literally invents, literally discovers for him- or
herself—day after day, a never-ending process. A derivative, IP-sanctioned appli-
cation of yoga TK (not to mention a multiplication of such applications) amounts
to diminishing or preempting the immeasurable potential, over immeasurable time,
for such an invention by an immeasurable number of people. This invention of
one’s inner self, in a process unique to each practitioner, is both systematic in its
own TK terms and nonstandard. It is anonymous, yet its great practitioners can
stand out as saints. Unlike art, it is not at all a form of expression—indeed, it is all
about the cultivation of impression toward one’s inner self.15 Only technicalities
of yoga postures can be given expression, but people’s individual realizations of
the inner goal cannot—and this is where the authentically desirable property resides.
When spiritual totalities are thus in substance (and not just as public domain)
beyond IP protection, yet in effect endangered by narrow-minded uses of IP pro-
tection away from the public domain substance, when they are as huge as yoga,
and moral rights holders are beyond counting, is it up to the state to come in as
representing those rights? It could be said that such a public domain being a com-
mon good (like health protection) of public interest (like national culture) should
naturally be taken care of by the state. India seems to have taken this path and has
launched a fittingly gigantic project—an online inventory of yoga texts to estab-
lish prior art.

But state custodianship, potential legal action, and law making in such a mul-
tiple and multidimensional field as yoga is fraught with all sorts of risks of dis-
possession for yoga practitioners, if ownership creeps into custodianship. Yoga is a
commons that as such should be tended by its communities, and perhaps a wise
state should rather seek to reempower that level of broad-based and diffuse re-
sponsibility. Besides, is it not contradictory for the secular state to take over pro-
tection of what is a spiritual wisdom system that should normally be left in the
care of its own institutions and guides?

Conversely, the online project will not, and cannot, document all the unwritten
and local variations of yoga sadhana, which go well beyond what yoga means to
Western or modern minds and include all sorts of vernacular and secret varia-
tions. In terms of recognition of knowledge traditions, this means perpetuating
the invisibility of nonscripture schools. But might such invisibility, in a negative

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

534

ROSANNE TROTTIER

IP space, be a lesser evil than state protection? In the same sense, would a negative
IP space perhaps be less detrimental to the substance of Baul songs than inter-
national masterpiece status that divorces the songs from their sadhana moorings?

Negative IP Space and the Cases of Magicians and Chefs

There might be some interesting clues for Baul wisdom protection in the way pro-
fessional magicians protect their secrets, the intangible assets of an ancient craft.
Magicians use very little by way of conventional IP tools, preferring reliance on
their own community ethics. Aspects of self-management of their knowledge by
magicians is consonant with customary protection of Baul esoteric wisdom.

It has been noted that magicians’ “innovation does in fact need intellectual prop-
erty. But it does not necessarily need intellectual property law.”16 IP law is by-
passed in favor of much more effective IP norms. Magic secrets per se cannot, for
obvious reasons, be protected by tools such as copyright or patents. There are grades
of magic, from the lowest level to the highest, with a corresponding deepening of
secret content whereby the deepest level open to only a few experts is deemed
proprietary. Expert magicians have an ethos of sharing information within their
community, as part of a strategy to minimize theft and exposure of their secrets—
they must never reveal secrets, even their own, outside the community. They have
a firm custom of creative attribution of inventions and a strong ethical or norm-
based regime of IP that even has effective enforcement mechanisms, with no de-
pendence on conventional IP law. Adherence to this set of norms is important for
a crucial asset, reputation within the community.

In view of these similarities with the Baul case, why is it that magicians can
flourish while the Baul are in decline? For one thing, magicians are well organized
in associations and have clearly articulated their norm system—the Baul are not
at all organized, and their customary rules are implicit, embedded in their whole
knowledge system. Magicians need their system to work so that they can derive
meaningful incomes from their performance—the Baul arguably need their sys-
tem to work for the sake of their esoteric income, what they themselves call “profit.”
The income of magicians is aligned with a monetary economy, while that of the
Baul belongs in the realm of nonmonetarized spiritual economies themselves mar-
ginalized even more, for example, in yoga, by the fashionable gurus whose highly
sought-after teachings reap large profits. The ancient craft of magicians has mod-
ernized successfully, something that only Baul singers have managed, at the ex-
pense of Baul initiates.

Another parallel case is that of chefs,17 who also have stronger norm-based than
law-based IP, and honor ethics, along similar lines to magicians. Like both magi-
cians and Bauls, they have rules of attribution, disclosure policies are selective and
targeted, and their rules for using others’ recipes are an effective informal code,
violations of which are promptly sanctioned by community contempt and bad
publicity.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

535

While secrets in magic and recipes can be copied exactly, Baul secrets are not
imitable since they can only be cognitively reached within an individual’s inner
esoteric practice. But across all three communities, it is interesting that a practi-
tioner is respected as an expert when he or she has attained a level of creativity
capable of generating innovations from what is the common stock of knowledge
content. For a Baul, innovation means the person’s ability to make the wisdom
knowledge alive and operational rather than a capacity to invent a recipe—although
esoteric practices involve lots of secret recipes that are or were perpetually re-
worked by generations of practitioners, strictly for their own use and certainly not
for producing income-generating dishes, unless the income is here again seen on
Baul terms as wisdom profit. As in the earlier comparison with magicians, the loss
of spiritual economies or ecologies is to blame for the devaluation of wisdom prof-
its, whereas chefs’ appropriate use of their recipes is highly profitable.

Fundamentally, the comparison with chefs and magicians who need their norm-
based IP, and deliberately not legal IP, to maintain the commercial value of their cre-
ativity cannot be taken any further than the translation described earlier into wisdom
profits for a Baul practitioner. Any IP system that seeks to generate economic ben-
efits from human creativity runs the risk, in spiritually grounded TK systems (not
the case for chefs and magicians), of commercializing and trivializing the sacred con-
nectivity of knowing that is precisely what makes such systems effective.

But a clear practical lesson does apply for the Baul—they need to establish a
true community, capable of discussing their own issues and articulating rules
explicitly.

IN A TRADITIONAL SYSTEM, WHAT IS KNOWLEDGE

IN THE FIRST PLACE?

Traditional knowledge systems are not consciously geared to innovation as such
or to monetary rewards for segmented creativity on discrete lumps of knowledge.
In them, knowledge is a complex continuum rather than specific things known. It
is collectively owned and perpetuated and replenished, and inventive contribu-
tions by individuals remain embedded in, and responsible to, the chain of trans-
mission and creativity preceding and following them in time, including the chain
and web of all surrounding life. It is also embedded in and responsible to nature,
the ultimate owner upon whose continued existence the whole system depends—
when an ecosystem is depleted, ownership of related knowledge loses substance.
Knowledge is not something a person has or things learned in a thematic and
measurable fashion as in the modern school system. Knowing is active—there is
no real distinction between learning and knowing until one reaches the status of
wise elder. Knowledge is not possessive—to say “I know this” does not mean “I
have this piece of knowledge.” Knowledge is seldom purely abstract, contrary to
what it is in school education—it is made of the same stuff as experience, as doing

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

536

ROSANNE TROTTIER

and as nondoing. It is not separate from memory; rather, it is memory. Rather
than the drudgery of learning by heart, it is organically learning by the heart.

Traditional systems do not understand the segmentation of knowledge into
subjects or objects owned by knowing subjects or, for that matter, subject–object
dualities. As is particularly well perceived in Baul esoteric wisdom, knowledge is
all at once what is known or being learned, the act of knowing as a kind of
digestion (never purely intellectual) of the knowable substance, and the incre-
mental essence of what makes a knowing person, which is qualitative as well as
quantitative. All of this of course means utterly different contents and forms of
education. As the essence of being knowledgeable rather than having knowledge,
it is clearly a quality of humans that is cultivated over years and matures into
producing a wise elder or initiate. Being such a quality, it translates as character
in a person—necessarily dictating appropriate ethical judgments and behavior.
Knowledge is thus to be understood as knowingness. This quality seems to be far
more difficult to mature in a literate person than in illiterates, because the ab-
straction and subject–object separation necessary for literacy are of course ob-
stacles to connective knowing.

A knowledge holder is a person who has the essence and quality of knowing—a
spiritual achievement that may or not involve quantities of things objectively known
but that crucially makes these things alive and effective in life. It is not necessarily
straightforward for outsiders to determine who is a knowledge holder, although
the criterion of recognized maturity and skill in elders and deeply committed in-
dividuals is a reasonable one. The determination of holders is best made from
within the community. This is not self-evident in the Baul case today, since such
wise people are increasingly rare and neglected, and where they exist, they tend to
keep to themselves. As in the case of yoga described earlier, a self-advertising elder
may have a lot of knowledge and appear authoritative, but checking his creden-
tials with others would soon reveal the cracks (self-advertising is a sure sign that
the knowledge is no longer working for that person’s wisdom profit). An elder
who reveals easily, or even sells, esoteric secrets is clearly not to be trusted.18

Knowingness in TK systems involves cognitive attitudes or patterns that inter-
connect all facets of life as woven together by spirit, and thus, as already men-
tioned, such knowingness is intrinsically spiritual. Nonobjectifying knowing is
relational, knowing the connectivity of everything in life and nature, and spiritu-
ality simply is connected cognition, connected knowingness. The business of human
life is to cultivate this or simply to live it correctly. The circularity of knowing as
spirituality, and vice versa, seems to be such a commonality across traditional com-
munities, and such an organic engine of communities’ sacred knowledge protec-
tions, that the anthropologist cannot resist the notion of an underlying (structural?)
invariant in how TK systems operate as knowingness—as spirituality. The beauty of
such an invariant is that, far from obliterating cultural diversity, its organic ability
is to produce diversity in the myriad ways of weaving connective cultural forms
into the warp of local ecosystems. A further, and related, pattern that seems pretty

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

537

constant as long as there is no major disruption affecting a community, is that
diverse cultures learn and create from, rather than impose themselves upon, these
intrinsically diverse ecosystems.

Baul wisdom further clarifies that local variability, natural and cultural, express-
ing the diversity of Mother Nature is part and parcel of her as one, yet a further
layer of invariant made of perpetual change—life. Ultimately, Mother Nature is
the great inspirer of traditional human groups’ propensity to creatively shape land-
scapes in nature, in societies and in the mind. Connective cognition or spirituality
as one and the same thing is the dynamic force of knowledge creativity where the
individual and the collective co-own their knowing and are in turn owned by the
larger culture and by nature. From this angle, the real need for protection into the
future is beyond knowledge—it is about the knowingness within places and fun-
damentally about reempowering communities’ whole ways of life.

Consequently, well-informed and sincere policies are needed rather than IP tools
or mixes. If the notion of invariants as outlined earlier is of any practical use, it should
not, however, be interpreted as offering a one-size-fits-all solution—rather,
connective-spiritual knowingness can be both a lever and a goal to empower cul-
tural communities to devise localized modalities and implementations. The notion
might also be helpful in formulating a possible international framework to encour-
age reempowerment of such knowledge systems within their communities. It can give
more substance—from within the reality of TK systems—to the emergent role of
customary law in the efforts of international bodies (WIPO and the International
Labor Organization’s Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention) whereby authority
can be returned to the spirit, inseparable from the letter, of customary law.

SPIRITUALITY AND MODERN LAW

It is precisely traditional communities, and their kind of spiritual knowing, that
have had to suffer the most under the modern world order. In parallel, it is not
fortuitous that modern IP law deliberately and legitimately stays away from what
it calls spiritual beliefs. This could, however, serve to highlight a fundamental la-
cuna in respect of TK systems—Baul wisdom discourse clearly claims that the
stuff of spirituality is indeed intellectually charged, not faith.

Ethically, and intellectually, modern knowledge systems should not be content
with just leaving such spiritualities beyond their legal-cognitive borders where be-
liefs are not credited with much knowledge creativity—it is beyond those borders
that the plundering of objectively valuable knowledge is so easy. Where such
spiritualities embody so much more knowledge wealth than the modern sense of
religion, global human self-interest needs knowledge diversity to flourish again, if
it is true that we now live in knowledge-based societies.

It is worth insisting that spirituality in knowingness is not to be confused with
spirituality as beliefs, where fittingly, modern law demarcates its boundaries from

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

538

ROSANNE TROTTIER

the law systems of officially recognized churches and faiths. Modern law and states
appear to uphold similar boundaries vis-à-vis traditional communities’ freedom
to celebrate their own beliefs. But relegating customary rules to marginal author-
ity over harmless folklore, subaltern beliefs, and rituals, in fact pushes the real
substance of these subaltern activities further down the value ladder than the ac-
cepted respectability of official churches.

Official religions seem to need no modern IP protection, given that they have
plenty of their own safeguards for the legacy of major founding figures enshrined
in scriptures. These institutions are expert interpreters of tenets, specific bodies of
religious, moral, and personal rules, all of which offer sui generis IP protection for
contents of doctrines underpinning beliefs. Subaltern traditional wisdom systems
such as the Baul also have laws, experts, and institutions, in various configurations
and weightings, with or without scriptural heritage. The difference is that official
religions are nonproblematic to (if not helpful for) the dominant knowledge and
power system precisely if they accept to remain in their separate universe of be-
liefs,19 while the little traditions have necessarily been relegated into disempow-
erment. As their communities held onto their own terms, in holistic spiritualities
of knowledge connectedness, not amenable to secular or spiritual (and intellec-
tual or cognitive) separation, they could obviously not be allowed to thus chal-
lenge the dominant order.

The most fundamental challenge for a TK IP agenda is then, logically, that of
reconciling the spiritually connected nature of knowledge and the intrinsically non-
holistic nonspiritual modes of modern cognition and law. The core of the modern
IP conundrum in TK systems is perhaps the very core of these systems, that is,
spirituality itself. This cognitive thing that IP law cannot and will not address due
to confusion with the psychological thing of beliefs is not credited with the cog-
nitive power that elicits intellectual status. Spirituality, now readily listed among
attributes of traditional systems, is not credited with the main ingredient needing
proper recognition. The challenge is for the modern legal mind to recognize the
other’s spirituality as a complex human cognitive activity, after centuries of con-
tempt for its backwardness.

Protecting such wisdom property can only be for its holders to ensure due to
the very nature of what makes these people wise, something too complex and sim-
ple for the modern mind to manage. Building broad safeguards for communities
to have the safety they need to address that challenge is the business of committed
policies, possibly including IP or non-IP packages for specific knowledge commu-
nities, to serve primarily as strong messages of recognition—including intellectual
recognition. Reempowerment for spiritual wisdom and its continued creativity (not
just for its expressions or separable products) is reempowerment of the agency
and freedom of the people themselves to protect their heritage, on their own terms.
Modern secular law governing most aspects of people’s lives, and leaving to cus-
tomary law just bits peripheral to a state’s secular jurisdiction, has been part of
colonial and state action resulting in very effective disempowerment. The cogni-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

539

tive wealth or poverty of TK systems as marginalized or recognized by the dom-
inant intellectual paradigm is thus a fully political issue. If now the agenda of
sustainability and ethics requires TK systems to thrive again, it takes nothing short
of true political commitment, ambitious yet humble. But is it conceivable to ef-
fectively equalize the authority, if not reverse the hierarchy, of modern and cus-
tomary law and knowledge systems so that communities can recover their holistic-
spiritual cognitive agency? In other words, is it conceivable for our world to move
away from the dominance of the Western intellectual paradigm? Can law diversity
be allowed to belong in the (still patchy) agenda of restoring cultural diversity?

ETHICS, ETHICS, AND MORE ETHICS—TRADITIONAL WISDOM

LESSONS IN A NUTSHELL

The Power of Names

Names of traditions or of bodies of knowledge can be very powerfully charged
words—for example, yoga, or in Bengal, Baul. Traditional people are very careful
about not uttering certain charged names, generally very ancient names. Con-
versely, but in the same realm, modern corporations go to great branding lengths
to appropriate powerful names or to generate power for new names. These con-
siderations hint at the possibility of recognizing TK systems’ names for their own
sake and their own meanings of value. Illicit use of names away from where the
customary rules of a tradition want to keep them should be prohibited.

The power of names having currency in spiritual economies should not be ap-
propriated as carrying equivalent substance into derivative products for the mar-
ket economy—the latter being unfair both to the original source (thus distorted
or impoverished) and to their customers (deceived into buying false original goods).
Clearer regimes of moral rights resting with all who are responsibly concerned by
such names could be given official recognition, rather than entrusted to state cus-
todianship. They could have empowering effects for the relevant knowledge com-
munities to reclaim active ownership and find effective forms of enforcement.

In a world where branding is a strategy for loading names artificially with shal-
low substance that charges them with market power, the reverse, that is, protec-
tion of old names really charged by long histories of real content building, makes
sense. It is also a route that could help in broadening the scope of conventional
profit seeking to other sorts of profits (cultural, environmental, social, etc.) dic-
tated by the knowledge systems bearing such names. Names are a category that
can be owned by relevant communities far more readily than they can claim prop-
erty of their knowledge systems as IP. Thus communities could also more readily
step in to decide on whether such names are used dubiously or illegitimately, bet-
ter ensuring informed custodianship than outsider authorities for their own her-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

540

ROSANNE TROTTIER

itage. Protecting the name “yoga” would mean that derivative products would have
to pass specific tests, regulated by authentic holders of the name, or to forego using
the name. Protecting the name “Baul” with respect to Baul songs would require
informed judgment by initiates, leading to proper attribution of qualification as
“popular Baul” or “authentic Baul.”

The right to use a powerful name should rest upon the duty to use it responsibly.

The Power of Duties

Indigenous peoples are the most articulate advocates of the urgent need for a shift
in the dominant global paradigm. Much of what they advocate stems from an-
other invariant in cognitive spirituality-connectivity and customary law systems—
common ethical principles that can intellectually be shared by modern law, on the
assumption that the legitimacy of law is grounded in ethics.

These systems all tend to emphasize the duties, explicit and implicit, of humans
far more than their rights. These duties include various types: to nature, divini-
ties, ancestors, and elders; reciprocal and/or asymmetrical duties; and, in all sadhana
cultures, duties to the self, because ultimately the self is the microcosm containing/
contained by the macrocosm. Such a sense of duties larger than rights has every-
thing to do with the sense of being owned by larger entities including nature, the
land, and the culture, and of being both indebted to ancestors and accountable to
future generations. This resonates with today’s clamorous calls for accountability
and responsibility in state and corporate governance.

While under modern IP, a knowledge holder’s or inventor’s rights increase in
tune with the person’s inventiveness, customary law gives ever-greater duties to
individuals who become more knowing and wise. Customary law simply knows
that knowledge as the quality of knowing gives the holder the supreme distinction
and entitlement, which is the right to hold responsibilities—it recognizes that the
knowing person has these important abilities.

The emphasis on duties is radically different from modern law and indeed from
the whole momentum of modern humanism, with its ever-expanding realm of
consumable rights and entitlements, and little emphasis on concomitant obliga-
tions (most of which appear to reside with the downtrodden classes, and, unreal-
istically, with states). Diverse values attaching to diverse duties make for connective-
spiritual economies that are radically different from the modern reduction of value
and rewards to monetary vectors, from the modern market that encourages selfish
interests over duties, and from modern trade’s despiritualized/deconnective ma-
terial and utility flows.

In healthy traditional settings (not in declining or unhappily modernizing ones),
the clear understanding by all of the duties of all tends to result in the reliable
enjoyment of suitable rights by all, congruent with the roles, gender, age group,
and knowing of each person. In modernity, proliferating rights and entitlements,
especially in a profit- and consumer-oriented mentality, do little to promote a spon-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

541

taneous sense of duties for all that can balance those rights—hence an ever-
expanding need for new legislation and enforcement mechanisms, as expanding
rights tend, like opportunities and money, to accrue to those who already have
more than others.

It is also seldom noted today that the effects of predominantly rights-oriented
agendas (as the logical response to rampant denial of human dignity) are often far
less empowering, in particular for the agency and creativity of the underpriv-
ileged and marginalized, than a good balance of rights and duties inside the com-
munity and at its interface with the wider world. People in traditional mind-sets
are generally far more empowered when they have the agency to fulfill their duties
correctly than when they are given new rights to which their mentalities are not
accustomed—these newly given rights can be counterproductive and create im-
balances within communities and families, while real agency in performing duties
gives meaning to life.

Performing one’s duties correctly within traditional values helps the maturing of
a knowing essence, that is, the connectivity dimension of cognitivity, because it helps
the development of wise elders (now in increasingly short supply in social groups).
Conversely, disoriented youth in such societies, who do not yet have the knowing
essence, are more open to the attractiveness of modernity’s rights and consump-
tion messages. While there is no denying that awareness of rights is crucial, pre-
cisely in situations of marginalization and dispossession, younger people are
alarmingly, and universally, losing receptivity to their elders’ values and knowledge—
justifiably so when the latter become ossified conservative rules. Youth easily per-
ceive how much more power resides in the mainstream of rights and opportunity
than in the shrinking local effects of correctly performed customary duties.

The many risk factors documented for indigenous and other grassroots youth
find their roots largely in these contradictions. To address these successfully, the
underlying disruptions in connective-spiritual cognitivity dictating formerly rel-
evant systems of duties have to be understood.

The learning and performing of duties in turn involve the whole complex issue
of education, where traditional transmission of knowledge and values should be
given more than marginal space for the meanings of heritage to be revitalized into
the future.20 This is also relevant for modern countries’ educational (and broader
value forming) systems, where the many problems of youth can usefully be ana-
lyzed through empowering/disempowering imbalances in the rights-and-duties
paradigm.

CONCLUSION

Reempowerment of TK for its inherent capacity to operate multidimensionally
has to be a matter of commitment, not just legal but political, to reempower the
communities where such knowledge is rooted.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

542

ROSANNE TROTTIER

Whether individual situations, communities, and countries choose to use IP law
or not, care must be taken to assess all possible contradictions to the customary
rules and wisdom of the tradition. While ownership and agency must be restored
to the communities concerned, it is necessary to inculcate respect for these in the
surrounding mainstream societies and the states.

Hypothetically, in the Baul case, sensitive facilitators would need to help the
formation of a more structured institution of elders, on the basis of a delicate
consultative exercise among holders of the Baul title to determine who are the
remaining authentic initiates, and to establish a community consensus on such
determination. A council of recognized figures would at last be an identifiable body
of authoritative people to defend the name Baul, to represent the overall Baul her-
itage, and to explore ways of giving shape to the broader community that does
not formally exist at present. They would need much capacity building to restart
their ability to update their wisdom knowledge and reempower its creativity for
today’s agendas. In fact, there is no shortage of fields in which the harnessing of
their wisdom expertise could operate beneficially and restore positive power of
influence to them,21 for example, environment, biodiversity, gender, health, and
education. Such larger causes could be valid triggers to restart the wise creativity
of the tradition. In addition, informed debates around the vexing issues of song
ownership and rights of performance should be respectfully facilitated and legal
awareness nurtured so that IP-related decisions can be reached as appropriate to
the wisdom knowledge. This of course is a highly hypothetical scenario, as long as
Baul wisdom as a noncommunalist grassroots counterculture of self-empowerment
is stuck between two extremes—being a part of the Bengali soul and being the
repressed opposite of orthodoxies, Muslim, Hindu, and the social orthodoxy of a
growing middle class.

While traditional systems use multiple currencies in their spiritual economies—
different meanings of value—rather than strictly monetary value, it is unfair now-
adays to deny them the economic means to get out of modern poverty. Yet economic
fairness to them should only be seen as the preliminary recognition, by the mod-
ern value of money, that their knowledge systems are valuable—helping them to
uphold multiple kinds of values is the broader challenge.

In most local situations, it is short-sighted to reduce the giving back to mon-
etary profit sharing, as this leaves most of the real power and profit in outsider
hands and offers little empowerment for the local culture, if not plenty of room
for intracommunity disruption. Giving back should seek to restore agency and
creativity on a community’s own terms, culturally, socially, and environmentally.
The prerequisite for such engagement is that partner entities must have a clear
and ethical duties agenda and the humility to learn from their beneficiaries. Such
encounters are indeed learning opportunities and a challenge to experience un-
expected nonmonetary profits.

It is the world’s cultural loss to limit our sense of profit to reductive economic
meanings and narrow corporate ambitions. Baul initiates have taught for centu-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

543

ries that the human body is a market, where all sorts of transacting takes place,
and where knowing literally yields profits.

The challenge of TK systems is to recover what one might call their knowledge
sovereignty. More broadly, especially in a globalized world, it is also a challenge to
the substance and functioning of the development paradigm—a challenge for the
reality rather than the empty discourse of sustainability. Corporations, markets,
states, and international organizations are not yet ready to forego economic growth,
fragmented knowledge, and unsustainable inequities that deplete all the compo-
nents of healthy local knowledge systems and ecosystems. The developed main-
stream is not yet ready to give culture, nature, and continuity precedence over fast
profits, technologies, and development. But voices of connective wisdom econo-
mies are increasingly firm in asserting their knowledge sovereignty, their con-
nected knowing, and the need to pull down the walls of knowledge.

ENDNOTES

1. In the field of culture, Prott, in “Cultural Heritage or Cultural Property?”, specifically argues
the case of cultural heritage as against the reductive meanings of cultural property. Traditional world-
views lead into deeper questioning of heritage, property, and ownership—of what and whom—by
individuals, communities, and cultures themselves as both encompassing and encompassed entities
in time and space.

2. In this article, the use of quotation marks for some terms expresses a conceptual discomfort with
the lack of translation equivalence between terms from fundamentally different knowledge systems.
3. This very condensed summary of Baul intellectual-cultural heritage is from Trottier, Fakir, la

quete d’un Baul musulman; Fakir, The Goddess and the Slave; and the bibliographies therein.

4. Esoteric is the nonexoteric, the inner core of spiritual wisdom that is pursued by seekers and
initiates, while the mainstream is governed by the exoteric or external body of doctrine. This dis-
tinction is broadly applicable to most religious systems and is an important criterion in determining
who are/were TK holders.

5. Reddy, “Making Heritage Legible,” on IP ownership of Ayurveda.
6. The literature seems to say that the Baul path around that time had an exceptionally large
population of devotees. Since then, the numbers, albeit considerable, have never made up a majority.
7. The intrinsically nonconventional wisdom embedded in the songs and its highly unorthodox
aspects are also totally incompatible with the mainstreaming and standardizing effects of schooling
in such countries.

8. It is also a loss on a broader human scale, if one accepts the humanist tenets of Baul wisdom

to be of universal value.

9. Across the subcontinent, accomplished seekers are those who have merged into oneness, tran-
scending the boundaries of human individuality. Wisdom is theirs, or rather they are wisdom embodied.
10. Not unlike the koan in Japanese Zen: particular words in seemingly meaningless sequence.
11. In all traditions, there tends to be fundamental respect for the integrity of originals, be they

a tangible or intangible heritage, as inspiration to lively continued creativity.

12. Fish, “The Commodification and Exchange of Knowledge.”
13. This notion is not mine—the idea, and the sense of underrecognition, were expressed to me

by a politically active Baul villager.

14. This illustrates a frequent problem from within traditional communities—elders whose con-
servatism in the face of overwhelming changes all around them does not allow the tradition to move
along creatively. There is thus a mismatch between deep knowledge holders whose wisdom is needed

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

544

ROSANNE TROTTIER

to guide such evolution and the less informed but more realistic aspirations of their juniors who feel
misunderstood and may well betray the tradition.

15. In a similar vein, the term “traditional cultural expressions” is somewhat reductive or mis-
leading. While traditional people do indeed express their cultural values, those expressions are cel-
ebratory cultural gestures and practices that largely serve to impress these values within the group
and within its individual members. This circularity, and spiritual feature, of traditional cultures is
obscured by modern terminologies.
16. Loshin, Secrets Revealed, p. 3.
17. Fauchart and von Hippel, Norms-Based Intellectual Property Systems.
18. Most researchers who have worked on the Baul tradition are not reliable; Baul practitioners
blame them for having acquired degrees, positions, and status at the expense of the Baul, and of the
esoteric wisdom that most publications misrepresent.

19. The nonseparation of secular and religious law in Islamic states is indeed problematic for the

ideology of modern Western states.

20. Best practices are not unavailable. Sustainable excellence in certain crafts and professions where
handwork is both useful and artful, and specifically rooted in tradition, has been nurtured by rig-
orous educational systems—as in Living Treasure systems of East Asia, or French compagnonnage.
21. Such appropriate investment of Baul wisdom has a successful precedent in Bangladesh. In the
1990s, the NGO Nabapran Andolon mobilized Baul sensitivities in considerable numbers of villagers,
including many women, for the cause of preserving the biodiversity of seeds and chemical-free farming.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Fakir, Rudrani. The Goddess and the Slave: The Fakir, the Mother and Maldevelopment. Varanasi, India:
Indica, 2005.

Fauchart, E., and E. von Hippel. Norms-Based Intellectual Property Systems: The Case of French Chefs.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Sloan School of Management, 2006.

Fish, Allison. “The Commodification and Exchange of Knowledge in the Case of Transnational Com-
mercial Yoga.” International Journal of Cultural Property 13 (2006): 189–206.

Loshin, Jacob. Secrets Revealed: How Magicians Protect Intellectual Property without Law. Working
draft. New Haven, CT: Yale Law School, 2007.

Prott, Lyndel. “Cultural Heritage or Cultural Property?” International Journal of Cultural Property 1,
no. 2 (1992): 307–20.

Reddy, Sita. “Making Heritage Legible: Who Owns Traditional Medical Knowledge?” International
Journal of Cultural Property 13 (2006): 161–88.

Trottier, Anne-Helene. Fakir, la quete d’un Baul musulman, Paris: L’harmattan, 2000.

BACKGROUND MATERIAL

Addison Posey, Darrell. “Can Cultural Rights Protect Traditional Cultural Knowledge and Biodiver-
sity?” In Cultural Rights and Wrongs, edited by Halina Niec. Powys: UNESCO/Institute of Art and
Law, 1998.

Aust, Anthony. “Treaties and domestic law.” In Modern Treaty Law and Practice, 143–61. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Brown, Michael. “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work on the Protection of Intangible Cultural Property.”
International Journal of Cultural Property 12 (2005): 40–61.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY FOR MYSTICS?

545

GRAIN. “Community or Commodity: What Future for Traditional Knowledge?” 2004 (http://
www.grain.org/seedling/?id⫽291).

Honko, Lauri. “Copyright and Folklore.” Folklore Fellows Network 21 (2001): 8–10.

International Labor Organization (ILO). Convention No. 169: Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Con-
vention, 1989.

Organization of African Unity (OAU). African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, 1981.

Prott, Lyndel. “Cultural Rights as Peoples’ Rights in International Law.” In The Rights of Peoples,
edited by James Crawford. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.

———. Cultural Heritage Law as Part of International Humanitarian Law. Geneva: ICRC, 1996.

———. “Understanding One Another on Cultural Rights.” Art Antiquity and Law 4, no. 3 (1999):
229–41.

Roy, Devasish. The International Character of Treaties with Indigenous Peoples and Implementation
Challenges for Intra-State Peace and Autonomy Agreements between Indigenous Peoples and States: The
case of the Chittagong Hill Tracts, Bangladesh. Background paper for UNHCR Expert Seminar on
Treaties, Agreements and Other Constructive Arrangements between States and Indigenous Peoples,
2003.

Secretariat of the Pacific Community/UNESCO. Pacific Regional Framework for the Protection of Tra-
ditional Knowledge and Expressions of Culture, 2002.

Shyllon, Folarin. “The Right to a Cultural Past: African Viewpoints.” In Cultural Rights and Wrongs,
edited by Halina Niec. UNESCO, 1998.

Suozzi, Marguerite. Native Delegates Challenge Development Orthodoxy. IPS press release, April 14,
2010.

United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. Analysis and State of Implementation of the
Recommendations of the Permanent Forum at Its Fourth Session, E/C.19/2007/5, 2007.

Conventions and Treaties

UNESCO:

• Convention on the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, 2003.
• Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, 2005.

United Nations:

• International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966.
• International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966.
• Draft Declaration on the Human Rights of Indigenous Peoples, 1993.
• Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of the Heritage of Indigenous Peoples, 1995.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251

546

ROSANNE TROTTIER

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO):

• Intellectual Property Needs and Expectations of Traditional Knowledge Holders.
• Revised Provisions for the Protection of Traditional Knowledge.
• Revised Provisions for the Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions.
• Draft Questionnaire in annex to WIPO/GRTKF/IC/7/INF/4.
• Customary Law and the Intellectual Property System in the Protection of Traditional Cultural Ex-

pressions and Traditional Knowledge. Issues paper, December 2006.
• Matters concerning Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folk-
lore, GA/26/6.
• Co-authored with L’auravetlan Information and Education Network of Indigenous Peoples. Tra-

ditional Knowledge and Indigenous Peoples, 2009.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:11:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739110000251


