The Native American  Graves
Protection and Repatriation  Act:
An  Introduction
Linda F. Pinkerton*

In November  1990 the United  States Government  enacted  the  Na-
tive  American  Graves  Protection  and  Repatriation  Act  (P.L.
101-601,  25 USC § 3001 et  seq.). The new statute, which  became
law  after  a  relatively  short  period  of  negotiation  and  discussion
between  lawmakers  and  representatives  of  many  Native  American
groups, adds  to  American  federal  law  significant  restraints  on  the
freedom  of  the  market  in  American  Indian  artifacts.  In  a  very
forceful  provision,  the  new  law  requires  all  museums  and  state  or
local  agencies  and  all  institutions  of  higher  learning  in  the  United
States  which  receive  federal  funds  (which  is  most  museums  and
universities)  to  inventory  and  return  the  American  Indian  human
remains,  funerary  objects,  sacred  objects  and  objects  of  cultural
patrimony  for  which  the  appropriate  tribal  relationships  can  be
established.

In this one writing, Congress set out civil law governing ownership
and  possessory  rights  in  personal  property,  administrative  require-
ments for recipients of federal funds, penalties for institutions which
fail  to  comply,  and  criminal  law  governing  human  conduct.  The
criminal  law  refers  directly  to  the  provision  of  the  civil  law  in  a
manner which may cause difficulties,  and  the extent  to which  feder-
ally funded  institutions  may be required  to  surrender  private prop-
erty without just  compensation  raises  the possibility  of  unconstitu-
tional  takings. The purpose  of  the  statute  is a worthy  one.  As  this
brief survey of the Act illustrates, however, it would  have  benefited
considerably  from  a more  thorough  review by its draftsmen  before
enactment,  if  for  no  purpose  other  than  more  careful  scrutiny  of
language  and  terminology.  Any  possessor  of Native  American  ob-
jects  will  now  have  good  reason  to  be  perplexed  about  property
rights in such objects and to worry about criminal penalty associated
with  their  transfer.

What  follows  is a brief  survey  of the statute, without  analysis  of
the  administrative  problems  of  museums  endeavouring  to  comply.

*  Secretary  and  Trust  Counsel,  The J.  Paul  Getty  Trust.

297

Linda F. Pinkerton

A  complete  study  of  the  effects  of  the  Act  on  United  States  law
and  the  fate  of  many  Native  American  artifacts  must  await  the
establishment  by the Secretary of the Interior  of a committee which
is charged, under  Section  8 of the Act, with  monitoring and review-
ing  implementation  of  Sections  5, 6 and  7 of  the Act.  To date, the
Interior Department  has begun  but  not  completed  the formation  of
the committee. In addition, the Interior Department itself is required
by Section 13 of the Act to promulgate regulations within 12 months
of  enactment  governing  its  own  implementation  of  the  statute.
Fifteen  months later, such regulations have not been drafted.  Unfor-
tunately,  because  of  the  wording  of  the  statute,  the  fate  of  many
objects  probably  awaits the final  outcome  of  litigation.

1  A  Roadmap

A  simple  roadmap  through  the  statute  would  show  the  following
markers: Following the definitions  in Section 2, Section 3 establishes
the  rules  of  ownership  and  control  of  Native  American  human
remains  and  objects  and  establishes  very  limited  bases  for  legal
excavation  or  removal  of  such  objects  from  federal  or  tribal lands;
Section 4 criminalizes  the knowing  sale,  purchase, use for  profit,  or
transport  for  sale  or  profit  of  such  objects  without  the  right  of
possession  established  in  Section  3; Section  5 requires  each  federal
agency  and  museum  (including  any  institution  of  higher  learning)
which  receives federal  funds  to  compile  an  inventory  of any Native
American human remains and objects, to identify  their geographical
and  cultural  affiliation,  and  within  six  months  after  completion  of
the  inventory  to  notify  the  affected 
tribes  or  organizations.  In
addition,  Section  6  of  the  Act  requires  each  federal  agency  or
museum holding such objects to provide  a written summary of them,
describing  the  scope  of  the  collection,  kinds  of  objects,  etc.,  for
determination  of  the  geographical  or  cultural  affiliations  of  the
objects. The strongest passage of the Act is Section 7 which requires
repatriation  of such Native American human  remains and objects in
the possession or control of federal agencies or museums. Procedural
matters are  set  forth  at  the end  of  the  Act.

2  Definitions

A careful  examination  of the  words  in  the  statute is essential  to  an
understanding  of  the  rights  and  burdens  it  establishes.  The  defini-
tions  set  forth  in  the  statute  are  of  sweeping  breadth  and  in  some
cases vague beyond the understanding  of a reasonable person. There
are  numerous  defined  terms  but  the  most  significant  are  noted
below.

298

Native American  Graves

First,  the  question  arises:  Exactly  what  types  of  objects  are  at
issue? The  answer  to  the  question  requires  carefully  picking  one's
way through  the definitions  in Section 2. Native American  remains
and  objects  are the focal  point.  In  Section  2(9), 'Native  American'
is defined  as  'of,  or  relating  to,  a  tribe,  people,  or  culture  that  is
indigenous  to  the  United  States.'  All  human  remains  of  Native
Americans are governed by the statute. In addition, it covers 'cultu-
ral  items'  including,  in  addition  to  human  remains,  'associated
funerary  objects',  'unassociated  funerary  objects',  'sacred  objects'
and  'cultural  patrimony'.  Each  of  these  four  terms  has  its  own
lengthy  definition:  'Associated  funerary  objects'  is a  term  meaning
objects which, 'as a part  of the death rite or ceremony of a culture,
are reasonably believed to have been placed with individual  human
remains either at the time of death or later...presently in the posses-
sion or control of a Federal agency or museum;' whereas 'unassoci-
ated  funerary  objects'  means  the  same type of object  not  presently
in  the  possession  or  control  of  a  Federal  agency  or  museum.  In
addition, the term 'associated funerary  objects' includes 'other items
exclusively made for  burial purposes or to contain human  remains'.
Unassociated  funerary  objects  must,  by  definition,  be  related  to
specific individuals or families or to known human remains or have
been 'removed  from  a specific  burial site of an individual  culturally
affiliated  with a particular  Indian  tribe' (§ 2(3)(A),(B)).

A 'sacred  object'  is one which  is a ceremonial  object  'needed  by
traditional  Native  American  religious  leaders  for  the  practice  of
traditional Native American religions by their present day adherents'
(§2(3)(Q).

Last among the four,  'cultural  patrimony' means:

[A]ny object  having  ongoing  historical, traditional,  or  cultural
importance  central  to  the  Native  American  group  or  culture
itself,  rather  than  property  owned  by  an  individual  Native...
American, and which, therefore, cannot be alienated, appropri-
ated,  or  conveyed  by  any  individual  regardless  of  whether  or
not  the  individual  is  a  member  of  the  Indian  tribe  or  Native
Hawaiian.organization  and such object shall have been consid-
ered  inalienable  by  such  Native  American  group  at  the  time
the object  was separated  from  such group (§ 2(3)(D)).

As noted  above, the term  'museum'  means any  'institution  or  State
or  local  government  agency  (including  any  institution  of  higher
learning)  that  receives  Federal  funds  and  has  possession  of,  or
control  over,  Native  American  cultural  items'  (§ 2(8)).  Because  of
the system of federal funding of the arts in the United States through
matching  grants  from  the  National  Endowment  for  the  Arts  and
other  federal  grants  of  all  types  to  virtually  every  college  and
university in the United  States, it is safe to say that practically every
museum,  college  and  university  in  the  country  falls  within  this
definition.

299

Linda F. Pinkerton

3  The 'Right  of  Possession'

The  Act,  at  Section  2(13),  attempts  to  define  the  term  'right  of
possession'.  The  language  used  is  'possession  obtained  with  the
voluntary  consent  of  an  individual  or  group  that  had  authority  of
alienation'.  How  one  can  learn,  usually  more  than  a  century  after
the  fact,  whether  alienation  was  voluntary  will  remain  for  legal
scholars and  the courts to decide. It is likely that  the current holder
of  a  Native  American  cultural  item  who  does  not  also  hold  a  bill
of  sale  or  deed  of  gift  associated  with  its  original  conveyance  out
of  Native American  hands  will  have  difficulty  proving  the right  of
possession.  Despite  the  fact  that  the  word  'title'  is  not  used,  this
part  of the  statute  represents  a  new federal  regime of private rights
in certain personal  property  in  the  United  States.

The  definition  of  'right  of  possession',  which,  inter alia, controls
whether  one is trafficking  legally or  illegally under  Section 4, states
that  the  original  acquisition  of  such  an  object  from  an  Indian
tribe  or  Hawaiian  organization  with  the  voluntary  consent  of  an
individual  or  group  with  the  authority  to  alienate  the  object  is
deemed  to give the  right  of possession  under the Act, unless:

[T]he  phrase  so  defined  would,  as  applied  in  Section  7(c),
result  in  a  Fifth  Amendment  taking  by  the  United  States  as
determined by the United States Claims Court... in which event
the  'right  of  possession'  shall  be  as  provided  under  otherwise
applicable  property  law.

The Section concludes with a statement that the original  acquisition
of human remains and associated funerary  objects which were exca-
vated,  exhumed  or  otherwise  obtained  with  the full  knowledge and
consent  of  the  next  of  kin  or  government  of the  tribe is deemed  to
give  right  of  possession  to  those  remains.  This, of course,  assumes
that  the current possessor can prove such  'knowledge and  consent.'
These elements are not presumed  in  the Act, at least insofar  as civil
law is concerned.

4  Establishment  of Ownership  and  Control

In  another  part  of  this  new  system  of  property  rights,  Native
American  cultural  items  found  on  or  excavated  from  federal  or
tribal  lands  after  the  date  of  enactment,  belong  to  the  following
extremely  complex  maze of possible owners:

(1)  in  the case  of  Native  American  human  remains  and  associated
the  Native

lineal  descendants  of 

funerary  objects...the 
American.

300

Native American  Graves

(2)  in  any  case  in  which  such  lineal  descendants  cannot  be  ascer-
tained,  and  in the case of unassociated  funerary  objects,  sacred
objects, and  objects  of cultural patrimony  —
'(A)  in  the  Indian  tribe  or  Native  Hawaiian  organization  on
whose tribal land  such objects  or remains were discovered;
'(B)  in the Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian  organization which
has  the closest  cultural  affiliation  with  such  remains  or  objects
and  which,  upon  notice,  states  a  claim  for  such  remains  or
objects; or
'(C)  if the cultural affiliation  of the objects cannot be reasonably
ascertained  and  if  the  objects  were discovered  on  Federal  land
that  is  recognized  by  a  final  judgment  of  the  Indian  Claims
Commission or the United States Court of Claims as the aborigi-
nal land  of  some Indian  tribe  —
'(1)  in the Indian tribe that is recognized as aboriginally occupy-
ing the area in which the objects were discovered, if upon notice,
such tribe states a claim for such remains or objects, or
'(2)  if it can be shown by a preponderance  of the evidence  that
a  different  tribe  has  a  stronger  cultural  relationship  with  the
remains  or  objects  than  the  tribe  or  organization  specified  in
paragraph  (1), in the Indian tribe that has the strongest demon-
strated relationship, if upon notice, such tribe states a claim  for
such remains  or  objects.

Native American cultural items not claimed at all are to be disposed
of  in  accordance  with  the  regulations  not  yet  promulgated  by  the
Secretary  of the Interior  (§ 3(b)).

The  practical  effect  of  this  section  of  the  Act  is  to  place  a  very
dark cloud on the title to any object standing a reasonable possibility
of having been  found  on  or in Federal  or tribal  land  in the United
States  after  November  1990,  which  might  fit  one  of  the  lengthy
definitions  of a Native American  cultural  item.

5  Repatriation

The  heart  of  the  statute  is  the  section  requiring  the  return  of
Native American cultural items. Section  7 states that  if the cultural
affiliation  of Native American cultural items with a particular Indian
tribe  or  Native  Hawaiian  organization  is established  (The word  is
'established'  for  human  remains  and  associated  funerary  objects;
'shown'  for  unassociated  funerary  objects,  sacred  objects  or  objects
of  cultural  patrimony),  then  on  the  request  of  a  descendant  of  the
person  whose  remains  or  funerary  objects  are  in  question  or  the
tribe  or  organization  most  closely  associated  with  the  other  types
of  items, the  federal  agency  or  museum  holding  such  objects  must
return  them  expeditiously.  There  is  no  requirement  of  payment

301

Linda F. Pinkerton

of  compensation  or  for  storage,  conservation,  or  other  benefits
conferred.

The  statute  provides  for  delay  in  repatriation  in  cases  where
scientific  study  is  under  way,  and  in  cases  where  disputed  claims
must  be resolved  by a court  of competent jurisdiction  (§ 7(b), (e)).

6  Excavation  and Discovery

In  order  to  excavate  or  discover  Native  American  objects  legally
under  the  new  statute,  one  must  have  a  permit,  under  the
Archaeological  Resources  Protection  Act of  1979 (93  Stat.  721, 16
U.S.C.  § 470aa  et  seq.),  to  remove  or  excavate,  intentionally,  any
Native American cultural items from  federal  or tribal lands (§ 3(c)).
It  seems  odd,  however,  that  the  new  statute  qualifies  the  purpose
for  which  a person  would  be doing such removing or excavating as
being  'for  purposes  of discovery,  study  or removal'.  (It  seems  that
the  qualification  is  extraneous  in  that  it  merely  restates  the  bases
upon  which  the permit  would  be granted. The way the new  statute
is written,  one  could  read  in  the  almost  absurd  interpretation  that
all other excavation  or discovery is authorized  by the new Act when
in  fact  Congress  probably  meant  that  this  is  the  only  type  of
excavation  and  discovery  which is authorized).

In  addition,  permitted  excavation  or  removal  requires  consulta-
tion with the appropriate Indian tribe and proof thereof, along with
'the  ownership  or  right  of control  of the disposition  of  such items'
being  consistent  with  the  ownership  provisions  of  the  Act.  The
inadvertent  discovery of  these  objects,  under  Section  3(d), requires
one who knows or has reason to know that he or she has discovered
Native  American  cultural  items  on  federal  or  tribal  lands  after
November  1990  to  notify,  in  writing,  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior
or  other  appropriate  authorities.

7  Burdens of proof

Obviously,  the  requirement  to  fulfil  certain  duties  under  the  Act
and  the state  of title of many  objects of movable personal  property
rest on  factual  determinations. The burdens of proof  of these many
facts  are  therefore  quite  interesting.  For  the  most  part,  the  statute
is silent on the burden of proof and we assume that in civil proceed-
ings the  burden  of proof  is the preponderance  of the evidence. The
following  list  of  specific  requirements  for  the  burden  of  proof,
however,  shows  inconsistencies  and  problems  in  the  evidence  re-
quired  to  recover  an  object  under  the Act.

Perhaps most interesting and puzzling is the evidentiary  standard
stated  in  Section  7(c)  entitled  'Standard  of  Repatriation.'  That

302

Native American Graves

section  specifies  that  if a Native  American  claimant  requesting  the
return  of a cultural  item presents:

[E]vidence  which,  if standing  alone  before  the  introduction  of
evidence  to  the  contrary,  would  support  a  finding  that  the
Federal agency or museum did not have the right of possession,
then  such  agency  or  museum  shall  return  such  objects  unless
it can overcome such inference  and prove that  it has a right of
possession  to the objects.

From  this  language,  we may  conclude  that  a  claimant  may  make
his  or  her  case  by  testifying  that  the  museum  does  not  have  the
right of possession as defined  in the Act. The museum has only one
means  of  overcoming  the  inference  which  is  to  demonstrate  that
right  of  possession,  i. e.,  to  produce  solid  evidence  of  voluntary
consent  to  the original  transfer,  however long ago.

For  no  apparent  reason,  Congress  specified  in  a  few  places
throughout  the Act  that  the  burden  of  proof  is the  preponderance
of  the  evidence.  For  an  object  to  be  considered  an  'unassociated
funerary  object'  under  Section  2(3)(B),  the  claimant  must  demon-
strate by a preponderance of the evidence that the object in question
is  related  to  a  specific  individual  or  families  or  known  human
remains or as having been removed from  a specific  burial  site of an
individual  culturally  affiliated  with  a  particular  Indian  tribe;  In
Section  3(a)(2)((C)(2)),  concerning  ownership  or  control  of  Native
American  cultural  items,  the  burden  of  proof  for  one  tribe  over
another claiming title to such objects in circumstances where cultural
affiliation  cannot  be  ascertained  is  the  preponderance  of  the  evi-
dence.  Excavation  and  removal  of  Native  American  cultural  items
from  federal  or  tribal  lands  is  permitted  only,  inter  alia,  if  the
ownership  and  control  of  such items is 'as  provided  in  subsections
(a) and  (b)' (§ 3(c)(3)).

In addition, in Section 7(a)(4) governing  return  of cultural items,
Congress  specified  that  the  relationship  of  human  remains  and
funerary  objects  for  which  cultural  affiliation  was  not  established
in an  inventory  or  summary  required  by the Act may  be shown  by
a  preponderance  of the evidence brought  forward  by a claimant  in
order  to recover  the objects.

As  for  the  criminal  aspects  of  the  Act,  however,  the  situation  is
more complicated. Section 4 of the Act sets forth  substantive  federal
criminal  law,  making  illegal  and  punishable  any  illegal  trafficking
in  Native  American  human  remains  and  cultural  items. (Note  that
the  separate  identification  of  the  human  remains  in  Section  4(a) is
redundant because 'cultural items' has been defined to include them).
In the United States, the burden of proof on the state in any criminal
prosecution  is  'beyond  a  reasonable  doubt'  for  each  and  every
element of the crime. Query: Is the lesser burden  of 'by the prepon-

303

Linda F. Pinkerton

derance  of  the evidence'  mandated  by  the  language  of certain  pro-
visions  of  the  Act  constitutional,  at  least  insofar  as  it  pertains  to
the crimes established  in Section  4? Probably  not.

8  Trafficking

It  is a valuable  exercise in  the case of the Native American  Graves
Protection  and  Repatriation  Act to consider what  objects  and  con-
duct it does not  affect.  One must pay careful  attention, however, to
the  plethora  of  state  and  local  laws  on  this  subject  which  are  not
affected  by  the  new  federal  law  and  not  discussed  in  this  article.
The new law does  not  criminalize trafficking  or regulate excavation
or  discovery  before  November  1990.  Nor  does  it  require  private
parties, i. e.,  neither  federal  agencies nor  museums or other  institu-
tions receiving federal  funds, to repatriate Native American cultural
items.

The  private  conduct  which  is prohibited  under  the Act is set  out
in  Section  4  on  illegal  trafficking:  knowingly  selling,  purchasing,
using  for  profit  or  transporting  for  sale  or  profit.  What  objects?
'Human  remains of a Native American without the right of posses-
sion'  and  'Native  American  cultural  items obtained  in  violation  of
...'the  Act.

What does the term 'obtained in violation of  mean in this context?
The Act is a statute which requires repatriation of objects  according
to cultural affiliation.  One is therefore  left  with the assumption  that
'obtained  in  violation  of  means  in  violation  of  Section  4  which
prohibits trafficking  or the provisions of Section 3 governing excava-
tion. Those are the only two sections which regulate human conduct
that  could  involve  'obtaining'  this  type  of  object.  Does  'obtained
in  violation  of  include  incorrect  repatriation,  i. e.,  repatriation  to
Claimant  number  1 when three years later  Claimant number 2 may
come forward  and  show superior  title? One assumes not,  especially
because  Section  7(0  exonerates  any  museum which  in  good  faith
repatriates  an  object.  Most  important,  does  'obtained  in  violation
of  mean  bought  or  sold  before  November  1990? We may  assume
that the answer to  that question is no, but a collector of such objects
who cannot prove  the date of acquisition may have difficulties  under
the  Act.

What  about  transferring  as  a  charitable  donation  an  object  or
entire collection  of  Native  American  objects  to  a museum  or  other
cultural  institution?  Such  a  transfer  presumably  has  no  'profit'
component  and  therefore  does not violate Section 4. Because of the
title  problems  presented  by  the  Act,  however,  most  museums  or
other  charitable  institutions  would  probably  pause and  give  careful
consideration  before  accepting  a  major  gift  or  any  object  of  great
importance  to  the  Native American  community. Has there been  an

304

Native American  Graves

unconstitutional taking of the value of such property held by parties
which  are not museums within  the meaning of  the Act?

What  may  be  an  oversight  in  the  Act,  as  it  affects  gifts  to
museums,  is  the  fact  that  a  museum  appears  to  be  required  to
prepare  the inventory  or  summary  at  one  point,  no  later  than five
years  after  enactment  of  the  statute  (Section  5(b)(l)(B)).  In  other
words,  the  statute  does  not  require  any  museum  to  maintain  an
active  inventory  or  summary  at  all  times.  May  a  museum,  then,
accept  with  less concern  a  gift  of  Native  American  cultural  items
after  it  has  prepared  its  inventory  and  repatriated  the  objects  on
the list?

9  Conclusion

In  an  effort  to  solve  a  major  problem  for  the  Native  American
community, Congress and the President appear to have acted hastily
in enacting the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation
Act. In the immediate future, museums will be scrambling to comply
with  the  requirements  for  preparing  inventories  and  summaries,
and  the  Department  of  the  Interior  will  be working  on  forming  a
committee and promulgating regulations. In the more distant  future,
however,  as  repatriation  actually  begins,  the  inadequacies  of  the
statute may become apparent  and  will require  repair.

This statute, which  nobly  acknowledges  the many  wrongs which
have been committed  against Native Americans  over the centuries,
nevertheless  ignores  the  results  of  those  centuries  on  the  collective
memories  of  the  peoples  involved.  The  federal  courts,  stripped  of
some  of  their  most  useful  tools  such  as  the  statute  of  limitations
and laches, have been left with the task of sorting out the assertions
of  claimants  and  defendants  in  reassigning  the  rights  to  Native
American  cultural items.

305


