The Poverty of Documentary

Heritage Management in Nigeria

 *

Summary: Nigeria’s national archival institution has been an object of neglect since its reluctant estab-
lishment in the colonial era to the present time. It was initially headed by a non-archivist on a part-
time and ad hoc basis, which blighted its prospects. The uniqueness of the National Archives of Nigeria
as the nation’s unfailing memory and one of the embodiments of its cultural heritage is not appreciated.
There is an urgent need to improve radically the infrastructures of the institution, taking advantage
of new technologies offered by the information revolution. Lack of democracy and accountability has
been the bane of independent Nigeria. There is obviously a link between this state of affairs and the per-
ilous state of the national and other archival institutions in the country. A sound records-management
practice is urgently needed to ensure the managerial accountability so vital to good governance.
1    

1.1 
Archives are records considered worthy of permanent preservation. The term, a
collective noun derived from the Greek word archeion (government building), orig-
inally applied to the records of government agencies (public archives) but later
was extended to include the records of institutions (institutional archives), as well
as of families and individuals (family and personal archives).1 The places where
the records are kept are sometimes referred to as archives, but in modern usage the
term refers to the writings themselves. When a mass of records (whether on paper
or, increasingly, as modern technology advances, in some modern equivalent such
as microﬁlm or audio, audiovisual, or magnetic tape) is kept in the form in which
they accrued, it attains the character of an archive. Before modern technological
development brought us to the age of electronic archives, papers of families and
individuals that lacked the organic character of true archives were called histor-
ical manuscripts.2 Archives include a wide variety of forms—correspondence,
notes, books, plans, maps, drawings, photographs, ﬁlms, microﬁches, sound record-
ings, and computerized data.3 They constitute an unsurpassed source of infor-

*Professor of Law, Faculty of Law, University of Ibadan, Nigeria. This article is dedicated to the
memory of a close friend, Ayo Carew, as a heartfelt memento.

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 9, No. 1, 2000, pp. 23– 48
© 2000 International Cultural Property Society

23

24  

mation concerning the political, legal, social, economic, and cultural developments
of the past.

1.     
The keeping of archives developed as an administrative technique in the urban cul-
tures of the Euphrates and Tigris valleys of the third millennium .. Clay tablets
on which are inscribed cuneiform characters recording the texts of ofﬁcial procla-
mations and law, judicial decisions, and contracts between private persons consti-
tute the earliest archives that have been preserved.4 The historical books of the Old
Testament add authenticity and completeness to antiquity. They contain reference
to record keeping in other countries as well as Israel and Judea.5 For example, it is
mentioned that Darius the King (Ezra 6:1) made decrees and a search was made “in
the house of archives” in Babylon “where the documents were stored” giving in-
structions for the building of the house of God in Jerusalem.

The Roman Catholic Church inherited from classical antiquity the technique
of keeping archives, which was subsequently perfected in the evolving nation-states
of western and central Europe.6 The concept of the archival agency as a service
agency emerged in an improved form during the French Revolution, when France
created its national archives (archives nationales) as the depository for records of
the central government, past and present. France later provided archival agencies
for the safekeeping of the records of provincial and local governments in each
province or département (archives départementales); this gave all citizens the right to in-
spect government archives, thus embodying the principles that such archives are the
property of the people whose legal rights and past history they preserve.7 Before
that time archives were private, for the exclusive use of the prince or, at most, some
approved scholar.8 Thus the secret archives of the Vatican acquired outstanding
signiﬁcance when Pope Leo XIII opened its doors to scholars in 1881.9

As archives acquired the dignity of national monuments, and as historians be-
came increasingly eager to have access to them, the more progressive states of Eu-
rope began to make provisions for statewide systems of archival service.10 This con-
stituted legal recognition of archives as a cultural resource and a fundamental
element in the civilization and culture of peoples11 that bear indispensable witness
to past acts, to historical decision making, to the evolution of institutions and or-
ganizations, and ﬁnally, to individual life histories, as well as to the values, beliefs,
and convictions on which they were based.12 In the process, archives were trans-
formed into cultural property and came to be regarded as a rich store of human ex-
perience and reservoir of knowledge and wisdom.

World War II caused enormous damage to the archives of many countries in
Europe. It has been asserted that the wanton destruction of the Naples archives by
the Germans was the greatest disaster that has befallen archives in modern times.13
Many archives in Germany, too, were destroyed or suffered damage. Archival trea-

     25

sures that were not destroyed were plundered by the Germans and the Russians.
The extent of the plundering has become obvious only recently, with the opening
of the previously sealed Soviet archives.14 Well before World War II, international
law forbade the looting of cultural property, including archives, in time of war. At
the Congress of Vienna, the victors of 1815 compelled France to effect one of the
ﬁrst large-scale restitutions of cultural property recorded in history. With regard
to archival treasures speciﬁcally, some manuscripts that Napoleon’s armies had
seized in Rome were restored not to the Pope, but to the Heidelberg Library from
which they had been looted in 1622.15 The 1919 Treaty of Versailles compelled Ger-
many to return the Koran that the Ottoman government had originally taken from
Medina and given as a gift to William II; Article 246 speciﬁed that it be returned
not to Turkey, but to Medina, to the King of Hejaz. The Treaty of St. Germain
in  1919  likewise  obligated  Austria  to  return  all  deeds,  documents,  and  biblio-
graphical materials removed from the invaded territories, including some that had
been taken from Italy as far back as 1718. The Treaty of Riga (1921) required Rus-
sia and the Ukraine to restore to Poland all war trophies, including libraries and
archives. Article 37 of the 1947 Treaty of Peace with Italy required Italy to “restore
all works of art, religious objects, archives, and objects of historical value belong-
ing to Ethiopia or its nationals removed from Ethiopia to Italy since October 3,
1935.”16

During World War II, Germany systematically ﬂouted Article 56 of the Hague
Regulations Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land appended to the
Convention on Laws and Customs of War on Land (Hague IV, 1907). This arti-
cle protected the property of municipalities and of institutions dedicated to reli-
gion, charity, education, and the arts and sciences and prohibited seizure or de-
struction  of or  willful  damage  to  such  institutions,  historic  monuments,  and
works of art and science. After the widespread Nazi breach of this obligation
(Germany was a party to the convention), this one article became the basis of a
new instrument promoted by UNESCO, the 1954 Hague Convention for the Pro-
tection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conﬂict.17 This convention
coined the phrase  “cultural property” and deﬁned it in Article 1, which states,
among other things, that the term covers “manuscripts, books, . . . [and] impor-
tant collections of books or archives.”

Article 1 of the Recommendation on the Means of Prohibiting and Prevent-
ing the Illicit Export, Import, and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,
adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO at its thirteenth session in Paris,
November 19, 1964, goes a little further than the 1954 Convention when it declares
that  “cultural property” means, among other things,  “manuscripts, books, . . .
[and] important collections of books and archives, including musical archives.”
UNESCO’s 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Il-
licit Import, Export, and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property further ex-

26  

panded the deﬁnition of archives to accommodate technological developments.
Category (h) of Article 1 enumerates “rare manuscripts and incunabula, old books,
documents, and publications of special interest (historical, artistic, scientiﬁc, lit-
erary, etc.) singly or in collections.” Category (j) in Article 1 refers to “archives, in-
cluding sound, photographic, and cinematographic archives.”

Article 1(f ) of the Recommendation Concerning the International Exchange
of Cultural Property, adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO at its nine-
teenth session in Nairobi, November 26, 1976, mentions only “archives and doc-
uments.” In the Recommendation for the Protection of Movable Cultural Prop-
erty 1978, the forms of archives are widened further in order to keep up with
technological developments. In Article 1(vii), “codices” are itemized along with
manuscripts and incunabula, books, documents, and publications of special inter-
est. Article 1(ix) enumerates “archives, including textual records, maps and other
cartographic materials, photographs, cinematographic ﬁlms, sound recordings,
and machine-readable records.” These conventions and recommendations clearly
recognize archives as cultural property and have expanded the scope of archives as
cultural property in harmony with the information revolution.18

1.    
Evidence of the keeping of archives in ancient Africa is available in Egypt, partic-
ularly in the Nile Valley area, which is the part of the continent richest in ancient
historical sources. When Manetho, an Egyptian by birth, was commissioned by
the Ptolemaic kings to write a general history of pharaonic Egypt in the third cen-
tury .., he had access to the archives and was able to read them. According to
Mokhtar and Vercoutter, this “presupposes the existence of properly maintained
ofﬁcial archives,”19 although these sources could only be used with caution. Most
often  they  were  prepared  with  a  speciﬁc  purpose:  to  enumerate  the  pharaoh’s
achievements or to ensure eternal worship and remembrance of the pharaoh, who
had earned the gratitude of the generations to come. Unfortunately, only two of
these documents, the Palermo Stone and the Turin Papyrus, have come down to us,
and even they are incomplete. 

The Palermo Stone, so called because the largest fragment of the text is pre-
served in the museum of Palermo in Sicily, is a diorite slab carved on both faces.
It preserves the names of all the pharaohs who reigned in Egypt from the First
through the Fifth Dynasty, around 2450 .. Starting with the Third Dynasty, the
Palermo Stone lists not only the names of the sovereigns in the order of their suc-
cession, but also, year by year, the most important events of each reign. The Turin
Papyrus, preserved in that city’s museum, is no less important, although it consists
only of a list of rulers in chronological order, with their complete protocol and the
number of years, months, and days of their reign. It provides a complete count of

     27

all the pharaohs from the earliest times to around 1200 .. Unfortunately, though
discovered intact in the nineteenth century, it was so badly mishandled in shipment
that it fell to pieces, and years of work were required to restore it.20

In the nonliterate parts of Africa, Africans were conscious of the past, appre-
ciated the signiﬁcance of records, and indeed had their own system of keeping
records. Their oral traditions constituted their archives. These traditions are not
just an oral recitation of the remembered history of a people; they also preserve
the values and ideals of the society. The repositories of the culture from whom the
rest learned were often the elders, the priests, and the drummers, who transmitted
history through their recitings. The purpose was to keep a record of the society
that included its past, its values, its mores, and all that they held dear. Even though
not categorized as modern archival records, they provide the same kinds of infor-
mation.21 This is why Amadou Hampate Ba said that “in Africa, when an old man
[or woman] dies, a library burns down.”22

1.    
Formal archival development came into being during the colonial period. The
colonial archives were conceived primarily as agents for effective administration of
the colonies and intended to keep the colonial records, half of which were re-
tained in the metropolitan headquarters. These records were seen as evidence of
the rights and activities of the colonial powers that created them, validating their
jurisdiction. The archives of conquered rivals were shared out as part of the war
booty, without any consideration of their value to the countries in which they
were established.23 Archival treasures were plundered and taken by the colonial
powers to the mother countries; there are particularly large amounts of colonial
materials in the archives of the United Kingdom, France, the Netherlands, Spain,
and Portugal.24

The problem of these so-called migrated archives can only be mentioned
brieﬂy here, as it is part of the larger debate on the return of cultural treasures.25
In discussions on the return of migrated archives, the argument of the principle of
provenance has been used. The former colonies argue that these records belong to
their states, since the documents were created in their territory. Certainly the trans-
fer of the documents is a political question, since the records are also part of the
history of the former ruling countries and relate to their decision making. There-
fore it seems reasonable to say that the colonizing countries should return these
documents as far as possible, either in the original or as copies.

As to archives in situ, the degree of preservation varies considerably. The prin-
cipal business of the colonial administrations was to govern, not to preserve the
records of their governments.26 The French archives, however, appear to be well or-
ganized and controlled; they also date back to an early period. For example, the

28  

documents for French West Africa were at ﬁrst centrally located in Dakar, where
an archive was established in 1913. Each territory also had its own archive. Senegal
and Mauritania had their own archives in 1913.27 Ivory Coast had its own archive
in 1914.28 In British West Africa, the late emergence of archives in Ghana and Nige-
ria (in 1946 and 1954, respectively) shows the lack of concern for the records. In the
Gold Coast (Ghana), no formal attempt to establish an archival system was even
made until 1946; before then, documents were left unbound and kept in record
rooms and ﬁling cabinets of each government department. Professionalism came
in 1949 with the advent of J. M. Akita as chief archivist.29

The rise of African nationalism was helpful to the development of archives,
thanks to the growing awareness of the importance of documentary research in the
life of the emerging African nations on the eve of independence. Dr. Kenneth On-
wuka Dike, whose report on the deplorable state of the valuable historical records
of Nigeria led to the establishment of the National Archives of Nigeria, endorsed
this view in a classic passage:

[The] archives of a nation are the raw materials of its history and if these
are not preserved the best source for the study of that country’s past will be
lost. The study of history is very important for all peoples but more so for
young and emergent nations. Our past is very much a part of our present
and in a measure as we comprehend that past so will the problems of the
present be illuminated. Every nation builds its future on its past and history
passes on the experience of former generations for our beneﬁt. True political
development can only take place on a basis of profound self-knowledge. In
the case of nations this knowledge comes largely from a study of history. . . .
Man cannot live by bread alone and cultural as well as material security is
needed to make the whole man. The poise and amour propre of a people
derive largely from their understanding and appreciation of their past
heritage and to some extent from their knowledge of the achievements of
their progenitors.30

  

The history of archives in Nigeria can conveniently be divided into three periods:
the precolonial era, the century beginning with the conquest of Lagos in 1851 and
ending with independence in 1960, and the current phase, beginning on October 1,
1960. However, it is logical to start our discussion of the postcolonial period with
the Public Archives Act at the end of 1957, a time when full representative gov-
ernment was well established, Nigerians were increasingly in charge of affairs, and
colonial disengagement had started.

     29

.1   
States existed in Nigeria centuries before the advent of British rule. Although they
were responsible for carrying out a large measure of government administration,
most  of these  indigenous  administrations  were  illiterate  and  kept  no  written
records. The joining of Arab and Negro cultures in the Western Sudan, a natural
consequence of the centuries-old trade between West Africa and the Moslem lands
of North Africa (via the trans-Sahara caravans), introduced Islam into the “Land
of the Negroes.”This Islamic impact led to the use of Arabic script in the area now
known as Northern Nigeria. States in this area acquired literate administrations and
began to produce records. These Arabic manuscripts are the oldest archives in Nige-
ria. Among the most important records to survive are the Kano Chronicles, which
record the reigns of forty-eight kings of Kano, from Bagoda (999– 1063 ..) to
Mohammed Bello (1883– 1892). In Southern Nigeria, certain states acquired and
produced written records in the course of their contact with Europeans, beginning
in the sixteenth century. A few of these have survived as well.31

European contact with the lands along the bights of Benin and Biafra—the
coast of modern Nigeria—dates back to the arrival of the Portuguese in the mid-
dle of the ﬁfteenth century. Trade, particularly the slave trade, was the fundamen-
tal link that bound West Africa to Europe. The archives of this period (1434–
1807)  repose  largely  in  the  capitals  of Europe,  including  Britain,  France,  the
Netherlands, Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the Vatican.32 With the abolition of the
British slave trade in 1807, interest shifted from the trafﬁc in human beings to
the exploitation of the raw materials of the Nigerian forest. Very few papers re-
lating to this period (1807– 1849) are in Nigeria; as is the case with the earlier pe-
riod, the records are emigrated archives.

The Nigerian archives of the British administration really begin with the next
period, the consular period of Nigerian history (1849– 1899). Among the impor-
tant records of this period are the minutes of the so-called Courts of Equity,
which deserve special mention. These “international courts,” as Consul Beecroft
described them, settled disputes between European and African traders in the
ports in the Niger Delta. The courts date back to 1851 and kept full minutes of
their proceedings. They dealt not only with commercial affairs but with disputes
between tribes and with any matter of importance affecting the local community.
They were at ﬁrst only courts of consent whose decisions were not always recog-
nized by British law, but in 1872 these courts were regularized and their powers
more exactly deﬁned by an order-in-council. Records of this court are to be found
only in Nigeria. Kenneth Dike was able to recover these and thousands of other
documents  relating  to  this  half-century  of Nigerian  history. The  documents
arranged under the Foreign Ofﬁce series in the Guide to Nigerian Records are well
organized.33

30  

.   , 1‒1
The major historical records of Nigeria of the colonial era are centered upon
the following administrative units: the consular period (1849– 1899), the Colony
of Lagos (1861– 1906), the Protectorate of Southern Nigeria (1900– 1906), the
Colony and Protectorate of Southern Nigeria (1906– 1913), the Royal Niger Com-
pany  (1879– 1899),  the  Protectorate  of Northern  Nigeria,  which  replaced  the
Royal Niger Company (1900– 1913), the Western and Eastern Provinces, created
from the Southern Provinces (1939– 1946), and the Colony and Protectorate of
Nigeria (1914– 1960).

The inﬂuence of nonadministrative bodies, notably the missions and the trad-
ing ﬁrms, was for many years wider and more penetrating than that of the public
administration. The Royal Niger Company was the forerunner of direct British ad-
ministration in Northern Nigeria. Missions had operated in parts of Yorubaland
for half a century before British occupation. The mission archives contain infor-
mation on all aspects of Nigerian life. Records of religious and educational activi-
ties predominate, but there is a mass of information on political and social life.
Some of these records are in Nigeria, but the majority are held in Britain. By the
early 1920s, other record-producing public bodies had come into existence, notably
tribal unions and cultural societies, political parties, labor unions, and social clubs.34

2.2.1 Colonial Inertia
The need to conserve the national archives of Nigeria was recognized by the Colo-
nial Ofﬁce in 1914. In that year the secretary of state circulated a letter to the staff
of the Colonial Ofﬁce in which he urged the importance of the preservation of
ofﬁcial documents in the colonies and protectorates. He wrote again in 1929 and
twice in 1936 to urge the safekeeping and preservation of public records. Another
letter was sent in March 1948 emphasizing that unless the arrangements for sort-
ing and preserving ofﬁcial documents were improved, records of permanent histor-
ical value might be seriously damaged or even destroyed or lost. When, in August
1950, the chief secretary to the government of Nigeria inquired of the ﬁnancial sec-
retary whether there was any possibility of securing ﬁnancial provision for a “spe-
cial ofﬁcer” to be appointed to collect and collate the vast amount of materials in
the country, he replied that “owing to lack of accommodation and staff it is not
proposed to set up archives in this territory at present.”35

Fortunately, in August 1949, an event occurred that would sweep away the
colonial administration’s apathy toward establishing an archive in Nigeria. Kenneth
Onwuka Dike, a doctoral candidate at King’s College, University of London, was
awarded a fellowship by the Colonial Social Science Research Council London to
carry out ﬁeldwork in connection with his research in Nigerian history. It was this
research grant that rekindled interest in a matter that had been swept under the
carpet by colonial ofﬁcialdom. How it happened is best told in Dike’s own words.

     31

In the course of my investigations I came across valuable historical records
in Nigerian Government Ofﬁces and the greater number of these were
exposed to decay and destruction; some were half-ruined by insects and
damp. I reported this to the Government and offered to lend my services
without salary in recovering what could be saved before it was too late. Gov-
ernment accepted this offer and appointed me in January 1950 to direct the
survey of historical records available in the country.36

Dike was appointed Supervisor of Public Records for three years “to under-
take part-time duties in connection with the preservation of ancient documents of
public interest in Nigeria” and “to ascertain the nature of available records and the
scale of the problem.”37

2.2.2 Dike’s Role and the Establishment of the National Archives
The Survey Ofﬁce was opened in 1951 at Ibadan on the university campus in two
rooms in the West African Institute for Social and Economic Research. Although
the survey was originally intended to be mainly exploratory, Dike soon discovered
that many valuable manuscripts might be entirely lost if they were not removed
from Calabar in Eastern Nigeria to Ibadan. With time, the number of documents
in similar circumstances increased, and he had no alternative but to create the nu-
cleus of a record ofﬁce.

Dike submitted his report in June 1953. “[I]n spite of the ravages of climate
and insects, and the careless destruction of records . . . some important documents
have survived.” Everywhere the survey visited, the archives were in a deplorable
condition, but the greatest single fact that emerged and the most pressing prob-
lem was “the complete absence of any form of legislation deﬁning and regulating
the administration, destruction, transfer, and ownership of the national archives.”
He therefore urged that an archives ordinance should at once be issued.38

The government of Nigeria accepted Dike’s recommendation for the estab-
lishment of a public record ofﬁce in Nigeria, and on December 24, 1953, he was
reappointed Supervisor of Records for another ﬁve years. He was to continue
“part-time duties in connection with the preservation of ancient documents of
public interest in Nigeria.”39 The major achievement of this period was the enact-
ment in 1957 of the Public Archives Act. The law changed the designation of the
executive head of the department from Supervisor of Public Records to Director
of Federal Archives and formally established a permanent National Archives Com-
mittee under the chairmanship of the chief justice of the federation. The act con-
centrated  on  public  archives  and  said  nothing  about  private  and  commercial
records. Yet it is obvious that the history of any nation is incomplete without ref-
erence to the economic activities within its borders. Public records touch on these
matters, but the records of the various commercial houses tell a fuller story. An-

32  

other defect of the act is its complete silence on the issue of records management.
In short, it failed to bestow on the director sufﬁcient authority to enable him to
execute his duties.40 However, section 11 of the act did restrict exportation of his-
torical documents unless a licence to export was issued by the minister supervising
the National Archives.

As previously mentioned, while the Colonial Ofﬁce in London wanted posi-
tive action on the preservation of Nigerian archives, the colonial administration
displayed apathy on the matter. It saw in all the colonial secretary’s prodding to es-
tablish Nigerian archives the creation of an unwanted, unnecessary, and unpro-
ductive burden on the exchequer. Therefore, when Dike volunteered his services
and requested only an ofﬁce or two to locate and save records, the government,
which never wanted to expend too much money on archives, seized on his offer.
Yet this very inexpensiveness of the Dike scheme would turn out to be a curse. It
became a habit of those who controlled the purse strings of government to won-
der  why  an  idea  that  had  begun  as  a  simple,  inexpensive  scheme  should  later
threaten to cost so much to carry out and maintain.41 In defense of Dike, it may be
suggested that if he had not offered his services at the time he did, valuable records
would have been lost forever. Perhaps his eagerness to obtain authorization to
start the survey let him put forward his modest proposals. Even then his budgets,
moderate as they were, were invariably cut.

S. O. Sowoolu, the second substantive director of the National Archives of
Nigeria, in a memorandum (which is in fact a history of the Nigerian Archives)
scathingly criticized Dike as a part-time director. He wrote that the part-time po-
sition adversely affected the work of the department. Dike was always away over-
seas during the long vacation (June or July to August or September), and then
“disorder, indiscipline and dissensions were let loose among the staff.” His ab-
sences led to delays in submitting departmental establishment or ﬁnance propos-
als to the authorities in Lagos, delays that sometimes affected the treatment these
proposals eventually got.42

On January 9, 1959, the archives moved from their makeshift rooms at Uni-
versity College, Ibadan, to their own dedicated building on campus. The move-
ment to its own facility was a watershed between the old Nigerian Record Ofﬁce
and the new National Archives of Nigeria and the right moment for Dike to dis-
engage. He had had two years to operate under the 1957 act. Unfortunately, Dike
did not see his task as done. In July 1958, six months before his ﬁve-year part-time
appointment was due to expire, Dike was informed by the Federal Ministry of Ed-
ucation of its intention to appoint a full-time director. He ﬂew into a rage and de-
manded a meeting with the minister on the issue.43 In June 1959 Dike was formally
appointed Director of National Archives on a part-time basis from January 1, 1959,
for a term of ﬁve years, terminating on December 31, 1963. The appointment has
been described as “irresponsible.”44 Indeed, the government ought to have stood
ﬁrm and appointed a full-time director.45

     33

Even earlier, in 1954, when Dike had submitted his report and discreetly urged
his own appointment as the head of the Nigerian Record Ofﬁce, English archivists
quietly voiced their doubts about entrusting the directorship of the institution to
a non–civil servant and a non-archivist.46 When the controversial 1959 appoint-
ment was nearing its end, Dike went behind the scenes to seek another ﬁve-year
term. This time the ministry did not oblige him, which allowed Sowoolu to com-
ment gleefully, “[T]hus ended—ingloriously—his thirteen years of misdirection
of the Nigerian National Archives.”47 This is perhaps too severe as a ﬁnal verdict.
Dike was undoubtedly the pioneer of archives in Nigeria. We must note that he re-
mained too long in his position, an all-too-common occurrence in contemporary
Africa. He should nonetheless be saluted for his vision and dedication.

Whatever criticism may be made against the Dike enterprise, it is an undeni-
able fact that his intervention ensured that many valuable records were not lost for
all time. He thus succeeded in his avowed mission “to save what can be saved be-
fore it is too late.” His pioneering work and lobbying efforts were crucial not only
to the establishment but also the development of the National Archives. The
major achievements of the National Archives from its beginning to the termina-
tion of Dike’s directorship in 1963 were the training of the ﬁrst generation of
Nigerian archivists abroad, the expansion and publicity of the department, and the
movement in 1958 to the ﬁrst purpose-built archives building in tropical Africa.48

   

Although Nigeria did not achieve political independence until October 1, 1960, as
earlier explained, our discussion should start from the commencement on No-
vember 14, 1957, of the Public Archives Act. By this time representative government
had been introduced and Nigerians were increasingly in charge of affairs. Although
Lloyd Chike Gwam, the ﬁrst substantive director, held ofﬁce for just over a year
(from April 1, 1964, till his untimely death on July 2, 1965), he exercised authority
over day-to-day affairs from 1958 up to the end of Dike’s part-time appointment
on December 31, 1963. A dynamic leader and motivator,49 he produced the Archive
Memoranda, which  provided  the  professional  and  technical  guidance  needed  by
young archivists and allowed the work in all branches of the National Archives to
become standardized.50 His brief tenure was further notable for the acquisition of
more  records  and  for  the  publicity  the  department  received.  He  and  other
archivists delivered public lectures and radio talks about their work, contributed
articles to both journals and newspapers, and published many ﬁnding aids.51

Sowoolu, whose trenchant criticisms of Dike’s part-time directorship have al-
ready been mentioned, was director of the National Archives for eighteen years.
He was primarily a man of ideas and lacked the dynamism of his predecessor,
which prevented him from achieving the great leap forward he envisaged for the

34  

archives. Under him, however, the department embarked on a policy of expansion
and began to establish more centers. Until 1982, only the three permanent build-
ings at Ibadan (1958), Kaduna, (1962), and Enugu (1963) had been built. Branches
were opened in Benin and Sokoto in 1982, shortly before Sowoolu died. The thirty-
month Civil War of 1967– 1970 had badly affected the eastern states, where records
were disorganized and lost. “That so much of the records were eventually recov-
ered and re-organized is to the eternal credit of Mr. Sowoolu.”52

Although Dike had been appointed to preserve “ancient documents” of Nige-
ria, he was mainly concerned with modern archives, that is, the records of the pre-
consular period (1807– 1849) and the consular period (1849– 1899), which he had
consulted for his doctoral thesis, “Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta, 1830–
1897.” He paid virtually no attention to Arabic documents, since he subscribed to
the view that “the nineteenth century Fulani conquest of Northern Nigeria de-
stroyed most of the local [Arabic] records.”53 It was S. S. Waniko, one of the early
archivists, who set about collecting Arabic manuscripts. He studied the Arabic lan-
guage, believing that to arrange and classify the manuscripts properly, some knowl-
edge of Arabic was required. He assembled a team of Arabic scholars and Mullahs
in the survey, collation, acquisition, and preservation of Arabic manuscripts.54
Progress was made by winning the support of the ruling families in the north.
Today the Kaduna archives house the oldest records in Nigeria’s holdings, dating
back to the twelfth century ..55 Nonetheless, it must be conceded that since its
inception, the National Archives has paid much more attention to the collection
and preservation of records written in European languages than to those written
in Arabic. Yet Arabic manuscripts are as important to the writing of Nigeria’s his-
tory as are those from Western European sources.56

.1  
It has been observed that the modest beginnings of the department constitute one
of its problems. It was regarded as the insigniﬁcant arm of a ministry meant to
serve the needs of a small circle of historians on the campus of the University of
Ibadan.57 It cannot be denied that Dike’s original conception of the archives was as
a workroom for historians. He certainly envisaged that the archives would be used
by government ofﬁcials to facilitate their administrative activities, but not by schol-
ars other than historians. The location of the archives in Ibadan, away from the
seat of government in Lagos, also affected their growth. Observers continuously
wondered why it was sited at the regional capital of Ibadan instead of the nation’s
capital at Lagos, where the heads of each ministry and all the cultural arms of fed-
eral government departments of state are located. The archives lost their identity
to the University of Ibadan, one of the facts responsible for their underdevelop-
ment. It would appear that the government almost forgot about the archives’ in-
dependent existence. The permanent committee on National Archives, provided

     35

for by section 9 of the 1957 Public Archives Act, “never once held a meeting.”58
Furthermore, the power given to the supervising minister under section 12 of the
act to make regulations for “the better carrying out of the objects and purposes”
of the act was never exercised. Because of the “complete ineffectiveness”of the
1957 act, the department “in 1980 submitted to its controlling ministry the text of
a bill”59 which was not promulgated into law, however, until 1992.

In the Daily Times of October 24, 1964, L. C. Gwam, then the director of the
Archives, was reported as saying that “there was no money to carry out necessary
improvements.” Seventeen years later a correspondent of the National Concord on
May 19, 1981, reported that Gwam’s successor, Sowoolu, “regrets that lack of ade-
quate funds . . . had not made things possible for the administrators to realize their
dream of an ideal archives for the nation.”60 There is no better index of total lack
of government interest in the growth and development of the National Archives
than the frequent relocation of the department from ministry to ministry. This has
been a source of “great instability,”61 commented a former director. Below is a
chronology of the archives’ movements:

Federal Ministry of Works, 1954– 1957

Federal Ministry of Education, 1957– 1975

Federal Ministry of Information, 1975– 1979

Federal Ministry of Social Development, Youth Sports, and, Culture,
1979– 1985

Federal Ministry of Information and Culture, 1985– 1990

Federal Ministry of Culture and Social Welfare, 1990– 1992

Federal Ministry of Information and Culture, 1992– 1999

Federal Ministry of Information, 1999 to date

The permanent secretary of the controlling ministry remarked at a conference in
1994 that it was sad that the establishment of the National Archives in 1954 had
not seriously affected the perception of archives by the administrators; if the role
of the archives in government had been accorded the proper recognition, the above
movements to various ministries would not have occurred.62

In addition to all the shufﬂing, in 1984 the department was merged with an-
other, the Department of Culture, and the headquarters moved from Ibadan to
Lagos. This is not all. In the ﬁve years between 1982 and 1987, it had four heads.
When Sowoolu died in 1982, Akinfenwa acted as director till 1984. When the de-
partment was merged with the Department of Culture, the Director of Culture,
Dr. Garba Ashiwaju, a non-archivist, became its head. In 1986, Ashiwaju was re-

36  

moved and a sole administrator, Colonel Tunde Akogun, appointed for the De-
partment of Culture—making a a military man head of the Nigerian Archives. In
1987, when the folly of merging the departments into one had become apparent
and the departments were separated, one of the early archivists, J. C. Enwere, be-
came acting director.

The movement of the headquarters to Lagos in 1984 was merely symbolic.
What moved to Lagos was the directorate. The life and soul of the organization,
the contents of the Ibadan archives and the library holdings, remained behind
in Ibadan, in the permanent buildings opened there and at Kaduna and Enugu.
Because of lack of money and equipment and low morale among staff, it has not
been possible to maintain the three early archives properly. A researcher who
visited the Ibadan archives in 1981, when it was still the department headquar-
ters, wrote that it had sunk into a wretched state and that it was “merely vege-
tating.”63 UNESCO experts who visited Nigeria eight years later reached the same
conclusion.

.   ’ , 1
Peter Bower and Joan van Albada, renowned experts on records management and
archives administration, respectively, visited Nigeria in April–May 1989 on a two-
week working tour of the country. They were sent by UNESCO at the insistence
of the Nigerian government. The report of their mission, titled Records Management
and National Archives in Nigeria, is in two parts. On records management, Bower
found the storage of non-current records unsatisfactory and advised that they
should be properly listed, arranged, and transferred to the National Archives in
order to facilitate public access and use, to promote conﬁdentiality, and to leave
no doubt about the authenticity of the records. His devastating conclusion was
that “there is no integrated, formal records management programme in the Nige-
rian Government.”64

Van Albada, the archives expert, visited the three major repositories in Ibadan,
Kaduna, and Enugu and found evidence of decay everywhere. For example, the
bindery, restoration section, photographic section, microﬁlming, reprography, and
laboratories were out of commission. All, or almost all, electrical or sophisticated
equipment, such as cameras, processing units, reader-printers, printers, photo-
copying machines, and board cutters, had broken down or were unusable for lack
of spare parts. The only cheerful note van Albada struck concerned the profes-
sional staff, who were praised for their “improvisational talents.” “Professional
standards  are  high,  though  knowledge  of developments  in  the  international
archival services are weak.”65 She therefore recommended the routine use of re-
fresher courses. The report’s dismal conclusion was inevitable:

While visiting the archives in Ibadan, Enugu and Kaduna, the consultant
could not help comparing them with a beautiful aircraft crashed, just after

     37

take-off. Unlike a downed aircraft however, these archival remains could be
reassembled, if reinforced, into a sound institution, serving its goal of
preserving for the people of Nigeria the documents containing their
common history.66

It was an apt metaphor. Philip Curtin, who visited Nigeria soon after the “take-
off,” had  predicted  optimistically  that  “it  appears  that  the  Nigerian  National
Archives will be one of the most efﬁcient in tropical Africa.”67 Evidently, the struc-
ture laid down by Dike, despite more than two decades of neglect, was sufﬁciently
apparent to enable the UNESCO experts to see that the foundation of the insti-
tution was solid and all that it had lacked was nurturing to a full life and contin-
uous development by the government.

The problem of neglect is common to many African archives. Adam Jones,
visiting the Ghana archives, which started eight years earlier than that of Nigeria
and which had the advantage of being headed from its inception by an archivist,
reported in 1987 that the Ghanaian institution too had suffered governmental ne-
glect. He concluded that there would be no improvement “as long as the govern-
ment of Ghana continues to display such indifference towards the country’s her-
itage.”68 All this conﬁrms the plea of the World Commission on Culture and
Development to developing countries in Our Creative Diversity:

The constitution of an archive is a long-term project which requires a high
degree of institutional continuity and commitment in both ﬁnancial and
human terms. As with all educational projects, returns on investments may
not be immediate or even immediately perceptible. Support to archival insti-
tutions and projects should therefore be conceived as a long-term enterprise,
not as a short-term proposition. From initial inventories to museum exhibits
or scientiﬁc publication, archival efforts need to be conceived as part of
larger concerted heritage policies.69

.      1
Three years after the UNESCO experts’ report was submitted, there was an op-
portunity to put the Nigerian archives on a sound footing to meet the challenges
of the informatics revolution when the military government promulgated the
long-awaited replacement of the 1957 act. The 1992 National Archives Decree
charges the National Archives of Nigeria (NAN) with the permanent custody,
care, and control of all archives of the federal government and empowers the state
governors to establish archives. The director of NAN now has the power to ex-
amine all public documents and also has compulsory powers over departmental
records. A commentator has enthused that with the decree there is now a well-
laid-down records-management programme. He adds that the new law will pro-
mote “the development of records keeping culture in the country.”70 The imme-

38  

diate past director of NAN has also commented that the 1992 law “has given us
hope and direction for the future.”71 While indeed the decree met most of the ob-
jections against the 1957 act, it seems to have focused almost exclusively on these
and fails to make provisions for the informatics revolution, which has transformed
the ﬁeld of archives. No attention is paid to the new multimedia technologies that
now complement audiovisual and ﬁlm archives, and hence no attention is paid to
the new problems raised by the preservation of electronic archives.72 The problem
with the law appears to be during its long gestation new matters and problems
arose that could not be accommodated lest the attempt to do so caused more de-
lays. More legislation is, therefore, overdue.

It is imperative that new legislation give NAN, as one of the oldest federal
cultural institutions, an autonomous status like that of other cultural bodies cre-
ated before or after it. The Department of Antiquities was created in 1954 and
abolished  in  1979. The  autonomous  National  Commission  for  Museums  and
Monuments took its place as a corporate body with perpetual succession and a
common seal. The National Library of Nigeria has a similar status, conferred on
it by section 1(2) of the 1964 National Library Act. The same is true of the Cen-
tre for Black and African Arts and Civilization, established in 1979 following the
Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, which was hosted
by Nigeria in 1977. The issue of an autonomous status for the National Archives
was ﬁrst raised by Momoh in 1984.73 It was renewed by the UNESCO experts ﬁve
years later. They recommended that “[t]he Nigerian Government should establish
a National Archives Commission,” comprising, from the public and private sec-
tors, Nigerians who are anxious “to further Nigeria’s interests in sound records
management practices, and in the preservation of its documentary heritage.”74
Meanwhile, the director of NAN should take advantage of the power to make reg-
ulations for “the better carrying out of the objectives and purposes” of the decree
conferred by section 49(f ) to take care of important developments in archival ser-
vices worldwide.

.     
In an address delivered soon after the promulgation of the 1992 National Archives
Decree, the then director of NAN said the decree “has opened new horizons”75
for her establishment. She spoke about the plan to microﬁlm the records in their
holdings for better security and permanent preservation. She also looked forward
to the development of methodology for the collection of oral traditions, as sec-
tion 44 of the decree shows awareness of oral traditions and oral history. Finally,
she noted that the recommendation of automation by UNESCO experts “is in
our priority list” and we “are looking forward to the computerization and mod-
ernization of our activities.”76 It remains to be seen whether the federal govern-
ment will adequately fund NAN. There are, however, some promising indications.

     39

On May 10– 29, 1993, NAN organized a refresher course in archival practice
in conjunction with UNESCO at Enugu in Eastern Nigeria, as a follow-up to the
UNESCO experts’ report of 1989. The facilitators, led by Joan van Albada, who
was the course director, were six in number. They came from the Netherlands, the
United Kingdom, Germany, and Canada. Fifty-eight participants attended the
course, which was the ﬁrst of its type in Nigeria.77 From October 31 to November 5,
1994, NAN hosted the ﬁrst Pan-African Conference on Archival Policies and Pro-
grammes in Africa at Abuja. The conference was well attended by 170 delegates, in-
cluding 13 from Francophone countries and 144 from Anglophone countries, 124
of whom came from Nigeria. UNESCO contributed the sum of $19,500 to cover
the travel expenses of foreign archivists and resource persons. Nigeria was respon-
sible for the accommodation of all the delegates to the conference. A seven-point
recommendation was issued in which, among other items, the conference called on
all African governments to recognize the importance of their archival heritage as
an essential part of the memory of Africa and thus of the world.78

The Nigerian head of state, in opening the conference, drew attention to two
interesting matters. The ﬁrst was the question of African records and artifacts in
Europe and America. He said that the records are very important “to our people”
and it would be beneﬁcial if they were returned or copied. The second issue was
“our oral tradition and history.” In our societies “old men and women are the ver-
itable repositories of our past.” He urged the conference to ﬁnd a strategy for
recording the information “before it is too late.”79 The report of the World Com-
mission on Culture and Development observes that archival institutions “are often
seriously in jeopardy in many developing countries.”80

From these two events, hosted in quick succession by NAN, and from the re-
marks of the Nigerian head of state, it is also quite clear that some of these coun-
tries appreciate the value of archives but do not have the wherewithal, or perhaps
are unwilling to spare it, for implementation.81 The management of NAN must,
therefore, continue to evince the same persistence that enabled it to secure funds
to organize the refresher course and the pan-African conference. Nigeria’s leader-
ship in the West African subregion in archival matters is crucial. In 1981, Kunle
Badmus reported that archivists in Ghana and other countries of West Africa were
lamenting the failure of NAN to play the leadership role expected of it, thereby
depriving the subregion of potential beneﬁts.82 The events of 1993 and 1994 show
that NAN is becoming conscious of its leadership role in the subregion in ensur-
ing properly run and maintained government archives.

.    
A fundamental problem of post-independent Africa is that her rulers (it would
be wrong to call them leaders) cannot reconcile themselves to what Gwam called
the intellectual objectives of a national archives: “the culture and cultivation of

40  

truth through the preservation of evidence.”83 When fraud is suspected in public
ofﬁces in Nigeria, the ﬁnancial and other administrative records are always the vic-
tims of deliberate destruction by arson. Many notable buildings have been torched
in this endeavour. One of the most notorious was the razing of the twenty-six
story Independence Building, erected by the federal government to commemorate
Nigeria’s independence on October 1, 1960. When the military president visited the
charred remains of the building, the front page of the next day’s Guardian showed
him and his top ofﬁcers smiling.84 An irate correspondent to the Guardian wrote
that he was ﬁlled with anger when he saw the “smiling faces of the Head of State
and some members of the ruling elite as they visited the scene of the devastating
inferno.” “Let our Generals understand,” he concluded, “that those smiles leave a
big sore in the people’s psyche as regards leadership and its sensitivity to national
disaster.”85

According to the report of the World Commission on Culture and Develop-
ment, “[o]pen public archives are . . . a necessary element of democratic gover-
nance and accountability.”86 Nigeria has been governed by military dictatorships
for nearly thirty of its forty years of independence. These governments have been
distinguished by the arbitrary exercise of power, graft, corruption, and lack of
transparency. With no culture of good governance since independence, our rulers
“would wish that the truths stored in archival records be suppressed.”87 Although
this position remains understandably unstated, the historian Bala Usman has no
doubt that it is “behind the dangerous neglect of the archives at all levels of gov-
ernment, and in all spheres of life, in this country.”88

“Records are essential to the principle of managerial accountability,”89 intone
the UNESCO experts in the introduction to their report. The Nigerian bureau-
cracy understands this too well and is loath to see in existence an “integrated for-
mal records management system in Nigeria.”90 They have virtually built a wall of
secrecy  around  what  is  in  fact  part  of the  national  heritage. Thus  in  1965  an
archivist, G. A. K. Adedipe, who went on a tour of inspection of the record rooms
of various ministries in Lagos, was informed by an ofﬁcial of the cabinet ofﬁce
that “the Cabinet Ofﬁce records are a class in themselves, too secret to be released
in a hundred years.”91

With this type of bureaucratic overzealousness, it is not surprising that an
archivist who put in thirty-ﬁve years of service at NAN afﬁrms that the institution
“is completely fettered in its functions as a department of state.”92 O. A. Momoh
has argued that right from its inception, NAN has never had sufﬁcient money
voted for its services and programmes.93 A survey by G. O. Alegbeleye between
1989 and 1992 of Nigerian archivists conﬁrms this position and shows that they are
not happy about “the nonchalant attitude of the government to archival matters
and not very pleased with the lack of ﬁnancial support for the Nigerian archival
enterprise.”94

     41

.     SUI GENERIS
Unlike the ancient Nok, Ife, Benin, and Igbo-Ukwu sculptures, which are regarded
as artistic masterpieces, there are no archives in Nigeria dating back to antiquity.
The status of these works of art ensured for antiquities management profound
interest even in the metropolis of the empire. In 1940, an editorial note in the
London-published Nigeria Magazine titled “The Bronze Heads of Ife” linked the
ﬁnds to appeals that had been made in the journal for the provision of a museum
in Nigeria, adding that “the case of the Ife bronze heads, several of which have un-
fortunately been allowed to leave the country, furnishes one of the strongest argu-
ments in favor of museum facilities and the preservation within Nigeria of objects
illustrating the indigenous culture of the country.”95

As late as 1973, a senior ofﬁcial of the Federal Ministry of Education writing
a  publication  that  bore  the  imprimatur  of UNESCO  said  absolutely  nothing
about archives or the National Archives, which had then been in existence for six-
teen years. Museums were mentioned at pages 30 and 42– 44 and monuments at
pages 44– 45.96 The omission reﬂects the age-old detachment of archives from cul-
tural heritage by our bureaucrats. In June 1948 a conference was held called “The
Preservation of Antiquities and the Development of Arts and Crafts.” Archives
was one of the items originally slated for discussion. The conference, however, de-
cided that “archives” was outside its scope. Thus an opportunity was missed for es-
tablishing an archives institution in Nigeria,97 in spite of the fact that one had been
established two years earlier for the Gold Coast (Ghana). Although there was a ref-
erence to archives in the 1988 federal government white paper Cultural Policy for Nige-
ria,98 it was belated, and the harm had been done.

Archives, though physical objects, are in the nature of intellectual property,
unlike sculptures and paintings, which are tangible property. As Principe has put
it, archives have always been thought of as “cultural institutions sui generis.” They
differ from museums, galleries, and libraries in that the majority of people do not
use them directly but through the intervention of the specialist, the scholar, who
does research on the archive records and then publishes the results from which the
layman can beneﬁt.99

The language in which a manuscript is written is a fundamental barrier to its
universality. In spite of the value of archives, they lack the universality of sculp-
tures, paintings, and drawings, which require no translation. The artistic excellence
of a work of art is revealed to the viewer directly and not through any interpreter.
This is why tourists ﬂock to all the great museums of the world wherever they may
be located. The objects therein speak for themselves in one universal language. In
contrast, tourists do not ﬂock to the Archives nationales in Paris or the National
Archives in Washington. The appreciation and appeal of archives, as materials
written in many languages, are restricted almost entirely to those engaged in aca-
demic and intellectual pursuits or involved in administration or news media. This

42  

uniqueness of archives, it is suggested, is their weakness, particularly in the Nige-
rian and indeed in an African context. Nok, Ife, Benin, and Igbo-Ukwu sculptures
and artifacts are evidence of a glorious Nigerian past, as celebrated in Ekpo Eyo’s
lavishly illustrated Two Thousand Years of Nigerian Art,100 but it is difﬁcult to generate
the same fervor for her archives in a still largely illiterate society.

Nonetheless, both archives and museums have much in common. As noted in
Our Creative Diversity, archives “can partner museums in documenting past, disap-
pearing, and extant traditions.”101 Two special categories of museums overlap much
more directly with archive centers in terms of their collections: biographical and
memorial museums and literature museums (plus the overlapping category of the-
atre and music museums). Most if not all of these see as one of their primary tasks
the acquisition and deployment of original manuscript material of the person or
persons commemorated, whether a single individual at one extreme, or all writers
of a nation at the other. Such museums need to employ professional archivists to
curate their manuscript collections.102

Archives and museums are not the only collecting centers of the evidence of
human activity; libraries and documentation centers serve similar functions. All are
responsible for the preservation of this evidence and its dissemination. Each of
these institutions has a speciﬁc ﬁeld of activity, a conception of its role in society
and its own practices. Nevertheless, they are linked to a common objective. This
institutional speciﬁcity can only be understood against a perspective of comple-
mentarity. So it is true that the very idea of culture implies a comprehensive re-
construction of the history of mankind.103

 

The value of archives is inestimable; they are priceless, and they constitute an
important part of the memory of a nation. They are both the memory of the
government—and of the people—and the principal raw materials for historical
research in other ﬁelds.104 They are a cultural resource and a fundamental element
in the civilization and culture of peoples.105 The archives of a people are an index
of their cultural growth and development. Yet in Africa governments are not con-
scious of the educational and cultural role archives play in society. Instead, as
Usman asserts, there is “widespread and dangerous neglect of, and sometimes cold
hostility towards the archives by the governments and in most public and private
institutions in Africa.”106

The Pan-African Conference on Archival Policies and Programs in Africa held
in Abuja in 1994 told African governments in its communiqué that “proper care of
archives and records is essential to decision making and underpins good govern-
ment.” It therefore called upon them to provide “adequate funding to their na-

     43

tional archives to enable them to fulﬁll their mission.”107 Well-managed records
provide the state with an essential database that enables it to formulate, assess, and
maintain continuity of policy.108 In other words, this vital part of the cultural her-
itage can be used for the betterment of governance, management, trade, and com-
merce, and for the general improvement of the national economy.

Many factors are responsible for the poverty of documentary heritage man-
agement in Nigeria. The archives were originally conceived by their founder as a
modest organization with the limited objective of serving the needs of a small cir-
cle of historians at the University of Ibadan. Dike deserves credit for establishing
NAN, but his inadequate assessment of the nature, role, and organization of a na-
tional archives in a modern state caused problems that continue to plague the in-
stitution: poor funding, inadequate manpower, and insufﬁcient infrastructures. In
a still largely illiterate society, the uniqueness and signiﬁcance of archives are not
appreciated. The National Archives are not seen as part of Nigeria’s cultural her-
itage, nor is it recognized that, like the works of art in the National Museum, the
archives of the nation require and deserve the same care, attention, and sustenance.
Since independence in 1960, Nigeria has not beneﬁtted from good governance
and managerial accountability. The culture of accountability in and of govern-
ment has simply not been present. It is, therefore, not surprising that the gover-
nors of Nigeria have shown apathy and even hostility toward open public archives,109
which, according to the World Commission on Culture and Development, are a
necessary  element  of democratic  governance  and  accountability. The  evidence
shows that successive governments did not know what to do with the National
Archives. The institution never enjoyed stable ministerial superintendence as it was
moved from one ministry to another and on one occasion even lost its indepen-
dent identity and was merged with another department, with non-archivists at its
head. The irony of it all is that despite the limitations that Dike’s perception of a
national archives imposed on the institution, it made an auspicious start, and it was
hoped that it would be one of the best in tropical Africa. The National Archives
is an indispensable instrument of nation building and national development. It is
the responsibility of the government of Nigeria to ensure that the “beautiful air-
craft [that] crashed, just after take-off, [is] . . . reassembled [and] reinforced into
a sound institution, serving its goal of preserving for the people of Nigeria doc-
uments containing their common history.”110



1. Ernst Posner, Archives, 2 Collier’s Encyclopedia 556 (Colliers, New York 1997).
2. Cyril Thomas Flower, Archives, 1 Chamber’s Encyclopedia 584 (International Learning Systems,
London 1969).

44  

3. World Commission on Culture and Development, Our Creative Diversity, 189 (UNESCO,
Paris 1995).
4. Posner, supra note 1, at 556.
5. Flower, supra note 2, at 584.
6. Ernst Posner, Archives, 2 The Encyclopedia Americana 239 (Grolier, Danbury, Conn. 1997).
7. Posner, supra note 2, at 584.
8. L. S. Principe, Everyman and Archives, 29 Archivum: International Review on Archives 135, 135– 142
(1982).
9. Posner, supra note 1, at 556.
10. Id. at 556.
11. Principe, supra note 8, at 135.
12. Our Creative Diversity, supra note 3, at 189.
13. Flower, supra note 2, at 584.
14. See, e.g., Spoils of War International Newsletter, July 5, 1995; no. 1, Dec. 19, 1995; no. 2, July 15, 1996;
no. 3, Dec. 1996; no. 4, Aug. 1997.
15. Louis-Jacquet Rollet-Andriane, Precedents: Return and Restitution of Cultural Property:
Viewpoints, 31:1 Museum 4 (1979).
16. R. Parkhurst, The Case of Ethiopia, 149 Museum 58, 60 (1986).
17. Lyndel V. Prott, Problems of Private International Law for the Protection of the Cultural
Heritage, 217 Recueil des cours de l’Académie de droit international de La Haye 219, 228 (1989).
18. We can see the same progression in speciﬁcity in the United Nations General Assembly
Resolutions on the subject of cultural property. The ﬁrst UNGA resolution on the topic,
“Restitution of works of art to countries victims of expropriation” (Resolution 3187 of 1973),
maintained that “the prompt restitution to a country of its works of art, monuments, museum
pieces, and manuscripts and documents by another country, without charge” will constitute
“just reparation for damage done.”The UNGA resolutions of 1983, 1985, and 1987 on the mat-
ter include in the operative part of the resolution an express reference to restitution of “ob-
jets d’art, monuments, museum pieces, archives, manuscripts, documents, and any other cul-
tural or artistic treasures,” thus seeing “archives” as a distinct category of cultural property. See
L. V. Prott and P. J. O’Keefe, 3 Law and the Cultural Heritage Movement 814, 893 (Butterworths, Lon-
don 1989).
19. G. Mokhtar and J. Vercoutter, Introduction, Ancient Civilizations of Africa, 2 General History of
Africa 7 (G. Mokhtar ed., UNESCO, Paris 1981).
20. Id. at 6– 8. An interesting revelation was made on the BBC World Service current affairs
program “Outlook” on Wednesday, Aug. 11, 1999, the day of the total eclipse of the sun. In a
special edition of the program to celebrate the eclipse, a commentator mentioned that the an-
cient Babylonians were able to predict the occurrence of eclipses accurately. He indicated that
several of the documents (cuneiform texts) used to do so are tucked away in the vaults of the
British Museum. In an e-mail communication of Sept. 13, 1999, that I received from Mark
Smalley, the producer of this program, he disclosed that there are over 150,000 Babylonian
cuneiform tablets held at the British Museum, “10% being of an astronomical nature.”

     45

21. Bolanle Awe, The Concept of Archives in Africa: A Preliminary Survey, Janus: International
Council on Archives 72, 73 (1996). Proceedings of Pan-African Conference on Archival Policies
and Programmes in Africa held in Abuja, Nigeria, October 3–November 5, 1994.

22. Our Creative Diversity, supra note 3, at 175.

23. Awe, supra note 21, at 74.

24. 2 Great Soviet Encyclopedia 265 (Macmillian, New York 1973).

25. See, e.g., the contributions to the debate by Mania Kagombe, H. M. Nasser, and Bimal Prasad
in 1 Archivum (special issue) 48, 52 (1976). Proceedings of the General Conference on the Plan-
ning of Archival Development in the Third World, Dakar, 28– 31 January 1975.

26. Philip D. Curtin, The Archives of Tropical Africa: A Reconnaissance, 1 Journal of African His-
tory 129, 130 (1960).

27. Id. at 132.

28. Id. at 133.

29. Awe, supra note 21, at 75.

30. Kenneth Onwuka Dike, Report on the Preservation and Administration of Historical Records and the
Establishment of a Public Record Ofﬁce in Nigeria 10 (Government Printer, Lagos 1954).

31. Id. at 5, 9– 10; F. O. Babalola, The Future of Arabic Manuscripts in Nigeria 1:4 The Nigerian
Archives: Journal of the Society of Nigerian Archivists 19, 24 (1993).

32. Dike, supra note 30, at 6; P. Carson, Materials for West African History in the Archives of Belgium and
Holland (Athlone Press, London 1962); R. Gray and D. Chambers, Materials for West African His-
tory in Italian Archives (Athlone Press, London 1962); A. F. C. Ryder, Materials for West African His-
tory in Portuguese Archives (Athlone Press, London 1965).

33. Dike, supra note 30, at 6– 7, 17.

34. Id. at 9.

35. S. O. Sowoolu, 1 A Memorandum on the Organization and Management of Archives in Nigeria 10 (2 vols.
mimeograph, National Archives of Nigeria, Ibadan 1970); O. A. Momoh, Thirty Years of the
National Archives of Nigeria 1951– 1981: History, Functions, Problems and Prospects 28– 31
(M.L.S. thesis, Loughborough University of Technology 1984); Dike, supra note 30 at 11.

36. Dike, supra note 30, at 11.

37. Id. at 4.

38. Id. at 13– 15

39. Sowoolu, supra note 35, at 56.

40. J. C. Enwere, Problems of Archives Administration and Records Management in English-
Speaking West African States, 1:1 The Nigerian Archives: Journal of the Society of Nigerian Archivists 1
(1989).

41. Sowoolu, supra note 35, at 23.

42. Id. at 14.

43. Id. at 122.

46  

44. Id. at 124.
45. As far back as September 1957, a member of the House of Representatives, Mr. (later
Chief )  M.  A.  Ajasin,  had  called  for  a  full-time  director  during  the  debate  on  the  Public
Archives Bill. After agreeing that Dike should be thanked for having started the work, Ajasin
went on: “What I would like to say, however, is that this has been a part-time job for Profes-
sor Dike, he works in the University and he does this work also. And now that the post of a
Director is created it should be a full time affair.” Id. at 114.
46. Id. at 158.
47. Id. at 148.
48. Curtin, supra note 26, at 135. On the occasion of the opening of the building, Lord Ever-
shed, Master of the Rolls, who ofﬁcially opened it said: “There can, I think, be few other
countries who can point to a single man and say ‘to him is due this most important institu-
tion.’” Momoh, supra note 35, at 46. Philip Curtin, who toured the archives of independent
African states in the early years of independence, commented in 1960 that “[t]he formation of
an archives [in Nigeria] has been largely the single-handed work of a Nigerian historian who
organized it, and saw it through to its present position of an independent government service
with a professionally trained staff.” He added that  “it appears that the Nigerian National
Archives will be one of the most efﬁcient in tropical Africa.” Curtin, supra note 26, at 135. From
his vantage position as principal of University College, Ibadan (1960– 62), and later vice chan-
cellor of the University of Ibadan (1962– 67), Dike was in a position to mobilize support for
the archives, at times communicating directly with the prime minister, Sir Abubakar Tafawa
Balewa, and the chief justice of Nigeria, Sir Adetokunboh Ademola.
49. Sowoolu, supra note 35, at 132– 33; Momoh, supra note 35, at 43.
50. C.A. Ukwu, The Archives in Nigeria: Its Mission and Vision, 2:1 The Nigerian Archives: Jour-
nal of the Society of Nigerian Archivists 1, 4 (1995).
51. Momoh, supra note 35, at 43.
52. Ukwu, supra note 50, at 4.
53. Dike, supra note 30, at 5.
54. Babalola, supra note 31, at 21.
55. Ukwu, supra note 50, at 8.
56. Babalola, supra note 31, at 21.
57. Momoh, supra note 35, at 170.
58. Ukwu, supra note 50, at 5.
59. Enwere, supra note 40, at 7; Ukwu, supra note 50, at 5.
60. Daily Times, October 27, 1964, at 13; National Concord, May 19, 1981, at 3.
61. Ukwu, supra note 50, at 4.
62. P. Eta, The Administrator’s Perception of Archives and Their Role in Government, Janus:
International Council on Archives 10, 12 (1996). Proceedings of Pan-African Conference on Archival
Policies and Programmes in Africa, Abuja, October 31–November 5, 1994.
63. Kunle Badmus, A Lack of Archives, West Africa, June 1, 1981, at 1233– 34.

     47

64. Joan van Albada and Peter Bower, Records Management and National Archives in Nigeria 5
(UNESCO, Paris 1989). FMR/IPS/UIS/89/117.
65. Id. at 9– 10; Tony Aleke and Rose Ovesuor, UNESCO Experts in Nigeria, 1:1 The Nigerian
Archives: Journal of the Society of Nigerian Archivists 75, 75– 76 (1989).
66. Van Albada and Bower, supra note 64, at 8.
67. Curtin, supra note 26, at 135.
68. Adam Jones, Neglected Heritage, West Africa, July 6, 1987, 1298, 1300.
69. Our Creative Diversity, supra note 3, at 190.
70. Obiora Cyril Nwosu, The Role of Archival Legislations in National Development, 2:1 The
Nigerian Archives: Journal of the Society of Nigerian Archivists 39, 45– 46 (1995).
71. Ukwu, supra note 50, at 13.
72. Our Creative Diversity, supra note 3, at 190.
73. Momoh, supra note 35, at 230.
74. Van Albada and Bower, supra note 64, at 11.
75. Ukwu, supra note 50, at 13.
76. Id. at 13– 14.
77. Id. at 10. Out of the ﬁfty-four participants who attended the course, twenty-nine were
archivists from NAN. The others were from various organizations in Nigeria. The twenty-one-
day course centered on a general introduction to recent developments in archival practices;
modern archival terminology; production and use of archival statistical data; life cycle man-
agement of records; the theory of computing; standardization of levels of description; theory
and organization of preservation; the theory of reprography and microﬁlming public services;
and bibliography and archival literature. The facilitators donated various items to NAN, in-
cluding all the teaching materials and aids, a computer (with software), and conservation ma-
terials. See 1:4 The Nigerian Archives: Journal of the Society of Nigerian Archivists 79 (1993).
78. Audu Momoh, Pan-African Conference on Archives, 2:1 The Nigerian Archives: Journal of the
Society of Nigerian Archivists 71 (1995).
79. Supra note 21, at 7– 8.
80. Our Creative Diversity, supra note 3, at 189.
81. Awe, supra note 21, at 77.
82. Badmus, supra note 63, at 1234.
83. Sowoolu, supra note 35, at 142.
84. Guardian, April 19, 1993, at 1.
85. Guardian, April 24, 1993, at 12.
86. Our Creative Diversity, supra note 3, at 189.
87. Enwere, supra note 40, at 4.
88. Yusufu Bala Usman, Nation-Building and Primary Historical Source Material, 2:1 The Nige-
rian Archives: Journal of the Society of Nigerian Archivists 35, 36 (1995).

48  

89. Van Albada and Bower, supra note 64, at 8.

90. Id. at 6.

91. Sowoolu, supra note 35, at 201. Consequently “public ofﬁcials have continued to refuse the
transfer of some vital records to the department.” Momoh, supra note 35, at 152.

92. Momoh, supra note 35, at 153.

93. Id. at 143.

94. G. O. Alegbeleye, The Nigerian Archivist: His Prevalent Social Value and Attitudes To-
wards the Profession, 2:1 The Nigerian Archives: Journal of the Society of Nigerian Archivists 15, 32 (1995).

95. 21 Nigeria Magazine 341 (1940).

96. T. A. Fasuyi, Cultural Policy in Nigeria (UNESCO, Paris 1973).

97. Sowoolu, supra note 35, at 10.

98. Federal Republic of Nigeria, Cultural Policy for Nigeria (Federal Government Printer, Lagos
1988).

99. Principe, supra note 8, at 135.

100. Ekpo Eyo, Two Thousand Years of Nigerian Art (Federal Department of Antiquities, Lagos
1977).

101. Our Creative Diversity, supra note 3, at 189.

102. P. J. Boylan, Museums and Archives in the Contemporary World, 30 Archivum: International
Review on Archives 39, 48 (1984).

103. B. C. Bloomﬁeld, Relations between Archives and Libraries, 30 Archivum: International Re-
view on Archives 28 (1984). The author pleads that it is important for both archives and li-
braries to work together more closely in the future since they share a similar cultural mission.
Id. at 35.

104. E. E. Ezomo, The Future of Archives in Nigeria: A Presidential Address 1:2, 3 The Nigerian
Archives: Journal of the Society of Nigerian Archivists 6 (1990).

105. Principe, supra note 8, at 135.

106. Yusufu Bala Usman, The Signiﬁcance of Primary Historical Source Materials for African
Unity and Integration, 1 Janus 15, 16 (1996).

107. 1 Janus, at 130– 31 (1996).

108. Anne Thurston, Preserving Information, West Africa, August 17, 1987, at 1591. This is a let-
ter in response to the article by Adam Jones in West Africa, July 6, 1987. See supra note 68.

109. On October 27, 1979, soldiers of the Ministry of Defense stormed the Federal Ministry
of Establishments, which occupied several ﬂoors of the Independence Building in Lagos be-
cause the use of the building had been allocated to them. In one swift operation, they dumped
ﬁles and furniture out of the windows. NAN, in a rescue operation, could save only 9,000 ﬁles.
The records saved included “personal ﬁles, policy ﬁles, land agreement and compensation ﬁles,
ﬁles on capital projects, in fact, the list is endless”. Momoh, supra note 35, at 145.

110. Van Albada and Bower, supra note 64, at 8.


