 International Journal of Cultural Property   (2016)   23:  295– 320 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2016 International Cultural Property Society 
 doi:10.1017/S0940739116000163 

              

    The Functioning of Indigenous Cultural 
Protocols in Australia’s Contemporary 
Art World 
       Marianne     Riphagen   *  

   Gretchen M.     Stolte    †   

    

         Abstract:     In recent decades, cultural protocols have emerged as a non-judicial 
alternative to the inadequate legal protection of Indigenous cultural heritage. 
They are meant to protect Indigenous peoples from the misappropriation of 
their heritage by outsiders and enhance Indigenous peoples’ control over their 
own domain. This article examines the functioning of Indigenous cultural 
protocols within Australia’s contemporary art world. As we will demonstrate, 
cultural protocols have clear practical utility. They can raise awareness, instigate 
changes in behaviour, and operate as a conduit for correcting the unauthorized 
use of Indigenous cultural materials. Yet, a disjunction exists between codified 
ideals and a messy reality. Our analysis of two protocol transgressions shows 
that protocols do not automatically protect Indigenous individuals equally. 
Furthermore, although discussions about compliance are infused with rhetoric 
about the authority of “the Indigenous community,” Indigenous people with 
cultural connections to contested heritage objects do not always have a clear 
voice in decisions made about their use.      

   INTRODUCTION 

 Since the late twentieth century, Indigenous cultural and intellectual property rights, 
understood as the rights of Indigenous people to own and control their cultural 

  *  Cultural Anthropology and Development Studies ,  Radboud University Nijmegen ,  the Netherlands ; 
Email:  m.riphagen@maw.ru.nl  
   †   Centre for Digital Humanities Research ,  Research School of Humanities and the Arts ,  College of 
Arts and Social Sciences ,  Australian National University ; Email:  gretchen.stolte@anu.edu.au  

295

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 296   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

heritage, have been the subject of increasing international debate.  1   In countries 
like Australia, Canada, and the United States, Indigenous people have sought 
greater control over cultural heritage including sacred sites, traditional knowledge, 
artworks, ancestral remains, dances, languages, and documentation of heritage 
in  books,  films,  sound  recordings,  photographs,  and  reports.  2    The  colonialist 
conditions under which cultural heritage items were removed from their Indige-
nous owners, coupled with the loss of culture and cultural memory, has ensured 
that  discussions  around  rights  to,  and  responsibilities  over,  collections,  docu-
mentation, and representation of heritage are imbued with politics and emotions. 
Many forms of Indigenous cultural heritage were collected during a colonial era 
when Indigenous societies across the world faced genocide, the annexation of terri-
tories, forced removals, and discrimination by European imperialists. Commer-
cial  photographers,  missionaries,  anthropologists,  government  representatives, 
and explorers obtained Indigenous cultural materials and documented peoples’ 
ceremonies,  physicality,  and  everyday  life.  3    During  the  era  of  salvage  anthro-
pology, a number of objects were acquired and photographs taken based on the 
belief that forms of material culture needed to be “secured” before Aboriginal  4   
people “died out.”  5   

 Concerns regarding the protection of Indigenous cultural and intellectual prop-
erty  have  become  firmly  embedded  within  global  human  rights  discourses,  6    yet 
Indigenous people continue to face significant challenges regarding the safeguard-
ing of, and control over, their cultural heritage.  7   A mismatch exists between the 
world’s intellectual property laws and Indigenous notions of creation and owner-
ship. Copyright, the dominant paradigm for the protection of cultural property, 
represents an inherently Western philosophical idea, imbued with Western values 
and assumptions.  8   

 Legal protection afforded by copyright laws frequently does not extend to Indige-
nous cultural heritage. For example, the copyright requirement of fixation in a tangible 
medium  of  expression  precludes  protection  for  intangible  Indigenous  cultural 
materials like songs, dances, and oral folklore.  9   The fact that rights conferred by 
intellectual property laws are limited also poses problems because, as Indigenous 
Australian lawyer Terri Janke has observed, “rights to culture last forever.”  10   Even 
if Indigenous cultural heritage is protected by copyright laws, the recognized copy-
right owners are not necessarily Indigenous. Films, sound recordings, photographs, 
and manuscripts based on Indigenous cultural heritage or representing Indigenous 
people are often legally owned by their non-Indigenous makers.  11   

 The  legal  non-recognition  of  various  Indigenous  laws  and  customs  pertain-
ing  to  the  protection  of  cultural  heritage  has  provoked  international  discussion 
about protocols, particularly within the realm of cultural industries. Debate has 
focused on how protocols, commonly known as an “established code of procedure 
or behavior” or “official etiquette,” can operate as a tool to protect Indigenous cul-
tural heritage.  12   In the Indigenous studies’ literature, two main forms of cultural 
protocols are discussed. The first type, often described in ethnographies, are those 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  297 

protocols applied within an Indigenous community that prescribe, among other 
things, hierarchies of knowledge and rules around passing on ancestral stories and 
designs between generations.  13   The second type of cultural protocols has emerged 
as  a  response  to  the  inadequate  legal  protection  of  Indigenous  heritage  items. 
These protocols have been, and proceed to be, created in cross-cultural engage-
ments,  as  when  non-Indigenous  anthropologists  and  art  historians  engage  with 
Indigenous communities in the display and exhibition of their material culture.  14   
Writing about the Australian context, Howard Morphy has noted that protocols 
“have developed as a mechanism for mediating relationships between Indigenous 
and non-Indigenous Australians.”  15   We focus on these latter protocols. 

 Since  the  turn  of  the  century,  Canadian  organizations  such  as  the  Creator’s 
Rights Alliance, the Department of Canadian Heritage, and the First Peoples’ Cul-
tural Council have staged symposia to explore the content and relevance of Indig-
enous protocols.  16   Canadians are currently working on developing a set of guiding 
protocols and principles for the arts.  17   In the United States, archivists, librarians, 
museum curators, historians, and anthropologists have drafted the Protocols for 
Native American Archival Materials to outline “best professional practices for 
culturally responsive care and use of American Indian archival materials” held by 
nontribal institutions.  18   In Australia, the past four decades have seen the develop-
ment  of  a  “culture  of  protocols”  19    with  published  documents  outlining,  among 
other things, appropriate ways of conducting research with Indigenous people, the 
use of photographic and video cameras, the acknowledgement of traditional own-
ership of country, the repatriation of Indigenous museum objects, and culturally 
responsible ways of trading in Indigenous art.  20   

 This article examines the functioning of Indigenous cultural protocols within 
Australia’s contemporary art world. The Australian art scene represents an excellent 
site for the study of protocols since written protocols have circulated and operated 
within this context for decades. As noted by Canadian Gregory Younging, “initiatives 
in Australia are three decades ahead of Canada’s. We must create awareness around 
our cultures and protocols like the Aboriginal people in Australia have.”  21   Australia’s 
approach to Indigenous protocols seems to present a useful model for the further 
development of international policies and methods to protect Indigenous cultural 
heritage. However, as we will demonstrate, there are still several issues and com-
plexities to attend to. 

 This  article  will  address  the  following  questions  as  a  preliminary  scoping  of 
the issues at hand: how do artists incorporate cultural protocols in their artistic 
process; who has the authority to identify and act upon a breach of protocol; and 
whose protocols are being enforced? To answer these questions, we present two 
case  studies  of  protocol  breaches.  The  first  case  concerns  a  complaint  made  by 
artist Christian Thompson against an artwork that was subsequently removed 
from exhibition at the Melbourne International Art Fair. The second case involves 
the objection by Yarnangu from Warburton, an Indigenous community located 
on the Ngaanyatjarra Lands in Australia’s Western Desert, against the display of a 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 298   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

video installation developed by artist r e a, as part of the exhibition  Yours, Mine 
and Ours: 50 Years of ABC TV .  22   

 These case studies are chiefly based on semi-structured and informal interviews 
conducted by the first-named author as part of an anthropological study of urban-
based  Indigenous  Australian  artists  and  their  photo-based  works.  23    This  study, 
carried out between 2006 and 2011, examined processes of meaning making and 
value creation around four artists’ careers and art in Australian and international 
visual art scenes.  24   The cases will demonstrate that cultural protocols can preclude 
the inappropriate use and display of forms of Indigenous heritage. Moreover, their 
enactment has the potential to instigate a change in behaviour towards the use of 
Indigenous cultural materials. However, complaints of breaches of protocols can 
also curtail the creativity of Indigenous artists, resulting in feelings of hurt and 
disempowerment and an experienced challenge to the construction of Indigenous 
identity. Finally, although protocols ideally serve to increase Indigenous control 
over  cultural  heritage,  the  cases  show  that  those  responsible  for  identifying  and 
resolving transgressions are not necessarily individuals with a cultural connection 
to the contested objects. Although discussions about compliance are infused with 
rhetoric about the authority of “the Indigenous community,” Indigenous people 
with cultural claims to contested heritage objects do not always have a clear voice 
in decisions made about their use.  25     

 AUSTRALIAN PROTOCOLS IN CONTEXT 

 The 1960s marked the beginning of a growing recognition by Australian institu-
tions of Aboriginal perspectives regarding rights to, and responsibilities for, cul-
tural materials. In 1967, the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, as it was 
then  known,  curtailed  the  distribution  of  films  produced  by  its  own  film  unit 
because they documented restricted Aboriginal men’s ceremonies. This institute 
subsequently decided on a buy-back policy to try and remove these ethnographic 
documents from the public domain.  26   

 Aboriginal  political  activism  has  been  integral  to  the  development  of  cultural 
protocols. In the late 1960s, the emergence of an Aboriginal protest movement her-
alded the beginning of two decades of social and political upheaval and the growing 
cultural and political visibility of Indigenous Australians. Australia’s major cities 
became the site of protests for social justice, and art became a particularly impor-
tant vehicle for expressing cultural identity and demanding cultural recognition.  27   
The articulation of an Aboriginal rights agenda influenced and occurred in tandem 
with changes in Australia’s political landscape. The 1970s saw the passing of land 
rights legislation and a shift from policies of assimilation and integration to Indig-
enous self-determination and self-management.  28   Such policy changes emphasized 
growing respect for Aboriginal society. Within this socio-political climate, Indig-
enous Australians began to request control over cultural materials that related to 
them. Jane Lydon writes how, during the 1980s, “Australian museums became the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  299 

target of vocal protests from Indigenous people demanding community access to 
collections, the appropriate display of objects, and training and employment within 
the museum sector.”  29   As described by Francesca Merlan, written Indigenous pro-
tocols emerged within the context of Australia’s post-war “reparations politics.”  30   
They  developed  as  part  of  a  broader  recognition  of  Indigenous  structures  of 
authority and governance and out of a widespread sense of moral obligation.  31   

 The  first  published  protocols  mainly  focused  on  guiding  interaction  between 
Aboriginal  communities  and  non-Indigenous  visitors,  such  as  researchers  and 
filmmakers.  32    From  the  1990s  onwards,  following  the  institutionalization  of 
Australian approaches to reconciliation, the number and scope of written proto-
cols has steadily increased. The document that laid the foundation for the develop-
ment of protocol principles relevant to visual artists was released in 1999. Written 
and researched by Terri Janke,  Our Culture: Our Future—Report on Australian 
Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights  delineates Indigenous concerns 
about, and wishes regarding, the use of their cultural heritage.  33   Furthermore, it 
describes  deficiencies  in  existing  intellectual  property  laws  in  Australia  and  rec-
ommends  strategies  to  increase  Indigenous  people’s  control  over  their  material 
culture. 

 In 2002, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Arts Board (ATSIAB) of the 
Australia Council for the Arts, the main funding body for Australian artists, pub-
lished a series of protocol guides that provide advice on respecting Indigenous 
cultural heritage to those working in or with the Indigenous arts sector. These 
guides largely draw on the 2001 document  Valuing Art, Respecting Culture: Pro-
tocols for Working with the Australian Indigenous Visual Arts and Craft Sector .  34   
The latter had been commissioned by the National Association for the Visual 
Arts (NAVA)—the peak body that represents the interests of Australia’s visual 
art sector—to underline its continuing support of Indigenous art and artists. The 
keywords in  Valuing Art, Respecting Culture  are control and respect. Indigenous 
Australians,  as  stated  repeatedly,  have  the  right  for  their  cultural  heritage  and 
values to be respected. This includes the right to prevent or refuse derogatory use 
of cultural material and to retain control over and use special measures to protect 
their cultural heritage. 

 The case studies in this article explore the application of the above principles in 
conjunction with the alleged protocol breaches. The first case study explores what 
could potentially be called a typical scenario where an artwork was created, found 
to be breaching cultural protocols, and then removed. The second case study com-
plicates this perception. In each study, we first briefly discuss the cultural objects 
under debate since it is these object histories, coupled with their physical make-up, 
that produce the notable tensions in their contemporary use. Second, we intro-
duce the individuals involved and explain their roles in the conflicts over protocol. 
Third, the process of consultation and discussion that resulted in the artwork being 
removed will be briefly described. Finally, we will discuss the aftermath, particu-
larly the effect of protocol complaints on the “accused.”   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 300   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

 CASE STUDY 1  

 The Object 

 In  2006,  artists  Helen  Johnson  and  Michelle  Ussher  created  a  drawing  based 
on a collage that included a photograph of Pitjantjatjara children from Ernabella, 
an Indigenous community located in the northwest of South Australia. The art-
work was intended to be displayed at the Melbourne Art Fair, within the Gertrude 
Contemporary’s project room.  35   The original image was sourced from the book 
 Australia  New  Zealand   as  part  of  a   Time  Life   series  and  had  been  taken  by  the 
well-known Australian photographer David Moore in 1963.  36   The contemporary 
drawing by Johnson and Ussher depicted a group of Indigenous children running 
around  naked  on  a  pile  of  rocks.  In  the  forefront,  non-Indigenous  people  were 
picnicking on a blanket. A number of children sat on a kind of wooden structure in 
between the rocks, while what appeared to be giant mushrooms grew at the scene.   

 The Complaint 

 A  number  of  days  prior  to  the  opening  of  the  Melbourne  Art  Fair,  Christian 
Thompson filed a complaint about this particular drawing. Thompson is an artist 
of  Bidjara  and  mixed  European  heritage.  The  Bidjara  Aboriginal  people  from 
whom he descends live in Central West Queensland, far from the area where the 
photo originated. His objections to this work of art entailed three key issues: self-
representation, misrepresentation, and the disregard of community protocol. With 
regard to the matter of self-representation, Thompson had asked: “How many 
times do you have to tell non-Indigenous people: do not represent us through 
your cultural paradigm?”  37   

 Although the artist is not necessarily opposed to non-Indigenous artists working 
with Aboriginal cultural materials, he questions the motivations of those who want 
to fight on behalf of Indigenous Australians. The drawing by artists Johnson and 
Ussher, entitled  The Only Thing You Taught Me Was The Only Thing You Know  
(2006), sought to comment on the invisibility of Aboriginal experiences and values 
in the public domain in general, and in Australian historiography in particular. 
As explained by Johnson in a blog post, the surreal landscape served to present a site 
where cultural conflicts could be acknowledged - for instance about the occupation 
and exploitation of the Australian landscape by non-Indigenous people - and where 
representations of Indigenous Australians could be reassessed.  38   Christian Thompson 
challenged the authority of such activism by asking: on behalf of whom? 

 The most important objection put forth by Thompson involved the disregard of 
cultural protocol. Johnson and Ussher had appropriated a historical photograph 
of unidentified Indigenous children without consulting with the individuals por-
trayed or with their descendants. Thompson described to the first-named author 
that his insistence on the artwork’s removal from display was based on principle. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  301 

His art practice, he elucidated, is about speaking up for Aboriginal persons who are 
unable, or do not feel confident enough, to stand up for themselves in these situ-
ations.  39   Thompson also made clear that his complaint was about creating aware-
ness of Indigenous cultural protocol among people who reclaim historical images 
depicting Aboriginal Australians.   

 The Process of Removal 

 Following Thompson’s complaint that the artwork disregarded protocol,  The Only 
Thing You Taught Me Was the Only Thing You Know  was withdrawn from exhibi-
tion at the Melbourne Art Fair. After determining the need to protest against the 
artwork, Thompson contacted a number of art professionals. He first approached 
Alexie  Glass  who  was  the  director  at  that  time  of  Gertrude  Contemporary  and 
responsible for the project room’s exhibit. During this conversation, Thompson 
asserted that he deemed the artwork offensive and in breach of written Indigenous 
protocols advocated by NAVA. The artist subsequently got in touch with NAVA 
to inquire about its position on compliance with protocol in this particular case 
and to voice his objections against the artwork. Moreover, Thompson approached 
Brenda L. Croft, the then senior curator of Indigenous art at the National Gallery 
of  Australia,  and  renowned  Aboriginal  cultural  activist  and  artist  Richard  Bell. 
He also phoned the organizers of the Melbourne Art Fair to state his complaint, 
causing them to also notify Glass about their alarm. 

 In response to the objections made against the display of their drawing and in 
an attempt to resolve the matter before the opening of the Melbourne Art Fair, 
Johnson and Ussher contacted the non-Indigenous manager of Ernabella Arts, an 
Aboriginal-owned art centre in Ernabella, and John Dallwitz, the non-Indigenous 
coordinator of the  A r a Irititja  project.  40   During the process of seeking permission 
for the appropriation of David Moore’s photograph, both artists were informed 
about the necessity to gain consent from each Aboriginal person depicted or 
their relatives. They also learned about the possibility that their drawing infringed 
on the copyright of David Moore, who, after his death in 2003, had placed strict 
constraints on the reproduction of his images. Due to the complexity and time-
consuming nature of the required authorization processes, it was eventually decided 
to conceal the offending drawing and the accompanying catalogues.   

 The Aftermath 

 The  removal  of   The  Only  Thing  You  Taught  Me  Was  the  Only  Thing  You  Know  
provoked discussion among Australian artists and art professionals regarding 
non-Indigenous use of historical materials depicting Aboriginal Australians.  41   Art 
magazine  Eyeline  published a forum in which Indigenous and non-Indigenous art 
professionals voiced their views. Non-Indigenous arts writer Justin Clements com-
mented against the removal: “When art gets it right, expect the agents of the law to 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 302   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

appear, wearing the concerned faces of good people indecently assaulted. Expect 
a battery of experts spouting their respect for protocols, and the disappearance 
of art.”  42   Alternatively, Bell stated as part of this forum: “An ignorance that is 
all consuming and all pervasive shrouds the nation. Fuelled by racist stereotyp-
ing  and  demeaning  symbolism,  that  ignorance  morphs  into  Australian  racism 
or ‘Austracism.’”  43   These two views illustrate how cultural protocols polarize. 
Following protocols can be viewed as art censorship while ignoring them can be 
seen as racism and cultural appropriation. 

 Significantly, artist Christian Thompson and the Pitjantjatjara descendants of 
the children depicted in the offending photograph were absent from this published 
debate. In an interview, Thompson explained that he refrained from contributing 
as he wanted to move on from what he described as a very stressful and upset-
ting  incident.  44    The  sole  reference  to  Pitjantjatjara  people  who  had  cultural 
connections to the image used by Johnson and Ussher constituted a quote by the 
non-Indigenous coordinator of Ernabella Arts, who stated that cultural protocols 
require permission to be sought from the descendants of each of the depicted chil-
dren before using the photograph.  45      

 CASE STUDY 2  

 The Object 

 In 2006, artist r e a was invited to produce a work in response to material from the 
archives of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) and exhibit her art in 
a group show celebrating the institution’s fiftieth anniversary. This exhibition was 
held at the Campbelltown Arts Centre and Penrith Regional Gallery in New South 
Wales. R e a, who is of Gamilaraay/Wailwan Aboriginal descent, decided to create a 
video installation featuring 16 millimetre black-and-white film excerpts produced 
by politician William Grayden during his expedition to the Ngaanyatjarra region 
of Western Australia in the late 1950s.  46   The images, shot by Grayden during a time 
of national debate about the health and welfare of desert Aboriginal people living 
in and around the Warburton mission, show Yarnangu residents of the region suf-
fering from hunger and disease.  47   

 Grayden’s depiction of Yarnangu misery, which he presented to audiences in his 
documentary  Their Darkest Hour , has been long contested.  48   Upon its release in 
1957,  Their Darkest Hour  shocked and enraged audiences. Yet, certain visitors to, 
and residents of, the Ngaanyatjarra Lands at that time claimed that the politician’s 
assessment of the Yarnangu condition was inaccurate and staged.  49     

 The Complaint 

 R e a used Grayden’s footage in her work, which is entitled  Maang Why , to com-
ment  on  the  disastrous  impacts  of  colonization  on  Australia’s  First  Peoples. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  303 

In  an  interview with the first-named author, the artist compared the footage to 
watching images of the holocaust.  50   It just so happened that a group of Yarnangu 
artists from Warburton was also included in the  Yours, Mine and Ours  exhibition. 
Prior to their travel to Sydney for the exhibition opening, members of this group 
had requested to view the ABC’s archived  Paul Robeson in Australia  program. This 
program, which documents a visit to Australia in 1960 by the late American political 
activist Paul Robeson, contains excerpts of Grayden’s documentary. As explained 
by r e a, the ABC had pre-selected materials from its collection and presented those 
commissioned  with  a  booklet  detailing  the  archived  items  on  which  their  work 
could be based.  51   As r e a recalls, this booklet comprised a reference to the Grayden 
footage.  52   

 Once in Sydney, the Yarnangu watched the  Paul Robeson in Australia  pro-
gram and reportedly felt shocked.  53   Most of the visiting artists had never seen the 
Grayden footage before. In fact, it was not until 2008, as part of a re-documentation 
project of historical films and photographs conducted by Pamela McGrath, that 
Yarnangu in and around Warburton first had the opportunity to view Grayden’s 
representation of them and their ancestors. As documented by McGrath and 
David Brooks, Yarnangu perspectives about the materials in question differed 
markedly from those put forth by Grayden. Yarnangu expressed a pragmatic 
recognition of the hardships of life in the desert and, while showing compas-
sion  for  the  filmed  individuals,  challenged  the  politician’s  portrayal  of  them 
as  victims  living  an  isolated  and  unviable  desert  existence.  In  addition,  they 
voiced concern about the negative stereotypes potentially generated by Grayden’s 
portrayal.  54   

 Just days before the opening of  Yours, Mine and Ours , r e a contacted the then 
non-Indigenous  coordinator  of  the  Warburton  Arts  Project,  who  accompa-
nied the visitors from Warburton to Sydney, to inform her about the contents 
of  Maang Why . According to r e a, the coordinator replied that Yarnangu had 
expressed concern about the presence of Graydon’s footage in the ABC archive 
and had requested that programs containing this footage be destroyed. In a sub-
sequent conversation between the artist and this non-Indigenous coordinator, 
r e a was told that the visitors from Warburton were unhappy about her use of 
Graydon’s excerpts.  55     

 The Process of Removal 

 According to the curator of  Yours, Mine and Ours  at the Campbelltown Arts Cen-
tre, gallery staff had urged r e a to obtain permission to exhibit  Maang Why  from 
“the community” as soon as it became clear that she intended to utilize sensitive 
material.  56   When it transpired that the visiting Yarnangu objected to r e a’s use 
of Grayden’s footage, the Campbelltown Arts Centre approached Djon Mundine, 
a well-known and experienced senior Aboriginal curator and writer. Mundine, 
who was unconnected to Yarnangu and the Ngaanyatjarra Lands, was engaged to 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 304   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

liaise with r e a and provide advice on cultural protocol.  57   Mundine discussed 
Yarnangu concerns about  Maang Why  with the non-Indigenous art coordinator 
from Warburton and eventually advised the gallery to uphold the principle of com-
munity consent. The Campbelltown Arts Centre decided to remove r e a’s work from 
display since, as the curator of  Yours, Mine and Ours  underlined, “the community” 
did not authorize the inclusion of Grayden’s footage in  Maang Why .  58   Throughout 
this process, neither r e a, Mundine, nor the exhibition curator succeeded in 
meeting Yarnangu to discuss the reasons behind their objection to the artwork in 
question. Furthermore, as stated by r e a, the visitors from Warburton did not view 
 Maang Why  before the work’s removal.  59     

 The Aftermath 

 Four years after the incident, Mundine discussed the protocol transgression in 
 Artlink , an Australian art magazine. He asserted that r e a, who remains unnamed, 
“refused  to  acknowledge  the  community’s  opinion.”  Mundine  also  argued  that 
being Aboriginal does not entail a right to use all Indigenous cultural materials, 
due to the heterogeneity of Australia’s Indigenous peoples. He stated: “Although 
there is a pan-Aboriginal movement, there is no one Aboriginal society.”  60   To r e a, 
however, Grayden’s footage portrayed much more than the specific history of 
Yarnangu from the Western Desert. According to the artist, the material operates 
as a signifier for Australia’s imperial history. R e a has explained that to her, as an 
Aboriginal woman, this broader story of colonialism also represents the (hi)story 
of her community and family.  61   

 Following  the  protocol  incident,  r  e  a  has  related  how  the  removal  of  her 
art  made  her  feel  disempowered  and  hurt.  A  long-term  resident  of  Sydney, 
r e a stated:

  I wanted to bring home the idea that this is our history. … What was 
most difficult was they were in my country dictating what should happen 
to my work. I would never go into their country and think I could have 
that  power,  yet  they  were  given  that  power  because  they  were  seen  as 
more Indigenous than I was by the white Australian gallery director, and 
that really bothered me.  62    

  In  her  commentary,  r  e  a  identifies  the  misguided  conviction  that  urban-based 
Aboriginal Australians are less authentic than Indigenous people from remote 
parts of the country.  63   Her distress about the alleged disavowal of her Aborigi-
nality  should  be  understood  against  the  background  of  the  past  exclusion  of 
urban-based  Indigenous  Australians  from  Australia’s  mainstream  art  scene, 
based  on  the  assumption  that  authentic  Aboriginal  art  is  produced  by  “real” 
Aborigines who necessarily live an isolated existence out in the bush.  64   While 
the 1980s and 1990s saw city-based Aboriginal Australians gain access to and rec-
ognition  within  Australia’s  visual  art  world,  stereotypes  about  their  Aboriginal 
identity still materialize in public debates.  65      

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  305 

 DISCUSSION  

 What Is at Stake? 

 When  allegations  about  artists’  non-compliance  with  Indigenous  protocols  are 
made, several things are at stake. First, there is the ability of both Indigenous and 
non-Indigenous artists to present a visual perspective on colonial relations and the 
enduring influence of Australia’s colonization on its Aboriginal peoples, without 
being  censored.  66    Second,  there  is  the  capacity  to  control  the  unauthorized  use 
of  Indigenous  cultural  heritage  and  to  protect  Aboriginal  Australians  from 
(mis)representation by people with no cultural affiliation with the materials in 
question. Third, when conflicts about protocols erupt, the reputations of artists, 
curators, and directors of institutions may also be at stake.  67   Fourth and finally, rec-
ognition of one’s Aboriginality and of claims to authority over materials based 
on this Aboriginal identity constitutes an important stake to some individuals. 

 The case studies present two key findings regarding the stakes at play when pro-
tocol incidents occur. First, Indigenous and non-Indigenous artists and curators 
by no means comprise discrete, ethnically defined groups that are divided by their 
position on artistic engagements with Aboriginal cultural heritage and the applica-
tion of cultural protocols. Those involved in resolving protocol conflicts—people 
who articulate the stake that Indigenous community members have in exerting 
authority  over  particular  cultural  materials—are  both  Indigenous  and  non-
Indigenous. Artists who experience the removal of their art from display may 
also identify similar stakes, regardless of their ethnicity. Indigenous artist r e a and 
non-Indigenous artists Michelle Ussher and Helen Johnson have all asserted the 
necessity of working with uncomfortable, historical imagery of Aboriginal Australians. 
Ussher has suggested that contemporary engagements with racist images can 
“be part of taking responsibility for a history and a present that is shared by Indige-
nous and non-Indigenous people.”  68   According to this artist, the censorship of her 
co-created work caused this opportunity to be lost. 

 Second, while Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people may profess to the same 
stakes,  differences  do  exist  between  how  artists  and  curators  of  Aboriginal  and 
non-Aboriginal heritage are invested in the use of Indigenous cultural heritage and 
how they experience the repercussions of protocol conflicts. For example, Johnson 
and Ussher have both proclaimed the importance of working with old depictions 
of Indigenous Australians to address stereotypes about Aboriginal people and raise 
“uncomfortable  questions”  about  non-Indigenous  involvement  in  the  creation 
and  perpetuation  of  problematic  images.  69    Yet,  neither  artist  has  explained  her 
connection to Moore’s photograph and to the colonial history referenced by this 
image  in  personal  terms.  Ussher’s  and  Johnson’s  statements  about  the  protocol 
incident do not communicate any sense that this is their history and their story. 
Furthermore, although publications about the Melbourne Art Fair conflict attest to 
the emotional impact of the protocol conflict on Johnson and Ussher—Clements 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 306   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

described the appearance of a teary artist at the time of the breach  70  —no evidence 
exists that the removal of the offending artwork affected the artists’ sense of self. 

 R e a, on the other hand, strongly identifies with Grayden’s documentary and 
frames his footage as an illustration of the violence and dispossession also experi-
enced by her own community. To r e a, the removal of  Maang Why  serves to deny 
her personal connection to aspects of Australia’s colonial history. Moreover, the 
process of resolution caused r e a to feel as if her Aboriginal identity was being dis-
avowed. In an interview with the first-named author, the artist explained how the 
protocol conflict caused her confidence to diminish and left her feeling invisible.  71   
 Although the intended audience for the type of cultural protocols discussed here 
principally consists of non-Indigenous people, the case studies demonstrate that 
protocols are also evoked to govern Indigenous artists’ practices. Should cultural 
protocols  be  used  to  constrict  the  creativity  of  Indigenous  people?  Indigenous 
Australian curators Mundine and Croft have answered this question in the affirma-
tive.  72   In the Australia Council’s protocol guide for media arts, Croft clearly states 
that “cultural sensitivity applies to Indigenous artists as well.”  73   Significantly, the act 
of subjecting Indigenous artists to the same cultural protocols as non-Indigenous 
artists does have ramifications for how we conceive protocols. While cultural pro-
tocols may be framed as inherently good, Indigenous people can also experience 
the disadvantages of their existence. Indeed, the use of cultural protocols can leave 
some Indigenous people feeling disempowered rather than protected.   

 Protocols and Equivocality: Matters of Consultation and Consent 

 Indigenous protocols ideally provide guidelines for culturally appropriate behav-
iour. According to Jane Anderson and Younging: “Protocols prescribe modes of 
conduct through emphasizing or normalizing particular forms of cultural engage-
ment. The presumption is that we read a protocol, we take on the advice, and we act 
accordingly.”  74   In reality, however, protocols do not automatically present people 
with “informed instructions about direction and action.”  75   A consideration of the 
much debated principles of consultation and consent, used to determine protocol 
breaches  in  the  case  studies,  exemplifies  this  ambivalence.  In  the  United  States, 
the publication of the report on protocols for Native American archival materials 
prompted critics to argue that it can be difficult or even impossible to establish who 
needs to be consulted about the use, display, or interpretation of Native American 
cultural heritage.  76   Detractors also argued that viewpoints within Native American 
communities about rights to, and responsibilities for, cultural heritage items may 
differ,  thus  making  it  difficult  to  obtain  consent.  77    Stephen  Gray,  writing  about 
alleged protocol breaches by writers and filmmakers in Australia, has said: “The 
protocols are not always entirely clear on such issues as who must be consulted, 
and whether consultation includes a right of veto or control over content.”  78   

 Our  case  studies  confirm  that  uncertainty  exists  around  what  consultation 
entails and when consultation is required, if adherence with Indigenous protocols 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  307 

is the aim. Although documents regarding Australian protocols invariably men-
tion consultation and consent, they frequently lack specificity regarding the appli-
cation of these principles. For example,  Valuing Art, Respecting Culture , which is 
the protocol document used by NAVA, emphasizes the importance of consultation 
and the requirement of consent with respect to “any activity involving another cul-
tural group” and “a course of action which might affect an Indigenous community 
or group.”  79   In the case of r e a’s work  Maang Why , it is evident that her use of 
Grayden’s imagery involved a different cultural group and the affected members of 
this group. However, as we will later discuss, Johnson and Ussher’s  The Only Thing 
You Taught Me Was the Only Thing You Know  ostensibly had little effect on the 
Pitjantjatjara residents of Ernabella. The protocols guide for the visual arts devel-
oped by the Australia Council suggests that “[i]f you plan to depict an identifiable 
individual or community, first ask the individual, community or relatives of the 
person for permission. Observe close consultation and consent throughout the 
process.”  80   Based on this principle, r e a’s artwork constituted a breach of cultural 
protocol. In other cases, however, the notion of infringement is less clear. 

 The written protocols that operate in Australia’s contemporary art world have 
been developed by selected Indigenous and non-Indigenous experts. To compen-
sate for a lack of input by the majority of Indigenous Australians and account for 
the heterogeneity of Indigenous societies, published protocols commonly employ 
open-ended phrasing. Yet, the generic language used in protocol documents and 
flagged  by  critics  is  not  exclusively  responsible  for  the  ambiguity  surrounding 
Indigenous protocols. The fact that contemporary artists continuously attempt to 
work with Indigenous cultural heritage in novel ways also complicates straightfor-
ward use of protocol principles. Situations without precedent, such as the drawing 
made by Johnson and Ussher based on a collage containing Moore’s photograph 
of Pitjantjatjara children, have caused artists and art professionals to feel unsure 
about the correct principles to be observed. With respect to the removal of her 
drawing, Ussher explained:

  This  experience  of  self-censorship  raises  important  issues.  It  is  not  a 
question  of  copyright  because  our  use  of  Moore’s  image  was  simply 
a  point  of  departure  for  an  artistic  intervention.  Nor  is  it  a  question 
of recycling an image which might have caused offense to Aboriginal 
people associated with those represented; the artwork did not represent 
any actual or recognizable Indigenous people. … It is no wonder that, 
in different ways, both Helen and I felt confused about how to appro-
priately use images of Indigenous people.  81    

  Furthermore, differences in opinion about what it means to properly observe 
protocols engender equivocality. For example, within Australia’s contemporary art 
world,  some  Indigenous  Australians  believe  that  artists  should  principally  work 
with  cultural  heritage  items  relating  to  their  own  people.  82    Others  oppose  the 
use of particular cultural materials in contemporary art, such as old photographs 
depicting deceased Aboriginal Australians, full stop.  83   R e a does not subscribe to 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 308   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

the conviction that historical images cannot be appropriated or that artists cannot 
incorporate  materials  into  contemporary  artworks  unless  they  are  derived  from 
their  own  cultural  heritage.  R  e  a  has  explained  her  understanding  of  following 
cultural protocols by saying:

  I will very rarely use images from archival material unless I can con-
sult family and unless the work has already been reproduced by non-
Indigenous people and it is about historical events. Not taking people’s 
culture or repositioning people’s culture, identity, spirituality, language, 
the ceremonial, the secret-sacred protocol.  84    

  The artist argues that in the case of the  Yours, Mine and Ours  exhibition she 
did observe cultural protocols, as she had asked the non-Indigenous coordinator 
of the Warburton Arts Project to inform the Warburton artists about her use of 
Grayden’s footage before putting  Maang Why  on display. According to r e a, the 
fact that the excerpts comprised no secret/sacred content meant that she did not 
require permission from Yarnangu for their use. R e a also claimed that the Camp-
belltown Arts Centre had prepared “appropriate signage” to warn Indigenous and 
non-Indigenous visitors to the exhibition about viewing sensitive materials.  85   

 Thus, Aboriginal Australians have maintained principles regarding Indigenous 
rights and responsibilities to forms of cultural heritage separate from, and, some-
times, as in r e a’s case, in contradiction to, published cultural protocols. Considering 
the diversity encountered within and between Indigenous Australian societies and 
the general nature of most facets of written protocols, it comes as no surprise that 
such alternative sets of standards prevail. However, their occurrence can exacer-
bate uncertainty about compliance with Indigenous cultural protocols.   

 Process of Resolution 

 Written protocols are not legally binding, but as Stephen Gray observes, “[t]hey 
are expressed in mandatory language. They appear to reflect the requirements of 
indigenous [ sic ] laws and customs, even where such laws and customs are not rec-
ognized  by  the  Australian  legal  system.”  86    According  to  the  literature,  protocols 
work because of people’s “self-governing capacity”  87   and because institutions such 
as  museums,  libraries,  professional  societies,  and  funding  bodies  demand  com-
pliance from their staff, members, and clients.  88   Scholars have also suggested that 
individuals  are  motivated  to  follow  cultural  protocols  because  they  do  not  wish 
to be, or be seen as being, disrespectful to Aboriginal people and because they do 
not want to lose grants or future access to funding due to non-compliance.  89   Our 
case  studies  nonetheless  demonstrate  that  protocol  incidents  are  not  necessarily 
prevented  because  institutions  enforce  compliance  and  people  attempt  to  avoid 
potential social and economic repercussions of a breach. They exemplify two require-
ments that need to be met in order to prevent and resolve protocol incidents: 
first, the awareness of the cultural protocols and acceptance of their principles and, 
second, the authority to enforce protocols.  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  309 

 Awareness and Acceptance 
 While  awareness  of  Indigenous  protocols  in  Australia’s  contemporary  art  world 
is  sometimes  taken  for  granted,  90    the  evidence  demonstrates  that  both  individ-
uals and institutions can be oblivious to matters of cultural protocol.  91   In the case 
of the Melbourne Art Fair, Johnson and Ussher never realized that their artwork 
breached  Indigenous  cultural  protocols  until  Thompson  complained.  Following 
the  incident,  Johnson  confessed  to  not  knowing  about  the  protocol  documents 
published by the Australia Council and NAVA.  92   Yet Johnson’s breach of cultural 
protocol did cause the artist to change her attitude to the use of Indigenous cultural 
materials within contemporary art. Johnson has remarked: “If there were ever a 
time that I wished to exhibit this work again, I would not do so without proper 
consultation and the attainment of all necessary permissions.”  93   

 In  the  case  of  the   Yours,  Mine  and  Ours   exhibition,  the  ABC  appeared  obliv-
ious to protocol concerns raised by Grayden’s material. After obtaining permission 
from copyright owner Grayden,  94   this institution provided r e a with the footage 
and abstained from enforcing any Indigenous protocols. Museums Australia’s pro-
tocol document,  Continuous Cultures, Ongoing Responsibilities , contains clear 
directions about the responsibility of holding and collecting institutions, stating 
that institutions “need to consider and advocate for the needs of Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander communities with regard to access to documents concerning 
them where other access conditions also apply.”  95   Evidence suggests that the ABC 
did  not  communicate  nor  develop  any  relationship  with  the  Indigenous  source 
community  regarding  its  holdings  of  the  Grayden  materials  prior  to  the   Yours, 
Mine and Ours  exhibition. Moreover, the ABC failed to protect r e a in her use 
of those materials by facilitating consultations with Yarnangu before, during, and 
after the creation of  Maang Why .  96   

 R  e  a,  who  became  aware  of  the  objections  to  her  use  of  Grayden’s  excerpts 
before the exhibition opening, withstood pressure to censor  Maang Why  because 
she  believed  that  her  actions  were  in  accordance  with  cultural  protocols.  Thus, 
while  protocols  can  work  “through  the  self-governing  capacity  of  individuals,” 
compliance  without  incident  relies  on  the  users  of  Indigenous  cultural  heritage 
accepting the necessity of behaving in ways that are prescribed by members of the 
Indigenous  community  who  have  cultural  claims  to  such  heritage  or  by  people 
acting on their behalf.  97     

 Authority to Object and Enforce 
 Since protocol documents emphasize the rights of Indigenous people to own and 
control their cultural heritage, one would assume that authority to protest against 
transgressions  is  vested  in  those  communities  or  individuals  whose  cultural 
materials are being used. Yarnangu who objected to  Maang Why  had both cultural 
and social connections to Grayden’s footage. However, in the case of the Melbourne 
Art Fair, it was Thompson who, as an Indigenous “outsider,” objected to the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 310   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

disregard of protocol. Thompson, who did not have to prove his “right to make a 
claim,” was empowered by cultural protocols to take a stance against Ussher and 
Johnson’s work. Thompson’s authority to protest against artworks that contravene 
protocols has even been endorsed by artist Johnson. Following the removal of her 
drawing, she stated: “If an Indigenous person looks at that image and finds it 
offensive, I respect that.”  98   Artist Ussher observed: “Any Indigenous person had 
the  right  to  object  to  our  work.”  99    The  withdrawal  of  the  artwork  from  the  fair 
demonstrates that, within Australia’s contemporary art world, protocol transgres-
sions do not necessarily need to be identified by the Indigenous people whose ma-
terial it concerns. 

 The  cases  discussed  thus  exemplify  the  enactment  of  two  forms  of  cultural 
protocols.  They  also  suggest  two  forms  of  empowerment.  Thompson,  as  the 
cultural  “outsider,”  and  Yarnangu  from  Warburton,  who  maintain  enduring 
connections to Grayden’s footage, both received recognition of their authority 
to object. However, as we explain below, the extent of Yarnangu’s empowerment 
through cultural protocols must be questioned. It is one thing to object to the 
exhibition  of  an  artwork,  but  it  is  another  thing  entirely  to  have  a  complaint 
enforced. Both cases demonstrate that the enforcement of sanctions in response 
to protocol transgressions occurs in an informal manner. With no opportunity 
to file a complaint to a national protocol authority and without legal recourse, 
Yarnangu from Warburton and Thompson had to rely on their own ability to 
change  the  status  quo.  Ngaanyatjarra  leader  L.  West  produced  a  commanding 
statement about Grayden’s archival footage, which subsequently became part of 
the  Yours, Mine and Ours  exhibition. He asserted:

  Those people getting filmed, they didn’t know what that little box was. 
Kurnta,  it’s  shaming  to  be  seen  like  that.  Don’t  show  that  film  (in 
Sydney). It’ll be like discrimination. … Put that film away. Put it away, 
for history. … It is not for someone else to show the way we are or con-
trol how we are seen.  100    

  As evidenced by Mundine’s advice to the Campbelltown Arts Centre, the own-
ership over the imagery employed by r e a of Yarnangu, made the complaint a 
powerful one and ultimately resulted in  Maang Why ’s censorship. Thompson, as 
someone unrelated to the Pitjantjatjara children photographed by Moore, ensured 
his complaint got traction by invoking protocol documents and mobilizing his social 
capital. Thompson contacted Indigenous and non-Indigenous art professionals in 
positions of power and drew on relationships with highly regarded Australians such 
as Croft and Bell, thereby underlining how informal networks play a pivotal role in 
achieving enforcement.     

 WHOSE VOICE? 

 Kathy  Bowrey  writes  that  “protocols  are  a  meaningful  mechanism  enabling  the 
expression  of  community  autonomy,”  101    while  Morphy  contends  that  protocols 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  311 

represent  “an  acknowledgment  of  people’s  rights  and  authority  over  their  own 
domain.”  102   We will take another look at the identification and resolution of the 
protocol incidents prompted by  Maang Why  and  The Only Thing You Taught Me 
Was the Only Thing You Know  with a focus on understanding whose authority is 
being acknowledged and whose protocols are being observed. Let us first briefly 
return to Australia’s published protocols and their emphasis on community authority. 
NAVA  mentions  community  consultation  regarding  the  appropriation  of  exist-
ing imagery or artworks in the following terms: “[I]f the inclusion of Indigenous 
designs in a project or publication is desired, using existing art works or designs, 
the use must be negotiated with the artist or community involved.”  103   The Australia 
Council’s protocol guides state:

  There  may  be  requirements  to  consult  with  the  traditional  custodians 
and community members, as well as the artist, for material that is com-
munally  owned  ritual  knowledge.  …  There  may  also  be  one  or  more 
groups that have custodianship of an image or other heritage items.  104    

  Although such guidelines leave room for interpretation, protocol documents sug-
gest a role for Indigenous communities in the protection of their cultural heritage. 
Yet, the reality is different. 

 It  appears  that  the  Campbelltown  Arts  Centre  enlisted  Mundine  to  verify 
the  accuracy  of  claims  regarding  r  e  a’s  protocol  transgression,  seeing  that 
Yarnangu’s objections were communicated by the non-Indigenous coordinator of 
the Warburton Arts Project. Arguably, Mundine’s recruitment also constituted a 
preventive measure. This outspoken and experienced Aboriginal curator was and 
is well placed to rebut any critiques of the arts centre and its handling of the pro-
tocol incident. Yarnangu derived authority from the existence and recognition of 
cultural protocols, yet their ability to exercise this authority depended, at least in 
part, on mediation by a renowned Aboriginal member of Australia’s contempo-
rary art scene. We also know that neither Mundine nor the exhibition’s curator 
consulted directly with Yarnangu about their reasons for objecting to  Maang Why . 
This raises the question: whose protocol principles were being upheld? Did Yarnangu 
corroborate  the  interpretations  of  consultation  and  consent  articulated  by 
Mundine and the show’s non-Indigenous curator? What rules exist in Yarnangu 
society around access to, and display of, historical footage such as that used by r e a? 
When it came to  Maang Why ’s censorship, the viewpoints about protocol directly 
communicated to r e a comprised those belonging to Mundine, the Campbelltown 
Art Centre’s curator, and the non-Indigenous coordinator of the Warburton Arts 
Project. The Yarnangu community remained disturbingly absent. 

 In the case of the Melbourne Art Fair, Thompson spoke up to protect supposedly 
disempowered Indigenous Australians from a protocol breach by non-Aboriginal 
artists. While laudable, there is no evidence that his complaint enhanced the 
affected community’s control over the contested cultural materials. In fact, it is highly 
likely that Ernabella’s Pitjantjatjara residents had no knowledge of the conflict that 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 312   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

erupted approximately 2,000 kilometres away over the unauthorized use of their 
depictions. When the then coordinator of the Ernabella Art Centre was contacted 
by artist Johnson, she consulted with the art centre’s previous manager and then 
referred the query on to John Dallwitz, the non-Indigenous coordinator of the 
 A r a  Irititja   project.  It  appears  that  neither  coordinator  showed  Pitjantjatjara 
people either Moore’s original image or the artwork in question. Pitjantjatjara 
contributors were also absent from the forum that was later organized by art 
magazine  Eyeline . 

 Thus, artists and art professionals affected by Thompson’s complaint gained no 
insight from Pitjantjatjara understandings of Moore’s photograph or Pitjantjatjara 
perspectives about the relation between Johnson and Ussher’s drawing and proto-
col principles. As Jennifer Deger has shown with regard to the Yolngu in Northern 
Australia, local beliefs about, and approaches to, photo-based materials, such as 
the use of images of the deceased, are dynamic, diverse, and may not, or no longer, 
reflect stipulations in protocol documents.  105   In the case of the Melbourne Art Fair, 
such local interpretations of what an image means and does were overlooked. The 
protocol  principles  used  to  remove  the  offending  artwork  from  display  encom-
passed those propagated by the Australia Council and NAVA. Furthermore, they 
included  convictions  about  protocol  maintained  by  prominent  Aboriginal 
members of the contemporary art world and interpretations communicated by 
non-Indigenous people working with Pitjantjatjara people. Pitjantjatjara commu-
nity remained quiet.   

 CONCLUSION 

 Cultural  protocols  are  meant  to  protect  Indigenous  peoples  from  outsiders 
abusing their material culture. They constitute a non-judicial alternative to the 
inadequate legal protection of Indigenous cultural heritage. The acceptance of 
a “correct” way of using and displaying Aboriginal cultural materials opens the 
door for rectifying transgressions. Through codified protocols, the power to cor-
rect transgressions is given to Aboriginal people to speak up, point out, and have 
offending  works  removed.  In  this  article,  we  have  shown  that  protocols  have 
practical utility. Allegations of breaches increase awareness about problems con-
cerning the use of Indigenous cultural heritage among non-Indigenous people 
and institutions. Protocol conflicts change how some people engage with, and 
create access to, Indigenous people and their cultures. Our case studies dem-
onstrate that when protocols are evoked and enforced the artists’ use of Indig-
enous cultural materials is effectively prevented. Thus, cultural protocols, at least 
those principally developed to mediate cross-cultural engagements, represent 
a conduit for correcting the misappropriation of Indigenous cultural heritage 
by outsiders. 

 However, there are several aspects to note  with  respect  to  Australia’s  cultural 
protocols  that  point  to  a  disjunction  between  codified  ideals  and  a  messy  reality. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  313 

Australia has been at the forefront of developing Indigenous protocols and functions 
as a point of reference for some Indigenous leaders involved in discussions around 
protocols internationally. Therefore, it is important to share challenges that emerge 
from the application of protocols in Australia’s art context. 

 Written protocols can be powerful as they are often the foundation upon which 
grant applications are accepted, based on artists’ successful demonstration of their 
understanding of how the engagement with Indigenous people and their cultural 
materials should be conducted. Published protocols also give legitimacy to accusa-
tions about transgressions articulated by people without a cultural connection to 
allegedly misappropriated forms of Indigenous heritage. Documents such as those 
produced by NAVA and the Australia Council of the Arts serve to provide a broad 
definition of cultural consultation and the appropriate use of cultural materials. 
These  documents  share  the  same  general  language,  and  although  NAVA’s  pub-
lished protocols give a range of case studies and examples from specific cultural/
language  groups,  written  protocols  serve  as  guidelines  only,  thereby  remaining 
open to interpretation. 

 This constrains the amount of guidance contemporary artists can derive from 
written protocols. Clearly, uncertainty continues to exist about the how, when, 
and what with respect to the requirements of consultation and consent. Ambiguity 
regarding compliance with protocols results not merely from the documents’ use 
of general language but also from the diverse interpretations of cultural protocols 
by Indigenous artists, curators, and other art professionals. The fact that contem-
porary artists continually create artworks that incorporate Indigenous materials 
in innovative ways adds to the uncertainty. The equivocality surrounding pro-
tocol principles, especially guidelines around consent and consultation, presents 
a challenge to artists. In addition, it opens up a space for both Indigenous and 
non-Indigenous people to impose their understanding of what must be done to 
realize compliance. 

 Protocols rely on institutions and the “self-governing capacity” of individuals to 
work.  106   However, transgressions cannot be averted and resolved unless people are 
knowledgeable about the contents of cultural protocols and accept the principles 
evoked  to  prevent  the  use  and  abuse  of  Indigenous  heritage.  Cultural  protocols 
are usually framed as being inherently good as they strive to empower marginal-
ized Indigenous peoples. Yet, as we have demonstrated, protocols do not auto-
matically protect or empower all Indigenous individuals. Protocol conflicts reveal 
that  the  stakes  regarding  the  contested  use  of  Indigenous  cultural  materials  are 
high and that Indigenous artists, while professing to stakes also important to non-
Indigenous art practitioners, are invested in the use of these materials in uniquely 
personal and emotional ways. It is important to realize that although protocols are 
mostly developed with a non-Indigenous audience in mind, they also, in reality, 
govern the art practices of Indigenous artists. When protocols are evoked against 
Indigenous artists, the result can be loss of confidence, loss of self-identity, and, 
ultimately, the silencing of a non-compliant Aboriginal voice. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 314   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

 Finally, although cultural protocols aim to return control to Indigenous people, 
thereby enhancing Indigenous people’s authority over their own domain, our article 
has shown the limitations of this objective. Despite the overwhelming emphasis in 
these two cases by various Australian institutions and their written protocols to con-
sult with Aboriginal communities, no community members—no matter how they 
are defined—were actually consulted. Although Indigenous and non-Indigenous art 
professionals alluded to the right of the Indigenous communities concerned to deter-
mine such conflicts, Pitjantjatjara and Yarnangu had no clear, unmediated voice in 
the process of resolution. Their understandings of cultural protocols remained 
unstated. Instead, the principles enforced were of a more generic kind and derived 
from written documents and understandings of protocols articulated by outsiders. 
While  the  principles  applied  in  these  cases  might  accord  with  Pitjantjatjara  and 
Yarnangu beliefs, we cannot be sure that they do. Rhetoric notwithstanding, cultural 
protocols, thus, are not necessarily the “meaningful mechanisms,” enabling the 
“expression of community autonomy,” they are made out to be.  107      

  ENDNOTES 

 1  .     Brown  1998 , 193; Anderson  2005 , 8; Myers  2005 .  
  
 2  .     Janke  1998 , xvii; Greer  2013 ; O’Neal  2015 .  
  
 3  .     Allen  2008 ; Hamby  2008 ; Kaus  2008 .  
  
 4  .     We use the words Aboriginal and Indigenous interchangeably, as is common in Australia. Yet, 
  
we do recognize that the term Indigenous, which has developed within transnational discourse on 
human rights, encompasses a large number of peoples around the world, whereas the use of the word 
Aboriginal is generally confined to the first inhabitants of Australia and, more recently, Canada. In 
Australia, the term Indigenous is more inclusive than the word Aboriginal since the former also 
acknowledges people from the Torres Strait Islands, which is part of Queensland. See Clifford  2001 .  
 5  .     Peterson, Allen, and Hamby  2008 .  
  
  
 6  .     Anderson  2005 , 8–9; Anderson and Younging  2010 , 13–14. See also the United Nations’s Declara-
tion on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Doc. A/61/L.67/Annex (2007), especially Arts. 11 and 31.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
protocols.html  (accessed 9 September 2016); Underhill  2006 , 441.  
  
  
and Gordon  2011 ; Michaels  1991 .  
  
  

 7  .     Van Meijl  2009 .  
 8  .     Roy  2008 ; Schüssel  2012 , 322.  
 9  .     Schüssel  2012 , 314. See also Greer  2013 , 29.  
 10  .     Janke  2001 .  
 11  .     Anderson  2005 , 25–26.  
 12  .     Sunder  2011 , 459.  
 13  .     Morphy  1991 , 57–90; Myers  1994 , 684; Myers  2002 , 31, 50, 63.  
 14  .     Merlan  2005 .  
 15  .     Morphy  2015 , 91.  
 16  .     Anderson and Younging  2010 , 9–13; Herbert and Wherry  2014a .  
 17  .     Herbert and Wherry  2014b , 10.  
 18  .     Protocols for Native American Archival Materials, 2007,  http://www2.nau.edu/libnap-p/

 19  .     Morphy  2015 , 90.  
 20  .     Mackinolty and Duffy  1987 ; Everett  2009 ; Davis and Holcombe  2010 ; Raven  2010 ; Pickering 

 21  .     Younging  2014 , 52.  
 22  .     Regina Saunders works under the name r e a. This is pronounced as “re,” as in “reference to.”  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  315 

 26  .     Peterson  2003 .  
 27  .     See Morphy  1998 , 35–37; Myers  2002 , 4, 139.  
 28  .     Myers  2002 , 138–39.  
 29  .     Lydon  2010 , 175.  
 30  .     Merlan  2014 , 297–98.  
 31  .     Morphy  2015 , 91.  
 32  .     Ibid., 92.  
 33  .     Janke  1998 .  
 34  .     Mellor and Janke  2001 .  
 35  .     Gertrude Contemporary is a not-for-profit art complex that supports emerging contemporary 

 23  .     Bernard  2002 , 203–06.  
  
 24  .     Riphagen  2008 ,  2013 .  
  
  
 25  .     Mellor  and  Janke   2001 ,  45;  Stanhope   2006 ;  Winikoff   2006 ;  Australia  Council  for  the  Arts 
 2007a , 12; Mundine  2010 ; Harrison  2013 ; Rowley  2013 . For a critique of the elusive notion of “the 
Indigenous community,” see Myers  1986 , 276–80.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Australian artists.  
 36  .     MacInnes  1964 .  
  
 37  .     Christian Thompson, personal communication, 26 February 2007.  
  
  
 38  .     Helen Johnson, “Peace—Not for You, Not for Me, but for All of Us,” Helen Johnson Blog, 
 http://triangularsun.blogspot.com/2006_08_01_triangularsun_archive.html  (accessed 1 April 2016).  
  
 39  .     Christian Thompson, personal communication, 10 August 2006.  
  
 40  .     Ara Irititja constitutes a database encompassing cultural materials, including photographs by 
David Moore, which are of cultural and historical importance to the Anangu people (Ngaanyatjarra, 
Pitjantjatjara, and Yankunytjatjara).  
 41  .     Follent  2006 ; Clemens  2007 .  
  
 42  .     Clemens  2006 .  
  
 43  .     Bell  2006 .  
  
 44  .     Christian Thompson, personal communication, 1 August 2006.  
  
 45  .     Follent  2006 .  
  
  
 46  .     The archive of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) only contains excerpts from 
William Grayden’s footage. These excerpts were used in four ABC programs, namely  Paul Robeson in 
Australia ;  Time Frame 1967 … Citizens at Last ;  Open Learning—History and Politics: Out of Empire ; 
and  Open Learning—Aboriginal Studies: Health, a Holistic Approach .  
  
Aboriginal people who instigated a protocol complaint against artist r e a.  
 48  .     McGrath and Brooks  2010 , 120–29.  
  
 49  .     Ibid.  
  
 50  .     r e a, personal communication, 11 October 2007.  
  
 51  .     r e a, personal communication, 2 April 2014.  
  
 52  .     r e a, personal communication, 24 June 2016.  
  
 53  .     Mundine  2010 , 91.  
  
 54  .     McGrath and Brooks  2010 , 134–37.  
  
 55  .     r e a, personal communication, 2 April 2014.  
  
 56  .     Lisa Havilah, personal communication, 6 March 2014.  
  
  
 57  .     This information derives from an interview with someone who discussed the protocol incident 
with Djon Mundine and Lisa Havilah, then-curator at the Campbelltown Arts Centre, at the begin-
ning of 2007. This interviewee has asked to remain anonymous but has kindly shared documentation 
of these conversations with Riphagen.  
  
  
  
  

 58  .     Lisa Havilah, personal communication, 6 March 2014.  
 59  .     r e a, personal communication, 2 April 2014.  
 60  .     Mundine  2010 , 91–92.  
 61  .     r e a, personal communication, 11 October 2007.  

 47  .     In this article, we use the words Yarnangu, Ngaanyatjarra, and Warburton to refer to the desert 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 316   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

 62  .     r e a, quoted in Adam Gifford, “Regina Saunders’  Gins—Leap/Dub—Speak  at the Moving 

 66  .     Gray  2004 ; Gilchrist  2006 .  
 67  .     Janke and Dawson  2012 , 24.  
 68  .     Ussher  2006 .  
 69  .     Johnson  2006 .  
 70  .     Clemens  2007 .  
 71  .     r e a, personal communication, 2 April 2014.  
 72  .     See also Stolte et al.  2015 , 72.  
 73  .     Croft, as quoted in Australia Council for the Arts  2007b , 17.  
 74  .     Anderson and Younging  2010 , 4.  
 75  .     Ibid., 3.  
 76  .     Boles, George-Shongo, and Weideman  2008 , 16.  
 77  .     Ibid., 11.  
 78  .     Gray  2004 , 24.  
 79  .     Mellor and Janke  2001 , 5–6.  
 80  .     Australia Council for the Arts  2007a , 21.  
 81  .     Ussher  2006 .  
 82  .     Foley  2011 , 5.  
 83  .     Australia Council for the Arts  2007b , 17.  
 84  .     r e a, personal communication, 11 October 2007.  
 85  .     r e a, personal communication, 2 April 2014.  
 86  .     Gray  2004 .  
 87  .     Anderson and Younging  2010 , 4.  
 88  .     Bowrey  2006 ; Janke and Dawson  2012 , 22–24; Morphy  2015 , 90.  
 89  .     Anderson and Younging  2010 , 4; Janke and Dawson  2012 , 23–24. See also Bowrey  2006 .  
 90  .     Clemens  2007 .  
 91  .     For an example of problems regarding institutions’ awareness of, and compliance with, Indig-

  
Image Centre,”  New Zealand Herald , 9 May 2007.  
 63  .     See Stolte et al.  2015 , 69.  
  
 64  .     Croft  1992 .  
  
  
 65  .     Andrew Crook, “Bolt Decision: Guilty of Discrimination, Judge Declares,” 28 September 2011, 
 https://www.crikey.com.au/2011/09/28/bolt-decision-guilty-of-discrimination-judge-declares/  
(accessed 17 June 2016).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
enous cultural protocols, see Stolte  2014 .  
 92  .     Helen Johnson, personal communication, 7 February 2014.  
  
 93  .     Ibid.  
  
 94  .     ABC employee, personal communication, 15 January 2014.  
  
 95  .     Museums Australia  2005 , 17.  
  
  
 96  .     Only after this protocol incident did the ABC decide to restrict access to the William Grayden 
materials. Those who now wish to use the Grayden footage require permission from Yarnangu from 
Warburton. See McGrath and Brooks  2010 , 136.  
  
  
  
    100  .     West  2006 .  
    101  .     Bowrey  2006 , 85.  
    102  .     Morphy  2015 , 91.  
    103  .     Mellor and Janke  2001 , 45.  
    104  .     Australia Council for the Arts  2007a , 12.  
    105  .     Deger  2008 ,  2016 .  
    106  .     Anderson and Younging  2010 , 4.  
    107  .     Bowrey  2006 , 85.   

 97  .     Anderson and Younging  2010 , 4, 6.  
 98  .     Johnson  2006 .  
 99  .     Ussher  2006 .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  317 

  REFERENCES 

    Allen  ,   Lindy  .  2008 .  “Tons and Tons of Valuable Material: The Donald Thomson Collection.”  In  The 
Makers and Making of Indigenous Australian Collections , edited by   Nicolas     Peterson  ,   Lindy     Allen  , and 
  Louise     Hamby  ,  387 – 418 .  Carlton, Australia :  Melbourne University Press .  

    Anderson  ,    Jane  .   2005 .  “Access  and  Control  of  Indigenous  Knowledge  in  Libraries  and  Archives: 
Ownership  and  Future  Use.”  Paper  presented  at  Correcting  Course:  Rebalancing  Copyright  for 
Libraries in the National and International Arena, New York, 5–7 May.  

    Anderson  ,   Jane  , and   Gregory     Younging  .  2010 . “Discussion Paper on Protocols.” Paper presented 
at the Canadian Public Art Funders Professional Development Meeting on Aboriginal Arts, Canada, 
9–10 March.  

   Australia  Council  for  the  Arts .   2007a .   Protocols  for  Producing  Indigenous  Australian  Visual  Arts . 
 Surry Hills :  Australia Council for the Arts .  

    ——— .  2007b .  Protocols for Producing Indigenous Australian Media Arts .  Surry Hills :  Australia Council 
for the Arts .  

    Bell  ,   Richard  .  2006 .  “Gertrude Forum: The Only Thing You Taught Me Was the Only Thing You 
Know.”   Eyeline   61 :  20 .  

    Bernard  ,   H. Russell  .  2002 .  Research Methods in Anthropology: Qualitative and Quantitative Methods . 
 Walnut Creek :  AltaMira Press .  

    Boles  ,   Frank  ,   David     George-Shongo  , and   Christine     Weideman  .  2008 .  Report: Task Force to Review 
Protocols for Native American Archival Materials .  Washington, DC :  Society of American Archivists .  

    Bowrey  ,    Kathy  .   2006 .   “Alternative  Intellectual  Property?  Indigenous  Protocols,  Copyleft  and  New 
Juridifications of Customary Practices.”   Macquarie Law Journal   6 :  65 – 96 .  

    Brown  ,   Michael  .  1998 .  “Can Culture be Copyrighted?”   Current Anthropology   39 , no.  2 :  193 – 222 .  

    Clemens  ,   Justin  .  2006 .  “Gertrude Forum: The Only Thing You Taught Me Was the Only Thing You 
Know.”   Eyeline   61 :  20 .  

    ——— .  2007 .  “A Law That Cannot Be Enforced: The Politics of Art in Australia.”   The Monthly   21 : 
 62 – 64 .  

    Clifford  ,   James  .  2001 .  “Indigenous Articulations.”   The Contemporary Pacific   13 , no.  2 :  468 –90.  

    Croft  ,   Brenda L  .  1992 .  “A Very Brief Bit of an Overview of the Aboriginal Arts/Cultural Industry by 
a Sort of Renegade, or the Cultural Correctness of Certain Issues.”   Art Monthly Australia   56 :  20 – 22 .  

    Davis  ,    Michael  ,  and    Sarah      Holcombe  .   2010 .   “‘Whose  Ethics?’  Codifying  and  Enacting  Ethics  in 
Research Settings.”   Australian Aboriginal Studies , no.  2 :  1 – 9 .  

    Deger  ,   Jennifer  .  2008 .  “Imprinting on the Heart: Photography and Contemporary Yolngu Mournings.”  
 Visual Anthropology   21 , no.  4 :  292 – 309 .  

    ——— .  2016 .  “Thick Photography.”   Journal of Material Culture   21 , no.  1 :  111 –32.  

    Everett  ,   Kristina  .  2009 .  “Welcome to Country … Not.”   Oceania   79 , no.  1 :  53 – 64 .  

    Foley  ,   Fiona  .  2011 .  “When the Circus Came to Town.”   Art Monthly Australia   245 :  5 – 7 .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 318   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

    Follent  ,   Sarah  .  2006 .  “Gertrude Forum: The Only Thing You Taught Me Was The Only Thing You 
Know.”   Eyeline   61 :  17 .  

    Gilchrist  ,   Stephen  .  2006 .  “Gertrude Forum: The Only Thing You Taught Me Was The Only Thing 
You Know.”   Eyeline   61 :  21 .  

    Gray  ,   Stephen  .  2004 .  “Imagination, Fraud and the Cultural Protocols Debate: A Question of Free 
Speech or Pornography?”   Media and Arts Law Review   9 , no.  3 :  23 – 37 .  

    Greer  ,   Olivia J  .  2013 .  “Using Intellectual Property Laws to Protect Indigenous Cultural Property.”  
 Bright Ideas   22 , no.  3 :  27 – 33 .  

    Hamby  ,    Louise  .   2008 .   “The  Reluctant  Collector:  Lloyd  Warner.”   In   The  Makers  and  Making  of 
Indigenous  Australian  Collections ,  edited  by    Nicolas      Peterson  ,    Lindy      Allen  ,  and    Louise      Hamby  , 
 355 –86.  Carlton, Australia :  Melbourne University Press .  

    Harrison  ,    Rodney  .   2013 .   “Reassembling  Ethnographic  Museum  Collections.”   In   Reassembling  the 
Collection: Ethnographic Museums and Indigenous Agency , edited by   Rodney     Harrison  ,   Sarah     Byrne  , 
and   Anne     Clarke  ,  3 – 38 .  Santa Fe :  SAR Press .  

    Herbert  ,   Tracey  , and   Cathi Charles     Wherry  , eds.  2014a .  Proceedings of the Cultural Protocols and the 
Arts Forum .  Brentwood Bay, Australia :  First Peoples’ Cultural Council .  

    Herbert  ,   Tracey  , and   Cathi Charles     Wherry  .  2014b .  “Executive Summary.”  In  Proceedings of the 
Cultural Protocols and the Arts Forum , edited by   Tracey     Herbert   and   Cathi Charles     Wherry  ,  7 – 10 . 
 Brentwood Bay, Australia :  First Peoples’ Cultural Council .  

    Janke  ,   Terri  .  1998 .  Our Culture: Our Future: Report on Australian Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual 
Property Rights .  Canberra :  Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies and 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission .  

    ——— .  2001 .  “Berne, Baby, Berne: The Berne Convention, Moral Rights and Indigenous Peoples’ 
Cultural Rights.”   Indigenous Law Bulletin   5 , no.  6 :  14 – 18 .  

    Janke  ,   Terri  , and   Peter     Dawson  .  2012 .  New Tracks: Indigenous Knowledge and Cultural Expression 
and the Australian Intellectual Property System .  Sydney :  Terri Janke and Company .  

    Johnson  ,   Helen  .  2006 .  “Gertrude Forum: The Only Thing You Taught Me Was the Only Thing You 
Know.”   Eyeline   61 :  18 .  

    Kaus  ,    David  .   2008 .   “Professional  and  Amateurs:  Different  Histories  of  Collecting  in  the  National 
Ethnographic Collection.”  In  The Makers and Making of Indigenous Australian Collections , edited by 
  Nicolas     Peterson  ,   Lindy     Allen  , and   Louise     Hamby  ,  281 – 314 .  Carlton, Australia :  Melbourne University 
Press .  

    Lydon  ,   Jane  .  2010 .  “Return: The Photographic Archive and Technologies of Indigenous Memory.”  
 Photographies   3 , no.  2 :  173 –87.  

    MacInnes  ,   Colin  .  1964 .  Australia and New Zealand .  New York :  Time Life Books .  

    Mackinolty  ,    Chips  ,  and    Michael      Duffy  .   1987 .   Guess  Who’s  Coming  to  Dinner  in  Arnhem  Land?  
 Darwin, Australia :  Northern Land Council .  

    McGrath  ,   Pamela Faye  , and   David     Brooks  .  2010 .  “ Their Darkest Hour : The Films and Photographs of 
William Grayden and the History of the ‘Warburton Range Controversy’ of 1957.”   Aboriginal History  
 34 :  115 –41.  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

INDIGENOUS CULTURAL PROTOCOLS  

  319 

    Mellor  ,   Doreen  , and   Terri     Janke  .  2001 .  Valuing Art, Respecting Culture: Protocols for Working with the 
Australian Indigenous Visual Arts and Craft Sector .  Potts Point, Australia :  National Association for 
the Visual Arts .  

    Merlan  ,   Francesca  .  2005 .  “Explorations towards Intercultural Accounts of Socio-Cultural Reproduc-
tion and Change.”   Oceania   75 , no.  3 :  167 –82.  

    ——— .   2014 .   “Recent  Rituals  of  Indigenous  Recognition  in  Australia:  Welcome  to  Country.”  
 American Anthropologist   116 , no.  2 :  296 – 309 .  

    Michaels  ,   Eric  .  1991 .  “A Primer of Restrictions on Picture-Taking in Traditional Areas of Aboriginal 
Australia.”   Visual Anthropology   4 , no.  3–4 :  259 –75.  

    Morphy  ,    Howard  .   1991 .   Ancestral  Connections:  Art  and  an  Aboriginal  System  of  Knowledge . 
 Chicago :  University of Chicago Press .  

    ——— .  1998 .  Aboriginal Art .  London :  Phaidon Press .  

    ——— .  2015 .  “Open Access versus the Culture of Protocols.”  In  Museums as Process: Translating 
Local and Global Knowledges , edited by   Raymond     Silverman  ,  90 – 104 .  London :  Routledge .  

    Mundine  ,   Djon  .  2010 .  “Nowhere Boy.”   Artlink   30 , no.  1 :  91 – 93 .  

   Museums Australia .  2005 .  Continuous Cultures, Ongoing Responsibilities: Principles and Guidelines for 
Australian Museums Working with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Cultural Heritage .  Canberra : 
 Museums Australia .  

    Myers  ,   Fred  .  1986 .  Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self: Sentiment, Place, and Politics among Western Desert 
Aborigines .  Washington, DC, and Canberra :  Smithsonian Institution Press and Australian Institute 
of Aboriginal Studies .  

    ——— .   1994 .   “Culture-Making:  Performing  Aboriginality  at  the  Asia  Society  Gallery.”    American 
Ethnologist   21 , no.  4 :  679 –99.  

    ——— .  2002 .  Painting Culture: The Making of an Aboriginal High Art .  Durham :  Duke University 
Press .  

    ——— .  2005 .  “Some Properties of Culture and Persons.”  In  Collaboration, Ownership and the Digital 
Economy , edited by   Rishab     Aiyer Ghosh  ,  45 – 60 .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  

    O’Neal  ,   Jennifer  .  2015 .  “‘The Right to Know’: Decolonizing Native American Archives.”   Journal of 
Western Archives   6 , no.  1 :  1 – 17 .  

    Peterson  ,   Nicolas  .  2003 .  “The Changing Photographic Contract: Aborigines and Image Ethics.”  
In  Photography’s Other Histories , edited by   Christopher     Pinney   and   Nicolas     Peterson  ,  119 –45. 
 Durham :  Duke University Press .  

    Peterson  ,   Nicolas  ,   Lindy     Allen  , and   Louise     Hamby  , eds.  2008 .  The Makers and Making of Indigenous 
Australian Collections .  Carlton, Australia :  Melbourne University Press .  

    Pickering  ,   Michael  , and   Phil     Gordon  .  2011 .  “Repatriation: The End of the Beginning.”  In  Australian 
Museums and Museology , edited by   Des     Griffin   and   Leon     Paroissien  .  Canberra :  National Museum of 
Australia ,   http://nma.gov.au/research/understanding-museums/MPickering_PGordon_2011.html  
(accessed 9 September 2016).   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163

 320   

 MARIANNE RIPHAGEN AND GRETCHEN M. STOLTE

    Raven  ,   Margaret  .  2010 .  “Protocols: Devices for Translating Moralities, Controlling Knowledge and 
Defining  Actors  in  Indigenous  Research,  and  Critical  Ethical  Reflection.”    Australian  Aboriginal 
Studies , no.  2 :  33 – 47 .  

    Riphagen  ,   Marianne  .  2008 .  “Black on White: Or Varying Shades of Grey? Indigenous Australian 
Photo-Media Artists and the ‘Making of’ Aboriginality.”   Australian Aboriginal Studies , no.  1 :  78 – 89 .  

    ——— .  2013 .  “Contested Categories: Brook Andrew, Christian Thompson and the Framing of 
Contemporary Australian Art.”   Australian Humanities Review   55 :  93 – 118 .  

    Rowley  ,    Susan  .   2013 .   “The  Reciprocal  Research  Network:  The  Development  Process.”    Museums 
Anthropology Review   7 , no.  1–2 :  22 – 43 .  

    Roy  ,   Alpana  .  2008 .  “Copyright: A Colonial Doctrine in a Postcolonial Age.”   Copyright Reporter   26 , 
no.  4 :  112 –34.  

    Schüssel  ,   Stuart  .  2012 .  “Copyright Protection’s Challenges and Alaska Natives’ Cultural Property.”  
 Alaska Law Review   29 , no.  2 :  313 –40.  

    Stanhope  ,   Zara  .  2006 .  “Gertrude Forum: The Only Thing You Taught Me Was The Only Thing You 
Know.”   Eyeline   61 :  21 .  

    Stolte  ,   Gretchen  .  2014 .  “Aboriginal Exhibitions and Aboriginal Communities: Contemporary Cura-
tion in Australia.”   International Journal of Cultural and Creative Industries   1 , no.  3 :  52 – 63 .  

    Stolte  ,   Gretchen  ,   Lynelle     Flinders  ,   Cheryl     Creed  , and   Robert Tommy     Pau  .  2015 .  “An Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander Approach to Intellectual Property: Industry Insight into the Development of 
Indigenous  Cultural  Protocols.”    International  Journal  of  Cultural  and  Creative  Industries    2 ,  no.   3 : 
 64 – 75 .  

    Sunder  ,   Madhavi  .  2011 .  “New Working Group on ‘Cultural Protocols’ Convenes at New York Uni-
versity, 19 August 2011.”   International Journal of Cultural Property   18 , no.  4 :  459 –60.  

    Underhill  ,   Karen J  .  2006 .  “Protocols for Native American Archival Materials.”   RBM: A Journal of 
Rare Books, Manuscripts, and Cultural Heritage   7 , no.  2 :  134 –45.  

    Ussher  ,   Michelle  .  2006 .  “What Should White Australians Do with ‘Bad’ Images?”   Eyeline   61 :  18 .  

    Van Meijl  ,   Toon  .  2009 .  “M ā ori Intellectual Property Rights and the Formation of Ethnic Boundaries.”  
 International Journal of Cultural Property   16 , no.  3 :  341 –55.  

    West  ,   L  .  2006 .  “Response to ABC Archival Footage.”  In  Yours, Mine and Ours: 50 Years of ABC TV . 
 Sydney :  Penrith Regional Gallery .  

    Winikoff  ,   Tamara  .  2006 .  “Gertrude Forum: The Only Thing You Taught Me Was The Only Thing 
You Know.”   Eyeline   61 :  19 .  

    Younging  ,    Gregory  .   2014 .   “Workshop  1:  Traditional  Knowledge,  Intellectual  Property  Rights 
and  Existing  Copyright.”   In   Proceedings  of  the  Cultural  Protocols  and  the  Arts  Forum ,  edited 
by   Tracey     Herbert   and   Cathi Charles     Wherry  ,  51 – 52 .  Brentwood Bay, Australia :  First Peoples’ 
Cultural Council .     

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000163


