 (2010) 17:493–517. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2010 Justifying and Criticizing the Removals
of Antiquities in Ottoman Lands:
Tracking the Sigeion Inscription
Fredrik Thomasson*

Abstract: This article attempts to widen the debate on the removal of
antiquities from the Ottoman Empire around 1800. The removals are often
seen in an Anglo-French perspective with the result that other voices are
erased, both those of the local populations and of other foreign observers. I
show that objects that now neglected were once highly valued by both local
inhabitants and collectors, and that their removals were repeatedly resisted. I
suggest that a more subtle interaction occurred between collectors and the
local populations than hitherto has been recognized. While the local
populations were accused of various “superstitious” practices—often
conveniently related to objects coveted by European collectors—I propose that
the removers were not uninfluenced by these practices. By introducing
testimonies from Swedish observers that were critical of the removals before
such critiques became frequent, I also question the stereotype of a common
European attitude toward the Ottoman Empire. I discuss how such critique
was related to their status as third-party observers from a nation without
power or museums. By investigating the arguments of both collectors and
critics, I propose that many positions in the debate today were already present
at the time of the removals. Following the history of a less famous object
serves to highlight aspects of early European collecting and expansion in the
Eastern Mediterranean that are often overlooked in the debate on ownership
and restitution claims.

*Department of History, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. Email: fredrik.thomasson@eui.eu

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: I thank my colleagues and professors at the European University Insti-
tute, where most of the research for this article took place. My gratitude also goes to the organizers
and participants at the London School of Advanced Studies’ London Debates of 2009, where I pre-
sented preliminary results; to Dr. Ian Jenkins at the British Museum; and to the editor and reviewers
of the .

493

494

Fredrik Thomasson

THE SIGEION STELE

Interest in the history of collecting in relation to European colonial expansion is
growing. Recent researchers are Maja Jasanoff, who treated European collecting in
the East relating to British imperial history, and Holger Hoock, who described the
competition between France and Britain in the quest for antiquities.1 Hoock claimed
that the role of the British state was more important than is commonly suggested,
while Jasanoff contrasted French and British collectors in India and Egypt. The
“war of antiquities,” as the race for Greek, Egyptian, and Eastern artefacts is some-
times called, is predominately represented as an Anglo-French affair. An approach
that interprets history as rivalry tends to exclude everyone that does not seem to
be actively participating in the contest. By focusing on the acquiring countries,
important perspectives have been disregarded.

Several successor states of the Ottoman Empire, including Greece and Egypt,
have made claims for the repatriation of artefacts deemed important for their cul-
tural heritage. What we usually hear of are exceptional objects, such as the Par-
thenon sculptures and great Egyptian art, or highly symbolic objects like the Rosetta
stone. At the same time as major pieces such as these were being taken, an intense
traffic of ships carrying lesser antiquities plied the Mediterranean. I believe that
tracing that class of object, no longer well-known but with an exceptional and
documented history, can offer new insights.2

The cultural property debate is important, and the following discussion con-
tributes to it.3 Nevertheless, I will avoid explicitly discussing present ownership,
restitution, and museum practices. I will also not provide an account of, for ex-
ample, the “rescue and stewardship” narratives and “universal museum” argu-
ments so common in today’s debate. As soon as such themes are raised, peoples’
standpoints tend to freeze, and questions that are difficult to frame in the current
configuration of the debate disappear.

The stone central to this article is a stele contained in a basement room of the
British Museum. The stele, a 2.31-meter-high marble shaft, is the bearer of the
so-called Sigeion inscription. In the 1710s the British consul in Smyrna, William
Sherard, noticed the stele outside a chapel in the small village Yeni,sehir. This is
less than 15 kilometers from what we now call Troy near the Dardanelles in Ae-
gean Turkey and close to the site of the ancient city of Sigeion. Sherard commu-
nicated the inscription to Edmund Chishull, who published it in 1721 (Figure 1).4
The stele’s exceptionality was immediately recognized. It is an example of the Greek
alphabet, given that it was taking a definite shape and is written in so-called
boustrophedon—as the ox plows—starting from left to right, with the next line
following on from right to left. Few such inscriptions were known at the time and
any specimen greatly sought after. It was even said to be the oldest Greek inscrip-
tion in existence, and today is dated to around 550 bce. The text itself is written in
two slightly different Greek alphabets and dialects, Ionian and Attic.5 It is most

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

495

FIGURE 1. The Sigeion stele from Chishull’s 1728 Antiquitates Asiaticae. Source: Uppsala
University Library.

probably a funerary monument, and—as is common in early Greek inscriptions—it
is the stone itself that speaks. The lower script reads:

I am of Phanodikos, son of Hermokrates, of Prokonnesos; and I gave a
mixing bowl [krater] with a support and a strainer for the prytaneum to

496

Fredrik Thomasson

the citizen of Sigeion as a memorial; if I should suffer in any way, care
for me, citizens of Sigeion, and Aisopos and his brothers made me.6

News of the stone’s existence spread before the transcription was published and
other travelers visited the site. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu wrote about it in her
collection of letters from Constantinople and her Mediterranean travels. She saw
it in 1718:

On the stone, on the left side [of the chapel], is a very fair inscription . . .
I am very sorry not to have the original in my possession, which might
have been purchased of the poor inhabitants for a small sum of money.
But our captain assured us, that without having machines made on pur-
pose, ’twas impossible to bear it to the sea-side; and, when it was there,
his long-boat would not be large enough to hold it.7

Lady Mary and her husband managed to buy a smaller inscription from inside the
chapel. As soon as the boustrophedon was published, more travelers sought out
the original. In 1764 Richard Chandler proposed the following strategy for the
removal of the inscription:

It is to be wished that a premium were offered, and that the undertaking
recommended to commanders of ships in the Levant trade. They have
commonly interpreters to negociate for them, with men, leavers, ropes,
and the other requisites . . . By a proper application of all-prevailing gold,
it is believed they might gain the permission or connivance of the papas
[priests] and the persons concerned. It should be done with secrecy.8

Chandler recommended approaching the Greek priests while keeping Ottoman
officials in the dark. However, both Montagu and Chandler had underestimated
the difficulty; neither all-prevailing gold nor large enough boats were sufficient
for the stele’s removal. Sir Richard Worsley, who visited the area in 1786, wrote
about another attempt to take both the stele and a bas-relief placed at the other
side of the chapel entrance (Figure 2). He chiefly commented on the bas-relief:

FIGURE 2. William Pars drew the relief in 1764: “It is placed as a Seat on one side of the
Door of the Greek Church, which has the famous Sigéan Inscription placed for the same
purpose, on the other.” Source: Uppsala University Library.12

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

497

It has been much injured by the inhabitants of the place to prevent its
being taken away . . . an English Gentleman . . . had bid 400 Venetian
sequins for this beautiful fragment. The Governor of the Castle had given
his consent to the sale and had sent some Turks to assist the gentleman
in getting it away, but they met with a violent opposition from the In-
habitants, who immediately began to beat off the heads of four of the
figures out of the five, and defacing the inscription [the Sigeion stele]
alleging that the reason why they would not be prevailed with to part
with the fragment was that upon a former occasion they had sold a frag-
ment, and soon after their village was infested with a dreadful plague.9

The previously sold fragment mentioned here might well be the inscription ac-
quired by Montagu in 1718; the plague of 1719 was one of the major outbreaks of
the century.10 Another traveler interested in the stones was the classical scholar Rob-
ert Wood, who first visited Sigeion in 1743. When he returned in 1750, he unsuc-
cessfully tried to buy both the inscription and the bas-relief. From Wood’s description
of the bas-relief, it is clear that it was already damaged in 1750, thus rendering Wors-
ley’s story about the destruction questionable or of older provenance.11

It was easy to visit Yeni,sehir as it lay on the thoroughfare toward Constantino-
ple. Although Swedish visitors to the area were not numerous in the eighteenth
century, we nevertheless have records of three Swedes inspecting the stones in 1784,
1796, and 1797.13 Sweden enjoyed friendly relations with the Ottoman Empire for
most of the century. Indeed, the Swedish travelers mentioned in the article were
all connected to Sweden’s diplomatic mission in Constantinople. Sturzenbecker
and Berggren were legation chaplains, Asp was an envoy and Bergstedt and Åker-
blad were both diplomats and scholars. Of these travelers, Åkerblad—introduced
in the following sections—was exceptional in his knowledge of the Ottoman Em-
pire, its history, and languages.14

Erik Bergstedt (1760–1829) wrote on the Sigeion stele: “Count Choiseul’s at-
tempt to remove it, supported by firmans [permissions] from the Porte and with
the help of [the local governor] Hassan Pasha, could not do anything against the
prejudices of the village inhabitants.”15 The French ambassador at Constantino-
ple, Count Marie-Gabriel-Florent-Auguste Choiseul-Gouffier, tried to take the bous-
trophedon as well as the bas-relief of five female figures in the 1780s (Figure 3).
His biographer interprets his failure as a token of his civility: “He tried to buy it
but the indigenous would not part with their treasure at any price, he refused to
resort to force, something that was recommended to him and that he could have
done with impunity.”16 Choiseul-Gouffier reputedly lied to the responsible Otto-
man official when asking permission to remove the stones. He claimed that the
inscription was connected to an ancestor of his who had participated in the cru-
sades. When the British ambassador Robert Ainslie learned of Choiseul-Gouffier’s
request, he informed the official that the Sigeion inscription was much older than
the era of the crusades, and that it anyhow would be very hard to find an ancestor
of Choiseul-Gouffier that took part in them.17 The rivalries in the diplomatic com-
munity in Constantinople were fierce, both for political gains in relation to the

498

Fredrik Thomasson

FIGURE 3. Choiseul-Gouffier’s audience with the governor of the area where the inscrip-
tion was found. The French ambassador received permission to take the stele but was
thwarted by local resistance. Only when Elgin brought sufficient troops was the stele re-
moved against the villagers’ will. Source: Uppsala University Library.18

Ottoman government and in the individual quest for antiquities. Ainslie was him-
self a keen collector.

Someone was bound to take the stele. Bergstedt again: “The English Ambassa-
dor at Constantinople Lord Elgin has been more fortunate. He . . . obtained . . .
permission and assistance to remove this remarkable monument.”19 Thomas Bruce,
seventh earl of Elgin, was on his way to Constantinople in 1799 when a British
military mission met him at sea in the Dardanelles. The British contingent was
assisting the Ottoman forces who were fighting the French invasion of Egypt and
Syria. The military surgeon William Wittman explained how the stones were taken
a few days later:

On the 7th [November], at eight in the morning, I accompanied the
general and officers to Koum Kali. . . . We there paid our respects to the
Bey, Adam Oglu, governor of the four fortresses, and of the district of
the Dardanelles. . . . The purport of our journey thither was to procure a
very curious bas-relief, and the celebrated Sigæan inscription, for Lord
Elgin, who had seen them, and was desirous to transmit them to En-
gland. To accomplish this, a firman was procured from the Capitan Pacha,
who also furnished a chaous [courier] to be the bearer of it. We were
not long in coming at these valuable antiquities, which we found at the
entrance of a small Greek chapel. The Greeks, by whom the village was
exclusively inhabited, were extremely averse to their being taken away.20

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

499

Elgin thus managed to engage the Kapudan Pasha, the chief admiral of the Otto-
man navy, the local governor, the commander of the British mission in Turkey,
and several British officers and soldiers in his quest for the stele. According to
Philip Hunt, embassy chaplain in Elgin’s suit, the general was accompanied by a
detachment of soldiers for protection and to transport the stones.21 The “ex-
tremely averse” reaction of the villagers may have included physical resistance as
in earlier attempts to take the stone. The Sigeion stele and the bas-relief of five
female figures were the first pieces of what soon became Elgin’s famous collection.22
Some of the travelers mentioned in this article were highly accomplished schol-
ars, and others were collectors with little interest in history or art. Their accounts
and the images that accompany them are, in several cases, testimonies to now lost,
or substantially changed, antiquities. Recording and collecting were often aspects
of the same project, and in this context, it serves us little to try to distinguish
between their different aims.23 The goal here is not to portray them as perpetra-
tors or saviors, but rather to understand how they reacted to, and described, local
use and ideas about the antiquities they were so interested in themselves.

SUPERSTITION AND AVARICE

Contemporary literature sometimes included reports of the local inhabitants’ re-
sistance to the stones’ removal. We only know how Western writers perceived this
resistance. Many scholars have observed that it is not possible to represent a “pure”
voice of people from other cultures, particularly those in situations of subjuga-
tion.24 Even if we do not claim to hear the voices of the Yeni,sehir villagers, their
attachment to the stele is obvious. Many of the descriptions contain elements which
are repeated but some are probably firsthand accounts. Hunt visited the area after
the stele was taken:

The sighs and tears with which the Greek priest accompanied his story
did not, however, arise from any veneration he bore to the antiquity of
these marbles, from any knowledge of their remote history, or any sup-
posed relation they bore to the tale of Troy divine, but because, as he
told us, his flock had thus lost an infallible remedy for many obstinate
maladies . . . such is the state of superstition at present among the Greek
Christians, that when any disease become chronic, or beyond the reach
of common remedies, it is attributed to daemoniacal possession. The
Papas or priest is then called in to exorcise the patient . . . at Yenicher,
the custom was to roll the patient on the marble stone which contained
the Sigean inscription, the characters of which never having been deci-
phered by any of their Διδασκαλ(cid:9)ι [teachers], were supposed to contain
a powerful charm. This practice had, however, nearly obliterated the
inscription.25

“Superstition” is often used to denote what the writers perceive to be foreign re-
ligious practices, and it can most easily be defined as “somebody else’s religion.”
James Dallaway, another British embassy priest, visited Yeni,sehir before the re-

500

Fredrik Thomasson

moval and described why the “Turks” were attached to the inscriptions: “The Turks
assign a singular reason for the curiosity travellers discover to examine all in-
scribed stones, but this [the Sigeion stele] in particular, ‘that it contains an exact
account of the treasures secreted under the different barrows’ [the grave mounds
in the vicinity].”26 Thus the Turkish-speaking inhabitants also invested the stele
with meaning. This belief may have been strengthened by the persistent foreign
interest in the inscriptions. Choiseul-Gouffier’s lie—that it named an ancestor—
invested the stone with a significance not wholly unlike that assigned to it by the
Greek- and Turkish-speaking inhabitants.

The reuse of artefacts in new circumstances has recently been labeled “indig-
enous archaeology,” a term that investigates the relationship of local populations
with—in a wide meaning—the archaeological record. The concept has been mostly
used in the context of native peoples, but it has also been explored in the analysis
of past practices.27

The customs of local populations were sometimes noted when the object was
of no interest to the collectors. John Cam Hobhouse described a ritual embraced
by both the Christian and Muslim inhabitants:

Went out with B.[yr]on horseback to the Temple of Theseus and the
tomb of Philoppapus. Noted, on the Right (North) of the Pnyx, a de-
scent about a yard & a half, worn smooth & shining . . . This, Mr Lusieri
told me, was a place where the women of Athens, Greeks & Turks, came
to slide down repeatedly, in hopes that the operation would favour their
production of male children.28

Later, writing on local religious customs, Hobhouse concluded: “In fact, there is a
great conformity of practice in many particulars, observable between the two na-
tions [Greek & Turk].”29

It was not only at Yeni,sehir that the local inhabitants resisted proposals for the
sale or removal of artefacts against their will. The strong attachment some owners
had to smaller objects was sometimes reported. The Reverend Hunt, who is best
described as a touring art buyer in this context, wrote to Elgin: “At a village near
Thebes, I saw an exquisite cameo of a female Centaur suckling her infant, but the
peasant to whom it belongs refused 600 Piastres which I offered. Indeed I believe
2,000 would not tempt him, as he supposes the welfare of his family and flocks
depends upon keeping it.”30 At that time, 600 piastres could buy approximately
100 sheep.31 Not even after soliciting the influence of the local bishop did he man-
age to purchase the cameo. However, eventually the “cameo of very exquisite beauty”
was secured.32 Hunt tried to acquire a coin in Yeni,sehir; “but we could not induce
a peasant to sell a most beautiful little copper coin, containing on one side the full
face of a female, and on the reverse two owls.”33 Hobhouse reported from Salamis
the impossibility of acquiring another cameo: “A peasant of Salamis wore on his
finger a ring, mounted with a most beautiful cameo, and, though himself ready to
sell it, was prevented by his wife, who regarded it as a talisman, effectual against

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

501

evil spirits.”34 Not surprisingly, women were sometimes made out to be even more
superstitious than men.

Cases from Athens and especially those concerning the removal of sculpture
from the Acropolis are well-known. Hobhouse recorded in his diary how local
workers reacted to the removal. It was Elgin’s agent Lusieri who spoke to Hobhouse:

They [the Greeks] consider that the statues antiques in Greece are men
& women enchanted by some magician, & that they will at some future
time recover their pristine form. Some men employ’d in loading my Lord
Elgin’s marbles a few days past, refused to put one of the chests on board,
saying that it was an “Arabin,” or had a spirit within—and some Greeks
who convey’d two busts to Captn Leake declared they heard the Arabin
groan & scream most piteously within them. Some of these statues, they
say, have been heard to bewail at leaving their friends & fellow marbles
in the Acropolis.35

A similar report—maybe based on the same incident—was published by Freder-
ick S. North Douglas, whose source was “an illiterate servant of the Disdar [mil-
itary governor] of Athens.”36 Another often-cited case is the removal to Cambridge
in 1801 of a female head and torso from Eleusis near Athens.37 The local popu-
lation venerated the statue as protector of their crops and regarded it a represen-
tation of Demeter (Ceres), but today it is considered a caryatid. Edward Daniel
Clarke was convinced it was a Demeter when he took it; he was certainly influ-
enced by previous authors’ descriptions and the local population’s beliefs.

The local priest was forced by the Turkish governor to assist Clarke. Clarke pos-
sibly also paid the priest: “the Priest of Eleusis, arrayed in his vestments as for high
mass, descended into the hollow in which the Statue was partially buried, to strike
the first blow with a pickaxe for the removal of rubbish, that the people might be
convinced that no calamity would befal the labourers.”38

The cultivation of local clergy was a recurrent strategy used by collectors trying
to acquire antiquities that locals did not want to part with. Their cooperation was,
as shown in the Sigeion case, not always guaranteed, but it can be suspected that
in certain circumstances the local priesthood was not adverse to the removal of
objects used in “pagan” worship. Chandler recommended dealing with the local
priests, and Hunt sought the support of the local bishop in acquiring the cameo.
In Eleusis the priest was instrumental to the release of the statue, and Capuchin
monks in Athens received money to facilitate removals from the city.39 The role of
the clergy is a difficult issue, considering the church’s ambiguous relationship to
pre-Christian cults.

The Swedish Constantinople legation chaplain Jacob Berggren (1790–1868) vis-
ited the chapel in Yeni,sehir during his 1819–1823 posting and spoke to the old
priest who still lamented the loss of the Sigeion inscription: “This marble earned
pastor loci [the local priest] considerable income, in that it was believed that it
could cure a variety of ailments . . . In this way it had been used for centuries, as a
talisman of the church, and it was well that it was saved from a superstition.”40

502

Fredrik Thomasson

Berggren’s account is similar to Hunt’s, but he added the income earned by the
priest as the main reason for his lament. It was not uncommon that travelers crit-
icized churchmen for taking money for “magical” services.41

The chaplains Dallaway, Hunt, and Berggren were surely aware of the rich tra-
dition of “superstitions” in their own mainly protestant countries of origin. These
did not vanish after the reformation, and a range of practices similar to those of
the Greek and Turkish populations survived far into the modern age. Such prac-
tices were not restricted to popular use but were also common among the elites
and often connected to objects containing texts and/or images.42

Local inhabitants’ “avarice” was sometimes associated with their superstitions.
Robert Wood, who tried to acquire the Sigeion inscription and bas-relief, wrote
about his 1751 visit to Palmyra, where he did his best to remove some inscribed
stones: “Inscriptions we copied as they fell in our way, and carried off the marbles
whenever it was possible; for the avarice or superstition of the inhabitants made
that task difficult and sometimes impracticable.”43 The locals were equally de-
spised for either wanting to sell too expensively or for being victims of supersti-
tion and not wanting to sell at all. The collectors thus accused the inhabitants
both of protecting and selling too dearly the antiquities in their areas. Supersti-
tion is often noted in collectors’ and travelers’ reports without giving details of
what the beliefs or uses consisted of. Such accusations were part of an overall strat-
egy to denigrate the inhabitants’ resistance to removals by mixing “avarice and
superstition.”44

As a result of these foreign attempts to take the Sigeion inscription and other
antiquities the local population was probably spurred into putting a higher value
on them. Seeing foreign visitors covet the stones surely impacted on the locals’
views of them, especially as the stones were already invested with spiritual signif-
icance. The relationship between the foreign cognoscenti’s infatuation with certain
artefacts and the local populations’ use of and ideas about them remains elusive.
A more than superficial interaction clearly emerges in, for instance, the case of the
Sigeion stele and the “Demeter” statue. Nevertheless, local use, often conveniently
called superstition, continues to be questioned today. A Keeper of Greek and Roman
Antiquities at the British Museum recently wrote: “The reasons for this affection,
[the inhabitants’ reaction to the removal] as usual with antiquities, do not seem to
have been engendered by any scientific sense of the sculptures’ importance or even
a sense of ‘national heritage’ . . . but rather by a mixture of superstition that their
loss would bring bad luck and a belief that they were magical or contained gold.”45
William St. Clair noted in his book on Elgin that around 1800 local resistance
was not expressed as a national sentiment, and one might add that the opposite
would have been surprising considering the then fledging ideas about a Greek na-
tion.46 But there was some “national” awareness; Hobhouse quoted the “singular
speech of a learned Greek of Ioannina,” who with foresight said, “You English are
carrying off the works of the Greeks, our forefathers—preserve them well—we
Greeks will come and re-demand them.”47 Greek national identity took shape

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

503

throughout the nineteenth century and was partly constructed on an image of an
ancient past heavily influenced by foreign philhellenism.48

FEAR OF DESTRUCTION

Fear of the destruction and loss of the artefacts was one of the main arguments
used by collectors to justify their actions. Inscriptions and funerary monuments
were subject to various dangers which were discussed by collectors. An engraving
in the second volume (1787) of the influential Antiquities of Athens clearly de-
picted one of these fears (Figure 4).

This scene was left without verbal description. In the next volume (1794), the
situation at the island of Delos was described: “The number of curious marbles
here is continually diminishing, on account of a custom, the Turks have, of plac-
ing, at the heads of the graves of their deceased friends, a marble column; and the
miserable sculptors of that nation come here every year, and work up the frag-

FIGURE 4. A Turkish sculptor making a tombstone of an inscribed marble on the Acrop-
olis. It is possible that inscribed stones were considered especially propitious for funerary
monuments. Unknown writing was often invested with significance. The image on the
journals’ cover is William Pars’ original drawing on which the print is based. Source: Upp-
sala University Library.49

504

Fredrik Thomasson

ments for that purpose.”50 The custom of turning funerary monuments, like the
Sigeion stele, into Turkish gravestones, “with their tops rudely carved into the shape
of a turban” was well-known.51 An Italian discovered a reverse business possibil-
ity. He identified ancient Greek fragments in Turkish graveyards and had them
dug up by night and transported to Italy to remarket the stones as Greek antiq-
uities. Turkish cemeteries have until recently been good hunting grounds for an-
cient marbles.52

In 1797, the Swedish diplomat Johan David Åkerblad (1763–1819) visited the
Troad for the third time. Åkerblad had been employed in the Swedish Foreign
Service since 1783 and had spent most of this time in Turkey. He traveled exten-
sively in the Eastern Mediterranean during the 1780s and spoke Arabic, Turkish,
and Modern Greek well enough to be able to travel in disguise. He had an unusual
understanding of Ottoman culture and politics and had observed the major pow-
ers fight for influence at the Ottoman court with skepticism. A few years later he
would become one of Europe’s foremost Coptic scholars, and in 1802 he gained
instant fame when his dissertation on the Rosetta stele’s Demotic text was pub-
lished in Paris. He was an extremely gifted linguist and is today mostly known for
being one of Jean-François Champollion’s predecessors.53

Åkerblad copied the Sigeion inscription and noted its bad state.54 He was typical
in assuming that it was in a much worse shape than when it had originally been pub-
lished. Chishull’s engraving was based on a copy made by Bernard Mould in 1722.
Mould described the poor shape of the letters: “very mean & poor, a thin, shallow
stroke. Especially the upper One, wch looks more like scratching than engraving.”55
Mould’s comments on the condition of the inscription already in 1722 question the
commonly held belief that the locals’ use of the stone had destroyed it.

There is a difference between maintaining that use had obliterated the inscrip-
tion and that it had been destroyed on purpose, but the distinction is sometimes
small. Robert Wood, who saw the Sigeion inscription in 1750, did not mention
any damage done by the population, but claimed that another inscription he saw
at Bodrum, further south, was destroyed by the “Turks” to avert it being taken:
“[the inscription] now lyes in a mangl’d condition . . . for some Franks [Western-
ers] offering to purchase It the Turks defac’d & broke It on purpose to prevent its
being carried away & ’tis now no longer legible.”56 Worsley’s story suggests (see n. 9)
that the Yeni,sehir inhabitants both cut off the heads of the bas-relief and tried to
obliterate the inscription to prevent its removal. As the Sigeion inscription was
highly valued, it is harder to believe that the population would destroy it on pur-
pose, but it is not impossible. Nevertheless, his and others’ accounts of destruc-
tion are still often unquestioned and sometimes repeated in the debate. For instance,
William St. Clair takes Worsley’s account at face value as well as stating that Mon-
tagu could have bought the inscription without problems.57 However, it should be
remembered that most destruction, as well as preservation, has been done by local
inhabitants or overlords. The coastal area of Sigeion was mined for centuries for
building materials and marbles to adorn both local buildings and the capital.58

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

505

Visitors from Western Europe were often equally disparaging toward the Chris-
tian and Muslim populations. Erik Bergstedt related a 1790s conversation with
Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel (1753–1838), a French consul and “art agent” in
Athens. Fauvel speculated on the destruction of sculptures:

Mister Fauvel . . . has in Athens told me that when he copied the bas-
reliefs of the friezes of the Parthenon and the Theseion temple, he ap-
pears to have found that some of the figures were mutilated by a hammer,
damage that surely should be ascribed to the barbarous zeal of the
Iconoclasts while the Turks certainly have not dedicated time to such a
slow and difficult destruction of these monuments of Phidian art, which
are located so high up that they cannot be reached and destroyed with-
out effort.59

Fauvel believed that the damage was the work of Christian iconoclasts, and his
judgment combined ideas on Eastern Church aberrations and “oriental laziness.”
Jean-Baptiste-Gaspard D’Ansse de Villoison, who traveled with Åkerblad in the
Greek archipelago in 1785, put forward another religious reason for the destruc-
tion of inscriptions. They were obliterated to prevent their possible profaning of
the name of the Lord, a custom “common to both Greeks and Turks.”60 Eastern
Christianity was often no more favored than Muslim customs, and believers were
often collated into a single Eastern or Levantine category.

FOREIGN OBSERVERS

Before the arrival of the Parthenon marbles in Britain there had been little criti-
cism of the removals. Interestingly, Åkerblad described the activities of Fauvel in a
book published in 1800. He was scathing:

No one has destroyed more grave mounds than the French painter Fau-
vel. He has excavated almost all in the vicinity of Athens, Marathon and
other areas. . . . The worst thing about it is that Fauvel has not given us
the slightest notice about the remarkable items found in these venerable
monuments, and that one does not even know what has become of the
objects61

The main problem for Åkerblad was the lack of documentation during the search
for objects. He recognized that the loss of context severely impaired the quest for
further knowledge. The digs resembled grave robbing rather than archaeology in
any modern sense. Scandinavian ideas on archaeology were influential in the sev-
enteenth and eighteenth centuries, and the Swedish state had in 1734 instituted a
law that prescribed finders of antiquities to render them to the state, which paid
finders more than the metal value.62 Åkerblad’s critique may be connected to a
greater sensitivity born out of a tradition where the state valued archaeological
finds.

Åkerblad was critical of the practices of the great collectors just when the most
famous removal of antiquities was on the verge of taking off in Greece. What makes

506

Fredrik Thomasson

his critique of Fauvel especially interesting is the value he puts on the artefacts as
being “historical” and not only “artistic.” He regarded objects in a wider environ-
ment and stressed that removal not only affects the single monument but also
implies a loss of knowledge and context. In a dissertation in 1811 Åkerblad un-
derlined the importance of keeping finds from graves together.63 This was espe-
cially evident in the case of inscriptions where texts give important information
about the places and contexts where they are found.64 Åkerblad was an excellent
Greek epigrapher, and in 1813, he published the first ever treatment of what is
now called a “curse tablet,” most often a small lead sheet, inscribed with magical
invocations.65 He was well aware of the magical powers that could be invested in
inscriptions and words. The engraving Åkerblad used as frontispiece to his disser-
tation on Greek magical inscriptions is telling in the way it depicts archaeological
tools and practices, this was one of the graves opened by Fauvel close to Athens
(Figure 5). A hammer and a pickaxe rest by the broken tomb, and the objects
found are exposed in front of it.66

In his 1811 publication, Åkerblad commented on new finds in Athens and crit-
icized the wrongs done there previously: “The grand staircase . . . was discovered
some years ago by Lord Aberdeen, a small gain that can not cancel the memory of
all the wrongs, that another Englishman, Lord Elgin, did to the monuments of
Athens.”67 It quickly became customary to denigrate Elgin’s deeds. Åkerblad’s friend

FIGURE 5. Frontispiece from Åkerblad’s 1813 treatise illustrating the archaeological
practices.

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

507

Edward Dodwell had traveled in Greece in the beginning of the century but only
published his travelogue 1819 when decrying Elgin was commonplace. Dodwell
lambasted the “wanton destruction” by Elgin and his agents, but on the next page
he proudly admitted that “The head of the male figure in the western tympanon,
[of the Parthenon] . . . is in my possession.”68

Åkerblad had already in 1800 commented in print on Fauvel’s methods and in
1811 on Elgin’s, but little critique appears in British publications before Byron
attacked Elgin in 1812. Having personally seen the sites may have been an impor-
tant factor. Byron had anonymously mocked Elgin in 1810, but it was only after
he himself visited Greece that his critique became incisive.69

Åkerblad lived in Rome from 1809 onwards. News was scarce as communica-
tions broke down during the final turbulent Napoleonic years. The British who
arrived in Rome after the French defeat brought news on the marbles. Their pent-up
lust for acquisitions was ironically described by Åkerblad: “the English milordi . . .
all walking around with their servants carrying vases under their arms, leaving the
Uggeri, Visconti, Guattani and all that bunch of antiquarians with dry mouths.”70
He elaborated on his earlier critique in a letter written in 1816 to a Swedish friend
who had seen the sculptures in London:

The marbles you have seen in London and which were barbarously taken
from Greece by Lord Elgin have been bought by the English govern-
ment and shall without doubt be placed somewhat more decently than
how you found them. Indeed, you are perfectly right in saying that it
would have been better to leave them where they were taken. The dam-
age that the villainous Lord has done is irreparable and even his com-
patriots that have visited Athens after him have sworn to relegate this
man to public despise and loathing. You might have seen Childe Harold
by Lord Byron where he is treated as deserved.71

SHRINES ON THE THAMES AND SEINE

The Sigeion stele resurfaced in a temporary building in the yard of Elgin’s London
house. It had a prominent place in the arrangement of his collection.72 In the
complicated sale of Elgin’s collection to the British government in 1816, the “ar-
tistic” artefacts were given much greater values than “historic” objects such as in-
scriptions.73 Nevertheless, when the collection was exhibited in the British Museum,
the stone was still given an important position (Figure 6).

Soon the Parthenon sculptures became the focus of the “inner sanctum of
Bloomsbury’s Temple of the Muses,” and the Sigeion stele, and with it other in-
scriptions, were demoted to basement locations.75 The years during which the mar-
bles were permanently exhibited in the British Museum saw a slowing down of
major removals from Greece. But removals in Ottoman territories would con-
tinue, with additional actors in the arena. Many other countries took part in the
quest to fill newly founded or enlarged museums. The wholesale removal of arte-

508

Fredrik Thomasson

FIGURE 6. Detail of a fold-out illustration of the Elgin Room. The Sigeion stele stands on
a square base on the far right. Source: Uppsala University Library.74

facts from Egypt that started with the French invasion in 1798 escalated during
the following decades. Jacob Berggren, who had been sanguine about the taking of
the Sigeion inscription, was less understanding of the spoliations in Athens. But
he could not help being scandalized at the extent of plunder going on when he
visited Egypt in the early 1820s.76 He questioned whether “these shrines, on the
banks of the Seine and the Thames,” were better than the original locations of the
monuments. Having witnessed the battles of European traders in Egypt, he con-
ceded that it might be preferable to come from a nation that did not have any
museums:

When you add to these violations against what a distant antiquity be-
queathed us of greatness and beauty above earth, add the battles, be-
tween mercenary agents on the ruins of Thebes and Philes of what the
tombs contain, it is better like certain countries to be without Museums,
and to be content with living mummies—and antiquaries.77

That an object’s function changed when it was put into a museum was also clear
to another astute observer of the movement of art and antiquities, Antoine-
Chrysostome Quatremère de Quincy. He remarked in 1815, when objects that had
been taken to Paris during the wars were about to return to Italy, how collecting
itself took objects out of their context and altered their function: “How many works
have lost their real value in losing their use! . . . Thus every day we see reduced to
the tribute of barren admiration all the scattered mutilated fragments of antiquity—
gods without altars, altars without worshippers.”78 Could such a value also be given
to an object like the Sigeion stele that had been assigned a role different from
what it was made for in antiquity?

Berggren exploited the advantage of being from a poor nation such as Sweden,
taking the opportunity to self-righteously criticize the greater powers for their mis-
deeds. Significantly, it is not the individual who is blamed, but the system, that is,
collections and museums. Coming from a country lacking in great collections

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

509

and virtually no museums in the 1820s, facilitated the task of criticizing others’
rapaciousness. Åkerblad, who was highly critical of the large-scale removals, him-
self collected portable antiquities on a small scale. He never had the money, or the
political backing, to acquire any major objects if he had so desired.79 Maybe these
factors—the lack of Swedish institutions and the fact that the Swedish observers
could not themselves collect—were instrumental in making them see and value
things differently than the great collectors? Or simply, to quote Aesop: The grapes
are sour anyway, said the fox?

EXCHANGES ON VALUE AND USE

One of main themes of this article is how collectors and travelers justified their
actions and how they described the local inhabitants’ resistance to the removal of
objects considered of religious or magical importance. The local populations re-
peatedly resisted removals, and the reuse of a range of objects was common. These
practices existed in both the Greek- and Turkish-speaking populations. The jus-
tifications used by collectors were often based on their professed superiority; the
local populations were accused of ignorance, superstition, avarice, and destruc-
tion of artefacts.

That most justifications used by the collectors were self-serving is obvious. When
criticizing the local inhabitants of, for instance, superstition, they disregarded sim-
ilar traditions in their countries of origin, both past and present. Many accounts
are by churchmen—Dallaway, Hunt, Berggren—and many of the counterparts that
facilitated the removals were local priests, both Orthodox and Catholic. There is
not yet sufficient evidence to conclude to what extent such cooperation was mo-
tivated by religious concerns, but it would surely be an exaggeration to ascribe it
to only money matters or pressure from the local Ottoman overlords. It was quickly
understood that local churches were allies in the removal of pre-Christian arte-
facts that were used in religious practices.

If local populations were influenced by the collectors’ interest, some of the an-
tiquarians and collectors were probably likewise inspired by the local use of an-
tiquities. Clarke’s and previous authors’ identification of the Eleusis caryatid as
Demeter is an example of how there was an exchange of ideas on the identity and
value of antiquities. We may also ask ourselves to what extent our own perception
of objects is influenced by knowledge of their history. In the case of the Sigeion
stele, does the information on the resistance to its removal compiled here change
how we see it? Would this perception change again if it were to be reclaimed?

The evidence put forward here indicates that a larger element of exchange oc-
curred between how the local population and the collectors valued and perceived
the artefacts than has been commonly understood. This may be compared to how
the antiquities became imbued with meaning when exhibited in Europe. Even if,
for instance, Berggren’s critique was laced with irony, the worship functions of

510

Fredrik Thomasson

European museums were noted immediately. Some observers were clear about how
the removal of an object changed its context and the perception of it.

The debate today probably bears more similarity to the discussions held during
the removals than what appears obvious. Though some positions have changed,
the configuration of the actors as local populations, collectors, and third-party ob-
servers remains in many respects similar, even though the first two parties have
changed their names to states of origin and museums and their states, and for the
third party, it would be convenient—true or not—to suggest academics. We often,
knowingly or unknowingly, repeat arguments that were formulated during the pe-
riod of removals. In taking the accounts of the removals for granted, we might
repeat early plaidoyers in the debate. It must, of course, be likewise questioned
whether we can trust the evidence of local resistance. The accusation of supersti-
tion formed part of a strategy to denigrate the local inhabitants and served the
collectors in their quest for antiquities. The repetition of “facts” and dubious chro-
nologies in certain accounts render some of them questionable. However, the range
of testimonies makes for convincing evidence of the local practices as well as the
resistance in, for instance, the Sigeion case.

Another important theme is the role of the third-party observers, in our case
the Swedish travelers. The evidence shows that it is difficult to construct a com-
mon European attitude toward the removal of antiquities. Opinions did differ in
a Europe that often has been constructed as a single cultural sphere, especially in
its contacts with the Orient. Both Åkerblad and Berggren had seen the sites and
knew the effects of the removals. Perspectives changed, and what Berggren ini-
tially saw as the saving of the Sigeion stele could no longer be defended when he
witnessed the bizarre scale of the removals from Egypt. Being observers from a
country that was not involved in the “war for antiquities” gave them the possibil-
ity to see the removals from a different perspective. Could this also be true today?
The collecting of antiquities was a small but not insignificant component of
European expansion in the nineteenth century. By seeing the removals largely from
the perspective of the acquiring countries—and whether these countries and in-
dividuals are made out to be villains or not may not change our perceptions
much—we forfeit the possibility of investigating other reactions and interactions
that were prompted by the removals.

ENDNOTES

1. Jasanoff, Edge of empire; Hoock, “The British state and the Anglo-French Wars over Antiquities.”
2. I am using the Sigeion stele, but I do not pretend to write an “object biography,” something
that would entail a different kind of investigation; for discussion and examples, see Gosden and
Marshall, “Cultural Biography of Objects.”

3. For a recent survey of the debate’s roots, see Miles, Art as Plunder. The bibliography is vast

and has branched out in many fields; for an overview, see for example, Merryman, Imperialism.

4. Chishull, Inscriptio Sigea. With plate and corrections, Chishull, Antiquitates Asiaticae. For an

overview of the area, see Cook, Troad, 150ff, 178ff.

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

511

5. Payne Knight, Greek alphabet, 10: “the oldest Greek [inscription] extant except coins”; Susan
Guettel Cole proposes an interpretation of the use of the two dialects in relation to identity and
citizenship: Landscapes, Gender, 84–85.

6. Translation by Margherita Guarducci in Richter, Archaic gravestones, 165ff. Guarducci sums

up the long debate around the dating and interpretation of the inscription.

7. Lady Montagu to Abbé Conti, 31 July 1718, in Montagu Letters.
8. Chandler, Travels, 39.
9. Richard Worsley’s diary in Smith, “Lord Elgin and His Collection,” 182.
10. Panzac, La peste, 207 ff., map 607.
11. Robert Wood’s diary in Hutton, “Travels of ‘Palmyra’ Wood,” 112.
12. Chandler, Revett, and Pars. Ionian Antiquities. Plate i, caption iv; Wilton, “William Pars”; Red-

ford, “The Antiquities of Athens and Ionian Antiquities.”

13. Adolf Fredrik Sturzenbecker, MS diary, X 405, fo. 31r, Uppsala University Library; [Asp], Resa

i Levanten, 45; Johan David Åkerblad, MS Vat. Lat. 9785, fo. 20r, Vatican Library.

14. For some of these, as well as other Swedish eighteenth-century oriental travelers, and the im-

portance of the Swedish mission in Constantinople, see Callmer, In Orientem.

15. Bergstedt, Resa till Propontiden, 1:103. All translations are mine if not otherwise stated.
16. Pingaud, Choiseul-Gouffier, 131; Jean-Baptiste Lechevalier, who was intermittently in Choiseul-
Gouffier’s service, also did his best to take the stones, but was stopped by the inhabitants. [Le]Ch-
evalier, A Description of the Plain of Troy, 17. According to another account, the French king Louis
XVI had also tried to acquire the stele (in the text Louis XIV, but probably a printing error since he
died in 1715). [Hamilton], Memorandum, 35.

17. Dedem, Un général hollandais, 21.
18. Choiseul-Gouffier, Voyage pittoresque, 1: plate 75, description 131.
19. Bergstedt, Resa till Propontiden, 1:103. Elgin had permissions to take the stones. The debate
on the validity of these permissions is continuous; for a recent contribution, see Williams, “Lord
Elgin’s firman,” on Sigeion 56.

20. Wittman, Travels, 65–6. Wittman was accused of plagiarism in his antiquarian descriptions,
but the accounts of the military campaigns and the Sigeion visit appear credible. Gentleman’s Mag-
azine, 16 October (1803): 927. On the veracity of travel accounts from Greece, see Constantine,
Question of Authenticity.

21. Hunt, “Journey,” 97.
22. Both now in the British Museum: inscription GR 1816.6–10.107, bas-relief GR 1816.6–10.324.
23. Several of the British travelers were connected to the Society of Dilettanti, many portrayed by

Jason M. Kelly’s in his institutional biography The Society of Dilettanti.

24. One of many examples: Spivak, “Can the Subaltern speak?” For an ample discussion on the
epistemological issues of the period’s antiquarian travel literature, see Leask, Curiosity and the Aes-
thetics. Constantine’s Early Greek Travellers is helpful for understanding Western attitudes in the period.

25. Hunt, “Journey,” 97–8.
26. Dallaway, Constantinople, 349–50. Some academics suggest that such beliefs remain and mo-
tivate the destruction of archaeological sites today in Turkey: see Hemelrijck and Berndt, “The Phry-
gian Highlands, a Postscript.”

27. For a discussion on the survival of such practices in the Greek case and the use of the term,

see, for example, Hamilakis, “Decolonising Greek Archaeology.”

28. Hobhouse, John Cam. MS diary, 28 December 1809, Add. MS 56529, fo. 3r, BL, [British Library].
29. Hobhouse, Journey, 1:508.
30. Hunt to Lord Elgin, 8 August 1801, cited in Smith, “Lord Elgin and His Collection,” 199.
31. Angelomatis-Tsougarakis, Eve of the Greek Revival, 195–8.
32. [Hamilton], Memorandum, 36.
33. Hunt, “Journey,” 99. A Sigeion coin, with Athena on front, often with the name ΣΙΓΕ.
34. Hobhouse, Journey, 1:383.
35. Hobhouse, MS diary, 6 January 1810, Add. MS 56529, fo. 6t, BL. See also Hobhouse, Journey,

1:348.

512

Fredrik Thomasson

36. North Douglas, An Essay on Certain Points of Resemblance, 85ff.
37. See for instance Bracken, Antiquities Acquired, 73–88. For a detailed discussion on testimonies

from Athens and Eleusis, see Hamilakis, The Nation and Its Ruins, 64ff.

38. [Edward Daniel Clarke], Testimonies of Different Authors, 24. He continued to defend his iden-

tification of the statue: Clarke, Greek Marbles Brought, 12ff.

39. According to the accounts of Elgin’s agent Lusieri payments were made to various churches.
In Athens a Father Urban of the Capuchins was awarded 100 piastres in relation to the removal of
the Erechtheion caryatid. Williams, “Of Publick Utility,” 139.

40. Berggren, Resor, 1:66.
41. Sestini, Lettere odeporiche, 1:26
42. For a recent example (with rich bibliography), see Cambers, “Demonic Possession”; on beliefs
during the seventeenth and eighteenth century, see Shaw, Miracles in Enlightenment England; An-
karloo and Clarke, Witchcraft and Magic.

43. Wood, Ruins of Palmyra, second page of preface.
44. Another case of such an accusation is Charles Robert Cockerell’s account of how he and col-

leagues took the sculptures from the Aegina Aphaia temple (now in Munich): Travels, 54.

45. Williams, “Of Publick Utility,” 139–40.
46. St. Clair, Lord Elgin and the Marbles, 207ff.
47. Hobhouse, Journey, 1:347–8.
48. Hamilakis, The Nation and Its Ruins, ch. 3. On earlier attitudes to monuments: Vin, Travellers

to Greece and Constantinople, esp. 1:310ff.

49. Stuart and Revett, Antiquities of Athens, vol. 2 (1787), ch. 2, plate 1, detail. On the picture

making in Ottoman territories, see Kelly, Society of Dilettanti, 217ff.

50. Stuart and Revett, Antiquities of Athens, vol. 3 (1794) 57.
51. For example, Pococke, Description of the East, 2:2:39; Chandler, Travels, 13; Hobhouse, Journey,
1:331; Choiseul-Gouffier, Voyage pittoresque, 2:306; Åkerblad, MS Vat. Lat. 9784, p. 56, Vatican Library.

52. Bracken, Antiquities Acquired, 60; Cook, Troad, 389ff.
53. Thomasson, The Life of J. D. Åkerblad. Åkerblad’s notebooks in the Vatican Library, Vaticani
Latini 9784 and 9785, constitute the main sources on his readings and travels and were used for
several decades.

54. Åkerblad, MS Vat. Lat. 9785, fo. 20r, Vatican Library.
55. Mould’s copy and description of the inscription. Gough Maps, 44, fo. 121, no. 218, Oxford,

Bodleian Library.

56. Wood in Hutton, “Travels of ‘Palmyra’ Wood,” 113.
57. St. Clair, Lord Elgin and the Marbles, 30–1.
58. Cook, Troad, 200–2.
59. Bergstedt, Resa till Propontiden, 2:261; on Fauvel, see Zambon, “Louis-François-Sébastien Fau-

vel et la constitution”; Legrand, “Biographie de Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel.”

60. Villoison, De l’Hellade à la Grèce, 157. Villoison also noted how much “marbles” Russian no-

bles and militaries took, 159ff.

61. Åkerblad, “Beylage,” 232; Alessia Zambon has traced the objects that went through Fauvel’s

hands, Le musée Fauvel.

62. Klindt-Jensen, A History of Scandinavian Archaeology, Esp. ch. 2–3; Baudou, Nordiska arke-

ologin, ch. 3–4.

63. Åkerblad, Sopra due laminette di bronzo, 22f.
64. For an introduction to the debate on text in modern archaeological theory, see Moreland,

Archaeology and text, and his revisions and comments in “Archaeology and Texts: Subservience.”

65. Åkerblad, Iscrizione greca sopra una lamina di piombo; Gager, Curse Tablets, 30.
66. The antiquarian practices in Greece during the decades around 1800 are seldom treated in
depth in archaeological history, because the period is regarded as “prediscipline.” Some ideas can be
found in Bracken, Antiquities acquired; Schnapp, La conquête du passé, 258ff; Dyson, In Pursuit of
Ancient Pasts, 65 ff; Diaz-Andreu, A World History of Nineteenth-Century Archaeology, 45ff; For a
slightly later period, 1815–1864, see Gunning, British Consular Service, 137ff.

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

513

67. Åkerblad, Sopra due laminette di bronzo, 9. Ironically, Aberdeen (George Hamilton Gordon)

also did his best to get marbles sent back to Britain, and was duly criticized by his cousin Byron.

68. Dodwell, A Classical and Topographical Tour Through Greece, 1:325. The head was long con-
sidered lost, but it is probably a metope centaur head in the Wagner Museum, Würzburg. Brommer,
Die Metopen, 1:83.

69. St. Clair, Lord Elgin and the Marbles, 180ff.
70. Åkerblad to Sebastiano Ciampi, 2 February 1815, Sebastiano Ciampis samling, Acc 1828, Royal

Academy of Letters, History and Antiquities, Stockholm.

71. Åkerblad to Lars Jacob von Röök, 2 February 1816, Brev till hovintendenten L. J. von Röök
1796–1866, Sävstaholmssamlingen II. 94., National Archives, Stockholm. Åkerblad copied Byron’s
verses on Athens. MS Vat. Lat. 9785, fo. 70t–71r, Vatican Library.

72. See drawing by Charles Robert Cockerell reproduced in Smith, “Lord Elgin and His Collec-

tion,” 299.

73. William Richard Hamilton valued the inscriptions, circa 100 pieces, to 2.000 £ out of a total
of 60.800 £ compared to Richard Payne Knight’s 300 £ of 25.000 £. Report from the Select Committee
of the House of Commons, 66, 96.

74. British Museum, A Description of the Collection of Ancient Marbles, plate xix: “General View of

the Elgin Room.”

75. Jenkins, Archaeologists and Aesthetes, 228. The Sigeion stele is now exhibited in the Inscription
Room (78). The room is often closed, but access is gained by addressing the Department of Greece
and Rome.

76. Berggren, Resor, 3:271f.
77. Berggren, Resor, 1:68; 3:270ff. For some sources on Egyptian perceptions of European “ar-
chaeological” exploits in the early nineteenth century, see Bosworth, “Al-Jabartı¯ and the Frankish
Archaeologists”; Reid, Whose Pharaohs?, 31ff.

78. Quatremère de Quincy, Antoine-Chrysostome. Considérations morales sur la destination des

ouvrages de l’art, 68–9. Quoted from translation in Jenkins, “Gods Without Altars,” 469.

79. In perennial but unsuccessful petitions to the Swedish government he sought a position in
Rome as Swedish consul and art agent. From there he would travel to Greece, where “my last so-
journ convinced me of how cheaply the most rare things can be had.” Underdånigst Pro Memoria af
J. D. Åkerblad, Stockholm 23 August 1800, Kongliga Museum, II Koncept, Äldre handlingar rörande
Kongl. Museum 1790–1836, Nationalmuseum, Stockholm.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Åkerblad, J.D. “Beylage.” In J.B. Lechevalier, Reise nach Troas oder Gemählde der Eben von Troja in
ihrem gegenwärtigen Zustande vom Bürger Lechevalier. Translated and abridged by C.G. Lenz, 223–
255. Altenburg and Erfurt, Rinck und Schnuphase 1800.

———. Sopra due laminette di bronzo trovate ne’ sontorni di Atene. Dissertazione d’un membro on-
orario dell’Accademia Libera d’Archeologia di Roma. Rome: Francesco Bourlié, 1811.

———. Iscrizione greca sopra una lamina di piombo trovata in un sepolcro nelle vicinanze di Atene.
Rome: Contedini, 1813.

Angelomatis-Tsougarakis, Helen. The Eve of the Greek revival: British travellers’ Perceptions of Early
Nineteenth-Century Greece. London: Routledge, 1990.

Ankarloo, Bengt, and Stuart Clarke, eds. Witchcraft and Magic in Europe. The Eighteenth and Nine-
teenth Centuries. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999.

[Asp, Pehr Olof von]. Resa i Levanten år 1796. Skara, F.J. Leverentz 1805.

514

Fredrik Thomasson

Baudou, Evert. Den nordiska arkeologin—historia och tolkningar. Stockholm: Kungl. Vitterhetsakad-
emien, 2004.

Berggren, Jacob. Resor i Europa och O¨ sterländerna. 3 vols. Stockholm, 1826–1828.

Bergstedt, Erik. Resa till Propontiden och Svarta Hafvet, öfversatt med Anmärkningar och Tilläggnin-
gar af E. Bergstedt. Translation and adaption with substantial additions of Lechevalier, Voyage. 3 vols.
Stockholm, 1802–1805.

Bosworth, C. E. “Al-Jabartı¯ and the Frankish Archaeologists.” International Journal of Middle East
Studies 8 (1977): 229–236.

Bracken, C. P. Antiquities Acquired: The Spoliation of Greece. Newton Abbot: David & Charles, 1975.

British Museum. A Description of the Collection of Ancient Marbles in the British Museum; with En-
gravings, Part VII. London, 1835.

Brommer, Frank, Die Metopen des Parthenon. 2 vols. Mainz: Verlag Philipp von Zabern, 1967.

Callmer, Christian. In Orientem: svenskars färder och forskningar i den europeiska och asiatiska Ori-
enten under 1700-talet. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell International, 1985, with English summary.

Cambers, Andrew. “Demonic Possession, Literacy and ‘Superstition’ in Early Modern England.” Past
and Present 202 (2009): 3–35.

Chandler, R., N. Revett, and W. Pars. Ionian Antiquities. London, 1769.

Chandler, Richard. Travels in Asia Minor: or an account of a tour made at the expense of the Society of
Dilettanti. Oxford, UK: 1775.

Chishull, Edmund. Inscriptio Sigea antiquissima boustrophedon exarata . . . London, 1721.

———. Antiquitates Asiaticae; Christianam aeram antecedents . . . London, 1728.

Choiseul-Gouffier, M.-G.-F.-A. Voyage Pittoresque de la Grèce. 3 vols. Paris: 1782–1822.

[Clarke, Edward Daniel]. Testimonies of Different Authors, Respecting the Colossal Statue of Ceres,
Placed in the Vestibule of the Public Library at Cambridge, July the First, 1803; with Short Account of its
Removal from Eleusis, November 22, 1801. Cambridge: 1803.

Clarke, Edward Daniel. Greek Marbles Brought from the Shores of the Euxine, Archipelago, and Med-
iterranean, and Deposited in the Vestibule of the Public Library of the University of Cambridge. Cam-
bridge, 1809.

Cockerell, Charles Robert. Travels in Southern Europe and the Levant 1810–1817. London: Long-
mans, Green and Co., 1903. Reprint, London: Routledge, 1999.

Constantine, David. Early Greek Travellers and the Hellenic Ideal. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1984.

———. “The Question of Authenticity in Some Early Accounts of Greece.” In Rediscovering Hel-
lenism: the Hellenic Inheritance and the English Imagination, edited by Graeme W. Clarke, and John
Christopher Eade, 1–22. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Cook, J. M. The Troad: An Archaeological and Topographical Study. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press,
1973.

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

515

Dallaway, James. Constantinople Ancient and Modern, with Excursions to the Shores and Islands of the
Archipelago and to the Troad. London, 1797.

Dedem, Antoine Baudoin Gisbet de. Un général hollandais sous le premier empire. Mémoires du général
B:on de Dedem de Gelder 1774–1825. Paris: Plon, 1900.

Diaz-Andreu, Margarita. A World History of Nineteenth-Century Archaeology: Nationalism, Colonial-
ism, and the Past. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2007.

Dodwell, Edward. A Classical and Topographical Tour Through Greece During the Years 1801, 1805,
and 1806. 2 vols. London, 1819.

Dyson, Stephen L. In Pursuit of Ancient Pasts: A History of Classical Archaeology in the Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.

Gager, John G., ed., Curse Tablets and Binding Spells from the Ancient World. New York and Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Gosden, Chris, and Yvonne Marshall, eds. “The Cultural Biography of Objects.” World Archaeology
31 (1999): 169–78.

Guettel Cole, Susan. Landscapes, Gender, and Ritual Space: The Ancient Greek Experience. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, 2004.

Hamilakis, Yannis. The Nation and Its Ruins: Antiquity, Archaeology, and National Imagination in
Greece. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2007.

———. “Decolonising Greek Archaeology: Indigenous Archaeologies, Modernist Archaeology, and
the Post-Colonial Critique.” A Singular Antiquity, edited by D. Damaskos and D. Plantzos, 273–84.
Athens: Benaki Museum, 2008.

[Hamilton, William Robert]. Memorandum on the Earl of Elgin’s Pursuits in Greece. London, 1811.

Hemelrijck, Jaap M., and Dietrich Berndt. “The Phrygian Highlands, a Postscript: Wilful Destruc-
tion of the Rock-Monuments.” Babesch—Bulletin antieke beschaving 74 (1999): 1–20.

Hobhouse, John Cam. Journey Through Albania and Other Provinces of Turkey in Europe and Asia, to
Constantinople, During The Years 1809 and 1810. 2 vols. London, 1813.

Hoock, Holger. “The British State and the Anglo-French Wars over Antiquities, 1798–1858.” The
Historical Journal 50 (2007): 49–72.

Hunt, Philip. “Journey from Parium to the Troad . . . from the Journals of Dr. Hunt.” In Robert
Walpole, Memoirs Relating to European and Asiatic Turkey; Edited from Manuscript Journals, 84–140.
London, 1817.

Hutton, C. A. “The Travels of ‘Palmyra’ Wood in 1750–51.” The Journal of Hellenic Studies 47 (1927):
102–128.

Jasanoff, Maya. Edge of Empire: Lives, Culture, and Conquest in the East, 1750–1850. New York: Knopf,
2005.

Jenkins, Ian. Archaeologists and Aesthetes in the Sculpture Galleries of the British Museum, 1800–1939.
London: British Museum Press, 1992.

———. “‘Gods Without Altars’: The Belvedere in Paris.” In Il Cortile delle statue: der Statuenhof des
Belvedere im Vatikan. Akten des internationalen Kongresses zu Ehren von Richard Krautheimer, Rom,

516

Fredrik Thomasson

21.-23. Oktober 1992, edited by Matthias Winner, Bernard Andreae, and Carlo Pietrangeli, 459–469.
Mainz: von Zabern, 1998.

Kelly, Jason M. The Society of Dilettanti. Archaeology and Identity in the British Enlightenment. New
Haven, CT, and London: Yale University Press, 2009.

Klindt-Jensen, Ole. A History of Scandinavian Archaeology. London: Thames & Hudson, 1975.

Leask, Nigel. Curiosity and the Aesthetics of Travel Writing, 1770–1840. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2002.

[Le]Chevalier, J. B. A Description of the Plain of Troy: With a Map of That Region, Delineated From an
Actual Survey. Edinburgh, 1791.

Lechevalier, J.B. Reise nach Troas oder Gemählde der Eben von Troja in ihrem gegenwärtigen Zustande
vom Bürger Lechevalier. Translated and abridged by C.G. Lenz. Altenburg and Erfurt, 1800.

———. Voyage de la Propontide et du Pont-Euxin. 2 vols. Paris, 1800.

Legrand, P.E. “Biographie de Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel. Antiquaire et Consul (1753–1838).”
Revue Archéologique, (1897) t. 30: 41–66, 185–201, 385–404, t. 31: 185–223.

Merryman, John Henry, ed. Imperialism, Art and Restitution. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 2006.

Miles, Margaret M. Art as Plunder. the Ancient Origins of Debate About Cultural Property. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2008.

Montagu, Lady. Letters of the Right Honourable Lady M—y W—y M———e: Written, During Her
Travels in Europe, Asia and Africa, to Persons of Distinction. London, 1763.

Moreland, John. Archaeology and Text. London: Duckworth, 2001.

———. “Archaeology and Texts: Subservience or Enlightenment.” Annual Review of Anthropology 35
(2006): 135–151.

North Douglas, Honble. Fred. Sylv. An Essay on Certain Points of Resemblance Between the Ancient
and Modern Greeks. London, 1813.

Panzac, Daniel. La peste dans l’empire ottoman 1700–1850. Paris: Association pour le développement
des études turques, 1985.

Patrizio Gunning, Lucia. The British Consular Service in the Aegean and the Collection of Antiquities
for the British Museum. Farnham: Ashgate, 2009.

Payne Knight, Richard. An Analytical Essay on the Greek Alphabet. London, 1791.

Pingaud, Léonce. Choiseul-Gouffier. La France en Orient sous Louis XVI. Paris: A. Picard, 1887.

Pococke, Richard. A Description of the East, and Some Other Countries. 2 vols., 3 parts. London,
1743–5.

Quatremère de Quincy, Antoine-Chrysostome. Considérations morales sur la destination des ouvrages
de l’art, ou de l’influence de leur emploi sur le génie et le goût de ceux qui les produisent ou qui les
jugent, et sur le sentiment de ceux qui en jouissent et en reçoivent les impressions. Paris: Crapelet, 1815.

Redford, Bruce. “The Antiquities of Athens and Ionian Antiquities.” In Dilettanti. The Antic and the
Antique in Eighteenth-Century England, 44–82. Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2008.

Justifying and Criticizing Removals

517

Reid, Donald M., Whose Pharaohs? Archaeology, Museums, and Egyptian National Identity From
Napoleon to World War I. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2002.

Report from the Select Committee of the House of Commons on the Earl of Elgin’s Collection of Sculp-
tured Marbles, &c. London, 1816.

Richter, Gisela. The Archaic Gravestones of Attica. London: Phaidon Press, 1961.

Schnapp, Alain. La conquête du passé: aux origines de l’archéologie. Paris: Carré, 1993.

Sestini, Domenico. Lettere odeporiche o sia Viaggio per la penisola di Cizico per Brussa e Nicea. . . 2
vols. Livorno, 1785.

Shaw, Jane. Miracles in Enlightenment England. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.

Smith, A. H. “Lord Elgin and His Collection.” The Journal of Hellenic Studies 36 (1916): 163–372.

Spivak, Gayatri. “Can the Subaltern Speak?” In Marxism and the Interpretation of Cultures, edited by
Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg, 271–315. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988.

St. Clair, William. Lord Elgin and the Marbles, 3rd revised edition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 1998.

Stuart, James, and Nicholas Revett. The Antiquities of Athens. 4 vols. London, 1762, 1787(8), 1794,
1816.

Thomasson, Fredrik. The life of J. D. Åkerblad: Egyptian Decipherment and Orientalism in Revolu-
tionary Times. Forthcoming. Leiden: Brill, 2011.

Villoison, Jean-Baptiste-Gaspard D’Ansse de. De l’Hellade à la Grèce. Voyage en Grèce et au Levant,
1784–1786. Edited by Etienne Famerie. Hildesheim: G. Olms, 2006.

Vin, J. P. A. van der. Travellers to Greece and Constantinople: Ancient Monuments and Old Traditions
in Medieval Travellers’ Tales. 2 vols. Istanbul: Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Instituut te ^Is-
tanbul, 1980.

Williams, Dyfri. “‘Of Publick Utility and Publick Property?’: Lord Elgin and the Parthenon Sculp-
tures.” In Appropriating Antiquity, Saisir l’Antique. Collections et collectionneurs d’antiques en Belgique
et en Grande-Bretagne au XIXe siècle, edited by Athéna Tsingarida and Donna Kurtz, 103–164. Brus-
sels: Le Livre Timperman, 2002.

———. “Lord Elgin’s firman.” Journal of the History of Collections 21 (2009): 49–76.

Wilton, Andrew. “William Pars and His Work in Asia Minor.” In Richard Chandler. Travels in Asia
Minor 1764–1765. Edited and abridged by Edith Clay, xix–xlv. London: British Museum, 1971.

Wittman, William. Travels in Turkey, Asia Minor, Syria, and Across the desert into Egypt During the
Years 1799, 1800, and 1801, In Company With the Turkish Army and the British Military Mission. . . .
London, 1803.

Wood, Robert. The Ruins of Palmyra, Otherwise Tedmor, in the Desart. London, 1753.

Zambon, Alessia. “Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel et la constitution de la collection Choiseul-
Gouffier.” In Le voyage en Grèce du comte de Choiseul-Gouffier edited by O. Cavalier, 62–83. Avignon:
Fondation Calvet et Editions A Barthélemy, 2007. See also Zambon’s forthcoming book on Fauvel.

———. Le musée Fauvel. www.fauvel.free.fr

Åkerblad, see Akerblad.


