Protecting Ireland's  Archaeological
Heritage
Eamonn P. Kelly*

Antiquities  legislation  in  the  Republic  of  Ireland  is  very  different
from that  which  obtains  in  England,  Wales  and  Scotland.  The  law
in  Northern  Ireland  is  closer  to  that  in  the  Republic  but  there  are
important differences,  especially  in relation to title. In the  Republic
of Ireland, since 1930, the National Monuments Act has regulated, by
licence, the excavation, export and conservation of all archaeological
objects. It also requires that all finds of archaeological  objects, cas-
ual or otherwise, be reported to the National Museum of Ireland. The
Act was amended in  1954, partly in response to the illegal export of
an eighth century reliquary, known  as the  Emly  Shrine, which was
acquired by the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, USA.

The introduction of cheap metal detectors during the  1970s intro-
duced  a new  situation.  The  law did not  prohibit  the  use  of the de-
vices to search for  objects,  although  a license was needed  in order
to dig for  archaeological  objects thus found.  However, the  fact  that
offenders  faced  a fine of  only  IR£ 10 encouraged  people  to  ignore
the law and made enforcement difficult.  There is evidence that many
metal detecting enthusiasts adhered, initially, to a self imposed code
of practice, which required that archaeological  sites be avoided  and
finds  of  historical  interest  be  reported.  By  1980  this  trend  had
changed and it became clear to the National Museum authorities that
most metal detected finds were being located on archaeological sites.
The discovery of a hoard of early church treasure at  Derrynaflan,
Co. Tipperary, in  1980, accelerated this trend and popularised metal
detecting.  Of eighth  and ninth  centuries  A. D. date, the hoard  con-
sisted of a chalice, paten, strainer and bronze basin. It was uncovered
by a man and his son, using a metal detector, within a large monastic
enclosure,  a portion of which was a protected National  Monument.
A finder's  reward, offered  by the  State, was rejected  as  insufficient
and the finders embarked  on legal proceedings  to  secure the  return
of the find. In July  1986 the  High  Court ruled  that  the find, or  its
value  (IR£ 5.5m),  should  be  returned  to  the  finders.  The  State  ap-
pealed to the  Supreme Court, which delivered  its judgement  in De-

Acting Keeper of Irish Antiquities, National  Museum  of  Ireland.

213

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Eamonn P. Kelly

'*>">..  .

The  Derrynaflan  Treasure  (left).  Found  in  1980  by  a  man  and  his  son  using  a  metal  detector  within  a
monastic  enclosure  at  Derrynaflan,  Co.  Tipperary.  The  hoard,  which  dates  to  the  8th-9th  centuries  A.D.,
contained  a  silver  chalice  and  paten,  a  gilt  bronze  strainer,  a  stand  for  the  paten  and  a  large  bronze  bowl
which  had  been  placed  over  the  other  objects.  The find resulted  in  an  upsurge  of metal  detecting  in  Ireland
which  led  to  changes  in  the  law  in  1987.
Early  Iron  Age  bronze  bowl  (right)  found  containing  a  cremation  burial  within  a  hillfort  at  Fore,  Co.
Westmeath.  Date:  1st century  B.C. The  object  was found  using  a metal  detector  and  was  recovered  from  a
dealer.
All  photographs  which  kind  permission  of The National  Museums  of  Ireland.  Dublin.

cember  1987. The treasure was declared to be State property and the
finders  received  a  reward  of  IR£ 50,000.  (In  an  earlier  settlement
with  the  State,  the  two  landowners  had  accepted  payment  of
IR£ 25,000  each). The ruling  extended  the  State's  ownership  to in-
clude  all  antiquities  of  national  importance,  where  the  true  owner
(the person who lost or deposited the object, or his/her heir) was not
known.

Effectively  this meant that all archaeological objects  found  within
the  jurisdiction  became  State  property.  The  Supreme  Court  laid
down  guidelines  on the payment  of  finder's  rewards and  dealt with
the relative  merits  of claims  by landowners  and  finders.

By  the  mid  1980s, although  it was  realised  that treasure  hunting
had become a lucrative  business, the official  response remained  un-
coordinated.  Throughout  the  early  1980s  the  National  Museum  of
Ireland  acquired  metal  detected  finds,  often  via  middle  men  and
most  appeared  to have been  found  on archaeological  sites. The  site
of  a  crannog  or  lake  dwelling  in  a  dried-out  lake  at  Newtownlow,
Co.  Westmeath  produced  a  large  number  of  early  medieval  finds
which  included  a silver inlaid bronze plaque and an elaborate  whet-
stone  of  tenth  or  eleventh  century  date.  The  whetstone,  although
much later in date, may be related to the sceptre found  in the Sutton
Hoo  burial.  Elaborate  mounts  from  the  door  of  an  early  Christian
monastery  were found  at Donore, Co. Meath. Other  important  finds
included  a bronze  bowl of first century  B. C. date found  containing
a  cremation  burial  within  a  hillfort  at  Fore,  Co.  Westmeath  and  a
decorated  bronze mount, possibly a book cover, from  the monastery
of Inisbofin,  Lough Ree, Co. Westmeath.

214

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Protecting  Ireland's  Archaeological  Heritage

During  1984  the  illegal  excavation  of  Staad  Abbey,  Co.  Sligo
resulted  in the first  successful  prosecution  of a metal detecting en-
thusiast.  The culprit, Mr. Patrick Davis from Co. Dublin, was  fined
the  maximum  IR£ 10, with  IR£250  costs.  Staad  Abbey  overlooks
Streedagh  Strand where three  Spanish Armada  ships were  wrecked
in 1588. Currently, the State is involved in legal proceedings involv-
ing members of a diving group who claim to be salvors in possession
of the wrecks. The claim is being contested.

Investigations revealed that there were a number of treasure hunt-
ing groups active, most notably in the midlands, where the wealthiest
sites  are  located.  The  favourite  sites  to be  targeted  were  crannogs.
Many  of  the  objects  located  on  such  sites  lay  underwater,  either
because  of erosion  of  the  sites  or because  objects  had been  lost  in
the water in antiquity. In order to recover these the treasure hunters
had trained  as divers. Some travelled  abroad for  training, to ensure
that there was no record, in Ireland, of their diving abilities.

Among the important crannog finds to be recovered were a hoard
of sixteenth century gold and  silver coins and a gold ring found  on
Cherry  Island,  Lough  Ennell,  Co. Westmeath  and  five  Viking  age
ingots,  weighing  nearly  seven  pounds  each,  from  Rocky  Island,
Lough Ennell.  A huge hoard of Viking Age silver ingots, having a
total weight  of  sixty pounds, were found  at Carrick,  Lough Ennell.
The Carrick hoard was not metal detected; some of the ingots, how-
ever,  were  taken  illegally  to  Belgium  from  where  they  were  reco-
vered  subsequently.  Three  Viking  age  hoards  of  silver  were  found
on Big Island, Lough Ennell. These included  ingots weighing more
than  one pound  each,  similar  to those  found  at  Carrick,  as  well  as
hack  silver  and  coins.  Hoards  of  Anglo-Saxon,  Viking  and  Cufic
coins are common on crannogs. One  such hoard from a crannog in
Lough  Lene,  Co.  Westmeath  was  recovered  from  a  number  of
sources  in  Britain  and  Ireland.  Containing  Hiberno-Norse  and  An-
glo-Saxon coins, the Lough Lene hoard had been broken up and sold
in London.  An important Anglo-Saxon coin hoard from a crannog in
Bishops  Lough  was  also  recovered  from  the  London  coin  market,
having been exported illegally.

A crannog  in Lough  Derravarragh,  Co. Westmeath yielded  large
numbers  of  valuable  finds  including  an  enamelled  bronze  plaque
from  an early Christian  shrine and Viking bracelets.  Other crannog
finds  included  an  elaborate  eighth  century  bronze  bucket  from
Clooneenbaun,  Co.  Roscommon;  an  eighth  century  silver  chalice
and paten from Lough  Kinale,  Co. Longford;  a  silver  brooch  with
gold  filigree  panels  from  Rinn  Lough,  Co.  Leitrim  and  decorated
bronze  plaques,  believed  to  be  harness  mounts,  found  in  Temple-
house  Lake, Co. Sligo. A hoard of hack  silver from Lough Kinale,
which was illegally exported to Australia, was recovered some years
later, as were two Viking silver bracelets from Rathmoley, Co. Tip-
perary, which, though not treasure hunted, had been exported with-
out application having been made for an export licence. In the same

215

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Eamonn P. Kelly

x

Decorated  door  knocker  (and  detail  on  next page) from Donore, Co. Meath.  Date:  8th  century  A.D.

216

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Protecting  Ireland's  Archaeological  Heritage

category  as  the  bracelets  were  two  gold-covered  Late  Bronze  Age
bullae, found  within a ceramic vessel  at Annaghbeg por Monastere-
dan, Co. Sligo and a bronze cauldron, believed to be from Co. Clare.
The bullae and cauldron had been offered  for  sale in London.

Ancient river fords were another favourite  target of treasure hun-
ters.  At  one  such  site  on  the  river  Shannon,  near  Athlone,  a  four-
man gang used a moveable rope grid,  10,000 square meters in area,
to assist them in their search for antiquities. Hundreds of prehistoric
bronze weapons, as well as objects of later date were recovered from
this  and  other  ford  sites.  Among  the  most  important  was  a  large
bronze shield dating to the eighth century B. C. and the mounts  for
an  elaborate  saddle  of  early  seventh  century  date, both  found  near
Athlone.

Elsewhere,  there  were  groups  searching  monuments  located,
mainly, on farmland, who in order to avoid detection, operated, usu-
ally,  at  night  (so-called  night-hawk  gangs).  Some  very  important
finds which  were  made  have  been  recovered  by  the  National  Mu-
seum but for  legal reasons these cannot be described.  More routine
finds  included  a  late  medieval  jetton  mould  found  on  a  national
monument  at  Clonmines,  Co. Wexford  and  the  enamelled  terminal
of an early medieval bracelet found  at Carbury, Co. Kildare.

The  treasure  hunting  groups  maintained  close  contact  and
swopped  intelligence.  Regular  meetings  were  held  to  discuss  the
strategies  they  might  adopt  to  counter  official  actions  being  taken
against them.  Black  market  dealers  and private  collectors,  some  of
whom were themselves treasure hunters, participated in these activi-
ties. The looters were well equipped and well researched. Equipment
included sophisticated metal detectors and other remote sensing de-
vices, subaqua gear and boats. To locate archaeological  sites, aerial
photographs  were  consulted  and,  on  occasion,  treasure  hunters

217

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Eamonn  P. Kelly

•>

•  "»   >  •  • »„   s »»

Decorated  book  cover
found  on  the  monastic
island  of  Inchbofin,
Lough  Ree, Co.
Westmeath.  Date 9th
century  A.D.

undertook  their  own  aerial  reconnaissance.  Library  research  was
undertaken  and  most treasure  hunters had  built  up their  own  refer-
ence libraries. One such library was sold some years ago for  around
IRf  30,000.  Of  particular  interest  were  monument  inventories,
which  were used  as "hit lists" by the looters. It is ironic that publi-
cations  designed  to  assist  the  planning  authorities  protect  monu-
ments  from  destruction came to be abused in this manner.

In  1986 the National Museum became aware of the finding  of two
major  pieces  of  eighth  century  metalwork.  The  discoveries  proved
crucial  in  that they led to  a high  level  decision  being  made to take
effective  action  against  treasure  hunting.  The  finds  were  a  pro-
cessional  cross,  believed  to  have  been  found  in  Tully  Lough,  Co.
Roscommon  and  a book  shrine, found  in Lough  Kinale, Co. Long-

218

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Protecting  Ireland's  Archaeological  Heritage

ford. Illegal export of the Lough Kinale book shrine was considered
by the  finders  and  a court  in Athlone  heard  evidence  of an  attempt
to  sell  the Tully  Lough  processional  cross  to  the  Getty  Museum  in
California,  for  $ 1.75m.

The first  step taken to counteract  the problem  was the  setting up,
towards  the  end  of  1986,  of  a  committee  composed  of  personnel
from the Arts and Culture Section, Department of the Taoiseach (the
Prime Minister's  Department)  and the National  Museum  of  Ireland.
Its  first  objective  was  to  ensure  the  acquisition  by  the  museum  of
the Lough Kinale book  shrine, the  discovery  of which had  recently
become  known.  This  objective  was  realised  quickly  and  the  com-
mittee, thereafter,  turned  its  attention  to  the  wider  problem.  It  was
decided  to  target  not  only  the  treasure  hunters  but  also  the' black
market dealers and antiquities collectors who are key participants in
the illicit trade. The committee was expanded to include  representa-
tives from  the National Monuments Branch, Office  of Public Works,
Police Headquarters  and the Chief  State  Solicitor's  Office.

An analysis of the  situation  determined  that progress would  need
to be made in a number of areas  if a successful  outcome was to be
achieved.  For  operational  reasons,  it  would  be  unwise  to  provide
details of the precise  steps taken. It must be obvious, however, that
great emphasis was placed  on intelligence  gathering and some indi-
viduals  within  the treasure  hunting  scene  were  persuaded  to  assist.
Some of these people placed themselves in considerable danger. One
man was advised by a senior police officer  about his personal  safety
following  a series of threats and what may have been an attempt  to
shoot him. On one occasion National Museum officials  unexpectedly
visited  a  former  treasure  hunter  whose  assistance  they  required  in
connection with a police investigation. In the process, they stumbled
upon  four  Provisional  I. R. A. men, recently  escaped  from  prison  in
Northern Ireland. One escapee had to be prevailed upon not to shoot
the  curators,  whom  he  mistook  for  police  officers.  This  incident
underlined  the  unexpected  dangers  which  could  be  encountered  in
undertaking this type of work. It would be wrong, however, to create
the impression that there is a major  involvement  in treasure hunting
by paramilitary organisations. Nor is it the case that it was an activity
engaged  in  mainly  by  unemployed  persons  seeking  to  provide  a
livelihood.  Many,, if  not  most,  of  the  top  treasure  hunters  were
reasonably  well  off  and  thus  able  to  invest  the  funds  necessary  to
purchase  the  equipment  needed  such  as  metal  detectors,  subaqua
gear, ordnance  survey maps and books.

In addition  to the  incident  described  earlier, National  Museum of
Ireland  personnel  encountered  many  other  problems  while  engaged
in  this  work.  Substantial  bribes  were  offered  as  an  inducement  to
assist  the  treasure  hunters;  threats  were  issued;  personal  property
was vandalised;  blackmail  was  attempted  and  a campaign  of  vilifi-
cation of certain  officials  was embarked  upon.

219

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Eamonn  P. Kelly

The involvement of the police at a high level was essential to the
overall  success  of the  effort.  The  fact  that  there  is  a  single  police
force  in the Republic of Ireland is of considerable operational advan-
tage.  Decisions  at a high  level  can  be  implemented  down  the  line.
Since  1987  the  police  have  been  involved  in  a  series  of  investi-
gations which have led to the recovery of a large number of treasure
hunted  antiquities. This  includes  an  enamelled  mount  and  a  decor-
ated gilt bronze mount found  on a monastic site at Linns, Co. Louth,
which  were  recovered  by the police  in Drogheda.  In  seeking  to re-
cover looted or stolen cultural property which was taken abroad, the
Irish police and the National Museum of Ireland have liaised closely
with  foreign  police  forces.  There  has  been  successful  cooperation
with police forces  in Britain and with the Royal Ulster Constabulary,
as well  as with  Interpol  and the F. B. I.  Some  specialised  assistance
was provided by the Irish Army Ranger Unit, which  is an elite anti-
terrorism  force  along the lines of the  S. A. S.

When  the  Committee  was  set  up  in  the  Department  of  the Tao-
iseach, the introduction  of new legislation  was already  in train. The
Committee  made  a number  of  new  recommendations  which  it  be-
lieved  would  result  in  the  law  being  enforced  effectively. 
In  July
1987, the National Monuments (Amendment) Act  was enacted. Un-
der its provisions the use of metal detectors, magnetometers or other
electronic  detecting  devices  to  search  for  archaeological  objects,
other than by licence, was made illegal. Police powers were included
in the act which would enable the police to conduct searches, under
warrant,  for  looted antiquities.

It was not only inland archaeological  sites which were the subject
of  attention.  Twenty-six  Spanish  Armada  vessels  and  many  other
important  historic  wrecks are  situated  around  the  Irish  coast  and  it
was  known  that  some of these  had  been  looted.  Currently  the  Irish
Government  is  seeking  the  return  of  two  Tudor  cannon  removed
from  a  wreck  off  the  Co.  Waterford  coast  and  purchased  sub-
sequently  by  the  Tower  of  London.  A  small  bronze  cannon  found
by  English  divers  off  the  Co.  Cork  coast  was  returned  to  Ireland
following  a  tip-off  from  the  Manchester  City  Museum.  The  1987
National Monuments (Amendment) Act gave automatic protection  to
all wrecks over  100 years old. Anyone wishing to dive on any under-
water  archaeological  site,  or  historic  wreck,  must  first  obtain  a  li-
cence.  This  would  only  allow  a diver  to  visit  the  location:  he/she
would not be entitled to remove anything, or otherwise interfere with
the  site.  (Generally,  such  licences  are  issued  to  diving  clubs  who
then  assume  a  responsibility  for  monitoring  the  wreck  sites.  The
licensing  system  has  worked  well  and  enjoys  the  support  of  the
sports diving  community).

Penalties  for  offences  under  the  National  Monuments Act  were
increased  from  IR£  10 to a fine of IR£ 50,000 and  a year in prison.
It was made an offence  to promote  treasure hunting and this pro-
vision  effectively  banned the sale of certain  publications  within  the

220

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Protecting  Ireland's Archaeological  Heritage

Bronze plaque  bearing
a  cross design  in red
and yellow  enamel  and
blue  and white mille-
fiori  glass. Found an  a
crannog  or lake  dwell-
ing in Lough  Derravar-
ragh, Co.  Westmeath.
Date  8th-9th  century
A.D.

jurisdiction. This aspect  of the  legislation  had other results; for  ex-
ample, The Sun newspaper was obliged to retract an article which it
published in its Irish edition which gave advice on treasure hunting.
The  newspaper  subsequently  advised  its  Irish  readers  that  treasure
hunting was illegal in Ireland.

The question of the ownership of archaeological objects had been
resolved by the Supreme Court ruling on the Derrynaflan  find.  This
opened  up the route  whereby  civil  actions  could be  initiated  to re-
cover  looted  property.  A  number  of  such  actions  are  in  train  cur-
rently.

The campaign against treasure hunting and the looting of ancient
sites generated much publicity, particularly when the recovery of ob-
jects from abroad was involved. Many thousands of looted items were
recovered in Ireland and material was also recovered from Britain, the
Continent and as far afield as Australia and the United States.

Decorated  stonework,  located  on numerous  early monastic  sites,
is  extremely  vulnerable  and  many  have  been  stolen  for  the  illegal
antiquities trade. Some of the thefts were by metal detecting treasure
hunters.  Over  a  number  of  years,  museum  officers  and  the  police
recovered decorated stonework stolen from  protected monastic  sites
at  Iniscealtra,  Co.  Clare,  Clonmacnoise,  Co.  Offaly  and  Carrown-
temple, Co.  Sligo. The theft  of  these  objects,  some  of  which  were
destined for illegal export to the United States, resulted in a number

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

221

Eamonn P. Kelly

, it*.,;,,

Eighth  century  A.D.  bronze  harness  mount  bearing  an  interlaced  animal  design.  Found  near  a  crannog  in
Templehouse  Lake,  Co. Sligo.

222

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Protecting  Ireland's  Archaeological  Heritage

of prosecutions.  International  publicity  surrounded  the recovery,  in
1991, of Early Christian carvings which were offered  for  sale in the
United States. The carvings  —  decorated and inscribed Early Chris-
tian gravestones and a cross-inscribed pillar stone —  had been stolen
by a treasure hunting gang from an ancient monastery on the island
of  Inchcleraun,  Lough  Ree,  Co.  Longford.  The  site  is  a  National
Monument.  The  theft  was  the  most  ambitious  operation  known  to
have been attempted. The main character involved was Peter Kenny,
a  retired  sailor  who used  his own  boat  to transport  the  material  to
Miami, Florida. From there, Kenny transported them by road to Bos-
ton,  where  he  attempted  a  sale to  Boston  College.  Mr. Kenny  had
first come to the National Museum's attention in 1987 and his activi-
ties  had  been  watched  closely  by  the  authorities.  An  elaborate
"sting" operation was mounted by the Terrorism and Fugitive Squad
of the F. B. I. in Boston, assisted by the Irish police and the National
Museum of Ireland. After  his arrest, Peter Kenny learned with great
surprise  that  Mr. Ed  Clarke, the wealthy patron  of  Boston  College
with whom he had sought to negotiate  a sale price of $2.5m. as, in
fact,  a senior  FBI  officer.  During  questioning,  Mr. Kenny  admitted
that  he  intended  to  make  a  substantial  donation  from  the  proceeds
to  Noraid,  an  Irish  American  Republican  support  group.  Simul-
taneously, a second "sting" operation was mounted which led to the
arrest, in Ireland, of Peter Kenny's  associates  who were  attempting
to  steal  other  stone  carvings  for  sale  to Boston  College.  Two men
were  prosecuted  and  were  fined  up  to  IR£ 10,000.  A  third  man,
a  serving  police  officer,  resigned from the  force.  The  Peter  Kenny
affair  was  not  an  isolated  one.  Other  stolen  carvings  have  been
recovered,  such  as  a  cross-inscribed  pillar  stone  retrieved  from
Germany.  Following  a  tip  off,  the  attempted  export  of  part  of  a
high  cross  was  blocked  and  the  object  was  acquired  by  the
National  Museum.

Some  other  aspects  of  the  illegal  trade  in  antiquities  should  be
referred to in passing. Numerous fakes have been manufactured  and
sold as genuine  antiquities. A popular  line has been  stone  carvings
which are purported to be of Early Iron Age or Medieval age. Other
forgeries  or fakes  which have appeared, allegedly  as metal detected
finds,  have included  reproduction  silver Anglo-Saxon  coins  as well
as silver copies  of  coins of  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  century date.
In two  separate cases Egyptian  gold ear-rings were offered  for  sale
as examples of Irish Late Bronze Age  ring-money.

In  October  1990, the  Taoiseach,  Charles  Haughey,  intervened  to
ensure the recovery  of  a Bronze Age gold collar, or lunula,  known
to have  been  illegally  removed  from  Irish jurisdiction  through  the
treasure hunting network and offered  for sale by Christie's, London.
Because the lunula had passed through the hands of metal detecting
enthusiasts it was assumed that the object had been found  by treas-
ure-hunters  and  that  it  was  State  property.  However,  once  it  was
returned  to  Ireland  detailed  examination  in  the  National  Museum

223

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Eamonn P. Kelly

\

1"  

J

Eighth  century  A.D.
book  shrine  found  by
treasure  hunter,  in
1986,  near  a  crannog  in
Lough  Kinale, Co.
Longford.  The  circum-
stances  surrounding  the
discovery  of  the  book
shrine  led  to  a  deter-
mined  effort  by  the
State  to  counter  the ac-
tivities  of  treasure
hunters.

revealed  that  the  object  was  one  of  a  number  of  antiquities  stolen
from  the  Limerick  City  Museum  in  1969. The object  had  been  alt-
ered,  presumably  to disguise  its  origins.  Recently  the  Royal  Ulster
Constabulary  recovered  a penannular  brooch  which  was among the
objects  stolen with the lunula. They arrested a man who is a spokes-
person  for  metal  detector  users  in  Northern  Ireland.  The  R. U. C.
also recovered unreported antiquities believed to have been found in
recent  years  in  Northern  Ireland.  Police  investigations  are  in  train
currently  to  locate  the rest  of  the  objects  stolen  from  the  Limerick
Museum.  There  is  close  cooperation  between  the  State  archaeolog-
ical bodies  in Northern  Ireland  and the Republic  of Ireland. A Liai-
son Committee  on Metal Detecting has been in existence for a num-
ber of years and meetings of representatives from  the State archaeol-
ogical  authorities  in  both  jurisdictions  have  met  in  Dublin  and
Belfast.  The  purpose of the meetings  has  been  to share  intelligence
and to pursue and coordinate joint policies to counteract the problem
of treasure  hunting.

At present  it  is believed  that  the  campaign  against  the  organised
looting  of  archaeological  sites  in  the  Republic  of  Ireland  has  been
largely  successful.  A great quantity  of  material  has  been  recovered
and  is  undergoing  study.  Criminal  prosecutions  are  pending  and  a
number  of  civil  actions  await  hearing  by  the  High  Court.  Further
legislation  is  planned,  to  seal  off  any  loop-holes  in  the  law.  These

224

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

Protecting  Ireland's  Archaeological  Heritage

efforts  enjoy  widespread  public  support  and  cross-party  political
support.

It was realised that not all the people involved in metal detecting,
or in wreck diving, could be characterised as hardened treasure hun-
ters. Many had a genuine interest  in the past and were not motivated
by  financial  greed.  Objection  to  their  activities  was  not  directed
against  the  technology  they  employed  but  against  its  unsupervised
and illegal use. A dialogue was opened up with the Metal Detecting
Society  of  Ireland  and with  interested  members  of the  diving  com-
munity. It was pointed out that the authorities would be prepared  to
licence well thought  out  and  properly  supervised  projects,  whereby
the  interests of enthusiasts  could be catered  for.

It took  some  years  for  this  approach  to prove  successful,  largely
because  of  suspicion  about  the  motives  and  intentions  of  the  auth-
orities.  Eventually,  however,  large  numbers  of  metal  detector  en-
thusiasts  and  former  treasure  hunting  divers  came  to  see that  there
were no real  alternatives  to working  in cooperation  with  State bod-
ies. That this was so was due, partly, to the success enjoyed  in coun-
tering  illegal  activities,  prosecuting  wrong  doers  and  recovering
looted antiquities. The Metal Detecting  Society now works in coop-
eration with the authorities and its members have assisted archaeolo-
gists  on  a  number  of  important  projects.  Very  often  this  work  is
undertaken  subject  to  payment  of  consultants'  fees.  During  1990
a  new  organisation  came  into  being.  Named  the  Irish  Underwater
Archaeology  Research  Team  it  includes,  among  its  membership, a
number  of  former  treasure  hunters.  The  organisation  has  been  in-
volved,  officially,  in  underwater  excavations  and  surveys  and  has
been in receipt of large sums of public money. It is accepted, widely,
that  the  approaches  which  were  taken  have  been  effective  in  cur-
tailing treasure hunting in Ireland, while at the same time providing
legitimate  outlets for  amateurs who wish to have an involvement  in
the  controlled  investigation  of  the  archaeological  heritage.  It  is  an
evolving  situation  and  there  is  considerable  optimism  about  future
prospects.

Success could  not have been  achieved  without  the availability  of
strong  protective  legislation  which  enjoyed  public  support,  backed
up by effective  action by the authorities. Official  government  spok-
esmen have stated the determination  of the Irish government to pro-
tect the archaeological heritage from  looters. This determination has
been  demonstrated  by  the  intervention  of  a  number  of  ministers,
including the Prime Minister, to ensure the recovery  of objects  both
at home and abroad. This strong political  commitment  opens up the
possibility  of  achieving  cooperation  with  other  governments.  Such
cooperation  is  vital  if  the  international  trade  in  stolen  and  looted
antiquities  is to be tackled  effectively.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305

225

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000305


