International Journal of Cultural Property (2005) 12:201–223. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2005 International Cultural Property Society
DOI: 10.1017/S0940739105050095

Museums and Cultural Property:
A Retreat from the Internationalist
Approach
Robert Hallman*

Abstract: Responding to J. H. Merryman’s discussion of cultural property
internationalism in the preceding IJCP issue, this article examines the currency
of the internationalist perspective within the museum community. Perhaps
surprisingly, there is little evidence of adherence to an internationalist
perspective, at least among the official policies and publications of museums
and museum organizations. The article proposes that the current dissociation
with cultural internationalism in the acquisitions arena signals an important
shift, and bears significant long-term consequences for many museums.

In a 1986 article, Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property, Professor Merry-
man first identified the cultural internationalist approach to the disposition of cul-
tural property, contrasting it with a cultural nationalist position. Nearly 20 years
later, his framing of the debate continues to set the stage for conversations about
cultural property.

As Merryman explains in the preceding IJCP issue, he and fellow internation-
alists posit “a legally cognizable international interest in cultural property.” They
detect recognition of that interest in a number of international legal instruments,
including the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event
of Armed Conflict (1954) and UNESCO’s Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Prop-
erty (1970). They also see an internationalist agenda mandated by the duties set
forth in UNESCO’s constitution, which include, among others, conservation and
protection of cultural property and encouragement of international exchange. The
proper way to meet these obligations, the internationalist opines, is to permit in-

*Stanford University Law School. Email: rhallman@gmail.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. Many thanks to John Merryman and to reviewers from several museums
for their frank discussions and helpful suggestions.

201

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

202

ROBERT HALLMAN

ternational movement of cultural property, whereby works will find their way to
those who value them most and who will be their most able protectors. A licit
market, they contend, will also promote protection of cultural property by reduc-
ing or eliminating the black market in antiquities. They do not go so far as to
advocate for an unregulated market (“[n]o thinking person argues for free trade
in cultural property”)1, and they recognize that sometimes the additional infor-
mation provided by a work’s context will render it more important—to the whole
world—in its place of origin than it would be elsewhere. The internationalists also
carve out an exception for objects of ritual/religious importance to living cul-
tures, observing in such cases an overriding noneconomic value.

The opposing camp—populated in part by archaeologists and art-rich nations—
regards international trade as inimical to the protection of cultural property. The
cultural nationalists would vest custody over cultural property in its nation of or-
igin, where it is less likely to be severed from its context, or where, as part of a
national patrimony, it assumes a value that supersedes any economic value. They
understand the UNESCO obligation to encourage international exchange to con-
template temporary loans and maybe bartering among public institutions but not
a market in cultural property.

In his recent assessment of the case for cultural internationalism, Merryman
observes that the nationalist viewpoint has been incorporated, implicitly or ex-
plicitly, in a series of UNESCO initiatives that he casts as major deviations from
the organization’s internationalist constitution.2 He notes that, predictably, the ar-
chaeological community continues to promote this position, whereas antiquities
dealers and collectors continue to advocate against its embodiment in what they
consider excessive restraints on the international trade of cultural property.

Merryman’s assessment does not discuss the current stature of cultural inter-
nationalism within the museum community. In earlier writings, he grouped mu-
seums among the acquisitors, whose discourse concerning the movement of cultural
property, while underdeveloped, nonetheless “favor[s] the free international move-
ment of privately held cultural objects and oppose[s] the enforcement of source
nation export restrictions.” Merryman continues:

At the most pragmatic level, museums exist to acquire and conserve cul-
tural objects for study and display. Without free movement there will be
fewer opportunities for acquisition. . .

Acquisitors also base their support for the free international movement
of privately held cultural objects on other arguments. The existence of a
market preserves cultural objects that might otherwise be destroyed or
neglected by providing them with a market value. In an open, legitimate
trade, cultural objects can move to the people and institutions that value
them most and are therefore most likely to care for them. Museum col-
lections are built on occasional market acquisitions and, often more im-
portant, gifts from collectors. The range and quality of major private
collections depend on the existence of an internationally active and ex-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

203

perienced art trade. . . In basic agreement with the international free trade
movement, acquisitors argue that export controls should receive at most
only selective international enforcement. . . .3

Merryman’s assessment makes sense. It describes a stance that we would expect
the museum community, at least that portion of the museum community en-
gaged in the collection and display of international cultural property, to adopt.
Even friendly adversaries of Merryman agree that alternative, context-driven ap-
proaches to cultural property present difficult questions for museums.4

This article proposes that, logical as an association between museums and cul-
tural internationalism may appear, it is not borne out in the stated policies of
museums and museum organizations. Cultural internationalism does not shape
current museum acquisition policies. Its application within the museum commu-
nity is largely confined to defending against restitution claims, and even that ap-
plication is controversial. The temporary exchange of cultural property through
international loan exhibitions has proven to be the only form of international ex-
change in cultural property that the museum community broadly and openly
endorses.

This article explores why there is relatively little museum advocacy of cultural
internationalist ideals, even among members of the museum community whose
collections feature cultural property from other nations; even among the so-called
universal museums. Focusing on collecting institutions primarily, but not exclu-
sively, in the United States, it asks whether this reticence reflects a sea change in
museum ideology and practice or reflects politically expedient equivocation. It also
asks, “if not acquisition, what then for the Getty, the Metropolitan Museum of
Art, the British Museum, and other acquisitors?

The Museum Community

One reason why the museum community does not broadly adopt the acquisitors’
discourse is clear: only a small proportion of the museum community is made up
of acquisitors, institutions that actively collect cultural heritage from beyond the
borders of their home country. It is possible, then, that the voice of such museums
has been drowned out by the rest of the museum community for which inter-
national acquisitions are a nonissue or even a threat.5 Understanding the relative
absence of cultural internationalist advocacy requires that we find out who speaks
on behalf of the museum community.
1. ICOM

The International Council of Museums (ICOM) is a vast international association
of museums, museum professionals, and related organizations. With more than
17,000 members in 140 countries, ICOM represents the museum community at
its broadest, most inclusive level. It includes art museums but also historical houses,
science centers, retired naval ships, etc. Among its museum professionals are

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

204

ROBERT HALLMAN

curators, collection managers, archaeologists, and anthropologists. ICOM’s broad
constituency and its symbiotic relationship with UNESCO, with which it has been
formally affiliated since its founding in 1946, color ICOM’s official stance con-
cerning cultural property.6

If museums that collect cultural property internationally (acquisitors) do in-
deed embrace a different perspective on the movement of cultural property from
other members of the museum community, then ICOM is unlikely to represent
adequately the interests of such collecting institutions. Like the United Nations,
ICOM has a nation-based approach to museum issues. ICOM’s General Assem-
bly, its supreme policymaking body, acts through a voting system whereby each of
some 116 national committees has five votes; each of 29 international committees,
five votes; and each eligible affiliated organization, three votes. The museum com-
munity in Nepal thus has the same voting power as the U.S. museum community.
Oman and Qatar, collectively, have twice the United States’ votes. That observa-
tion is not a criticism—ICOM’s organizational scheme may be the best available
to meet its goals. However, it seeks to underscore two points; first, that the mu-
seum community does not divide proportionately along national lines; second,
that because relatively few nations are home to a significant number of acquisi-
tors, the acquisitors’ voice will be overwhelmed where it diverges from that of in-
stitutions that collect nationally, locally, or not at all.

ICOM supports UNESCO’s mandate to conserve and protect cultural property
and to encourage international exchange. Like UNESCO, its approach to these re-
sponsibilities diverges from the cultural internationalist approach. While it pro-
motes the preservation of cultural property as the heritage of all humankind, on
balance, ICOM considers cultural property primarily the province of its country
of origin.7 It is in its home nation that cultural property assumes its greatest sig-
nificance, informing a national identity and contributing to a national heritage.8
ICOM’s approach does not reject all forms of international exchange of cul-
tural property. ICOM has facilitated international exchange by encouraging and
standardizing loans and temporary exhibitions. In 1970, ICOM went so far as to
include among the responsibilities of museums in art-rich countries the duty “to
cooperate with foreign museums and other scientific institutions to ensure ade-
quate representation of that culture on an international scale.” 9 But like UNESCO’s
1976 Recommendation Concerning the International Exchange of Cultural Property,
which grew out of a 1974 study conducted by ICOM, the breed of international
exchange ICOM endorses is exchange on the terms of the country of origin,
whereby cultural property can and should cross borders but only under extensive
institutional or government supervision. ICOM shares, or perhaps fuels, UNESCO’s
distrust of the market. If, as Professor Merryman suggests, UNESCO’s 1976 Rec-
ommendation represents a sharp turn away from cultural property international-
ism, then ICOM has followed (or indeed led) UNESCO in that direction.

ICOM’s efforts to protect cultural property, dominated by its role in the cam-
paign to curb the illicit trade in antiquities, has further informed its understand-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

205

ing that cultural objects belong at home, in the country of origin. In the 1995
Declaration of Cuenca, for example, ICOM joined UNESCO and affiliated organi-
zations in developing a strategy to curtail the illicit trade in Latin American
cultural property. The declaration observes “[t]hat the State has diminished its
governing role, as the custodian entity responsible for the social function and cap-
italization of the benefits of the cultural heritage.” It also urges that nations “as-
sume the appropriate role in reinforcing the cultural identity of our peoples” by,
among other things, endorsing international cultural property initiatives, like the
UNESCO Convention and UNIDROIT, developing or enforcing national legisla-
tion, assuming “a more active attitude concerning recovery of expatriated cultural
heritage,” and promoting their cultural institutions.

In addition to its declarations and press releases, ICOM publishes its position
on cultural property through its Code of Ethics for Museums. The Code, adopted in
1986 and amended in 2001 and again in 2004, urges member institutions to refuse
the acquisition or display of works with an incomplete or questionable prov-
enance, as “such displays or usage can be seen to condone and contribute to the
illicit trade in cultural property.” (§ 4.5)

Every effort must be made before acquisition to ensure that any object
or specimen offered for purchase, gift, loan, bequest, or exchange has
not been illegally obtained in or exported from, its country of origin or
any intermediate country in which it might have been owned legally (in-
cluding the museum’s own country). Due diligence in this regard should
establish the full history of the item from discovery or production. (§ 2.3)

There is a narrow exception to the prohibition:

In very exceptional cases an item without provenance may have such an
inherently outstanding contribution to knowledge that it would be in
the public interest to preserve. The acceptance of such an item into a
museum collection should be the subject of a decision by specialists in
the discipline concerned and without national or international preju-
dice. (§ 3.4)

The Code imposes upon ICOM members an ethical obligation to uphold for-
eign nations’ export laws, and to establish a work’s full history prior to consider-
ing its acquisition. As critics are quick to point out, this means an object is guilty
until proven innocent. Exemption from the full-history rule appears to require
the consent of specialists beyond the acquiring institution itself. The Code evinces
a distrust, perhaps well founded, not only of the market but also of museums’
individual capacities to resist justifying acquisitions that ICOM fears facilitate an
illicit trade.

The Code further obliges members to adhere to the principles laid out in the
Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Con-
flict (1954), UNESCO’s Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the
Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (1970), UN-
IDROIT (1995), and recent UNESCO conventions. They should also be willing to
consider the restitution of cultural property:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

206

ROBERT HALLMAN

Museums should be prepared to initiate dialogues for the return of cul-
tural property to a country or people of origin. This should be under-
taken in an impartial manner, based on scientific, professional and
humanitarian principles as well as applicable local, national and inter-
national legislation, in preference to action at a governmental or polit-
ical level. (§ 6.2)

When a country or people of origin seek the restitution of an object or
specimen that can be demonstrated to have been exported or otherwise
transferred in violation of the principles of international and national
conventions, and shown to be part of that country’s or people’s cultural
or natural heritage, the museum concerned should, if legally free to do
so, take prompt and responsible steps to co-operate in its return. (§ 6.3)

2. Museum Organizations in Acquisitor Nations

Even in art-market nations, museum associations, such as the American Associa-
tion of Museums (AAM) and the UK Museums Association (UKMA), do less than
one might expect to promote the international movement of cultural property.
Acquisitors stand at a significant disadvantage if their views are not endorsed by
such national associations, which serve as the principal interface between the mu-
seum community and governments, international organizations, and courts.

UKMA Although it represents a number of acquisitors among its 600 insti-
tutional members, UKMA’s cultural property agenda seems to steer far clear of
cultural internationalism. In its Code of Ethics for Museums, UKMA follows ICOM
in requiring members to reject considering the acquisition of:

any item if there is any suspicion that, since 1970, it may have been stolen,
illegally excavated or removed from a monument, site or wreck contrary
to local law or otherwise acquired in or exported from its country of
origin (including the UK), or any intermediate country, in violation of
that country’s laws or any national and international treaties, unless the
museum is able to obtain permission from authorities with the requisite
jurisdiction in the country of origin. (§ 5.10)

UKMA’s Code also instructs member institutions to:

[d]eal sensitively and promptly with requests for repatriation both within
the UK and from abroad of items in the museum’s collection, taking
into account: the law; current thinking on the subject; the interests of
actual and cultural descendants; the strength of claimants’ relationship
to the items; their scientific, educational, cultural and historical impor-
tance; their future treatment. (§ 7.7)

In recent years, UKMA has lent considerable resources to address the problem
of illicit trade in cultural property. Its efforts, including statements before the UK
parliament and an influential report that it commissioned, culminated in the UK
ratification of the UNESCO Convention in 2002. The 64-page report, Stealing His-
tory, authored by members of the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Re-
search, rejects the internationalist position that a legitimate market might curb
the black market in antiquities. It calls for more effective controls over the move-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

207

ment of cultural property and urges the UK government to resist any World Trade
Organization (WTO) initiatives that would limit such controls.10 The report con-
cedes that museums may need the market, but it warns of the legal and ethical
dangers that museums face there.11 It cites alternatives to the continued pursuit of
ownership of cultural property, observing “a growing realisation that the best way
forward for museums that don’t want to encourage the illicit trade may be ambi-
tious programmes of inter-museum loans.” Quoting Martin Sullivan, former chair
of the U.S. Cultural Property Advisory Committee, the authors suggest that “[t]oo
many museums are still thinking in terms of ownership. . . Museums started out
being institutions for the preservation of cultural heritage. We have to get back to
that—and find some new ways to do it.” 12 That view, that the focus on acquisi-
tion is outdated or uncreative has some traction in the UK (and U.S.) museum
community.13

UKMA has weighed in on the topic of restitution as well. It has been highly
critical of the position adopted by a number of acquisitors in their 2002 Declara-
tion on the Importance and Value of Universal Museums (discussed later), and
of the British Museum in particular for its handling of the Parthenon Marbles
controversy.14

AAM The American Association of Museums (AAM) represents a museum
community that stands apart from others in its high proportion of private fund-
ing and in the independence and the sizeable acquisition budgets that sometimes
follow. Some posit that well-funded American acquisitors lag behind their Euro-
pean counterparts in rethinking acquisitions policies.15 But even if the U.S. com-
munity trails behind Europe in this regard, it is certainly moving in the same
direction. AAM’s enthusiasm for cultural internationalism has cooled to lukewarm.
Provisions in the AAM Code of Ethics, first established in 1993 and revised in
2000, require that “acquisition, disposal, and loan activities are conducted in a
manner that respects the protection and preservation of natural and cultural re-
sources and discourages illicit trade in such materials” and that “competing claims
of ownership that may be asserted in connection with objects in its custody should
be handled openly, seriously, responsively and with respect for the dignity of all
parties involved.” 16 The Code does not define what it means by illicit.

In 1999, responding to heightened media attention, AAM clarified its position
in a Statement on Cultural Property. The statement outlined a basic problem of
paucity of provenance information:

From earliest times, works of art have passed from country to country
with few if any records of their travels. They have frequently been the
victims of theft or plunder, and laws and policies of nations vary widely
concerning the effect of such events on the issue of title. This means
that those who are concerned about title because they wish to acquire or
use a work of art are often unable to clarify title status with reasonable
certainty because essential information is not readily available.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

208

ROBERT HALLMAN

The statement went on to affirm AAM support of the UNESCO Convention:
“[S]ince 1983, when the United States implemented the UNESCO Convention . . .
AAM has aggressively promoted the objectives of that Convention. It has done
this in its code of ethics, in its educational programs and in its encouragement of
museums to adopt self-imposed collection management policies that articulate ac-
quisition criteria.” 17

That communication was at least in part a response to the negative press and
the disapproval of some AAM constituents surrounding an amicus brief the or-
ganization had filed a year earlier in a case involving prominent New York collec-
tor Michael Steinhardt (discussed later).18 The brief urged the court against an
expansive interpretation of what is known as the McClain doctrine—a principle
established in a case before the Fifth Circuit that allows the application of the
National Stolen Property Act to protect ownership derived from a foreign patri-
mony law, even if the foreign government had not reduced its ownership to pos-
session.19 In short, the brief opposed broad U.S. enforcement of foreign export
controls. This was an unambiguously cultural internationalist move. It was also
consistent with past policies, including the group’s opposition to U.S. ratification
of UNIDROIT in 1995. But attitudes were changing, and support for the amicus
brief was mixed. When the same legal questions were again before the court two
years later, AAM chose not to get involved.

AAMD The Association of Art Museum Directors (AAMD), its membership
limited in size and collecting interests, represents more specifically the interests of
acquisitors such as the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Getty Museum, and oth-
ers. AAMD accordingly espouses a more robust cultural internationalist position
than any other museum organization, but recent statements and decisions suggest
that even at AAMD, open support for cultural internationalism may be tapering
off.

In a 2002 statement, Art Museums and the International Exchange of Cultural

Artifacts, AAMD set forth the following internationalist rationale:

The United States government has adopted a global perspective on cul-
ture, believing that citizens of other countries benefit from exposure to
American works of art just as Americans benefit from exposure to the
arts of other cultures. American museums are committed to the free ex-
change of ideas and the responsible acquisition of cultural artifacts.

While this basic commitment to internationalist principles was affirmed in a
2004 Report on the Acquisition of Archaeological Materials and Ancient Art, the point
of the report was to introduce a series of guidelines for acquisitions of inter-
national cultural property. The guidelines represent a significant shift. They re-
quire broad inquiry prior to acquisition and broad disclosure following acquisition.
They also advise members to comply with relevant domestic laws and to become
familiar with foreign laws, “[s]ince the status of a work of art under foreign law
may bear on its legal status under U.S. law. . .” While the guidelines stop short of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

209

advising members to comply with foreign export or patrimony laws, they present
whether “the importation [is] consistent with applicable law, including relevant
international conventions” 20 as a factor to consider in any acquisition decision.
The guidelines contemplate scenarios in which a museum may and should ac-
quire an important work with an incomplete provenance, but the examples prof-
fered sound a lot like the very exceptional standard enunciated in the ICOM Code
of Ethics.21

Although AAMD remains, on the whole, an actively internationalist organiza-
tion,22 one could interpret the rigorous guidelines, along with its decision not to
take a stand in the Schultz case (discussed later) and the emergence of a new non-
affiliated internationalist advocacy group, as at least a partial retreat from the spot-
light on AAMD’s part.

Museum Policies and Practices

A survey of acquisitors’ published policies suggests a general consensus that the
principles adopted in ICOM and national associations’ codes of ethics constitute
the only acceptable approach to the acquisition of cultural property.23 Of course,
a number of acquisitors’ policies are unpublished (or unwritten), and that may be
significant, yet it underscores the general idea that if a museum harbors a robust
cultural internationalist agenda, it does so in private. Moreover, certain acquisi-
tors that have delayed in adopting more rigorous acquisition policies have been
singled out for criticism.24 While there is more room for debate—and for the in-
troduction of internationalist principles—on the topic of restitution, ironically,
the deployment of a cultural internationalist justification for retaining cultural prop-
erty operates against an internationalist justification for acquiring it today.
1. Acquisition

According to Merryman’s acquisitors’ discourse, we should expect that a museum
actively engaged in collecting international cultural property would incorporate
internationalist ideals into its acquisition policies as far as it could do so legally
and without breaching compliance obligations under applicable ethics codes, but
that does not appear to be the case. Indeed, major collecting institutions have tended
to follow acquisitions policies that uphold foreign nations’ export laws whether or
not it is a legal requirement,25 and some have adopted policies that limit acquisi-
tions significantly further than ICOM and the UNESCO Convention would require.
In 1972, thirty years before the United Kingdom ratified the UNESCO Conven-
tion, the British Museum, keeper of the Parthenon Marbles, announced it would
not acquire illegally exported cultural property. In its current form, the museum’s
policy states that “[w]herever possible the Trustees will only acquire those objects
that have documentation to show that they were exported from their country of
origin before 1970 and this policy will apply to all objects of major importance.”
(§ 4.2.5) For minor antiquities, the museum reserves the right to allow its cura-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

210

ROBERT HALLMAN

tors to use their judgment as to whether acquisition should be pursued in spite of
an inadequate provenance.

The Berlin State Museums likewise adopted a strict acquisitions policy early on.
According to Wolf-Dieter Heilmeyer, director of the Museum of Classical Antiq-
uities, the policy means that the museums “will no longer acquire, display, or re-
store any objects that do not have clear provenances.” In short, “if there is any
doubt about provenance we don’t go further.” 26

The Metropolitan Museum of Art has not published an acquisitions policy, elect-
ing instead to be “guided in its acquisition pursuits by the policies set forth by the
[AAMD].” 27 After the acquisition guidelines enunciated in the 2004 AAMD Re-
port (discussed previously), that means the museum will be subject to a fairly
rigorous policy, even if vicariously. The conspicuously missing ingredient is an
unequivocal ban on acquiring works exported in contravention of foreign na-
tions’ laws.

Another major collector, the Getty Museum, once the very symbol of the ag-
gressively acquisitive American museum, has adopted a particularly stringent ac-
quisition policy. Antiquities that were not published by 1995 are flat out ineligible
for acquisition at the Getty.28 Acquisition protocol also requires contacting poten-
tial nations of origin to confirm that there are no known claims on the object.
Whereas a policy like the British Museum’s is arguably required at least in its basic
form by membership in ICOM and/or UKMA, bright-line policies like the Getty’s
clearly exceed the mandate of ICOM or other associations.

What is one to make of such a policy? Does it reflect a sea change in museum
ideology? Have even the acquisitors become convinced that the best hope for pro-
tecting cultural heritage rests in curtailing pursuit of new acquisitions? Another
possibility is that the shift in policy comes instead as a politically expedient con-
cession to a cultural nationalist position that has been effectively promoted and
widely embraced by the public. In light of a number of embarrassing incidents in
recent years, one might speculate that among the many acquisitors that have reined
in support for cultural internationalist ideals, at least some are seeking to avoid
undesirable associations and special scrutiny as much as they are contemplating a
reinvention of museum goals and responsibilities. A few examples from the U.S.
museum community experience illustrate this point.

The Kanakaria Mosaics

In 1988, Peg Goldberg, an Indiana dealer trading pri-
marily in modern art, acquired in Switzerland and attempted to sell in the U.S.,
four Byzantine mosaic fragments that had been removed from the Church of the
Panagia Kanakaria in northern Cyprus. A year later, Cypriot efforts to recover the
mosaics wooed an international media and filled an Indiana federal courthouse.
American museums emerged largely unscathed from Cyprus’ recovery of the mo-
saics from American soil.29 They had done the right thing. The Getty refused to
purchase the mosaics and made the Republic of Cyprus aware of their where-
abouts. Another museum’s director provided expert testimony on Cyprus’ behalf

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

211

in the proceedings. Still, a new era of due diligence and intense media scrutiny
had arrived for all collectors, public as well as private.

The Lydian Hoard A great deal of negative press for the Metropolitan Mu-
seum of Art surrounded the ultimate return to Turkey—following six years of legal
wrangling—of a massive sixth-century bc treasure, the Lydian Hoard. While it de-
nied Turkey’s claims that the museum knew the treasure was stolen when it chose
to acquire it and further denied that it intentionally mislabeled it the museum
eventually acknowledged publicly that some staff members “were likely aware, even
as they acquired these objects, that their provenance was controversial.” 30 Other
source nations, encouraged by Turkey’s settlement with the museum, have brought
claims to the attention of the courts and the media. These challenges have kept
museums in the news, more often than not in a defensive posture.

The Achyris Phiale

In United States v. An Antique Platter of Gold,31 a gold phi-
ale acquired by prominent New York collector Michael Steinhardt was seized by
U.S. Customs agents and ultimately returned to Italy. Although museums were
only peripherally involved in the case, it proved to be a conspicuous ground for
the Archaeological Institute of America (AIA) and AAM/AAMD to slug it out as
amici curiae (friends of the court) for either side in the debate over international
trade in cultural property.32

Before the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, AAM and AAMD argued that en-
forcing foreign export laws “threatens the ability of U.S. museums to collect . . .
and make available for public exhibition objects from around the world that have
not been stolen or been the object of looting, but rather have been the subject of
sweeping foreign cultural patrimony laws that are, in significant respects, antithet-
ical to fundamental principles of United States law and public policy.”33 The court
never reached that issue, but the associations’ involvement had an effect just the
same. Although they framed their involvement as a pure policy stance, detached
from the particular facts of the case, AAM and AAMD were nonetheless perceived
by some as aligned in interest with unscrupulous collectors and dealers. Consider
the way AAMD support was described by the Boston Globe: “[T]he same museum
directors’ association has . . . quietly decided to join a legal battle to protect the
booming multibillion-dollar trade in antiquities, objects often plundered from ar-
cheological sites in countries like Italy and Turkey and then illegally exported.” 34
The case revealed the intense media interest in stolen art and prompted both AAM
and AAMD to elect against weighing in the next time that this legal question was
considered by the court, in United States v. Frederick Schultz.35

The Schultz Scandal The July 2001 indictment and subsequent conviction of
Frederick Schultz, a well-known antiquities dealer, for smuggling and forgery was
a major embarrassment for museums as well as dealers. Not only had Schultz sup-
plied a number of museums with Egyptian antiquities over the years, but in his
capacity as president of the National Association of Dealers in Ancient, Oriental

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

212

ROBERT HALLMAN

and Primitive Art, Schultz had participated in AAMD strategy meetings surround-
ing the Steinhardt appeal. Newspapers were quick to point out that the disgraced
dealer was the same Schultz that museums had teamed up with to argue against
U.S. enforcement of foreign patrimony laws. The AIA got its jabs in, too, propos-
ing that this time around, “[r]ather than bemoan the prosecution of those who
deal in illicitly excavated antiquities, museum officials should support efforts to
curtail their activities.” 36

These and other less-publicized embarrassments in the United States and abroad
have no doubt contributed to acquisitors’ reticence. Even if they believe that the
current nation-based cultural property model is the wrong one, with their acqui-
sitions policies and practices under greater scrutiny than ever before,37 it is not an
easy moment for museums to stand up as proponents for greater availability of
another nation’s cultural property. One result has been that advocacy for cultural
internationalism in museum acquisitions more and more occurs outside of the
museums themselves. Museum directors have shared cultural property interna-
tionalist perspectives on the acquisition of works, but primarily on their own be-
half and not on behalf of a particular institution or group of institutions. James
Cuno, former director of Harvard University Museums and now director of the
Art Institute of Chicago, has been a vocal proponent of an internationalist posi-
tion that recognizes the importance of keeping museums in the business of ac-
quisition. “Indeed,” Cuno suggests, “it is often only through the act of acquiring
an object, doing due diligence, exhibiting it, publishing it, and further studying it,
that one comes to know what is most important about it and what in fact its legal
standing is.” 38 But that view is not reflected in Harvard Museums’ policies, which
as early as 1971 demanded “reasonable assurance that the object has not, within a
recent time, been illegally exported from its country of origin.” Prior to acquisi-
tion, Harvard policies require evidence “that the University can acquire valid title
to the object in question, meaning that the circumstances of the transaction or
knowledge of the object’s provenance must be such as to give adequate assurance
that the seller or donor has valid title to convey.” 39 Other directors have likewise
expressed cultural property internationalist sentiments outside of their museums’
press offices or policy handbooks.40

The same trend toward dissociation with cultural internationalist advocacy is
evident in the 2002 emergence of a new American lobbying organization, the Amer-
ican Council for Cultural Property (ACCP).41 The group, headed by Ashton Hawk-
ins, formerly counsel to the Metropolitan Museum of Art Trustees, operates with
the stated intention of providing a counterweight to retentionist policies. Goals
include revision of the U.S. Cultural Property Implementation Act and advocacy
in aid of “legitimate dispersal of cultural material through the market.” 42 These
are roles that, in the past, one might have expected AAM or AAMD to assume.
ACCP was also willing to take to the field in the Schultz appeal, a battleground too
hot for AAM and AAMD. While ACCP may prove an able advocate for cultural
internationalism, an organization that is not directly accountable to the museum

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

213

community is likely to have less leverage than an organization that counts muse-
ums as institutional members.
2. Consequences of Acquisition Reform

Whether the new acquisition policies represent a genuine commitment to a new
ideology or a perceived political necessity, they bear significant long-term conse-
quences. Chief among these is the prospect of little or no acquisition of inter-
national cultural property in years to come. True, the effect of a policy banning
acquisitions of recent export may not be felt at present or even in the near future.
For one thing, some museums may persist as cultural internationalists in practice
though they do not advertise it in public statements. Even where new rules have
been introduced, it is possible that former acquisition practices continue largely
unfettered, either because policies are routinely ignored, or because they leave
enough loopholes that they are easily circumvented. In her 1998 assessment of
acquisition policies, Clemency Coggins suggests that the Getty’s acquisition policy
is relatively unique, “especially in that it is actually carried out.” 43 Avoidance of
the spirit of acquisition policy reforms may indeed occur to some degree (some
think to a high degree), but as the failure to follow comprehensive and transpar-
ent procedures in the acquisition of works of international cultural property be-
comes less and less defensible, there will be less and less room for resistance. One
suspects, moreover, that the negative association with freewheeling acquisitions,
both in the media and in the museum community itself, will continue to limit
noncompliance.

The impact of acquisition reform is also forestalled at some museums—U.S.
museums especially—by a steady stream of new acquisitions furnished by gifts
and sales from private collections. One might again, with good cause, entertain
concerns that such acquisitions evade the spirit of the new policies. Such a high
percentage of acquisitions hail from private collections that the exception surely
swallows the rule when acquisition standards are not applied to donations.44 Per-
haps some museums have failed to close this loophole, but that oversight seems
perilous enough in the current climate that it almost has to be short lived. The
Schultz scandal has revealed to the whole world how easy (and common?) it is to
fabricate a private collection provenance that satisfies museum requirements. As
the new AAMD guidelines indicate, acquisitors can no longer accept proffered prov-
enance details at face value, nor keep such details to themselves. And the Getty’s
experience with the Fleischman collection, both in the criticism it received over
accepting a collection with incomplete provenance and in the eventual return of
an object from the collection that had been illegally removed from Italy, made it
clear that nothing short of comprehensive inquiry is acceptable, even for the most
eminent of private collections.45

There is a large body of provenance-ready works held in private collections, but
it is not infinite (nor is it renewable), it is deep in some subject areas and thin in
others, and not all of it has been earmarked for museum acquisition. It cannot, in

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

214

ROBERT HALLMAN

the long term, sustain more than a trickle of museum acquisitions. That means
that acquisitors need to sort out a method of acquisition capable of satisfying all
relevant parties that it does not facilitate the black market, or they need to seek
out alternatives to acquisition. The substantial obstacles to the first option have
been examined by others.46 The latter option now looms over acquisitors.
3. Alternatives to Acquisition

Patty Gerstenblith has argued that antiquities acquisitions are no longer prudent.
She repeats the observations of a Getty Museum curator that “a decrease in ac-
quisitions can encourage museums to provide much-needed resources for the ex-
isting collections. . . [and] the lack of purchasing power provides a great incentive
for exchanges among collections and meaningful loan programs.” 47 There is con-
siderable support for the view that temporary exchanges should replace the prac-
tice of acquisition.

The 1976 UNESCO Recommendation Concerning the International Exchange of
Cultural Property contemplated barter and temporary exchange at the institu-
tional level. Over the past 30 years, barter has not been a significant factor. A hand-
ful of interesting long-term loans have been negotiated, but the practice is hampered
by cultural patrimony laws in some nations. Turkey’s laws, for instance, forbid
loans of antiquities that extend beyond one year.48 Long-term loans hold promise
as an acquisition alternative if the kinks can be worked out. A creative arrange-
ment, for example, saw the Pergamon Museum lend an important marble statue
of Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius to the Getty Museum, which, for its part,
provided extensive conservation work. Although in that example the loan was from
one acquisitor to another, the model seems broadly practicable.

In contrast to the minimal impact of barter and long-term exchange, short-
term loan exhibitions have proven an immensely popular, if lopsided, forum for
international exchange. Such exhibitions have presented acquisitors and other mu-
seums with opportunities never before imagined.49 Still, loaned works—at least at
present—come with substantial limitations. The associated costs of mounting an
international exhibition are high and can raise related concerns of sponsorship;
preparation is time consuming; the condition of a work can preclude frequent
travel; international politics can restrict loan availability; borrowers may be un-
able to present a loaned work in the manner they find most effective or intellec-
tually honest particularly in prepackaged, traveling exhibitions; and borrowers
generally cannot perform conservation or examine a work’s composition or au-
thenticity. In short, borrowing a work is not the equivalent to owning it, and a
museum community that does not acquire international cultural property will be
a different one.

Different may turn out to be better or it may turn out to be worse. Some of the
limitations currently in place may be overcome. Compromises with reluctant lend-
ers may be reached. Other mutually beneficial arrangements may evolve. Muse-
ums may be able to reach out just as effectively to their communities and their

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

215

donors without new acquisitions of cultural property from abroad. It would be
reassuring, however, to see more evidence that acquisitors are thinking about and
preparing for their future. To date, acquisitors appear reluctant to share with an
interested public the forecasts and strategies, the soul-searching, that must accom-
pany such a major change in museum practice.
4. Restitution

Whereas the museum community may have reached some consensus that, for now
at least, cultural internationalism cannot shape acquisition policies, internation-
alist principles continue to inform conversations about restitution. A sizeable quan-
tity of cultural property has been returned to places of origin in recent decades.
The recent dismantling and preparation for the return of Ethiopia’s Axum obelisk
from Rome represents the largest-scale restitution project, but it is just one of nu-
merous examples—large and small, complete and partial.50

In spite of a mounting number of works repatriated, it is important to distin-
guish those that stem from recent acquisitions that were later recognized to con-
travene laws or museum policies from those that stem from acquisitions made
during the age of imperialism, before the UNESCO Convention and before acqui-
sition practices were modernized.51 In the former category, there is general agree-
ment that restitution should be considered and carried out if legal and practical;
many museums’ and museum associations’ policies so state. In the latter context
there are far fewer examples of restitution to report (although NAGPRA and re-
lated national programs stand out as an exceptional example), and there remains
a wide range of opinions in the museum community, including opinions that es-
pouse cultural internationalist principles.

One strand of cultural internationalism opposes restitution on the ground that
the physical preservation of important examples of some nations’ cultural prop-
erty is better secured in the foreign museums where objects currently reside. This
argument grows less and less compelling as museums in so-called source nations
continue to emerge better equipped and better organized. Still, in specific in-
stances it has persisted as a justification. The Royal Museum for Central Africa in
Tervuren, Belgium, for instance, opposes restitution following its experience of
returning 114 ethnographic works in 1976 to the custody of the Kinshasa Mu-
seum only to see a large number of them stolen amidst subsequent political tur-
moil in the Congo. Such disappointing results convinced the Royal Museum’s
director, Guido Gryseels, that wholesale return of objects collected during the co-
lonial era is not a viable option: “The past is what it is.” 52

Another cultural internationalist perspective has been aired primarily in re-
sponse to the ultimate restitution debate of recent decades, namely Greece’s de-
mand for the return of the British Museum’s Parthenon Marbles. The protracted
demand, now decades old, was voiced with heightened urgency in recent years, as
Athens prepared to host the 2004 Olympic games and as a new museum on the
Acropolis was designed to house the Marbles. Pressure to return the Marbles has

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

216

ROBERT HALLMAN

come from all corners—the press, UKMA, the Greek government, even the U.S.
Congress. The British Museum continues to resist restitution of the Marbles, and
in 2002–2003, was joined by a large group of many of the world’s preeminent
acquisitors in a statement in defense of universal museums.

The Declaration on the Importance and Value of Universal Museums, issued in

December 2002, reads as follows:

The international museum community shares the conviction that illegal
traffic in archaeological, artistic, and ethnic objects must be firmly dis-
couraged. We should, however, recognize that objects acquired in earlier
times must be viewed in the light of different sensitivities and values,
reflective of that earlier era. The objects and monumental works that
were installed decades and even centuries ago in museums throughout
Europe and America were acquired under conditions that are not com-
parable with current ones.

Over time, objects so acquired—whether by purchase, gift, or partage—
have become part of the museums that have cared for them, and by ex-
tension part of the heritage of the nations which house them. Today we
are especially sensitive to the subject of a work’s original context, but we
should not lose sight of the fact that museums too provide a valid and
valuable context for objects that were long ago displaced from their orig-
inal source.

The universal admiration for ancient civilizations would not be so deeply
established today were it not for the influence exercised by the artifacts
of these cultures, widely available to an international public in major
museums. Indeed, the sculpture of classical Greece, to take but one ex-
ample, is an excellent illustration of this point and of the importance of
public collecting. The centuries-long history of appreciation of Greek
art began in antiquity, was renewed in Renaissance Italy, and subsequently
spread through the rest of Europe and to the Americas. Its accession into
the collections of public museums throughout the world marked the sig-
nificance of Greek sculpture for mankind as a whole and its enduring
value for the contemporary world. Moreover, the distinctly Greek aes-
thetic of these works appears all the more strongly as the result of their
being seen and studied in direct proximity to products of other great
civilizations.

Calls to repatriate objects that have belonged to museum collections for
many years have become an important issue for museums. Although each
case has to be judged individually, we should acknowledge that muse-
ums serve not just the citizens of one nation but the people of every
nation. Museums are agents in the development of culture, whose mis-
sion is to foster knowledge by a continuous process of reinterpretation.
Each object contributes to that process. To narrow the focus of muse-
ums whose collections are diverse and multifaceted would therefore be a
disservice to all visitors.53

Immediately noteworthy is the Declaration’s failure to assume a cultural inter-
nationalist position when it comes to the acquisition of cultural property in the
present. It seeks, instead, to convince the interested public, governments, and the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

217

museum community that there is a wide gulf separating the past from the present;
that one must not consider cultural property transferred prior to the UNESCO
Convention or modern collecting policies and practices in the same way that one
perceives cultural property transfers under the UNESCO regime. In other words,
the Declaration does not say that current nation-based attitudes are wrong, just
that they should not apply retroactively.54 Such a stance seems poised to seal the
fate of cultural internationalism in the acquisition arena.

It is hard to gauge at present what impact, if any, the Declaration will have on
the restitution debate. It demonstrated that, for now at least, some acquisitors re-
main willing to assume a cultural internationalist posture, even if it has been re-
duced from a modus operandi to a defense. The Declaration garnered attention to
a cultural internationalist position, but along with attention came renewed criti-
cism of that position, both within the museum community and beyond.55 It will
be interesting to see whether these acquisitors hold fast to the internationalist model
when it comes to repatriation, or whether—as in the acquisitions arena—policies
and practices will be reconfigured to fit a different model.

CONCLUSION

After 20 years, Professor Merryman’s framing of the cultural property debate still
makes sense. As his recent article indicates, there continue to be individuals and
organizations poised to take up nationalist and internationalist positions. For mu-
seum acquisitors, however, an internal push for reform and great external pres-
sure have made a cultural internationalist agenda untenable. They are no longer
willing to stand up with the rest of the acquisitors group that Merryman de-
scribes.56 Cultural internationalism no longer shapes their practices or policies,
except as an occasional defense against restitution claims.

If the current dissociation with cultural internationalism persists, some muse-
ums face major changes. Without a steady stream of new acquisitions, such mu-
seums will have to find new ways of sharing other cultures with their visitors. The
movement away from cultural internationalism signals a new direction for muse-
ums, but they have given little indication to date where they would like that new
direction to lead them.

ENDNOTES

1. Merryman, “Cultural Property Internationalism,” 12.
2. Merryman, “Cultural Property Internationalism,” 27. The 1976 Recommendation Concerning
the International Exchange of Cultural Property, for instance, clearly excludes international trade, and
limits acceptable international exchange to loans and barter among governments and public insti-
tutions. The 2001 Convention on Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage states simply: “Un-
derwater cultural heritage shall not be commercially exploited.”

3. Merryman, “The Free International Movement of Cultural Property,” 307.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

218

ROBERT HALLMAN

4. Gerstenblith, Art, Cultural Heritage, and the Law, 537, observes that museums’ traditional role
“as collectors of cultural objects from throughout the world. . . inherently contradicts the placement
of objects in their original social, historical and even geographical milieu.”

5. Consider, for example, the divergent interests when it comes to international trade in cultural
property of the National Museum, Athens, on the one hand, and the Getty Museum, on the other
hand.

6. And vice versa. ICOM was a key proponent behind UNESCO’s official stance on a broad

range of cultural property topics.

7. ICOM, 1970 Ethics of Acquisitions, imposes a responsibility on museum professionals “to con-
trol the international movement of objects belonging to [the national] heritage” they are charged
with preserving, and requires that collecting institutions observe the laws and interests of the coun-
try of origin in acquisitions of cultural property.

8. ICOM, Illicit Traffic of Cultural Property, recognizes cultural property as “the surest testimony
to the history of a people or a civilisation. . . . an integral part of a country’s heritage”; ICOM, Arusha
Appeal, declares that the theft and illegal excavation of cultural property deprive African nations “of
the knowledge of their past, by removing from the communities the symbols of their identity”; Lewis,
Universal Museum, remarks that the focus should be on “the ability of a people to present their
cultural heritage in their own territory.”

9. ICOM, 1970 Ethics of Acquisitions, Recommendation 9. In its 1989–2001 Code of Ethics, ICOM
refrains from imposing an affirmative duty upon source-nation museums to ensure international
representation. See also Noble, “International Museum Exchanges,” 77–82.

10. Brodie et al., Stealing History, 31.
11. Brodie et al., Stealing History, 48. UKMA has also published a guide for museums, Buying in

the Market.

12. Brodie et al., Stealing History, 54.
13. Gerstenblith, “Museums, the Market and Antiquities,” calls attention to proposed advantages

of temporary custody (as opposed to ownership) of cultural property.

14. UKMA’s deputy director, Maurice Davies, called the Declaration “a George Bush approach to
international relations.” See Bailey, “A George Bush approach to international relations.” The Art
Newspaper (Feb. 2003). The same deputy director, before an Athens audience, described the British
Museum as “rude, high-handed, and offensive,” and suggested that listeners may take comfort in the
fact that “UK museums do not all behave like the British Museum.” See Davies, “UK Museums As-
sociation Talks in Athens on Repatriation.”

15. Eakin, “Debating ‘Illegal Archeology,’ ” reports a conspicuous absence of American museum
representatives at an international conference dedicated to stemming traffic in looted antiquities:
“One important point that emerged from the discussions is that there is a widening divide between
the collecting policies of large, donor-driven American institutions and the more rigorous practices
pursued by smaller university collections and adopted by major European museums in recent years.”

16. AAM, Code of Ethics for Museums.
17. AAM, Statement on Cultural Property. Note that the Statement, while acknowledging AAM
support for the 1970 UNESCO Convention, fails to define precisely what that support entails.
18. See the Web report submitted by Claire Lyons concerning the Steinhardt appeal, at 具http://
www.museum-security.org/99/046.html典, citing disagreement engendered by the brief. See also Rob-
inson, “Museums’ stance on Nazi loot belies their role in a key case.” The Boston Globe (Feb. 13,
1998), A01, available at 具http://www.dhh-3.de/biblio/news/1998/0213a/典, noting that the brief “pro-
voked objections from some museum directors, who find the smuggling indefensible and fear the
museums will be tainted by joining the effort to overturn the judge’s decision.”

19. The doctrine is explained in some detail in the context of the Achyris phiale in Shapreau,
“Second Circuit Holds that False Statements Contained in Customs Forms Warrant Forfeiture of
Ancient Gold Phiale—Hotly Contested Foreign Patrimony Issue Not Reached by the Court: United
States v. An Antique Platter of Gold.”

20. AAMD, Art Museums and the International Exchange of Cultural Artifacts.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

219

21. AAMD, Report on the Acquisition of Archaeological Materials and Ancient Art, 4.
22. AAMD, Testimony to CPAC on Colombian Art and Artifacts.
23. O’Keefe, “Museum Acquisitions Policies.”
24. Brodie et al., Stealing History, 47.
25. While many art-collecting countries like Japan, Germany, and the Netherlands have not joined
the Convention, the museums and museum organizations there have endorsed UNESCO principles
nonetheless. See O’Keefe, “Museum acquisitions policies.”

26. See Heilmeyer’s comments reported in Eakin, “Debating ‘Illegal Archeology.’ ”
27. See Eakin, “Debating ‘Illegal Archeology,’ ” quoting the museum’s senior vice president for

external affairs, Harold Holzer.

28. Papageorge Kouroupas, “Illicit Trade in Cultural Objects.”
29. Hofstadter, “Annals of the Antiquities Trade,” 39. There were allegations leveled by one of
those implicated in the scheme, that looted Cypriot objects were housed in many museums, includ-
ing the British Museum, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Getty Museum, the Museum of Fine
Arts in Antwerp, and Dumbarton Oaks.

Supp. 222 (S.D.N.Y. 1997); 184 F.3d 131 (2nd Cir. 1999).

30. Maier, “The Met Digs In.” Newsday (May 23, 1995), B36.
31. United States v. An Antique Platter of Gold aka Gold Phiale Mesomphalos, c. 400 BC, 991 F.
32. The briefs filed by AAM/AAMD and AIA are reproduced in Shapreau, “Second Circuit Holds
that False Statements Contained in Customs Forms Warrant Forfeiture of Ancient Gold Phiale—
Hotly Contested Foreign Patrimony Issue Not Reached by the Court: United States v. An Antique
Platter of Gold,” 76–137.

33. See Shapreau, “Second Circuit.”
34. Robinson, “Museums’ Stance on Nazi Loot Belies Their Role in a Key Case.” The Boston Globe

(Feb. 13, 1998), A01, available at 具http://www.dhh-3.de/biblio/news/1998/0213a/典.

35. United States of America v. Frederick Schultz, 178 F. Supp. 2nd 445 (S.D.N.Y. 2002); affirmed at

the Second Circuit, 333 F.3d 393 (2nd Cir. 2003).

36. Wilkie, “Landmark Decision.”
37. Stoll, “Whose Art Is This, Anyway?”
38. Cuno, “U.S. Art Museums and Cultural Property,” 195.
39. Harvard University Museums, “General Principles.” See also Robinson and Yemma, “Harvard

Museum Acquisitions Shock Scholars.” The Boston Globe (Jan. 16, 1998).

40. Lowry, “Cultural Property: A Museum Director’s Perspective;” Anderson, “Art Market Chal-
lenges;” Baker, “Selling the Past,” quoting Vikan’s frustration with the existing paradigm: “Right now
the model is that this stuff moves like drugs: evil, ugly, rotten and terrible. Why can’t it move like
oranges and bananas?”
41. The group maintains an Internet presence, at 具http://www.culturalpolicycouncil.org/index.

htm典.
at 具http://www.theartnewspaper.com/news/article.asp?idart⫽10176典.

42. D’Arcy, “Legal group to fight ‘retentionist’ policies.” The Art Newspaper (Fall, 2002), available

43. Coggins, “A Proposal,” 434–5. See also Robinson and Yemma, “Harvard Museum Acquisitions

Shock Scholars.”

44. Gerstenblith, “Museums, the Market and Antiquities.”
45. The limits of the Getty’s new policy were tested shortly after its implementation when the
museum acquired the Fleischman antiquities collection in 1996. The only source of the required
“well-established provenance” for the bulk of the collection came in the form of a Getty catalog of
the objects published in 1994. As a postscript to the story, in 1999, one of the Fleischman objects,
which was shown to have been stolen from an excavation storeroom, was returned to Italy.

46. See for example Merryman, “Cultural Property Internationalism,” and Coggins, “A Proposal

for Museum Acquisition Policies in the Future.”

47. Gerstenblith, “Museums, the Market and Antiquities.”
48. Getty Conservation Institute, “Conversation with Engin O¨ zgen.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

220

ROBERT HALLMAN

49. Consider the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s recent exhibition Byzantium: Faith and Power, in
which curator Helen Evans assembled more than 350 works from 135 institutions in 30 countries.
50. Examples of recent activity in this area include the 2002 return of a mummy to Egypt by
the Carlos Museum at Emory University; Princeton University’s 2002 return of a Roman marble
funerary monument to Italy; the Denver Art Museum’s 1999 return of a Maya wooden lintel to
Guatemala; the Royal Albert Memorial Museum’s 1997 return of Truganini’s necklace and bracelet
to the Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre in Australia; the Getty Museum’s return of three antiquities to
Italy in 1999; the Berlin Museum of Indian Art’s return of an 800-year old Nepalese carving to
Katmandu; and the National Ethnographic Museum of Stockholm’s decision to send a totem pole
to the Haisla nation in Canada. As well as the unconditional return of an object, there have been
some creative compromises reached during restitution negotiations, including the 1981 agreement
between the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco and the Instituto Nacional de Anthropologia e
Historia de Mexico, providing for the joint conservation and custody of an important set of Teo-
tihuacan Murals.

51. A useful third category comprises works seized before and during the Second World War. A

final category might consider works lost from museums during more recent armed conflicts.

52. Gryseels, “Assuming our Responsibilities in the Present,” 8.
53. The Declaration was signed by the directors of the following institutions: The Art Institute of
Chicago; Bavarian State Museum, Munich; State Museums, Berlin; Cleveland Museum of Art; J. Paul
Getty Museum, Los Angeles; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Los Angeles County
Museum of Art; Louvre Museum, Paris; The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; The Museum
of Fine Arts, Boston; The Museum of Modern Art, New York; Opificio delle Pietre Dure, Florence;
Philadelphia Museum of Art; Prado Museum, Madrid; Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam; State Hermitage
Museum, St. Petersburg; Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum, Madrid; Whitney Museum of American Art,
New York; The British Museum, London.

54. Ronald de Leeuw, director of the Rijksmuseum, was careful to distinguish the Declaration’s
principles from acquisition policies: “Of course, we would not now dream of buying illegally ex-
ported antiquities or ethnographic objects, or of not returning a painting to a rightful Jewish owner.”
See also Bailey, “Shifting the Blame,” The Art Newspaper (Jan. 2003), available at 具http://www.
forbes.com/2003/01/21/cx_0121hot.html典.

55. ICOM, “Repatriation of Cultural Property.” See also Lewis, “Universal Museum,” 3; Leyten,
“Return—Restitution—Repatriation.” For a recent assessment from a museum director’s perspec-
tive, see O’Neill, “Enlightenment Museums,” 191 (where he observes “[t]he gladiatorial appeal for
the media of anything to do with repatriation”).

56. Merryman, “The Free International Movement of Cultural Property,” 307. See also Merry-

man, “Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

AAM. Statement on Cultural Property. Jan. 19, 1999. 具http://www.aam-us.org/hottopics.cfm?mode⫽-
list&id⫽15典

AAM. Code of Ethics for Museums. 2000. 具http://www.aam-us.org/aamcoe.cfm典.

AAMD. Art Museums and the International Exchange of Cultural Artifacts. January 2002. 具http://
www.aamd.org/pdfs/Cultural%20Property.pdf 典

———. Report of the AAMD Task Force on the Acquisition of Archaeological Materials and Ancient
Art. June 10, 2004. 具http://www.aamd.org/papers/documents/June10FinalTaskForceReport_001.pdf 典

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

221

———. Testimony to CPAC on Colombian Art and Artifacts. September 9, 2004. 具http://www.aamd.org/
advocacy/documents/ColombianTestimonySept.041_000.doc典

Anderson, Maxwell. “Art Market Challenges for American Museums.” In Thinking About the Elgin
Marbles: Critical Essays on Cultural Property, Art and Law, 251–4. Boston: Kluwer Law International,
2000.

Baker, Alexi Shannon. “Selling the Past: United States v. Frederick Schultz.” Archaeology (22 April
2002). 具http://www.archaeology.org/online/features/schultz/典

Brodie, Neil, Jenny Doole, and Peter Watson. Stealing History: The Illicit Trade in Cultural Material.
London: The McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2000.

Coggins, Clemency Chase. “A Proposal for Museum Acquisition Policies in the Future.” International
Journal of Cultural Property 7 (1998), 434–37.

Cuno, James. “U.S. Art Museums and Cultural Property.” Connecticut Journal of International Law
16 (2001), 189–96. 具http://www.culturalpolicycouncil.org/readings/CunoUSMuseumsCulturalProperty.
htm典
Davies, Maurice. “UK Museums Association Talks in Athens on Repatriation.” 具http://www.
museumsaustralia.org.au/hottopics/davies_repat.html典
Declaration on the Importance and Value of Universal Museums. December 2002. 具http://www.
thebritishmuseum.ac.uk/newsroom/current2003/universalmuseums.html典
Eakin, Hugh. “Debating ‘Illegal Archeology.’ ” ARTNews, (September 2003). 具http://www.artnewsonline.
com/pastarticle.cfm?art_id⫽1400典

Gerstenblith, Patty. Art, Cultural Heritage, and the Law: Cases and Materials. Durham (NC): Caro-
lina Academic Press, 2004.

———. “Museums, the Market and Antiquities.” University of Chicago Cultural Policy Workshop:
Property Rights and Museum Practice. Paper presented March 2, 2000. 具http://culturalpolicy.
uchicago.edu/workshop/gerstenblith.html典
———. “The McClain/Schultz Doctrine: Another Step Against Trade in Stolen Antiquities.” Culture
Without Context 13, Autumn 2003.

Getty Conservation Institute. “The Recovery of Antiquities: A Conversation with Engin O¨ zgen.” Getty
Conservation Institute Newsletter 13.1, Spring 1998. 具http://www.getty.edu/conservation/publications/
newsletters/13_1/profile1.html典

Gryseels, Guido. “Assuming our Responsibilities in the Present.” ICOM News 57, February 2004.
具http://palimpsest.stanford.edu/icom/universal.html典
Harvard University Museums. “General Principles Governing Acquisition.” June 21, 1971. 具http://
icom.museum/acquisition.html典

Hofstadter, Dan. “Annals of the Antiquities Trade: The Angel on her Shoulder, I-II.” The New Yorker
(20 July 1992).
ICOM. Ethics of Acquisitions. 1970. 具http://icom.museum/acquisition.html典

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

222

ROBERT HALLMAN

———. Arusha Appeal: Workshop on the Illicit Traffic of Cultural Property (28–9 September 1993).
具http://icom.museum/arusha.html典

———. Declaration of Cuenca: Workshop on the Illicit Traffic of Cultural Property (10–5 September
1995). 具http://icom.museum/cuenca.html典
———. Fighting the Illicit Traffic of Cultural Property. nd. 具http://icom.museum/traffic.html典
———. “Repatriation of Cultural Property.” Press Release (13 December 2002). 具http://icom.museum/
release.13-12-02.html典
———. Code of Ethics for Museums. (Amended 8 October 2004). 具http://icom.museum/ethics.html典

Kaye, Lawrence M. “Art Wars: The Repatriation Battle.” NYU Journal of International Law and Pol-
itics 31 (1998), 79–94.

Lewis, Geoffrey. “The Universal Museum: a Special Case?” ICOM News 57 (February 2004).
具http://palimpsest.stanford.edu/icom/universal.html典

Leyten, Harrie. “Return—Restitution—Repatriation: A tradition of non-cooperation.” ICME News
34 (February 2003).

Lowry, Glenn D. “Cultural Property: A Museum Director’s Perspective.” International Journal of Cul-
tural Property 7 (1998): 438–45.

Merryman, John Henry. “Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property.” American Journal of In-
ternational Law 80 (1986): 831–53.

———. “The Free International Movement of Cultural Property.” New York University Journal of
International Law and Politics 31 (1998): 1–14. Reprinted in Merryman, Thinking About the Elgin
Marbles: Critical Essays on Cultural Property, Art and Law (2000): 300–311.

———. “Cultural Property Internationalism.” International Journal of Cultural Property 12 (2005):
11–39.

Noble, Joseph Veach. “International museum exchanges as an instrument of mutual enrichment be-
tween cultures.” In Museum and Cultural Exchange. The Papers From the Eleventh General Conference
of ICOM. Paris: ICOM, 1977.

O’Keefe, Patrick J. “Museum acquisitions policies and the 1970 UNESCO Convention.” Museum In-
ternational 197 (1998).

O’Neill, Mark. “Enlightenment Museums: Universal or Merely Global?” Museum and Society (No-
vember 2004): 190–202.

Papageorge Kouroupas, Maria. “Illicit Trade in Cultural Objects.” Getty Conservation Institute
Newsletter 13.1 (Spring 1998). 具http://www.getty.edu/conservation/publications/newsletters/13_1/
feature1.html典

Shapreau, Carla J. “Second Circuit Holds that False Statements Contained in Customs Forms War-
rant Forfeiture of Ancient Gold Phiale—Hotly Contested Foreign Patrimony Issue Not Reached by
the Court: United States v. An Antique Platter of Gold,” International Journal of Cultural Property 9
(2000): 49–137.

Stoll, Michael. “Whose Art Is This, Anyway?” San Francisco Magazine (May 2004), 88–139.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095

MUSEUMS AND CULTURAL PROPERTY

223

UKMA. Buying in the Market: A Checklist for Museums. 2000. 具http://www.museumsassociation.org/
asset_arena/text/et/buying_in_the_market.pdf 典
———. Code of Ethics for Museums. 2002. 具http://www.museumsassociation.org/asset_arena/text/
cs/code_of_ethics.pdf 典
Wilkie, Nancy C. “From the President: Landmark Decision.” Archaeology 55 (May/June 2002).
具http://www.archaeology.org/0205/etc/president.html典

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050095


