 (2009) 16:221–232. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2009 Pacific Discourses About Cultural
Heritage and Its Protection:
An Introduction
Toon van Meijl*

Any theory of culture must include the concept of the dialectical in-
teraction between culture and something that is not culture.

E.P. Thompson, The Long Revolution, p. 33

Abstract: The articles collected in this special issue aim at addressing the
debate about the protection and use of cultural heritage in the Pacific within
the context of globalization. Contributions aim specifically at analyzing the
tension that exists between, on the one hand, political, legal and economic
discourses of Pacific peoples who wish to retain control and who seek
protection of the use of their cultural heritage, and, on the other hand, the
view of others arguing that it is in the interest of the general public to lift as
many embargos as possible in order to stimulate research and to increase
economic growth. All authors approach the subject of cultural and intellectual
property rights as a discourse, with specific attention for the concepts of
property and ownership, particularly in relation to cultural heritage and

* University of Nijmegen. Email: t.vanmeijl@ru.nl

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Contributions to this special issue have been developed in the course of
a series of workshops held at the annual meetings of the Association for Social Anthropology in
Oceania. In 2005 an informal session was held in Lihu’e at Kaua’i, Hawaii; in 2006 a working session
was held in San Diego, California; and in 2007 a symposium was held in Charlottesville, Virginia.
For a variety of reasons, not every article presented at any of these sessions made it into this special
issue, but we remain grateful to the following people for their interest and contributions to the var-
ious sessions: Nick Bainton, John Barker, Jane Barnwell, Anne Chambers, Keith Chambers, Haidy
Geismar, Sam Kaima, Jacob Simet, and Nicholas Thieberger. I am especially indebted to Malia Ta-
lakai for co-organizing the sessions and for her stimulating work on the protection of cultural prop-
erty in Tonga. I also thank Alex Golub for drawing my attention to the early work by Robert Lowie,
and Michael Goldsmith for his comments on an earlier version of this introduction. Finally, I would
like to acknowledge the contribution to my work on cultural and intellectual property by Mark
Busse, Manuka Henare, ‘Okusitino Ma¯hina, and Owen Morgan, with whom we hope to initiate a
large, comparative research program on the issues set out in this special issue.

221

222

TOON VAN MEIJL

cultural knowledge; the potential benefits of property; appropriate protection
mechanisms; the complexities of the discourses about rights, especially
property rights; the appropriation of property or its misappropriation, often
associated with what is freely available in the public domain; and, finally, the
use of intellectual property as either a form of enclosure or as a form of ethnic
boundary.

Culture is increasingly represented as a resource that can be claimed as property of
which the claimants are the intellectual owners.1 In Europe, for example, the cul-
tural practices associated with the production of champagne, feta cheese, and tokai
wines have recently been recognized as the intellectual property of French, Greek,
and Hungarian farmers, so their artisanal products are protected against imita-
tions by cultural aliens. It is widely accepted that this casting of culture must be
understood in the context of the worldwide rise of neoliberal economics. How-
ever, economic benefits are not the only motivations for ownership claims of cul-
tural practices and products. Thus, a restaurateur in Amsterdam was forced to
change the name of his new premises, which he had branded “Moko,” referring to
Ma¯ori tattoo designs, because the indigenous population of New Zealand consid-
ers the label moko a spiritual treasure that must not be alienated from its cultural
roots. This concern with culture is usually articulated by peoples who feel they are
being marginalized, especially those who are tagged as indigenous. They fear the
loss of their culture and traditions or control over their culture and associated
symbols that express their identity. Ownership claims of culture are therefore also
significant for symbolic reasons, if not for political reasons.2

Obviously, the politicization of culture is also intertwined with the process of
globalization, which in contrast to earlier expectations has incited a large-scale
revival of cultural heritage at local levels.3 Paradoxically, however, cultural tradi-
tions of small-scale societies are increasingly disseminated around the world
following innovations in information and communication technologies. This glob-
alization of local traditions, in turn, provokes the desire to control culture, which
is particularly widespread in societies that fear their cultural heritage is under
threat.4 Interestingly, contemporary representations of culture in this context fre-
quently involve a reification that reinforces a relatively strict demarcation of cul-
tural and ethnic boundaries. People who experience their culture and identity as
endangered by global forces increasingly aim at regulating, managing, or limiting
either the inflow of culturally foreign symbols, considered impure, or the outflow
of culturally indigenous symbols, considered a form of piracy or theft.5 Needless
to say, the development of “proprietary identities,” as Simon Harrison describes
them, generates a certain degree of tension between different communities.

The tension that emerges from the global debate about the ownership of cul-
tural heritage constitutes the common point of departure of the contributions to
this special issue on the discourse of cultural and intellectual property rights in

PACIFIC DISCOURSES ABOUT CULTURAL HERITAGE

223

the Pacific. To be sure, a tension of sorts is the focus in this issue, between different
communities as well as between culture and politics.6 The tension between culture
and politics in the strategic context of the protection of cultural heritage is often
misconstrued, because the debate takes place in legal terms. The legalization of
culture is a relatively new global process that mystifies the intricate relationship
between culture and politics, because the explication of culture in terms of law
leaves out the dimension of moral and political agency.7 To deconstruct the jurid-
ification of the political goal to maintain and regain control of culture, we opted
to use the concept of discourse in our analysis and clarification of the various di-
mensions of the discussion. The concept of discourse is useful for the analysis of
the political context surrounding the protection of cultural properties, because it
directs the attention away from the truth value of specific statements. Instead, it
channels the focus onto the rhetorical devices used to substantiate arguments and
which enable issues or certain constellations of values to pass from one discourse into
another (i.e., from culture into politics).8 Thus, we address debates revolving around
the legal protection of culture in Pacific societies by situating them in a multidimen-
sional context characterized by conflicting interests between different groupings, in-
cluded or excluded in the competing claims of cultural and intellectual property.
All contributors to this issue also share a common background in social and
cultural anthropology with ethnographic expertise in the Pacific region. In an-
thropology the Pacific was traditionally known as the laboratory of the discipline,9
because the conditions for comparative research are outstanding. The region was
settled relatively recently in evolutionary history. Consequently, cultural similari-
ties between different societies are striking, whereas dissimilarities are equally in-
teresting because the various societies have developed rather autonomously on
the various islands. Divergent experiences during the colonial era have reinforced
cultural variation in the region.10

In the context of the debate about cultural property, the Pacific region is in-
teresting, because it leads the development of sui generis legislation to protect
traditional knowledge and expressions of culture against misuse and misappro-
priation by others. A consequence of this development, however, is the reinforce-
ment of boundaries between communities that counterpoises the irreversible
globalization process, which brings about social and political tension, both within
and between societies. At a theoretical level this tension is related to the episte-
mological dilemma between cultural relativism and universalism, which has also
reacquired significance in the related debate about the human rights of indig-
enous peoples, such as the Australian Aborigines, the New Zealand Ma¯ori, and
the Kanaka Maoli, the first inhabitants of the Hawaiian archipelago.11 Our goal
is to address this tension by comparing and contrasting Pacific strategies for the
protection of their cultural heritage with other third-party interests and the in-
terests of the general public further afield. Before going into further detail about
the Pacific, however, it is necessary to clarify a few more theoretical premises and
political and strategic developments guiding the contributions to this special issue.

224

TOON VAN MEIJL

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE SYSTEMS

Cultural traditions and the knowledge that is associated with them are often con-
veniently represented as heritage. Clifford has defined heritage as “self-conscious
tradition . . . asserted against historical experiences of loss.”12 This definition can
be further specified by clarifying that the term self-conscious is understood in the
sense of revitalized and revalued, whereas loss is considered particularly in the form
of (mis)appropriation. Experiences of (mis)appropriation are probably most sig-
nificant in societies of indigenous peoples who are trying to come to terms with a
colonial history of dispossession.13 For that reason, too, over the past 15 years
claims of cultural and intellectual property have become of particular concern in
counterhegemonic discourses of indigenous peoples and other small-scale soci-
eties that experience their way of life as under threat.14

The first claims of cultural property rights in the strict sense of the term emerged
during the Uruguay Round of negotiations for a revision of the General Agree-
ment on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) aiming at a further reduction of barriers for
trade and investment demanded by the globalization process. During these nego-
tiations, intellectual property rights became one of the new areas of concern, be-
cause the United States and the European Community argued that goods of
developed countries contain a large intellectual property investment that is inad-
equately protected in developing countries that do not have a strong regime for
the protection of intellectual property rights. Eventually, the new GATT of 1994
included an agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS), which set down some minimum standards for intellectual property reg-
ulation but also stipulated some conditions under which certain materials or in-
novations may be excluded from intellectual property regimes.

The TRIPS agreement triggered protest from small-scale, postcolonial societies
around the world, because it opened up the avenue to the exploitation of their
traditional knowledge systems for transnational corporations.15 These companies
increasingly recognize so-called indigenous knowledge about genetic resources, ex-
otic species of flora and fauna, ecosystems, and landscapes as bonanzas for eco-
nomic investments and technological innovations, especially by pharmaceutical
industries, bioprospecting businesses, and mining companies. The global trend of
exploring indigenous knowledge systems for commercial purposes provided a range
of postcolonial societies with an important incentive to campaign worldwide for
the recognition of their human rights, including the right to self-determination.16
They claim that the enhanced accessibility of traditional knowledge systems vio-
lates their right to self-determination, which includes the autonomy to make de-
cisions about the use of traditional knowledge. The first highlight of this campaign
was the proclamation of the year 1993 as the United Nations Year for Indigenous
Peoples when a Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples was drafted. This
declaration was finally adopted in 2007, but 4 major countries voted against it
(Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States), while 11 other countries

PACIFIC DISCOURSES ABOUT CULTURAL HERITAGE

225

abstained from voting. In final form the declaration nevertheless states explicitly
that indigenous peoples are entitled to the recognition of the full ownership and
protection of their cultural and intellectual property. The bottleneck is, however,
that cultural and intellectual property rights are simultaneously eroded by the TRIPS
agreement.

PACIFIC STRATEGIES FOR THE PROTECTION OF CULTURAL AND

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

When indigenous claims of cultural and intellectual property were first articu-
lated, they were soon dismissed as incompatible with existing intellectual property
legislation. Brown, for example, argued that indigenous expressions of knowledge
cannot be ascribed to one identifiable inventor, and the cultural heritage of indig-
enous people is usually much older than is allowed within the scope of intellectual
property legislation (50 or 70 years).17 Indigenous claims to stop others from using
their heritage are also contradictory to the purpose of intellectual property legis-
lation that aims at making knowledge available in the public domain.18 These con-
tradictions are further compounded by the expansion of the concept of intellectual
property to cultural property as though the law would recognize originality in a
broad sense, which it does not.19

Indigenous peoples throughout the world, however, have not been discouraged
by the limitations of Western legislation to protect their cultural heritage.20 They
have responded that their right to control traditional knowledge is primarily a
right of self-determination, which is embedded in the Declaration on the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples. In the Pacific this right was further specified in the Mataatua
Declaration on Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
which was signed by delegates from 14 countries in New Zealand as early as 1993.
At the same time, indigenous peoples began developing new strategies to safe-
guard their heritage, for which they have been receiving support from inter-
national organizations, such as UNESCO and especially the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO). In 1999 WIPO examined the relationship be-
tween intellectual property rights and traditional knowledge, after which it estab-
lished the Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic
Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore. The aim of this committee is to
develop guidelines concerning the protection of traditional knowledge and expres-
sions of culture against misappropriation and misuse. This objective, in turn, is
linked to the effort to develop special legal mechanisms, generally known as sui
generis legislation, to protect traditional cultural expressions.

Recent initiatives of WIPO’s Intergovernmental Committee have resulted in spe-
cial provisions for the protection of traditional knowledge and cultural expres-
sions against misappropriation around the world. In the Pacific area it has even
led to the development of a so-called Model Law to promote sui generis legisla-

226

TOON VAN MEIJL

tion for the protection of their cultural heritage. The Pacific Model Law was de-
signed by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), comprising 26 Pacific
Island countries and territories (PICTs). In 2002 it adopted a Regional Framework
for the Protection of Traditional Knowledge and Expressions of Culture to stim-
ulate and guide the development of national legislation for the protection of cul-
tural and intellectual property that has been transmitted over generations and is
also held in collective ownership. The objective is to protect the rights of tradi-
tional owners in their traditional knowledge and expressions of culture (TKECs),
permit tradition-based creativity and innovation, including commercialization, en-
sure that the use of TKECs always takes place with the prior informed consent of
the traditional owners, and finally, ensure the sharing of benefits derived from the
use of TKECs.21 The Pacific Model Law recognizes that a universal template to
protect TKECs does not accommodate national priorities and the needs of local
communities. Instead, a holistic approach is taken to enable national governments
to develop policy solutions and legislation that fit within and complement the
regional framework.

THE CONTRIBUTIONS

The development of a Model Law by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community
demonstrates that in the Pacific region the drive to protect cultural and intellec-
tual property has gathered its own momentum, in spite of the legal barriers in
Western intellectual property legislation that were identified as important imped-
iments at the beginning of the discussion some 15 years ago. This precisely makes
the contributions to this special issue highly topical. The first article by Jo Recht,
who has been trained in law as well as in anthropology, presents an overview of
the contemporary context in which indigenous peoples and multinational orga-
nizations have pursued the objective of “protecting indigenous knowledge”; at the
same time, it addresses some of the theoretical and practical questions such pro-
tection raises. Recht examines the debate with particular attention to its heg-
emonic overtones and argues that anthropological analysis and insight is invaluable
in informing the development of the various frameworks of protection so that
they will enhance rather than undermine the cultural diversity they are designed
to protect. Her argument is illustrated with reference to the work of the Pacific
Community and the government of Fiji in trying to develop sui generis protec-
tion frameworks for their indigenous cultural knowledge, Fijian pottery designs
especially.

Guido Pigliasco extends the debate initiated by Recht from—tangible—pottery
to the—intangible—firewalking ceremony traditionally performed only by mem-
bers of a certain clan in Fiji. With an increasing numbers of tourists visiting Fiji,
however, firewalking has become a commodified symbol of the indigenous cul-
ture of the entire Fijian archipelago. Pigliasco compares the discussion about the

PACIFIC DISCOURSES ABOUT CULTURAL HERITAGE

227

appropriation of the firewalking ceremony by the tourism industry to the discus-
sion about the ownership of the nagol in Vanuatu, the land diving originally con-
ducted on Pentecost Island but later also on the island of Espiritu Santo. Both
land diving and firewalking are traditional forms of culture that constitute potent
ethnic markers for local groups, but their performances became also popular among
other neighboring groups with the growth of tourism, which generated a debate
about the ownership of intangible cultural property. The originators of the fire-
walking ceremony in Fiji began a project in collaboration with Guido Pigliasco, an
Italian lawyer with a doctorate in anthropology from the University of Hawai‘i, to
protect their cultural heritage by documenting their cultural heritage in DVD for-
mat. The production of a multimedia tool aims at the legal protection of indig-
enous practices under the auspices of the Great Council of Chiefs, which is also
involved in the implementation of the Pacific Model Law in Fiji.

The discussion about the ownership of the firewalking ceremony in Fiji brings
to light a structural difference between traditional principles regarding the own-
ership of traditional knowledge and practices on the one hand, and Western re-
gimes for the protection of intellectual property on the other. First, it is incorrect
to assume that non-Western societies were traditionally unfamiliar with mecha-
nisms for the protection of cultural or intellectual property. Robert Lowie, for
example, described a range of compelling examples of what he labeled “incorporeal
property” among “primitive peoples” who sometimes see stories, dances, myths,
magical rites, or even dreams as the exclusive property of individuals.22 Second,
it is misleading to refer to Western intellectual property legislation for the pro-
tection of cultural property, because it has also been used for the expropriation
and legal alienation of traditional knowledge. The latter point is demonstrated
by James Nason, an American professor of anthropology, and Joakim Peter, the
director of the Chuuk Campus of the College of Micronesia in the Federated
States of Micronesia. They discuss the conflict between indigenous and so-called
nonindigenous law in Micronesia, especially on Chuuk (formerly Truk), but they
also compare this clash of cultures in relation to contemporary Native American
intellectual property issues and tribal responses for the protection of such knowl-
edge and to control research activities by outsiders. Nason and Peter situate their
analysis of the commodification and misappropriation of traditional knowledge
in Micronesia within the wider discussion about the Pacific Model Law, and they
finish with the recommendation of specific steps to be taken to protect cultural
heritage.

Shifting the discussion to Melanesia, Lamont Lindstrom examines the compli-
cated debate about the use and abuse of kava. In the 1990s global interest in the
recreational and therapeutic use of kava peaked, but at the same time concerns
emerged over bioprospecting or even biopiracy of the plant. Bioprospecting refers
to scientific investigations of new medical uses of plants and animals, whereas
biopiracy is used to describe the appropriation or misappropriation of flora and
fauna by pharmaceutical and other commercial industries. Given its popularity

228

TOON VAN MEIJL

around the globe, kava was under serious risk of appropriation by multinational
pharmacological corporations, which in the Pacific generated claims to kava as
cultural property by Vanuatu as well as by Fiji. Kava piracy narratives, however,
became more complicated when in 2001 Germany and later a range of other West-
ern countries banned sales of kava products following reports of liver damage
among heavy users. The kava export market collapsed, and the discourse of kava
as the cultural property of Pacific societies shifted to a debate about new market-
ing strategies to recapture the recreational market for kava. In this context, pro-
ducers of kava began labeling the place of origin in analogy with winemakers and,
more recently coffee brewers, all attempting to highlight the so-called noble vari-
eties of their products, in this case: kava. Thus, it is hoped that by situating the
plant within its terroir, it would be more difficult to pirate.

Andrew Moutu also provides a contribution on the basis of ethnographic re-
search in Melanesia, more specifically his home area the Sepik in Papua New Guinea.
He aims at highlighting the differences between Western and Melanesian modes
of thinking about culture, creativity, and ownership. Moutu participated in the
Cambridge project initiated by Marilyn Strathern, entitled “Property, Transac-
tions and Creations: New Economic Forms in the Pacific,”23 which aimed to pro-
duce knowledge of the social relations in which ownership claims are made. It
tried to reveal the principles whereby transactions of ownership make explicit claims
to the creative input of various kinds in actual resources. Against this background,
Moutu outlines a dialectical contrast between, on the one hand, the linear logic of
Western forms of creativity and, on the other hand, the analogical forms of cre-
ativity in Melanesia. In Western societies people generally own what they create,
whereby ownership functions as a mechanism to enhance and stimulate further
creativity. In Melanesia, by contrast, people generally create what they own; thus,
creativity functions as a mechanism to perpetuate ownership. Moutu substanti-
ates his argument with an ethnographic case study from a Iatmul village in the
Sepik, where two kin groups have been contesting the rights to use a particular
fishing lagoon created by redirecting the banks of the Sepik River. One group
claimed the lagoon because it had created it, but the other group opposed the
claim on grounds that they own the names connected to the land on which the
lagoon was created. Moutu relates this discussion to the introduction of trade-
marks in Papua New Guinea, which enables him to illustrate Strathern’s concep-
tion of land as intellectual property.

Michael Goldsmith extends Moutu’s discussion of incompatible claims of cul-
tural and intellectual property in Melanesia to New Zealand, where property rights
are also inflected by a number of crosscutting issues, questions, and tensions. Gold-
smith revisits and revises Michael Brown’s original question “Who Owns Native
Culture?” by posing the question “Who Owns Native Nature?” in his investigation
of the overlaps and tensions between nature and culture in theoretical, legal, and
political discourses. The relation between nature and culture is interpreted and
understood in a radically different way by the indigenous people of New Zealand,

PACIFIC DISCOURSES ABOUT CULTURAL HERITAGE

229

Ma¯ori, and descendants of the predominantly European settlers of the country,
referred to as Pa¯keha¯ by Ma¯ori. The tense relationship between Ma¯ori and Pa¯keha¯
is characterized by judicial procedures and constitutional settlements put in place
to mediate between Ma¯ori tribes and the Crown. Over the last 30 years, these pro-
cedures have generally been channeled through the Waitangi Tribunal, but some
particularly contentious issues have been removed from the judicial sphere. The
debate over rights to the foreshore and seabed is the most prominent issue and
constitutes the main empirical focus of Goldsmith’s article. He explores the dif-
ferences and similarities between various property rights and the legal regimes
that are brought to bear on them, the cultural similarities and differences that are
referred to as the basis for some of the conflicts and settlements between the set-
tler and indigenous populations (i.e., individualism and secularism versus collec-
tivism and spirituality), and the tacit theoretical underpinnings of claims to property
rights that have discernible links to the contrasting philosophical positions known
as realism and social constructionism.

Finally, Toon van Meijl also addresses and contextualizes the emergence of a
discourse of cultural and intellectual property rights in Ma¯ori society. Since the
establishment of the Waitangi Tribunal in 1975, and even more since 1985 when
the jurisdiction of the Waitangi Tribunal was backdated to 1840, not only lands,
forests, and fisheries have been claimed back under the terms of the treaty, but
also a variety of nonmaterial objects, such as language and an equitable share of
the airwaves to be able to broadcast Ma¯ori programs on New Zealand radio and
television. These claims have been acknowledged because in the Ma¯ori version of
the Treaty of Waitangi the concept of taonga or treasure was included in the clause
protecting Ma¯ori chieftainship over their “lands (and) villages.” Earlier submis-
sions to the Waitangi Tribunal have successfully contended that taonga refers to all
dimensions of a tribal group’s estate, material and nonmaterial.

Van Meijl analyzes the discourse of cultural and intellectual property in the con-
text of the problematic and paradoxical relationship between Ma¯ori and Pa¯keha¯
in postcolonial New Zealand. Following Simon Harrison,24 he argues that Ma¯ori
claims regarding intellectual property also function to reinforce ethnic bound-
aries between Ma¯ori and Pa¯keha¯. Ma¯ori consider the demarcation of ethnic bound-
aries necessary because they experience their society and distinctive way of life as
endangered both by the foreign consumption or misappropriation of aspects of
their authentic cultural forms and by the intrusion of foreign cultural elements.
The first threat is often represented as an undesired form of cultural appropria-
tion, piracy or theft, whereas the second threat is viewed as a form of cultural
pollution. This argument is elaborated with a case study of each so-called danger,
namely a claim regarding six species of native flora and fauna submitted to the
Waitangi Tribunal, which is considered an example of resistance against cultural
appropriation, and the increasing hostility of Ma¯ori to foreign interest and re-
search in Ma¯ori culture and society, which is analyzed as an example of opposi-
tion to putative pollution.

230

TOON VAN MEIJL

In sum, these articles address the discourse of cultural and intellectual property
rights in the Pacific region in its full complexity. The holistic and anthropological
approach that is underlying all contributions to this special issue enables the au-
thors to reflect on the social and political tension that is not only provoking in-
digenous policies for the protection of traditional knowledge and expressions of
culture against misuse and misappropriation by others, but which is reinforced by
these policies at the same time. Thus, it is also hoped that this special issue may
make a contribution to the further development of indigenous strategies for the
protection of their cultural traditions without simultaneously strengthening the
ethnic inequalities that are triggering indigenous discourses of cultural property
in the first place, not only in the Pacific but around the globe.

ENDNOTES

1. Coombe, The Cultural Life of Intellectual Property.
2. Kaneff and King, “Owning Culture.”
3. Appadurai, Globalization.
4. Brown, “Heritage as Property.”
5. Harrison, “Cultural Boundaries” and Fracturing Resemblances.
6. Compare Striphas and McLeod, “Strategic Improprieties.”
7. Hastrup, “Representing the Common Good.”
8. Compare Fabian, “Religious and Secular Colonization,” 341.
9. Goodenough, “Oceania and the Problem of Controls.”
10. Denoon and colleagues, The Cambridge History.
11. For example, Cowan, Dembour, and Wilson, Culture and Rights, Rowlands, “Cultural Rights

and Wrongs,” and Wilson and Mitchell, Human Rights in Global Perspective.

12. Clifford, “Looking Several Ways,” 6.
13. Kirsch, “Lost Worlds.”
14. Brush, “Indigenous Knowledge,” Greaves, “Tribal Rights,” and Posey, “International Agreements.”
15. Arewa, “TRIPS and Traditional Knowledge.”
16. For example, Mead and Ratuva, Pacific Genes.
17. Brown, “Can Culture Be Copyrighted?”
18. Brown, Who Owns Native Culture?
19. Strathern, “Potential Property,” 23; and Strathern, Property, Substance and Effect.
20. Coombe, “Protecting Cultural Industries.”
21. Pacific Community, Guidelines for Developing.
22. Lowie, Primitive Society, 235–43.
23. For example, Strathern, “Rationales of Ownership,” and Hirsch and Strathern, Transactions

and Creations.

24. Harrison, “Cultural Boundaries.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Appadurai, Arjun, ed. Globalization. Durham: Duke University Press, 2001.

Arewa, Olufunmilayo B. “TRIPS and Traditional Knowledge: Local Communities, Local Knowledge
and Global Intellectual Property Frameworks.” Marquette Intellectual Property Law Review 10, no. 2
(2006): 156–80.

PACIFIC DISCOURSES ABOUT CULTURAL HERITAGE

231

Brown, Michael F. “Can Culture Be Copyrighted?” Current Anthropology 39, no. 2 (1998): 193–222.

———. “Heritage as Property.” In Property in Question: Value Transformation in the Global Economy,
edited by K. Verdery and C. Humphrey, 49–68. Oxford: Berg, 2004.

———. Who Owns Native Culture? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.

Brush, Stephen B. “Indigenous Knowledge of Biological Resources and Intellectual Property Rights:
The Role of Anthropology.” American Anthropologist 95, no. 3 (1993): 653–71.

Clifford, James. “Looking Several Ways: Anthropology and Native Heritage in Alaska.” Current An-
thropology 45, no. 1 (2004): 5–30.

Coombe, Rosemary J. The Cultural Life of Intellectual Properties: Authorship, Appropriation and the
Law. Durham: Duke University Press, 1998.

———. “Protecting Cultural Industries to Promote Cultural Diversity.” In International Public Goods
and Transfer of Technology Under a Globalized Intellectual Property Regime, edited by K. Maskus and
J. Reichman, 559–614. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.

Cowan, Jane K., Marie-Bénédicte Dembour, and Richard A. Wilson, eds. Culture and Rights: Anthro-
pological Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Denoon, Donald, with Stewart Firth, Jocelyn Linnekin, Malama Meleisea, and Karen Nero, eds. The
Cambridge History of the Pacific Islanders. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Fabian, Johannes. “Religious and Secular Colonization: Common Ground.” History and Anthropol-
ogy 4 (1990): 339–55.

Goodenough, Ward H. “Oceania and the Problem of Controls in the Study of Cultural and Human
Evolution.” The Journal of the Polynesian Society 66, no. 2 (1957): 146–55.

Greaves, Thomas. “Tribal Rights.” In Valuing Local Knowledge: Indigenous People and Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights, edited by S.B. Brush and D. Stabinsky, 25–40. Washington: Island Press, 1996.

Harrison, Simon. “Cultural Boundaries.” Anthropology Today 15, no. 5 (1999): 10–13.

———. Fracturing Resemblances: Identity and Mimetic Conflict in Melanesia and the West. New York:
Berghahn, 2006.

Hastrup, Kisten. “Representing the Common Good: The Limits of Legal Language.” In Human Rights
in Global Perspective: Anthropological Studies of Rights, Claims and Entitlements, edited by R.A. Wilson
and J.P. Mitchell, 16–32. London: Routledge, 2003.

Hirsch, Eric, and Marilyn Strathern, eds. Transactions and Creations: Property Debates and the Stim-
ulus of Melanesia. New York: Berghahn, 2004.

Kaneff, Deema, and Alexander D. King. “Owning Culture.” Focaal: European Journal of Anthropology
44 (2004): 3–19.

Kirsch, Stuart. “Lost Worlds: Environmental Disaster, ‘Culture Loss’ and the Law.” Current Anthro-
pology 42, no. 2 (2001): 167–98.

Lowie, Robert H. Primitive Society. New York: Liveright, 1947.

Mead, Aroha Te Pareake, and Steven Ratuva, eds. Pacific Genes and Life Patents: Pacific Indigenous
Experiences and Analysis of the Commodification and Ownership of Life. Wellington: Call of the Earth

232

TOON VAN MEIJL

(Llamado de la Tierra) and Institute of Advanced Studies, United Nations University, 2007. Available
at http://www.ias.unu.edu/sub_page.aspx?catID⫽97&dd1ID⫽229 (accessed 25 October, 2009).

Pacific Community, Secretariat of the. Guidelines for Developing National Legislation for the Protec-
tion of Traditional Knowledge and Expressions of Culture Based on the Pacific Model Law 2002. Noumea:
Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2006.

Posey, Darrell A. “International Agreements and Intellectual Property Right Protection for Indig-
enous Peoples.” In Intellectual Property Rights for Indigenous Peoples, edited by T. Greaves, 223–51.
Oklahoma City: Society for Applied Anthropology, 1994.

Rowlands, Michael. “Cultural Rights and Wrongs: Uses of the Concept of Property.” In Property in
Question: Value Transformation in the Global Economy, edited by K. Verdery and C. Humphrey, 207–
26. Oxford: Berg, 2004.

Strathern, Marilyn. “Potential Property: Intellectual Rights and Property in Persons.” Social Anthro-
pology 4, no. 1 (1996): 17–32.

———. Property, Substance and Effect: Anthropological Essays on Persons and Things. London: Ath-
lone, 1999.

———. “Rationales of Ownership.” In Rationales of Ownership: Transactions and Claims to Owner-
ship in Contemporary Papua New Guinea, edited by L. Kalinoe and J. Leach, 1–12. Wantage, UK: Sean
Kingston, 2004.

Striphas, Ted, and Kembrew McLeod. “Strategic Improprieties: Cultural Studies, the Everyday and
the Politics of Intellectual Properties.” Cultural Studies 20, no. 2–3 (2006): 119–44.

Thompson, E.P. “The Long Revolution.” New Left Review no. 9–10 (1961): 24–39.

Wilson, Richard Ashby and Jon P. Mitchell, eds. Human Rights in Global Perspective: Anthropological
Studies of Rights, Claims and Entitlements. London: Routledge, 2003.


