Restitution  of Archaeological
Artifacts:  The Arab-Israeli  Aspect
Talia  Einhorn*

1  Summary

Since the second half of the last century, public international  law has
been  developing  rules  regulating  the  restitution  of  cultural  objects
removed from occupied territories during armed conflict.  Today it is
generally  recognized  that  customary  international  law  forbids  pil-
lage. The Protocol to the  1954 Hague Convention for the Protection
of  Cultural  Property  in  the  Event  of  Armed Conflict  further man-
dates that artifacts  removed from an occupied  territory  must be re-
turned to the competent  authorities  of  that territory  at the  close  of
hostilities.  The Arab-Israeli  case  highlights  the problematic  side  of
this  solution. Following the Six  Day War in  1967, the Sinai  Penin-
sula,  the Golan  Heights,  the Gaza  strip and the territory  known as
the "West  Bank" came  under  Israeli  control.  Israeli  archaeologists
carried out numerous excavations, and discovered artifacts of special
importance  to  Jewish  cultural  heritage.  It  is  regrettable  that,  as a
result of the peace  treaty  with  Egypt,  these  artifacts  can no longer
be exhibited and appreciated at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem, but
had  to  be  delivered  to  Egypt,  where  they  now  face  an  uncertain
future. A similar fate may befall the artifacts excavated in the Golan
Heights. The Palestinian claim for restitution cannot be based on the
Protocol.  The  Problem  is  nevertheless  the  same  in all  cases; if the
artifacts  are to be preserved,  properly  appreciated  and made avail-
able for purposes of study and research, it may be more appropriate
to  distribute  them  among  the  states  by  way  of  compromise  and
agreement,  that  will  seek  to  enhance  their  cultural  significance,
rather than use the arbitrary sole criterion of the  place of discovery.

*  Dr. iur. (Hamburg). Senior lecturer, The Institute of Law  and Business Studies,

Kiryat  Ono,  Israel  (affiliated  with  the  University  of  Manchester,  UK).  1  am
indebted to Prof. Dr. Kurt Siehr of the University of Zurich Centre for Private
International  Law for his invaluable observations. Thanks are also due to Mr.
Ronny  Reich of the  Israel  Antiquities  Authority  for his help, and to the Max
Planck  Institute  for  Foreign  and  Private  International  Law  in  Hamburg and
the Max Planck  Gesellschaft  for generously  supporting this research.

133

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia  Einhorn

King David playing the lyre a mosaic from the synagogue of Gaza (6th century CE)
(Collection  of  Israel  .Antiquities  Authority  Exhibited  &  photographed  Israel
Museum)

134

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution of Archaeological  Artifacts

2  The  Factual  State of Affairs  at  Present

In  1993  Israel  agreed  to hand over to  Egypt all archaeological  find-
ings,  resulting  from  the  excavations  carried  out  by  Israel  in  Sinai,
during  the  Israeli  occupation  from  1967 to  1983.'  It  is  said  that  at
the  same time,  Israel  made a  separate  request, not  mentioned  in the
Agreement,  that,  out  of  the  hundreds  of  items  returned,  some  24
artifacts,  of  special  importance  to  Jewish  cultural  heritage,  be  kept
in  Israel,  to  be  exhibited  on  a  permanent  loan  basis,  at  the  Israel
Museum  in  Jerusalem.  Egypt  has  refused  this  request,  and  the  last
shipment  of  artifacts  was delivered  to  Egypt  in December  1994.

The  1994 Cairo Agreement signed between  Israel and the Palesti-
nians mentions the Palestinian demand that Israel return all archaeol-
ogical  artifacts  found  in the Gaza strip and Jericho  area since  1967,
but  leaves  the  final  resolution  of  this  issue  to  the  negotiations  on
the  final  status.2  Similar  claims  have  already  been  raised  by  the
Palestinians  with regard  to all other parts of the West  Bank  and  the
Gaza  Strip, and  are yet to  be  expected  from  Syria  in respect of  the
artifacts  excavated  in the Golan  Heights.3

3  The  Scope  of the Duty to Restitute  under Public  Inter-

national  Law

It  has  been  maintained  that  restitution  of  cultural  property  taken
from  occupied  territories  has  become  part  of  the  customary  inter-
national  law.4 To what  extent  is that  true?

It  is true that  peace treaties have  often  included  provisions under
which the defeated  party had to return objects taken by it from terri-
tories that it had occupied during the war, sometimes even those that
had  been  looted  in  former  wars.5 There  are cases  where  restitution
has  been  effected  by  the  victorious,6  many  others  however  where
this has not been done, and museums in the lands of previous occu-
pying powers provide abundant  evidence of that.

The prohibition on confiscation  and pillage of private property has
developed rather early.7 The  1907 Hague Convention concerning the
Laws and Customs of War on Land8 is of importance in this respect,
as it includes these  prohibitions.9  It stipulates that  "private  property
cannot be confiscated"  (article 46), and that "pillage  is formally  for-
bidden" (article  47).  Pillage  is taken  to  relate  only  to  private prop-
erty.10 As regards cultural property, article 56 states the following:

"The  property  of  municipalities,  that  of  institutions  dedicated
to  religion,  charity  and  education,  the  arts  and  sciences,  even
when  State  Property,  shall  be treated as private property.
All seizure of,  destruction or wilful  damage done to institutions
of this character, historic monuments, works of art and science,

135

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia  Einhorn

is  forbidden,  and  should  be  made  the  subject  of  legal  pro-
ceedings".

The International  Military  Tribunal  in Nuremberg regarded  the pro-
visions  contained  in  article  56  as  imperative,  in  respect  of  the  or-
ganized  plunder  of  both  public  and  private  property."  The  same
should  hold true  for  articles  46 and 47. Thus, although  none of the
states involved in our case is a party to the  1907 Hague Convention
they are all nevertheless  bound  by these provisions.

Article  56  does  not  in  itself  imply  a  duty  to  effect  restitution.

Under article 3,

"A  belligerent  Party  which  violates  the  provisions  of  the  said
regulations shall, if the  case demands, be liable to pay compen-
sation. It shall be responsible for all acts committed by persons
forming  part of its armed  forces."

Nevertheless, in view of the Nuremberg  proceedings  it would  seem
that  restitution  in  effect  or  in  kind  has  indeed  become  mandatory,
under  such  circumstances.  Valid  title  cannot  be  obtained  through
pillage  and  loot.12

To the extent that archaeological  findings  are private property, or
form  part  of  museum  collections,  or  are  otherwise  subject  to  the
rules of the  1907  Hague  Convention,  there  is no room  to  consider
redistribution. All objects should be left intact. The last case of resti-
tution  under such  circumstances  relates to the collection  of the Ku-
waiti  National  Museum  (some  17,000 artifacts),  seized  by  Iraq  dur-
ing the Gulf War, and returned  after  the Iraqi  defeat.13

But  how  about  undiscovered  and  undocumented  findings  of  ar-
chaeological excavations? The Hague rules will apply to them when-
ever  they  are  considered  private  property,  belonging  to  the  private
owner of the piece of land  in which they were excavated, according
to  the  law  of  the  land  prior  to  its  occupation.  The  rules  will  also
apply to them  insofar  as they are the property of municipalities and
institutions mentioned  in article 56. Other findings do not fall  under
the first paragraph  of article  56, and  it is doubtful  whether  they are
included  in the  second  paragraph.  Some  may  indeed  be  considered
works  of  art,  but  many  may  not  fit  that  category,  as  it  is not  their
artistic  features  (quite  a  few  may  have  none),  but  rather  their  re-
ligious,  cultural  or  historical  significance  that  make  them  all  im-
portant.

The  1907  Hague  Convention  is rather  limited  in  its treatment  of
cultural  property,  and  its  provisions  are  insufficient  to  cover  the
kinds  of  public  international  law  problems  encountered  in  fact.
Hence  the  need  for  rules to fill the gaps  left  open.  This was to  be
attained  by  the  1954  Hague  Convention  for  the  Protection  of Cul-
tural  Property  in  the  Event  of  Armed  Conflict  (hereinafter  -  "the
1954  Hague  Convention",  or  "the  Convention")  and  its  Protocol,

136

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution of Archaeological  Artifacts

concluded under the auspices of UNESCO.14 This Convention  is not
regarded  as  forming  part  of  customary  international  law.  It  is  rel-
evant  to  our  case  though,  since  Israel,  Egypt,  Syria  and  Jordan  are
all  High  Contracting  Parties.

The  Protocol  relates  directly  to  the  duty  to  restitute  artifacts  re-
moved  from  occupied  territories.15  It  is to  be  read  in  context  with
the relevant  provisions of the Convention.

4  The  1954 Hague  Convention

4.1  Protecting  "the cultural heritage of all  mankind"

The  most  striking  feature  of  the  Convention  is  the  broad,  indeed
universal, notion of cultural property that merits protection. The pre-
amble  to  the  Convention  stresses  that  the  determination  to  protect
has resulted from "being convinced that damage to cultural  property
belonging  to  any  people  whatsoever  means  damage  to  the  cultural
heritage of all mankind,  since each people makes  its contribution  to
the culture of the  world".

The wording of the preamble was no accident. As aforementioned,
the  Convention  was  to  provide  an  answer  to  the  problems  elicited
by  the  First  and  Second  World  Wars,  and  those  seemed  to  require
that  an  end  be put  to  the  almost  systematic  destruction  and  looting
of the cultural  property of one nation  by another during  armed con-
flicts.16  "These provisions  were the response  of civilized  nations to
the  widespread  devastation  of  collections  and  institutions  by  overt
Nazi policy  in occupied  Europe."17

The wide  definition  of  "cultural  property"  in art.  1, well  reflects
the  scope  of  what  needs  to  be  protected  during  armed  conflicts.
Article  l(a)  mentions  specifically  "movable  or  immovable  property
of  great  importance  to  the  cultural  heritage  of  every  people".  This
is  followed  by  a  rather  long  and  all-inclusive  list  of  examples  of
protected  items. Could  it however be that  the definition  is  qualified
by relating only to that property  which  is of great  importance to the
cultural  heritage of  every people, and  that  only those  items that  are
of universal  importance, if such are to be found, deserve  protection?
When  read  together  with  the  preamble  this does  not  seem  to  make
sense. The definition  should be construed as enhanced by this phrase
rather than as qualified  by it.

In  line  with  its  universal  approach  the  Convention  pays  regard
neither  to  the  cultural  nor  to  the  religious  provenance.  Nor  does  it
matter whether  the  cultural  property  is private  or  public,  belonging
to  nationals  of  the  High  Contracting  State  or  to  foreign  persons,
organizations  or governments  of  other  Contracting  Parties. All  cul-
tural  property coming  within  the scope of the Convention  is treated
equally  throughout  its provisions.

137

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia  Einhorn

Bronze  coin  with
Hebrew  inscription:
le-shihrur  Yerushalem
Ha-qedosha
("for  the freedom  of
Holy  Jerusalem")
Gamla, the Golan
Heights, CE  67 (the
Great  Revolt  against
the  Romans)
(Collection  of  Israel
Antiquities  Authority
Exhibited  & photo-
graphed  Israel  Museum)

4.2  The duty to protect

In view of the dangers that modern  armed  conflicts  pose to cultural
property,  the  Convention  provides  a  range  of  protective  measures.
The  High  Contracting  Parties  are  required  to  protect  all  cultural
property  irrespective  of  origin.  The  duty  to  protect  comprises  the
duty to safeguard  and the duty to respect  such property.18

The  duty  to  safeguard  imposes  upon  the  Contracting  States  the
obligation to take precautions, in time of peace, for the  safeguarding
of cultural  property, situated  within the Contracting  State's territory,
against  the  foreseeable  effects  of  an  armed  conflict.  Having  been
made a positive undertaking, this means that the safeguarding  is not
any more an "internal  affair"  of the Contracting  State.19

The  duty  to respect,  on  the  other  hand,  is  first  and  foremost  the
duty  to  refrain  from  any  act  of  hostility  directed  against  cultural
property, as well as the duty to refrain  from  making  such use of the
property  that  may prompt  the  enemy  to endanger  it.20  This passive
duty  applies  to  the  territory  of  the  Contracting  State  as  well  as  to
that  of  all  other  Contracting  Parties.21  The  duty  to  respect  further
entails a positive  obligation  to prohibit and prevent theft,  misappro-
priation  and  vandalism  directed  against  cultural  property;22  a  duty
to  refrain  from  requisitioning  movables  situated  in  the  territory  of
another  High  Contracting  Party;23  and a duty to  refrain  from  using
cultural property  by way of reprisals.24

4.3  Occupied  territories
The  Convention  specifically  provides  for  the protection  of  cultural
property  by  a  Contracting  State  occupying  in  whole  or  in  part  the
territory  of another  High Contracting  State.25

138

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution of Archaeological  Artifacts

Article  18(2) makes it clear that the duties under the Convention
apply only where it is the territory of another Contracting  Party that
is occupied.26

The Convention contains no express provision regarding archaeol-
ogical  excavations  conducted  by  the  occupying  state.  Excavations
are not prohibited.27  Indeed from the point of  view of the Conven-
tion they do not  matter; the items excavated  come  within  the defi-
nition  of "cultural  property" under article  1, and the prohibition  of
exportation  coupled  with  the duty to return are both  taken care  of
by the Protocol.

4.4  Restitution
The duty to effect  restitution is intrinsically connected with the pro-
hibition of the exportation of cultural property  from occupied terri-
tories. Both issues are dealt with in article 1 of the Protocol:

" 1. Each High Contracting  Party undertakes to prevent the ex-
portation, from a territory occupied by it during an armed con-
flict, of cultural property as defined in Article  1  of the Conven-
tion  for  the  Protection  of  Cultural  Property  in  the  Event  of
Armed Conflict,  signed at the Hague on  14 May,  1954...
3.  Each  High  Contracting  Party  undertakes  to  return,  at  the
close of hostilities, to the competent authorities of the territory
previously  occupied, cultural  property which is in its territory,
if such property has been exported in contravention of the prin-
ciple laid down in the first paragraph. Such property shall never
be retained as war reparations".

The  language  used  is quite categorical.  The obligation  of  the High
Contracting  Party  to  prevent  exportation  is  absolute,  an  exception
made only for the sake of rescuing cultural property.28 This may be
interpreted  as  a  special  far-reaching  positive  duty  imposed  by  the
Convention,  due  to  the  imminent  danger  of  having  more  cultural
property  exported  during  occupation.29  Another possible  interpret-
ation could  be  that the  difference  between  "prevent" and "refrain"
has simply been overlooked by the drafters.30 The second interpret-
ation would seem to offer the better solution. In the Arab-Israeli case
the occupation has so far lasted some 27 years, and a duty to impose
total  prohibition  on  any  kind  of  exportation  of  cultural  property
would have caused excessive hardship for both the occupied and the
occupant. The danger of losing the cultural property through an over-
permissive attitude taken by the occupant could be mitigated, at least
to  a  certain  extent,  by  recalling  the  occupant's  duty  to  fulfill  its
obligations under the Convention  in good faith.

It did  not  escape  the  minds  of  the  authors  that  there  could  be
discrepancies  between  the  claim  to  restitution  and  the  claim  to
ownership. During the intergovernmental  conference that took place

139

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia Einhom

in the  Hague, under the auspices  of  UNESCO,  in  April-May  1954,
the  West-German  representative  asked  to  whom  an  artifact  should
be  restituted,  in  case  the  owner  left  the  source  state,  resided
elsewhere, and is now opposed to the object  being restituted  to that
state.  The  answer  given  by  the  conference  President  Carl  W. A.
Schumann,  Head  of  the  Dutch  Delegation,  was that  the  state  with
which  the  artifacts  were  deposited,  should  return  them  to  the  de-
positing state, without bothering at all about the relationship existing
between  the  depositing  state  and  the  proprietor  of  the  deposited
goods.31

This may be explained  by the nature of the Convention, being an
agreement  between  sovereign  states,  therefore  dealing  solely  with
restitution  to the competent  authorities of the formerly  occupied  ter-
ritory, and leaving out all  (but one) private law aspects.32

Another  possible  explanation  is  that  the  problems  of  ownership
seemed  far  too  difficult  to  settle  within  the context  of  the  Conven-
tion.  In  the  course  of  preparing  the  Convention,  the  International
Institute for the Unification  of Private Law was asked for advice. Its
answer  was  that  the existing  differences  between  the  various  civil
laws made it difficult  to formulate provisions acceptable to all.33 The
USA  and  UK  delegates  considered  the  issue  too  complicated,  and
found  it  difficult  to  disassociate  the  problem  from  private  law.34
Their  further  declaration  that  the  USA  and  the  UK  would  not  be
able to sign  a convention  that  included an obligation  to effect  resti-
tution  without  further  study  of  the matter,  prompted  the  separation
of  this  issue  from  the  Convention  and  its  inclusion  in  a  separate
Protocol.  Eventually,  they  did  not  accede  to the  Convention  at  all.
However,  the  issues  remained  separate,  and  although  it  has  been
maintained  that  the  Protocol  is  nevertheless  an  integral  part  of  the
Convention,35  it  remained  far  less  detailed.  The  provisions  are
phrased  in terms that  are  too  general, and cannot  provide  adequate
answers  to  a  number  of  public  international  law  problems  in-
volved.36

A third explanation  could be provided by the export control exer-
cised  by  states  prior  to  1954,  prohibiting  private  parties  exporting
cultural  property  belonging  to  them.  The history  of  export  prohib-
itions has  its origins already  in the  15th century.37  By ensuring  the
return of the cultural property to the territory, the Contracting Parties
could  retain control  of its export.

The solution adopted by the Protocol is administrative. All objects
taken from a territory are to be returned to its competent authorities.
The  obligation  to  effect  restitution  is  absolute,  the  only  condition
being  that  the cultural  property  has  been  exported  in  contravention
of  Article  I( 1) of  the  Protocol.  Since  Article  I( 1) provides  for  no
justifications  to any export of any kind, this applies to article 1(3) as
well.

Whereas the Protocol mentions the duty to effect  restitution to the
competent  authorities  of  the  occupied  territory,  it  does  not  specify

140

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution of  Archaeological  Artifacts

whether it refers to the competent authorities prior to the occupation,
or after  the  occupation  is  over.  This  question  may  assume  special
importance  in cases of movement of populations.38

Following  restitution,  it is up to the competent  authorities to de-
cide the questions of ownership with the claimants, whether private
or public, and whether the artifacts must stay in the country or may
be exported.  The Convention  thus contents  itself with restoring the
status quo ante.39

The control  given  to  the  competent  authorities  over  the cultural
property is in fact the counterpart of ownership on the international
plane, at least as regards that part of the cultural  property which is
public. The receiving  authority  is not  under any  duty  under public
international  law as regards  its protection  and preservation,  except
for the duty to safeguard  it in times of peace (article  3), so long as
it still keeps it.  It is not however obliged to retain it in the territory
or at  all.  It  is  within  its  sovereign  powers  to  do  with  it  as  it may
deem fit.

5  The Application of the Hague  Convention  to the

Arab-Israeli  Case

5.1  The status of the occupied territories
The right of the Jews  to return to their ancient homeland  has been
recognized by the international community, albeit within borders that
have yet to be settled. The element  of "defined  territory" as a con-
dition for statehood has always been unclear in the case of Israel.40
Following the Six  Day War in  1967, the Sinai  Peninsula, the Golan
Heights,  the  Gaza  Strip  and  the  land  known  as  the  "West  Bank"
came under Israeli control.  For the purpose of this study however it
will suffice  to relate to the status of these occupied territories under
public international law.

a.  The Sinai Peninsula
The peace treaty between Israel and Egypt specifies  in article II, that
"the permanent boundary between Israel and Egypt is the recognized
international boundary between Egypt and  the former mandated terri-
tory of Palestine ...  without prejudice to the issue of the status of  the
Gaza Strip".41 This means that the Sinai Peninsula, that prior to 1967
was part of Egypt, has been regained by it under the  Peace Treaty.

b.  The Gaza Strip and the West Bank
The Gaza Strip formed part of the British  Mandatory  until  1948. It
was then administered by Egypt from 1948 to  1967. It was occupied
by Israel from 1967 until  1994, when it became part of the  Palestin-
ian autonomy. Egypt has never claimed title to it.42

The West  Bank  also  formed  part of  the  Palestine  Mandate terri-
tory.  It was  occupied  by  Jordan  in  1948,  following  the  1948  war

141

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia  Einhorn

with  Israel. Jordan  attempted  to annex  the  West Bank  in  1950. The
annexation was not recognized under public international law, Britain
(with a reservation regarding East Jerusalem) and Pakistan being the
only states to recognize the annexation, which was also vehemently
opposed  by the  Arab states.43  In addition  King  Hussein  declared in
1988  that Jordan severed its legal and administrative ties with the West
Bank.  Israel  has never  formally  incorporated  the West  Bank,  to the
exclusion  of  East Jerusalem.  The  Israeli  annexation  of  East  Jerusa-
lem has not been recognized  under public  international  law.44

c.  The Golan  Heights
The  Golan  Heights  were  Syrian  territory  until  1967.  Their  annex-
ation  by  Israel  in  1981 has not been  recognized  under public  inter-
national  law.45

5.2  The Convention's  scope of application

a)  As regards artifacts  excavated  in the  Golan  Heights they  fall  di-
rectly  under  the  provisions  of  the  1954  Hague  Convention,  since
both  Israel and  Syria are High Contracting  Parties.

b) As regards artifacts excavated in Sinai, the claim for their resti-
tution  would have initially  come under the Convention.  However as
regards this territory there is also the  1993 Agreement made between
the  Egyptian  Archaeological  delegation  and  the  Israeli  Antiquities
Authority. The  Agreement  is  very  brief,  makes  no  reference  to  the
Hague  Convention,  and  consists  of  two  operative  provisions,
namely:

"It  was agreed between  the delegation  and the  Israeli  Antiqui-
ties  Authority,  that  all  artifacts  and  finds  from  Sinai  will  be
returned  to  Egypt  within  the  next two  years and  not  later than
December  31, 1994.
Those  artifacts  which  have  been  processed  and  documented,
will  be returned to Egypt within the next two months."

This is a special agreement, which does not conflict  with the under-
takings  under the  Hague Convention.  It thus takes precedence  over
the  general  provisions  of  the  Hague  Convention,  as  regards  these
artifacts.

c) As regards the West Bank and Gaza, those do not seem to come
within the Convention's scope of application, as the Palestinians are
not a High Contracting  Party. Article  19, treating conflicts  not of an
international  character, does not  seem to apply as well. It applies in
the event  that  an  armed  conflict  takes  place  within  the territory  of
one of the  High Contracting Parties. Even though it is autonomy not
sovereignty  that  is under discussion  for the time being, it cannot be
said  that the armed  conflict  between  Israel  and the Palestinians  has
occurred  within  the territory  of  Israel  alone, as the  West  Bank  and

142

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution  of Archaeological  Artifacts

Gaza  have  not  been  recognized  as  part  of  it.  Besides,  article  19
commits  the  Parties,  in  such  events,  only  to  the  provisions  of  the
Convention  regarding  respect  for  cultural  property,  that  is:  those
mentioned in article 4.

Finally, article  18(3) stipulates that "if one of the Powers in con-
flict  is not a Party to the present Convention  ...  the  Powers which
are parties  ...  shall  be bound by the Convention,  in relation to the
said  Power,  if  the  latter has declared  that  it accepts  the  provisions
and so  long  as  it applies  them".  It seems  however that  such duties
would only  operate ex  nunc,  that is: the duty  to protect  as well  as
the  duty  to  prevent  exportation  will  be  in  effect  as  of  the  time  of
declaration.

As  in the  case  of  the  Sinai  artifacts  however,  a special  bilateral
agreement  could  be  made,  pursuant  to  the  1994  Cairo  Agreement.
The provisions  of such an agreement  would  supersede those of the
Convention, as regards the artifacts mentioned in it.

The  only  issues  to  be  solved  under  the  Hague  Convention  are
therefore  those  related  to  the  findings  in  the  Golan  Heights.  Even
here however there is a further complication,  due to the absence of
recognized  borders. Whereas the right of the Jews to return to their
ancient  homeland  has  been  recognized  by  the  international  com-
munity, the borders of the State of  Israel have not been determined
up to date, the borders with Egypt and Jordan having become excep-
tions following the peace treaties with both countries. In the absence
of recognized borders, it would only be made known, after the con-
clusion of the respective peace treaties, which territories were occu-
pied and which will be considered to have been held by  right.

5.3  Mode of application: restitution of all artifacts

As both  Israel  and  Syria  are parties  to  the  Hague  Convention  and
Protocol, those should be strictly observed and enforced. All artifacts
exported  in  contravention  of  the  Convention  should  be  restituted,
and that includes also all artifacts of Jewish origin.

According to article 1(3) the artifacts should be returned only after
the hostilities have come to an end. This could be construed as mean-
ing that,  in the same manner as the Convention  relates  not only to
warfare but to all sorts of armed conflict,  it is only after all hostilit-
ies, not only the state of war, have come to an end, that restitution
should be effected.  This construction has however two serious limi-
tations: First,  even  where  hostilities  and rivalry may  seem  to have
come  to  an  end  the  situation  may  in  fact  remain  fragile  over  ex-
tended periods of time, with dormant yet very  strong emotions just
awaiting an almost casual spark to ignite them, as is well  evidenced
in the case of Yugoslavia.  Secondly, where the cultural property be-
longs to the cultural heritage of those to whom it should be returned,
there does  not  seem  to be  a justification  to withhold  it  any  longer
than necessary  to make  sure that  it  is  safely  protected.  If the con-

143

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia Einhom

tinued  hostilities  have no bearing  on this  issue, the  artifacts  should
be returned irrespective of the  ongoing hostilities. On the other hand,
where  the  hostilities  are  turned  against  the  people,  or  groups,  to
whom  the  artifacts  belong,  return  thereof  may  serve  to  endanger
rather  than  protect  them.  Cultural  property  belonging  to the  adver-
sary's  heritage may  thus become a target  to hostile  rather than pro-
tective  action  at  worst,  or just  suffer  from  neglect  due  to  lack  of
positive  interest  in it.

The  correct  reading  of  the  Convention  thus  mandates  restitution
of all artifacts  of whatever provenance. The conclusion  seems clear.
Indeed this  study could  be brought  to an  abrupt  end  here and  now,
if  not  for  the  throbbing  question:  Is  this  result  also  a  satisfactory
one?

6  The Problematic  Consequences  of Complete  Resti-

tution

The demand that all items, including those of the utmost  significance
to  Jewish  religious,  ethnic  and  cultural  origins  be  returned  to  the
territories, is troublesome, not to say painful, to Jews concerned with
the enhancement  of their cultural  heritage.

Israel must,  under the wording  of the Convention,  return  the ob-
jects  even  if  it  is  known  for  certain  that  the  objects  will  not  be
preserved, will not be made accessible, will not be made the subject
of appreciation  and  study, and will not be displayed  anywhere. The
Convention  seeks only  a  restoration  of  a  status  quo  ante.  It  places
no obligation beyond  the duty to safeguard  the object,  within a cer-
tain narrow meaning. It does not account for preservation from dam-
age and destruction  in the aftermath  of the period of hostilities.

In this case, the parties competing  for the territories  have been at
odds with  each  other  for  years. Even  peace  treaties do not  seem  to
remove  all  hostilities.  There  are  yet  significant  parts  of  the  popu-
lation that oppose the peace process. Cultural  property belonging to
the adversary's  heritage  may  thus become  a  target  to  hostile  rather
than  protective  action  at  worst,  or just  suffer  from  neglect  due  to
lack of positive  interest  in it.

This  is  a  sad  result  not  only  from  the  point  of  view  of  Jewish
culture,  but  also  from  a  general  cultural  point  of  view.  It  further
raises  the  question  whether  the  Hague  Convention  is  an  adequate
legal  instrument  to handle this and similar cases.

7  The Arab-Israeli  Case: A Case  that  Misfits

7.1  The "regular" case of occupation
The  Convention  and  the  Protocol  seem  to  provide  an  adequate
answer  to  the  regular  case  of  occupation,  where  one  High  Con-

144

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution  of Archaeological  Artifacts

tracting  State  occupies  the  territory  of  another,  and  should  not  use
its controlling position  to remove  the conquered's  cultural  property.
By signing the Convention, the High Contracting  States have under-
taken to put an end to plunder, as means of humiliating the  defeated
people,  adding  to  the  grandeur  of  the  victorious,  and  allowing  for
the use of cultural  property as reprisals. Apart  from  that,  it is a  fact
that most peoples are to be found  in their respective lands, and, once
occupation  is over, restitution  to the state authorities  would  dispose
of most if not all problems in a satisfactory  manner. The Arab-Israeli
case does not fit this model, and the arguments brought by the parties
to this conflict  reflect  different  interests  from  those that would  nor-
mally  arise in the case of  occupation.

7.2  The Israeli aspect: whose culture? whose  heritage?

Israel was established in 1948 as the state of the Jewish people, who,
after  nearly  2000  years, regained  sovereignty  in  their  homeland.  It
is the past of the country that has attracted the interest of archaeolog-
ists since the middle of the  19th century. The establishment of Israel
has made research far more proliferous. The public has been  follow-
ing the excavations  with  deep  interest,  as those  have  come  to  shed
light on Jewish  life, rituals, folklore,  and the etymology of words in
the Hebrew language. Archaeological  research  is vital  to the  under-
standing  of  many  Biblical  texts.  This  is  due  to  Jewish  continuity.
While  the  cultural  heritage  has  developed  from  one  generation  to
another the fundamental  bases remained the same. The Jew of today-
speaks the same  language and reads the same Bible as his ancestors
who lived  in Israel  for  generations before the Exile in CE 70.

Following  the  Six  Day  War in  1967, the  Sinai  desert,  the  Golan
Heights and the land known as the "West Bank" came under  Israeli
control. New vistas were immediately  opened  to Israeli  archaeolog-
ists, in areas that were until then inaccessible to them. Was not theSi-
nai  trodden  by  the  ancient  Israelites,  according  to  the  Old  Testa-
ment, for some 40 years, prior to
their  return  to  Israel?  Inciden-
tally,  despite  archaeological  ef-
forts, no such remnants from  the
Exodus  have  been  found.  Some
very  important  artifacts  relating
to the period of the First Temple
were  excavated,  mainly  in  Kun-
tillet  'Ajrud,  a  religious  centre
near  the  Israeli  border,  dated  to
the 8/9th  century  BCE  (Judaean
Monarchy  period).  Gaza  has
been  an  important  centre  of  the
Cana'anites  and  the  Philistines,
the
whose 

interactions  with 

145

Kuntillet  'Ajrud
a  religious centre  near
the  Israeli  border,  8/9
century  BCE,
Judaean  Monarchy
period

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia  Einhorn

Inscription  incised  on
rim  of  large  stone
basin:  Pbdyw  bn  'dnh
brk  h" lyhw  -
"(Belonging)  to  'Obad-
yau  son  of  'Adnah,  may
he be blessed  by  God",
Kuntillet  'Ajrud
(Collection  of  Israel
Antiquities  Authority
Exhibited  & photo-
graphed  Israel  Museum)

People of  Israel  are well-documented  in the Old Testament.  During
the  Talmud  Period  there  was  a  considerable  Jewish  population  in
Gaza,  as  evidenced  by  the  Synagogue  there  with  its  magnificent
mosaics dated to the 6th century CE. Gamla, also known as the Mas-
sadah  of  the  north,  a  Jewish  settlement  in  the  Golan  Heights, was
besieged  and  conquered  by  the  Roman  Emperor  Vespasian  at  the
time of the Great  Revolt in CE 66.

Most important however, from the point of view of Jewish history,
is  the  West  Bank.  Major  cities  of  the  Old  Testament:  Hebron,  Jer-
icho, Bethel, Shilo, Shechem, Samaria, are situated here. It is the site
of biblical Judaea and Samaria, the two ancient Jewish kingdoms; of
Mount Gerizim (the mountain of the blessing in Jewish tradition, the
most  important  Samaritan  site, also  a  Roman  site); of  Qumran,  the
site of the  Dead  Sea Scrolls, to mention just  a few  of the numerous
archaeological  sites of great  importance  in Jewish  history.

7.3  The Arab claim  for  restitution:  a matter of sovereignty

"We refuse  any  concept  of  Swiss-cheese  cantonisation  and  will  ac-
cept nothing but complete control".48 The Palestinian claim is based
on the territorial  link. The artifacts belong to the place of excavation,
and the people who is the sovereign  of that territory, should  also be
given control over the artifacts, to the exclusion of all others. At the
moment, autonomy  not sovereignty  is under discussion. The Palesti-
nians however never concealed their aspirations to a sovereign  state
within the territory  of the former  British  Mandatory. In this political
process, archaeology  is therefore  an important  issue.

The same  is true for  Egypt.  Egypt  insisted on having all  artifacts
excavated  in  Sinai,  including  those  intrinsically  connected  to  the
Jewish  heritage, restituted  to it.

146

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution of Archaeological  Artifacts

7.4  What  makes this case  different?

To begin with, the setting  is rather unique. Where has it ever  before
happened  that  a  people  regains  sovereignty  in  the  land  where  its
ancestors  had  been  sovereign,  and  from  which  as  a  people  it  was
driven  out  (although  Jewish  settlement  in  Israel  continued  through-
out history), and then gets to occupy yet another part of that  ancient
homeland and to excavate the remnants of its own cultural heritage?
No  less  amazing,  a  clear  direct  link  to  that  heritage  was  retained
during  the  two  millennia  of  diaspora.  These  facts  account  for  the
problems  encountered.  Had  it  not  been  for  them,  had  the  Jewish
people not been exiled, or had they not regained  sovereignty, it may
be safely  assumed  that  we would be hardly discussing this case.

During  the  whole  period  of  exile  the  artifacts  remained  un-
excavated. It can therefore  not be argued that they have in the mean-
while  become part of the cultural  heritage of any of the many  other
peoples that governed the territory of Israel since the Exile: Romans,
Byzantines,  Arab-Moslems,  Christian-Crusades,  Mamluks,  and  Ot-
tomans.

7.5  Is this case really  different?

The  Arab-Israeli  case  has  some  unique  features.  It  does  however
resemble  other  cases  where  new  states  replace  former  ones,  in  an
attempt to fulfill  a need for secure living and self-definition  of ethnic
groups.  As  in  the  Israeli  case, the  borders  finally  drawn  will  often
reflect the political pressures and balance of powers at the time when
the new states are created, rather than the historical or cultural  links
of the ethnic groups to the part  of the  land assigned  to them  within
the  territory.

The  division  of  the  territories  between  Israel/Palestine  and  the
neighbouring  Arab  States  has  been  subject,  from  the  beginning,  to
much  arbitrariness.  The  borders  were  initially  delineated  according
to the way by which  the English  chose to share with the French the
territories  they  had  conquered  during  the  First  World  War  in  the
Middle  East, or, in the case of the Sinai  Peninsula,  in an  agreement
concluded  in  1906  between  Britain  and  Turkey.  These  borders  did
not  reflect  the  natural  geographic  conditions  of  the  territory.  Nor
were they  delineated  with  regard  to the  location  of peoples  and  na-
tions.  They  simply  expressed  the  political  pressures  exerted  by  the
negotiating  parties.  This  is  how  the  new  political  territorial  unit
"Palestine  (Land  of  Israel)" came  into being.47  The borders  are not
yet  settled,  but  it seems that  when  they  are finally determined  they
will  again  reflect  political  pressures  more  than  historical  links.
Therefore  it may be expected  that also in the future  remnants of the
Jewish cultural  heritage will  be found  in territories not occupied  by
Israel.

147

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia  Einhom

8  In the Best Interest of the Artifacts

The  1954  Hague  Convention  has  been  termed  "a primarily  object-
oriented  document".48  Furthermore,  "it  is  a  short  step  from  Hague
1954,  limited  in application  to the threat to cultural  property  during
armed  conflict,  to  a more  general  recognition  of  the  importance  of
object-oriented  values  in international  cultural  property  policy".49 It
has  also  been  maintained  that  "Hague  1954  seeks  to  preserve  cul-
tural property from damage or destruction",50 and therefore well rep-
resents "cultural  internationalism".51

The Arab-Israeli case seems to point out that the "object-oriented"
approach  taken by the Convention  is of a rather limited  nature. The
troublesome  result  brought  about  by  it  may  perhaps  be justified  in
the  "regular" case  of  occupation,  but  could  hardly  be  supported  in
cases  resembling  the  Arab-Israeli  case.

In fact,  such  a  result  can  hardly  ever  be justified.  In the  context
of former drafts of the UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally
Exported  Cultural  Objects,52  it  has  been  suggested  that,  at  least  as
regards  the  return  of  illegally  exported  objects,  the  State  addressed
should be allowed  to decline return thereof so long as the requesting
State  cannot  guarantee  that  the  object  will  be  well  preserved  and
maintained  after  its  return.  This  would  have  been  a dilatory  clause
of cultural public policy and would have empowered the forum  State
to declare that there is an obligation to return the cultural object, but
'not yet'.53  In the case of the UNIDROIT Convention the  settlement
of  disputes  would  take  place  in  the  domestic  courts  of  the  con-
tracting  states,  which  in  principle  allows  for  the  application  of  the
ordre  public,  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  private  international
law, to avoid a result that is manifestly  incompatible  with the public
policy  of the  forum  state.  Nevertheless,  the  suggestion  was  rejected
and the  final  text  of the  Convention  does  not allow  any defence  of
ordre  public.54

In the domain of public  international  law  such a suggestion  could
not have even been made, as there is no generally recognized "ordre
public  culturel".  Instead,  a  change  in  the  public  international  law
rules  is  called  for,  in  order  to  provide  better  solutions  in  the  best
interest of  the artifacts.  While  it is  hard to draw  hard and  fast  rules
that would  fit all cases, it is possible to name the interests that merit
consideration  in  such  cases:  Which  state  has  the  stronger  cultural
link  to the objects?  Do they  form  part of the cultural  heritage  of  its
people? Which state is capable of and willing to preserve the objects,
and  would  undertake  the  effort  to  make  them  the  subject  of  study
and  appreciation?  Who  carried  out  the  excavations,  documented
them,  and  published  the  studies?  Geographic  proximity  is  another
factor.  The closer  the objects  are  to the  current  borders  of  the  state
claiming  them,  the  stronger  the  claim.  The  status  of  the  borders
should also be taken into account; to what extent and in what manner

148

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution of Archaeological  Artifacts

have  they  been  settled  under  public  international  law  between  the
states competing for the  findings?

This  approach  bears  a  similarity  to  solutions  chosen  in  cases of
state succession. Cultural property  objects have, in such cases, been
distributed  among the newly  formed  states by way of compromises
and agreement, rather than according to the arbitrary place in which
they were situated at any given  moment.55 The establishment  of Is-
rael did not occur following a process of orderly transfer of adminis-
tration by the British  Mandatory. Instead, Israel came into existence
by  its own  act  on  14.5.1948. It  has therefore  been  maintained  that
no  rules  of  state  succession  are  applicable  to  Israel.56  This  should
not  exclude  the possibility  of  learning, when  appropriate, from the
solutions adopted in other cases where territories were divided anew
among states following  war, revolution  or a peaceful  settlement.

A word of caution is in order. This study does not advocate absol-
ute  segregation  of  cultural  objects.  It  would  be  far  better  for  each
party to share some of the  artifacts  belonging to its cultural  heritage
with  the  other  party,  with  a  view  to  enhancing  inter-cultural  ex-
change and mutual understanding. This could be developed in a cau-
tious  manner.  With  the  cold  peace  warming  up  more  cultural  ex-
change  may  be  expected.  However,  this  issue  should  not  be  dis-
carded  even  at  the  initial  phase.  Sometimes,  and  this  is  a  strange
phenomenon  (or  is  it?), art  objects  do  not  show  their  full  magnifi-
cence at their place of origin (where so many similar objects can be
seen), but abroad, where they give evidence of their distinct character
as compared with objects from other regions. This is due to the univer-
sality  of cultural  values. Cultural  objects, when  properly  displayed,
promote appreciation for "the  cultural heritage of all mankind", which
brings us all the way back to the preamble of the 1954 Hague Conven-
tion. They are probably the best ambassadors of any nation.

9  Conclusions

Finally, I would like to highlight the following  points:
1.  The  provisions  contained  in  articles  46, 47 and  56  of  the  1907
Hague Convention  concerning the Laws and Customs of War on
Land  are  imperative,  in  respect  of  pillage  and  plunder;  to  the
extent  that  archaeological  findings  are private  property,  or  form
part of museum collections, or are otherwise  subject  to the rules
of  the  1907  Hague  Convention,  they  must  be  left  intact,  and  if
removed  -  must be expediently  returned.

2.  The  1907 Hague Convention  is rather  limited  in its treatment of
cultural property, and leaves the greater part of the archaeologocal
artifacts discussed in this article outside its scope. The 1954 Hague
Convention  and  Protocol, concluded  under  the  auspices  of  UN-
ESCO, to which Israel, Egypt, Syria and Jordan are all High Con-
tracting Parties, is the instrument created to fill the gaps left open.

149

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia  Einhorn

3.  The  1954  Hague  Convention  embodies  a "cultural  international-
ism"  approach,  in relating  to the need  to protect  "the  cultural
heritage  of mankind"  in the  events  of warfare.  In line  with its
universalism  it does  not  reflect  a nation-oriented  policy.  Neither
however  is it all that  object-oriented.  As  regards  restitution,  the
Protocol  adopts a technical  administrative  territorial-oriented  ap-
proach,  seeking  to restore the status quo ante.

4.  While  suitable to dispose  of the "regular" case of occupation,  the
Arab-Israeli case manifests that in some cases the Convention, by
mandating the strict and ^discriminating  restitution of all archae-
ological  artifacts  excavated  in occupied  territories, may  yield re-
sults that are harsh  from a cultural  point of view.  Important  cul-
tural  objects,  intrinsically  connected  with  Jewish  cultural  heri-
tage, must be surrendered, without  any guarantee given that their
preservation,  truth and accessibility  will be cherished  by the Arab
state demanding  restitution.

5.  On a broader  scale,  where  there  are no recognized  borders to
begin with, the  Protocol  may not be suitable to resolve  the distri-
bution  of cultural  property,  before  these  are  drawn  for  the  first
time. Once hostilities come to an end, then alongside the drawing
of  recognized  borders  and  signing  of peace  treaties,  distribution
of cultural  objects should be carried out on the basis of an object-
oriented  policy.

6.  The  interests  to be  taken  account  of include  the  cultural  link to
the  objects;  the  will  and  capability  to preserve  the  objects,  and
make  them  the  subject  of study  and appreciation;  the  credit  due
to  whoever  carried  out  the  excavations,  documented  them,  and
published the studies; geographic proximity to the current borders
of the state claiming  them; as well  as the  status of the borders.

7.  Absolute  separatism is yet another evil  to be wary of. Sharing of
artifacts  belonging  to the cultural  heritage  of one  people  with
another  may  enhance  inter-cultural  exchange  and  mutual  under-
standing,  which  should not be discarded even at the initial  phase.
Cultural objects are probably the best ambassadors of any nation.

Notes

1  The wording of the agreement, signed in Tel-Aviv by the Israeli  Antiquities
Authority and an Egyptian archaeological  delegation on 21.1.1993, is given
in paragraph 4.2.b infra. S. also Lapidoth, Ruth/Hirsch, Moshe, The Practice
and Case-Law of Israel  in Matters Related to International  Law, Israel Law
Review  27 (1993) 515. Regarding the Sinai  findings  s. Ronnen,  Meir,  Sinai:
A Shared Heritage, ARTnews October  1994, pp. 147-148.

2  Annex  II, art. 2.B.30 of the  Cairo Agreement of April  1994:

"e.  With due consideration to the Palestinian demand that Israel shall return
all  archaeological  artifacts  found  in  the  Gaza  Strip and Jericho  area since
1967, this issue shall be dealt with in the negotiations on the final status."

150

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution of Archaeological  Artifacts

3  Ben-Dov.  Meir,  The Last  Days of  the  Bashan Gods,  Ha-aretz  Daily  News-

paper (in Hebrew) 9.10.1994.

4  Nahlik,  Stanislaw .,  International  Law and the Protection of Cultural Prop-
erty  in  Armed Conflicts,  The  Hastings  Law  Journal  27  (1976)  1069,  at p.
1083;  Rudolf,  Walter,  Ober  den  intemationalen  Schutz  von  Kulturgutem,
in: Staat und Vdlkerrechtsordnung  -  Festschrift  fur Karl Doehring, Berlin:
Springer  1989, 853 at p. 860.

5  Rollet-Andriane,  Louis-Jacque,  Precedents,  Museum  31  (1979) (UNESCO,

Paris) 4.

6  Nafziger,  James A.,  The New International  Legal  Framework for the Return,

Restitution or Forfeiture of Cultural  Property, New York University Journal
of International  Law and Politics  IS (1983) 789, at p. 790.

7  As regards the development  of the regulation  of  international  protection  of
cultural  property  in times  of war s.  Williams,  Sharon  A., The International
and  National  Protection  of  Movable  Cultural  Property  -  A  Comparative
Study, Dobbs Ferry, New York: Oceana  1978, pp.  15-29.

8  205  The  Consolidated  Treaty  Series  (Parry,  Give  (ed.))  277;  36  United

States Statutes at Large 2277.

9  Solf.  Waldemar,  A., Cultural  Property, Protection  in Armed Conflict, Encyc-

lopedia  of  Public  International  Law,  vol.  9  (1986)  64,  at  p.  65;  S.  also
Mossner, Jorg Manfred.  Hague Peace Conferences of  1899 and 1907, Encyc-
lopedia of  Public  International  Law, vol.  3 (1982) 204, at p. 211.

10  S.  Black's Law  Dictionary,  6th.  ed.,  Minn: West  1990; Hackworth.  Green
Haywood, Digest of International  Law, vol. 6, Washington: US Government
Printing Office  1943, p. 403.

11  International Military  Tribunal (Nuremberg), Judgment  and  Sentences,

American Journal of International  Law 41  (1947)  172, pp. 235-238.

12  Siehr, Kurt,  Internationa]  Art Trade  and  the  Law,  Recueil  des  Cours  243

(1993-VI)  I, p. 113.

13  For details s. DuBoff, Leonard D.I Caplan, Sally Holt,  The Deskbook of Art

Law, 2nd ed., Oceana  1993, Booklet  D: Art: The Victim of War, at p. D-79.

14  249 UNTS 216 (1956).
15  Article 1(3).
16  Clement,  Etienne,  Some Recent Practical  Experience in the Implementation

of the 1954 Hague Convention, International  Journal of Cultural Property 3
(1994)  11; Williams,  supra n. 7, pp. 34, 41.

17  Prott, Lyndel V.,  War, Heritage  and Normative  Action,  Museum 45  (1993)

(UNESCO, Paris) 45, at p. 46.

18  Article 2.
19  Strebel, Helmut, Die  Haager  Konvention  zum  Schutze  der Kulturguter im
Falle  eines  bewafmeten  Konfliktes  vom  14. Mai  1954,  Zeitschrift  fur
auslandisches  offentliches  Recht  und  Volkerrecht  16  (1955/56)  35,  pp.
50-51.

20  Article 4(1).
21  Ibid.
22  Article 4(3).
23  Ibid.
24  Article 4(4).
25  Article 5.
26  Strebel, supra n.  19, p. 58.
27  Lang, Gordon, UNESCO and Israel,  Harvard International  Law Journal  16
(1975) 676, pp. 678-679;  S. also Nafziger, James A..  UNESCO-Centered
Management of International Conflict Over Cultural Property, The Hastings

151

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Talia Einhorn

Law Journal 27 (1976)  1051, pp.  1051-1053; Regarding the  1956 UNESCO
Recommendation  to  prohibit  excavations  in  occupied  territories  s.  von
Schorlemer,  Sahine.  International  Kulturgiiterschutz,  Berlin:  Duncker  &
Humblot  1992,  pp.  301-302.

28  Articles  12-13  of  the  Convention.  The  procedure  to  be  followed  in  such
cases  is  detailed  in articles  17-  19 of  the  Regulations  for  the  Execution  of
the Convention,  249  UNTS  270  (1956).

29  Turner.  Stefan.  Die  Zuordnung  beweglicher  Kulturgiiter  im  Volkerrecht,  in:
Intemationaler  Kulturgiiterschutz  und  deutsche  Fragc  (Fiedler.  Wilfried
(ed.)),  Berlin:  Mann  1991,  p.  71; S.  also  Engstler  Ludwig,  Die  temtoriale
Bindung  von  Kulturgiitern  im  Rahmen  des  Volkerrechts,  Koln:  Heymann
1964,  p.  222,  who  regards  this  as  an  excessive  positive  undertaking  of  the
Contracting  Parties.

30  Strebel.  supra n.  19, at p. 69.
31  Nahlik, Stanislaw  ..  Biens culturels et conflit  arme,  Recueil  des Cours  120

(1967-1)65,  pp.  137-138.

32  Ibid., pp.  136-138.  The only  exception  is the duty of the High  Contracting
Party, that failed  to prevent the exportation  of the cultural  property  from the
occupied  territory,  to  idemnify  the  holders  in good  faith  thereof.  It is men-
tioned  in article  1(4) of the  Protocol.

33  Nahlik.  supra n. 4,  p.  1083.
34  Strebel.  supra n.  19, p. 71.
35  Nahlik.  supra n. 4,  p.  1083.
36  Nahlik. supra n. 4,  pp.  1083-1086.
37  Siehr, supra n.  12, pp.  162-163.
38  Turner,  supra  n. 29,  p. 73.
39  Rudolf,  supra  n. 4, p. 861.
40  Malanczuk. Peter.  Israel: Status, Territory and Occupied Territories, Encyclo-

pedia  of  Public  International  Law, vol.  12 (1990)  149, at p.  163.

41  18  ILM (International  Legal  Materials)  362  (1979).
42  Malanczuk.  supra n. 40, p.  165.
43  Malanczuk,  supra n. 40,  pp.  170-171; S.  also  Blum,  Yehuda Z., The  Missing
Reversioner:  Reflections  on  the  Status  of  Judea  and  Samaria,  Israel  Law
Review  3 (1968)  279,  p. 288.

44  Malanczuk.  Peter,  Jerusalem,  Encyclopedia of Public  International  Law, vol.

12(1990)  184, at p.  193.

45  Malanczuk.  supra n. 40,  p.  176.
46  This is  the  statement  made  by  Dr.  Nasmi  Juabeh, Professor  of  Archaeology
at Bir Zeit  University  and adviser to the Palestinian delegation, according to
Abraham.  Helga.  West Bank and Gaza  -  Roots: The Arab-Israeli peace talks
include  the hotly disputed  issue of archaeological  sites. The Art Newspaper,
No.  37.  April  1994, p. 20.

47  Shavit,  Ya  akov. Two Competing  National  Societies  within a British  Manda-
tory,  The  History  of  Eretz  Israel,  vol.  9  (Shavit.  Ya 'akov  (ed.)),  Jerusalem:
Yad Yizchak  Ben-Zvi  1982,  11, at pp.  12-19  (in  Hebrew).

48  Merryman,  John  Henry: The  Nation and the Object,  International  Journal  of

Cultural  Properly  3 (1994)  61, p.  70.

49  Merryman,  ibid., p. 70.
50  Merryman,  John  Henry. Two Ways of Thinking about Cultural  Property, The

American  Journal  of  International  Law  80 (1986)  831. p.  846.

51  Ibid.
52  For the  version  of October  1993  s.  Siehr. Kurt,  The  UNIDROIT  Draft  Con-
vention  on  the  International  Protection  of  Cultural  Property,  International

152

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

Restitution of Archaeological  Artifacts

Journal  of Cultural  Property  3 (1994)  301-307.  The  version  of  26.1.1990
was reproduced  in the  International  Journal  of  Cultural  Property  1 (1992)
252-255.

53  Siehr.  Kurt, The UNIDROIT  Draft Convention  on the  International  Protec-

tion of Cultural Property, (1992)  1 International Journal of Cultural Property
321,  p.  328;  S.  also  Siehr, Kurt,  Offentliches  Recht  und  intcmationales
Privatrecht beim grenziiberschreitenden  Kulturgiiterschutz,  in: Rechtsfragen
des  international en  Kulturgiiterschutzes  (Dolzer/Jayme/Mussgnug  (eds.)),
Heidelberg:  Muller  1994, pp. 83-104,  at pp.  101-102; Siehr,  supra n. 12.
p. 279.

54  S.  the final text  of  the  UNIDROIT  Convention  on  Stolen  or  Illegally  Ex-
ported Cultural Objects,  International  Journal of Cultural  Property 5 (1996)
I. Seite der "Documents".

55  Siehr.  supra n.  12, pp.  123-128.
56  D. P.  O 'Connell,  State Succession  in Municipal Law and International Law,

vol.  II,  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  1967,  pp.  155-156; Rosenne,
Shabtai,  The Effect  of Change of Sovereignty  upon Municipal  Law, British
Yearbook of International  Law 27 (1950) 267, pp. 267-273.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:38, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000252

153


