Licit International  Traffic  in
Cultural  Objects  for Art's  Sake
Hugo Keith Weihe*

1  Introduction

The movement of works of art and cultural properties has at all times
been  beneficial  to  the  development  of  new  cultural  values  in  new
places  and  eras. There  is no  question  that  it  encourages  the mutual
understanding  and  respect  between  people.  Major  historic  events
throughout the world have always entailed the relocation  of cultural
goods  when  victors  took  their  tributes  from  the  defeated.  These
goods  were  treasured  and  highly  regarded  for  their  level  of human
achievement.

In  a  series  of  lectures  entitled  'On  the  removal  of  works  of  art
from  the  conquered  territories  to  Rome',1  held  in  Leipzig  at  the
Casselischen  Alterthumer-Gesellschaft  in  1798,  L.  Volkel  justifies
Napoleon's  seizure  of  works  of  art  in  Italy  and  the  Netherlands  at
that  period,  by relating  it to  the Romans  abducting  sculptures  from
Greece  to  Rome.  The  latter  had  captured  the  sculptures  of  Greek
gods, robbing  them  of their protective  function  in their native terri-
tories,  but  continued  to  worship  them  and  were  inspired  by  their
artistic  beauty.  Now  they  were  being  captured  once  again  to  be
placed  in a new temple, a temple of art, the Louvre. What  formerly
was a standard  procedure by the victorious, making hostages  of the
guardian gods of the defeated,  had now become.a full  tribute to their
cultural  status. To possess  these  great  pieces  naturally  reflected  on
the  grandeur,  knowledge  and  style  of  the  new  owners,  apart from
being a token of their martial superiority. At no time were they inter-
ested  in destroying them.

In the same year,  1798, Napoleon  had taken  with him to Egypt a
staff  of  scientists  who  immediately  set  about  registering  the monu-
ments and making exact drawings which  some years later led to the
first  major  publication  in  the  field.  The  famous  Rosetta  Stone un-
earthed  by  his  troops  was  to  become  the  actual  key  to  Egyptian
culture when  it was deciphered  by Francois Champollion.  However,
in  an  unprecedented  change  of  fortune  Napoleon  was  cornered  by

*  Artibus Asiae, Museum Rietberg Zurich, Switzerland.

81

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063

Hugo  Keith  Weihe

the  British, who captured  the material  assembled by him and trans-
ferred  it  to  the  British  Museum.  This institution  then  and  now  ful-
filled  the  important  function  of  making  it  easily  available  to  the
general public as well as to foreign  scholars who were able to estab-
lish its cultural  value in a global perpective. With some justification
the  director  of the British  Museum considers his museum  a master-
piece in its own right.2 In this new context the seized cultural goods
actually  advanced the recognition  of Egyptian culture as well as the
establishment  of  a whole  new  field  of science, which  equally  ben-
efited  the  source  nation.  Furthermore,  it  spurred  a  whole  artistic
movement  in France, the Empire.

This is a characteristic of all  cultural transfers  throughout  history.
If  not  warlords,  then  there  are  connoisseurs  somewhere  else  in the
world,  who  are  eager  to  obtain  foreign  cultural  objects.  This  is  in
the  first  place  a  tribute  to  the  curiosity  of  mankind,  to  learn  about
and  to  cherish  other  peoples'  achievements.  A  priori  there  is  no
arrogance, reckless exploitation  or derogatory  attitude  of the politi-
cally  superior,  or of the  'civilized'  nations towards the Third World
countries.  The  only exceptions  to this were blinded  by the  obvious
material value, as were the  Spanish faced  with the gold treasures of
the  Aztecs,  which  they  chose  to  cast  into  ingots.  Had  they  known
the potential  market value they would certainly have refrained  from
this brutal  act.

Cultural  heritage consists  of various goods that bear  a distinctive
relevance  to a people's  origin  and  development.  The term  'national
cultural patrimony'  is applied  in a broad sense to cultural goods and
works of art created within  a nation, but not necessarily by an artist
of  that  specific  nationality.  This  would  apply,  for  instance,  to  the
works  of  Pablo  Picasso,  a  Spanish  artist  spending  most  of  his  cre-
ative  life  in  France. At  the  same  time  he remains  a  unique  artistic
talent  —  as every  artist essentially  is  —  at various  stages of his  life
venturing  into  new  artistic  realms,  initially  perhaps  indebted  to
French impressionism but probably more so to African  art, later truly
independent  —  or rather becoming influential  himself. It is a remark-
able phenomenon that the work of an individual should become rep-
resentative  for  a  whole  nation,  apart  from  the  fact  that  he  may not
even  be of that  nationality.

Some  categories  of  cultural  heritage, for  example  music  and  lit-
erature, stand apart for their specific properties. Although there is an
original  score or manuscript,  they factually  exist only as a perform-
ance  or  as  printed  matter,  whereby  the  problem  of  uniqueness  is
eliminated.  Without  this  burden  and the lack  of a  singular  material
base they have transgressed all borders and in a quite  straightforward
way  exploit  their  potential  to  become  the  cherished  good  of  the
world.  The  aspects  of nationality  and  internationality  have  thereby
already  been  overturned,  without  the  loss of  a  specific  identity.  In
view of this and with regard  to the three images of the  international
cultural  property  milieu  in  mind,  (1)  'national  cultural  heritage',

82

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063

Licit  Traffic  for  Art's  Sake

(2) 'cultural heritage of all mankind'  and (3)  'cultural  context', why
should this kind of liberation not be possible for all embodiments of
cultural  heritage?  In the  following  I will choose to  speak mostly of
works of art, but generally  imply cultural  goods  in a broader  sense.

2  Culture  in Context

The 'context'  is the crucial point of view of the art historian. I would
like to provide various aspects of this term beyond the object/context
relationship  as employed  in archaeology.

The art historian is trained to adopt both a local historical perspec-
tive  as well  as a concept  of  'global  positioning',  the  assessment of
mutual  influences  on  a  national  and  international  level  and  cross-
cultural exchange. Art history is as much about individual masters as
it is about anonymous workgroups, their predecessors and followers,
embedded in a cultural context, whose work may or may not become
a gradient, a stepping stone in the artistic evolution. One of its most
powerful  tools  is  comparison,  both  within  a  cultural  context  and
beyond.  Art  itself  thrives  on  relative  values;  mostly  there  is  an el-
ement of technical  accomplishment,  for example  of taking architec-
tural structures to ever greater heights and more splendid decoration.
But  beyond  that  there  is  vision,  innovation,  singularity,  creativity,
genius.  This  is  what  we  cherish  and  which  is  to  the  benefit  of  all
humankind.

An  interesting  aspect  in  view  of  cultural  importance  is  the  fact,
that cultural  goods in their making are very  often  not recognized as
such. Naturally many cases are obvious by the sheer magnitude and
effort  employed in the construction of objects of national status right
from  the  start,  for  example  the  great  pyramids  of  Giza  and  their
contents, but there are others that are first passed by, generally  'mo-
bile'  works,  like  the  paintings  of  Vincent  van  Gogh  or  the  Im-
pressionists.  Still others may  slip into oblivion  for  a while,  like the
works  of  the  Pre-Raphaelites,  to  be  rediscoverd  at  a  later  point  in
time. These latter cases are most interesting to our argument, stress-
ing the volatility  of judgement.

One  of  the  crucial  aspects  is how  we perceive  art  over  a period
of  time.  Why  is  it  possible  that  works  of  art  like  the  paintings  by
Vincent  van  Gogh  were  not  considered  to  be  art  when  they  were
first  created  and  virtually  unsellable  at  any  price,  only  to  become
unchallenged masterpieces less than a century later and commanding
the highest prices ever achieved  by cultural  goods at auction? True,
the  letters  published  by his  widow  revealed  a powerful  personality
of great  insight  totally  determined  in  his  artistic  quest  and  this has
undoubtedly helped to form his image, but should that not have been
clearly visible in the paintings themselves right from the start? How
are we to know which of the goods of today are the cultural heritage
of tomorrow?

83

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063

Hugo  Keith  Weihe

It is the liberality that has always existed in the contemporary  art

market  —  at any  given  time  and  undisputed  today  —  that  has been
instrumental  in the making of an artist. His work needs to be disco-
vered,  i. e.  needs  to  be  shown  around  to  as  broad  an  audience  as
possible. The collector buying from  a dealer, a gallery or an auction
is  making  a  'cash  commitment',  he  needs  to  be  sufficiently  con-
vinced of its quality to entail a financial  suffering.  This commitment
to  art by individuals  is  its status  nascendi. It needs to be  perceived
as  such  and placed within  its cultural  context.  This cultural  context
does not therefore  exist per  se, but is formed  by growing consent in
the  relevance  of  an individual  work  for  a community.  More  collec-
tors  might  begin  to compete,  the  prices  would  rise,  themselves  be-
coming  an  indication  of value  and  relative  importance.  There  is no
guarantee  however that  a once  fashionable  artist might  not  become
forgotten  again, whole  artistic movements  (re)considered  to be sec-
ondary.  The  failure  to  recognize  art  in  the  making  is therefore  ex-
tended by a perpetual uncertainty in its potential as national heritage.
However,  the  more  time  elapses,  the  more  precise  this  evaluation
will probably be.

This  would  cast  considerable  doubt,  for  example,  on  the  justifi-
cation of considering a painting by Matisse as cultural property, par-
ticulary  as the  time factor  becomes  overly  important.  When  does a
Matisse  in  Italy  become  a  National  Treasure?  In  1940,  50  or  60?
The owner intending to move the painting might just miss his chance
by a few  years. The time element  is decisive, there is movement  in
the  perception  of  art  and  the  status  and  influence  it  exerts  at  any
given  time  in past, present and  future.

3  Commodification  and  Collecting

Turning  cultural  objects  into  commodities  is  sometimes  considered
morally  questionable.  However,  it  is  an  inevitable  historic  fact  and
mostly a sign of recognition  and respect.  Speaking merely of specu-
lation  is  too  simple, there  always  is  a relationship  between  market
value and cultural relevance at any given time. The market is not out
to destroy, but to intermediate  and to supply to other more  strongly
interested  parties. Futhermore, the  market guards  itself  from  overly
excessive activities. The apparent eagerness of the art market in rich
nations has encouraged  fakes  which to some extent act as an inbuilt
protective measure  for the real  thing and have made many fields of
collecting  far  less desirable, for  example Pre-Columbian  ceramics.
From  the  history  of collections  and  the building  of  artists'  repu-
tations  it  cannot  be  emphasized  enough  how  important  the  role  of
the private collector is as the main driving force of artistic discovery.
At  the  initial  level  of  collecting  there  is  no  restriction,  but  why
should  the  fruit  of  individual  connoisseurship  eventually  result  in a

84

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063

Licit  Traffic  for  Art's  Sake

ban? Should the collector not be entitled to profit from rising market
values and to freely dispose of his property.

In Europe, since the Renaissance, many works were not only cre-
ated  by  commission,  but  for  a  free  market.  Art  became  a  highly
unique  product,  the  work  of  a  gifted  individual,  as  opposed  to  a
group-effort  or  the  work  of  a  nameless  craftsman.  The  notion  of
artistic genius became apparent. The pricing for art gradually  shifted
from purely  technical  aspects, as the  cost  of  the pigments  involved
and  the  total  labour  employed,  to  the  aspect  of  artistic  quality. Al-
brecht  Diirer argued  in the case of the so called  'Heller-altar',3  that
the more time he would invest in this commission the finer the result
would  be  -  thereby  trying  to coax  out  an  extra  100 guilders  from
his client.4 Essentially he was not willing to compromise his artistry
by a modest price level. This awareness of market value on the part
of  artists, culminating  in the  contracts between  the  Paris  art  dealer
Daniel-Henry  Kahnweiler  and  Picasso,  Braque,  Gris,  Leger  and
others  in the early  1900s, guaranteeing  them  a certain  sum per can-
vas of a specific  size, established art in the making as a commodity.
The  history  of  the  making  of  an  artist  generally  proves  that  the
dealer  who  makes  works  available  and  assembles  exhibitions  and
the  private  collector  who  buys  .from  him  are  instrumental  in  this
process.  To  discredit  the  private  collector  would  be  equally  detri-
mental  to the public  interest, as museums heavily rely on donations
from  private  sources.  To that  extent,  private  collections  very  often
represent an intermediary  state. The private collector, as opposed to
any  institution,  is  only  responsible  to  himself,  drawing  on  his  own
funds  and  therby  generally  being  far  more  enterprising  and  taking
greater risks. A museum, as a rule, has to reach a decision  within a
large  premium  and  be  in  a  position  to  publicly  justify  any  acqui-
sitions.  This  will  often  prevent  it  from  acquiring  avantgarde  art  at
an  early  stage. The  image  of the private  collector  might  have  been
tinged  by  the  avaricious  approach,  particularly  in  the  eighties,  of
investors  new  to  the  art  market,  but  the  true  collector  still  is  the
carrier  of connoisseurship.  It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  works of
art very often are highly individualistic products and likewise require
a personal  approach.

It  is  a  false  conception  to  believe  that  by  becoming  a  sellable
commodity a cultural  object ceases to be an object  of cultural ident-
ity. Naturally its actual cultural value cannot be priced; none the less
it has  a market  value  at any  given  time  which  may  vary  according
to  location.  If  'commodification'  is  an  inevitable  attribute,  it  is by
no  means  a priori  detrimental.  At  any  time  the  actual  or  potential
market  value  is an  indication  of the  importance  of a given  cultural
object  or of its momentary  perception.5  Most  importantly  the  status
of  works  of  art  has  been  established  by  their  effective  or  potential
market  value  reflecting  back  on them.  The  market  offers  a manag-
able reference  to relative  values  between  objects.  Without  trade  art
would only have an intrinsic value. The market-place does not neces-

85

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063

Hugo  Keith  Weihe

sarily  spoil  the  objects  or their  aura,  high  prices  rather  reflect  their
very  special  status.

The trade  actions of Peter Paul Rubens provide a fine  example of
the workings  of artistic  exchange  and the total lack of any negative
connotation.  Through  his  achievements  as  a  painter  and  his  diplo-
matic  skills  Rubens became  an influental  political  figure  conversing
with  the  powerful  people  of  his  time.  Being  himself  a collector  of
antiquities, he longed to acquire the collection  of Roman  antiquities
of the British emissary to Holland, Sir Dudley Carleton. He set about
in  1618 offering  his own works in exchange, some of which he had
sold  previously  and bought  back  at higher prices, thereby  underlin-
ing  their  importance.6  An  agreement  was  ultimately  reached,  in
which  Sir  Dudley  accepted  a  number  of  paintings  up  to  a  specific
total  value,  insisting  on  the  difference  being  made  up  by  Gobelin
tapestries, a highly prized good  at that time. Subsequently both par-
ties  parted  again  with  their  newly  acquired  treasures,  Sir  Dudley
offering  the  Rubens'  to  the  King  of  Denmark,  Rubens  being  asked
by  the  infanta  Isabella  of  Spain  in  a  move  of  appeasement  with
England  to  pass  on  his  collection  to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  to
which  he  obliged.  Both  the  paintings  by  Rubens  as  well  as the  an-
tiquities  are  cultural  goods  today. The  status of tradable  goods they
enjoyed  in  the  past  not  only  asserted  their  importance,  but  helped
alleviate  political  tension.

A  distinction  should  therefore  be  made  between  these  'mobile'
cultural  goods,  and  those  commissioned  for  a  specific  function.  A
vast  majority  of the cultural  goods handled  in the art market  will at
one point become part of a public collection. Private collectors, seen
in a historic  context,  are part-time owners.

The main  concern  is for  archaeological  and ethnographical  mate-
rial  which  is most prone to looting. The fact  that there  is a demand
for  archaeological  objects  is  in  line  with  the  general  interest  in  all
cultural  artefacts  and  should  neither be condemned  nor indeed sup-
pressed.  The  market,  the  private  collector  as  well  as  institutional
collections,  are  to  some  extent  the  driving  forces  for  further  dis-
coveries.  The  uncovering  of  hitherto  unknown  cultural  objects  fur-
thers  the  general  knowledge.  There  is no  question  that  excavations
today  must be undertaken  in controlled conditions to ensure the ob-
ject/context  image. However,  once this has been  established  and re-
corded,  there  is  no  immediate  reason  why  objects  should  not  be
dispersed other than that they should remain together to form a study
collection.  It  could  be  argued  that  without  the  outlook  of  market-
ability, many  excavations could or would not be undertaken.

Any art  historian, particularly  so in a museum, must be interested
in  the  furthering  of  public  interest,  knowledge,  and  awareness  of
cultural  values. The more material  surfaces, the better. The denial of
expertise  to  pieces  of  questionable  source  by  experts  and  scholars
would  boomerang  scientific  advance,  apart  from  the  fact  that  'em-
bargos'  of  this  sort  never  work  in  a  global  perspective.  Naturally
there  can  be no  interest  in a black  market,  where  objects  submerge

86

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063

Licit Traffic  for  Art's  Sake

and thereby pass scientific recognition. A possible way of preventing
this might be the encouragement  of private enterprise  in  supervised
land excavations, as has been  practised  in  shipwreck  incidents. The
incentive  would  be  a share  in the  potential  hoard,  at the  discretion
of the responsible  government.

There  is  a certain  irony  in  the  fact  that  sporadic  finds  and  illicit
trade  brought  things  to  light  and  initiated  scientific  research  and
artistic evaluation. For example Max Loehr correctly  established the
development  of  archaic  Chinese  bronze  styles  in  the  Shang  period
based  on careful  observation  of existing  objects  of which most had
no  record,  just  by  deducing  a  logical  sequence  of  development.7
Many  objects  had  been  found  by  farmers  ploughing  their  fields  in
the vicinity  of ancient  tomb  sites, who would  later  sell  them  in the
market place, where  subsequently  all traces of origin were  lost. His
analysis  supported by theory alone, which was no easy task, proved
to be  correct  based  on pieces  later  found  in controlled  excavations
in Hunan province.

The  fact  that  the  nationalist  image  dominates  in  Third  World
source  nations  notably  has  to  do with  the  fact  that  they  have  been
exploited and have not profited  financially  to the full  extent. If they
have  been  stripped  of  their  heritage  almost  completely,  there  will
have to be some consideration placed in the restitution of individual
pieces by a body like UNESCO. Otherwise, the solution can only be
to further  awareness  and knowledge  locally to guard what remains.
However,  there  must  be  a  strict  line  of  conduct  to  avoid  a double-
faced  approach. In a phase of economic strain there must not be any
semi-official  sale  of  works  formerly  considered  'national  heritage'
in an attempt to alleviate  this condition.  There  is to be no tolerance
of clandestine  excavations  in order to profit  from  commissions.

4  Exchange  and  Perception

The mutual understanding  between  people and above all, the  'Com-
mon Heritage of Mankind' (CHOM) are concepts strongly supported
by the UNESCO. Both in effect  strengthen the argument for a liberal
approach  of exchange.

Ever  since  the  times  of  Albrecht  Durer,  prints  of  all  kinds  have
become a very effective  means of distributing art and the knowledge
of cultural  achievements. Today, in the age of luxurious book publi-
cations  with beautifully  printed  colour  plates throughout,  the  status
of the original work has changed. Masterpieces thereby become gen-
erally  known  and  are  accessible  from  all  over  the  globe,  in  some
cases  already  via  electronic  databases.  However,  there  can  be  no
doubt that the ability to reproduce cultural goods, both physically as
well  as  in  high  quality  photographs,  always  fails  to  substitute  the
original,  as  its  'aura'  and  uniqueness  in  time  and  location  ('hie  et
nunc')  remain irreproducible.8 Only an original has the attributes of
a  cultural  property.  The  high  level  of mobility  we  enjoy  today  can

87

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063

Hugo  Keith  Weihe

never make up  for actually having works  in our  immediate  vicinity
or even  living with them. Still, the increasingly easy access through
various  media  might justify  a  reconsideration  of  this  position,  par-
ticularly  in an  era of computerized  communication  and the  concept
of the world  as  a  'global  village'.

Cultural exchange should not just be left  to acts of war. Exchange
and  dislocation  is  a strong  driving  force  in  the  making  of  cultural
values, if not a catalyst  in cultural  evolution.  Probably every  culture
in  history  has profited  from  foreign  imports  influencing  and  affect-
ing the perception  of its  own  culture. African  cultures  adopted  new
shapes and utensils brought to them by the Portuguese, while African
masks triggered the development of cubism in France. Persian scroll-
work was adopted by the Chinese in the Yuan period  blue-and-white
porcelain  which  in turn became  highly prized  collectables  in Persia,
whereby  influences  and goods were exchanged via the silk route.

Just as their works, the creators of cultural goods may potentially
profit  from  moving around, as naturally every artist is strongly  influ-
enced  by his  surroundings.  So he might  sometimes  precisly  choose
to  escape  in  search  of new  input:  for  example,  Van  Gogh  moved
from  Holland to Paris and then to the south of France. His dark early
works were now replaced by much brighter ones. The vivid colours
he  experienced  in  the vibrant  sun  of  the  Provence  were  most  ben-
eficial  to his  artistic development,  but more  striking  is the  fact  that
he  described  this  landscape  as  his  personal  view  of  Japan,9  a  far
more distant culture of which he formed  a vision through the colour
woodblock  prints that had been introduced to the Western art world
around  the  mid  1850s. The  strong  colours  he  found  in  these  'off-
prints'  from  the  land of the  rising  sun had  led  him to this belief. It
might  therefore  be  said  that  a  high  level  of  liberality  in  exchange
of  goods,  thoughts  and  visions  is  often  instrumental  in  an  artistic
process.

Why  not  pledge  for  an  interchange  of  cultural  property  on  the
basis  of  loans?  After  all,  among the  most successful  exhibitions to-
day  are  the  blockbusters  bringing  together  the  output  of  a  lifetime
of the likes of Braque, Cezanne, Picasso, Rembrandt, to name just a
few.  It  might  therefore  even  be  argued  that  it  would  appear  more
practical  if  these  works  had  always  remained  together.  But  Van
Gogh or Picasso would certainly not be the internationally renowned
masters they are today if their work had not been distributed world-
wide and thereby granted the opportunity of being viewed and disco-
vered  internationally.  Today,  the  exchange  of  loans  of  cultural  ob-
jects  is becoming  increasingly  difficult.  Many objects are too  fragile
or too  unique  in their importance  to risk frequent  dislocation,  apart
from  the  insurance  premiums  and  the  cost  of  safe  transport  being
prohibitive.  While  this  may  be  seen  as  a  repercussion  of  the  art
market,  it  is foremost  an account of the importance  of each  work.

At all times contemporary art is exempt from  any restrictions. Age
barriers  concerning  cultural  goods  are  set  at  fifty  or  one  hundred

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063

Licit Traffic  for  Art's  Sake

years,  but  are purely  technical  measurements  lacking  actual  justifi-
cation. The making of a cultural  object  is fluent  and not determined
by precise age barriers. At one time all cultural products were  'con-
temporary'.  Because they have not yet proven their cultural  import-
ance, they  cannot be looked back  on and  seen  within  a cultural  de-
velopment.  They  are  granted  total  freedom  so  that  they  can  prove
their importance  —  and rightly so, although this would appear incon-
sistent from a protectionist  point of view.

Spreading  also  guarantees  a  higher  level  of  survival  of  cultural
objects by distributing  the risks of destruction  by natural  causes, by
vandalism  or  theft.  The  keeping  of  cultural  objects  in  their  source
nation  alone  does  not  guarantee  the  best  rate  of  survival,  on  the
contrary.  Naturally  this  does  not just  apply  to  Third  World  source
nations.

Finally,  it could be argued  that  strong protective  measures  as  im-
plied  by  the  UNESCO  convention  to  some  extent  damage  cultural
objects by making them untouchable ('noli me tangere'). They might
thereby  lose a certain degree of accessibility  within  a source  nation
most interested  in preventing this.

5  Conclusions

Foremost,  it is imperative  to further  strengthen  the awareness of  all
peoples of their own local heritage, to further  education, knowledge
and ethics  in all fields including culture  in a broader perspective.

With  regard  to  archaeological  excavations  it  is  vital  for  govern-
ments  to gain  control,  in  order  to conduct  them  with  the  necessary
care  and  to record  existing  objects  and  the  context  of  those  yet  to
be  discovered.  In  order  to  assure  this,  a  certain  amount  of  private
enterprise  in this  field  could  be considered  along  the  lines  drafted.
Even  looters  and  smugglers  could  be  trained  to use  more  care  and
develop  more  knowledge,  as  the  financial  rewards  are  greater  the
better the condition  of an object  and the more they are aware of  its
importance.

Blaming destruction of monuments in Third World countries on  a
receptive market in the rich countries focusses away from the lack of
necessary control in the countries themselves. Preventing clandestine
looting  by  killing.the  market  might  prove  an  uphill  battle  rather
like fighting  drug abuse. The causes of collecting cultural goods are
generally  noble  and not  detrimental  to  health  or  a financial  burden
to society.

Rules  as  expressed  by  the American Journal  of Archaeology not
to publish  any works  that  have  not  knowingly  been  in  a  collection
for  more  than  thirty  years prior  to the  1973 rules  could  backfire  in
the sense that important but illegally  exported  works would have  to
be  withheld  from  general  knowledge,  thereby  seriously  hindering
scientific  advance.

89

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063

Hugo  Keith  Weihe

With  regard  to the concept  of  'global  treasures', the preservation
of  each  cultural  object  would  be  of  foremost  importance.  It  would
therefore  be  necessary  to  assure  its  best  possible  protection  in  the
safest  available  haven  wherever  that  might  be. After  controlled  as-
sessment of its historic context, it should be made generally available
and placed  in the most  suitable  surroundings  regarding  accessibilry.
Regulations  for  the  movement  of  cultural  objects  should  be  as
simplistic and unbureaucratic  as possible. The British and Canadian
export  regulations  appear  to  be  the  most  workable  as  they  respect
the  workings  of  the  art  market.  The  long  tradition  in  the  sale  of
works  of  art  through  auctions  in  England  has  established  a  liberal
approach. The problem  of Third  World  countries often  being unable
to afford  buying back their own  cultural  goods would  be alleviated,
if they were to sell goods under controlled conditions and fully docu-
mented  at  their  true  market  value.  This  would  also  be  a  way  of
assuring  true  exchange,  allowing  them  to  acquire  cultural  goods
from  other  source nations.

Art  has  always  flourished  by  exchange.  We are  obliged  not  only
to  look  back,  but  also  to  look  forward.  Cultural  objects  should  be
allowed  to  be  there  where  they  are  most  treasured  and  can  unfold
their  greatest  potential.

Notes

1  L. Volkel,  'Uber die Wegfiihrung  der Kunstwerke  aus den eroberten  Landern
nach  Rom,  Eine Vorlesung in der  Casselischen  Alterthiimer-Gesellschaft  ge-
halten  von  L.  Volkel,'  Leipzig,  1798.

2  Cf.  Sources  UNESCO,  no. 28  (July/August  1991), p. 11.
3  Commissioned  from  the  artist  by  Jakob  Heller  in  1507  and  destined  for  the

Dominican  church  in  Frankfurt  am  Main.

4  Cf.  Hugo Weihe, 'Kiinstlerische  Qualitat  und  Marktwert,'  Diss. phil., Zurich

1992,  pp.  15ff.

5  It  is  important  to  consider  these  values  as  relative  rather than  absolute. For
example,  according  to  present  legislation,  the  same  Matisse  painting  might
be  'worth'  less  if  it were  in  Italy  rather  than  in  England,  for  the  fact  that  it
cannot  be  moved.  This  fact  would  be  reflected  in  its  market  value.

6  Jeffrey  M. Muller states: 'Through  his active choice and seeking out,  Rubens
became,  in  effect,  a collector  of  his  own  work.'  in  'The  artist  as  collector,'
Princeton  1989, p. 15.

7  Max  Loehr,  'The  Bronze  Styles  of  the  Anyang  Period,'  Archives of the  Chi-

nese Art  Societ  of America,  New  York  1953, VII, pp. 42-53.

8  Cf.  Walter Benjamin,  'Das Kunstwerk  im Zeitalter seiner technischen  Repro-

duzierbarkeit,'  Gesammelte  Schriften,  Vol.  1, Frankfurt  am  Main,  1974.

9  Van Gogh expresses an admiration  for  Japan  and Japanese colour woodblock
prints  in  various  letters  to  his  brother  written  in  Aries  between  1888  and
1889, cf.  Johanna Gesina Van Gogh-  Bonger (Ed.),  Vincent von Goghs Briefe
an  seinen  Bruder,  Frankfurt  am  Main  1988,  Vol.  Ill,  pp. 340,  342,  385,
letters  526,  527, 540.

90

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000063


