International Journal of Cultural Property (2007) 14:241–266. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2007 International Cultural Property Society
DOI: 10.1017/S0940739107070075

A Line in the Sand? Explorations of the
Cultural Heritage Value of Hominid,
Pongid, and Robotid Artifacts
Dirk H. R. Spennemann*

Abstract: Although cultural heritage management is an inherently retrospective
discipline, there is a need for strategic forward thinking. Too many valuable
heritage places have been lost because they are not recognized and assessed in
time. As cultural heritage management begins to examine modern structures
and sites, this paper takes strategic thinking in cultural heritage management
one step further and addresses the management of artifactual material created
by our closest relatives, the great apes. Given the increasing understanding that
chimpanzees have cultures and traditions in tool use, there is a need to
recognize their heritage value in reference to human evolution.

Expanding the concept of nonhuman heritage into the future, it is now also
time to explore how to deal with the artifacts that the first artificial intelligence
(AI)-imbued, self-reflecting robots will create. By extension, which artifacts will
be kept along the way? The contemplation of the role of nonhuman heritage
will ultimately foster a reappraisal of human heritage. The article outlines some
of the conceptual issues that must be addressed if our heritage is to have an
ethical future.

INTRODUCTION

Heritage is a human construct. In a broad conceptual framing, cultural heritage is
the result of humankind’s interactions with their environment and one another.
The outcome of these processes is reflected in a number of forms and is generally
divided within two typologies of tangible (built environment, sites, landscapes,
objects, and artifacts) and intangible cultural heritage (language, folklore, skills
and customs, folklore, skills, and customs).1 This paper is only be concerned with

*Institute of Land, Water and Society. Email: e-mail dspennemann@csu.edu.au

241

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

242

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

the tangible aspects. Heritage managers assess the values projected onto cultural
heritage places (and artifacts) by the public against predetermined criteria to de-
termine their significance. Preservation theory holds that this process enables im-
portant aspects of the past to be identified, protected, and managed for the benefit
of present and future generations.2

Subjective valuation, revaluation, and ultimately prioritization occur consciously
and subconsciously on a continual basis. As with all values, cultural heritage val-
ues are variable between communities as well as between socioeconomic layers
within a community. Moreover, values are mutable qualities that change both in
intensity of conviction and in general over time, and thereby create a semifluid
state in heritage valuations.3

HERITAGE AND STRATEGIC FORESIGHT

The field of futures studies researches the medium- to long-term future of soci-
eties and their setting, the physical world, encompassing the mechanisms as well
as the driving forces of change. Because the future is neither predictable nor pre-
determined, but will be influenced by the choices we make in the present, a subset
of future studies is concerned with foresight. The research direction of strategic
foresight, defined as “the ability to create and maintain high-quality forward views
and to use the insights arising in organizationally useful ways”4 is particularly
apposite when considering the management of cultural heritage. The aim is to
expand the present-day conceptual horizon by forward-projecting present obser-
vations and trends and interpreting their potential future significance.

Given that by its nature, cultural heritage management is an intensely retro-
spective discipline, it is not very surprising that future studies have been rare in
the discipline. Even front-end technologies such as space exploration received (and
in many cases still receive) mainly retrospective assessments only once it was (al-
most) too late.5 True future studies are limited to discussion of the management
of space technology such as orbiting satellites6 as well as the future heritage man-
agement of sites currently in existence on other celestial bodies and out of reach
of human interference.7 All these issues, however, are still confined to the human
sphere of heritage.

By starting a discussion on the future of robotic heritage and by looking at the
question of how we might manage heritage sites created by future AI-imbued ro-
bots, the anthropocentric paradigm of heritage management that has recently been
challenged.8 This article is an extension of the previous assessment and concerns
itself with the current and future management of heritages other than human: in
particular the moveable cultural heritage of the great apes and that of robots.

This article first summarizes the nature of hominid artifacts and then expands
the discussion to explore the status of pongid-generated artifacts. Conceptually,
this is just a logical extension of the anthropocentric concept of heritage, as we

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

243

are, after all, assessing the heritage potential of artifacts and sites created by our
closest physical ancestors. The second part of the paper will consider the future
heritage management of artifacts created by AI-imbued robots—whom we could,
and should, consider to be our intellectual children.

Hominid archaeology is seen by most practitioners as a means of understand-
ing who we are and how we came to be the humans we are at present. Despite
often-conflicting interpretation and robust debate, archaeological excavations are
considered a means to research aspects ranging from an investigation of tool pro-
duction and manipulative skills9 as well as human diet10 to understanding cog-
nitive evolution11 and the development of social behavior.12 Thus, a study of the
technological development of our direct ancestral lineage is of great importance.
Yet, no archaeologist would argue that the study of Neanderthal tool use should
be abandoned; even though it is very persuasive from a monophyletic point of
view that Neanderthals were not in our direct ancestral lineage,13 but actually an-
other species of Homo (neanderthalensis), moreover a species that our own spe-
cies, Homo sapiens, extinguished some 30,000 years ago. The study of pongid sites
and artifacts is merely an extension of the concept, looking at a genus (Pan spe-
cies) that split off at the tribal level (see Figure 1). Just as the study of the cultural
heritage of our direct ancestral lineage provides insight into who we are, and just
as the study of Neanderthal sites provides a means to compare ourselves with con-
temporaries at that time, so the study of the (cultural) heritage of chimpanzees
and other great apes will provide reference points to our own self.

Furthermore, with technological innovation running at an ever-faster rate, ad-
vances in robotic development, on the technological (consider RoboCup14 or Hon-
da’s ASIMO), the conceptual,15 and the commercial front (NEC’s PaReRo200316)
are poised to revolutionize our lives. Migrating from pure mechano-logical pro-
graming to fuzzy logic, AI is trying to replicate the actions of animal brains. The
Darwin robot series is a case in point.17 Unbeknownst to most users, AI has al-
ready become quite pervasive in modern society; and robotic appliances are en-
tering the consumer market in a series of guises.18

Thus, AI-aided applications are already all-pervasive in modern life. As these
AI-imbued robots become ever more powerful (in terms of intellectual computing

FIGURE 1. Monophyletic relationship between humans and the great apes.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

244

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

power), in the near to medium-term future they could very well generate a set of
artifacts that are derived from human-independent reasoning. Applying the pre-
cautionary principle,19 as well as meeting the obligations of responsible steward-
ship20 heritage, practitioners must curate such items in an ethical fashion so future
generations can retrospectively evaluate and make a final decision what to retain
and what to discard.

DEFINITIONS

It is understood that a recent reclassification of the human and pongid family tree
based on genetics has seen a reclassification of the interrelationship (see Figure 1),
with the family Hominidae now including all great apes. Orangutans belong to
the subfamily Ponginae, and all others belong to Homininae. At the tribe level,
gorillas split out into Gorillini, whereas chimpanzees and humans are combined
into Hominini,21 which in turn split at the genus level.

For the purposes of this article, the traditional anthropological, and effectively
anthropocentric, definition model is used that places all great apes into one group,
irrespective of actual monophyletic genetic closeness to humans (as shown in
Figure 1).

For the purposes of this article, three terms need to be defined and clarified:

Pongid includes all species deemed to belong to the (former) pongid lineages as
traditionally understood by anthropologists. This includes the modern spe-
cies of gorilla (Gorilla gorilla; Gorilla beringei ), orangutan (Pongo abelii; Pongo
pygmaeus), and chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes; Pan paniscus).

Hominid includes all species deemed to belong to the hominid lineages as
traditionally understood by anthropologists. This includes Homo sapiens—
us—as all other species of the genus Homo (i.e., Homo erectus, H. neander-
thalensis, etc.).

Robotid is a term specifically coined for this paper, to sit alongside the previ-
ously mentioned terms. It extends to all variants of robots where the ma-
chines have some degree of ability for independent decision-making based
on AI algorithms.

Although the evolutionary processes for all lineages are of course continuing,
all available evidence for the processes for the pongid and hominid lineages rest in
the past. Conversely, most evolutionary processes for robotid lineages will take
place in the immediate and medium-term future.

HUMAN-CREATED ARTIFACTS

One early scientific definition for the dichotomy between animals and humans
was the axiom that humans used tools, whereas animals did not. Benjamin Franklin

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

245

most prominently expressed it when he commented, “man is a tool-making ani-
mal.”22 Franklin’s view held much import for the interpretation of human devel-
opment and influenced, inter alia Karl Marx; and through Marx’s monumental
work Das Kapital,23 generations of socialists.

That definition, which soon became more generalized to encompass mere tool
use, could be sustained for almost 200 years24 until studies of primate behavior by
Jane Goodall25 showed that primates, too, were able to use tools. Indeed, it was
soon found that tool use was not confined to primates but can be demonstrated
for birds26 and sea otters.27

If the use of tools did not suffice as a discriminant feature, it was necessary to
return to the initial dichotomy of the manufacture of tools. However, as is dis-
cussed in the following section in more detail, studies of primate behavior showed
that primates, too, were able to make tools. This occurred not only in laboratory
settings but also in their natural environments. Thus, the level of separation had
to be raised a further notch. The manufacture of tools that defined humankind
was the manufacture of tool not for simple task, but to create a tool to make a tool
to carry out a task. It was this major cognitive step that defined the new boundary.
The ancestry of human tool use and manufacture has long been debated. Early
hominid use of unmodified flake tools (flakes struck by percussion flaking of a peb-
ble core), labeled the Oldowan Industrial Complex, goes back 2.5 million years ago
(Ma).28 Based on the unmodified and accidentally modified tool use observed among
chimpanzees (see the following text), it has been speculated that evidence of even
earlier use may have not been recognized in the archaeological record.29 Much of the
speculation depends on the correlation of the morphological characteristics of the
chimpanzees and early hominid ancestors based on brain capacity and hand anatomy.
To meet the raised cognitive test previously outlined, however, we have to wait
1.5 million years with the advent of large core tool technologies of the Acheulean
Industrial Complex, where humans reduced a pebble to shape it into a tool.30

ANIMAL-CREATED ARTIFACTS

There is little need to comment in any detail on the curating of human-created
artifacts. There is a plethora of publications and manuals written for museums
and archives dealing with the curating of archaeological materials, artworks, tex-
tiles, photographs, paper-based items, and so forth.

Although tool use among animals has long been observed, such as the
Woodpecker Finch using twigs to extract larvae from decaying wood31 or, more
recently, the use of sponges by bottle-nosed dolphins,32 most such use is limited
to objects of preexisting shape. The New Caledonian crow appears to be the only
nonprimate able to select appropriate tools and if need be shape them to size.33
However, primates have demonstrated the capability to shape a range objects to
suit the task at hand: in short, to make tools.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

246

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

Primate-Created Tools in Natural Environments

Tool use among great apes has been documented in captivity for gorillas,34 com-
mon chimpanzees,35 Bonobos,36 and orangutans,37 as well as other species of plat-
yrrhine and catarrhine monkeys.38 However, only the great apes show the ability
to comprehend causal relations and thus modify tools (in experimental situa-
tions).39 In the natural environments, these observations are confined to chim-
panzees40 and orangutans.41 Most primate tool use has been related to gathering
food. In addition, we have recent observations where a female gorilla was ob-
served using a stick to test the depth of a pond before proceeding, while another
female gorilla used a tree trunk as a makeshift bridge.42 This shows a level of re-
flective thought, neither of which is associated with food procurement.

In addition, research has attributed some level of culture at least to chimpan-
zees inasmuch as they exhibit traditions of grooming, calling, and tool use that
suggest intergenerational learning and differentiation by one group from another.43
Chimpanzees in the Taï Forest in the Ivory Coast collect stones and use them as
nutcracking implements. A scatter of stone flakes is gradually formed around spec-
ified sites where unmovable anvils exist. The hammer stones were of varied raw
materials, some of which were transported to the nutcracking site from source
locations of up to 2 km away. Some assemblages have been excavated by archae-
ologists and studied for their similarities with early hominid sites.44 The authors
claim that the artifacts from the Taï Forest site “resemble some Early Stone Age
industries from East Africa.”45 That has been criticized by others who claim that
any modification of the stone hammers and anvils is accidental.46 At the present
state of study and observation of chimpanzee populations living in their natural
environments, stone use is limited to unmodified stones. Stone flaking, a skill that
could be taught to chimpanzees in captivity (see the following text), does not seem
to occur in the natural world.47

Primate-Created Tools in Human-Controlled Environments

The debate on human consciousness and learning has also created a debate that
has looked at the ability of great apes to learn and perform cognitive tasks under
controlled laboratory conditions. A number of pongids in captivity have been taught
how to use and flake stone tools.

The pioneering study was carried out in 1971 by Richard Wright who demon-
strated to a 5 1
_-year-old captive male orangutan, Abang, how to use a stone tool to
2
cut a string that kept shut a box with food. The orangutan could copy the action
after 9 demonstrations and 12 trial event exposures. Subsequent trial events all
resulted in success. In the continuation of the experiment, Wright demonstrated
to the orangutan how to strike a stone flake off a core. After six demonstrations
and seven trial events the orangutan succeeded in striking a chip off the core,
which he repeated in the following attempt. After another demonstration, the orang-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

247

utan managed to copy that skill and strike off flakes in the following three trial
events. After the last attempt Abang proceeded to use the flake to open the box.
Filming of the orangutan 10 days after the last event showed that he was able to
strike flakes and cut the string of his own accord.48 The study carried was pio-
neering in its scope, but in the final summation it only demonstrated that a
orangutan had the imitative capacity to learn to make tools and put them to a
(predefined) use. The study, as Wright himself counselled, was not designed to
test intuitive problem solving.

The experimental setup was repeated by Nick Toth and Kathy Schick starting
in 1991; they carried out a series of experiments with a 9-year-old Bonobo (Pan
paniscus), Kanzi. Striking flakes off a core and using them to cut string and keep
shut a food reward box was briefly demonstrated. Kanzi soon acquired the skill
to carry out the task, continually improving his abilities to flake. In view of the
long-term experiment, Toth and Schick demonstrated that the Bonobo carried
out an innovation. Kanzi found that throwing the hammer stone at the core
provided better results, possibly because of the larger force exerted in that way.
The longitudinal study, to which another Bonobo has been added, has yielded a
large number of tools that could be analyzed in a fashion akin to human stone
tools.49

The important observation made by the researchers was that Kanzi was able,
over 3 years of observation, to improve his skill at producing flakes,50 indicating
that Bonobos are capable of improving of skills through practice.

Curating Animal-Created Artifacts

Commencing with the curiosity cabinets of the sixteenth century, there is a long
tradition in collecting human artifacts with a range of institutions worldwide.
Common to all major museums and archives is that they have a collections pol-
icy grounded in the ethical management and curating items long term to ensure
that they do not deteriorate.51 These museums tend to divide along traditional
lines of scientific enquiry into the human and the natural animate and inani-
mate world. The artifacts of human endeavor are collected in museums of ar-
chaeology, ethnography, art, and folklore, as well as in archives and libraries. The
animal world is collected in live form in zoos as well as in natural history mu-
seums. Do the items derived from the studies of great ape tool use belong into
the realm of natural history museums, or should they be part of an archaeological/
anthropological collection? And what about the material culture created by ani-
mals in captivity? Who collects that? And what kind of collections policy should
be applied?

The excavation at the Tai Forest sites by Mercader and coworkers52 has created
congruence between primatological behavioral research on one hand and pale-
oanthropological and archaeological research on the other. The traditionally an-
thropocentric discipline of archaeology has been widened to consider pongid sites.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

248

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

The findings of the research are significant and the excavated material culture of
the chimpanzee population must be curated in an ethically acceptable way so fu-
ture generations have the opportunity to compare. This is even more imperative
considering that the chimpanzee group is capable of learning and that, at some
point in time, technological change may in fact occur.

At present the research into chimpanzee generated sites is limited; the full vari-
ation within the tool manufacturing process is unknown, neither is there a full
understanding of how common such sites are. Both are of requirements for the
assessment of these within the concept of cultural heritage management. This then
raises the question of how the material, both from the excavations and experi-
ments previously mentioned, is being curated. The artifacts derived from these
excavations at the Tai Forest sites are curated at the researcher’s academic institu-
tion. The artifacts created by the orangutan Abang in Wright’s pioneering study of
1971 are still in the researcher’s possession53 and thus subject to the vagaries of
domestic house fires and the like. There are no formal plans for where these ar-
tifacts will be curated in the long term, but a future holding in public hand can be
anticipated. The artifacts created by the Bonobo Kanzi as part the Toth and Schick
study are held at the Centre for Research into the Anthropological Foundations of
Technology, at Indiana University.

The underlying questions about how these artifacts should be valued, and how

these values should be assessed, are addressed later in the article.

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE-CREATED ARTIFACTS

New developments in AI have seen the gradual development of computing algo-
rithms that can out-think grandmasters at the game of chess,54 analyze and create
music,55 art,56 develop and self-learn construction rules,57 develop new car body
shapes, influence transportation systems,58 or design aircraft parts.59 It can be used
to equip machines with independent decision-making capabilities based on pre-
defined grammatical (rather than fixed rule) sets, obviating the need for the pres-
ence of humans. Not surprisingly, military applications have been at the forefront:
Uncrewed combat vehicles60 and surveillance planes have been developed and de-
ployed61 and are continually being given increased capabilities.62

At the same time, new research is looking at the concept of genetic algorithms63
and how they can be successfully employed to improve the performance of ro-
bots.64 Parallel research considers the ability of (at present simple) robots to ob-
serve the behavior of other robots and imitate it based on a stored set of possible
outcomes.65 As these developments continue with ever-increasing pace, there can
be little doubt that before long a robot will create the first artifact. That artifact
will have been derived purely from the evolutionary thought processes of the robot
rather than from human-designed preconditions to which the robot/genetic algo-
rithm developed a solution.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

249

If we ignore the emergence of robot-generated sites from the consideration of
this paper,66 at present the only artifacts generated by robots are confined to dig-
ital constructs in the realm of genetic algorithms and artificial (digital) life forms.

Issues Of Curating

At present, no robots are included in national lists of cultural heritage items pro-
tected from export or destruction. Some museums (Smithsonian, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology [MIT]) are collecting items of the information age, but
none of this has been particularly systematic.

Most research relating to robotics and AI is carried out by academics in a wide
range of universities as well as by scientists in commercial settings (such as Sony,
NEC, or Honda). The commercial realities of the modern world, with the devel-
opment of intellectual property in inventions, mean that many of the intermedi-
ate stages will be held in-house without formal collection and curating processes,
apart from standard academic or laboratory diligence. Even where universities have
set up museums of technology (such as MIT), there is no guarantee that the sig-
nificant items created by university staff will eventually be handed to the museum
for curating.67

Some scholarly research on the matter has commenced, at least in the realm of
computers, as is evidenced by the journals IEEE Annals of the History of Comput-
ing as well as Iterations: A journal of Software History and the work carried out by
the Charles Babbage Institute at the University of Minnesota.68 Science and tech-
nology museums have been collecting examples of such equipment as part of their
mission.69 There are also some web archives that focus on historic software.70

CULTURE: A WORKABLE DICHOTOMY?

Having considered aspects of material culture of hominid, pongid, and robotid
design and some issues related to curating, it is now time to tie the discussion
back to the question of cultural heritage management. Before considering the ques-
tion of how the cultural heritage values of these three sets of artifacts are assessed
(see the following text) it is necessary to establish whether there is a fundamental
difference between these three typologies of artifacts, and if so, where the dichot-
omous line can be placed. Since heritage management and evaluation, as well as
the whole concept of ethics per se is a human construct, it is inevitable that the
considerations presented later in the article will be rooted in human constructs
themselves. One of the major concepts that influences the discussion is that of
culture.

As tool use, and later tool manufacture became untenable as a dichotomy be-
tween humans and the great apes (and other animals), anthropologists have tended
to position the key dichotomy at the concept of ‘culture.’ Culture has been re-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

250

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

garded as an eminently human trait based on the “cognitive and learning mech-
anisms by means of which such information is transmitted.”71 Definitions of human
culture vary, subjectively based on the ideological standpoint of the interpreter.
UNESCO 72 holds that “culture should be regarded as the set of distinctive spiritual,
material, intellectual and emotional features of society or a social group, and that
it encompasses, in addition to art and literature, lifestyles, ways of living together,
value systems, traditions and beliefs,” which according to Bates and Plog73 “are
transmitted from generation to generation through learning.”

The definition of culture among ecologists is based on the assumption that any
animal behavior that is not uniform across all members of the species but varies
in circumscribed geographic areas and that cannot be explained either environ-
mentally or genetically, must be learned behavior transmitted within a subpopu-
lation.74 “Culture is information or behavior acquired from conspecifics through
some form of social learning.”75 In that view, humans are merely other animals,
where the intergenerational learning is more complex. Thus, the matrilineal trans-
mission of the use of sponges to protect the vulnerable nose of bottlenose dol-
phins has been described as cultural transmission76 and Rendell and Whitehead77
in their review of cultural transmission among cetaceans analyzed a wide range of
definitions of culture as used in the ecological literature.

Culture Among the Great Apes

Setting aside the literature on culture and dialect among song birds, as well as the
growing number of studies on cetaceans, the main body of work on animal ‘cul-
ture’ looked at the great apes—mainly because of their evolutionary proximity to
humans. The key difference between the great apes and other animals also rests in
the fact that primates are the only animals other than humans where multiple be-
havioral elements have been observed.

Several studies have been carried out to investigate the nature of culture among
chimpanzees78 and orangutan.79 Studies of behavior and tool use among chim-
panzees have shown that tool-use behavior is organized in traditions or cul-
tures.80 A good example is nutcracking that is practiced among some groups but
not among others, even though the latter are only 30 km away.81

The study of the captive Bonobo Kanzi showed that an individual Bonobo could
learn experientially, innovate on techniques, and improve his skills to create useful
flakes.82 The key question is whether such skills would be passed on, intra- and
intergenerationally and if so, how.

Observations among chimpanzee populations have shown that intergenera-
tional transmission of skills and cultural practices occurs but also that some tool
use is invented yet dies out again without being adopted by most of the group. For
this, group dynamics and the social standing of the inventor were held responsi-
ble. The key difference rests in the fact that among human innovators the role of
(formalized) teachers able to vocalize instructions must be considered. This is ab-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

251

sent in the chimpanzee world where imitators may exist but where the imitation
may take on its own expressions.83

Human culture provides ample evidence of the ratchet effect, whereby the plane
of knowledge and thus learning complexity is raised from generation to genera-
tion and where the next generation can critically interpret the cumulative results
of the previous generations. This is largely absent among the chimpanzee popu-
lations. But as Boesch and Tomasello84 rightfully point out, the line of evidence
for the culture of chimpanzees is only very short because behavioral studies among
the chimpanzee populations are only comparatively recent. Moreover, as Whiten85
pointed out, the evidence from the early hominid sites demonstrates that the ratchet
effect occurred in small increments that can only be identified in a time scale of
hundreds of thousands of years.

If we accept that culture is, essentially, a process where “information or behav-
ior is acquired from conspecifics through some form of social learning,” and where
this learning is reinforced through intergenerational emulation (among the great
apes) and emulation and organized instruction (among humans), culture is no
longer a valid measure and the dichotomy between animal and human must be
placed at a different level.86

Culture Among Robots

The current discussion of culture among robots falls into three spheres: literary
imagination; technological innovation; and technologically-informed conceptual-
ization. All are relevant as they inform and influence each other.

Created in 1920 by the Czech playwright Karel Cˇ apek for his play R.U.R. (Ro-
sumovi Umeˇlí Roboti [Rossum’s Universal Robots]), the term robot87 soon re-
placed automaton in most languages of the world. The concept was explored in a
range of plays, novels, and films. Both academic and popular (science fiction) works
quickly took to the term robotics, coined by Isaac Asimov in 1941 in the short
story “Liar!”88 To create some order in his imaginary world, Asimov created a se-
ries of behavioral rules.89

Asimov’s laws of robotics assume the supremacy of humans, even though in
earlier films (such as Metropolis) and plays (such R.U.R.) that is not given and the
view is much darker. As Bartneck90 has shown, much of the contemporary pop-
ular perception of robots as perpetuated by the media and entertainment indus-
try is that people assume there are two types of robots: those would want to be
like humans (e.g. Bicentennial Man) and those who are evil and wish to destroy
the world (e.g., the Cylons in Battlestar Galactica). There is little conceptual work
in the media that future robots may in fact have their own, different priorities
and, eventually, their own value sets. That robot life forms will use humans as
reference points for their value constructs may well be a fallible assumption: Ro-
bots might merely regard humans as at the same level of abstraction they might

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

252

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

regard other mammals, or in fact as they might regard any other carbon-based life
form.

Substantial work has been carried out on the design requirements and concepts
of socially interactive robots91 with attitudinal research on how people would
respond to social robots.92 Yet, many commercial applications still mimic human
behavior as the following text from the NEC product information illustrates:

[NEC created a] Behavior model [that] designs the robot character
through the design of consistent behavior patterns based on the given
character. For example, a robot can be designed by specifying his “likes”
and “dislikes” such as “he loves dancing but astrology” [sic] “selfish and
independent,” or “passive and obedient.” Based on the specified inter-
ests, tastes, and characters of the robot, he evaluates each human-robot
interaction, such as ‘fun’ or ‘boring.’ The collected evaluation results are
used to define the next action, spontaneous behavior, and reaction to a
questions by the user.93

Although there is much talk about a robot culture, exercise care to avoid con-
fusing the concepts. The Japanese electronics companies are proponents of a robot
culture conceptualized in the same way as we would talk about a good food and
dining culture (i.e., still focused on the human element).94 The construct of robot
culture as posited in this article relates to the cultural construct originated by
robots.

Although the current commercial work imitates selected subsets of human be-
havior, based on human concepts and values, little consideration has been given
to the values robots themselves may hold and, ultimately, the concept of robot
culture.

The prerequisites for robots to develop culture in human terms would be for
them to develop independent, critical, and self-reflective thought—in essence that
a robot would gain consciousness and, ideally, self-awareness. The traditional key
test for AI to have come of age, has always been the Turing Test.95 To answer the
question whether machines can think, he proposed a variation of the imitation
game96 where a machine takes the place of one of the humans in the closed-room
scenario. A machine is deemed capable of thought if the human interrogator is
unable to correctly identify the target individual (in this case as a machine) as
often as the human fails to do in the entirely human setting.97 Often criticized as
impossible and unrealistic, it is argued that the Turing Test would not measure the
consciousness of a machine.98 At present there is no acceptable test to assess whether
an AI design has consciousness. Many of the chatbots, starting with ELIZA,99 ap-
pear to mimic real conversations; but in fact they have been carefully programed
to respond to human-provided cue words in such a way that humans ignore the
occasional non sequitur and generally interpret the responses as they wish; and
thus they continue the conversation unaware that the machine answers but does
not understand. The chatbots are, by their design, incapable of cognitive learning
and development.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

253

From the perspective of cultural heritage management, it is crucial to define
what the term culture should encompass. If the human concept of consciousness,
is used, the development of a robot culture is a very long way off.100 Conversely, as
in the case for the great apes, to propose an acceptance that culture is essentially a
process where “information or behavior is acquired from conspecifics through some
form of social learning,” and where this learning is reinforced through intergen-
erational emulation, deems the matter somewhat different.

There are already examples where robots learn from each other and optimize
strategies of collaboration based on their situation.101 The definition of culture
among the great apes also assumes that these traits and skills are spatially con-
fined to one or more groups, while at the same time some neighboring groups do
not share these traits. As a corollary among the robots, a set of identically de-
signed machines is interpreted; they carry out a series of experimental simula-
tions as populations, where each population executes the same experiment, but
where the outcomes and thus the optimization strategies differ. It is worth exper-
imenting to see whether these strategies, without human intervention and guid-
ance (through programing), would become habitual; and in the next level, to add
new but identical machines to the mix to see whether the learning process is
intergenerational. Such models have already been run successfully in the fields of
genetic algorithms.102

At present there is no tangible manifestation of robot culture in the form of
artifacts along those produced by the great apes either in captivity or in their
natural setting. The closest such developments are the improved technological
designs in the car and aircraft industry (see above).

JUDGED BY WHOSE VALUES?

Because cultural heritage and values in general are both human constructs, the
values that underpin and circumscribe what people define as heritage are subjec-
tive, individual, or communal but purely human projections onto an essentially
value-free animate or inanimate world. The central figure in the valuations is the
individual, and the central generation is the present one.103 So then, how should
these items be valued?

As de Waal104 pointed out, animal culture cannot be compared with human
culture if the standards of human art, cuisine, science, and politics are applied.
But what, he posited, if we “change perspective, and don’t measure them by our
standards?”

If we take the ecological definition of culture as the basis of our considerations,
and thus regard human culture with its psychological complexities merely as an
extremely well-developed set of cultural traits, the artifacts generated by the great
apes are regarded as material culture. As such then they must be researched and
evaluated to address regional and subregional variation, all of which can give

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

254

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

evidence on the development of tool traditions among the early hominids105 and
can illuminate human evolution.

When considering the values projected onto pongid, hominid and robotid
artifacts we have to consider the capabilities of the creators to exert value judge-
ments, as well as our own contemporary human values that we are projecting on
the moveable cultural heritage resources.

Hominid Values

Most modern humans value the past in one form or another. We are, of course, un-
informed about how the early hominids valued their artifacts once they were no lon-
ger used. Thus, the concept of hominid values must be constructed based on how
we value(d) the artifacts of our more distant past. Bandi106 explored the percep-
tions of the past held by European and Mediterranean cultures. He demonstrated
that until the beginning of positivist thinking in the Age of Enlightenment, the past
was regarded as better than the (then) present. The fall, the expulsion from para-
dise as expressed in Judeo-Christian religion, as well as Golden Age of Greek and
Roman thought are examples. Only with Rousseau, Schiller, and Kant did the present,
and by implication the future, become more positive than the past.

Although the discovery of Herculaneum and Pompeii was of significance for
Renaissance art, it was only with the positivist frame of mind that humans began
to seriously value the objects of their ancient past—and to collect them.107 thus
there results an established a range of institutions, administrative processes, and
rules of behavior to manage these expressions of the past.108

Pongid Values

The excavation at the Tai Forest sites has broadened the perception of archaeology
from an anthropocentric discipline. It now also encompasses the behavior and
tool use of chimpanzees. Although Mercader and colleagues109 and their com-
mentators110 comment on the expansion of archaeology, they consider archaeol-
ogy at present as a mere method to study the site and its contents. Yet, the excavation
of chimpanzee sites forms an expansion of the concept that might entail a para-
digm shift in opinion.

What needs to be considered, however, is the extent of the conundrum of hav-
ing to manage pongid heritage. Certainly, pongid heritage is in museum collec-
tions. Although some humans may value this heritage, it is self-evident that the
pongid creators of this heritage do not value the items once they are removed
from their sites to museums. Moreover, as far as can be ascertained, no studies
have been carried out that consider the extent of pongid reuse of an artifact in the
natural setting, or on the reuse, or habitual use, of successful flakes created by Kanzi
and the second Bonobo Panbanisha.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

Robotid Values

255

As humanity’s values change in response to the new intellectual challenges posed
by the increased capabilities of AI-derived robots, it is necessary to adjust the
perceptions of heritage. Ultimately, consider that the present definition of cultural
heritage must be flexible enough to include the actions of human-designed, but
AI thinking robots in the not-so-distant future. Until such time that self-aware
robots make their own decisions on the products of their own making, custodial
decisions must be made for them. Heritage managers must consider whether to
stand accused by future generations that the opportunity to collect robotid arti-
facts and intermediate milestone artifacts slipped by.

OUTLOOK

As the article has shown, the issue of managing nonhuman cultural heritage of
our close relatives among the great apes, and well as among our intellectual and
technological children among the robots is quite real. By focusing on the biolog-
ical concept, regarding culture as a behavior acquired from conspecifics through some
from of social learning, the concept of cultural heritage management can expand
from the hominid sphere to include aspects of pongid and robotid culture. Al-
though pongids do not seem to value the cultural artifacts they have created, hom-
inids should value them as they provide an insight into possible manifestations of
their past. Although the tangible manifestation of robotid culture does not exist at
present, the development of genetic algorithms with group learning ability, as well
as the development of robotid technologies, suggest that this is not too far off.

The difference between pongid and robotid cultural heritage rests in the fact
that robots, once self-awareness has been reached, can to develop their own value
sets and thus make their own decisions regarding the management of cultural her-
itage. Until such time, however, hominids, as intellectual parents, must act as cus-
todians and protect the manifestations of emergent robotic heritage.

The article has raised some serious issues relating to our construction of heritage
and how that may apply to artifacts created by robots capable of (semi)indepen-
dent thought through improved AI algorithms. Although some issues appear quite
futuristic in concept, always remember that the technological developments are pro-
gressing at an ever-accelerating pace. The fact remains that it is only a matter of time
before the question arises: What is the nature and future of the earth’s robotic her-
itage? The implications of the matter must be seriously considered, lest by future gen-
erations accuse preceding generations of not protecting the emerging heritage when
there was an opportunity. The precautionary principle should apply in this case.

Cultural heritage managers have traditionally drawn a line in the sand and con-
fined their activities, as well as their conceptual thinking to the human-derived
world. With the winds of change blowing, both in terms of behavioral research

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

256

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

into our closest relatives among the great apes, and in terms of the increasing de-
velopments in AI and its robotic applications, that line in the sand is becoming
increasingly blurred. The day will dawn when it is obliterated altogether. Will we
be ready for it?

ENDNOTES

1. See Pearson and Sullivan, 1995; Tunbridge and Ashworth, Dissonant Heritage; Spennemann

“‘Preserving the Past for the Future.’”

2. Pearson and Sullivan, 1995; Murtagh, Keeping Time.
3. Lockwood and Spennemann, 2001.
4. Slaughter, Futures for the Third Millennium, p. 281.
5. Butowsky, Man in Space; Campbell, Assessing and Managing Human Space Heritage; Spen-
nemann, “The Naval Heritage of Project Apollo”; Spennemann and Kosmer, “Heritage Sites of the
US Space Program.”

6. Barclay and Brooks, “In Situ Preservation”; Gorman “The Cultural Landscape”; and Gorman,

“The Archaeology of Orbital Space.”

7. Fewer, “Towards an LSMR and MSMR”; Rogers, “Safeguarding Tranquility Base”; Spenne-
mann, “The Ethics of Treading on Neil Armstrong’s Footsteps”; Spennemann, “Out of This World”;
Spennemann and Murphy, “Technological Heritage on Mars.”

8. Spennemann, “On the Cultural Heritage of Robots”; Spennemann, “Of Great Apes and Robots.”
9. For example, Young, “Evolution of the Human Hand.”
10. For example, Haynes, “Archeological Methods.”
11. For example, Wyn, “Archaeology and Cognitive Evolution.”
12. See Lebel et al., “Comparative Morphology and Paleobiology” and critique by deGusta, “Com-

parative Skeletal Pathology.”

13. Ovchinnikov et al., “Molecular Analysis of Neanderthal DNA.”
14. For example, Kitano et al., RoboCup.
15. Fox, Sitompul, and van Schaik, “Intelligent Tool Use in Wild.”
16. NEC, Child Care Robot; NEC, PaReRo 2005; and NEC, PaReRo 2003.
17. Krichmar et al., “Characterizing Functional Hippocampal Pathways.”
18. See the 2004 World Robotics survey by the United Nations Economic Commission for Eu-
rope (UNECE) (http://www.unece.org/press/pr2004/04robots_index.htm).

19. See Sandin et al., “Five Charges Against the Precautionary Principle” for concept.
20. But see Spennemann, “Preserving the Past for the Future” for a critique of the underlying

notion of stewardship in cultural heritage management.

21. Goodman et al., “Primate Evolution at the DNA Level.”
22. Boswell, Life of Samuel Johnson, entry, April 7, 1778.
23. Marx, Das Kapital, p. 194.
24. For example, Oakley, Man the Toolmaker; Reed, “New Light on the Origins of Man.”
25. Goodall, “Chimpanzees of the Gombe Stream Reserve.”
26. Riedman et al., The transmission of individually distinctive foraging strategies.
27. See salient work by Jenkins “Cultural Transmission of Song Patterns.”
28. Ambrose, “Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution”; Panger et al., “Older than the

Oldowan.”

29. Panger et al., 2002.
30. Ambrose, “Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution.”
31. For example, Tebbich and Bshary, “Cognitive Abilities Related to Tool Use.”
32. Krützen et al., “Cultural Transmission of Tool Use in Bottlenose Dolphins.”
33. For example, Chappell and Kacelnik, “Tool Selectivity in a Non-Primate.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

257

34. Fontain, Moisson, and Wickings, “Observations of Spontaneous Tool Making”; Boysen et al.,

“Tool Use in Captive Gorillas.”

35. Celli, Hirata, and Tomonaga, “Socioecological Influences on Tool Use in Captive Chimpan-

zees”; Herzfeld and Lestel, “Knot Tying in Great Apes.”

36. Gold, “Ladder Use and Clubbing by a Bonobo”; Herzfeld and Lestel, “Knot Tying in Great

Apes.”

37. O’Malley and McGrew, “Oral Tool Use by Captive Orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus)”; Herzfeld

and Lestel, “Knot Tying in Great Apes.”

38. Beck, Animal Tool Behavior; van Schaik, Deaner, and Merrill, “The Conditions for Tool Use

in Primates.”

39. Visalberghi, Fragaszy, and Savage-Rumbaugh, “Performance in a Tool-Using Task.”
40. Whiten et al., “Cultures in Chimpanzees”; Miller, “Tool Study Supports Chimp Culture.”
41. Fox et al., “Intelligent Tool Use in Wild Sumatran Orangutans”; van Schaik, Fox and Fechtman,
“Individual Variation”; van Schaik et al., “Orangutan Cultures and the Evolution of Material Culture.”
42. Breuer, Ndoundou-Hockemba, and Fishloc, “First Observation of Tool Use in Wild Gorillas.”
43. Whiten et al., “Cultures in Chimpanzees”; Vogel, “Chimps in the Wild.”
44. Mercader, Panger, and Boesch, “Excavation of a Chimpanzee Stone Tool Site.”
45. Mercader, Panger, and Boesch, Chimpanzee-Produced Stone Assemblages.
46. Vogel, “Can Chimps Ape Ancient Hominid Toolmakers?”
47. Schick et al., “Continuing Investigations into Stone Tool-Making.”
48. Wright, “Imitative Learning of a Flaked Stone Technology.”
49. Toth, Schick, and Sema. “A Technological Comparison”; Schick and Toth, Making Silent Stones

Speak; Schick et al., “Continuing Investigations into Stone Tool-Making.”
50. Schick et al., “Continuing Investigations into Stone Tool-Making.”
51. Although environmental decay is less a problem for stone tools, they too can be affected by
natural disasters affecting the storage facility. The case of the artifact storage of the Australian Na-
tional University, destroyed in January 2003 as part of the Canberra bush fires is a case in point.

52. Mercader, Panger, and Boesch, “Excavation of a Chimpanzee Stone Tool Site.”
53. Wright, E-mail to the author.
54. Called “Deep Blue”; Pollack et al., “Three Generations.”
55. Jacob, Composing With Genetic Algorithms; Widmer, “Machine Discoveries.”
56. Cohen, “The Further Exploits of AARON, Painter.”
57. Called Legobots. Pollack et al., “Three Generations.”
58. For example, Chou, “The Growing Role of IT in Transportation.”
59. For example, Keane and Nair, “Problem Solving Environments in Aerospace Design.”
60. Gage, “UGV HISTORY 101.”
61. Cf. Thornberg and Cycon, “Sikorsky Aircraft’s Unmanned Aerial Vehicle.”
62. Cf. Granlund et al., The WITAS Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Project.
63. Genetic algorithms are a class of evolutionary algorithms that use techniques inspired by evo-

lutionary biology (e.g., inheritance, mutation, natural selection, and recombination).

64. See Watson, Ficici, and Pollack, “Embodied Evolution” for an example of evolutionary robotics.
65. Elshaw, Lewis, and Wermter, Incorporating Reactive Learning Behaviour.
66. See Spennemann, “‘Preserving the Past for the Future.’”
67. See Spennemann, “‘Preserving the Past for the Future.’”
68. Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, available at http://www.cbi.umn.edu.
69. Cf. Spicer, “The IBM 1620 Restoration Project.”
70. Cf. Burba and Frana, “Researching the History of Software”; Schlombs, “Digital Archives for

the History of Software.”

71. Cf. Boesch and Tomasello, “Chimpanzee and Human Cultures.”
72. UNESCO, UNESCO Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity.
73. Bates and Plog, Cultural Anthropology, p. 7.
74. Boesch and Tomasello, “Chimpanzee and Human Cultures.”
75. Boyd and Richerson, “Why Culture Is Common but Cultural Evolution Is Rare.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

258

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

76. See Krützen et al., “Cultural Transmission of Tool Use in Bottlenose Dolphins.”
77. Rendell and Whitehead, “Culture in Whales and Dolphins.”
78. Boesch and Tomasello, “Chimpanzee and Human Cultures”; Whiten et al., “Cultures in

Chimpanzees.”

79. van Schaik, Fox, and Fechtman, “Individual Variation”; van Schaik et al., “Orangutan Cultures
and the Evolution of Material Culture”; van Schaik and Pradhan, “A Model for Tool-Use Traditions
in Primates.”

80. Boesch and Boesch, “Optimisation of Nut-Cracking”; Boesch and Boesch, “Mental Map in
Wild Chimpanzees”; Boesch and Boesch, “Tool Use and Tool Making in Wild Chimpanzees”; Boesch
and Tomasello, “Chimpanzee and Human Cultures”; Sugiyama and Koman, “Tool-Using and Tool-
Making Behaviour.”

81. Boesch and Tomasello, “Chimpanzee and Human Cultures.”
82. van Schick, Deaner, and Merrill, “The Conditions for Tool Use in Primates.”
83. Boesch and Tomasello, “Chimpanzee and Human Cultures.”
84. Boesch and Tomasello, “Chimpanzee and Human Cultures.”
85. Whiten, “Commentary to Christophe Boesch and Michael Tomasello’s ‘Chimpanzee and Human

Cultures.’”

86. The ability of humans to transcend their own physical needs and to express themselves in a
self-reflective and self-aware way appears a logical dichotomy. Placing the dichotomy of human, and
by implication, of prehuman, at a level of psychological development, determines the psychological
thresholds that must be recognizable in the archaeological and paleontological record. Three main
incisions that separate us from the great apes come to mind:

1) Overcoming the fear of fire, demonstrable certainly because approximately 800 ka (Goren-
Inbar, “Evidence of Hominin Control”), but possibly as much as 1.6 Ma (Bellomo, “Methods of
Determining Early Hominid Behavioral Activities; Wrangham, “The Raw and the Stolen”).

2) Overcoming the fear of open water, demonstrable because approximately ⬎800 ka by the col-
onisation of a Homo erectus to Flores, which was always cut off from the Sunda Shelf (cf. Bednarik,
“Seafaring in the Pleistocene.”).

3) An understanding of the concept of mortality and of afterlife, because approximately 90 ka as
evidenced by Neanderthal burials (cf Pettitt, “The Neanderthal Dead” for review). There are some
indications that caching of the dead may have occurred from 200–300 ka onwards (see Pettitt, “The
Neanderthal Dead” for discussion).

87. Robot is a contraction from the Czech robota meaning drudgery or servitude; and robotnik
meaning peasant or serf. Karel Cˇ apek credited his brother, the painter Josef Cˇ apek, with the actual
creation of the word.
88. Asimov, “Liar!”
89. In his 1942 short story Runaround Asimov first explicitly introduced his three laws of robot-
ics (Asimov, “Runaround”), to which in 1985 he added a fourth which underpins the previous three
(and hence is referred to as the zeroeth law of robotics) (Asimov, Robots and Empire).

0) A robot may not injure humanity or, through inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.
1) A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to

harm.

2) A robot must obey orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict

with the First Law.

3) A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the

First or Second Law.

90. Bartneck, “From Fiction to Science.”
91. See Fong, Nourbakhsh, and Dautenhahn, “A Survey of Socially Interactive Robots.”
92. Cf Dautenhahn et al., What is a Robot Companion.
93. NEC, PaReRo 2003.
94. Cf. Japan Times, “New Osaka Shop to Promote ‘Robot Culture.’”
95. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

259

96. The imitation game sees a male and a female in one room and an interrogator (whose sex is
irrelevant) trying to ascertain the gender of either person A or B. This is effected through a series of
questions to which the respondents provide typed answers (to avoid identification via voice or hand
writing). The object for the target person is to answer correctly but confuse the interrogator, while
the second person in the room will try to provide helpful answers to the interrogator.

97. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.”
98. See Saygin “Turing Test: 50 Years Later” for a discussion of the literature on the Turing Test.
99. See Saygin “Turing Test: 50 Years Later.”
100. For example, Manuel, “Creating a Robot Culture.”
101. For example Alonso, “Learning in Multi-Agent Systems.”
102. Cervone et al., Combining Machine Learning With Evolutionary Computation.
103. Spennemann, “Your Solution, Their Problem.”
104. de Waal, “Cultural Primatology Comes of Age.”
105. Boesch and Tomasello, “Chimpanzee and Human Cultures.”
106. Bandi, “Der Topfknick.”
107. Cf. Taylor, The Taste of Angels, for survey of collecting.
108. Pearson and Sullivan, “Looking After Heritage Places”; Murtagh, Keeping Time, Spenne-

mann, “Your Solution, Their Problem”; World Heritage Center, The World Heritage List.

109. Mercader, Panger, and Boesch, “Excavation of a Chimpanzee Stone Tool Site”; Mercader,

Panger, and Boesch, Chimpanzee-Produced Stone Assemblages.

110. Cf. Bower, “Wild Chimps Rocked On.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alonso, E., M. d’Inverno, D. Kudenko, et al. “Learning in Multi-Agent Systems.” Knowledge Engineer-
ing Review 16 no. 3 (2001): 277–84.

Ambrose, Stanley H. “Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution.” Science 291, no. 5509 (2001):
1748–54.

Asimov, Isaac. “Liar!” In Astounding Science Fiction, May 1941, 43–55.

———. “Runaround.” In Astounding Science Fiction, March 1942, 94–103.

———. Robots and Empire. New York: Doubleday, 1985.

Bandi, H.-G. “Der Topfknick oder die unterschiedliche Wertung der Domestikation des Menschen.”
In Festschrift für Günter Smolla. Materialien zur Vor-und Frühgeschichte von Hessen Band 8, vol. 1,
17–24. Wiesbaden: Landesamt für Denkmalpflege Hessen Abteilung archäologische und paläontol-
ogische Denkmalpflege, 1999.

Barclay, R.L., and R. Brooks. “In situ preservation of historic spacecraft.” JBIS-Journal of the British
Interplanetary Society 55, no. 5–6 (2002): 173–81.

Bartneck, C. “From Fiction to Science: A Cultural Reflection of Social Robots.” In CHI2004 Work-
shop on Shaping Human-Robot Interaction: Understanding the Social Aspects of Intelligent Robotic Prod-
ucts, edited by J. Forlizzi and C. Bartneck. Vienna, 2004. http://www.bartneck.de/workshop/chi2004
(accessed April 25, 2004).

Bates, D.G., and F.Y. Plog. Cultural Anthropology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990.

Beck B.B. Animal Tool Behavior: The Use and Manufacture of Tools By Animals. New York: Garland
Press, 1980.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

260

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

Bednarik, R.G. “Seafaring in the Pleistocene.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 13 (2003): 41–66.

Bellomo, R.V. “Methods of Determining Early Hominid Behavioral Activities Associated with the
Controlled Use of Fire at FxJj 20 Main, Koobi Fora, Kenya.” Journal of Human Evolution 27, no. 1–3
(1994): 173–95.

Boesch, C., and M. Tomasello. “Chimpanzee and Human Cultures.” Current Anthropology 39 no. 5
(1998): 591–614.

Boesch, C., and H. Boesch. “Optimisation of Nut-Cracking with Natural Hammers by Wild Chim-
panzees.” Behaviour 83 (1983): 265–86.

———. “Mental Map in Wild Chimpanzees: An Analysis of Hammer Transports for Nut Cracking.”
Primates 25 (1984): 160–70.

———. “Tool Use and Tool Making in Wild Chimpanzees.” Folia Primatologica 54 (1990): 86–99.

Boswell, J. Life of Samuel Johnson. London: JM Dent, 1901.

Bower, Bruce. “Wild Chimps Rocked On: Apes Left Unique Record of Stone Tool.” Science News 161,
no. 13 (2002): 195.

Boyd, R., and P.J. Richerson. “Why Culture Is Common but Cultural Evolution Is Rare.” In Evolution
of Social Behaviour Patterns in Primates and Man Proceedings of the British Academy, edited by W.G.
Runciman, John Maynard Smith, and R.I.M. Dunbar, 77–93, London: British Academy, 1996.

Boysen S.T., V.A. Kuhlmeier, P.O. Halliday, et al. “Tool Use in Captive Gorillas.” In The Mentalities of
Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives, edited by S.T. Parker, R.W. Mitchell, and H.L.
Miles, 79–187, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Breuer, T., M. Ndoundou-Hockemba, and V. Fishloc. “First Observation of Tool Use in Wild Goril-
las.” PLoS Biology 3, no. 11, e380 (2005): 2042–44.

Burba, J., and P.L. Frana. “Researching the History of Software: Mining Internet Resources in the
‘Old World,’ ‘New World,’ and the ‘Wild West’.” Iterations: A Journal of Software History, 2002. http://
www.cbi.umn.edu/iterations/burbafrana.pdf (accessed April 23, 2007).

Butowsky, H.A. Man in Space: A National Historic Landmark Theme Study. N.P.S., U.S. Department
of the Interior, 1984.

Campbell, John B. Assessing and Managing Human Space Heritage In the Solar System: The Current
State of Play and Some Proposals. World Archaeological Congress 5. Themes The Heavens Above:
Archaeoastronomy, Space Heritage And SETI, 2003. http://godot.unisa.edu.au/wac/paper.php?paper⫽
1049 (accessed April 23, 2007).

Cˇ apek, K. R.U.R.—Rosumovi Umeˇlí Roboti [Rossum’s Universal Robots], 1920. Digital version of
Czech original available at http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/13083 (accessed April 23, 2007).

Celli, M.L., S. Hirata, and M. Tomonaga. “Socioecological Influences on Tool Use in Captive Chim-
panzees.” International Journal of Primatology 25, no. 6 (2004): 1267–81.

Cervone, Guido, Ryszard S. Michalski, Kenneth K, et al. Combining Machine Learning With Evolu-
tionary Computation: Recent Results on LEM. Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on
Multistrategy Learning (MSL-2000), Guimarães, Portugal, June 11–14, 2000. Pp. 41–58.

Chappell, J., and A. Kacelnik. “Tool Selectivity in a Non-Primate, the New Caledonian Crow (Corvus
moneduloides).” Animal Cognition 5 (2002): 71–78.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

261

Chou, W. “The Growing Role of IT in Transportation.” IT Professional 5, no. 6 (2003): 5–6.

Cohen, H. “The Further Exploits of AARON, Painter.” Stanford Humanities Review SEHR 4 no. 2
(1995): 141–158.

Dautenhahn, K., S. Woods, C. Kaouri, et al. What is a Robot Companion: Friend, Assistant or Butler?
Proceedings of the IROS 2005, IEEE IRS/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, August 2–6, 2005, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, 1488–1493.

de Waal, F.B.M. “Cultural Primatology Comes of Age.” Nature 399, no. 6737 (1999): 635–36.

deGusta, D. “Comparative Skeletal Pathology and the Case for Conspecific Care in Middle Pleisto-
cene Hominids.” Journal of Archaeological Science 29 (2002): 1435–38.

Dick, Steven J. “Cultural Evolution, the Postbiological Universe and SETI. International Journal of
Astrobiology 2, no. 1 (2003): 65–74.

Elshaw, M., D. Lewis, and S. Wermter. Incorporating Reactive Learning Behaviour into a Mini-robot
Platform. Proceedings of AI-2003, the 23rd SGAI International Conference on Innovative Tech-
niques and Applications of Artificial Intelligence. Edited by Frans Coenen, Alun Preece, and Ann
Macintosh. London; New York: Springer, 2003: 255–266.

Fewer, Greg. “Towards an LSMR and MSMR (Lunar and Martian Sites and Monuments Records):
Recording Planetary Spacecraft Landing Sites as Archaeological Monuments of The Future.” In Dig-
ging Holes in Popular Culture, edited by Miles Russell, 112–20. Oxford: Oxbow, 2002.

Fong, T., I. Nourbakhsh, and K. Dautenhahn. “A Survey of Socially Interactive Robots.” Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 42 (2003): 143–66.

Fontain, B., P.Y. Moisson, E. J Wickings. “Observations of Spontaneous Tool Making and Tool Use in
a Captive Group of Western Lowland Gorillas (Gorilla Gorilla Gorilla).” Folia Primatologica 65 (1995)
219–23.

Fox E.A., A.F. Sitompul, C.P. van Schaik. “Intelligent Tool Use in Wild Sumatran Orangutans.” In The
Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives, edited by S.T. Parker, R.W. Mitch-
ell, H.L, 99–116. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Fox, D. “Brainbox.” New Scientist 188, no. 2524 (2005): 28–32.

Gage, Douglas W. “UGV HISTORY 101: A Brief History of Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV) De-
velopment Efforts.” Unmanned Systems Magazine 13, no. 3 (1995): 9–16, 32.

Gold, K.C. “Ladder Use and Clubbing by a Bonobo (Pan paniscus) in Apenheul Primate Park.” Zoo
Biology 21, no. 6 (2002): 607–11.

Goodall, J. “Chimpanzees of the Gombe Stream Reserve.” In Primate Behaviour, edited by I. DeVore.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1965.

Goodman, M., D.A. Tagle, D.H, Fitch, et al. “Primate Evolution at the DNA Level and a Classifica-
tion of Hominoids.” Journal of Molecular Evolution 30 (1990): 260–66.

Goren-Inbar, Naama, Nira Alperson, Mordechai E. Kislev, et al. “Evidence of Hominin Control of
Fire at Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, Israel.” Science 304, no. 5671 (2004): 725–27.

Gorman, Alice C. “The Cultural Landscape of Interplanetary Space.” Journal of Social Archaeology 5,
no. 1 (2005): 85–107.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

262

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

———. The Archaeology of Orbital Space. Presented at the Australian Space Science Conference,
14 to 16 September, 2005, Melbourne, Australia: RMIT University. 338–57.

Granlund, G. K. Kuchcinski, E. Sandewall, et al. The WITAS Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Project. In
W. Horn (ed.): ECAI 2000. Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Berlin, August 20–25, 2000. IOS Press, Amsterdam.

Haynes, G. “Archeological Methods for Reconstructing Human Predation on Terrestrial Vertebrates.”
In The Fossil Record of Predation, edited by M. Kowaleswski and P. Kelly. The Paleontological Society
Papers 8 (2002): 51–67.

Herzfeld, C., and D. Lestel. “Knot Tying in Great Apes: Etho-Ethnology of an Unusual Tool Behav-
ior.” Social Science Information 44, no. 4 (2005): 621–53

Jacob, B.L. Composing With Genetic Algorithms. Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference, Banff, Alberta, Canada, September 1995.
Japan Times. “New Osaka Shop to Promote ‘Robot Culture.’” Japan Times, December 18, 2004. http://
search.japantimes.co.jp/print/business/nb12–2004/nb20041218a5.htm (accessed April 23, 2007).

Jenkins, P.F. “Cultural Transmission of Song Patterns and Dialect Development in a Free-Living Bird
Population.” Animal Behaviour 26 (1978): 50–78.

Keane A.J., and P.B. Nair. “Problem Solving Environments in Aerospace Design.” Advances in Engi-
neering Software 32, no. 6 (2001): 477–87.

Kitano, H., M. Asada, Y. Kuniyoshi, et al. RoboCup: The Robot World Cup Initiative. International
Conference on Autonomous Agents. Proceedings of the First International Conference on Autono-
mous agents. Marina del Rey, California. February 5–8, 1997, 340–47, 1997.

Krichmar, J. L., D.A. Nitz, J.A. Gally, et al. “Characterizing Functional Hippocampal Pathways in a
Brain-Based Device as It Solves a Spatial Memory Task.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 102 (2005): 2111–16.

Krützen, M., J. Mann, M.R. Heithaus, et al. “Cultural Transmission of Tool Use in Bottlenose Dol-
phins.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102, no. 25 (2005): 8939–43.

Kuman K. “The Oldowan Industry from Sterkfontein: Raw Materials and Core Forms.” In Aspects of
African Archaeology: Papers from the 10th Congress of the PanAfrican Association for Prehistory and
Related Studies, edited by G. Pwiti and R. Soper R., 139–46. Harare: University of Zimbabwe Publi-
cations, 1996.

Lebel, S., E. Trinkaus, M. Faure, et al. “Comparative Morphology and Paleobiology of Middle Pleis-
tocene Human Remains from the Bau de l’Aubesier, Vaucluse, France.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 98 (2001): 11097–102.

Manuel, Tyrus L. “Creating a Robot Culture: An Interview with Luc Steels.” IEEE Intelligent Systems
18, no. 3 (2003): 59–61.

Marx, K. Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Erster Band. Buch I: Der Produktionsprocess
des Kapitals. Vierte Auflage. Marx-Engels-Werke Bd 23. Berlin: Dietz Verlag, 1867 (1952).

Mercader, J., M. Panger, and C. Boesch. “Excavation of a Chimpanzee Stone Tool Site in the African
Rainforest.” Science 296 (2002): 1452–55.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

263

———. Chimpanzee-Produced Stone Assemblages from the Tropical Forests of Taï, Côte d’Ivoire.
Paleoanthropology Society Meetings. Denver, CO, March 19, 2002. Abstract http://www.paleoanthro.
org/abst2002.htm#mercader (accessed April 23, 2007).

Miller, G. “Tool Study Supports Chimp Culture.” Science 309, no. 5739 (2005): 1311.

Mundinger, P.C. “Animal Cultures and a General Theory of Cultural Evolution.” Ethology and So-
ciobiology 1 (1980): 183–223.

Murtagh, W.J. Keeping Time: The History and Theory of Preservation in America. New York: John
Wiley and Sons, 1997.

NEC. Child Care Robot. PaReRo 2003. Product Information Page. NEC Personal Robot Research
Center, 2005. http://www.incx.nec.co.jp/robot/english/childcare/how.html (accessed April 23, 2007).
———. PaReRo 2005. Product Information Page. NEC Personal Robot Research Center, 2005. http://
www.incx.nec.co.jp/robot/english/papero2005/index.html (accessed April 23, 2007).

———. PaReRo 2003. “He has a character like a human being.” Product Information Page. NEC
Personal Robot Research Center, 2005. http://www.incx.nec.co.jp/robot/english/2003papero/english/
gijyutu3.html (accessed April 23, 2007).

——— PaReRo 2003. “Creating a Robot Culture.” Product Information Page. NEC Personal Robot
Research Center, 2005. http://www.incx.nec.co.jp/robot/english/2003papero/english/index.html (ac-
cessed April 23, 2007).

O’Malley, R.C., and W.C. McGrew. “Oral Tool Use by Captive Orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus).” Folia
Primatologica 71 (2000): 334–41.

Oakley, K.P. Man the Toolmaker, 3rd ed. London: British Museum, 1956.

Ovchinnikov, I.V., A. Gotherstrom, G.P. Romanova, et al. “Molecular Analysis of Neanderthal DNA
from the Northern Caucasus.” Nature 404, no. 6777 (2000): 453–54

Panger, M.A., A.S. Brooks, B.G. Richmond, et al. “Older than the Oldowan? Rethinking the Emer-
gence of Hominin Tool Use.” Evolutionary Anthropology 11, no. 6, 235–45.

Pettitt, P.B. “The Neanderthal Dead: Exploring Mortuary Variability in Middle Palaeolithic Eurasia.”
Before Farming: The Anthropology of Hunters-Gatherers 1, no. 4 (2002): 1–19

Pollack, J.B., H. Lipson, G. Hornby, et al. “Three Generations of Automatically Designed Robots.”
Artificial Life 7, no. 3 (2001): 215–23.

Reed, E. “New Light on the Origins of Man.” International Socialist Review 24, no. 3 (1963): 81–83.

Rendell, L., and H. Whitehead. “Culture in Whales and Dolphins.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24,
no. 2 (2001): 309–82

Riedman, M.L., M.M. Staedier, J.A. Estes, et al. The transmission of individually distinctive foraging
strategies from mother to offspring in sea otters (Enhydra lutris). From the Eighth Biennial Confer-
ence on the Biology of Marine Mammals. Pacific Grove, CA, 7–11 December, 1989.

Robson Brown, Kate. “The Meaning of Hominid Species: Culture as Process and Product?” Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences 23, no. 1 (2002); 157.

Rogers, T.F. “Safeguarding Tranquility Base: Why the Earth’s Moon Base Should Become a World
Heritage Site.” Space Policy 20, no. 1 (2004): 5–6.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

264

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

Sandin, Per, Martin Hansson Peterson, Christina Sven Ove Rudén, et al. “Five Charges Against the
Precautionary Principle.” Journal of Risk Research 5, no. 4 (2002): 287–99.

Saygin, A.P., I. Cicekli, and V. Akman. “Turing Test: 50 Years Later.” Minds and Machines 10, no. 4
(2000): 463–518.

Schick, K., and N. Toth. Making Silent Stones Speak: Human Evolution and the Dawn of Technology.
New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993.

Schick, K., N. Toth, G. Garufi, et al. “Continuing Investigations into Stone Tool-Making and Tool-
Using Capabilities of a Bonobo (Pan paniscus).” Journal of Archeological Science 26, (1999): 821–32.

Schlombs, C. “Digital Archives for the History of Software: The Allen Newell Collection and the
Herbert A. Simon Collection.” Iterations: A Journal of Software History 1 (2002). http://www.cbi.umn.
edu/iterations/schlombs.pdf (accessed April 23, 2007).

Slaughter, R. Futures for the Third Millennium. Sydney: Prospect Media, 1997.

Smolla, G. Epochen menschlicher Frühzeit. Freiburg & München: Karl Aber, 1967.

Spennemann, D.H.R. “The Ethics of Treading on Neil Armstrong’s Footsteps.” Space Policy 20, no. 4
(2004): 279–90.

———. “The Naval Heritage of Project Apollo: A Case of Losses.” Journal of Maritime Research,
October 2005, http://www.jmr.nmm.ac.uk/spennemann (accessed April 23, 2007).

———. “Out of this world: Issues of Managing Tourism and Humanity’s Heritage on the Moon.”
International Journal of Heritage Studies 12, no. 4 (2006): 356–71.

———. “Gauging Community Values in Historic Preservation.” CRM: The Journal of Heritage Stew-
ardship 3, no. 2 (2006): 6–20.

———. “Your Solution, Their Problem. Their Solution, Your Problem: The Gordian Knot of Cul-
tural Heritage Planning and Management at the Local Government Level.” disP 42, no. 164 (2006):
30–40.

———. “On the Cultural Heritage of Robots.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 13, no. 1
(2007): 4–21

———. “Of Great Apes and Robots: Considering the Future(s) of Cultural Heritage.” Futures–The
Journal of Policy, Planning and Futures Studies 39, no. 7 (2007): 861–77.

———. “‘Preserving the Past for the Future.’ Altruism, Egotism and the Future of Historic Preser-
vation.” CRM: The Journal of Heritage Stewardship 5, no. 2, (2008), forthcoming.

Spennemann, D.H.R., and L. Kosmer. “Heritage Sites of the US Space Program in Australia: Are We
Managing Them Adequately?” QUEST—The History of Spaceflight Quarterly 12, no. 2 (2005): 52–64.

Spennemann, Dirk H.R., and Guy Murphy. “Technological Heritage on Mars: Towards a Future of
Terrestrial Artifacts on the Martian Surface.” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 60, no. 2
(2007): 42–53.

Spicer, D. “The IBM 1620 Restoration Project.” IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 27 (2005):
33–43.

Sugiyama, Y., and J. Koman. “Tool-Using and Tool-Making Behaviour in Wild Chimpanzees at Bossou,
Guinea.” Primates 20 (1979): 513–24.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

A LINE IN THE SAND

265

Taylor, F.H. The Taste of Angels. A History of Collecting from Ramases to Napoleon. Boston and Lon-
don: Little Brown & Co., 1948.

Tebbich, S., and R. Bshary. “Cognitive Abilities Related to Tool Use in the Woodpecker Finch Cactospiza
pallida.” Animal Behaviour 67, no. 4 (2004): 689–97.

Thornberg, Christopher A., and James P. Cycon. “Sikorsky Aircraft’s Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, Cypher:
System Description and Program Accomplishments.” 51st AHS Annual Forum 9–11 May 1995, Fort
Worth, TX. 804–11, 1995.

Toth, N., K. Schick, and S. Sema. A Technological Comparison of the Stone Tool-Making Capabili-
ties of Australopithecus/Early Homo, Pan paniscus, and Homo sapiens, and Possible Evolutionary
Implications. Paleoanthropology Society Meetings. Denver, CO, March 19, 2002. Abstract http://
www.paleoanthro.org/abst2002.htm#toth (accessed April 23, 2007).

Toth, N., K. Schick, E.S. Savage-Rumbaugh, et al. “Pan the Tool-Maker: Investigations into the Stone
Toolmaking and Tool-Using Capabilities of Bonobo [Pigmy Chimp] (Pan paniscus).” Journal of Ar-
chaeological Science 20 (1993): 81–91.

Tunbridge, J. E., and G.J. Ashworth. Dissonant Heritage: The Management of the Past as a Resource in
Conflict. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.

Turing, A.M. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind 49 (1950): 433–60.

UNESCO. UNESCO Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity 2 November 2001. In United Na-
tions Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Records of the General Conference, 31st
Session Paris, Volume 1 Resolutions. Paris, France, October 15–November 3, 2001, 62–64.

van Schaik C.P., R.O. Deaner, and M.Y. Merrill. “The Conditions for Tool Use in Primates: Implica-
tions for the Evolution of Material Culture.” Journal of Human Evolution 36, no. 6 (1999): 719–41.

van Schaik, C.P., and Gauri R. Pradhana. “A Model for Tool-Use Traditions in Primates: Implications
for the Coevolution of Culture and Cognition. Journal of Human Evolution 44 (2003): 645–64.

van Schaik, C.P., M. Ancrenaz, G. Borgen, et al. “Orangutan Cultures and the Evolution of Material
Culture.” Science 299, no. 5603 (2003): 102–05.

van Schaik, C.P., E.A. Fox, and L.T. Fechtman. “Individual Variation in the Rate of Use of Tree-Hole
Tools Among Wild Orang-Utans: Implications for Hominin Evolution.” Journal of Human Evolution
44, no. 1 (2003): 11–23.

Visalberghi, E., D.M. Fragaszy, and S. Savage-Rumbaugh. “Performance in a Tool-Using Task by Com-
mon Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), Bonobos (Pan paniscus), an Orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus), and
Capuchin Monkeys (Cebus apella).” Journal of Comparative Psychology. 109, no. 1 (1995): 52–60.

Vogel, G. “Chimps in the Wild Show Stirrings of Culture.” Science 284, no. 5423 (1999): 2070–74.

Vogel, G. “Can Chimps Ape Ancient Hominid Toolmakers?” Science 296, no. 5572 (2002): 1380.

Watson, R.A., S.G. Ficici, and J.B. Pollack. “Embodied Evolution: Distributing an Evolutionary Al-
gorithm in a Population of Robots.” Robotics and Autonomous Systems 39 no. 1 (2002): 1–18.
World Heritage Center. The World Heritage List. Alphabetically by State Party, 2004. http://whc.
unesco.org/heritage.htm (accessed April 19, 2007).

Whiten, A. “Commentary to Christophe Boesch and Michael Tomasello’s ‘Chimpanzee and Human
Cultures.’” Current Anthropology 39, no. 5 (1998): 609–10.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075

266

DIRK H. R. SPENNEMANN

Whiten, A., J. Goodall, W.C. McGrew, et al. “Cultures in Chimpanzees.” Nature 399 (1999): 682–685.

Widmer, G. “Machine Discoveries: A Few Simple, Robust Local Expression Principles.” Journal of
New Music Research 31, no. 1 (2002): 37–50.

Wrangham, R.W., J.H. Jones, G. Laden, et al. (1999) “The Raw and the Stolen: Cooking and the
Ecology of Human Origins.” Current Anthropology 40, no. 5 (1999): 567–94.

Wright, R.V.S. “Imitative Learning of a Flaked Stone Technology: The Case of an Orangutan.” Man-
kind 8 (1972): 296–306.

Wright, R.V.S. E-mail to the author, November 13, 2005.

Wyn, T. “Archaeology and Cognitive Evolution.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 25, no. 3 (2002):
389–402.

Young, Richard W. “Evolution of the Human Hand: The Role of Throwing and Clubbing.” Journal of
Anatomy 202, no. 1 (2003): 165–74.

Want to Comment on this Article?
Go to www.culturalproperty.org/forum/

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:49:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070075


