 

False Closure? Known Unknowns in 
Repatriated Antiquities Cases
Christos Tsirogiannis*

 

Abstract: Based on research into the confiscated photographic and document 
archives in the hands of the top antiquities dealers (Robin Symes-Christos 
Michaelides, Robert Hecht, Giacomo Medici, and Gianfranco Becchina), so far 
more than 250 looted and smuggled masterpieces have been repatriated from 
the most reputable North American museums, private collections, and galleries, 
mainly to the Italian and the Greek states. Most of these repatriations were 
advertised in the press as voluntary action by the institutions and the individuals 
who possessed them. However, this is far from true; the repatriations were the 
results of lengthy negotiations, where the presentation of evidence alternated 
with diplomatic tactics and legal threats in order for the two parties (in some 
cases, three) to reach an agreement. Among the much-celebrated repatriated 
antiquities are at least two cases that require further research regarding their legal 
owner. This article aims to analyze these two cases and to set out new questions. 
In the end, there is doubt that the state who finally received these antiquities is 
necessarily the one from which they have been looted and smuggled. Based on 
this analysis, the article aims to highlight alternative paths to the discovery of the 
truth, paths that might have been more effective, if they had been followed.

INTRODUCTION

This article argues that it is quite possible that two antiquities delivered to Italy in 
the last decade by an American museum and a private collector, respectively, were 

*Senior Field Archaeologist, Cambridge Archaeological Unit, Department of Archaeology, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Email: christos.tsirogiannis@cantab.net

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The author acknowledges support from the European Research Council 
under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013; ERC Grant Agreement 
no. 283873).

407

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

International Journal of Cultural Property (2016) 23:407–431. Printed in the USA.Copyright © 2016 International Cultural Property Societydoi:10.1017/S094073911600028X408 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

each in fact looted from a country other than Italy. I present all available informa-
tion related to the collecting history of a marble statue of Vibia Sabina, delivered 
to Italy by the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, and a krater by Euphronios, delivered 
to Italy by the American collector Shelby White. Since the members of the nego-
tiation teams representing each side of these two cases have signed confidentiality 
agreements, it is not possible to know the details of the discussions at the time. 
Still, my argument adds new information from unpublished sources and compares 
these cases with the case of a marble kore (Greek archaic statue of a woman) that 
was returned to Greece on the basis of evidence that it was looted from there. Until 
the Roman statue and the krater likewise prove to have been looted from Italy, we 
should refer to these antiquities as “given” or “delivered” (by the museum/collector 
to Italy) rather than as “returned” or “repatriated.” Having demonstrated the lack 
of proof that it was from Italian soil that these two objects were looted, this article 
also briefly considers why these two antiquities were nonetheless sent to Italy.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

The characters involved in the two cases on which this article focuses, as well as 
the historical circumstances behind the negotiations and returns in these cases, 
require some introduction. The first major player is the antiquities dealer Giacomo 
Medici. In 1995, the Italian authorities obtained information that a sarcophagus, 
stolen from a medieval tower in Italy, was being consigned for auction at Sotheby’s 
London branch.1 The consigner was Edition Service, one of the companies belonging 
to Medici. Jointly with their Swiss colleagues, the Italians raided Medici’s ware-
houses at the Free Port of Geneva on 13 September 1995.2 They confiscated, along 
with hundreds of looted, smuggled, and stolen antiquities, about 4,000 images, 
most  of  them  Polaroid  photographs,  depicting  thousands  of  antiquities  in  a 
fragmentary condition and covered with soil encrustations. Since its discovery, 
this extensive group of images, together with documents found with them, have 
become known as the Medici archive. The Italian state prosecuted Giacomo Medici, 
and on 12 May 2005, the court found him guilty of illegal export of antiquities, 
receipt of stolen goods, and conspiracy.3 After appealing twice, Medici was finally 
convicted by Italy’s highest court in December 2011 to an eight-year prison sen-
tence and a €10 million fine.4 Medici was never jailed since by the time of the final 
verdict he was over 70 years of age and, according to the Italian law, unless some-
one is found guilty for committing a murder, criminals over 70 years old do not 
serve sentences in jail.5

The second important figure in this article is Robert Emmanuel Hecht, Jr, the 
American illicit antiquities dealer who dominated the international market from 
the mid-1960s until the mid-1980s. A year before the raid at Medici’s premises, 
during a raid at a flat belonging to an Italian middleman in Rome, the Carabinieri 
art squad had already obtained a handwritten diagram depicting the Italian branch 
of the international illicit antiquities network.6 This plan, which became known as 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

409

the “organigram,” presented Medici as one of the two main suppliers of Hecht, 
whose name was occupying the highest point of the diagram. Hecht had already 
been  charged  in  Italy  and  Turkey  of  buying  illegally  excavated  antiquities.7  
On 16 February 2001, the Italian and French authorities jointly raided Hecht’s 
flat in the center of Paris and discovered dozens of images and a few antiquities 
in fragmentary condition and covered with soil. However, the most valuable 
discovery was Hecht’s handwritten memoir, in which he narrated his involvement 
in some of the most well-known instances of illicit antiquities surfacing in the inter-
national market from the early 1960s until the early 1990s.8 The memoir focused, 
in particular, on the famous story of the illicitly excavated and sold Sarpedon krater 
painted by Euphronios, the most celebrated vase painter of antiquity.9 Hecht had 
sold the krater to the Metropolitan Museum in 1972 for US $1 million, not only 
setting a new record for the sale price of a single antiquity but also creating the 
biggest and most long-lasting mystery over any antiquity acquired by a museum. 
The Italian state prosecuted Hecht, but in January 2012, the case ended without a 
verdict because the statute of limitations had expired.10 Less than three weeks later, 
Hecht died at the age of 92.11

My  third  focus  is  on  Robin  Symes  and  Christos  Michaelides,  the  dealers  that 
succeeded Hecht in dominating the international antiquities market. In April 2006, 
on the privately owned peninsula of the Cycladic island of Schinousa in the Aegean 
Sea, the Greek authorities raided the complex of villas that used to be the property 
of Symes and Michaelides. The raiding team, in which I participated as a forensic 
archaeologist, discovered hundreds of antiquities not registered in the catalogues of 
the Greek Ministry of Culture (which a Greek citizen is obliged to do according to 
national law) and the invaluable photographic archive of Symes and Michaelides.

Following  each  of  these  raids,  there  was  an  examination  of  the  archives 
on  which  the  Italian  repatriation  claims  were  based  (Greece  started  to  examine 
the same archives in 2006 to claim repatriation of post-1970 looted antiquities). 
The Italian public prosecutor, Paolo Giorgio Ferri, had asked Daniela Rizzo and 
Maurizio Pellegrini, two prominent archaeologists working at the Etruscan Museum 
of Villa Giulia in Rome, to exercise their forensic skills on the Medici archive. 
In  the course of 10 years, Rizzo and Pellegrini managed to identify hundreds of 
illicit masterpieces in North American and European state and private collections, 
by  combining  research  on  the  confiscated  images  in  the  Medici  archive  with 
information from the Hecht memoir, the Symes–Michaelides archive, and other 
archives. Armed with these identifications and using the confiscated images as evi-
dence in trials against looters, middlemen, and dealers, the Italian state contacted 
some of the most reputable museums and private collections around the world. 
Negotiations started over specific claims regarding the repatriation of antiquities 
that were looted and smuggled out of Italy in the post-1970 period (1970 being the 
cut-off date created in November of that year by the Convention on the Means of 
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership 
of Cultural Property [UNESCO Convention]).12 Among the museums identified 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

410 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

as having acquired illicit material were the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. Additionally, negotiations over 10 
antiquities started with Shelby White, who together with her late husband Leon 
Levy, were the owners of one of the best private antiquities collections in the world.
Both the defendants (museum officials and private collectors) and claimants 
(state authorities) presented an image of productive cooperation, but the negotia-
tions proved to be lengthy, lasting several months.13 Contrary to the public image, 
the resulting repatriations of 43 illicit antiquities to Italy from these three collec-
tions were definitely not made voluntarily.14 In 2006, the Boston Museum of Fine 
Arts returned 13 antiquities, among which was the over-life-size marble statue of 
the empress Vibia Sabina, wife of the Roman emperor Hadrian. In January 2008, 
after 18 months of intense negotiations, White returned 10 antiquities,15 among 
which was another Euphronios krater, depicting Herakles killing Kyknos, son of 
the god Ares. This Euphronios krater (henceforth the Euphronios’ Kyknos krater), 
although reconstructed, was missing most of its original pieces. The Metropolitan 
Museum returned 20 antiquities in the first instance, comprising the Euphronios’ 
Sarpedon krater bought during Thomas Hoving’s directorship (1967–77) and 19 more 
masterpieces  that  became  part  of  the  museum’s  collection  during  the  period  of 
Philippe de Montebello’s directorship (1977–2008). Several other antiquities were 
returned from the Met to Italy over the following years.16

Ten years after the agreements were made for the return of these 43 masterpieces 
to Italy, a few issues in the reconstructed collecting history of some of these objects 
raise doubts as to whether Italy was in fact the country of origin for at least two of 
these antiquities. The objects in question are the statue of Vibia Sabina, returned 
by the Boston Museum of Fine Arts (MFA), and the Euphronios’ Kyknos krater, 
returned by White from her collection.

CASE STUDY 1: MARBLE STATUE OF VIBIA SABINA

My account of this case is based on a comparison and contrast with another object 
in a very similar set of circumstances that had a different end result. Circumstan-
tial  details  about  the  photographs  will  be  important,  along  with  the  reaction  of 
the museums and the action (or lack of action) by the state authorities concerned. 
Just before the beginning of the 1974 football World Cup hosted by Germany, the 
Greek,  Geneva-based  antiquities  dealer  Nikola  Koutoulakis  was  informed  of  an 
impressive haul of antiquities that was about to appear on the market.17 Among 
them was a marble statue of the empress Vibia Sabina, wife of the Roman emperor 
Hadrian (117–138 ad). The over-life-size statue (204 centimeters in height) was 
kept in the warehouse of a Turkish dealer in Munich. Koutoulakis asked Giacomo 
Medici to check the object for him since Medici had already scheduled to be in 
Munich on 15 June in order to watch the football match between Italy and Haiti. 
After the match, Medici visited the warehouse and took three Polaroid images,18 
depicting the statue still covered with soil, on a wooden pallet on the floor, near 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

411

other antiquities (figs. 1–3).19 Medici kept the Polaroid images in his archive and 
reported back to Koutoulakis on the condition of the statue.

However, it seems that Robert Hecht, the dealer who dominated the interna-
tional illicit antiquities market at the time, found out that the statue of Vibia Sabina 
was on offer. Apparently, acting quicker than Koutoulakis, Hecht bought the statue 
and sold it to the Boston MFA on 14 November 1979 (Account no. 1979.556), pre-
tending, as often happens, to be the agent of his own conservator Fritz Bürki.20  
The Boston MFA acquired the Vibia Sabina statue using funds from the Classical 
Department Exchange Fund.21 The museum gave the collecting history of the statue 
as follows: “Said to have been in an aristocratic family collection in Bavaria.”22

After the raid of the Medici warehouses by the Swiss and Italian authorities, the 
three Polaroid images that were produced by Medici in Munich were discovered 
in  the  archive.  The  Italian  archaeologists  Maurizio  Pellegrini  and  Daniela  Rizzo 
identified the statue depicted in the three Polaroids as the one on exhibition in the 
Boston MFA.23 Apart from this statue, they also identified 12 more antiquities at 
the Boston MFA from the confiscated archives. On 28 September 2006, the Boston 

Figure 1.  The first Polaroid image from the confiscated Medici archive depicting the 
Vibia Sabina statue unconserved and lying on a wooden pallet. © Italian Ministry  
of Justice.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

412 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

Figure 2.  The second Polaroid image from the confiscated Medici archive depicting 
the Vibia Sabina statue unconserved and lying on a wooden pallet. © Italian Ministry  
of Justice.

MFA signed an agreement with the Italian Ministry of Culture for the return of all 
13 identified antiquities.24

The museum agreed to return the antiquities to Italy after five months of quiet 
negotiations, without demanding any legal proof that the objects had been looted.25 
Furthermore, as Jason Felch and Ralph Frammolino note, “[u]nlike the Met, the 
MFA did not demand loans in exchange for all the returned objects and delivered 
them as soon as the deal was struck. And unlike the Getty, it did not resist.”26 
However,  at some point between 2006 and 2007, Medici told journalist Sharon 
Waxman, regarding the Sabina statue: “Boston returned it to Italy, but it came from 
Turkey. This is absurd; the piece is not Italian. It’s typically Turkish, of smooth 
marble. Now it’s in the Villa Adriana.”27 Moreover, on 5 May 2009, Suzan Mazur, 
a journalist with a lengthy passion about research on illicit antiquities cases, wrote 
that the Turkish journalist Ozgen Acar informed her about the possible identity 
of the Turkish dealer who in 1974 had the statue of Vibia Sabina at his gallery in 
Munich; the information included his connection with Hecht:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

413

Figure 3.  The third Polaroid image from the confiscated Medici archive depicting 
the Vibia Sabina statue unconserved and lying on a wooden pallet. © Italian Ministry  
of Justice.

Acar has emailed me from Turkey saying it’s likely it was Fuat Uzulmez 
of Munich’s Artemis Gallery. Uzulmez is the handsome playboy who 
escorted  me  out  of  the  Hecht-McNall  Park  Lane  Hotel  auction  in 
November  1990,  putting  his  arm  around  me  and  whispering  in  my 
ear: “We are going to kill him [Acar].” Hecht’s daughter knew him as 
“Uncle Fuat.”28

The use of photographs in the Medici archive as “evidence” for an Italian claim 
may now be compared and contrasted with that of a Greek archaic female statue,  
a kore, likewise depicted in this archive and likewise acquired by a major North 
American museum, but eventually—rightly—returned to Greece. Kore statues 
have been found chiefly in Greece and Minor Asia; only a few examples come from 
Magna Graecia and Cyprus.29 In March 1993, the J.P. Getty Museum notified the 
Greek and Italian authorities about its intention to acquire the kore statue (along 
with another object, a golden wreath, which could have been Italian but eventually 
proved to have been looted from Greece). The Greek Ministry of Culture responded 
that the statue could only be the product of an illicit excavation, but at the time, 
the Greek authorities had no proof to support that claim. Their rationale, as Peter 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

414 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

Watson and Cecilia Todeschini make clear, was that material of such quality, had 
it been legally excavated, would have been widely published.30 Regardless of the 
Greek reaction, the Getty approved the acquisition of the kore on 14 April 1993 
from the dealer Robin Symes for US $3,300,00031 and formally acquired the statue 
on 10 June 1993.32

Twenty-one images in the Medici archive depict the kore still covered with soil 
and bearing fresh marks from tools used for looting the statue, in what appears to 
be two different warehouses (three of these images are shown as figs. 4–6). While 
an official Greek claim, lacking the required evidence of supporting documenta-
tion, was pending on the kore, the Italian state discovered the images of the kore 
in the Medici archive. However, before the Italian state pushed forward with their 
claim of the kore, based solely on the fact that the images were discovered in the 
confiscated archive of an Italian dealer (Medici), a fruitful cooperation between 
the Italian and Greek authorities,33 in which I participated as an archaeologist for 

Figure 4.  The first of 21 images from the confiscated Medici archive depicting the Kore 
statue unconserved and bearing marks of unprofessional excavation. © Italian Ministry  
of Justice.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

415

Figure 5.  The second of 21 images from the confiscated Medici archive depicting 
the Kore statue unconserved and bearing marks of unprofessional excavation. © Italian 
Ministry of Justice.

Greece, resulted in the reinforcement of the 14-year-old (by that time) Greek claim 
and the repatriation of the kore to Greece in March 2007.34

Another element contributing to the repatriation of the kore statue to Greece 
was Robin Symes’ testimony to the Italian public prosecutor Paolo Giorgio Ferri. 
During his interrogation in Rome on 28 March 2003, Symes stated regarding the 
kore statue:

Symes: I bought it from Koutoulakis and I sold it to the Getty …
Ferri: To the Getty …
Symes:  Many  years  ago.  It’s  Greek,  completely  Greek!  It’s  even  Paros 
marble … it’s made of. It couldn’t be anything else.35

The  involvement  of  the  Greek  dealer  Koutoulakis  in  the  case  of  the  kore  statue 
reinforced the Greek task force’s argument regarding the statue’s Greek origin and 
aided the repatriation of the statue to Greece.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

416 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

Figure 6.  The third of 21 images from the confiscated Medici archive depicting the 
Kore statue unconserved and bearing marks of unprofessional excavation. © Italian 
Ministry of Justice.

The Greek dealer’s involvement with the kore connects this case with that of the 
Vibia Sabina statue, but these two similar cases received differing treatment. The 
Vibia Sabina was returned to Italy based purely on the fact that three Polaroid  
images of the statue were discovered in the confiscated archive of an Italian dealer, 
a fact that does not prove the statue’s Italian origin—the statue is Roman and 
could theoretically have been looted from any country that in antiquity was part 
of the Roman Empire. Moreover, in the case of this statue, a statement of the 
witness (Medici) that it came from Turkey was not taken into account. However, 
neither this detail, nor the fact that Medici told Silver that he saw the statue at the 
warehouse of a Turkish dealer in Munich,36 are by themselves proof of the statue’s 
Turkish origin, any more than the images in the Medici archive constitute proof for 
the statue’s Italian origin. Rightly, then, the discovery of seven times more images 
of the kore statue (21 in total) than of the Vibia Sabina statue (three) in the same 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

417

archive of the same Italian dealer should not have been regarded as proof enough 
for the kore statue to be “returned” to Italy. In neither case was there other evi-
dence in the photos regarding the possible origins of the object, such as there was 
in the case of two marble griffins depicted in the Medici archive in an Italian news-
paper, a fact that helped their repatriation to Italy.37

Note that the fact that kore statues of this type (Parian) are exclusively found 
in  Greece  was  not  seen  as  being  sufficient  in  itself  for  the  repatriation  of  this 
kore  to  Greece,  otherwise  the  statue  could  have  been  repatriated  there  as  early 
as March 1993, when the Greek authorities first became aware of the kore’s exis-
tence. Again, the Italian dealer’s statement of the Turkish origin of the Vibia Sabina 
statue depicted in his archive has not (yet) overturned that statue’s repatriation to 
Italy, not just because the Turkish authorities have not investigated the matter, or 
because the Italian authorities, when they were claiming the statue, were unaware of  
Medici’s view and experience. The statement of the English dealer (Robin Symes) 
about the kore’s Greek origin was (eventually) made to contribute to the Greek 
case, but I judge that the Italian authorities were right to be cautious regarding the 
validity of Symes’ statement in 2003. Both Symes and Medici, during their legal 
fights with various countries’ authorities, have been found to have lied in several 
cases, and thus, neither man’s word is proof in itself.38

The fact that the Boston MFA gave the Vibia Sabina statue to Italy, relying purely 
on three images coming from an Italian dealer’s confiscated archive, without asking 
the Italian authorities to provide any proof that the Vibia Sabina statue was actu-
ally looted from Italy, leaves the case open to further research regarding the true 
origin of this statue. The Italian authorities apparently benefited from the Boston 
museum’s loose approach (see next paragraph) at the time of the negotiations to 
the Italian claim of the Vibia Sabina along with other more obviously Italian 
antiquities. Indeed, there is a telling caveat in the catalogue of the Italians’ cele-
bratory exhibition of the objects in Italy, “Nostoi. Capolavori Ritrovati.” In regard 
to the origin of this statue, the catalogue entry reads: “La statua proviene forse da 
villa Adriana a Tivoli [The statue possibly comes from Hadrian’s villa at Tivoli].”39 
Medici’s own link to the case is circumstantial, as may be inferred from his telling 
Vernon Silver that Koutoulakis had asked him to inspect the Vibia Sabina statue as 
a favor since he would be in Munich anyway to watch the football match.

The reason that the Boston MFA did not insist on the Italian authorities’ pro-
viding evidence of the statue’s Italian origin seems to be the weight of the evidence 
presented  during  the  negotiations  regarding  the  12  other  antiquities  claimed. 
Those 12 objects, at any rate, were undoubtedly looted from Italian soil and had 
been traded by the same illicit antiquities dealers. Although in the case of the Vibia 
Sabina statue, there were available only the Polaroid images, which did not consti-
tute proof that the statue was looted from Italy, the evidence concerning all of the 
claimed objects, taken as a whole, probably deterred the museum from requesting 
evidence of an Italian find-spot for this one object. The alternative for the Boston 
MFA would have been to take the case to court, trying to resist the release of only 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

418 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

this  antiquity.  However,  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  museum’s  legal  team  did 
a  risk  assessment  and  gave  the  advice  not  to  follow  this  path  since  a  court  case 
could lead to public disclosure of information currently protected by confidenti-
ality agreements, disclosure that might encourage Italy or other countries to make 
further claims on the museum’s collection. The lawyers might have warned more 
generally that a court case might result in long-lasting negative publicity if the 
institution were to emerge as a guilty and greedy organization trying to hold onto a 
statue that was probably looted (as the Polaroids implied) and traded by the same 
dealers who traded antiquities that the museum had just agreed to release. These 
reasons likely explain why no museum or private collector has ever tried to defend 
their acquisitions in court regarding any claims made so far on the basis of photo-
graphic evidence from the confiscated archives.40

At the moment, there is no real proof to support Italy’s claim to the Vibia Sabina 
statue; any other country that used to be part of the Roman Empire could raise a 
claim to the statue, if it gathers sufficient evidence. Given that Hecht and Kout-
oulakis are no longer alive, one way to re-open the case might be to re-examine 
Medici, Fritz Bürki, and the Turkish dealer (reportedly Fuat Uzulmez). All of the 
indications so far (although they are not in themselves proof) point not to Italian, 
but, rather, to Turkish, origin.

CASE STUDY 2: KYKNOS KRATER BY EUPHRONIOS

The collecting history of the Kyknos krater by Euphronios has never been investi-
gated in isolation from the more famous Sarpedon krater that was acquired by the 
Metropolitan Museum in 1972 and repatriated to Italy in 2008. The Kyknos krater 
was also repatriated in 2008 to Italy and, like the Sarpedon krater, was traded by 
Robert Hecht, this time ending up in the collection of Shelby White. After recount-
ing the known collecting history of the Kyknos krater, I will evaluate various points 
of speculation about its earlier trade, in terms of evidence for its repatriation to 
Italy.

This fragmentary krater, of which about one quarter survives, depicts Herakles 
killing the prince Kyknos, while Athena protects Herakles from the god Ares who 
advances to avenge his son Kyknos.41 Euphronios signed this krater and inscribed 
below  Herakles ΛEAΓΡΟΣ ΚΑΛΟΣ  (“Leagros  is  beautiful”).  The  beauty  of  this 
young man was regularly praised on Athenian vases in the late sixth century bc, 
a detail that helped Dietrich von Bothmer, the then curator of antiquities at the 
Met, to date the krater to around 510 bc.42 The first public appearance of this vase 
was as an “anonymous loan” to the J.P. Getty Museum on 28 February 1980. The 
Kyknos krater was exhibited among a group of Euphronios vases and fragments, 
the biggest accumulation of previously unknown Euphronios vases in hundreds of 
years. All of these works of Euphronios were published in a single article, without 
reference to any previous collecting history, by Martin Robertson in 1981,43 who 
was at the time, together with Bothmer, the greatest living authority on Attic vase 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

419

painting and who “had the good fortune of being a Visiting Scholar at the Getty” 
when all these Euphronios vases appeared there.44 Through this publication and 
their exhibition at the Getty museum, these previously unprovenanced vases and 
fragments acquired some kind of collecting history. Soon after, the krater appeared 
as  part  of  the  Nelson  Bunker  and  William  Herbert  Hunt  collection.  From  June 
1983 to June 1984, the collection went on tour to some of the most famous American 
museums (the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, the Detroit Institute of Arts, and the 
Dallas Museum of Art), beginning with the Kimbell Art Museum in Ohio, where 
the  Texan  Hunt  brothers  had  been  born.  The  catalogue  of  the  exhibition,  enti-
tled Wealth of the Ancient World, included the publication of the Kyknos krater by 
Bothmer.

When  the  Hunt  brothers  went  bankrupt,  they  sold  their  antiquities  collection 
through  an  auction  organized  by  Sotheby’s  in  New  York  on  19  June  1990.45  At 
the auction, Robin Symes, acting as an agent for the collectors Shelby White and her 
husband Leon Levy, acquired the Kyknos krater for US $1,760,000. The krater was lent 
by White and Levy to the Metropolitan Museum in 1999 (Account no. L1999.36.1), 
where it stayed on exhibition at least until December 2005.46 As mentioned previ-
ously, in January 2008, White returned 10 antiquities to Italy after 18 months of 
intense negotiations. Among the returned objects was the Kyknos krater.

In order to examine whether the return of the Kyknos krater to Italy was right, 
it is important to trace the collecting history of the vase before its acquisition by 
the Hunt brothers. In the mid-1970s, Hecht had arranged to cooperate with the 
American dealer Bruce McNall, becoming almost exclusively the sole supplier of 
McNall’s gallery (named the Summa Gallery and situated on Rodeo Drive in Los 
Angeles) and splitting the proceeds with him.47 In 1979, Hecht, through McNall, 
sold  the  Kyknos  krater  to  the  Hunt  brothers  together  with  a  Euphronios  cup 
that depicted Sleep and Death carrying Sarpedon’s body; the price for both was 
US  $2  million.48  According  to  Silver,49  Hecht  told  McNall  that  he  bought  the 
Kyknos krater from Medici for US $800,000–$900,000. It appears that these two 
vases, before they reached the Hunt brothers who were now their owners, were 
sent directly to the Getty museum by Bürki, on behalf of Hecht and McNall, for 
exhibition. For official purposes, these objects were listed by the Getty as being 
an “anonymous loan.”50

Before Hecht’s acquisition of the Kyknos krater, nothing is proven regarding 
its previous collecting history. According to Thomas Hoving, the former director 
of the Metropolitan Museum, the Kyknos krater was bought by Hecht from a 
Lebanese  dealer,  Dikran  Sarrafian.  Hecht  stated,  and  Sarrafian  confirmed  in 
interviews,  that  he  inherited  the  fragments  of  a  Euphronios  krater  from  his 
father, who he said acquired the fragments in London in the 1920s. In Hoving’s 
opinion, the Euphronios’ Kyknos krater was “a bona fide krater,” whose col-
lecting history Hecht deliberately switched with that of the freshly excavated 
near-complete Sarpedon krater that Hecht had sold to the Met.51 Hecht claimed that 
he  had  bought  the  Sarpedon  krater,  the  highest  quality  vase  surviving  from 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

420 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

antiquity, signed by Euphronios, from Dikran Sarrafian in August 1971. In fact, 
as  we  now  know,  the  Sarpedon  krater  was  not  excavated  until  December  1971. 
Moreover, Sarrafian always emphasized that his Euphronios krater was not com-
plete. Hoving met Hecht in December 2000 during an exhibition in London, 
where, Hoving asserted, Hecht admitted that he switched the collecting histories; 
Hecht later denied that he said this.52

However,  Hoving’s  scenario  about  the  two  Euphronios  kraters  seems  to  me 
very possible, as it explains in a convincing way all of the statements and incidents 
from the time.53 This includes the apparently independent testimony from Muriel 
Silberstein-Newman, who wrote to the Metropolitan Museum, on seeing the con-
troversy about the Sarpedon krater in the papers, to attest that she had seen the 
fragments of a Euphronios krater in Sarrafian’s flat in Beirut in 1964; however, the 
fragments were “large—very—and thick and extremely dirty.”54 If Hoving’s theory 
is correct, then the Kyknos krater was used to launder the Sarpedon krater and was 
not exhibited deliberately until nine years later in order to disassociate it from 
its Euphronios twin. This would make the Kyknos krater the only legal antiquity 
that Hecht ever sold, and, according to the Italian law (passed in 1939) and the 
1970 UNESCO Convention, the Italian authorities had no grounds on which to 
claim it.

There  is  a  real  question,  then,  as  to  why  White  delivered  the  most  expensive 
object of her collection to the Italian authorities. The Italians have no proof that 
the Kyknos krater was looted from Italian soil in the post-1970 period. Equally, 
though, White had no proof that the Kyknos krater was licit. The absence of proof 
on  both  sides  does  not  justify  either  the  removal  of  the  object  from  the  private 
collection  or  its  repatriation  to  Italy  in  particular.  Yet,  both  happened.  Later  in 
this article, I offer several possible explanations for why the absence of proof 
regarding the licit origin of the krater in this case seems to have weighed more than 
the absence of proof regarding its illicit excavation.

Indeed, the likelihood is slim that the Kyknos krater is licit since everyone con-
nected with the known part of its collecting history is tarnished by association 
with  the  trade  and/or  acquisition  of  numerous  other  illicit  antiquities.  I  have 
already discussed Hecht and his restorer Fritz Bürki. Bruce McNall, after being 
sentenced for financial fraud, wrote his memoir Fun While It Lasted (2003) while 
he was in jail, in which he narrates the ways in which he was smuggling antiq-
uities  from  their  countries  of  origin  and  trading  other  illicit  objects  indepen-
dently or through his cooperation with Robert Hecht. Bothmer, a close friend of 
Hecht,55 became a customer of Hecht and other illicit antiquities dealers, form-
ing a private collection of vases and fragments that he kept in his office at the 
Metropolitan Museum—an obvious case of conflict of interest that the museum 
overlooked.56 Several fragments and a near-complete vase from the Bothmer col-
lection have been repatriated to Italy.57 Bothmer was instrumental in the acqui-
sition of the Sarpedon krater, which he later published. He also published the 
Kyknos krater in the Hunt collection volume and several other antiquities in the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

421

Shelby White and Leon Levy volume, many of them now proven to be illicit and 
returned to Italy, while others are still under investigation.

The Hunt brothers very quickly built up a formidable collection of antiquities, 
acquiring from Hecht and McNall objects originating from illicit antiquities dealers 
such as Medici. The same stands for the collection of White and her husband Levy, 
which, even after all of the repatriations, remains the foremost in the world. Part 
of the Levy and White collection was presented for the first time at an exhibition at 
the Metropolitan Museum in 1990,58 arranged by Philippe de Montebello; in this 
exhibition 93 percent of the objects lacked a “source,” and 84 percent had no 
collecting history before 1974.59 When Philippe de Montebello retired from being 
director of the Met in December 2008, he immediately became (in January 2009) the 
first Fiske Kimball Professor in the History and Culture of Museums at New York 
University’s (NYU) Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, an establishment 
created by White, from whom New York University accepted a US $200 million 
donation for its creation.60 The acceptance of this donation caused the resignation 
of at least one NYU academic from its existing Center for Ancient Studies because 
of the known activity of White in collecting antiquities largely without any collect-
ing history.61 Indeed, White was the declared source of several entries in the 2008 
catalogue  of  the  Nostoi  exhibition  of  antiquities  repatriated  to  Italy  and  Greece, 
which have now been proven to have been stolen or freshly looted and smuggled.62
There is one other consideration to bear in mind. It is not absolutely certain that 
the Kyknos krater “was a bona fide krater.”63 Silver states that Hecht sent images 
of the Kyknos krater to McNall and from them it was evident that “Bürki hadn’t 
yet done his handiwork because they thought other fragments might come into 
the market. There’d be no point gluing it all together if they’d have to take it apart 
again to stick in extra bits.”64 Only after McNall persuaded Bunker Hunt, in 1979, 
to acquire the krater did Hecht notify Bürki to glue the vase together.65 If the origin 
of the Kyknos krater was indeed from Sarrafian (thus, in London in the 1920s), 
then the fragments of the Kyknos krater that reached Bürki in August 1971 and 
were photographed by Widmer in early September, would have been glued imme-
diately, as no other fragments would have been expected to emerge. The fact that 
the Kyknos krater remained in a fragmentary condition at Bürki’s workshop for 
eight years after its acquisition by Hecht may indicate that the krater is the result of 
much more recent looting and that the owners of other fragments belonging to the 
same vase might have offered them in due course.

As with every antiquity, there are ultimately only two options regarding the Kyknos 
krater’s collecting history: either it is licit or illicit. If we accept that the Kyknos 
krater is licit, then we accept Hoving’s theory about Sarrafian being the original 
holder of the krater. After all, there is no third Euphronios krater—complete or 
fragmentary—that has surfaced in the market since 1971. In that case, the Kyknos 
krater should have stayed in the Shelby White collection. On the other hand, if we 
suppose that the Kyknos krater was looted, we have no other lead but to accept 
McNall’s statement that Hecht received the fragments of the Kyknos krater from 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

422 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

Medici,  as  happened  with  the  Sarpedon  krater  fragments.  We  thereby  also  distrust  
the statements of Sarrafian, if Sarrafian was talking about the fragments of the Kyknos 
krater. However, Sarrafian never explicitly claimed that he owned the Sarpedon or 
the  Kyknos  krater.66  According  to  Silberstein-Newman,  Sarrafian  told  her  in 
1964 that the “extremely dirty fragments” he had were from a Euphronios krater. 
Silberstein-Newman’s testimony indicated that she could not know if the fragments 
she saw were those of the Sarpedon krater or the Kyknos krater or even of any krater 
painted by Euphronios. If the Kyknos krater is illicit, and we accept that Silberstein-
Newman is telling the truth, there are two possibilities: either Silberstein-Newman 
saw fragments of another Euphronios krater that for over half a century has not 
reached the market (a highly improbable scenario) or she saw fragments of another 
krater that she was told was by Euphronios when it was not.67

If the Kyknos krater was looted, then—if we accept McNall’s statement—it is 
possible that the krater was looted from Italy. In this case, Medici and Hecht were 
involved in the trafficking of all three Euphronios vases surfacing in the market 
since  1971.  Several  of  the  objects  trafficked  by  Hecht  have  been  proven  to  have 
passed through the hands of Medici after being looted in Italy.68 However, in the 
case of the Kyknos krater, we have no actual proof of this. We may compare the case 
of the Vibia Sabina statue discussed above, in which the involvement of Medici’s 
name and three images were enough for the statue to be delivered by the Boston 
MFA to Italy. However, in the case of the Kyknos krater, there is not even a single 
image in the Medici archive.69

The condition of the Kyknos krater, however, makes an Italian origin less likely. 
Unlike the Sarpedon krater, which is complete enough to have been found in a 
tomb, only a quarter of the Kyknos krater survives.70 Daniella Rizzo believes that 
the Kyknos krater could have been discovered in Greece. Its partial survival is a 
reminder of the few Euphronios vases that were discovered in Greece and that also 
survive  only  in  part  because  of  their  discovery  in  archaeological  contexts  other 
than tombs. In reply, one might point to a fragmentary kylix, also depicting the 
death of Sarpedon, which (eventually) was judged to have been looted from the 
same Etruscan tomb as the Sarpedon krater.71 This theory, however, seems to be 
an exception, and the “proof” of its find-spot was not its condition but, rather, the 
looters’ testimony and other information.

Indeed, the Italians have failed to prove on the basis of fragment matching that 
the  Euphronios  kraters  were  looted  from  Italy.  In  1973,  one  of  the  looters  who 
discovered the Sarpedon krater, Armando Cenere, led the Carabinieri art squad 
to the illicit dig site, and the investigators discovered four fragments from the rim 
of a vase.72 It was later proven that although these fragments did belong to a vase 
painted by Euphronios, they could not belong to the practically complete Sarpedon 
krater,73 nor did they belong to the Kyknos one.74 Fifteen more fragments were 
found  at  the  site  by  the  Carabinieri  in  1973,  as  Maurizio  Fiorilli,  the  lawyer 
representing the Italian state in the negotiations with the foreign museums told 
Silver.75 With information that I received from Rizzo and Maurizio Pellegrini, 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

423

I can report that this appearance was probably to distract the authorities from the 
investigation of the Sarpedon krater, for the fragments had been left at the entrance 
of the archaeological site of Cerveteri and were found by the guards who opened 
the site in the morning. When put together, the fragments formed half the base of 
a Euphronios krater with a lotus palmette towards the bottom of the krater’s body. 
During Fiorilli’s negotiations to win back the krater from White, “Italy claimed 
the fragments definitely comprised the vase’s missing foot.”76 However, after the 
negotiating team got the Kyknos krater from White, Rizzo and Pellegrini realized 
that these fragments did not fit that krater.77 In fact, this should have emerged from 
close attention to the photographs of the krater in Robertson and Bothmer’s pub-
lications. Judging only from the timing of Rizzo and Pellegrini’s discovery (non-
disclosure agreements cover the negotiations), it seems most probable that White 
had not asked experts to check for a match during the negotiations. Such inatten-
tion makes her agreement to return the object even more remarkable, and I note 
several possible scenarios below. The result is that the Italian state does not have a 
single proof that the Kyknos krater was looted from Italy in recent years.

As in the Vibia Sabina and the archaic kore cases, it is impossible to know the 
points discussed by the negotiation teams at the time, due to the confidentiality 
agreements that were signed by all of the participating members. There are two 
main scenarios. Either White believed that there was a match and so released the 
object without first checking with an archaeologist, or she did not believe the claim 
but gave up the object anyway for other reasons (see my discussion below). With 
respect to the first scenario, she may have been deliberately deceived by the claim 
that the fragments found at Cerveteri “definitely” belonged to the krater she 
possessed—Silver’s account leaves open this possibility, although the quotes that 
he directly attributes to Fiorilli and public prosecutor Ferri, earlier in the account, 
speak rather of a “hypothesis,”78 and by attributing the final claim to “Italy,” Silver 
elides the origin of the shift from a suspected match to a definite one. It is equally 
possible, however, that the Italians claimed in genuine (but mistaken) belief that 
the fragments matched White’s krater and so unintentionally deceived her.

If we follow up the second scenario, there are several possible reasons why White 
relinquished ownership of the Kyknos krater despite suspecting that the claim was 
not valid. In my view, these would be exactly the same reasons as (I believe) pre-
vailed previously over the Boston MFA in the case of the Vibia Sabina statue—that 
is,  the  weight  of  the  photographic  and  other  evidence  relating  to  the  remaining 
antiquities being claimed, which White accepted were undoubtedly looted from 
Italy. For an object linked to the most notorious antiquities dealers, as were the 
remaining nine objects, to pursue the defense of its ownership in the American 
or Italian courts would have resulted in significant negative publicity for White. 
Intense negotiations had been underway in private for 18 months and were kept 
that way after the repatriations due to the non-disclosure agreements.79 Moreover, 
there was the possibility that a public trial would produce more evidence regarding 
other antiquities in the Levy and White collection, either for Italy’s benefit and/or 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

424 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

for attracting the attention of other countries for possible claims. For all of these 
reasons, the overall risk assessment by White’s advisers must have been against the 
option of resisting this one, resulting in the delivery of all 10 claimed antiquities to 
Italy, regardless of the absence of solid proof by the Italian team that the Kyknos 
krater was looted from Italy.

An alternative possibility may be deduced from an allusive comment concluding 
an online article by Susan Mazur in 2006.80 In her article, Mazur is discussing an 
exhibition of high-quality Greek vases (with ownership disguised) in the “Phoenix 
Ancient Art” gallery in New York. She reminds us of the legal problems that the 
gallery owners, the brothers Ali and Hicham Aboutaam, had with several coun-
tries, including Italy and the United States, regarding illicit antiquities. (Indeed, 
in 2009, the Aboutaams, who were cooperating with Medici,81 would return 251 
antiquities to Italy.)82 Mazur’s article concludes:

The  fragmentary  Euphronios  is  now  owned  by  New  York  collector 
Shelby White and is on loan to the Met. It was purchased for White’s late 
husband, Leon Levy, by dealer Robin Symes who paid $1.76 million for it 
at the time. It rests on a pedestal just down the hall from the Sarpendon 
[sic] Euphronios krater, whose title of ownership was transferred from 
the Met to Italy earlier this year.
And the Italians are as interested in the Herakles-Kyknos Euphronios as 
they were in the Sarpendon [sic] Euphronios.
But  surely  Dr.  C.J.D.’s  Swiss  provenance  is  proof  enough  that  the 
Aboutaams’ Herakles-Kyknos carries no risk for the buyer? Perhaps it’ll 
turn up in Shelby White’s hoard as insurance against <the?> loss of her 
Kyknos Euphronios.83

Written  in  2006  at  the  start  of  the  negotiations  with  the  Italian  authorities, 
Mazur’s phrase “insurance against loss” is suggestive; it implies that White’s Kyknos 
krater is linked with the Aboutaams and that they should compensate White for 
her anticipated loss of the Kyknos krater. In 2006, the Aboutaam brothers were in 
their thirties, so they themselves could not have trafficked the Euphronios’ Kyknos 
krater. However, the Aboutaams’ place of origin is Beirut, and their father, Sleiman, 
was  an  antiquities  dealer  and  close  friend  of  Robert  Hecht.84  Mazur’s  comment 
opens the possibility that the Kyknos krater truly came from Beirut, with the involve-
ment not only of Dikran Sarrafian but also of Sleiman Aboutaam. This would be 
particularly ironic because, as Hoving declares regarding Hecht’s assertion of Beirut 
as the origin of the Sarpedon krater:

Beirut was the cliché provenance for any smuggled antiquity out of Italy 
or Turkey. Lebanon was as shopworn an origin as “from an old Swiss 
private collection.” Beirut was such an obvious laundry that I wondered 
why  Hecht  had  not  chosen  the  “Gessler  collection”  from  Switzerland. 
That would have sounded more authentic.85

If my guess based on Mazur’s mysterious comment is correct, Hecht mentioned 
Beirut because it was in fact the provenance of one of the Euphronios kraters. 
Sarrafian’s initial testimony about his Euphronios (it is now doubted whether 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

425

this was genuinely Sarrafian or was a testimony (a letter) forged by Hecht) stated 
that  Hecht  had  seen  the  krater  “with  Sarrafian’s  friends  in  Switzerland.”86  Such 
“friends,” with connections to Beirut, Switzerland, and Hecht, would most prob-
ably include Sleiman Aboutaam.

Ultimately, no one of these scenarios has any more real proof than another. We 
do  not  know  whether  the  Italians  intended  to  deceive  White  with  their  citation 
of fragments that “definitely fitted” the Kyknos krater; we do not know whether 
White consulted an expert on this before giving back the krater. All we can say for 
sure is that, in effect, the Italians got the Kyknos krater because White could not 
prove that it was legally traded and because those who were involved in its trade 
up to that point were involved in numerous other illicit antiquities cases. These 
points, by themselves, are not proofs.

Are there any ways leading forward to find out what really happened? Hecht, 
Hoving, and Sarrafian are now deceased (Sarrafian was killed in a mysterious car 
accident  with  his  Danish  wife  in  1977).87  We  might,  however,  have  a  chance  to 
clear  up the case by consulting the photograph archive (if it still exists) of Dieter 
Widmer,  the  professional  photographer  of  Medici,  Hecht,  and  Symes,  based  in 
Basel. In response to the Metropolitan Museum’s searching for evidence of the legal 
origin of the Euphronios’ Sarpedon krater, Widmer testified that he had received 
“fragments in an unrestored state” in early September 1971 and was paid for his 
images in October 1971.88 As we now know, the Sarpedon krater was not excavated 
until December of that year, and so it seems most likely that Widmer was referring 
to the Kyknos krater, but it remains possible that he photographed the Kyknos krater 
earlier or later. Sometimes, information on the reverse of a professional photograph 
depicting looted antiquities yields not only its date but also clues about the client 
(owner of the object) for whom the images were made.89 No one yet has examined 
the photographer and his archive.

CONCLUSION

While we suspect that many items recently on offer in the international antiq-
uities market are probably looted, or illicit in some way, actual repatriation should 
require evidence. But for these two objects, the Vibia Sabina statue and the Kyknos 
krater,  questions  remain.  Both  were  sold  by  Hecht,  through  his  “fronts”  (Bürki 
and McNall) in 1979 to the Boston MFA and to the Hunt brothers, respectively. 
However, we have no clue where these objects came from originally, and the Italian 
authorities did not have any proof that they were recently looted from Italian soil, 
although they succeeded in bringing them to Italy.

Several conclusions may be drawn. The first concerns the type of evidence in the 
repatriation process. In the two cases I have discussed, the Italians claimed a group 
of objects (13 from the Boston MFA and 10 from the Shelby White and Leon Levy 
collection). The Italians succeeded in bringing all 23 objects to Italy, despite the fact 
that they did not offer conclusive evidence for each and every object claimed; as 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

426 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

I have shown, two objects may well have been trafficked from other countries. One 
interpretation for these two doubtful objects being included among those returned 
to Italy was the cumulative force of the evidence presented for the rest of the 
antiquities claimed. It seems to be important, therefore, that these two objects were 
claimed among other antiquities for which there was concrete evidence of Italian 
origin. That is to say, the Italians, intentionally or not, by grouping those doubtful 
objects with the others in large-scale claims thereby strengthened by association 
their claim on the doubtful objects.

A second point, suggested by my analysis of why the Vibia Sabina statue and 
the Kyknos krater of Euphronios were delivered to Italy despite uncertainty about 
their origin is that evidence is not always the sole reason for the success of a claim 
made in the name of repatriation. Since we would expect that the claim on each 
object  would  be  checked  by  legal  and  archaeological  experts  on  behalf  of  the  
museums and collectors, the decisions to give the doubtful objects to the Italians seem 
to  have  weighed  reputational  factors  above  the  requirement  for  strict  evidence. 
Such factors include the odds against winning a court case involving a undoubtedly 
tainted object (even if that object was not explicitly proved to be trafficked from 
Italy), the museum and collector’s desire to keep private all that had been discussed 
in negotiations, the likelihood of negative publicity, and the fear of provoking fur-
ther claims (by Italy or by other countries) from circumstantial information that 
would be revealed if the case reached the courts. Apart from other reasons (for 
example,  the  financial  cost  of  a  long-lasting  trial),  such  concern  for  reputation 
surely helps to explain why no museum or private collector has ever tried to defend 
their acquisitions in court regarding any claims made so far on the basis of pho-
tographic evidence from the confiscated archives. In the case of the Vibia Sabina 
statue, the photographic evidence from the archives did not conclusively point to 
the  object’s  Italian  origin.  In  the  case  involving  the  Kyknos  krater,  the  absence 
even of photographic evidence from the archives did not prohibit the success of its 
claim by the Italian negotiation team. Therefore, the decisive factor in a successful 
repatriation claim has not always been the evidence.

My third conclusion is that the search for the missing proofs should be ongoing. 
Although the Vibia Sabina statue and the Kyknos krater by Euphronios seem to 
be exceptions to the rule regarding the evidential basis for claims on antiquities, 
they represent the rule in terms of illicit antiquities in the modern market. That 
is, objects whose country of origin cannot be proven are far more common in the 
antiquities market than objects for which repatriation claims can be made (on the 
basis of archival, testimonial, or other evidence). For these two cases, at least, there 
are now some unfinished lines of enquiry to follow up.

ENDNOTES

 
 

1. Silver 2010, 145–48, 169–70.
2. Watson and Todeschini 2007, 54, 66–79.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

427

9. Robert Emmanuel Jr. Hecht, Memoires, 2001 (unpublished).

5. Felch and Frammolino 2011, 253.
6. Watson and Todeschini 2007, 362.
7. Hamblin 1970, 93–94; Hoving 1993, 322; Watson and Todeschini 2007, 164–65.
8. Watson and Todeschini 2007, 156–81; Silver 2010, 197. These two studies differ regarding the 

3. Ibid., 19–22, 283.
 
 
4. Jason Felch, “Italian Case against Antiquities Dealer Ends,” Los Angeles Times, 19 January 2012, 
http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/culturemonster/2012/01/italian-antiquities-robert-hecht-case-ends.
html (accessed 4 May 2015).
 
 
 
 
number of pages discovered.
 
  10. See Felch, “Italian Case against Antiquities Dealer Ends.”
  11. Jason Felch, “Robert Hecht Jr. Dies at 92; Controversial Dealer in Classical Antiquities,” 
Los Angeles Times, 9 February 2012, http://articles.latimes.com/2012/feb/09/local/la-me-robert-
hecht-20120209 (accessed 18 May 2015). See also Bruce Weber, “Robert Hecht, Antiquities Dealer, 
Dies at 92,” New York Times, 9 February 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/10/arts/design/
robert-hecht-antiquities-dealer-dies-at-92.html?_r=0 (accessed 6 May 2015).
  12. Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer 
of Ownership of Cultural Property, 14 November 1970, 823 UNTS 231.
  13. On signing the agreement with Italy, de Montebello stated: “It is with a recognition of its insti-
tutional responsibility—coupled with the highest hopes for continued, mutually beneficial relation-
ships with our many colleagues in Italy—that the Metropolitan has concluded these negotiations, 
which affirm a solution that it first proposed in Rome in November. This is the appropriate solution 
to a complex problem, which redresses past improprieties in the acquisitions process through a highly 
equitable arrangement.” Metropolitan Museum of Art, “Statement by the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art on its agreements with Italian Ministry of Culture,” 21 February 2006, http://www.metmuseum.
org/press/news/2006/statement-by-the-metropolitan-museum-of-art-on-its-agreement-with-italian- 
ministry-of-culture (accessed 4 May 2015). Regarding the negotiations over the 10 antiquities from the 
Levy and White collection and the contradicting image presented, see Elisabetta Povoledo, “Repatriated 
Art  in  Rome,”  New  York  Times,  29  March  2008,  http://www.nytimes.com/2008/03/29/arts/29arts-
REPATRIATEDA_BRF.html?pagewanted=print (accessed 18 May 2015): “Among the pieces Ms. 
White handed over this year after long negotiations are … The Italian government has never accused 
Ms. White or Mr. Levy of any wrongdoing, and the joint statement said that Ms. White had shown 
great sensitivity and taken the initiative voluntarily to offer to return 10 items.”
  14. “[T]he Met’s director, speaks of the ‘leadership position’ the museum had taken in crafting an 
agreement with Italy, as if the relinquishing of the vase were a triumph rather than a much resisted 
capitulation.” Rebecca Mead, “Den of Antiquity: The Met Defends Its Treasures,” The New Yorker,  
9 April 2007, http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2007/04/09/070409fa_fact_mead (accessed 4 May 
2015).
  15. Povoledo, “Repatriated Art in Rome”; Felch and Frammolino 2011, 307.
  16. Tsirogiannis and Gill 2014; Fabio Isman, “L’ archeologia restituita dagli USA,” Il Messaggero, 
21 January 2012.
  17. Silver 2010, 110 (the information comes from Silver’s interview with Medici).
  18. Ibid.
  19. Tsirogiannis 2013b, 23–24, Appendix 1.
  20. Gill  and  Chippindale  2006,  315–17,  who  provide  supporting  evidence;  Watson  and  Todeschini 
2007, 187–88, who note Bürki’s admission that he was used as a “front” for Hecht; Silver 2010, 110, 132–33.
  21. Godart, de Caro, and Gavrili 2008, 190.
  22. Gill and Chippindale 2006, 314.
  23. Watson and Todeschini 2007, 354.
  24. Silver 2010, 263.
  25. Felch and Frammolino 2011, 293.
  26. Ibid.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

428 

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

  27. Waxman 2008, 293–94.
  28. Suzan Mazur, “Hi Ho Silver! – The Lost Chalice,” Scoop, 5 May 2009, http://www.scoop.co.nz/
stories/HL0905/S00036.htm (accessed 29 May 2015).
  29. Karakasi 2003, 12.
  30. Watson and Todeschini 2007, 312.
  31. Nikolas Zirganos, “Αθήνα Καλεί Γκετί: Τι διεκδικούμε απ’το Μουσείο” (“Athens Calls Getty: 
Our Claims from the Museum”), Epsilon, 21 May 2006, 58.
  32. Zirganos, in Watson and Todeschini 2007, 312.
  33. The  Italian  and  Greek  delegations,  consisting  of  public  prosecutors,  archaeologists,  and 
policemen, met twice, in July 2006 in Athens and in September 2006 in Rome. They exchanged 
digital  copies  of  the  confiscated  archives,  photocopied  transcripts  of  interrogations  (see,  e.g., 
notes 35 and 81 below), and discussed numerous cases of antiquities that could be claimed by 
each state from US public and private collections.
  34. Ibid., 321.
  35. Unpublished transcript of Symes’ interrogation by Ferri in 2003; Robin Symes, “Interrogation 
of Robin Symes,” Italian Public Prosecution, 2003, 434 (unpublished). The material, typology, and 
size of this particular kore indeed indicate that it was made on the island of Paros. Karakasi 2003, 
83, pls. 82–83. Whether it was found on Paros remains a matter of conjecture, according to Karakasi 
(ibid., 89). However, she herself assigns to Paros all the Parian kore statues or statue fragments (three 
with known find-spots and four with unknown find-spots; ibid., 160, table 7.3).
  36. Silver 2010, 110.
  37. Personal communication with the archaeologists in the case, Maurizio Pellegrini and Daniella 
Rizzo.
  38. Judge Guglielmo Muntoni wrote in his verdict about Medici: “Medici never stopped lying and 
in fact accentuated the distortion of reality.” Watson and Todeschini 2007, 277. In the same verdict, 
Muntoni wrote that Robin Symes initially lied, trying to support Medici’s “line of defence.” Watson 
and Todeschini 2007, 282.
  39. Godart and de Caro 2007, 232; English translation in Godard, de Caro, and Gavrili 2008, 190 
(emphasis added in both quotations).
  40. I explore this point from a different angle in Tsirogiannis 2013a, 4–5.
  41. Robertson 1981, 29–34; Bothmer et al. 1983, 58–61.
  42. Bothmer et al. 1983, 58.
  43. Robertson 1981, 23–34.
  44. Silver 2010, 136.
  45. Sotheby’s 1990.
  46. Silver 2010, 324.
  47. McNall 2003, 41.
  48. Silver 2010, 131; McNall 2003, 71.
  49. Silver 2010, 130.
  50. Ibid., 134.
  51. Hoving 1993, 339; Hoving, quoted in Apostolides 2005.
  52. Watson and Todeschini 2007, 388, n. 2; Silver 2010, 194–95.
  53. Hoving 1993, 339.
  54. Affidavit cited in ibid., 335.
  55. Symes, “Interrogation of Robin Symes,” 212.
  56. Jason  Felch,  “The  Met’s  Von  Bothmer  Collection  May  Be  Evidence  in  Princeton  Criminal 
Case,” Chasingaphrodite.com, 26 January 2012, http://chasingaphrodite.com/2012/01/26/the-mets-
von-bothmer-collection-may-be-evidence-in-princeton-criminal-case/ (accessed 16 June 2015).
  57. Isman, “L’ archeologia restituita dagli USA”; Tsirogiannis and Gill 2014, 474, respectively.
  58. The  absence  of  the  Kyknos  krater  from  the  Shelby  White  and  Leon  Levy  exhibition  at  the 
Metropolitan Museum may be because its acquisition (three months before the opening) was too 
recent for its inclusion or because there was no need for it to be exhibited. It is a striking fact that 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

429

none of the Attic vases selected for the Met exhibition had been “academically” exhibited elsewhere 
beforehand; rather, the Met exhibition itself initiated for those objects a prestigious collecting history. 
The Kyknos krater, however, had already been published and exhibited in several museums as part 
of the 1983–84 Hunt Collection tour. Many years later, most of these museums, too, would be found 
to have acquired illicit antiquities looted from Italy and trafficked by Medici, Symes, and other illicit 
antiquities dealers. Gill 2013; Tsirogiannis 2013b, 2013d.
  59. Chippindale and Gill 2000, 472–73.
  60. Higginbotham and Hollander 2010.
  61. Robin Pogrebin, “$200 Million Gift Prompts a Debate over Antiquities,” New York Times, 1 April 
2006,  http://www.nytimes.com/2006/04/01/arts/01gift.html?n=Top/Reference/Times%2520Topics/
People/L/Levy,%2520Leon%3Fref=leonlevy&_r=0 (accessed 13 June 2015).
  62. Godart, de Caro, and Gavrili 2008, from the Italian section nos. 5, 8, 18, 36, 37, 44, 45, 66, 70; 
from the Greek section nos. 4, 8.
  63. Hoving 1993, 339.
  64. Silver 2010, 131.
  65. Ibid.
  66. According  to  Jiri  Frel,  the  J.P.  Getty  Museum’s  first  antiquities  curator,  the  Metropolitan  
Museum had paid off a Lebanese dealer to help concoct a cover story about the provenance of the 
Sarpedon krater. Felch and Frammolino 2011, 27.
  67. Strictly  speaking,  there  is  a  third  possibility—that  Sarrafian  did  have  the  Kyknos  krater  in 
1964 and that it had been looted since 1939, therefore being illicit according to the 1939 Italian law 
but “legal” according to the 1970 UNESCO Convention. However, it is unlikely that it would have 
ended up in Beirut after being looted in Italy, Greece, or elsewhere, before being sent to Switzerland, 
especially when Hecht and Medici were involved.
  68. The point is proved by the combination of Tsirogiannis 2013c, 10, and McNall 2003, 41.
  69. Watson and Todeschini 2007, 131. The authors are mistaken, since there are no fragments from 
the Kyknos krater depicted in the confiscated Medici archive.
  70. Silver 2010, 133. Hoving states that “this krater is about fifty percent complete.” Hoving 
1993, 338.
  71. Medici asserted that it was not found in the same tomb but from another tomb in Cerveteri—
thereby admitting at least that it came from a tomb. Silver 2010, 271.
  72. Hoving 1993, 331.
  73. Ibid., 334.
  74. Hoving 1993, 339; Silver 2010, 121.
  75. Silver 2010, 265–66.
  76. Ibid., 269.
  77. These two archaeologists compared the fragments with the krater when it arrived at the Villa 
Giulia Museum.
  78. Silver 2010, 266–67.
  79. Felch and Frammolino 2011, 307.
  80. Suzan Mazur, “Hicham Aboutaam: “It Is Good to Be Scrutinized,” Scoop, 5 May 2006, http://
www.suzanmazur.com/?p=48 (accessed 17 June 2015).
  81. Watson and Todeschini 2007, 182–85, 192.
  82. Felch and Frammolino 2011, 307.
  83. Mazur, “Hicham Aboutaam.”
  84. Unpublished transcript of Marion True’s examination by Ferri; “Examination of Marion True,” 
Italian Public Prosecution, 2001, 59, 74 (unpublished).
  85. Hoving 1993, 315.
  86. Ibid., 319.
  87. Ibid., 336–37; Silver 2010, 120–21.
  88. Hoving 1993, 334.
  89. Tsirogiannis 2013d.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

430 

BIBLIOGRAPHY

CHRISTOS TSIROGIANNIS

Apostolides, Andreas. 2005. “The Network” (documentary).

Bothmer,  Dietrich,  Jane  M.  Cody,  Jiri  Frel,  Arthur  Houghton,  Catherine  Custis  Lorber,  
and  Margaret  Ellen  Mayo,  eds.  1983.  Wealth  of  the  Ancient  World:  The  Nelson  Bunker  Hunt 
and William Herbert Hunt Collections. Fort Worth and Los Angeles: Kimbell Art Museum and 
Summa Publications.

Chippindale,  Christopher,  and  David  W.  J.  Gill.  2000.  “Material  Consequences  of  Contemporary 
Classical Collecting.” American Journal of Archaeology 104: 463–511.

Felch, Jason, and Ralph Frammolino. 2011. “Chasing Aphrodite.” Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Gill, David W. J. 2013. “Context Matters: Dallas Museum of Art Takes the Initiative.” Journal of Art 
Crime 9: 81–86.

Gill, David W. J., and Christopher Chippindale. 2006. “From Boston to Rome: Reflections on Return-
ing Antiquities.” International Journal of Cultural Property 13, no. 3: 311–31.

Godart, Louis, and Stefano de Caro. 2007. Nostoi. Capolavori ritrovati. Rome: Segretariato Generale 
della Presidenza della Repubblica.

Godart,  Louis,  Stefano  de  Caro,  and  Maria  Gavrili,  eds.  2008.  Nostoi:  Repatriated  Masterpieces. 
Athens: Lucy Braggiotti Editions.

Hamblin, Dora Jane. 1970. Pots and Robbers. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Higginbotham, Lori, and Jason Hollander. 2010. “History, Not Taught in a Nutshell.” NYU Alumni 
Magazine 14: 10–11.

Hoving, Thomas. 1993. Making the Mummies Dance. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Karakasi, Katerina. 2003. Archaic Korai. Los Angeles: J.P. Getty Museum.

McNall,  Bruce.  2003.  Fun  While  It  Lasted:  My  Rise  and  Fall  in  the  Land  of  Fame  and  Fortune.  
New York: Hyperion.

Robertson, Martin. 1981. “Euphronios at the Getty.” J. Paul Getty Museum Journal 9: 23–34.

Silver, Vernon. 2010. The Lost Chalice. New York: Harper.

Sotheby’s. 1990. The Nelson Bunker Hunt Collection: Highly Important Greek Vases / The William 
Herbert Hunt Collection: Highly Important Greek, Roman and Etruscan Bronzes. New York: Sotheby’s.

Tsirogiannis, Christos. 2013a. “A Marble Statue of a Boy at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts.” 
Journal of Art Crime 9: 55–60.

———.  2013b.  “Nekyia:  From  Apulia  to  Virginia:  An  Apulian  Gnathia  Askos  at  the  Virginia 
Museum of Fine Arts.” Journal of Art Crime 10: 81–86.

———. 2013c. “Something Is Confidential in the State of Christie’s.” Journal of Art Crime 9: 3–19.

———.  2013d.  “Unravelling  the  International  Illicit  Antiquities  Network  through  the  Robin 
Symes-Christos Michaelides Archive and Its International Implications.” PhD dissertation, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X

FALSE CLOSURE? KNOWN UNKNOWNS IN REPATRIATED ANTIQUITIES CASES 

431

Tsirogiannis, Christos, and David W. J. Gill. 2014. “‘A Fracture in Time’: A Cup Attributed to the 
Euaion Painter from the Bothmer Collection.” International Journal of Cultural Property 21, no. 4: 
465–80.

Watson, Peter, and Cecilia Todeschini. 2007. The Medici Conspiracy. New York: Public Affairs.

Waxman, Sharon. 2008. Loot. New York: Times Books.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:34:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911600028X


