International Journal of Cultural Property (2009) 16:103–129. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2009 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739109090183

Property Rights of Ancient DNA:
The Impact of Cultural Importance on
the Ownership of Genetic Information
Lisa M. Elliott*

Abstract: This article examines the way property rights can be applied to DNA
from ancient sources. In particular, it examines the ways in which the legal
classification of a source as a “cultural artifact” can influence the assignment
of property rights over genetic information. I explore the discrepancy between
the legal ability to own ancient dead bodies but not nonancient dead bodies,
illustrating how dead bodies with a perceived cultural value are legally distinct
from those which are not considered to have cultural value. Second, I address
the way such cultural preservation laws fail to influence ownership rights over
genetic information. Finally, I propose a model for the best way to deal with
genetic information from ancient sources, based on the policies of the
International Ancient Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank.

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Background

In 1985, when Svante Pääbo extracted and analyzed a short segment of DNA from
a 2400-year-old mummy, he demonstrated that DNA analysis could be systemat-
ically applied to archaeological samples, and the cloning of mitochondrial DNA
sequences could allow diachronic studies of genes in the Egyptian population since
Neolithic times. Pääbo removed samples from 23 mummies and mummy frag-

*School of Law, Western New England College. Email: elliottlm1@gmail.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENT: I would like to thank Professor Barbara Noah for her multiple reviews,
insightful comments, and for encouraging creativity.

103

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

104

LISA M. ELLIOTT

ments from the Sixth Dynasty (circa 2370–2160 BC) to the late Roman period.
One sample contained DNA that could be molecularly cloned in a plasmid vec-
tor. He found that it is feasible to clone substantial pieces of genomic DNA from
ancient biological remains.1 Since Pääbo’s discovery, DNA analysis has been used
on ancient remains to establish everything from familial lines and identity to the
paleoepidemiology of disease.2 With an increasing interest in tissue analysis of
ancient remains, the Manchester Museum in Manchester, England, created the
International Ancient Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank to act as a repository and
custodian of mummy tissue for scientific research.3 The bank ensures that tissue
is made available for studies, including DNA analysis, and stores the results of
those studies in the bank’s records.4

Historically, mummies such as those with deposits in the International Ancient
Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank have been treated as cultural artifacts and there-
fore fall within the property laws of that category, though generally, there are no
property rights in dead human bodies. However, with the increasing desire to se-
quence DNA from the tissue samples of ancient remains and the development of
ancient tissue banks, it is timely to discuss how ancient samples and the DNA
chains extracted from them will be controlled under the law. Although most dis-
cussions of property rights of DNA center their attention on samples collected
from living (or recently deceased) donors, perhaps examining these rights in a
framework of antiquity will shed new light on the conversation.

Paradise and Andrews recognized the unique legal and ethical problems of
extracting and analyzing DNA from ancient (or otherwise culturally important)
artifacts in their 2007 article, “Tales from the Crypt.” Paradise and Andrews ex-
amined current biological research being performed on the remains of historical
figures, like the Medicis, Abraham Lincoln, Billy the Kid, Albert Einstein, and the
like.5 (In this article, I often address ancient DNA or ancient bodies as being
culturally important or culturally relevant. By cultural importance, I mean that
within a particular culture, there is a significance assigned to the artifact that
makes it particularly valuable to that culture above any other.) Paradise and An-
drews examined current biological research being performed on the remains of
historical figures, like the Medicis, Abraham Lincoln, Billy the Kid, Albert Ein-
stein, and the like. They analyzed potentially applicable federal statues, case law,
and codes and guidelines from 26 professional organizations and societies infor-
mative to the field of biohistory (an area that combines historical and biological
research).6 They used the legal and ethical precedents to propose ways to avert
abuses in five areas they identified as important: (1) promotion of research, (2)
access to samples or artifacts, (3) scientific integrity and dissemination of results,
(4) informed consent and rights of participants, and (5) avoidance of conflicts
of interests.7 In all, though their summaries of various codes of ethics provide
excellent professional guidance in the field of biohistory, there have been little to
no binding legal precedents for dealing with ancient DNA.8 Little scholarship
has been written with such a unique perspective in mind. In this article, I have

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

105

taken up part of the problem revealed by Paradise and Andrews’s work, and I
explore how concepts of property and ownership influence the legal policies gov-
erning DNA analysis of artifacts that have a perceived cultural value.

B. Defining the Problem

Commonly, tissue to be used for research purposes is taken from a living donor
and stored in a tissue bank. The ability for researchers to return to those samples
for further data collection often requires informed consent from the donor, or in
cases where the donor has recently died, the next of kin must provide informed
consent.9 Similarly, museum and universities often house tissue samples such as
bones, preserved skin, and hair samples from archeological excavations and an-
thropological studies. Yet, in most circumstances, genetic (and other) research can
be performed on these remains without seeking the informed consent of the dead
person’s descendants.10 This is because the identities of the remains are likely un-
known, descendants are unknown, and even cultural affiliation is difficult to es-
tablish because ancient ancestral groups often give rise to a number of different
descendent groups.11 When researchers do not know anything about the donor or
their culture, then it is difficult to attribute any preference with regard to the treat-
ment of their tissue or of their body, which is compounded by the broader issue
that researchers working with these samples generally have no legal obligation to
report how they treat the samples, especially with regard to ancient remains and
their possible descendents.12 But, when a descendent can be traced, or a body has
a distinguishable cultural affiliation, the descendent or representatives of the cul-
ture often become a proxy decision maker for the deceased.13 In this capacity, they
may proscribe scientific research. Effectively, when the identity of the body is es-
tablished, genetic research can only be performed on samples taken from the body
when the proxy decision maker consents to the testing.

When a proxy decision maker cannot be established and remains may be tested
without any informed consent, or when a proxy decision maker grants consent
for genetic testing, the proxy’s custodianship of the remains does not equate to
ownership of the DNA sequence extracted from those samples. It would be a mis-
take to assume that DNA from these samples automatically follows the custodi-
anship of the body and thus becomes the property of the proxy decision maker,
because DNA sequences obtained from living donors are currently considered by
the law to be something between private property and common heritage.14

The purpose of this article is to analyze the legal and ethical issues of applying
property rights to ancient DNA when the DNA was extracted from samples of
cultural artifacts, like those from Egyptian mummies housed in the International
Ancient Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank. In other words, when DNA sequences are
extracted from ancient remains, who should control rights to those sequences for
research, preservation, and commercial purposes?15 First, this article will trace the
interests of property rights in the human body, both of nonancient and ancient

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

106

LISA M. ELLIOTT

remains. Part of this includes analyzing whether proxy decision making over re-
search samples (by an individual or by a cultural representative) implies a proxy
ownership over the remains. Second, it will look at whether assigning property
rights over the DNA sequence of ancient remains to proxy decision makers is in
the best interest of the deceased themselves, their descendant communities, and
humanity as a whole.

II. THE BODY

A. Property Interests in Dead Bodies

The legal status of dead bodies first developed in the common law of seventeenth-
century England when grave robbing threatened the dignity of the deceased. The
value in grave robbing prior to the introduction of anatomical studies in medi-
cine, was not in the body itself. Rather, grave robbers would loot graves for the
burial clothing or other items interred with the deceased.16 Grave robbers would
exhume a recently interred body to sell to medical colleges, anatomists, and sur-
geons for use in medical training. Prior to anatomical study as a part of medical
training, dead bodies had little (if any) commercial value.17 With no value in a
dead body, English law historically saw no point in recognizing a property right in
a human corpse.18

But the definition of property is dynamic. What was not property in the past is
capable of becoming property in the future. Before the development of travel by
air, a landowner’s right to use the airspace above his property extended to what
would be ordinary use and enjoyment of his land.19 In 1997, the English court
reconsidered the no-property principle in Dobson v. North Tyneside Health Au-
thority.20 A deceased’s next of kin brought suit against (1) the North Tyneside
Health Authority for failing to diagnose the brain tumor of the deceased and (2)
the Newcastle Area Health Authority for failing to preserve the brain of the de-
ceased. The coroner in the matter requested a postmortem examination. and dur-
ing the autopsy, the deceased’s brain was removed and fixed in paraffin, to later
potentially be used for research purposes. Although English common law main-
tained a no-property rule in human bodies, the plaintiff sought relief for conver-
sion.21 When the court of appeal reviewed the case, the court recognized two
exceptions to the historic no-property rule: First, there was a right to possession
of a body for the purpose of burial or disposition. Second, “the lawful exercise of
work or skill so dealt with a human body or part of a human body in a person’s
lawful possession such that it has acquired some attributes differentiating it from
a mere corpse awaiting burial” possibly creates a property right in the body.22 So
although English common law still finds no proprietary rights in the human body,
if the brain has been removed from the body and prepared on slides, those slides
and the brain matter they contain are capable of becoming property.23

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

107

The development of anthropological institutes and cultural museums also re-
flects the changing conception of property rights of bodies. Museums all over the
world that house collections of mummies and biological material are now facing
requests (if not lawsuits) to return these collections to their country of origin (or
to a representative of their cultural affiliation) who believe they have an intrinsic
proprietary interest in the material.24 So how does the law treat ancient dead bod-
ies with respect to proprietary rights? Is there a fundamental difference in the pro-
prietary right of ancient dead bodies versus nonancient dead bodies? Jurisdictions
differ when answering these questions.

English law’s recognition of property rights created through the application of
the work or skill exception (established in Dobson and reaffirmed in Kelly) does
not directly state how ancient dead bodies can become property. But, it is evident
from those cases that the courts were not hesitant to create a property interest in
a body. Their creation of the work or skill exception meant that the dissection or
preservation of dead bodies for exhibition or teaching purposes was a sufficient
investment of the scientists’ time, energy, and knowledge deserving of a legal right
in the body itself.25 Then, in 2004 the Human Tissue Act (HTA 2004) codified the
work or skill exception of the common law and gave special attention to ancient
dead bodies. Under the HTA 2004, consent is the fundamental principle govern-
ing the storage and use of any material that contains human cells.26 Appropriate
consent must be obtained to both store and use this material, with several excep-
tions, the foremost being that consent is not required to store and use material
where the body or bodily material comes from a person who died 100 years or
more before the HTA 2004 became effective.27 The specific language in the HTA
2004 exception indicates the English legislature had a conscious desire to distin-
guish between a mere (nonancient) dead body and what could be considered an
ancient dead body, for the purpose of establishing legal interests in the body.

American jurisprudence, in contrast, is more willing to find an interest in a
dead body, though the reality of this right is that it only exists as a quasi-property
right to facilitate burial. It will not support a claim of conversion. In this sense, it
is similar to the English no-property principle. In Ritter v. Couch, descendants of
those buried in a town burial place brought suit to prohibit the removal of their
ancestors from their graves. The Ritter court tried to distinguish American juris-
prudence from its English counterpart by articulating that although old English
law does not recognize the body as property, American courts do recognize a quasi-
property right over which the relatives of the deceased have rights.28 Yet, we find
from other common law cases, the courts are only willing to extend that right for
the limited purpose of seeing that the body is decently interred or disposed of.29
In Culpepper v. Pearl Street Building, Inc., parents brought an action for conver-
sion when their son’s body was mistakenly cremated.30 On review, the Supreme
Court of Colorado explicitly held that a property right did not exist in a dead
body that would support an action for conversion. Because the quasi-property
right arose to facilitate recovery for the desecration of a dead body, the plaintiff

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

108

LISA M. ELLIOTT

avoided needing to prove emotional distress. In reality, the primary concern of the
right was not injury to the dead body itself, but to the emotional pain suffered by
surviving family members. Thus, the courts created a nonproprietary right in dead
bodies to ease the burden of family members who would otherwise have to ap-
pear in court to prove emotional distress.31 The American possessory interest for
burial is clearly a limited legal interest, distorted by an American court system
applying the term quasi-property. Even under health code laws, next of kin are
prevented from exhuming of bodies without legal approval from the state or an-
other state-regulated health authority.32 As such, it is evident that “property” rights
in the body exist only as illusory rights.

The differences between English and American law is really only one of lan-
guage. English law, in essence, finds no property rights in a body unless there has
been an application of work or skill. American law, on the other hand, finds a
quasi-property right in the body but only for the purposes of burial. This quasi-
property right is a legal fiction and toys with language to give an impression of
ownership where none actually exists. The resistance in American law to conform
to English law and mimic the language of the no-property principle (even ac-
knowledging of the right to possession for burial) is puzzling. Nonetheless, Amer-
ican law may have distinguished itself from English law in characterization but
not entirely in principle. The question then remains, do exceptions exist in Amer-
ican jurisprudence, like those in the English common law, that create a nonfictional
proprietary right in dead bodies or materials removed from the dead body similar
to the work or skill exception? There appears to be a gap in both case law and
scholarship on this point. The primary case that addresses the question of pro-
prietary rights of human tissue samples is Moore v. Regents of the University of
California, though Moore was a living supplier of tissue rather than a dead body.
John Moore underwent treatment for hairy-cell leukemia at the University of
California’s Medical Center. On October 20, 1976, Moore’s physician removed
Moore’s spleen. Thereafter, Moore’s physician conducted extensive research on
Moore’s cells, from which they were able to establish a cell line and applied for a
patent of the cell line. Moore’s physician then negotiated agreements for the com-
mercial development of the cell line and products to be derived from it. Moore
brought suit for conversion, claiming a property right in his excised cells, but the
court refused to find a proprietary interest in his cells due to a lack of precedent
establishing a proprietary right in human cells and policy concerns that hold sci-
entific research as a socially useful activity.33

Because Moore explicitly found there was no property right in excised tissue
from living suppliers, it is easy to assume that there also is no property right in
excised tissue from dead bodies. However, this would be a mistake. Although Amer-
ican case law does not distinguish between tissue samples of living suppliers and
tissue samples of dead bodies in the application of proprietary interest, the law
does discriminate between dead bodies with cultural value and dead bodies with-
out cultural value. Thus, tissues excised from culturally relevant bodies may be

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

109

capable of becoming property, whereas tissues excised from nonculturally rele-
vant dead bodies cannot.

In State v. Redd, the Utah Supreme Court discussed Utah Code Ann. § 76–

704(1)(a)(1995), which provided:

A person is guilty of abuse or desecration of a dead human body if the
person intentionally and unlawfully:

Removes, conceals, fails to report the finding of a dead body to a local

law enforcement agency, or destroys a dead body or any part of it.

The court found that the legislature intended the statute to “protect partial re-
mains of many people buried long ago in crude graves such as pioneers, war dead,
or victims of horrendous accidents or crimes” whether those crimes or accidents
occurred in the near or far past.34 In other words, there is no distinction based on
the age of remains. Under this law, remains from the far past and remains from
the near past have equal protection from desecration.

In 2004 the U.S. Supreme Court decided Bonnichsen v. U.S., also known as the
Kennewick Man case, which relied, in part, on the Native American Graves Pro-
tection and Reparation Act (NAGPRA) and the Archaeological Resources Protec-
tion Act (ARPA).35 ARPA was created in 1979 after a century of congressional
concern for the protection of archaeological resources.36 It attempted to make
“abundantly clear” statutory language prohibiting the trafficking of valuable ar-
chaeological resources and to preserve these resources, so that through the coop-
eration of government authorities, the archaeological community, and private
individuals valuable information could be exchanged.37 However, the ARPA granted
no property rights over these resources. For example, in Matter of Shivers, Shivers
sought the return of 50 metal tokens which he found in the Angelina National
Forest. They had been seized by the government under warrant suggesting he had
violated federal law by removing archaeological resources from a national forest.38
In 1990, the U.S. government enacted the NAGPRA, which explicitly classified Na-
tive American human remains as cultural objects and vested control over those
remains in the descendants of the Native Americans.39 The Bonnichsen Court held
that in order to fall under the protection of NAGPRA, human remains must bear
some relationship to a presently existing tribe, people, or culture to be “Native
American” and in the present case, 9000-year-old remains found off the waters of
Kennewick, Washington, could not be classified as such. The cultural group to
which he belonged either died out or was “unknowable.”40 This case exemplifies
that though the U.S. Code does not differentiate between ancient dead bodies and
nonancient dead bodies, the courts are willing to recognize a proprietary interest
in dead bodies that are culturally important.41 However, often the very fact that
the remains are ancient renders them culturally important.

English and U.S. courts use different terms to discuss interests of dead bodies and
biological samples taken from those bodies, and rights to possession in both juris-
dictions vary in degree from a mere duty to bury through complete dominion and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

110

LISA M. ELLIOTT

control. Nevertheless, each regulation, statute, act, or case attempts to allocate pro-
prietary and nonproprietary rights that ensure the dignity of the deceased and are
allocated to those who generally best represent that interest. Yet, who has the best
representative interest when the dispute is between religious tenets and scientific
inquiry? The United Kingdom has developed a proprietary right that protects the
work (or application of skill) created by scientists, researchers, or preservationists
over the religious beliefs of the nation or culture associated with particular re-
mains, regardless of whether those remains are ancient or not. For example, when
scientists apply their “skills” to tissue, such as creating slides of tissue samples, the
U.K. courts have routinely found that those scientists own those slides and like-
wise own the tissue on those slides. Yet, the individual from whom the tissue orig-
inated has no right of ownership over that excised tissue even though it is their
biological matter. The United States, likewise, protects scientific inquiry into nonan-
cient remains by (1) refusing to give property rights to living donors of excised
tissue, (2) allowing the commercialization of information extracted from that tis-
sue, and (3) repeatedly affirming that only a nonproprietary right of custody for
burial purposes only exist for the next of kin of a recently deceased body. How-
ever, when the remains are ancient (as opposed to a recently deceased dead body),
the United States’ model, NAGPRA, promotes religious sanctity above scientific
value, but only if the remains are Native American. If a Native American descen-
dent can be located, the remains become the property of that descendent, but when
a descendent cannot be located, tribal or cultural affiliation is treated as a descen-
dent and becomes the proxy owner of the remains.

I think the reason why science is given a paramount right probably has to do
with social norms. As a whole, society is seeking answers about their origins and
their future, which they feel can be answered by scientific inquiry. Yet, NAGPRA is
an exception to that desire to drive forward scientific inquiry. Why? Perhaps it
represents a legacy of guilt based on the actions of our colonist ancestors. In other
words, the positions in NAGPRA suggest that no profound leap in our under-
standing of our biological origin (as humans) gained through the study of these
remains can justify the disrespect of cultural values of Native American tribes,
who have endured near annihilation through the writing of this country’s history.
Because any ancient remains discovered in the borders of the United States are
likely to be the ancestor of a Native American tribe, NAGPRA serves to preserve
the values of a minority class who occupy a unique place in our country’s past.

B. Assignment of Property Rights Over the Body

The establishment of cultural affiliation is a complex issue. In the Kennewick Man
case, the remains were over 9000 years old and the right to proxy decision making
was contested. Native American tribes claimed ownership of the remains under
NAGPRA, while scientists argued NAGPRA did not apply. The court examined
both historical records and genetic analysis to establish the final claim of right to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

111

Kennewick Man’s remains and found that the remains were so old, and the infor-
mation about his era was so limited, that they could not reasonably conclude Ken-
newick Man “shared any special and significant genetic or cultural features with
presently existing indigenous tribes, people, or cultures.”42 Thus, legally Ken-
newick Man’s remains were not Native American and therefore did not fall within
the meaning of NAGPRA. Because NAGPRA is the only act in American jurispru-
dence that bestows a clear proprietary right in dead bodies, Kennewick Man’s re-
mains by default fell within ARPA and were protected as an item of national heritage
though they do not belong to any particular person.43 In essence, the U.S. govern-
ment became the proxy decision maker of Kennewick Man’s remains under 16
U.S.C.A. §470dd, which allowed the U.S. government to control the future of the
remains.44 Establishing a property right based on nationality became the default
for a failure to unearth a better cultural identity or lineal descendant who could
become a proxy decision maker for the remains.

Yet, even national identity is not a bright-line category. The issue becomes more
complex when the remains are found close to national borders. In the Kennewick
Man case, the court observed a limitation in NAGPRA, finding that the term “Na-
tive American” could not equate to any remains that predate European settlers but
only to remains that relate to a “tribe, people or culture that is indigenous to the
United States” (emphasis retained).45 Further, the court found that the “United
States” is a political entity that dates back to 1789, and the use of the present tense
(“that is indigenous”) referred to tribes, peoples, and cultures that exist in modern
time but not those that may have existed thousands of years ago but do not exist
now.46 In contrast to the statutory definition of “Native American,” the statutory
definition of “Native Hawaiian” under NAGPRA means “any individual who is a
descendant of the aboriginal people who, prior to 1778, occupied an exercised
sovereignty in the area that now constitutes the State of Hawaii” (emphasis added).47
Thus, Congress has consciously chosen to define Native American as it relates to
the borders of a political entity rather than a geographic location as they do when
defining Native Hawaiian.

This is a common position taken by nations after World War II, and it is one of
cultural nationalism; objects belong within the physical boundaries of the nations
within which they are found or with which they are historically associated (i.e.,
Egyptian mummies belong in Egypt, Greek marble statues belong in Greece, etc.).48
This has been the guiding principle behind the development of international leg-
islation affecting cultural property, including UNESCO and UNIDROIT.49 Yet, na-
tionalism is limited by political stability. When borders change, nations change.
Nationality becomes a fluid term that appeals to the emotions, while the epithet
of nationality overshadows other forms of heritage (such as religious heritage).
The Egyptian mummy stirs images of the pyramids and pharaohs who began to
expand the borders of the nation we now know as Egypt, a country that we be-
lieve to have unchanging geographic borders and that will, in 50 years, remain just
as we left it on the map in 2009. Yet, Egyptian mummy means so much more. It

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

112

LISA M. ELLIOTT

represents the religious past of pharaonic Egypt, where preservation of the dead
ensured a chance in the afterlife. Does present-day Egypt—a geographic region
inhabited first by Rmt Kmt (the people of Kemet); invaded by the Greeks, Ro-
mans, and then a succession of Islamic rulers; also experienced a French occupa-
tion and a British occupation; and is now 90% Muslim—have the best right to a
pharaonic mummy?50 In other words, does national identity represent the best
means for establishing cultural heritage? This is not to say nationality and cultural
identity should be mutually exclusive. Each serves an important function in the
development of the other. It is surely pragmatic to use nationality as a default
when a better cultural identity is impossible to ascertain. And, using nationality
has its benefits. When artifacts are culturally unidentifiable but nonetheless have
historical value, using nationality generates historical pride and unity among those
who live within the borders of the nation. Although it is doubtful that many Egyp-
tians want to be identified exclusively as “the county with all the pyramids and
mummies,” there is a sense of honor in the recognition of the marvels of ancient
Egyptian ingenuity.

The case of Otzi (also known as the Iceman) reveals the danger of using na-
tionality as a default tool for assigning property rights. Otzi’s remains were found
100 meters from the border between Austria and Italy in 1991, and the contro-
versy over the ownership of his remains became an international dispute as dis-
cussed by Brenda Fowler in her book, Iceman. Otzi (named after the region in
which he was found) was approximately 5200 years old when he was discovered.
This means he had lived during the late Neolithic or early Copper Age, before the
nations of today were established. Historically, Tyrol (the area where Otzi was found)
had been part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.51 But after the empire’s defeat in
World War I, Austria ceded the portion of Tyrol south of the main Alpine ridge to
Italy, and the 1919 Treaty of Saint-Germain established the new border between
Austria and Italy along the watershed of the Austrian river Inn and the Italian
river Adige.52 Mussolini sponsored the settlement of thousands of ethnic Italians
in the region in 1935, but in 1939, on the eve of World War II, Hitler (who re-
spected Mussolini’s desire to hold onto the region) allowed the population to ac-
cept German citizenship and emigrate to Germany or keep Italian citizenship. At
least 70% of the population voted to leave. In 1969 Austria and Italy agreed on a
set of terms for a largely autonomous province called Sudtirol (South Tyrol) in
German and Alto Adige (High Adige) in Italian. By 1991, the 440,000 people liv-
ing in the province were 65% German, 26% Italian, and 4% Ladin. When the dis-
covery of Iceman occurred, both Austria and Italy sought ownership, and the
governor of Austrian Tyrol stressed that either way one looked at it, the discovery
had been made in Tyrol. In other words, although Austria and Italy argued for
their own proprietary rights, Otzi was most likely the cultural heritage of neither,
but rather a nation that did not exist at the time he was discovered.53

The issue was resolved when both Austrian and Italian officials agreed to survey
the land where Otzi was discovered make a final determination whether the land

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

113

belonged to Austria or Italy. Though the 1919 Treaty of Saint-Germain had de-
fined the border between Austria and Italy, it had done so only in language. Be-
tween 1921 and 1923, an international team mapped out the watershed between
the Inn and the Adige rivers and set the border stones. However, because the moun-
tains were covered in part by glaciers, the commission directed that where the
land was concealed by ice, a straight line would be drawn between the two closest
identifiable border points. In 1990, the surveyors determined the site where Otzi
was discovered indeed lay on the Italian side of the border by 101 yards. However,
much to everyone’s surprise, the glacier melt in the preceding 70 years had shown
more of the true watershed, which swung out more than 100 meters to the west of
the actual border and around the site of the find. Otzi had actually lain inside the
Austrian river Inn’s watershed. Had the original surveyors seen the present view,
the border would have been marked accordingly, and Otzi would now be the prop-
erty of Austria.54

The battle for Otzi demonstrates the potential for controversy when using na-
tionality to establish property rights, but is there a better way when a lineal de-
scendant or cultural representative cannot be found? Probably not. If rights were
not based on nationality but through a system that only found rights in individ-
uals, only the next of kin (or in the case of ancient remains, a lineal descendant)
would have a right. Because the courts have established that a lineal descendant or
cultural representative already has the best right, nationality only becomes proxy
when either of the two cannot be located. If a descendent or tribe (or cultural) is
unknowable from the remains, and the nation in which the discovery was made is
eliminated from eligibility, then who remains to make decisions with regard to the
future of the remains? I offer no better solution to the problem, but challenge
academic and legal community to devise a methodology that accounts for the flu-
idity of international or even interstate borders in a more appropriate and just
manner than measuring how far valuable ancient remains lie from a series of boul-
ders or GPS markers.

III. GENETIC INFORMATION

A. Property Interests in DNA

Establishment of proprietary rights of dead bodies, ancient dead bodies, and bio-
logical tissue samples from both demonstrates the fluidity of state, federal, and
even international law. Cultural importance transforms a dead body that is not
capable of becoming property into a cultural artifact that is capable of becoming
property in any number of ways. Yet a new wrinkle in the fight for property rights
over dead bodies has emerged, DNA. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is found in
the nuclei of cells, where it stores the blueprint for the human body. However, a
small amount of DNA can also be found in the mitochondria, where it is called

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

114

LISA M. ELLIOTT

mitochondrial DNA, or mtDNA.55 Each strand of DNA or mtDNA contains a
sequence that differs among individuals. By analyzing these sequences, it is pos-
sible to trace paternity, determine predisposition to disease, or even establish phys-
ical traits of an individual. Thus, DNA can be scrutinized in two forms: physical
and informational. The genetic information (made visual by a computer printout
of the base pair sequences) is distinct and separate from the genetic samples them-
selves (i.e., blood, cheek swabs, etc.)56 Because it is probably legitimate to analo-
gize genes in their physical form to other physical parts of the body, property rights
might follow the same pathways.57 But can someone have a property right to ge-
netic information? Maybe.

Currently American courts seem to prefer using terms like privacy and confi-
dentiality as opposed to property when considering the legal rights in connection
with DNA.58 However, with the increasing commercial value of genetic informa-
tion, two models have emerged as proposals for finding legal rights: the common
heritage model and private property model. Generally speaking, DNA sequences
have been extracted from tissue supplied by living and willing donors, but does
the treatment of property rights change when the sequences are extracted from
tissue of ancient remains, specifically cultural artifacts? Should the proxy decision
makers of ancient remains, like those of Kennewick Man or of an Egyptian mummy,
“own” not only the remains and any samples taken from them but also the genetic
sequence extracted from them? Or, in contrast to the American and British law on
bodies, should cultural relevancy have no bearing on DNA ownership?
1. Common Heritage

The common heritage of mankind is an international legal concept that conveys equal
property interests to all people.59 It includes four characteristics: (1) No country can
appropriate for itself the territory in question; (2) all states share responsibility for
managing the territory; (3) all states share in the benefits from exploitation of the
territory or its resources; and (4) all countries must use the territory for exclusively
peaceful purposes.60 The United Nations has applied the common heritage doc-
trine to deep seabeds, Antarctica, the Moon, other celestial bodies, and certain world-
wide historical sites.61

Proponents argue that the human genome is also within the common heritage
of mankind, like other natural resources. There are two reasons for regarding the
human genome as common heritage: We all share a common ancestry through
the genome, and human beings have almost all of their genes in common (hu-
mans share over 99% of their genes with one another).62 UNESCO stated, “The
human genome underlies that fundamental unity of all members of the human
family . . . in a symbolic sense, it (the human genome) is the heritage of human-
ity.”63 Although there would be no property right in a particular person or insti-
tution, any individual, company, or country could benefit from it, provided each
abided by a moral obligation vis-à-vis that resource. For example, anyone is able
to conduct research on the ocean’s seabeds, yet each person has a moral obligation

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

115

to use the oceans fairly and wisely, and to protect them for future use.64 In this
sense, benefits are shared throughout the world.65

However, there are fundamental problems with the common heritage doctrine
reasoning. First, the common part of the common heritage reasoning is ambigu-
ous. There is no single, identifiable thing that constitutes the human genome. Al-
though humans share most of their DNA, SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms)
vary from person to person.66 Also, there is not a single identifiable set of people
who inherit the human genome. Although human beings share 99% of their genes
with each other, they also share 98.5% of their genes with chimpanzees, 95% with
other primates, and a great deal with other species, including fruit flies and yeast.67
Thus, if only 1.5% of the human genome is actually common to humans, could
the remaining 98.5% also be considered the common heritage of chimpanzees? It
makes little sense to say a nonhuman species has any property interest in DNA.
Second, it may be misleading to label the human genome as heritage. To say
something is inherited in a legal sense, there must be (1) an identifiable thing (or
set of things) to be inherited, (2) an identifiable person (or set of persons) to
inherit, and (3) an identifiable person (or group of people) from which the thing
is handed down (whether by intention or default).68 I have already discussed con-
cerns of what constitutes the human genome. Yet, if the genome can be identified
as a particular thing, then DNA patenting would be, for all practical purposes,
illegal without the consent from every human being, because every human being
would have a property interest in the genome.69

In connection with (but distinguished from) the common heritage model, pro-
ponents of a family property standard argue that DNA by its nature carries a sig-
nificant amount of a family’s genetic secret, and it is reasonable to regard a family’s
genetic makeup as a shared property interest (though not necessarily with all of
humanity).70 A person acquires his or her genetic profile because of the biological
membership in a given family. If any exclusionary right were given to any partic-
ular family member with respect to his or her genetic data, it would have the ef-
fect of converting what was part of the commons of the family’s property into
“private” property.71 In essence, no one person could have an exclusive right to
their genes, because it is only by virtue of their membership within a particular
family that their particular gene sequence exists. Yet, this does not bar granting a
type of property right to families exclusive of the rest of humanity, because within
each family there are patterns shared by the members, yet unique to the rest of
humanity.72

In either the common heritage model or the family property model, DNA se-
quences (extracted from modern sources) are not and cannot be owned by an
individual. So, does a DNA sequence that has been extracted from an ancient cul-
tural artifact qualify it for an exception to that rule? Both American and British
laws have exceptions to the no-property principle in the human body when the
body is ancient because of its cultural importance. But will the cultural impor-
tance of ancient DNA sequences save it from the common heritage doctrine and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

116

LISA M. ELLIOTT

create an exception that would allow culturally important DNA to be the subject
of property rights?

Interestingly, the common heritage language was actually first codified in rela-
tion to the protection of cultural property. Formulated during the Hague Con-
vention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,
the preamble of the UNESCO treaty states that “damage to cultural property be-
longing to any people whatsoever means damage to the cultural heritage of all
mankind, since each people makes its contribution to the culture of the world.”73
Although the treaty does not recognize an explicit property right in other’s cul-
tural heritage, it articulates an interest of all people in protecting and preserving
the cultural heritage of others.

In essence, the cultural property of any culture impacts the cultural (common)
heritage of us all, and therefore each person has an interest (though a nonpropri-
etary one) in ensuring that property survives. It seems, therefore, that ancient DNA
sequences (along with the ancient samples themselves) represent a cultural prop-
erty that has contributed to the cultural heritage of humankind and thus should
be protected under the common heritage doctrine in the same manner that DNA
sequences from living donors would be protected. Consequently, culturally im-
portant DNA is not saved from the no-property principle of the common heri-
tage doctrine. Yet, under the common heritage reasoning, even culturally important
bodies could not be the subject of property rights, because we all have an interest
in preserving all artifacts of the past; but this is not fully in harmony with Amer-
ican and British law, which does allow bodies to become the subject of (some)
property rights.

By using cultural importance to test each of these theories, it is easy to see a
disconnection between the treatment of DNA and the treatment of bodies. Why
would the legal, scientific, and academic communities create policies for the treat-
ment of genetic information in a way that differs so greatly from the policies for
the treatment of bodies, when both the samples and bodies are culturally impor-
tant? Specifically, why should cultural importance protect a property right in the
body, but not the blueprint to the body? Perhaps the law has simply not yet evolved
to answer questions about genetic information. Without a solid foundation of legal
precedent over nonancient DNA, it is difficult to imagine how the cultural impor-
tance of ancient DNA could impact the assignment of property rights over it. Per-
haps asking questions like these before a clear legal standard has been established
will help inform the development of legislation over nonancient DNA, which in
turn will make property rights over ancient DNA apparent.

The case for applying the common heritage doctrine is substantial considering
the variety of uses of ancient DNA in current research. The use of genetic data has
greatly increased the world’s knowledge of evolution and, in some instances, has
helped to reconstruct history by confirming migratory patterns, the spread of dis-
ease, or by showing the effect of diet on human populations.74 These data are not
limited to information extracted from DNA sequences in the modern population.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

117

The International Ancient Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank has studied the genetic
markers of Egyptian mummies to understand the origins and migration patterns
of ancient populations.75 Individual familial memberships are being tested with a
range of markers to derive the genetic fingerprints of supposedly related individ-
uals.76 Paleoepidemiology of parasitic diseases like schistosomiasis (caused by a
species of Schistosoma, which is also known as Bilharzia), which affects 200–300
million people worldwide today, and the human immune system’s response to it
were analyzed using DNA.77

In the case of Otzi the Iceman, a battery of tests were run to discover more
about his origin, including the isotope composition of his bones, intestinal con-
tents, and mtDNA analysis.78 Mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother
and is extremely useful in tracking ancestry through the female line. Researchers
extracted molecules from Otzi’s surviving tissue, and although most of the DNA
was degraded, the researchers were able to amplify some mtDNA. The sequence
showed that the mitochondrial type of Otzi fits into the genetic variation of con-
temporary Europeans, and it was most closely related to mitochondrial types de-
termined from central and northern European populations.79 When this sequence
was combined with other information obtained by examining his tools and bone
fragments, it was determined that Otzi lived within the Alpine valleys of central
Europe, roughly 60 kilometers from the site where he was found.80

In 2007, the Supreme Council of Antiquities in Egypt, lead by Dr. Zahi Hawass,
extracted usable nuclear DNA from KV60A, a mummy thought to be Hatshepsut.
The Council sought genetic confirmation that this was indeed the pharaoh queen
through the comparison with two other sources, Thutmose I and Ahmose Nefer-
tari (Hatshepsut’s maternal grandmother.)81 It turned out that the nuclear DNA
extracted from Thutmose I was unusable, but the mtDNA from Ahmose Nefertari
had remained relatively intact. The lab is still completing its work, but initial re-
ports indicate that the mtDNA being sequenced from KV60A is most likely that of
Hatshepsut.

The DNA sequences extracted from Otzi, Hatshepsut, and the other Egyptian
mummies may be a part of the cultural heritage of the world that all people are
morally obligated to protect, in the same manner that they are obligated to pro-
tect DNA sequences from modern sources (according to the common heritage
doctrine). Yet, the moral obligation proposed in the doctrine does not have the
power of legal obligation. It is reasonable to assume that, without a controlling
authority (international laws, treaties, or agreements), the ability for a person or
entity to misuse genetic information is at least a moderate threat. Likewise, a moral
obligation (rather than a legal obligation) fails to ensure protection against the
areas of abuse identified by Paradise and Andrews (described earlier), namely, fair
access to samples, informed consent and rights of participants, and the avoidance
of conflicts of interests. We see this problem today with the protection of cultur-
ally important bodies under the doctrine. Though the bodies represent a valuable
resource that should be shared among all peoples, their value has actually made

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

118

LISA M. ELLIOTT

them a commodity, which has led to concealment by research institutions and
governments. This hinders proper research and fails to provide rights for the par-
ticipants. It would be difficult to imagine the treatment of ancient DNA would
follow any other pattern.

If international courts adopt the common heritage doctrine to protect DNA
sequences, it will likely apply without discrimination based on the age of the se-
quence, just as it applies to bodies. Moreover, similar to the treatment of bodies,
genetic information will likely be unfairly distributed among researchers and gov-
ernments. The protection of ancient DNA has no greater or lesser interest to the
cultural heritage to humankind than does the protection of DNA from modern
sources, because the kind of information that can be extracted from DNA is equal
across the age of the DNA. The only limitation for mining useful information
from any kind of DNA is the physical sample size of the DNA. In the case of an-
cient sources, obtaining a sample size large enough to sequence may be problem-
atic because of degradation over time; yet modern sources also can face the problem
of adequacy due to a variety of circumstances, including problems with contam-
ination or collection. Accordingly, ancient DNA would have no special protection
under the doctrine. Rather, DNA sequences (both ancient and nonancient) could
be the property of none, but the resource of all. One can only hope that this in-
formation will be used for the benefit of humanity rather than being exploited as
it has with bodies.
2. Private Property

In contrast to the common heritage model, proponents of the private ownership
model argue for a property right in genetic information that follows other models
of property rights including the ability to buy, sell, and transfer the right.82 This is
usually accomplished through a patent.83 As of 2008, over 4000 human genes were
patented, totaling almost 20% of the roughly 24,000 genes shared among hu-
mans.84 The current policy in the United States, as set forth by Congress, the Pat-
ent and Trademark Office, and the federal court system, allows the patenting of
human genes as similar to any other chemical found in nature. Patents can be
issued for “anything under the sun that is made by man” but not for “laws of
nature, physical phenomena, and abstract ideas.”85 The isolation and purification
of DNA sequences means that a generally nonpatentable phenomenon (DNA) is
turned into a patentable one. Yet, this method only creates a property right in the
DNA sequence for the patent owner, who does not necessarily coincide with the
DNA supplier. Thus, only those who have the technical ability to isolate and pu-
rify DNA have the ability to transform the sequence into property. But this may
not entirely roadblock DNA ownership by the individual.

Private property rights in genetic information may be established two ways:
(1) Property rights of genetic information follow similar rights over other kinds
of research and discovery and are associated with intellectual property (as with
patent protection), or (2) property rights over genetic information follow rights

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

119

assigned to tissue ownership because the genetic information is sourced from
the tissue. But, these two paths do not have to be mutually exclusive. If intellec-
tual property rights are merged with tissue ownership, individuals (and not just
research entities) may establish a claim of right over DNA sequences. Although
this may add to the complexity of the system (though not unduly), I believe it is
necessary to create the most appropriate and just result for both the individual
and society as a whole.

Ownership of a purified and isolated gene, such as BRCA1 (also known as “the
breast cancer gene”), was established through a patent protection following the
research and discovery of that gene.86 Yet, humans are composed of thousands of
genes. Naysayers believe that institutions and research facilities will eventually eat
up the patent rights for every human gene, and though this may be true, it does
not mean that there will be no self-ownership over the contents in the individuals’
own cells. What we are really talking about when we discuss the private property
right of our DNA is not the individual genes themselves, but the unique pattern
in which they exist in our bodies. As I stated earlier, DNA as a whole shares 99%
of its components with other species, and of the 1% remaining that all humans
share, only a tiny bit distinguishes each person as an individual. It stands to rea-
son that people should not be able to own the entire code, given that it is so vastly
shared, but why should an individual not be able to have a property interest in the
sequence or mutations that is unique to him or her?

Genes like BRCA1, or those for eye and hair color, height, and so on, are not
unique. They are common genes in the portion of DNA unique to humans. Yet,
it is the combination of those genes that are unique to the individual. This is the
pattern the individual should have a right to protect. In other words, individuals
do not have the right to protect individual genes themselves, but they do have an
interest in the protection of the particular order of those genes and their unique
genetic variations. This may eventually translate into an individual’s right to own
his or her genetic fingerprint and thus prevent the duplication of that particular
sequence of genes by any other entity. The value (which will be different for
every person and may be economic, scientific, etc.) would then be protected by
the same laws as those that govern personal property.87 The individual parts of
shared DNA would belong to the common, but the whole sequence (composed
of unique variations alongside the standard shared genes) could belong to the
individual.

Researchers, however, have an interest in protecting their scientific work. This
includes methods of isolation, purification, and modification, but should not in-
clude the naturally occurring gene sequence itself.88 So far, the courts have been
unwilling to apply property rights over naturally occurring DNA sequences for
the individual. Rather, they have imagined a property model based only on patent
law and intellectual property, and have ignored claims by individuals who believe
they are entitled to some right over the sequence derived from their tissue sample.
But through their reasoning, it is evident that the courts support some kind of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

120

LISA M. ELLIOTT

right to property over the DNA code. Though the courts seem to draw a bright
line against the patent protection argument for the individual (and patent protec-
tion of naturally occurring DNA coding), they have not yet stated a bright-line
conclusion prohibiting an individual’s right to ownership of his or her DNA se-
quence. Because there is no case precedent on an individual’s right to own his or
her naturally occurring DNA sequence, it is difficult to theorize how ancient DNA
would measure up against the standard. Thus, the only comparison that can be
made at this time is against the intellectual property standard.

So, will the design of the intellectual property–based standard be appropriate
for classifying property rights in ancient DNA? Because analyzing any DNA trans-
forms it (through the isolation and purification requirement of patent law) into
something that can become property according the current U.S. case precedents,
ancient DNA would easily fall into this model. Genes from ancient DNA would
become the property of any institution or research facility that makes a unique
gene discovery and seeks a patent on that gene. An individual’s attempt (or like-
wise a cultural representative’s or proxy decision maker’s attempt) to establish a
proprietary right over the sequence is still probably in vain unless in-home isola-
tion and purification kits are developed. Accordingly, the DNA sequence extracted
from Egyptian mummies or from Kennewick Man will not be protected as the
personal or private property of Egypt or a lineal descendent, but rather as patent
or intellectual property for institutions and researchers.

The intellectual property model for DNA ownership, as it currently stands, al-
lows for genetic ownership but weights the scales heavily in favor of research insti-
tutions and large (well-funded) companies at the sacrifice of individuals’ autonomy.
Yet, there is more than the symbolic value of autonomy at stake. The value of human
genetic codes (particularly ones of desirable mutations) is real and can be quanti-
fied. When research institutions begin to patent genetic mutations that are unique
to a particular individual, then there is a threat that the institution may own or con-
trol parts of the individual. If, sometime in the future, the courts and Congress allow
a property right in genetic sequences that are accessible by individuals, then indi-
viduals could protect themselves against what could essentially be genetic slavery by
research institutions who control the use of, experimentation with, and commer-
cialization of any genetic code contained in a tissue sample they posses, regardless
of the individuals’ wishes.

The application of the common heritage model or the private property model
works equally as well with respect to ancient and nonancient DNA. Under the
common heritage model, there can be no particular owner. Under the private prop-
erty model, as it currently stands, anyone can theoretically be an owner, though
the reality is that only well-funded research entities are able to meet the patent
qualifications. Accordingly, cultural importance would have little legal impact on
the application of property rights over DNA. Although this model would allow
for descendants, tribes, or nations to establish a proprietary right over the genetic
information, the road to acquiring this proprietary right raises the spectrum of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

121

concerns of Paradise and Andrews. If a system is set up that is exceedingly un-
equal in the manner in which property rights are assigned, then concerns will re-
main about the integrity and dissemination of the results, as well as the consent
and rights of participants. A free-for-all pool of genetic information, from which
anyone can obtain a property right if they have isolated and purified a gene, ne-
glects to recognize a descendant’s birthright to that genetic information or a tribe’s
shield for religious reasons. In other words, the intellectual property approach fails
in nearly the same manner that the common heritage doctrine fails. Under both
doctrines, the individual’s preference is lost, usually to the wealthy and resourceful
nation or research institution.

B. Assignment of Property Rights: A Model

The International Ancient Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank of the Manchester Mu-
seum bridges the channels between the special treatment of cultural artifacts and
the rights over genetic information. Depositors to the bank must verify that they
possess legal title in the remains and thus are the legal proxy decision makers re-
garding the possession and control of the body.89 The museum agrees that the
samples remain the property of the depositor, and in turn, the depositor grants
the museum license to use the samples in the bank.90 However, the agreement
notes:

If commercially useful developments result from any use of the sam-
ple(s) of mummy tissue in the Bank, the Parties agree to notify each
other promptly negotiate on fair and reasonable terms and conditions
independent of this Agreement.

Through this agreement, the property interest created by being a proxy decision
maker over a piece of cultural heritage may be transferred to the genetic informa-
tion extracted from the item. It appears that proxy decision makers have, at min-
imum, a future property interest in any commercially useful (genetic) development
based on their interest in the ancient remains. Thus, if researchers using tissue
from the bank purify and isolate a gene or sequence of genes, they do not have a
sole right to commercialization from that research. The proxy decision makers (or
individuals) have, in essence, a property right in genetic information because they
have a property right in cultural property.

This model allows for research that benefits modern populations (e.g., re-
search regarding Bilharzia), it provides a benefit or compensation to the DNA
supplier (or proxy) in addition to the researcher, and it preserves the dignity of
dead bodies. Thus, this model addresses the policy concerns for proprietary rights
of ancient DNA in a workable and fair form. Rights over ancient DNA are not
be limited to a single person, but rather are weighed by a scale accounting for a
variety of legal and ethical rights. Returning to the original problems posed by
Paradise and Andrews, the model of the International Ancient Egyptian Mummy

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

122

LISA M. ELLIOTT

Tissue Bank averts the abuses facing professional organizations in this field.
The model promotes research, allows scientists access to samples, promotes sci-
entific integrity and dissemination of results, accounts for the rights of all par-
ticipants, and attempts to avoid conflicts of interest. The one obstacle the bank’s
model does not address is how to best establish the property rights over the
remains.

Any future legislation mirroring this model should account for a property right
over the body before addressing any rights over DNA. Accordingly, if a claimant is
found to have no right to the body, then they would be barred from establishing
a claim to the genetic information within that body. Only when a property right
to the body is recognized could a claimant pursue a right over the genetic infor-
mation. However, the rights are not concurrent but rather sequential; the right
over genetic information must be given separate consideration after a finding of a
right over the body. In the case of DNA supplied by a living donor, the donor’s
right to possess or control his own body is sufficient to establish a right over his
body, and therefore the donor could pursue a claim over his own genetic infor-
mation. In the case of DNA that was taken from an already deceased person (or a
taken from person who was living but now is deceased), there must be a right to
possess, control, or own the dead body under current law before a claim of right
over the genetic information from that body could be found.

This model combines the idealism of both the common heritage doctrine and
the private property model by ensuring equal access for all but also recognizing
that an investment in the genetic analysis of remains should not be without com-
pensation. More importantly, though, it preserves the autonomy of the individual
who retains a voice in the use of the remains.

IV. CONCLUSION

This article has confirmed that a proprietary interest can exist in ancient DNA
when the DNA was extracted from a cultural artifact, just as property rights may
exist in DNA extracted from modern sources. However, because the current law
is in flux regarding the application of property rights over modern supplied DNA,
establishing who has the best right of property over ancient DNA remains tricky.
Although there is a general no-property principle for dead bodies, the cultural
importance of ancient dead bodies establishes a proprietary right over the re-
mains. This right may go to a descendent, or an entire nation. However, because
DNA is from an ancient source does not grant it an exception to the property
rules based on its cultural importance alone. Under the common heritage doc-
trine, all DNA is subject to a no-property principle, whether it is ancient or not.
Under the intellectual property model, DNA can be the subject of property only
once it is in a nonnaturally occurring form. In other words, neither ancient DNA
nor modern DNA can be property until it has been subjected to purification and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

123

isolation, which by its nature limits the pool of people who are capable of trans-
forming body tissue and its DNA into property. Thus, these theories recognize
no distinction or special needs of ancient DNA. This is where the theories are
incomplete. As a new science, policies and theories concerning genetic analysis
are shortsighted and limited in scope. They have failed to account for variety in
the forms of DNA and instead have created generic policies that do not address
peculiarities in the various disciplines. However, models like those of the Inter-
national Ancient Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank provide a more useful proto-
type for how ancient DNA should be treated to protect against as many abuses
as possible. As a consequence of the inconsistencies in the law, the dispute of
who has the best interest to any DNA has yet to be resolved. Whether the best
interest in ancient DNA (like that of ancient bodies) rests in the nation or in the
culture, I leave to be answered by another.

Although the scope of this article was to be limited to the property rights of
ancient DNA, it is impossible to achieve a thorough analysis while current policy
for controlling DNA from nonancient sources remains ambiguous. Models like
the donor agreement for the International Ancient Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank
show that research, preservation, and commercialization of ancient DNA do not
have to be sacrificed. Society may derive the maximum benefit, while the dignity
of the remains can be preserved. Thus, this model serves as an excellent place to
begin a discussion of ways in which the individual’s right can be protected with-
out abandoning the interests of mankind as a whole.

ENDNOTES

1. Pääbo, “Molecular cloning.”
2. See, generally, Lambert-Zazulak et al., “Mummy Tissue Bank”; Miller et al., “Palaeoepidemi-
ology of Schistosoma Infection”; Handt et al., “Molecular Genetic Analyses”; David, “Disease in Egyp-
tian Mummies”; “Is she or isn’t she? Mummy lab working to ID pharaoh queen,” CNN. 具http://
edition.cnn.com/2007/TECH/science/12/24/mummies.dna.ap/index.html典 (December 24, 2007)
accessed November 11, 2008.

3. Lambert-Zazulak,“Mummy Tissue Bank”; Manchester Museum Committee,“Policy Document.”
4. Lambert-Zazulak, “Mummy Tissue Bank,”44–; Manchester Museum Committee, “Policy Doc-

ument,” 21.

5. Paradise and Andrews, “Tales from the Crypt,” 223–299.
6. Paradise and Andrews, “Tales from the Crypt s,” 225.
7. Paradise and Andrews, “Tales from the Crypt,” 225.
8. Paradise and Andrews, “Tales from the Crypt,” 226.
9. See, e.g., Nwabueze, Biotechnology and the Challenge of Property.
10. Holm, “Privacy of Tutankhamen,” 447.
11. Holm, “Privacy of Tutankhamen,” 442. “If we for instance considered the cultural affiliation
of a Viking warrior buried on the west coast of Norway there are several present-day cultures that
may claim affiliation (present-day Norway, Iceland, Faero Islands, but also Orkney, Shetland, Northum-
berland, Yorkshire, Normandy and general British culture.) All of these could lay a reasonable claim
to have a culture which in a significant way has a link to Viking age culture on the west coast of
Norway. There seems to be no principled way of deciding who has the best claim.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

124

LISA M. ELLIOTT

12. Holm, “Privacy of Tutankhamen,” 446; Bahn, “Do Not Disturb?.”
13. Holm, “Privacy of Tutankhamen,”441. “This is the idea behind the American legislation gov-
erning ‘repatriation’ of Native American remains and cultural artifacts from American museums,”
through the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA).

14. Hardcastle, Law and the Human Body, 17.
15. I specifically am limiting my argument here to a Western legal model as opposed to a more
encompassing and complex matrix of Western and non-Western systems. I have assumed away most
of the substantial complexities involving the question of how direct or strong a link need be between
the remains and the cultural representative for brevity. Rather, for this argument, I presume a link
between the two is relevant to the question, and the relationship is defined by a western understand-
ing as demonstrated by our legal codes, statutes, and case law.
16. See generally Hardcastle, Law and the Human Body, 25.
17. See generally, Nwabueze, Biotechnology and the Challenge of Property, 17.
18. The no property principle has been affirmed as recently as 1999 in R v Kelly, [1999] Q.B. 621
(defendant was charged with the theft of approximately 35 human body parts from the Royal Col-
lege of Surgeons. The court found that while there historically has been no property rights in corpses,
when a corpse has undergone the application of work or skill it acquires value and becomes prop-
erty. The implication is that a corpse which has not undergone such an application, still falls under
the no-property principle.) See Hardcastle, Law and the Human Body, 25.

19. Nwabueze, Biotechnology and the Challenge of Property, 13.
20. Dobson v. North Tyneside Health Authority, [1997] 1 WLR 596.
21. Dobson v. North Tyneside Health Authority, 602.
22. Dobson v. North Tyneside Health Authority, 600; Hardcastle, Law and the Human Body, 29, 46,
40. The second exception also applies to biological materials when they have been separated from
the body by work or skill. Australia follows a similar model in the application of property rights, but
the United States are split in the Circuits. Some courts have grated constitutional protection for the
next of kin, but the majority have declined to find that property rights exist in biological materials
separated from a dead body. The U.S. decision to recognize property rights to protect dead bodies
and the biological materials separated from them is not dependent on the work or skill exception.
Rather, it stems from the Due Process Claus of the 14th amendment of the U.S. Constitution. The
Dobson work or skill exception was also reaffirmed in Kelly.

23. In 2004, the U.K. court heard In re Organ Retention Group Litigation, [2004] EWHC 644(Q.B.)
103. (claim of action for wrongful interference with a body brought by a group of parents with
children who had died while at Alder Hey Children’s Hospital in Liverpool, England. The children
had their organs or tissues removed and retained after a postmortem examination, unbeknownst to
the parents.) The court reviewed the facts of the case against Kelly and Dobson and found that while
tissue removed during a postmortem examination is capable of being subject to the rights of pos-
session through the ‘work or skill’ exception, and while parents have a right to possession of a body
for burial, the parents “have no right of burial and possession of organs lawfully removed at post
mortem and retained.”
24. Mayhood, “Owning up to History,” The Columbus Dispatch. 具http://www.dispatch.com/live/
content/science/stories/2008/04/22/sci_whose_bones.ART_ART_04-22-08_B6_9A9UMP7.html?
sid⫽101典 (April 22, 2008). accessed November 17, 2008.

25. Hardcastle, Law and the Human Body, 32.
26. Human Tissue Act, 2004, c.30, § 53. “Relevant material” (1) In this Act, “relevant material”
means material, other than gametes, which consists of or includes human cells. (2) In this Act, ref-
erences to relevant material from a human body do not include—(a) embryos outside the human
body, or (b) hair and nail from the body of a living person.

27. Human Tissue Act, 2004, c.30, § 45 (2)(a) Bodily material is excepted if—(a) it is material
which has come from the body of a person who died before the day on which this section comes
into force and at least one hundred years have elapsed since the date of the person’s death.

28. Ritter v. Couch, 76 S.E. 428 (W.Va. 1912), 430.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

125

29. Whitehair v Highland Memorial Gardens, 327 S.E. 2d 438 (W.Va. 1985), 441.
30. Culpepper v. Pearl Street BLGD Inc. 877 P. 2d 877 (Colo. 1994).
31. Culpepper v. Pearl Street BLGD Inc.
32. Dougherty v Mercantile Safe Deposit and Trust Company, 387 A.2d 244 (Ct.App. 1978). “The
dead are to rest where they have been lain unless reason of substance is brought forward for dis-
turbing their repose;” Franklin Foer Exhumation, Slate http://www.slate.com/id/1093 (May 10, 1998)
accessed November 17, 2008. “Generally, citizens can apply to their state’s attorney general for per-
mission to exhume family members for any reason, and requests for reburial are usually automati-
cally granted. And the state can exhume a body when it deems a death suspicious and improperly
investigated.” For example, the Alabama Code 1975 § 22–9A-16 Authorization for final disposition
states, “Authorization for disinterment and reinterment shall be required prior to disinterment of a
dead body or fetus as prescribed by rules of the board.” This authorization is addressed in the Ala-
bama Administrative Code, Alabama State Board of Health Department of Public Health AL ADC
420–7–1–13 which states, “(2) Authorization for disinterment as required in Ala. Code 1975, § 22-
9A-16(g), shall be handled as follows: (a) The funeral director, or person acting as such, who intends
to disinter a body must file a notice of disinterment with the State Registrar or the local registrar in
the county in which the body is buried to indicate that he or she will abide by the Rules and Reg-
ulations of the State Board of Health which govern the disinterment, transportation, and disposi-
tion of dead human bodies. (b) The State Registrar or local registrar shall provide a statement to the
funeral director, or person acting as such, that the required notice has been filed. The acceptance of
the notice by the State Registrar or local registrar does not establish a legal right to disinter a body,
but only indicates that the appropriate notice to follow the Rules and Regulations of the State Board
of Health has been filed by the person carrying out the disinterment.”

33. Moore v Regents of the University of California 793 P. 2d 479 (Cal. 1990), 489–493. “. . . the laws
governing such things as . . . dead bodies deal with human biological materials as objects sui generis,
regulating their disposition to achieve policy goals rather than abandoning them to the general law
of personal property.”

34. State v. Redd 992 P. 2d 986 (Utah 1999), 1165. (Defendants were charged with abuse or des-
ecration of a dead human body for allegedly disinterring human bones from an ancient Native Amer-
ican burial site near Bluff, Utah. Defendants were charged under §76–704(1)(a) of the 1995 Utah Code.)
35. The 9000-year-old remains, designated Kennewick Man, were found near Kennewick, Wash-
ington. The man lived in a period that not only predates recorded history, but the community in
which he lived has not been identified with any singular present-day Native American tribe. Native
Americans who currently inhabit Washington, Idaho, and Oregon now claim rights to the remains
and seek to prevent scientists from examining the remains so that they may be immediately buried
because of religious and social traditions. Prior to Bonnichsen v. U.S. 367 F.3d 864 (9thCir. 2004) the
Na Iwi O Na Kupuna O Mokapu v. Dalton court held that human remains are explicitly classified as
cultural items under NAGPRA. 894 F.Suppl. 1397 (D.Haw. 1995), 1406. (Native Hawaiians sued the
Secretary of the Navy under NAGPRA for the return of remains recovered and inventoried by a
museum at the Secretary’s request.)

36. Ades, “The Archaeological Resources Protection Act.”
37. 16 U.S.C.A. § 470aa(b).“The purpose of this chapter is to secure, for the present and future ben-
efit of the American people, the protection of archaeological resources and sites which are on public
lands and Indian lands, and to foster increased cooperation and exchange of information between gov-
ernmental authorities, the professional archaeological community, and private individuals having col-
lections of archaeological resources and data which were obtained before October 31, 1979.”

38. Matter of Shivers, 900 F. Supp. 60 (E.D.Tex. 1995).
39. 25 U.S.C.A. § 3002a1. “(a) Native American human remains and objects: The ownership or
control of Native American cultural items which are excavated or discovered on Federal or tribal
lands after November 16, 1990, shall be (with priority given in the order listed)—(1) in the case of
Native American human remains and associated funerary objects, in the lineal descendants of the
Native American. . . .”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

126

LISA M. ELLIOTT

40. Bonnichsen v. U.S.
41. For the United States, it appears that cultural relevancy extends only to Native American bod-
ies. This is likely due to the deficit of any other type of ancient artifact left by a thriving civilization
before the colonization by the Europeans, while cultural relevant items are abundant in European,
African, and Asian countries. (i.e., Egypt, Greece, Italy, etc.)

42. Bonnichsen v. U.S., 882
43. Bonnichsen v. U.S., 882; See generally, Ray,“Native American Identity,”89–154; Harry and Kanehe,
“Asserting Tribal Sovereignty,” 27–55; Willie, “Kennewick Man—Mission Accomplished?” 301–322.

44. 16 U.S.C.A. § 470dd.
45. Bonnichsen v. U.S., 878 referencing Native American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act

(NAGPRA) 25 U.S.C.A. § 3001(9)

46. Bonnichsen v. U.S., 878
47. NAGPRA § 3001(10)
48. Merryman, Thinking About the Elgin Marbles, 162; 4,500-Year-Old Mummies Discovered in
Chile, Sify 具http://sify.com/news/fullstory.php?id⫽14704621典 (June 28, 2008) accessed November 17,
2008. The remains uncovered are believed to be those of a 4500-year-old member of the Chinchorro
culture. The Council of National Monuments of Chile seeks to have the mummies declared as ar-
chaeological patrimony of humanity by UNESCO. Row over mystery mummy, BBC News 具http://
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/997588.stm典 (October 29, 2000) accessed November 17, 2008;
mummy found by Pakistani police is believed to be that of 2500-year-old royalty. Iran has demanded
the mummy from Pakistan based on a claim from the Iranian Cultural Heritage Organization, which
says it will take legal action under UNESCO to get the mummy back.

49. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) was founded in
1945 and serves as a laboratory for ideas as well as a standard setter to forge universal agreements on
emerging ethical issues. About UNESCO. 具http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID⫽3328&URL_
DO⫽DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION⫽201.html典 accessed November 17, 2008. The International In-
stitute for the Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT) examines needs and methods for modernizing,
harmonizing and coordinating private and in particular commercial law between states and groups
of states. UNIDROIT, 具http://www.unidroit.org/dynasite.cfm?dsmid⫽84219典 accessed November 17,
2008; These organization have combined efforts to prevent illicit traffic in cultural objects through
several conventions: UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects and
the 1970 UNESCO Convention. See Prott, “UNESCO and UNIDROIT.”

50. During Pharaonic Egypt, the natives would refer to their land as Kemet (spelled Kmt) and
thus would refer to themselves as the people of Kemet (Rmt Kmt). Cheikh Anta Diop, Origin of the
Ancient Egyptians. 具http://www.africawithin.com/diop/origin_egyptians.htm典 accessed November 17,
2008.

51. Fowler, Iceman, 58.
52. Fowler, Iceman, 58.
53. Fowler, Iceman, 61.
54. Fowler, Iceman, 61.
55. Mitochondria are structures within cells that convert the energy from food into a form that
cells can use. Small amounts of DNA, known as mitochondrial DNA or mtDNA is found in mito-
chondria. mtDNA only spans about 16,500 DNA base pairs, which is a fraction of the total DNA
found in cells.

56. Nwabueze, Biotechnology and the Challenge of Property, 180.
57. Nwabueze, Biotechnology and the Challenge of Property, 172.
58. Nwabueze, Biotechnology and the Challenge of Property, 171.
59. See, generally, Tenenbaum, “A World Park in Antarctica,” 112.
60. Tenenbaum, “A World Park in Antarctica,” 114.
61. Sturges, “Who Should Hold Property Rights,” 247.
62. Resnik, The Human Genome.
63. UNESCO, Universal declaration on the human genome

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

127

64. Resnik, The Human Genome, 201.
65. For more information on benefit sharing and genetics, see Knoppers, “Population Genetics

and Benefit Sharing,” 212–214.

66. Resnik, The Human Genome, 200.
67. Resnik, The Human Genome, 201.
68. Resnik, The Human Genome, 200; See also Ossorio, “Human Genome as Common Heritage,”

425–439.

69. Resnik, The Human Genome, 200.
70. Nwabueze, Biotechnology, 178.
71. Nwabueze, Biotechnology, 178–79.
72. I have yet to find a pragmatic approach to application of this theory.
73. UNESCO, Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property.
74. See, generally, Rollo et al., “Microbial Ancient DNA,” 111–119; Wayne et al., “Full of Sound

and Fury,” 457–477.

75. David, “Disease in Egyptian Mummies,” 1760–1763.
76. David, “Disease in Egyptian Mummies,” 1760–1763.
77. Lambert-Zazulak, “Mummy Tissue Bank.”
78. Handt et al., “Molecular Genetic Analyses,” 1775–1778; Muller et al., “Origin and Migration

of the Alpine Iceman,” 862–866.

accessed November 17, 2008

79. Handt, “Molecular Genetic Analyses,” 75.
80. Muller et al., “Origin and Migration of the Alpine Iceman,” 75.
81. Johnson Lewis, Hatshepsut DNA evidence, About.com 具http://womenshistory.about.com/od/
hatshepsut/a/dna_evidence.htm典 accessed November 17, 2008; Is she or isn’t she? CNN. So far the
results have not been published in a reputable peer reviewed scientific journal.
82. See, generally, Navigenics, Gene Patents, 具http://www.navigenics.com/policies/GenePatents/典
83. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Patents, 具http://www.uspto.gov/go/pac/doc/general/#patent典
accessed November 17, 2008. “A patent for an invention is the grant of a property right to the
inventor, issued by the United States Patent and Trademark Office. Generally, the term of a new
patent is 20 years from the date on which the application for the patent was filed in the United
States or, in special cases, from the date an earlier related application was filed, subject to the
payment of maintenance fees. U.S. patent grants are effective only within the United States, U.S.
territories, and U.S. possessions. Under certain circumstances, patent term extensions or adjust-
ments may be available.

“The right conferred by the patent grant is, in the language of the statute and of the grant itself,
‘the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling’ the invention in the
United States or ‘importing’ the invention into the United States. What is granted is not the right
to make, use, offer for sale, sell or import, but the right to exclude others from making, using,
offering for sale, selling or importing the invention. Once a patent is issued, the patentee must
enforce the patent without aid of the USPTO.”

84. Malinowski, “Legal Limitations on Genetic Research,” 47.
85. Diamond v Chakrabarty, 447 US 303 (1980), 309. (Chakrabarty filed a patent application re-
lating to the invention of a bacterium that was a human made, genetically engineered bacterium.
The court concluded it was not a product of nature and therefore permitted the patent.)

86. See, generally, Murray, “Owning Genes,” 231–257.
87. I believe the full value in owning our own genetic code is yet to be realized. However, with the
ongoing research in cloning, reprogenetics, medical treatments, and the like, the value of ownership
by the individual will become more obvious with time. Of course, aside from a monetary value,
individuals may begin to see their genetic makeup has having spiritual or psychological value as
well. As our genes become more and more associated with our identity (just as our names, our
social security numbers, or even our email addresses), there most likely be a demand that they are
protected, secure, and inaccessible to anyone but the individual.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

128

LISA M. ELLIOTT

88. This is why the patent office of the United States has limited patent protection over the ge-
nome (it is a naturally occurring phenomenon). See note 78. Isolation of BRCA1 and BRCA2 (also
known as the breast cancer genes) led to a court battle between two groups of researchers, Myriad
Genetics and OncorMed. OncorMed had been granted a patent covering a BRCA1 allele, which while
similar to the sequence used by Myriad was also slightly different because of differences in naturally
occurring polymorphisms of the normal BRCA1 gene. Thus, naturally occurring differences be-
tween the DNA of individuals result in many minor differences in the DNA sequence of a given
gene. See Murray, “Owning Genes,” 235.

89. Manchester Museum Committee, “Policy Document,” 21. “At the time of transfer of sam-
ple(s) of mummy tissue to the Museum, the Depositor shall verify to the Museum by documentary
evidence that legal title to the sample(s) vests in the Depositor and that the transfer has been duly
authorized.”

90. Manchester Museum Committee, “Policy Document,” 21. “The Museum acknowledges that
the sample(s) of mummy tissue shall remain the property of the Depositor unless otherwise agreed
in writing. The Depositor agrees to grant the Museum a royalty free, non-exclusive, world-wide li-
cense to use the sample(s) of mummy tissue for the maintenance of the Bank.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ades, Stephanie Ann. “The Archaeological Resources Protection Act: A New Application in the Pri-
vate Property Context.” Catholic University Law Review 44 (1995): 599–630.

Bahn, Paul. “Do Not Disturb? Archaeology and the Rights of the Dead.” Journal of Applied Philoso-
phy 1, no. 2 (1984): 213–225.

David, A. R. “Disease in Egyptian Mummies: The Contribution of New Technologies.” Lancet 349
(1997): 1760–1763.

Fowler, Brenda. Iceman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.

Handt, O. et al. “Molecular Genetic Analysis of the Tyrolean Ice Man.” Science 264 (1994): 1775–1778.

Hardcastle, Ron. Law and the Human Body: Property Rights, Ownership and Control. Portland, OR:
Hart, 2007.

Harry, Debra, and Le’a Malia Kanehe. “Asserting Tribal Sovereignty Over Cultural Property: Moving
Towards Protection of Genetic Material and Indigenous Knowledge.” Seattle Journal for Social Jus-
tice, 2006: 27–55.

Holm, Soren. “The Privacy of Tutankhamen—Utilising the Genetic Information in Stored Tissue
Samples.” Theoretical Medicine 22 (2001): 437–499.

Knoppers, Bartha. “Population Genetics and Benefit Sharing.” Community Genetics 3 (2000): 212–214.

Lambert-Zazulak, Patricia. “The International Ancient Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank at the Manches-
ter Museum.” Antiquity 74, no. 283 (March 2000): 44–48.

Lambert-Zazulak, Patricia I., Patricia Rutherford, and A Rosalie David. “The International Ancient
Egyptian Mummy Tissue Bank at the Manchester Museum as a Resource for the Palaeoepidemio-
logical Study of Schistosomiasis.” World Archaeology 35, no. 2 (2003): 223–240.

Malinowski, Michael. “Legal Limitations on Genetic Research and the Commercialization of Its Re-
sults.” American Journal of Comparative Law 54 (2006): 45–65.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183

PROPERTY RIGHTS OF ANCIENT DNA

129

Manchester Museum Committee. “Policy Document for the Strategic Development of the Manches-
ter Museum.” The Manchester Museum Reports and Policies. http://www.museum.manchester.ac.uk/
aboutus/reportspolicies/ (June 2004) accessed September 24, 2008.

Merryman, John Henry. Thinking About the Elgin Marbles: Critical Essays on Cultural Property, Art
and Law. Cambridge, England: Kluwer Law International, 2000.

Miller, R. L., et al. “Palaeoepidemiology of Schistosoma Infection in Mummies.” British Medical Jour-
nal 304 (1992): 555–556.

Muller, Wolfgang, et al. “Origin and Migration of the Alpine Iceman.” Science 302 (2003): 862–866.

Murray, John. “Owning Genes: Disputes Involving DNA Sequence Patents.” Chicago: Kent Law Re-
view 75 (1999): 231–257.

Nwabueze, Remingius. Biotechnology and the Challenge of Property: Property Rights in Dead Bodies,
Body Parts, and Genetic Information. Burlington, United Kingdom: Ashgate, 2007.

Ossorio, Pilar. “The Human Genome as Common Heritage: Common Sense or Legal Nonsense?”
The Journal of Law, Medicine and Ethics 35, no. 3 (2007): 425–439.

Pääbo, Svante. “Molecular cloning of ancient Egyptian mummy DNA.” Nature, April 1985: 644–645.

Paradise, Jordan, and Lori Andrews. “Tales from the Crypt: Scientific, Ethical, and Legal Consider-
ations for Biohistorical Analysis of Deceased Historical Figures.” Temple Journal of Science, Technol-
ogy and Environmental Law 26 (2007): 223–299.

Prott, Lyndel V. “UNESCO and UNIDROIT: A partnership against trafficking in cultural objects,
UNESCO Uniform L R, 1996–1.” Uniform Law Review 1 (1996): 59–71. 具http://unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0010/001050/105002E.pdf典 accessed on April 30, 2009.

Ray, S. Alan. “Native American Identity and the Challenge of Kennewick Man.” Temple Law Review
79 (2006): 89–154.

Resnik, D. “The Human Genome: Common Resource but not Common Heritage.” Proceedings of the
Frontis Workshop on Ethics for Life Scientists. Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2003. 197–210.

Rollo, Franco, Isoline Marota, M. Spigelman, and R.P. Ambler. “How Microbial Ancient DNA, Found
in Association with Human Remains, Can Be Interpreted.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society Biological Sciences 354 (1999): 111–119.

Sturges, Melissa. “Who Should Hold Property Rights to the Human Genome: An Application of the
Common Heritage of Mankind.” American University Law Review 13 (1997): 219–261.

Tenenbaum, Ellen. “A World Park in Antarctica: The Common Heritage of Mankind.” Virginia En-
vironmental Law Journal 10 (1990): 109–136.

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Convention for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. Paris: UNESCO, 1954.

———. Universal declaration on the human genome and human rights. Paris: UNESCO, 1997.

Wayne, Robert, Jennifer Leonard, and Alan Cooper. “Full of Sound and Fury: The recent history of
ancient DNA.” Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 30 (1999): 457–477.

Willie, Burt. “Kennewick Man—Mission Accomplished?” Idaho Law Review 43 (2006): 301–322.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090183


