'Cultural  Heritage'
or 'Cultural  Property'?
Lyndel V. Prott*  and Patrick J.  O'Keefe**

Is  it  time  for  law  and  lawyers  to  recognize  that  the  term  'cultural
heritage' is rightfully  superseding that of 'cultural property'? To our
minds the answer  can  only  be 'Yes'. Our  argument  in brief  is first,
that  the  existing  legal  concept  of  'property'  does  not,  and  should
not  try  to, cover  all that  evidence of  human  life  that  we are  trying
to  preserve:  those  things  and  traditions  which  express  the  way  of
life  and  thought  of  a  particular  society;  which  are  evidence  of  its
intellectual and spiritual achievements. On the other hand, they can
be  encompassed  by  the  term  'heritage'  which  also  embodies  the
notion  of inheritance and handing on. This is central to our  second
objection  to  the existing  legal  concept  of  property;  that  'property'
does not incorporate concepts  of duty  to preserve and  protect.

1  What are We Discussing?

The cultural heritage consists of manifestations  of human life which
represent a particular view of life and witness the history and validity
of that  view. The expression  of culture  or evidence of a way of  life
may  be  embodied  in  material  things  such  as  monuments  or  sites.
Archaeological sites and human-built structures are clearly accepted
as important evidence of the past to be preserved. Thus the remains
of ancient cities, complexes of historical character and urban ensem-
bles which show the evolution  of modern  life  or a now  abandoned
way  of  living  are  important.  Not  only  buildings  but  also  their
gardens and parks are seen to be an integral part of many construc-
tions. It also covers sites where fossil  evidence  shows the  evolution
of  humanity,  such  as  the  early  hominid  sites  in  Africa,  as  well  as
prehistoric caves with  evidence of  the life  and  artistry  of  our  early
ancestors (such as the rock  art at  Lascaux, Altamira and  Kakadu).
But other immovables are also of primary  importance, especially in
cultures  whose  cultural  energies  have  not  been  poured  primarily

*  Professor  of  Cultural  Heritage  Law,  University  of  Sydney,  Australia.
**  Associate  Professor  of  Law,  University  of  Sydney,  Australia.

307

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

Lyndel V. Prott and Patrick J.  O'Keefe

into  buildings  or  landscaping. Thus ritual  and  ceremonial  sites are
significant  among  all  races  and  peoples  whether  or  not  they  have
been  redesigned  by  their  users from  their  natural  state,  as  well  as
natural  sites  held  by human  beings to  be  of  special meaning,  such
as rivers, lakes and mountains endowed with particular  significance
(e.g.,  among  Native  American  tribes  and  Bantu  peoples  and  in
Oriental  cultures  among  others);  billabongs,  rocks  and  'dreaming
tracks'  (among  Australian  Aborigines);  and  other  natural  objects
such as a tree regarded as having some special character (legislatively
protected  in  the Seychelles).

Besides  immovables  there  are  movable  objects.  This  category
encompasses  artworks  of  every kind  (paintings,  drawings,  sculptu-
res,  ceramics,  textiles  and  so  on);  objects  of  historic  importance
such  as  those  related  to  important  historical  figures;  objects  of
archaeological importance (human and animal remains, evidence of
habitation  and  of  particular,  perhaps  vanished,  skills);  objects  of
daily  life  such  as  utensils,  clothing  and  weapons.  There  are  also
objects  of  scientific  importance  such  as  early  inventions  or  fossil
evidence  of  biological  evolution.  Some  are  masterpieces,  some  are
merely  representative,  a  'snapshot'  as  it  were,  of  a  particular  way
of life at a particular  time, especially valuable as a historical  record
where that  way  of life is under  threat.

These two groups represent tangibles. There are also intangibles.
For  example, the ideas on which new skills, techniques and knowl-
edge  are  built.  Included,  as  also  in  need  of  protection,  are  other
traditional  aspects of cultural life such as patterns of behaviour  and
knowledge embodied in skills (e.g. samurai sword making in Japan;1
beadwork  in  Sarawak;2  mat  weaving  in  the  Maldives),  ceremonies
(e.g.,  the  tea  ceremony  in  Japan,  corroborees  among  Australian
Aborigines), rituals (e.g., initiation in many cultures) and ceremonies
where tradition  may be handed on in song, dance or spoken words.
Oral  history  embodied  in  myths,  sagas,  songs  or  poetry  falls  into
this category.  Music and dance are also included: physical evidence
of  them  may  be  kept  by  musical  or  choreographic  scores,  or  on
film,  while  stage  sets,  musical  instruments  and  costumes  may  be
preserved as part of the movable cultural heritage. The performance,
or  historic  evolutions  of  a  particular  style  of  presentation  (e.g., of
one  of  Shakespeare's  plays), is part  of  the  cultural  heritage  which
cannot  be so  embodied.

A  professional  commitment  has  emerged  among  art  historians,
sociologists but  especially archaeologists and anthropologists of the
essential  need  to  preserve  information.  It  is  evident  that  how  a
musical instrument  was used, on what occasion and  by whom, adds
a great deal to our understanding of the human context from  which
it comes. A cultural  object whose textual information  has been lost
is less valuable  to  the further  development  of culture than  it would
otherwise  be. Conversely,  information  about  it  can  never  be  quite

308

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

'Cultural  Heritage' or 'Cultural  Property'?

as  valuable  to  a  performer  without  the  opportunity  of  actually
holding the instrument  and  trying to perform  on it.

There is widespread agreement among States today that a substan-
tial  representation  of  this  material  should  be  preserved  for  future
generations. Not everything can, or should, be preserved. The choice
depends on numerous factors: the nature of the material in question,
its rarity; its significance  as  illustrating  development  of  the  human
condition. On the other hand, the cultural heritage does not consist
solely  of  a  few  select  objects  singled  out  by national  legislation —
a  notion  put  forward  by  some lawyers3 but completely  at  variance
with that held  by cultural  experts in the social sciences.

2  Problems with  'Property'

There is no doubt  that  many  of these manifestations  of human  life
have traditionally  been  dealt  with  in  the law within  the concept  of
property.  'Property'  is  a  category  of  cardinal  importance  in  the
Common  Law, around  which important  politico-philosophical  the-
ories have been developed. This means that, where traditional values
attached  to  property  need  to  be modified  in  order  to  secure  other
social goals (such  as effective  land  usage, environmental  protection
or protection  of the cultural  heritage), opposition  is often  mustered
on  the  basis  that  'property'  has  some  kind  of  fundamental  impor-
tance  in  our  culture  and  its  traditional  legal  incidences  must  be
given priority. This fundamentally  ideological argument  should  not
be  prejudged  by  the  unconscious  use  of  a  term  such  as  'property'
which  carries  an  ideological  load  with  it.  The  social  goals  behind
property  law  and  cultural  heritage  law  should  be clearly  admitted
and  properly  balanced  so  that  a judgment  of  the  social  goal  to  be
achieved  can  be made in  a clear-headed  way. While  'cultural  herit-
age' is a relatively new term and  has far  less ideological  baggage in
tow,  'property'  has  acquired  a  wide  range  of  emotive  and  value-
laden nuances, from  the arguments of John  Locke to the challenge
of Communism  in the first  two-thirds of this century.

The fundamental  policy behind property law has been seen as the
protection  of  the rights of  the possessor.  If  this policy is carried  to
its logical conclusion  then  the owner can be buried  with a  painting
that  he  purchased  for  millions  of  dollars  but  which  represents  a
peak achievement of human culture. The fundamental  policy behind
cultural heritage law is protection  of the heritage for  the  enjoyment
of  present  and  later  generations.  This  means  not  only' physical
protection  but  the  possibility  of  access  for  persons  other  than  the
owner.  It  may  involve  restrictions  on  the  right  of  the  possessor
whether  that  be  an  individual,  a  legal  person,  a  community  or  a
State. For example, in many  states of the United  States of America
there  are  no  controls  on  archaeological  excavation  on  privately
owned  land  because  to  impose  them  would  interfere  with  rights of

309

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

Lyndel V. Prott and Patrick J. O'Keefe

private property.  This is contrary  to the community  interests in the
cultural  heritage.  Such  policy  conflicts  should  be  decided  clearly
and  not  pre-empted  by reliance on existing categories  of law.

The important  function  of 'property'  and  'ownership' in Western
law  is  historically  evident:  yet  that  function  has  little  in  common
with  heritage  values.  It  is  an  especially  Western  concept  and  has
particular  commercial connotations: it implies control by the owner
expressed by his ability to alienate, to exploit and  to exclude others
from  the  object  or  site in question.  Yet  this  way  of  delineating  an
individual  or  group's  relationship  to  a  thing  may  be quite  alien  in
other  societies. In Milirrpum  v Nabalco Pty. Ltd.4 the Judge consid-
ered  the relationship  of Australian  Aboriginals  to  their  tribal  land.
He held that,  rather  than believing that  the land belonged  to them,
they  believed  that  they  belonged  to  the  land:  that  it  had  been
entrusted  to them by their spirit ancestors and that they had certain
duties  towards  it  and  rituals  to  perform  on  it.  In  other  societies
certain  objects  such  as idols  are  regarded  as  themselves  divine,  or
as  made  by  God.  Such  attitudes  are  deeply  respectful  of  heritage
objects:  should  a  claim  based  on  such  a  relationship  be  denied
because  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  property  right?  In  Mullick v
Mullick5  the  Privy  Council  held  that  a  Hindu  family  idol  was  not
a  mere  chattel  (movable property)  which was  owned  and  could  be
dealt  with  by an  owner as he pleased  in the same way as he would
deal  with  secular  property,  but  a  legal  entity  in  its  own  right  to
which  duties  were  owed  and  which  was  entitled  to  have  its  own
interests  represented  in  court  by  a  'next  friend'.6  Such  examples
show that, if the word 'property' is used, it must be used with great
care  and  will  have  to  be  re-interpreted  in  many  cases.  Indeed,  the
potential for misunderstanding is so large that it seems better to use
the  term  'heritage'  to help us keep in mind  the  very different  aims
of the  law in this area to those behind  the formulation  of property
law.

Property  connotes ownership and  this, as stated  above, has been
defined  in  the  Common  Law  as  meaning  the  right  to  exploit,  to
alienate,  to  exclude.  While  that  legal  definition  may  not  be  con-
sciously held in those terms by members of the public it is sufficiently
strong  for  there  to  be a perception  of  ownership  as  being the  right
to  do  what  one  wishes with  what  one  owns. That  perception  is of
course  over-simplified  to  the  point  of  distortion.  It  is  difficult  to
think  of  anywhere  in  the world  where  such  a  concept  of  absolute
ownership applies. In virtually all States there is legislation  regulat-
ing  what  one  can  do  in  relation  to  the  kinds  of  things  we  have
described as 'cultural manifestations'.  It takes many forms: prohibi-
tions  against  destruction  or  damage,  import  or  export,  copying;
zoning of cities to protect historic areas; establishment  of the rights
of creators in their works even after  they have sold them;  formation
of registers of works subject to periodic inspection to test their state
of  conservation.  Nevertheless,  while  distorted,  that  perception  is

310

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

'Cultural Heritage' or 'Cultural  Property'?

powerful  and  needs to be displaced.  Use of  the term  'heritage'  can
assist  in  this.  Heritage  creates  a  perception  of  something  handed
down;  something  to  be  cared  for  and  cherished.  These  cultural
manifestations  have  come  down  to  us  from  the  past;  they  are  our
legacy from  our  ancestors. There  is today  a broad  acceptance  of a
duty to pass them on to our successors, augmented  by the creations
of the present.

The term 'cultural property' has yet other connotations contribut-
ing to  the commoditization  of  the cultural  manifestations  outlined
above. There is an increasing tendency for  many people to think of
heritage items solely in terms of their commercial value. The public
is bombarded  by  prices  paid  for  objects  on  the  market.  Paintings
are  sold  for  tens  of  millions  of  dollars.  Individual  items  at  more
than a million dollars are commonplace. Art takes on the nature of
a financial security; so much so that in New York there is a proposal
that such sales be regulated  by the provisions of the law controlling
deals  in  stocks,  bonds  and  securities.  In  Japan  there  are  scandals
involving  art  secured  loans  in  the  order  of  many  million  yen  and
some  of  the  nation's  leading  commercial  companies.  The  United
States  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  proposes  that  mu-
seums capitalize  — in  other  words,  record  on  their  balance  sheets
as monetary  assets  —  all  donations  plus  their  entire  collections  of
artworks,  historical  material,  and  similar  holdings.  Some  would
argue  that  this  commoditization  of  the  cultural  heritage  is a  good
thing; that it helps to preserve the heritage by making it too valuable
to  destroy  by  neglect  or  desire.  This  is  debatable.  But  there  are
definitely  damaging  consequences.  One  is  increased  theft;  another
the  destruction  of  sites  and  monuments  through  looting  to  supply
the international  art market.  'Property'  does nothing  to  counteract
the concentration on commercial value whereas 'heritage', while not
of course capable  of doing away with it, can  lessen  the  impact.

There are other reasons for using the term 'cultural heritage'. The
cultural  manifestations  discussed  above include very different  sorts
of  material.  They  need  to  be  considered  together  as  essential  ele-
ments  of  the cultural  heritage.  Early  efforts  to  protect  the  cultural
heritages  of  nations  related  to  concrete  objects;  particularly  to
monuments and works of art. Legislation reflected  this in it's termin-
ology  of  'monuments'  and  'Denkmaler'.  As practice  evolved,  how-
ever, it became clear that  there was far  less value in an object  alone
than of the object accompanied by information  about its significance
and  use in  the society which created  it; the context  within  which it
emerged. Legislation, both national and international, is increasingly
concerned,  not  with  isolated  objects,  museum  pieces  such  as  were
collected  for  chambers  of  curiosities  in  the eighteenth  century,  but
with  identifying  and  preserving  what  is  representative  of  culture.
Similarly,  curators  of  sites  are  today  meticulous  to  preserve  the
context  and  natural  environment  of  sites  and  museum  curators
increasingly  try to  display articles in context.  Cross-cultural  under-

311

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

Lyndel V. Prott and Patrick J.  O'Keefe

standing depends on information.  In societies where intellectual and
spiritual  life has found  forms  not represented  by great  monumental
complexes  or the creation of a vast number  of material objects, the
preservation  of  cultural  identity  depends  far  more  on  the  appreci-
ation  of  tradition  and  the  preservation  of  folklore,  rituals  and
traditional  skills.  This  has  created  a  complex  of  protective  needs
which  is  not  well comprehended  by  the  word  'property'.  It  is  true
that  there  are  various  forms  of  property  and  property  can  exist in
intangible  things,  including  secrets  and  information  quite  outside
the  formal  and  artificial  statutory  regimes  of  patents,  copyright
and  registered  designs.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  unified  system  of
property law applying to all aspects of these cultural  manifestations.
Indeed,  in  respect  of folklore  many  would  argue  that  there  should
be no concept  of property although  States have been  endeavouring
to  create  it  through  copyright.  Overall,  what  exists  are  various
notions of property law applying to particular aspects of the cultural
heritage where those aspects happen to coincide with property rights
in respect  of other  matters. What  is needed  is a coherent  system of
law  applying  to  all  cultural  manifestations;  a  system  of  law which
will take  account  of the  peculiar  nature  and  requirements  of  those
manifestations  arising from  the need  to protect  them.

3  Where  is  the  Law  at  Now?

The  phrase  'cultural  property'  was  first  used  in  English  in  a  legal
context in the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property  in the Event of Armed Conflict.7  That  Convention ampli-
fied provisions  originally  contained  in the  1907 Hague  Convention
for  Respecting  the Laws and Customs of War on  Land.8 Article 56
of  its  Regulations  protected  the  property  of  municipalities  and  of
institutions  dedicated  to  religion,  charity  and  education,  the  arts
and  sciences  and  prohibited  seizure  or  destruction  of  or  wilful
damage  to  such  institutions, historic monuments, works of art  and
science. The  1954 Convention  coined  the phrase  'cultural  property'
and  defined  it, at  least for  the purposes  of that  Convention.  Before
the  1954  Convention,  'cultural  property'  was  not  an  established
concept  in  the  Common  Law,  although  it  represents  the  French
'biens  culturels'  and  the  Italian  'beni  culturali'  which  have  long
acceptance  in  Civilian  legal terminology  but  which  are  themselves
inadequate  to  comprehend  the  whole  of  what  is  covered  by  the
'cultural  heritage'.

It  has  been  suggested  that  'cultural  property'  is  an  addition  to
the  law  of  property,  to  be placed  and  studied  alongside  the  law of
real  property,  personal  property  and  intellectual  property.9  While
the legal concept  of  'property'  might cover most  of the items in the
first  two  categories  of  the cultural  heritage  (monuments  and  sites,
movable objects)  and some of the third  (intangibles, some of which

312

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

'Cultural Heritage' or 'Cultural  Property'?

are controlled  by the rules of intellectual  property  law), it does  not
include all  of  that  category;  nor  does it  include  the fourth  (rituals,
ceremonies, oral history and  the performing  arts) and  it is  doubtful
how far it applies to the fifth (information  relating to the other  four
categories).

The legal concept  of  'property'  can  be subdivided  in a variety of
ways: those stated  above  (real, personal  and  intellectual); movable,
immovable;  tangible,  intangible.  This  process  of  classification  is
designed  to  make  it  intellectually  easier  to  assess  the  interests  in-
volved  and  the  appropriate  response.  In  relation  to  the  cultural
heritage it is largely unhelpful  in that cultural complexes often  flow
across the classifications  in a way that the legal system has not been
constructed  to cope with:

The  law classifies  property  as  real  (interests  in  land)  and  per-
sonal  (everything  else)  with  different  rules  as  to  ownership
being applicable. Thus an  initial  question, at  least in regard  to
excavated material, is under which classification  is an archaeo-
logical  relic  placed?  This  simple  question  does  not  have  a
straightforward  answer... title to land can be very complex and
not  vested  in  whom  may  seem  the  'owner'.  An  Australian
example  of  this  problem  is  the  ownership,  at  common  law
and  under  statute,  of  carved  and  canoe  trees  which  may  vary
depending  on  whether  the  tree concerned  is living and  part  of
the land  or merely a chattel.10

Equipment  used  for  a ceremony,  a place built  for  its  performance,
the record of its procedure, the unwritten traditions associated with
it and information  about it, perhaps found by sophisticated  scientific
research,  will  all  contribute  to  understanding  of  that  aspect  of
cultural  life.  Use  of  existing  legal  categories  would  allow  some  to
be protected  and  not  others,  for,  though  the  traditional  categories
of  property  will  apply  to  some  of  these  aspects  of  the  cultural
. heritage,  they  are  by  no  means  coextensive  with  them,  since  they
apply  to  many  other  items  which  are  not  part  of  the  cultural
heritage. Use of these categories for the purposes of cultural heritage
protection is likely to lead to confusion  and to some cross purposes,
since these categories  did  not  develop  to  meet  the aims  of  cultural
heritage  protection,  but  for  other  purposes.  All five categories  of
the cultural  heritage  are  linked  by  the common  need  of  protection
and  fit  well within  the  policy  framework  of  a category  of  cultural
heritage law.

While  cultural  heritage  is  seen  to  merit  protection  in  virtually
every community, different  relationships  to land or objects of ritual
in certain  societies  may  be difficult  for  Western  lawyers  to  under-
stand  and  accept  although  they  represent  concepts  of  importance
in  cultural  heritage  law.  Relationships  to  the  cultural  objects  not
based  on  concepts  of  property,  the  need  to  protect  intangibles  (a

313

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

Lyndel V. Prott and  Patrick J.  O'Keefe

pattern  of  drumbeats,  for  example)11  not  generally  recognized  in
Western-style  legal  systems, mean  that  scholars  from  these  systems
have  to  make  efforts,  when  dealing  with  the  cultural  heritage,
beyond  those  generally  required  to  adjust  the  rules  to  foreign  con-
cepts. Those unversed in these concepts of property, or dealing with
objects which to them are not 'owned', can be faced with a situation
where their actions bring them into conflict with property law which
interprets  those actions by its own standards. It looks for  an owner
and  assesses  everything  from  that  standpoint,  rather  than  looking
to  the preservation  of the cultural heritage itself.

Consider  the  case  of  the  Strehlow  collection.  Strehlow  was
the  son  of  a  Lutheran  pastor  at  the  Hermannsburg  mission  in
Central Australia. As a child he had learnt the language of the local
Aboriginal  people  —  the Aranda  —  and  come  to  understand  their
traditional  lore.  On  graduating  from  University,  he  returned  to
Central Australia to collect songs, chants, legends and artifacts  from
these  people.  They  became  his lifelong  study.  He  amassed  a  great
and  unique  collection  of  this  material,  including  films  and  sound
recordings of secret and sacred rituals and other ceremonies. Accord-
ing  to  his  own  account,  he  was  entrusted  with  tjuringa and  the
legends  associated  with  them  because  the  tribal  elders  thought  the
young men, much influenced by European ways, unworthy to receive
this special  knowledge.  He promised  that  he would  never show the
pictures to other white people, especially never to a white woman.12
In seeking a position at the University of Adelaide, Strehlow argued
that, if given this position and appropriate funding, he could provide
the  University  with  anthropological  material  far  beyond  the  reach
of  others;  material,  he  stressed,  which  would  place  the  University
in  the  position  of  being  able  to  marshal  a  unique  collection  of
artifacts.13  In  subsequent  years, members of  the University  became
concerned  that  most of  the artifacts  and  information  brought  back
from  research  expeditions were either placed  in Strehlow's home or
locked  in  his  room  at  the  University.  In  his  later  years  he  taught
some aspects of Aboriginal mythology first to a woman student and
later to his second wife, although  they covered  subjects  to which no
woman  was  allowed  to  have  access  under  tribal  law,  since  they
embraced certain sacred/secret ceremonies.14 On his retirement  from
the  University,  Strehlow  claimed  ownership  of  the  material.  He
wanted  to  set  up  a  research  foundation  and  sought  funds  from
various  sources  to  do  so.  One  proposal  was  to  sell  his  colour
films of  Aranda  sacred/secret  ceremonies.  The  Aborigines  became
disenchanted  with  Strehlow.  A serious  controversy  emerged  when
he  sold  to  the  German  magazine  Stern  an  article  illustrated  by
a  series  of  pictures  of  sacred/secret  tribal  ceremonies.  Secondary
publication  rights  were sold back  to an Australian  magazine. When
Aborigines  saw  the  pictures  and  learnt  of  their  source,  they  were
outraged.  Strehlow  claimed  that  all  the people in  the pictures  were
dead  and  that  his agreement with Stern was that  the pictures would

314

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

'Cultural Heritage' or 'Cultural  Property'?

not appear  in Australia.15 Aboriginal activists then claimed  that the
material  should  be returned  to its 'rightful  owners'.

This  case  thus  shows  the  extreme  complexity  of  determining
ownership in such situations. Was the relationship of the Aboriginal
elders to these materials ownership? Even if it were not, why should
the  Common  Law  concept  of  ownership  override  it?  Should  the
transfer of possession to Strehlow be considered a transfer  of owner-
ship or simply of custody? If it is construed  as a transfer  of owner-
ship, should it be considered  subject  to trust? Even within the white
community,  ownership  was  disputed  between  Strehlow  and  the
University  of  Adelaide,  and  between  Strehlow's  divorced  wife  and
his  widow.16  Conversely,  what  rights  should  present-day  Arandas
be recognized  as having in the material? Although  the elders might
have  considered  their  sons  unreliable  guardians  at  a  time  when
Aboriginal culture was being challenged and to some extent destabi-
lized  by  the  intruding  white  culture, what  of  their  grandsons, who
may  want  to  re-establish  their  tribal  identity  and  take  pride  in
their  unique  heritage?  Formalistic  application  of  legal  rules  as to
ownership  seems  quite  inappropriate  in  such  a  context  and  may
work  considerable  injustice.

In the Civil Law systems another distinction also creates confusion
in  property  law;  different  rules  apply  where  the  cultural  resources
concerned  are  owned  by  the  State  or  by  some  other  public  body,
to  those  which  apply  to  cultural  resources  owned  by  a  private
citizen. Some systems have another  set of rules for  property  owned
by religious organizations. The degree of protection  will then vary,
not  because  of  the  different  value  (cultural  or  commercial)  of a
cultural  object,  but  merely  because  of  the  incidence  of  its  legal
qualification.  Thus most of the objects in French museums (belong-
ing  to  the  state  or  to  local  authorities)  have  the  protection  of
inalienability  and  indefeasibility,  while objects  which  are unique or
very rare or of great cultural  importance  which are in the hands of
private  owners  will  have  applied  to  them  the  normal  legal  rules,
such  as  the  protection  of  a  bona fide acquirer.  The  result  is  that
cultural  objects  which  are  public  property  and  have  been  lost  or
stolen can be claimed back in circumstances where private property
cannot.

Furthermore, it may be very difficult  to decide when an  object is
public, and when it is private, property, though clearly the need for
protection  has  nothing  to  do  with  this  qualification.  Consider  the
case  of  Arne  Magnussen's  Trust  {The Arnamagnaean  Foundation  v
Ministry of Education).xl The Icelander, Arne Magnussen, who was
Danish  Commissioner of Lands, lived in Iceland from  1702 to 1712
to compile  a property  register  and  report  on  the general  condition
of  the  country.  At  this  time  Iceland  was  very  poor.  Some  families
had in their possession manuscripts of the great Sagas from Iceland's
Golden Age, but because of the poverty of the land they were in peril;
the old farmhouses where they were being kept were in disrepair, and

315

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

Lyndel V. Prott and Patrick J.  O'Keefe

no money was available for  their restoration. On his own initiative,
Magnussen  collected  these  and  took  them  back  to  Denmark  to
ensure  their  preservation.  After  this  period  only  a  very  limited
number  of  manuscripts  remained  behind  in  Iceland.

Magnussen's  will  bequeathed  all  his  books  and  papers  to  the
University  of  Copenhagen  together  with funds  to  set up a  trust  for
their care. In the  193O's and  1940's the Icelandic Government  asked
for  the manuscripts  to be returned.  Eventually,  a treaty was signed
between  the  two  countries  agreeing  to  the  handing  of  the  manu-
scripts  to  the  University  of  Iceland  and  the  Danish  Parliament
passed  legislation  altering  the  provisions  of  the  Arne  Magnussen
Trust.  Arne  Magnussen's  Trust  (The Arne Magnussen  Foundation)
sued the Ministry of Education (the body responsible for the Danish
universities, the Foundation  being part of the University  of Copen-
hagen) on the ground that the Foundation was a private person and
that  this  legislation  amounted  to  expropriation  of  private  property
which, according to Section 73 of the Danish Constitution, was only
permitted  under  certain  conditions. It thus became very  significant
to determine  whether  this was public or private  property.

As often  happens in cases concerning major  items of the cultural
heritage, the facts are quite unprecedented and challenge the existing
internal  conceptualization  of  the  law.  The  Trust  possessed  2572
manuscripts  and  a  large  number  of  legal  documents.  The  oldest
manuscripts  dated  from  the  12th  to  the  13th  century,  but  the
majority  came  from  the  14th  to  the  17th centuries. They covered a
wide  range  of  subjects,  including  astronomy,  philology,  physics,
geography,  history, law, mythology and aesthetics. A large  propor-
tion  were  sagas  dealing  with  the  Icelandic  chieftains  and  their
families  in the period  930-1030  A.D.

In favour  of their public status it could be argued that  Magnussen
had  had  the opportunity  to collect as a Danish public servant,  that
he  had  never  intended  the  collection  for  his  private  use  or  as  a
commercial  asset,  but  established  it  for  the  preservation  of  the
threatened  cultural  heritage  of  Iceland  (the  manuscripts  are  by
far  the  most  significant  embodiment  of Icelandic  culture)  and  for
scholarly  access, and  that  he had  entrusted  them  to  the  University
of  Copenhagen,  clearly,  it  would  seem,  as  custodian  and  for  the
public  benefit.

In  favour  of  their  status  as  private  property  it  was  argued  that
the  collection  of  manuscripts  was undertaken  by  Arne  Magnussen
as a private person  and  solely by virtue of his personal  interest  and
effort.  Until his death they must have been his private property and
the  Foundation  inherited  them  as such. It  was further  argued  that
it was  not  the  State, nor  the University, but  the  Foundation  as an
independent  institution  which  owned them.

If it were public property,  then  the Government  had  the right to
deal  with  the property  as it wished. If it were private, it could  only
take over the property  if such action were in the public interest and

316

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

'Cultural Heritage' or 'Cultural  Property'?

subject  to  compensation.  Should  that  be  the  case  new  questions
would  arise as  to  how  to  measure  the 'public  interest'  (of  Iceland?
of Denmark? of their joint interests? of Scandinavia? of the world?)
and  compensation  (commercial  value?  scholarly  value?  heritage
value? and who should  pay it?).

The Danish Supreme Court ingeniously decided that the Founda-
tion, while an independent body, was of such a particular  character
in this case as to be decisively distinguished from private  foundations
and  that  it  had,  in  any  event,  suffered  no  economic  loss  from  the
surrender  of the manuscripts.

The  division  between  'public'  and  'private'  property  may  be  not
only unsuitable but obstructive in the heritage context. For  effective
protection  it is necessary  to know who has what rights in it.  There
should  be a coherent  body  of rights and responsibilities  devoted  to
the  preservation  of  the  cultural  heritage.  In  an  attempt  to  achieve
a balance of private rights and public responsibilities, some national
systems of law have developed a special regime in relation to heritage
items, e.g.,  in  relation  to  artifacts  Ecuador  has  a  law  under  which
these  were  held  by  an  Italian  court  to  fall  into  an  'intermediate
category between private property and property owned by the nation
for public purposes'.18 Peru has a similar regime, but a court in the
United  States  has  refused  to  recognize  the  interest  of  the  State,
considering  the matter  from  its own conception  of property:

Possession of the artifacts is allowed to remain in private hands,
and  such  objects  may  be  transferred  by  gift  or  bequest  or
intestate  succession.  There  is  no  indication  in  the  record  that
Peru  has  ever  sought  to  exercise  its  ownership  rights  in  such
property,  so  long  as  there  is  no  removal  from  that  country.
The  laws  of  Peru  concerning  its  artifacts  could  reasonably  be
considered  to have no more effect  than  export  restrictions.19

The notion of ownership underlying the court's view of the Peruvian
claim is a narrow, conservative one. It is at  odds with the emerging
nature  of  the concept  of  the cultural  heritage wherein  ownership is
seen in relative, not  absolute terms.

Whether a legal system favours public or private property depends
on  the  political  and  historical  basis  of  that  society:  yet  there  is  a
consensus between the different  systems on many aspects of cultural
heritage  protection:  for  example, as discussed  above  some  systems
treat heritage items as public property  —  but allow a private person
to  have  possession.  Others  treat  them  as  private  property,  but
subject  them  to  controls  for  the  benefit  of  the  community.  This
shows that the policy of cultural heritage protection is widely shared,
and  the  means  traditionally  favoured  in  a  particular  legal  system
have been used  to reach the same kind of conclusion. It also shows
that  there is no theoretical  bar  to such  protection.

317

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

Lyndel V. Prott and  Patrick J.  O'Keefe

Of  course,  specialists  in  property  law  will  be  reluctant  to  admit
any  new  classification  of  law,  especially  one  which  will  intersect
with  their  traditional  classifications.  The  same  kind  of  arguments
were made when environmental law began to emerge as a new study,
not  fitting  comfortably  into  administrative  law, or property  law or
the  law  of  tort  (nuisance),  although  it  was  clearly  dealing  with
matters  which  traditionally  would  have  been  qualified  within  all
those areas. Now it is well accepted that this highly specialized field
is an area  of law sui generis, where public and  private law intersect,
and the prospective purpose of the law, relying on scientific evidence
and  impact assessment,  has produced  its own special technique and
means of  protection.

4  Use of 'Cultural Heritage' in Law

As stated  above  the first use  of  the phrase  'cultural  property'  in a
legal  context  in  the  English  language  occurred  in  the  1954  Hague
Convention  for  the Protection  of Cultural Property  in the Event of
Armed  Conflict.  The  same  phrase  is  used  in  the  1970  UNESCO
Convention  on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Preventing  the  Illicit
Import,  Export  and  Transfer  of Ownership  of Cultural  Property.20
However, in the 1972 UNESCO Convention concerning the Protec-
tion  of  the World  Cultural  and  Natural  Heritage21  the phrase  used
is 'cultural  heritage'. The Preamble emphasizes the change by  refer-
ring  to  'the  existing  international  conventions,  recommendations
and  resolutions  concerning  cultural  and  natural  property'  whereas
everywhere else in  the text  one finds the phrase  'cultural  heritage'.
The Council  of  Europe  uses 'heritage' in its international  instru-
ments. The first was the  1969 European  Convention  on the Protec-
tion  of  the  Archaeological  Heritage22  which  is currently  subject  to
a  revision  which emphasizes the element of heritage. Another  is the
1985  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  the  Architectural  Heritage
of  Europe23  which  recognizes,  to  quote  the  Preamble,  'that  the
architectural  heritage constitutes  an irreplaceable  expression  of  the
richness  and  diversity  of  Europe's  cultural  heritage'.  Not  fitting
within  this  classification  is  the  1985 European  Convention  on  Of-
fences  Relating  to  Cultural  Property24 which, however, was  drafted
mainly  by lawyers specializing in criminal law and, unlike the other
two  Conventions, has not  been  accepted  by the  European  nations,
in  that  it is not  yet in force.

Turning to national law, one finds little reference in earlier legisla-
tion to either cultural 'property' or 'heritage'. Usually that legislation
uses terms such  as  'monument',  'site', 'antiquity',  'relic'. Folklife  is
usually  subsumed  in copyright  legislation.  However,  more  modern
legislation  is  beginning  to  incorporate  both  terms,  with  the  more
frequent  reference  being  to  'cultural  heritage'.  For  example,  both
Canada  and  the United  States of America used the phrase  'cultural

318

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

'Cultural  Heritage' or 'Cultural  Property'?

property'  in  their  implementing  legislation  for  the  1970  UNESCO
Convention  on  the  Means  of Prohibiting  and  Preventing  the  Illicit
Import,  Export  and  Transfer  of Ownership  of  Cultural  Property.25
However,  Australia,  in  implementing  the  same  Convention,  did  so
by means of the Protection of Movable Cultural  Heritage Act 1986.
The movable cultural  heritage of Australia  'is a reference  to  objects
that  are  of  importance  to  Australia,  or  to  a  particular  part  of
Australia, for  ethnological, archaeological, historical, literary, artis-
tic,  scientific  or  technological  reasons'  provided  they  fall  within
categories enumerated in the legislation and further  refined  in Regu-
lations.  Other  relevant  Australian  legislation  is  the  Aboriginal  and
Torres  Strait  Islander  Heritage  Protection  Act  1984, the  Australian
Heritage  Commission  Act  1975  and,  in  New  South  Wales,  the
Heritage  Act  1977.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Canada  has  recently  re-
leased  for  comment  its Proposed  Act  Respecting  the  Protection  of
the  Archaeological  Heritage  of  Canada.  The  'archaeological  herit-
age' is stated to be 'a product of and witness to human achievement'.
Moreover, 'the creation of a system for the management of Canada's
archaeological  heritage  will contribute  to  the  long-term  protection
and public appreciation of that heritage' i. e., recognizing the protec-
tion points made above.

5  Conclusion

The  concept  of  the  'cultural  heritage'  is  one  well  recognized  and
universally  used  by  historians,  archaeologists,  anthropologists  and
other researchers of human life both past and present. They virtually
never  use  the  term  'property'  unless  in  a  legal  context.  In  the  law
which  has  embodied  the  notion  of  'property'  it  is  now  coming  to
be recognized that this is inadequate and inappropriate for the range
of matters covered  by the concept  of the  'cultural  heritage'.

Notes

1  Adachi,  B.  The  Living  Treasures of  Japan  (Kodansha  International  Ltd.,

Tokyo,  1973).

2  Sheppard,  M. Living Crafts of Malaysia  (Times Books International,  Singa-

pore,  1978).

3  Referred  to  in  Nahlik,  S.E.  'International  Co-operation  to  Prevent  Illicit
Traffic  of  Cultural  Property'  (1981-83)  51-53 Annuaire de I'A.A.A.  73, 76.

4  (1971)  17F.L.R. 141.
5  LR  LII  Indian  Appeals  245  (1925);  the  only  English  commentary  on  this
case notes: 'though  it was reported  here, it does not  seem  to  have  interested
English lawyers' (Duff,  P.W. 'The Personality  of an  Idol' (1927) 3 Cambridge
Law Journal 42).

6  Ibid. 255-56,  259-61.

319

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

Lyndel V. Prott and  Patrick J.  O'Keefe

7  249  U.N.T.S. 240;  discussed  in  Nahlik,  S.E.  'La  protection  international
des  biens  culturels  en  cas  de  conflit  arme'  (1967)  120  Recueil des  Cours de
I'Academie de la Haye 61.

8  U.K.T.S. 9 (1910) Cd.  5030; (1908)  2 American  Journal of International Law

90.

9  Crewdson,  R.  'Cultural  Property  -  A  Fourth  Estate?'  (1984)  18  Law

Society's  Gazette  126.

10  Hammond,  G.N.  'The  Ownership  and  Control  of  Museum  Property  —
Confidentiality  and  Restitution  in Australia'  (1982) 10 Bulletin of the Confer-
ence of Museum  Anthropologists  14, 15.

11  Jonassen,  J.  'Cook  Islands  Drums  in  a  Polynesian  Setting:  A  Study  of
Development,  Instrumentation,  Presentation  and  Rhythms'  unpublished
paper,  University  of Hawaii,  1981.

12  McNally, W. Aborigines, Artefacts  and Anguish (Lutheran  Publishing House,

Adelaide,  1981)  38-40.

13  Ibid.  76.
14  Ibid.  130, 152.
15  Ibid.  190ff.
16  The Good  Weekend, 2 8 - 29  August  1987, 32.
17  1966 UfR  22; 1971 UfR  299 (Denmark); see also  O'Keefe  P.J. & Prott,  L.V.
Law and the Cultural Heritage:  Volume II  Movement  (Butterworths,  London,
1990)  878, 912, Greenfield;  J.  The Return  of  Cultural  Treasures (Cambridge
University  Press, Cambridge,  1989).

18  Republic of  Ecuador  v Danusso  District  Court  of Turin, 4410, 79.
19  Government of  Peru  v Johnson  Daily  Appellate  Report,  5 January  1990, 180

at  182.

20  823 U.N.T.S. 231.
21  (1972)  11 International  Legal  Materials  1358.
22  E.T.S. No.  66.
23  E.T.S. No. 121.
24  E.T.S. No.  119.
25  Cultural  Property  Export  and  Import  Act  1975 and  Convention  on  Cultural

Property  Implementation  Act  1983  respectively.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919200033X

320


