International Journal of Cultural Property (2013) 20:113–153. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2013 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739113000015

The Illicit Antiquities Trade as a
Transnational Criminal Network:
Characterizing and Anticipating
Trafficking of Cultural Heritage
Peter B. Campbell*

Abstract: The illicit antiquities trade is composed of a diverse population of
participants that gives the appearance of complexity; however, using the
network paradigm, a simple underlying structure is revealed based on specific
geographical, economic, political, and cultural rules. This article uses a wide
range of source material to chart interactions from source to market using a
criminal network approach. Interchangeable participants are connected
through single interactions to form loosely based networks. These flexible
network structures explain the variability observed within the trade, as well as
provide the basis behind ongoing debates about the roles of organized crime,
terrorism, and the Internet in antiquities trafficking. Finally, a network
understanding of trade’s organization allows for anticipation, though not
necessarily prediction, of antiquities trafficking and offers the opportunity to
develop new strategies for combating the trade.

Illicit antiquities are a major resource for traffickers, ranking among other highly
trafficked commodities such as narcotics.1 UNESCO estimates the antiquities trade

*Archaeology, University of Southampton, Avenue Campus, Highfield, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK.
Email: pbc1g11@soton.ac.uk

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: The author would like to thank the editor and the two anonymous re-
viewers, whose comments greatly improved this article. Sam Hardy was an invaluable sounding board
and gave advice throughout the writing process. Gretchen Peters kindly provided advice and con-
tacts about Afghan trafficking. The author would like to thank Jessica Dietzler and Blythe Bowman
Proulx for help on an earlier article that discussed some of the ideas in this article, though it ulti-
mately was not published. Lucy Blue, Jesse Ransley, and William Campbell provided valuable feed-
back on early drafts. Illicit antiquities research is a small but dedicated field and a synthesis such as
this would not be possible without the scholarship of individuals like Paul Barford, Neil Brodie,
David Chippendale, Ricardo Elia, David Gill, and Simon MacKenzie to name just a few.

113

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

114

PETER B. CAMPBELL

to be worth US$2.2 billion annually; however, the financial scope of the illicit
trade is ultimately unknowable as black market statistics are notoriously diffi-
cult to ascertain.2 A precise characterization of the trade has arguably eluded
researchers since the observable aspects of antiquities trafficking have proved to
be incredibly variable. This article argues that the illicit antiquities trade is orga-
nized as a network similar to other trafficking, where loosely connected and
interchangeable participants give the appearance of complexity;3 however, par-
ticipants are guided by simple rules that provide an identifiable underlying struc-
ture.4 This research focuses specifically on trafficking, defined as transnational
movement of illicit commodities, rather than local or indigenous looting as a
function of engagement with the past, which exhibits its own structure.5 The
network paradigm links the trade’s observable variability to four reoccurring stages,
which provides a broad understanding of how antiquities trafficking functions.
Most modern criminal groups are characterized by “fluid network structures
rather than more formal hierarchies,” an organizational structure that is partic-
ularly well suited for trafficking.6 Criminal networks are typically composed of
interchangeable participants collaborating together when mutually beneficial with
limited complexity and no central organization.7 Participants in criminal net-
works are not typically career criminals, but are generally rational thinking and
otherwise ordinary individuals taking advantage of an opportunity to sup-
plement their income.8 With no central leadership, each participant is a replace-
able cog in a series of criminal relationships analogous to a “plate of spaghetti
[where] every piece seems to touch each other, but you are never sure where it
all leads.”9 The flexibility of criminal networks creates a myriad of challenges for
law enforcement.10

The network structure runs counter to popular views of organized crime, which
“treat centralised hierarchies as synonymous with organised crime and to treat
networks as disorganised crime,” when in reality “a network is . . . a highly so-
phisticated organizational form.”11 The United Nations Convention Against Trans-
national Organized Crime categorizes criminal relationships with fluid membership
as a “structured group,” which is defined as “a group that is not randomly formed
for the immediate commission of an offence and that does not need to have
formally defined roles for its members, continuity of its membership or a devel-
oped structure.”12 In fact, as an organizational model, networks are a significant
societal development currently being adopted by many legitimate organizations
because of their efficiency. Despite the chaotic outward appearance of trafficking
webs, criminologists have begun modeling the underlying structure of fluid
networks.13

Does the illicit antiquities trade operate as a network and, if so, what is its
underlying structure? The antiquities trade has many similarities with the other
commodities trafficked through networks. Demand in wealthy countries drives
individuals in economically depressed countries to export material abroad.14 This
is characterized in the antiquities trade by artifacts passing transnationally from

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

115

archaeological sites in “source” countries to collections in “market” countries, typ-
ically via transit countries.15 Transporting illicit artifacts from source to market
requires organization, though not necessarily centralization, and sources on an-
tiquities trafficking show a vast population of participants, from farmers to
university-trained antiquities experts, whose only connection is a shared oppor-
tunity. Within trafficking networks each interaction is personal with no obliga-
tion to others; rather than dividing profit following final sale, money is exchanged
at each interaction along the line. Since no further interaction between partici-
pants is necessary, individual risk is reduced through the limited amount of time
in direct contact.16 Antiquities trafficking connections might be brief and occur
only once, like an intermediary driving past a site to visit subsistence diggers,17
or interactions might be more regular, like Italian tombaroli phoning smugglers
with new finds.18 All these elements are found in criminal networks, suggesting
that the apparent complexity observed in the antiquities trade is best explained
through fluid networks.19

To test this hypothesis, this article first examines the observable roles within
antiquities trafficking and the factors that drive role creation, which forms the
underlying structure to the trade. Next, criminology’s network paradigm is ap-
plied to three case studies—Afghanistan, Iraq, and Bulgaria—by tracing the se-
quence of events from source to market. Finally, the discussion uses the network
paradigm as an analytical tool, applying what is known about other trafficking
networks to infer the nature of the illicit antiquities trade. This offers the oppor-
tunity to address several lingering questions about cultural trafficking, such as
whether antiquities are funding Afghanistan’s Taliban and Iraq’s insurgency, as well
as how Internet auction sites impact the trade. Finally, the role and extent of or-
ganized crime within cultural trafficking is identified and the network paradigm
is used to suggest new strategies to combat trafficking through anticipating net-
work connections.

A discussion of antiquities trafficking would be remiss to only convey the fi-
nancial implications of the trade and not mention the cultural impact of illicit
antiquities. The exodus of cultural heritage from conflict areas and impoverished
countries to wealthy countries is as much a cultural consideration as a financial
or criminal one. In contrast to the quantitative side of trafficking, the social
impact of stolen heritage is qualitative; it is based on the absence of physi-
cal evidence of the historical narratives that drive social cohesion and cultural
legitimacy, especially in the postcolonial world.20 The result is “symbolic dom-
ination,” even as far as “symbolic annihilation,”21 through denying cultures
their patrimony and whitewashing the historical narratives that are the mecha-
nism for group identity.22 It has been argued that desire for other cultures’ art is
tied to symbolic dominance of disadvantaged cultures, first developed in the co-
lonial period.23 While this article focuses on the process rather than impact, the
qualitative losses are important to mention and the discussion will revisit this
concept.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

116

PETER B. CAMPBELL

I. ORGANIZATION OF THE TRADE

Within the antiquity trade, several roles have been repeatedly observed. Paul Bator
first noted them, stating the trade begins with “local diggers, who sell their finds
through a black market to intermediaries, who in turn resell to local or foreign
dealers” who then resell artifacts to collectors.24 Later scholars have made similar
role distinctions;25 however, the reason behind these roles has not been satisfac-
torily explained. Since the roles are found ubiquitously throughout the trade, what
is the empirical basis behind them? Network specialization may explain these roles.
Role specialization has been observed in other trafficking networks to fulfill spe-
cific tasks, as a higher success rate can be expected from specialists.26 Specialization
is the result of functional considerations, when one role must interact with another
to fully exploit an opportunity.27 That is to say, when participants are unable to com-
plete the task themselves, they agree to collaborate and accept a smaller portion of
profits in exchange for a higher success rate. This implies that specialization is a func-
tion of collaboration and therefore to be expected within networks.28

Specialist knowledge within antiquities trafficking includes locating sites, trans-
portation, transnational smuggling, laundering, and art history.29 Four general stages
are observable within the trade—looter, early stage middleman or intermediary,
late stage intermediary, and collector—and more than one individual may occupy
a stage. Profit appears to favor the most specialized,30 since rural looters lack smug-
glers’ transportation knowledge, who in turn lack the gallery owners’ appraisal
skills. Therefore, specialization correlates with profit in each stage, as shown in
Figure 1. Assuming that the antiquities trade resembles other trafficking, then spe-
cialized knowledge is likely the basis behind role development, reflecting the trade’s
network development over time.

The reoccurring nature of these stages suggests that they are manifestations of
an underlying internal structure. It appears that the stages are the result of role
specialization dictated by physical and cultural limitations placed on participants
due to geography, economics, local and international legislation, and cultural views

FIGURE 1. The four stages observed within antiquities trafficking illustrating how both
specialization and profit increase through the stages.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

117

on antiquities. In particular, three limiting factors emerge that create an uninten-
tional and organically designed four-stage structure through which most traf-
ficked antiquities pass.

The mechanism behind this internal structure warrants further examination.
There exists a complex geographical, political, and economic framework that
enmeshes antiquities and necessitates specialized roles. Antiquities can be distin-
guished from other trafficking in three regards: Cultural heritage is a finite re-
source that cannot be cultivated or manufactured, profits increase progressively
from source to market, and artifacts must be laundered in order to appear legit-
imate.31 While narcotics can be cultivated and arms can be manufactured, antiq-
uities are a finite resource derived solely from looting cultural sites. Looters can be
highly skilled at locating sites and knowledgeable about the local landscape, but
they often lack the means to transport artifacts out of their immediate region or
across international borders.32 Antiquities are therefore typically transferred to par-
ticipants with the means and knowledge to transport illicit commodities inter-
nationally. In turn, these early stage intermediaries lack the knowledge to judge
the value of antiquities, including whether artifacts are real or fake,33 or the ability
to appear legitimate to collectors. The first two stages, theft and transport, there-
fore, have specialized roles of looter and early stage intermediary with the local
knowledge required to extract antiquities from source countries.

Unlike narcotics and arms, antiquities often appear in legitimate sales in source
countries. The reasons are economic and cultural. First, a larger purchasing pop-
ulation can be accessed through selling laundered artifacts in legitimate or gray
market businesses.34 Second, collectors generally purchase artifacts as status sym-
bols and therefore objects to be displayed.35 Symbols require shared experience
with peers in order to communicate meaning, which in this case is the owner’s
wealth, prestige, or connoisseurship.36 However, illicit activity typically earns dis-
approval, the opposite of the desired effect. Collectors therefore specifically pur-
chase artifacts that have been laundered, even when they know the antiquities are
looted, as demonstrated by several prominent museums.37 This legitimacy con-
cern creates the third stage, where laundering specialists interact with the black
market while presenting themselves as legitimate to the public. Legitimacy and art
history specialization, both important for the late stage intermediaries, is some-
times the result of university education. Notable examples include Robert Hecht,
who studied Latin at Haverford College, classics at University of Zurich, and was
a Rome Prize Fellow at the American Academy in Rome.38 Jonathan Tokeley-
Parry has degrees from Cambridge University and University College London.39
Christoph Leon received a degree in archaeology before becoming known as the
dealer who sold the J. Paul Getty Museum a looted gold funerary wreath.40 Late
stage intermediaries join collectors to form the third and fourth stages, respec-
tively, which operate primarily in market countries.

The elements that distinguish antiquities from other trafficking serve as limit-
ing factors for participants that typically precludes a single individual from acting

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

118

PETER B. CAMPBELL

alone due to lack of capital, mobility, or art history knowledge. This is not to say
that nonspecialists do not attempt to traffic antiquities; however, probability sug-
gests that specialists have a higher success rate, which is precisely why specializa-
tion develops and is favored within network structures. The emerging picture of
the trade’s structure is a framework unique to each series of transactions, ren-
dered thus by conditions in source and market countries. On one end is a geo-
graphical, political, and economic framework that is specific to each source country,
while on the other end exists a set of conditions for each market country. For
example, antiquities smuggling from Afghanistan faces different geographical and
cultural factors than Bulgaria, just as selling antiquities through eBay is quite a
different skill set from owning a gallery.

Several well-documented antiquities trafficking cases are excellent examples of
the four stages. Giacomo Medici’s trial and subsequent conviction provided a wealth
of information on the trade, which is presented in the seminal work “The Medici
Conspiracy.”41 Local tombaroli looted archaeological sites and Medici acted as an
early stage middleman by purchasing artifacts from the tombaroli and their asso-
ciates. Due to relaxed customs laws in the Freeport, Medici could sell the antiq-
uities internationally to dealers in market countries from this transit country. Medici
never sold directly to collectors, instead selling the artifacts to dealers, primarily
Robert Hecht, who then resold the antiquities. In his role as late stage intermedi-
ary, Hecht laundered the antiquities onto the licit market to facilitate sales to col-
lectors like the J. Paul Getty Museum and the Metropolitan Museum of Art. As the
newly legitimized antiquities came to rest in museum cases, the final stage of traf-
ficking ended.

The Italian prosecutor described Medici as part of a hierarchical antiquities or-
ganization, so it is important to understand why he made this claim and why it is
false. It was based on two pieces of evidence, a tombarolo referred to a “cordata,”
or mafia structure, when describing Medici and other participants and an organ-
igram found in Pasquale Cameras’ home.42 The organigram diagrammed a path
of antiquities flows leading to Hecht, creating a pyramid of relationships that looked
similar to a hierarchy. However, criminology has determined that a hierarchical
structure functions based on three features: (1) participants lower in the hierarchy
are subject to a monopoly, (2) long-term agreements, and (3) sanctions.43 In con-
trast, the Medici case showed that the transfer of looted artifacts from tombaroli
to early stage intermediaries was optional and on an opportunity-to-opportunity
basis, which implies a network structure. In fact, tombaroli freely sold artifacts to
other early stage intermediaries than Medici like Gianfranco Becchina, so the loot-
ers had no fear of sanctions, even going so far as attempting to sell fraudulent
artifacts to early stage intermediaries.44 Hecht established himself as the top late
stage intermediary through guaranteeing the best rate, as Medici discovered at the
start of his career, rather than through agreements or sanctions.45 The most dra-
matic evidence that the Italian illicit antiquities trade was not hierarchical is that
it continues to thrive even with the conviction of key figures like Pietro Casasanta,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

119

Medici, and Hecht, as well as the death of Nino Savoca and Cameras. In light of
analysis, the tombarolo who used the term “cordata” was apparently using a famil-
iar word rather than an accurate one. Furthermore, the prosecutor had to ap-
proach the case under the existing laws and most Italian organized crime laws
were written to combat hierarchical groups following years of mafia crime, so the
prosecutor tailored the approach to Medici’s case to the legislation. Antiquities
trafficking fits none of the criteria for a hierarchal structure and scholars studying
cultural trafficking have quite rightly rejected hierarchical structures for the illicit
antiquities trade.46

The Lydian Hoard is another well-documented case that clearly demonstrates
the four-stage structure. In 1965, a group of Turkish farmers looted a tomb and
sold the contents to smuggler Ali Bayirlar. Bayirlar sold them to two late stage
intermediaries, Swiss dealer George Zacos and New York dealer John Klejman,
who sold the artifacts to the Metropolitan Museum of Art from 1966 through
1970.47

Few cases are as clear-cut as the two previous examples. Roles are often filled by
multiple individuals, as Operation Ghelas illustrates. Eighty-five individuals were in-
dicted in a case of criminal networks smuggling Italian antiquities across several
countries. Tombaroli sold looted antiquities to smuggling cells that operated tran-
snationally. Police located four cells that smuggled artifacts from Italy to Switzer-
land through a large population of participants, including taxi drivers and policemen.
From Switzerland a network transported antiquities to Germany, Spain, the United
Kingdom, and United States. Once in the market countries, several late stage inter-
mediaries laundered the artifact from seemingly legitimate storefronts and auction
houses including at least one notable dealer.48

The Achyris phiale demonstrates the variable routes that antiquities can take in
certain stages. Sicilian intermediary Vincenzo Pappalardo purchased the artifact
from an unnamed Sicilian looter. Pappalardo traded it to another well-known Sicil-
ian intermediary, Vincenzo Cammarata, who traded it to Hungarian intermediary
William Veres. After three early stage intermediaries, the artifact passed to New
York dealer Robert Haber. Haber and Veres falsified documents about the artifact’s
history in order to launder it. Haber then transported the gray-market phiale, sell-
ing it as an apparently licit item to collector Michael Steinhardt. In this case, Veres
and Haber falsified documents in Switzerland, laundering the artifact before ar-
riving in New York.49

These cases demonstrate the known observable roles. The previous examples
show the variety of participants, from Turkish farmers to New York gallery own-
ers, found within the trade. Following the traditional law enforcement approach,
these court cases focused on specific individuals or artifacts. In contrast, an effec-
tive model of trafficking networks synthesizes the behavior of all participants into
a broadly applicable organizational model. If the roles are network based, then
they can explain how participants interact. Similarly, the network’s internal struc-
ture defines how participants behave. Understanding interaction and behavior is

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

120

PETER B. CAMPBELL

crucial for characterizing and anticipating trafficking. The following section fo-
cuses on three major source countries and charts the sequence of events from
source to market demonstrating network organization with an underlying four
stage structure.

II. CASE STUDIES

As major supply countries, the path that Afghan, Iraqi, and Bulgarian antiquities
take from the ground to collections is largely representative of the trade as a whole.
Significantly, these three countries are also the focus of several lingering questions
about the trade. Each case is organized by stage and the interactions within each.
The first two case studies follow transactions through each stage, as suggested
by network criminologists.50 However, it should be noted that published traffick-
ing sources, including antiquities, are limited and problematic.51 The sources cited
below are a collection of media and law enforcement reports, military records,
online auction records, and research articles. While each of these source types has
potential shortcomings, together they give a broad overview of the trade through
their sequence of events. Readers would do well to consult the endnotes, which
often contain several examples, since the overviews presented in the case studies
are digests of many sources. Since media, military, and law enforcement records
can create a potentially biased model of based on failed criminals,52 this is bal-
anced by the third case study that examines a specific individual that was a suc-
cessful dealer for many years and how his antiquities were transferred through
each stage.

A. Afghanistan

Afghanistan is a major victim of the illicit antiquities trade.53 Subsistence diggers,
local citizens that turn to looting due to economic hardship, are the primary loot-
ers.54 This type of looting often occurs during the political turmoil following mil-
itary action, when law enforcement is unable to protect sites.55 Subsistence diggers
sell artifacts to intermediaries who visit villages or archaeological sites.56

The primary exit for Afghan antiquities appears to be Pakistan.57 Though dan-
gerous, this route is popular among smugglers.58 Narcotics smugglers are known
to cross easily into Pakistan at the unmanned border crossing at Baramcha.59 Sev-
eral established smuggling organizations operate on the border, the two largest
being Hezb-i-Islami and the Haqqani network;60 however, smaller groups also con-
duct narcotics, timber, and gem smuggling.61 Jack-of-all-trades smuggling groups
are likely the primary transportation for antiquities headed to Pakistan.62

In her analysis of the opium trade, Gretchen Peters details how these organized
smuggling groups operate along the Afghan-Pakistani border, engaging in any prof-
itable enterprise including trafficking of narcotics, arms, humans, antiquities, and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

121

other commodities, as well as crimes including kidnapping and theft.63 In Peters’
report for the West Point Combating Terrorism Center, one Afghan source ex-
plained how the Taliban profits from illicit antiquities, stating “businessmen who
smuggle precious stone, sculptures and other historic artifacts. . .pay dues to the
Taliban to avoid trouble on road.”64 According to the same source, this smuggling
is tied to the Haqqani network and is major financial consideration for both the
Taliban and the smugglers.65

Once in Pakistan, antiquities are sold in border towns and transported to major
cities.66 Commercial airlines and ships transport the artifacts to cities like Sharjah
or Dubai, United Arab Emirates, which has grown into the region’s primary transit
country due to few regulations.67 The Afghan Transit Trade Agreement, which re-
scinds import taxes between Afghanistan and the Pakistani port of Karachi, ensures
a large flow of Afghan goods through the port, including a large quantity of smug-
gled goods. There is also a large amount of air cargo between Kandahar and Dubai.68
Illicit shipments have been found in Karachi destined for Sharjah as well as in Shar-
jah having arrived from Pakistan.69 Antiquities are smuggled hidden in common-
place items like furniture, in falsified cargo manifests, or in false compartments.70
United Arab Emirates is an arterial route for antiquities leaving the region for
market countries. Illicit antiquities from the entire region, including Afghanistan,
Iraq, Iran, Yemen, Azerbaijan, and Pakistan, as well as countries outside the im-
mediate area like Turkey, are sent to Sharjah before being sent internationally.71
The fact that a Turkish shipment worth an estimated at US$6 million was trans-
ported via Sharjah demonstrates the importance of United Arab Emirates as a
transit country.72 In the first six months of 2008, looted antiquities from Yemen
alone amounted to 90 law enforcement raids capturing over 5000 antiquities.73
Upon arrival in Sharjah, antiquities are purchased by individuals with connec-
tions abroad, who collaborate with corrupt customs officials in order to export
them.74 Many artifacts then head to the traditional European transit country of
Switzerland.75

Arriving in Europe, antiquities have passed through many hands, but now enter
the same established routes detailed in the Medici case and other examples. Re-
patriated artifacts indicate travel from Switzerland and Germany to market coun-
tries like United Kingdom and Belgium.76 In Blood Antiquities, documentary
filmmakers captured how dealers launder Afghan antiquities in Belgian galleries.
One dealer has a “safe house” off the main gallery street where newly smuggled
antiquities arrive and are either sold to other dealers or placed in his gallery. An-
other dealer claimed an artifact came from an old collection, a traditional laun-
dering practice, until the interviewer pointed out that it still contained dirt.77 The
film clearly illustrates that dealers are knowingly engaged in laundering Afghan
antiquities onto the licit market.

After laundering, collectors purchase the newly legitimized artifacts. Collectors
in traditional market countries including the United Kingdom, Belgium, and the
United States have seen an increase in Afghan antiquities since the start of the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

122

PETER B. CAMPBELL

recent conflict.78 This increase underscores the scale of trafficking occurring since
the export of unprovenienced Afghan antiquities is illegal.79

B. Iraq

Similar to Afghanistan, Iraq experienced widespread looting following military con-
flict.80 Numerous sources detail the looting of archaeological sites as well as Iraqi
artifacts repatriated from market countries, but there is an information gap be-
tween looting and the licit market.81 Antiquities disappear into the black market
before reappearing laundered in galleries or collections, making evidence from this
in-between phase problematic. Neil Brodie has argued that military records could
contain a wealth of information on antiquities trafficking.82 WikiLeaks’ release of
the Iraq War Logs83 provides an opportunity to examine military records, albeit
leaked, and fill the gaps in the middle of the Iraqi antiquities trade.

As a source, the WikiLeaks documents are not without issues. The documents
appear to have been chosen randomly and span several years. It is impossible to
determine if the information they contain is representative or not;84 however, even
as a fragmentary record, the WikiLeaks files confirm Brodie’s hypothesis that mil-
itary records have value for researchers.

Sources about Iraqi looting indicate a large amount of subsistence digging sim-
ilar to Afghanistan, largely due to the country’s 70% unemployment rate follow-
ing the invasion.85 The WikiLeaks files corroborate this, reporting raids on “major
archaeological sites” that resulted in arrests and confiscation of looted artifacts.86
The same economic hardship that drives subsistence diggers to loot also keeps
them from transporting their looted material long distances. Iraqi intermediaries
appear to come from various backgrounds. Roger Atwood records an incident where
an individual parked on a site and purchased antiquities from the subsistence dig-
gers.87 Other sources describe criminal networks88 and the WikiLeaks files, as law
enforcement reports, support this view. Most of the antiquities reports come from
countercrime raids.89 Illicit antiquities are profitable for these groups, as demon-
strated by one smuggler captured with artifacts and one million Iraqi dollars.90

Media sources detail how antiquities exit Iraq. There are numerous exit loca-
tions, as smuggled antiquities have been found transited to Jordan, France, Italy,
Syria, Switzerland, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Turkey.91 Many end up in es-
tablished transit countries like United Arab Emirates and Switzerland, as well as
the familiar Karachi to United Arab Emirates route.92

Once in market countries, similarities are seen between Iraqi antiquities and
those from other source countries. One Munich auction house attempted to sell
a smuggled gold vessel, while another dealer purchased a stolen royal battle axe.93
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) captured a dealer in the United States
with a “multitude” of smuggled Iraqi antiquities.94 Once laundered into Euro-
pean and North American galleries, antiquities pass easily to collectors. In an
infamous case from the first Gulf War, University College London found that a

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

123

collection of Aramaic incantation bowls owned by Martin Schøyen had been looted
in 1991. The university suppressed the report, but it was eventually leaked through
WikiLeaks.95 A certain population of collectors is cognizant that available Iraqi
antiquities are looted. On 24 January 2003, a group of collectors organized the
American Council for Cultural Policy and met with the Bush administration about
relaxing laws governing the sales of Iraqi antiquities in advance of the 20 March
invasion.96

C. Bulgaria

Bulgaria has long experienced looting problems as the third largest source coun-
try in Europe.97 Bulgaria is also a major conduit for antiquities smuggled from
the Near East, Middle East, and Africa since it is a popular trafficking route to
European market countries.98 The history of the Bulgarian antiquities trade shows
a shift in the market upon entering the digital age, as exhibited by online auction
sales.99

Under the former communist government, trafficking was state run and fell
under the auspices of the Bulgarian secret service. Using a front company named
Kintex, the secret service held a monopoly on Bulgarian smuggling that included
antiquities, arms, and other illicit goods.100 Criminal groups supplied Kintex with
antiquities from well-defined territories that were guarded and exploited through
related crimes including murder.101

Today, state run smuggling has been replaced by networks that supply market
countries with large quantities of illegal commodities including humans, narcot-
ics, arms, and antiquities.102 Smugglers are known to transport antiquities with
other illicit goods including human trafficking.103 Law enforcement has found ties
between narcotics, arms, and antiquities.104 Widespread corruption aids smug-
gling. Georgi Getov, head of the National Police’s Cultural Property Department,
collaborated with an antiquities smuggling ring that included police, prosecutors,
and museums.105 Prosecutors colluding with Bulgarian criminal groups keep ar-
chaeologists from known archaeological sites.106 Dealers take advantage of Bul-
garian trafficking to create large online stores, such as one dealer identified by
multiple sources as former Prosecutor General Nikola Filchev’s brother, as he will
be referred to in this article since he still freely operates in the United States.107
According to sources, Filchev’s brother has a history of run-ins with the law
between 1994 through 2007 over illicit antiquities. He has not been convicted, but
researchers suggest this is due to Filchev’s status as Bulgaria’s Prosecutor Gener-
al.108 Filchev himself has been accused of large-scale corruption while serving in
office.109 His brother allegedly held a protected position while Filchev was in power,
allowing him to conduct antiquities smuggling.110

Charges were first brought against Filchev’s brother in April 1994 for antiqui-
ties trafficking and he faced charges again in December 1997. In May 1998, he was
arrested at a checkpoint attempting to smuggle antiquities across the border to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

124

PETER B. CAMPBELL

sell them to “an international organized crime organization.”111 Filchev’s brother
was placed in custody, but prosecutor Kiril Ivanov released him “without giving
due reason” and he left the country before his trial, while Ivanov received a pro-
moted from Filchev.112 In 1999, Filchev’s brother moved to Hackensack, New Jer-
sey, where he opened a business named Silenos Coins and Antiquities that sold
artifacts on eBay.113 Silenos Coins applied for several visas for foreign nationals
traveling to the United States.114 In March 1999, German officials captured a pack-
age of illicit antiquities that he was shipping to himself and police also identified
eight previous packages that he had sent to the United States through Germany.115
When German officials sent the details of Filchev’s brother’s case to Bulgaria,
the prosecutor’s office requested all documents related to the case and subsequently
buried them from public view.116 Journalists who mentioned the German inci-
dent were brought into the prosecutor’s office for a false interrogation meant to
intimidate them and Filchev told subordinates, “publishers and all people con-
nected to them should be pressed not to allow such publications in the future.”117
According to one of Filchev’s prosecutors, Nikolay Kolev, Filchev told his staff that
a case would not be pursued against his brother for antiquities trafficking. Shortly
after speaking to the media about the incident, Kolev was murdered.118

The contract killer who murdered Kolev was part of an organized crime group
linked to Filchev and the prosecutor’s office never investigated Kolev’s murder.
Kolev’s widow won a human rights case based on the fact that the murder had not
been properly investigated and the court ordered the case back open. Filchev is
currently under investigation for ordering Kolev’s murder, as well as a lawyer’s
murder in an unrelated case, and other crimes. It should be noted that Filchev is
a polarizing figure in Bulgaria, so some accusations and court cases may be po-
litical maneuvers by political opponents.119

Filchev left office in 2006 and Silenos Coins disappeared from eBay in June
2007.120 In March 2007, the new prosecutor general had publically announced
that his office was tracking the brother’s online records.121 Since eBay users in
2007 could leave feedback up to 90 days following purchase, Filchev’s brother
appears to have stopped selling under Silenos Coins immediately following the
announcement.122 However, another account allegedly owned by him, S*P*Q*R,
continued selling antiquities into 2009.123 It is unknown whether Filchev’s brother
continues to sell antiquities, but the Bulgarian court case is pending while he
remains abroad.124

Silenos Coins’ eBay records can still be accessed,125 providing detailed informa-
tion about online antiquities sales. Most artifacts are coins and the other artifacts
are likewise metal, such as bronze arrowheads, which suggests that looters used
metal detectors. Periods vary from fourth century bce through eighteenth century
with the bulk being late Roman bronzes from Thrace, modern Bulgaria, though
coins originating in the Near East, Turkey, and Greece are found.126 This geo-
graphic region fits well with historical events and antiquities trafficked through
Bulgaria.127

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

125

Unlike the two previous case studies, this discussion is heavily focused on an
individual. While this is not ideal for a network approach,128 the information is
significant in that these records are detailed transactions of a successful antiqui-
ties trader. In contrast, many law enforcement or media sources are evidence of
failed traffickers. Law enforcement sources can bias trafficking reconstructions,129
so Silenos Coins provides researchers with direct documentation.

Bulgarian looting is a mixed population of impoverished individuals, hobbyists
looking to supplement their regular income, and well-funded crews supplied with
the latest technology.130 The police estimate that Bulgaria has 30,000 looters, in-
cluding criminal groups that oversee illegal excavations.131 There is no evidence of
Filchev’s brother looting himself, so he likely used connections to purchase antiq-
uities from looters. Early in his career, he was part of an “underground structure,”
though it is uncertain whether this began with general smuggling or if he has
always focused on antiquities.132 He used at least two smuggling methods, physi-
cally carrying antiquities across the border and mail,133 though other methods
were potentially used following these reported incidents since he did not experi-
ence any law enforcement issues between 1999 and 2007. Once in the United States,
Filchev’s brother maintained a legitimate storefront; however, he lacked special-
ized knowledge about antiquities and resorted to hiring specialists to identify ar-
tifacts.134 Silenos Coins was a staple of eBay antiquities sales from 2 February 2000
through 16 June 2007.135 Online antiquities sales are likely to increase as the In-
ternet offers an easy route to connect with collectors.

III. DISCUSSION

The case studies show large scale trafficking composed of diverse and loosely con-
nected participants, with interchangeable individuals in the first two stages and a
small reoccurring population in the third stage. Sources show that there is no rep-
resentative type of participant in the first stage, revealing that any individual pre-
sented with a profitable opportunity might be inclined to participate. The second
stage is composed of interchangeable transporters, often general smugglers that
take on antiquities shipments on an opportunity to opportunity basis. The third
stage has the smallest population, but observable trends show that even this stage
is variable, with early stage intermediaries regularly using different late stage in-
termediaries. Interactions generally consist of single exchanges of capital and goods
with no promise of long-term agreements or minimum guarantees of a portion of
later profits.136 In contrast to hierarchical structures, participants in the trade have
no fear of sanctions if further interactions do not occur, as discussed in the Med-
ici case. The mechanisms behind the trade’s observable complexities as well as the
similarities found with other trafficking networks suggest that antiquities traffick-
ing has a network structure with four transitional stages. For this reason, the trade
is characterized broadly and most accurately as a network with fluid interactions.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

126

PETER B. CAMPBELL

By focusing on a structural approach rather than specific individuals or crimes,
behavior is explained as opposed to simply describing observable actions. During
interactions participants are motivated based on personal risk and specialization,
often with no cognizance of the preceding or proceeding nodes in the network.
Money is exchanged at each interaction rather than collaborating together as a
chain and partitioning profits after the final sale, so personal profit is a result of
risk and specialization. Once in possession of an illicit item, concealment is nec-
essary.137 Seeking a higher profit requires more time to search for participants,
resulting in extended risk. Additionally, the longer an individual has possession of
the item, the more risk is compounded. Those in possession of an illicit object
must balance concealing their crime with being public enough to attract the in-
terest of participants in the next stage. A nonspecialized participant can attempt
to fill a specialized role, but their lack of knowledge increases possession time with
the illicit item and the corresponding risk, so nonspecialists face increased likeli-
hood of arrest. Therefore, interactions weigh risk against knowledge, which cor-
relates directly to a participant’s profit.

This balance is observed through all four stages of the trade. Afghanistan, Iraq,
and Bulgaria all have large populations of subsistence diggers attempting to sup-
plement their meager incomes. These impoverished individuals are unable to trans-
port the antiquities transnationally where demand is located, so they accept a small
sum. A series of transporters then move the antiquities locally, nationally, and in-
ternationally. In the Afghan case, antiquities traded hands multiple times, while in
the Bulgarian example there appeared to be only one or two early stage intermedi-
aries. Once reaching a transit or market country, the artifacts are transferred to
individuals offering either the largest profit or the safest transfer. Late stage inter-
mediaries require legitimate storefronts to display artifacts for the widest popula-
tion of the target demographic in order to command the highest price and
maximize their own profits. This series of interactions maximizes each participant’s
profit while minimizing individual risk, creating a network from source to market
with a predictable structure.

An interesting result of risk and specialization is decentralized market regula-
tion. The United States Department of Defense noted that intermediaries in an-
tiquities trafficking carefully regulate the market to keep demand and prices high.138
During interviews, looters have noted that market forces maintain both supply
and demand artificially.139 For example, tombaroli are paid preestablished fixed
fees by early stage intermediaries, removing the possibility of receiving a higher
price from different intermediaries.140 On the surface, it appears questionable that
market regulation is possible in loosely based, noncentralized networks. However,
regulation is maintained through the threat of risk extension. Each proceeding
stage has specialized knowledge unavailable to the preceding one, meaning that
the earlier participants can either accept the given price or extend their risk while
attempting to find another buyer. The threat of risk extension causes early nodes
to accept a lower price, demonstrating the influence of risk and specialization within

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

127

the stages. These behaviors are useful for answering some of the lingering ques-
tions within this field of research.

A. Using the Network Paradigm: New Perspectives
on Lingering Questions

The network paradigm allows researchers to interpret the antiquities trade on var-
ious scales. The case studies examined the observable aspects within each stage, so
this discussion will focus on the behaviors found among each level of partici-
pants. Analyzing the previous case studies for behaviors using the network para-
digm offers new perspectives on several lingering questions and demonstrates the
interpretive ability of a structural approach over research focused on a specific
individual or artifact.

Afghanistan and Terrorism

Whether illicit antiquities are funding terrorism is a hotly debated topic. Media
sources claim that the Taliban and Al-Qaeda are benefiting from antiquities sales.141
A widely cited Der Spiegel article states that 11 September 2001 terrorist Mo-
hamed Atta contacted a University of Gottingen faculty member about selling Af-
ghan antiquities, while also mentioning that he needed funds to purchase a plane.142
This article is the most touted evidence of illicit antiquities funding terrorism, but
the article is a brief seven sentences, published four years after the attacks, and
written based on a law enforcement interview with an anonymous individual who
has remained silent despite the enormity of the claim.143 This is not to say the
article is false, but extraordinary claims require evidence. The article’s tenuous na-
ture has not deterred writers from repeating it and citing each other, the result
being articles far longer than the original Der Spiegel report without providing
new evidence.144 Until the faculty member comes forward, the Der Spiegel article
cannot be viewed as more than what it is: an anonymous secondary source. How-
ever, given what is known about the trade as a network, could Atta have been
acting as an early stage intermediary seeking a late stage intermediary? Do illicit
antiquities fund terrorism?

As explored earlier, Afghan early stage intermediaries are typically general smug-
glers trafficking any illicit commodity that is in demand. The two major smug-
gling organizations are Hezb-i-Islami and the Haqqani network, who work closely
with the Taliban.145 In fact, the Haqqani network is recognized as the most dan-
gerous insurgent group in Afghanistan and is considered the Taliban’s chief ally.146
The Haqqani network smuggles illicit commodities into Pakistan, primarily nar-
cotics, where it exchanges them for arms that are in turn sold to the Taliban.147
Assuming that looters receive around 2% of the final sale price similar to else-
where,148 the bulk of Afghan antiquities money goes to early stage intermediaries
in the region and late stage intermediaries in transit or market countries, meaning

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

128

PETER B. CAMPBELL

that the Haqqani network and other smugglers may receive a significant amount
through antiquities.

While affiliate organizations may be profiting, it is doubtful that the Taliban
would handle antiquities if they do not even smuggle their own weapons. How-
ever, businessmen smuggling commodities in collaboration with the Haqqani net-
work pay a tax to the Taliban to operate safely.149 Based on currently available
sources, this tax appears to be the only source of funding for the Taliban related to
antiquities, though all commodities smuggled across the border are a facet of the
arms trade that supplies the Taliban.

This fits well with the known Taliban structure in Afghanistan. Former Tali-
ban foreign minister Waheed Mojda stated that “The international community
and the Americans have been deceiving themselves for the past seven years, say-
ing the Taliban has been getting all of their money from drugs.”150 Hezb-i-Islami
and the Haqqani network are hardly the only smuggling groups in Taliban con-
trolled territory and the development of a high profit crime-driven economy has
resulted in “a wide spectrum of illegitimate economic activity, including . . . smug-
gling of antiquities and other contraband. . . The main beneficiaries of these ac-
tivities are the warlords, spoiler groups and an emerging narco-mafia.”151 The
many criminal groups exploiting this gray economy not only benefit the Taliban
through tax revenue, but also supply them with weapons on the return route
allowing the Taliban to prolong the conflict.152 It is reasonable to claim that money
from the antiquities trade is making its way to the Taliban. However, the vast
majority of this money is likely lining the pockets of affiliated organizations such
as the Haqqani network, though this indirectly extends the Afghan conflict and
benefits the Taliban.

While the Taliban is a political group that governs territory, Al-Qaeda lacks a
governance to impose a similar tax. It appears that Al-Qaeda receives most its rev-
enue through patrons and donations; however, recent Islamist terrorist attacks have
been funded by crimes including bank robbery and petty theft, credit card fraud,
and drug trafficking.153 The anonymous Der Spiegel source aside, there is cur-
rently no direct evidence of Al-Qaeda profiting from the antiquities trade, though
it would not come as a surprise based on the group’s funding from other criminal
activities.
Iraq and Insurgency

Since the Iraq invasion, a number of individuals have claimed antiquities are fund-
ing either insurgency or terrorism. Iraqi ambassador Hussain Mahmood Fadhlalla
al-Khateeb stated that antiquities trafficking is funding terrorists and Iraqi mu-
seum director Donny George claimed that illicit antiquities are funding insurgent
groups.154 The United States Marine Corps states that there is a “strong case” that
illicit artifacts are funding weapons.155 United States Colonel Matthew Bogdanos
says, “There is no doubt that international trade in illegal Iraqi art and antiquities
is funding the insurgency” and funding arms purchases.156 Bogdanos describes a

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

129

raid that captured a terrorist bunker containing weapons, ammunition stockpiles,
and illicit antiquities.157

The antiquities trade in Iraq and Afghanistan closely resembles each other. Sub-
sistence diggers exploit known sites and sell artifacts for a small sum to early stage
intermediaries.158 General criminals or smugglers then transport the antiquities
out of the country to established transit countries, such as United Arab Emirates
or Switzerland.159 This fits with Bogdanos’ view that smugglers will transport any
illegal commodity that is profitable, “whether the cargo is drugs, weapons, human
beings, or antiquities.”160 The WikiLeaks files mention links between general crime
and antiquities. For example, in one raid five individuals were caught with stolen
goods, counterfeiting machines, and 31 artifacts looted from the Baghdad Muse-
um.161 Another raid found smugglers with several valuable illicit commodities in-
cluding rubies, platinum alloy, gold dust, and “archaeological material.”162 Several
other files indicate general smugglers were transporting antiquities.163 The files
reveal early stage intermediaries, rather than subsistence diggers, engaged in all
manner of illicit business.

Connections to violent groups are documented as well, potentially linking an-
tiquities to the insurgency. One raid captured more than 89 arms and related ma-
terial, as well as antiquities including “several vases, statues and tools.”164 Several
individuals were arrested on a tip that they were selling weapons and antiqui-
ties.165 The most direct example is a criminal group that planned a coordinated
multipronged attack with rocket launchers. The purchaser of the rockets was a
known antiquities trafficker.166 Potentially related, the antiquities protection de-
partment found a large weapons cache that included 16 mortars167 and a similar
cache was found in an “antiquities area” including masks, mortars, and launchers.168
Are antiquities funding the insurgency? The fragmentary WikiLeaks files indi-
cate that general, and at times violent, criminals are engaged in the antiquities
trade, but are these insurgents? Certainly, the planned rocket assault paid by an
individual profiting from antiquities fits with an insurgent attack.169 Louise Shel-
ley argues that there is an artificial distinction between crime and terrorism, since
both groups have interchangeable members and exploit opportunities available
for both.170 However, claiming that insurgents fighting for their country, in their
view, are the same as criminals or terrorists appears to be an oversimplification.
Similar to Afghanistan, Iraqi smugglers acting as early stage intermediaries and
market country dealers are most likely to profit from the trade. Participants that
engage in both insurgency and antiquities trafficking are likely the result of “one
crime depend[ing] on another” and smugglers pursuing any profitable commod-
ity.171 The link between insurgency and the antiquities trade is likely a question of
scale as there is doubtless some measure of overlap between participants.

The Syrian civil war offers a supporting view on participants. Interviews with
smugglers along the Syrian and Lebanese border regarding the role of antiquities
in the conflict provide detailed information on the first two stages. According to
the smugglers, looting is propagated by “opportunists,” or any individuals seeking

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

130

PETER B. CAMPBELL

extra money.172 The majority of looters are subsistence diggers, “trying to take
advantage of the conflict to earn a few extra dollars, whether to buy bread or weap-
ons.”173 However, smugglers claim both the Free Syrian Army and Bashar Al-
Assad’s regime are selling looted antiquities to raise money.

Antiquities and arms are a only portion of the smugglers’ trade, as they trans-
port a wide range of illicit materials including cigarettes and stolen goods.174 Weap-
ons are the general currency along the border. Syrians request weapons in exchange
for antiquities, while the smugglers receive weapons instead of money from inter-
mediaries in Beirut.

Smugglers report that the Free Syrian Army has created a looting team to fund
their movement, which a spokesman denies with the caveat, “Sure, there are peo-
ple who loot, but they work alone. If that is how they buy weapons to fight, we
can’t control them. It’s revolution, we are not organized, and no one is supporting
us.”175 This telling quote points to the decentralized system at work, composed of
a fluid population of participants similar to Afghanistan and Iraq. Do Iraqi, or
Syrian, antiquities fund violence? In certain instances it appears so, but these cases
show that marginal or desperate groups will exploit any profitable resources,
whether it is counterfeiting, narcotics, or antiquities. To imply that antiquities fund
violence instead of viewing their exploitation as a product of economic and po-
litical turmoil is placing the cart before the horse.
Internet Sales

The Internet has become a major conduit for criminal activities, so it is hardly
surprising that illicit antiquities are available online.176 The benefits of online sales
for criminals include reaching a wider population, nonpersonal interactions, and
what is termed “simple concealment,” based on the privacy afforded by a personal
computer.177 While some scholars claim that Internet auction sites are hurting the
illicit antiquities trade by driving down prices and introducing fakes,178 sales ac-
counts show that both high- and low-end antiquities are being sold with consid-
erably ease through websites, often for record sums.179 Traditional dealers are
frequently moving toward Internet sales, including established galleries with known
links to the illicit antiquities trade.180 Auction site dealers are able to sell large
quantities of cheaply priced, but culturally significant, looted artifacts.181 This ac-
tivity is unlikely to cease in the future, so understanding how Internet sales func-
tion is important for researchers.

The Silenos Coins case study can provide insight into Internet sales. Antiquities
trafficking by Internet dealers has the same basic structure as the rest of the trade,
but the role of late stage intermediaries is revised, replacing the traditional par-
ticipants with new a type of specialist skilled at Internet marketing. Looters sup-
ply intermediaries, who move Bulgarian antiquities through the same channels as
other illicit commodities, reminiscent of the second stage in Afghanistan and Iraq.182
Smugglers transport the antiquities to market countries and then mail them to
dealers,183 presumably because mail from other market countries is less likely to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

131

be screened than packages coming from source countries. Filchev’s brother’s ar-
rests and German incident suggest that he originally smuggled antiquities himself,
but others procured the artifacts after he moved to the United States. The estab-
lishment of a storefront allowed for sales through auction sites.

The Internet enters the network in the third stage, with auction sites replacing
traditional late stage intermediaries and acting as the interface for the dealer and
a much larger population of potential collectors than a gallery. Auction sites un-
wittingly launder artifacts through their appearance of legitimacy provided by the
template structure, sustaining the gray market and being rewarded with a percent-
age of the profits. Collectors purchase items that are assumed to be legal based on
the site’s guidelines. In reality, there are few options for checking an item’s prove-
nience, as sites conduct no oversight of listed items and trust sellers to be ethical.
Silenos Coins’ eBay records reveal the extent of the business. Silenos Coins’ 41,198
transactions reviews are not a wholly accurate method for determining values since
some auction lots contain multiple artifacts and a significant percentage of trans-
actions are never reviewed. eBay users estimate that 40% to 90% of transactions
are reviewed, but never 100%.184 Similarly, seller feedback left by Silenos Coins
totals 51,808 transactions; however, customer requests for feedback suggest that
not every transaction was reviewed.185 Therefore, any estimates based on eBay feed-
back are conservative. Sales prices are only listed on reviews left between Novem-
ber 14, 2006, and June 16, 2007. During this seven-month period, 4515 transactions
occurred ranging between US$0.99 and US$481.50 and totaling US$109,109.64.
This equates to an average price of US$24.17 per transaction. With 51,808 re-
viewed transactions, it can be conservatively estimated that Silenos Coins earned
US$1,251,993.85 in the seven years and four months that it operated between 2000
and 2007. This equates to approximately US$465 each day since the store opened
or US$779 per business day.186 These figures only account for eBay transactions,
but in-store sales, trade shows, and conventions also contributed profits. Silenos
Coins reveals the element hidden behind innocuous listings on auction sites.

Future research on antiquities trafficking is likely to focus on Internet sales. The
legitimate appearance of auction templates simplifies laundering and websites have
access to a wider audience than traditional storefronts. eBay alone has over 212
million registered users.187 eBay auctions are also viewable through major search
engines like Yahoo and Google, increasing the audience to practically any Internet
user. The detailed information from Silenos Coins is useful as a baseline for future
research into Internet sales. Canadian officials captured more than 21,000 illicit
Bulgarian antiquities that were destined for the United States and a numismatist
estimated the total value at Y100,000 (US$134,119), or fewer than Y5 (US$6.71)
per artifact.188 Based on Silenos Coins’ data, the shipment is more accurately es-
timated as Y378,219 (US$507,570). This figure is conservative considering the pres-
ence of high-value antiquities, like jewels and glass objects, in the shipment. Internet
auctions will likely become a popular research area since online transaction records
can provide more detailed sales information than previously available.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

132

PETER B. CAMPBELL

B. Crime within the Network

Researchers have debated the character and proportion of crime within the illicit
antiquities trade and few topics have such contrasting views as organized crime.
Blythe Bowman Proulx argues that organized crime involvement is limited and
claims of organized crime are in fact the product of definitional issues.189 Andrew
McCalister argues for large-scale organized crime participation in both looting
and smuggling.190 Noah Charney states that art crime has developed into a sig-
nificant business for organized crime.191 Simon McKenzie supports the notion that
organized crime, in the traditional definition, is limited.192

How are such different views possible while at the same time presenting accurate
evidence and plausible conclusions? Sources reveal the issue. Bowman Proulx uses
sources from the first stage from the perspective of archaeologists. McCalister draws
on sources from the first and second stages. McKenzie’s research is based on gallery
and museum sources, the third and fourth stages. McKenzie notes this source issue,
stating that dealers are least likely to know about or discuss organized crime involve-
ment and this could affect his interpretation.193 Within this field of study, primary
source interviews are available from looters, late stage intermediaries, and collec-
tors; however, sources on early stage intermediaries remain elusive.194 Due to the na-
ture of black market crime, sources on the third and fourth stage will always be more
readily available than those about the second stage. In addition, sources that are avail-
able will be mostly failed intermediaries. Examining the available sources, the au-
thor argues that the type of crime is dependent on behaviors exhibited at each stage.
Crime in the first stage is characterized by theft from archaeological sites, mu-
seums, or cultural centers like churches or mosques. These participants generally
use manual labor in public space to steal artifacts, which has limited concealment
and makes it is a high-risk job. Despite the risks, this stage has the largest and
most diverse population. Participants’ second crime is selling stolen goods to early
stage intermediaries.

The second stage has the most variable population in terms of skills and, there-
fore, has connections to other forms of crime. As a multibillion dollar industry
with less risk than narcotics or arms, antiquities draw diverse profit-seeking par-
ticipants, including established crime groups.195 Researchers seeking connections
between antiquities and narcotics, arms, human trafficking, and other illicit com-
modities should focus on the second stage.196 Likewise, corruption is almost solely
found in this stage, including public officials, police, ambassadors, and customs
agents.197 Violent crime, generally rare, is likewise primarily relegated to this stage
when it does occur.198

“Organized crime” is a problematic term whose meaning continues to be de-
bated without resolution, including in the context of the antiquities trade.199 Suf-
fice it to say, when crime groups ranging from the Haqqani network to the mafia are
involved in the trade, it is almost entirely found in the second stage. It is important
to distinguish between organized crime members participating individually in a net-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

133

work and organizational participation. Crime begets crime and criminals can have
multiple affiliations. For example, mafia member Vincenzo Cammarata acted as an
intermediary for the Achyris phiale, but there is no evidence that this was a mafia
endeavor.200 However, organized crime does participate in the trade as an organi-
zation. Vaman Narayan Ghiya built a “smuggling cartel” in South Asia that oper-
ated for 30 years, transporting antiquities that ended in sales at auction houses like
Sotheby’s and Christie’s.201 Dealer Bruce McNall states that the Turkish mafia moves
antiquities from looters to the legitimate market.202 In Armenia, the mafia smug-
gles humans and antiquities.203 Smugglers along the Syrian and Lebanese border are
trafficking antiquities in exchange for arms.204 The largest organized crime group
involved in the antiquities trade is the Russian mob, known as the Red Mafiya.

The Red Mafiya is emblematic of modern organized crime, earning billions of
dollars worldwide through business of “every shape, manner, and form of crime
globally” including counterfeiting, money laundering, extortion, arms deals, drug
trafficking, prostitution, theft, bribery, smuggling, fraud, tax evasion, contract kill-
ing, and even toxic waste dumping.205 The Red Mafiya is also the preeminent ex-
ample of a criminal network structure.206 As one law enforcement agent stated
“Whatever opportunity affords itself—that is what they do that day.”207

If there is a central figure in the Red Mafiya, then it is man with the moniker
the “Brainy Don,” who was labeled by the FBI as the “most dangerous mobster
in the world.”208 When he is not running the largest laundering schemes in the
history of Canada and United States and taking out US$100,000 assassination
contracts on journalists that write about him, he engages in a wide range of art
crime.209 Antiquities stolen from churches, synagogues, museums, and collectors
in Russia, Germany, and Eastern European countries are smuggled to “front” stores
operated by his partners in the Moscow-based Solntsevskaya crime group, which
launders antiquities onto the licit market.210 The former head of Russian mob
activities in Italy was another member engaged in antiquities trafficking.211 Sig-
nificant organized crime groups participate in the antiquities trade; however, it is
from an opportunity to opportunity basis as one would expect from a network
structure.

The third and fourth stages are characterized by white-collar crimes with few ex-
amples of violent or crime group participation. Their absence is largely the result of
success being dependent on maintaining a legitimate appearance and specialized
knowledge in art history. The third stage is defined by laundering, but crimes also
include fraud and tax evasion.212 Crimes in the fourth stage consist of purchasing
stolen property, as an unknown percentage of collectors are complicit with deal-
ers.213 Former J. Paul Getty Museum curator Marion True allegedly used the Fleish-
mann Collection to launder antiquities, even speaking to Hecht and Medici about
areas where the tombaroli were working.214 Some museum donors knowingly pur-
chase illicit antiquities to launder the artifacts in return for tax write-offs.215 Each
of the four stages is populated by dramatically different participants, with behavior
and crimes corresponding to their location within the network structure. This is not

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

134

PETER B. CAMPBELL

to say there are not exceptions; however, as a broad portrait of the trade, sources sug-
gest this framework to be accurate.

While the network is composed of a series of individual transactions, it should
be noted that the entire trade is criminal and organized.216 Each participant is
cognizant that they are stealing or purchasing stolen items, with the possible ex-
ception of some collectors, and participants are interacting with sole purpose of
facilitating at least two crimes personally, since each stage has a crime at either
interface. In other trafficking networks, every participant is considered part of or-
ganized crime.217 Antiquities participants are variable, but from “one timers” to
Mafiya members, each individual is performing a role that conspires to commit at
a minimum, theft, transnational smuggling, fraud, and laundering over the course
of the network.218 In fact, compared to narcotic and arms trafficking that often
commits only two crimes, transnational smuggling and possession of illicit goods,
antiquities trafficking commits more offenses than these top two illicit trades. Pur-
chasing laundered antiquities is communicating, directly or indirectly, with par-
ticipants in each stage through feedback loops. This funds the trade as well as the
numerous associated crimes discussed above. Mounting evidence reinforces Ri-
cardo Elia’s statement that collectors are the real looters219 and the network par-
adigm highlights their role. Antiquities trafficking participants have thus far escaped
the label of “organized crime,” but it is a term that has encompassed the other
forms of trafficking and their members.220

C. Anticipating Antiquities Trafficking

Though “social phenomena are often too complex for social science to emulate the
[predictive ability of the] natural sciences,” criminologists have identified a meth-
odology for anticipating network crime.221 Since networks lack a central authority
to cut off at the head, they can be combated by removing locations where criminals
interact, hence cutting them off at the feet. Physical locations where criminal inter-
action and exchange occurs are called “convergence settings.” On the surface this ap-
proach seems simplistic, but removing convergence settings has a significant impact
since “crime prevented is largely crime depleted” and some criminologists suggest
that this approach has more long-term effect than targeting individuals.222 It is im-
portant to remember that participants in criminal networks typically exploit op-
portunities rather than create opportunities. Preventing participants from interacting
with others in networks removes opportunity and extends risk. Anticipation offers
nuanced and intellectual solutions for both source and market countries.
Limiting Convergence Settings

If the entire network is viewed as a criminal market, then targeting the conver-
gence settings used by participants at each stage can have an immediate impact on
combating the trade.223 All trade, licit and illicit, is a social activity requiring a
physical location and communication. International networks, though they stretch

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

135

globally, are composed of a series of individual relationships that occur in local
physical settings.224 Since crimes of theft, smuggling, and laundering are neces-
sary for each artifact within the network, preventing one crime also prevents the
subsequent crimes. Prevention is easiest, and least dangerous, through removing
convergence settings. When seeking an opportunity, participants seek a new col-
laborator or work with a previous one. Criminals congregate in locations where
they can meet collaborators, but if these locations are identified by law enforce-
ment, then criminals must find new, riskier, locations. Importantly, since general
criminals participate in antiquities trafficking, collaborations with law enforce-
ment can prevent other types of trafficking by removing a setting.225 Barring entry
to archaeological sites is an obvious example, but identifying cafes or bars where
smugglers congregate prevents progression through the network. For example, Med-
ici took advantage of private warehouses in Switzerland’s free port, popular with
smugglers, to meet with late stage intermediaries.226

Internet crime is likewise affected by removing convergence settings. Restrict-
ing illegal activity on websites complicates interaction and prevents crime.227 One
potential target is the sale of “crusty” ancient coins on eBay, a name referring to
their dirty state after coming fresh from archaeological sites.228 While eBay claims
that it is unable to monitor coin sales, prohibiting sale of these undeniably looted
artifacts would restrict Internet convergence settings between late stage intermedi-
aries and collectors. It is also important to remember that though the Internet is
global, participants are nevertheless in physical locations and criminal transac-
tions on auctions sites have a level of transparency, recording criminals’ banking
information and addresses.
Localized Response to Networks

Response to criminal networks can be tailored to the geopolitical conditions in
each country. Why are there subsistence looters in Iraq and not in Italy, where
there are tombaroli? Why are Afghan intermediary composed of smuggling gangs,
while in Italy and Switzerland Medici worked alone as an intermediary? Impor-
tantly, why do antiquities from all these different groups in the first two stages end
up in the same galleries together? Criminologists examining other trafficking have
noted, “Understanding the cultures and subcultures that facilitate organized crime
can provide an important basis for planning,” and ultimately anticipating net-
works.229 Crime is dependent on its location and context,230 and develops based
on the economics, legislation, and cultural views in each country.

The case studies are good examples of each country’s context. The type of looter
is largely dependent on the economic situation. Subsistence looters are found in
countries with high unemployment, while more specialized tombaroli or huaque-
ros are found in economies with less than 10% unemployment.231 Violent and
traditional organized criminal elements are likewise dependent on local condi-
tions. The Afghanistan, Iraq, and Bulgaria cases are more violent than the exam-
ples from Italy and Turkey, who have more stable economies and governments.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

136

PETER B. CAMPBELL

Scholarship has reached the level where if the unemployment rate of a country is
known, then it is arguably possible to estimate the type of looters present. Fur-
thermore, if there are observations from the first and third stages, then it is pos-
sible to infer information about the second stage. In this way, using what is known
about networks and antiquities trafficking in general can be used to guide re-
sponse to local conditions.

Arresting subsistence diggers has a minimal impact since participants are inter-
changeable and easily replaceable. It compounds what is at its root an economic
problem; however, these countries can disrupt the trade through focusing on smug-
gling forms specific to their own legislation and borders. Organized crime clusters
near arterial routes,232 evidenced by antiquities over broad regions following fa-
miliar routes to transit countries like United Arab Emirates and Switzerland. In-
ternational pressure placed on transit countries can lead to customs reforms,
limiting all types of trafficking.233 Note that the trade is never static and it changes
with new legislation, as the economic situation improves or degrades, or to ex-
ploit new loopholes. For example, new routes are being formed to replace the tra-
ditional transit country of Switzerland, so even as scholars identify sequences of
events the circumstances are changing. This is why tailoring response to local con-
ditions and targeting convergence settings provides a nuanced and adaptable ap-
proach for each country. Importantly, the first two stages are unique to each source
country, but two final stages are shared across the trade.

Crimes fall into certain rhythms based on local circumstances and response can
be fitted to these rhythms.234 For example, tombaroli and huaqueros work only at
night due to local legislation and cultural views in Italy and Peru. This means law
enforcement can maximize its presence through preventative measure such as early
morning spot checks on roads leading from major archaeological areas, especially
toward major cities where connections to early stage middle men will likely occur.
Late stage intermediaries are tied to a physical location, their storefront, and as
the most specialized they are the smallest population in the entire network, as
Figure 2 illustrates. While individuals in the other stages may participate only once,
late stage intermediaries are a constant population. This creates a bottleneck within
the network that is vulnerable to disruption through monitoring. Black market
interactions cannot occur at the store or during public hours, so law enforcement
resources can be maximized during specific hours and targeting offsite locations.
By understanding their own geographical, economic, and cultural factors, coun-
tries can anticipate the types of crime and the rhythms that criminals follow. Both
limiting convergence settings and tailoring local responses are best carried out
through law enforcement collaborations aimed at limiting all forms of trafficking,
as well as other forms of crime.
Culture Change

The most effective long-term option is targeting the social nature of trade. Cri-
minologists note how difficult it is for crime to continue when society is mobi-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

137

FIGURE 2. Relative populations in each stage with each symbol representing 1000
participants.244

lized against it, removing both participants and convergence settings.235 By
challenging collectors’ desire for status symbols, a culture change would prevent
the trafficking from the top down. While admittedly difficult, this is the only real
option for large-scale prevention of the trade. Culture changes have found vary-
ing success in other areas, including “blood” diamonds, the antifur movement,
and the environmental movement.236 This movement has already begun with
archaeologists arguing the similarities between endangered species and cultural
heritage as well as drawing parallels between blood diamonds and illicit antiqui-
ties.237 A recent antiquities trade example of a mobilized society is the public
protection of the Egyptian museum during the 2011 revolution.238

Artifacts’ esteem, and therefore value, is directly linked to significance within
the culture of origin,239 suggesting that ownership of illicit cultural items is a ves-
tige of the colonial era tied to dominance over another’s identity.240 Indeed, the
gentleman collector, a concept first introduced during the colonial period, is a
common theme among modern collectors.241 In contrast, the “Good Collector”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

138

PETER B. CAMPBELL

recognizes the culture behind art, promoting knowledge over aesthetics, while dis-
paraging destruction of archaeological sites and antiquities without provenience
records.242 Ownership of “old things” should never be discouraged, but knowingly
purchasing stolen culture heritage is neither art appreciation nor the mark of a
cultured individual. Rather, it is participation in organized crime and exploitation
of another culture. Educating the public about the quantitative and qualitative
impact of antiquities trafficking should help promote a culture change.

What would be the result of a culture change? A smaller purchasing population
would decrease the value of the bulk of antiquities and cause capital traveling through
the network to correspondingly decline. If capital decreases below the risk-to-profit
threshold, then general criminal groups will cease to transport antiquities and cut
looters’ connections to dealers. This threshold is significant. The author was con-
ducting archaeological research in Albania in 2011, when a local fisherman found a
complete amphora in his nets. Based on previous sales, the fisherman believed he
could get 100,000 leke (US$1000) from intermediaries selling to Italian collectors;
however, the market has decline significantly due to the economy. With intermedi-
aries apparently working elsewhere, there was no one to transport the artifact to col-
lectors in Italy and in 2012 the fisherman reported that he had given up attempting
to sell the amphora and discarded it. Influencing the market end of the network, as
well as disrupting the middle, can affect the entire interaction chain back to the
source country. There may never be an end to antiquities trafficking, but under-
standing its organizational structure can direct resources to combat the trade in an
efficient manner through anticipating interactions at convergence settings and tai-
loring societal and legislative disincentives to regional contexts.

IV. CONCLUSION

The apparent complexity observed within the illicit antiquities trade can be use-
fully explained through the network paradigm. Hierarchical organization does not
appear to exist currently within the trade. Antiquities trafficking has an underly-
ing four stage structure that developed as part of role specialization within the
network organization. Each stage is guided by behaviors based on the geograph-
ical, economic, legislative, and cultural conditions that the participants operate
within. Participants are loosely connected through informal interactions, often one
time transactions though sometimes repeating. The average participant is not a
career criminal, but a regular citizen attempting to exploit an opportunity to sup-
plement their income, especially in the first stage. Though participants may have
no knowledge of the other nodes, network trafficking constitutes organized crime.243
Rather than focus on specific criminals or artifacts, future research should con-
tinue to examining the organizational structure. This approach explains how par-
ticipants both interact and behave. The network paradigm offers a nuanced view
of cultural trafficking, including lingering questions within the field about terror-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

139

ism, insurgency, and Internet sales. Future research will provide more detailed in-
formation on actual transactions as criminals are identified and their online
accounts are examined. Organize crime, in the traditional sense, can be explored
by researchers focusing on the second stage. By viewing antiquities trafficking as a
network, criminal interactions can be anticipated and law enforcement can con-
duct safe, preventative measures like removing convergence settings.

ENDNOTES

1. Calvani, “Frequency and Figures,” 29.
2. UNESCO, International Flows of Selected, 37.
3. For the antiquities trade, see Bowman Proulx, “Organized Criminal Involvement,” 24; for other

trafficking, see Coluccello and Massey, “Out of Africa,” 86.

4. Williams, “Networks, Markets, and Hierarchies,” 62; an overview provided by Williams, “Trans-

national Criminal Networks.”

5. Antoniadou, “Reflections on an Archaeological Ethnography.”
6. Williams and Godson, “Anticipating Organized and Transnational,” 333; Williams, “Net-

works, Markets, and Hierarchies,” 62.

7. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 7; Felson and Boba, Crime and Everyday Life,

11–12.

8. Felson and Boba, Crime and Everyday Life, 12.
9. Green, The Smugglers, 9.
10. Williams and Godson, “Anticipating Organized and Transnational,” 311.
11. Williams, “Networks, Markets, and Hierarchies,” 73.
12. United Nations, United Nations Convention Against Transnational, 5.
13. Williams and Godson, “Anticipating Organized and Transnational,” 332.
14. Adler and Polk, “The Illicit Traffic in Plundered.”
15. Merryman, “Two Ways of Thinking,” 832.
16. Felson and Boba, Crime and Everyday Life, 11.
17. Atwood, Stealing History, 5.
18. Ruiz, “My Life as a Tombarolo,” 36–38.
19. Bowman Proulx, “Organized Criminal Involvement,” 24.
20. Bell, “Mythscapes,” 67–69; Anderson, Imagined Communities, 182–84.
21. A term appropriated from whitewashing historical narratives of slavery; see Eichstedt and

Small, Representations of Slavery. Also see Alderman and Campbell, “Symbolic Excavation.”

22. Improper collecting not only debases existing narratives through removing their physical
evidence, but goes further by creating false narratives about the past based on their own views,
such as the invented past of Cycladic figurines discussed in Gill and Chippendale, “Material and
Intellectual Consequences,” 602, 634, 647–48; as well as Egyptian artifacts in Colla, Conflicted An-
tiquities, 27.

23. Meskell, “Pharaonic Legacies,” 150–56; Anderson, Imagined Communities, 182.
24. Bator, “An Essay on the International,” 292.
25. Kersel, “From the Ground to the Buyer”; Alderman, “Honor Amongst Thieves.”
26. 1 Coluccello and Massey, “Out of Africa,” 88.
27. Pastore et al., “Schengen’s Soft Underbelly,” 107.
28. Pastore et al., “Schengen’s Soft Underbelly,” 102.
29. For an example of locating sites, see Ruiz, “My Life as a Tombarolo.” For transportation and
smuggling transnationally, see McCalister, “Organized Crime and the Theft,” 26. For laundering and
art history, see Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy, x.

30. Brodie, “Pity the Poor Middlemen.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

140

PETER B. CAMPBELL

31. Department of Defense, “Several Theories Justifying”; Kersel, “From the Ground,” 188–89.
32. For looters’ knowledge, see Conklin, Art Crime, 158–59; Ruiz, “My Life as a Tombarolo”; and

for specialized transporters, see McCalister, “Organized Crime and the Theft,” 26.

33. Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy.
34. Bowman, “Transnational Crimes Against Culture,” 226.
35. MacKenzie, Going, Going, Gone: Regulating the Market; for antiquities and social mobility, see

Gill and Chippendale, “Material and Intellectual Consequences,” 634.

36. Social mobility discussed in Gill and Chippendale, “Material and Intellectual Consequences”;
for city-scale examples, see Greenhalgh, Marble Past, Monumental Present, 390; for examples of col-
lectors, see Kletter, “The Friends of Antiquities,” 11.

37. Slayman, “The Trial in Rome”; Hoving, Making the Mummies Dance, 217, 310.
38. Bruce Weber, “Robert Hecht, Antiquities Dealer, Dies at 92,” New York Times, 9 February 2012,
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/10/arts/design/robert-hecht-antiquities-dealer-dies-at-92.html
?_r⫽0 (accessed 6 December 2012).
39. Andrew Chang, “Antiquities Trial Evokes Indiana Jones & 007,” ABC News, 13 February 2003,
http://abcnews.go.com/International/story?id⫽80143&page⫽1#.UMB5YZOLJPQ (accessed 6 De-
cember 2012).

40. Felch and Frammolino, Chasing Aphrodite, 339.
41. Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy.
42. Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy, 17, 79.
43. Pastore et al., “Schengen’s Soft Underbelly,” 107.
44. Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy, 78–79, 316.
45. Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy, 166–68.
46. Bowman Proulx, “Organized Criminal Involvement.”
47. Hoving, Making the Mummies Dance, 217; Waxman, “Chasing the Lydian Hoard”; Kline, “Art

Market,” 102–103; Bessieres, “We Have to Change.”

48. Drake, “Italy Awaits Biggest Ever Trial,” 11.
49. Merryman et al., Law, Ethics, and the Visual Arts, 289–91.
50. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized,” 8.
51. Pastore et al., “Schengen’s Soft Underbelly,” 98.
52. Pastore et al., “Schengen’s Soft Underbelly,” 98.
53. ICOM, Red List of Afghanistan, 6.
54. For Afghan subsistence diggers, see Schetter, “The ‘Bazaar Economy,’” 9–10; for subsistence

diggers in general, see Conklin, Art Crime, 158–59.

55. Atwood, Stealing History, 246.
56. Brems and Van den Eynde, Blood Antiquities; Atwood, Stealing History, 5.
57. Peters, Seeds of Terror, 236; Elizabeth Rubin, “In the Land of the Taliban,” New York Times, 22
October 2006, http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/22/magazine/22afghanistan.htm (accessed 2 March
2011); Miriam Al Serkel, “Federal Law Needed to Fight Smuggling of Antiquities in UAE,” GulfNews,
18 May 2008, http://gulfnews.com/news/gulf/uae/heritage-culture/federal-law-needed-to-fight-
smuggling-of-antiquities-in-uae-1.105604 (accessed 28 March 2013).

58. Schetter, “The ‘Bazaar Economy,’” 10.
59. Rubin, “In the Land.”
60. “Al Qaeda-Linked Militants Captured in Afghanistan,” Huffington Post, 13 August 2010, http://
www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/08/13/afghanistan-al-qaeda-mili_n_681012.html (accessed 1 April
2011).

61. Collins and Ali, “Financing the Taliban.”
62. Peters, “More than 1,500 Stolen,” 2; Schetter, “The ‘Bazaar Economy,’” 10.
63. Peters, Seeds of Terror, 236.
64. Peters, “Crime and Insurgency,” 36.
65. Peters, “Crime and Insurgency,” 36.
66. Abdullah Iqbal, “Statues Find Way into Pakistan,” GulfNews, 3 March 2001, http://gulfnews.com

/news/gulf/uae/general/statues-find-way-into-pakistan-1.409988 (accessed 16 March 2011).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

141

67. Al Serkel, “Federal Law Needed”; Charles Stratford, “Illegal Antiquities Pass through Porous
Law,” GulfNews, 31 July 2006, http://gulfnews.com/news/gulf/uae/general/illegal-antiques-pass
-through-porous-law-1.246427 (accessed 7 January 2011); “Dubai Customs Foil a Major Attempt to
Smuggle Antiquities,” AMEInfo, 29 November 2008, http://www.ameinfo.com/177351.html (ac-
cessed 12 January 2011).

68. Schetter, “The ‘Bazaar Economy,’” 11.
69. “Antiquities Smuggling Bid to UAE Foiled,” PakTribune, 18 November 2004, http://www
.paktribune.com/news/print.php?id⫽160417 (accessed 8 January 2011); “Antiquities Smuggling Case:
Customs Want Clearing Agents’ Bail Cancelled,” Daily Times, 20 November 2006. http://www.dailytimes
.com.pk/default.asp?page⫽2006%5C11%5C20%5Cstory_20-11-2006_pg12_2 (accessed 28 January
2011).
70. For smuggling inside licit commodities, see “Antiquities Smuggling Bid”; Adil Najam, “Smug-
gling Historical Artifacts to Sharjah,” Pakistaniat, 19 November 2006, http://pakistaniat.com/2006
/11/19/smuggling-historical-artifacts-to-sharjah/ (accessed 10 February 2011); for falsified cargo man-
ifests, see Stratford, “Illegal Antiquities Pass”; for false compartment, see “Dubai Customs Foil.”
71. Al Serkel, “Federal Law Needed”; Nasser Arrabyee, “Antiquities Returned to Yemen,” Gulf News,
19 June 2008, http://gulfnews.com/news/gulf/yemen/antiquities-returned-to-yemen-1.112525 (ac-
cessed 11 January 2011).
72. Miriam Al Serkel, “Smuggled Antiquities Worth $6M Seized,” GulfNews, 25 February 2008,
http://gulfnews.com/news/gulf/uae/crime/smuggled-antiques-worth-6m-seized-1.86448 (accessed 8
January 2011).

73. Arrabyee, “Antiquities Returned to Yemen.”
74. For international connections, see “Smugglers of Iraqi Artefacts Arrested,” GulfNews, 28 May
2007, http://gulfnews.com/news/gulf/uae/crime/smugglers-of-iraqi-artefacts-arrested-1.180199 (ac-
cessed 7 January 2011); Al Serkel, “Smuggled Antiquities Worth”; for corruption, see “Antiquities
Smuggling Case.”

75. Al Serkel, “Smuggled Antiquities Worth.”
76. For transit countries, see “Antiquities Smuggling Case”; Al Serkel, “Smuggled Antiquities Worth”;
for market countries, see Ray, Deeti Ranjita, “Cultural Crime: Reaching New Heights,” Institute of
Peace & Conflict Studies, 3 September 2003, http://www.ipcs.org/article/India/cultural-crime-reaching
-new-heights-1122.html (accessed 6 April 2011); Brems and Van den Eynde, Blood Antiquities; Sarah
Rainsford, “Looted Treasures Return to Afghanistan,” BBC News, 10 June 2009, http://www.news
.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8093573.stm (accessed 1 April 2011).

77. For laundering through claiming an old collection, see Gill and Chippendale, “Material and
Intellectual Consequences,” 623; for a Belgian example, see Brems and Van den Eynde, Blood Antiquities.
78. Tijhuis, Transnational Crime, 117; “Taliban Making Profit from Belgian Antiques Dealers,”
Expatia, 9 July 2009, http://www.expatica.com/be/news/local_news/Taliban-making-profit-from
-Belgian-antiques-dealers-_56076.html (accessed 12 April 2011).

79. ICOM, Red List of Afghanistan, 2.
80. McCalister, “Organized Crime and the Theft.”
81. For a looting, see Atwood, Stealing History; for repatriation, see Lucian Harris, “German Court
Orders Return of Ancient Vessel to Iraq,” Art Newspaper 18 November 2009, http://www
.theartnewspaper.com/articles/German-court-orders-return-of-ancient-vessel-to-Iraq/19796 (ac-
cessed 21 April 2013). Eric Kelsey, “Germany Hands Ancient Battle Axe Back to Iraq,” Reuters, 10
February 2011, http://in.reuters.com/article/2011/02/10/idINIndia-54805020110210 (accessed 12 Feb-
ruary 2011).

82. Brodie, “The Market in Iraqi Antiquities,” 72–73.
83. WikiLeaks, “WikiLeaks Iraq War Logs.”
84. Simon Rogers, “WikiLeaks Iraq: What’s Wrong with the Data?” Guardian, 25 October 2010,
http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2010/oct/25/wikileaks-iraq-data (accessed 2 April 2011).
85. For subsistence diggers, see Atwood, Stealing History, 4–6;“Stealing Undiscovered History in Iraq,”
Aljazeera, 14 April 2004, http://english.aljazeera.net/archive/2004/04/2008410141833634744.html (ac-
cessed 7 March 2011); for unemployment rate, see McCalister, “Organized Crime and the Theft,” 36.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

142

PETER B. CAMPBELL

86. WikiLeaks, “Materials Recovered by 2004-02-20”; WikiLeaks, “(Friendly Action) Detain RPT

2008-10-19”; WikiLeaks, “(Criminal Event) Smuggling RPT 2008-4-3.”

87. Atwood, Stealing History, 5.
88. McCalister, “Organized Crime and the Theft,” 32.
89. WikiLeaks, “During Op. 2004-02-20”; WikiLeaks, “Raid by Wolf BDE 2005-07-18”; WikiLeaks,

“Friendly Action Arrest RPT 2008-03-18.”

90. WikiLeaks, “Friendly Action Raid RPT 2008-7-3.”
91. Chalmers Johnson, “The Smash of Civilizations,” Asia Times, 9 July 2005, http://www

.atimes.com/atimes/Middle_East/GG09Ak01.html (accessed 9 February 2011).

92. For transit countries, see Johnson, “The Smash of Civilizations”; Al Serkel, “Federal Law
Needed”; Frank Christiansen, “Stolen Iraqi Artefacts Seized in Germany, But Sellers to Go Free,”
Newcomers Network, 22 December 2010, http://www.accessmylibrary.com/article-1G1-245165052
/stolen-iraqi-artefacts-seized.html (accessed 13 January 2011); for UAE, see Stratford, “Illegal An-
tiquities Pass”; Najam, “Smuggling Historical Artifacts”; “Smugglers of Iraqi Artefacts.”

93. Harris, “German Court Orders”; Kelsey, “Germany Hands Ancient.”
94. Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Iraqi Artifacts Seized.”
95. WikiLeaks, “UK Possession of Arts Works”; Vanessa Thorpe and James Doeser, “UK Scholars
Linked to ‘Stolen’ Bowls of Babylon,” Guardian, 8 November 2009, http://www.guardian.co.uk
/world/2009/nov/08/british-link-stolen-treasures?cat⫽world&type⫽article (accessed 1 April 2011).
96. Johnson, “The Smash of Civilizations.”
97. Malcolm Moore,“Tomb Raiders Strip Bulgaria of its Treasures,”Telegraph, 29 August 2007, http://
www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/1561613/Tomb-raiders-strip-Bulgaria-of-its-treasures.html (ac-
cessed 8 February 2011).
98. Bozhidar Dimitrov, “Antiques Are Smuggled in Bulgaria through Drug Traffic Channels,” Stan-
dart News, 12 May 2008, http://www.paper.standartnews.com/en/article.php?d⫽2008-05-12&article
⫽23660 (accessed 10 April 2011).
99. Zornitsa Gavrilova, “Bulgaria Takes Back Its Antique Treasures: Prosecutors Inspect Foreign
Museums for Bulgarian Treasures,” Standart News, 13 December 2007, http://www.paper.standartnews
.com/en/article.php?d⫽2007-12-13&article⫽3874 (accessed 1 April 2011).
100. “Kintex—Key Player in Bulgaria’s Secret Transit,” Sofia News Agency, 29 February 2010, http://
www.novinite.com/view_news.php?id⫽90870 (accessed 6 March 2011); “Illegal Antiques Channels
and Lyudmila Zhivkova’s Role, Part I,” Sofia News Agency, 20 May 2008, http://www.novinite.com
/view_news.php?id⫽93302 (accessed 6 March 2011).

101. Guineva, “Illegal Antiques Channels.”
102. Harry Quetteville, “Bulgaria Acts to Smash Mafia’s EU Network,” Telegraph, 6 May 2008,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/bulgaria/1932962/Bulgaria-acts-to-smash-mafias
-EU-network.html (accessed 1 April 2011).

103. Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria, 186.
104. “Nine Arrested in Drug Bust in Bulgarian Town of Blagoevgrad,” Sofia Echo, 26 July 2010, http://
sofiaecho.com/2010/07/26/937695_nine-arrested-in-drug-bust-in-bulgarian-town-of-blagoevgrad (ac-
cessed 2 April 2011).

105. Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria, 194.
106. Ivan Dikov, “Bulgaria: An Archaeology and Treasure Hunting Paradise. Or Hell,” Sofia News
Agency, 31 July 2009, http://www.novinite.com/view_news.php?id⫽106385 (accessed 22 February
2011).

107. Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria; Dragieva, Political Corruption Practices; “Bulgaria
to Recover Smuggled Archaeology Finds from Canada Shortly,” Sofia News Agency, 6 August 2010,
http://www.novinite.com/view_news.php?id⫽118921 (accessed 6 March 2011); “Publications against
Nikola Filchev Only Reason for Prosecutor Investigations Nikolay Kolev, Ex-Military Prosecutor
Speaks to Mediapool.bg,” Dnevnik.bg, 3 August 2001, http://www.m.dnevnik.bg/bulgaria/2001/03
/08/14915_publications_against_nikola_filchev_only_reason_for/?print⫽1T (accessed 4 April 2011).
108. Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria, 186; Dragieva, Political Corruption Practices, 58; “Pub-

lications Against Nikola Filchev.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

143

109. “Bulgaria Ex Chief Prosecutor to Be Interrogated over ‘Octopus’ Mafia Case,” Sofia News Agency,
15 February 2010, http://www.novinite.com/view_news.php?id⫽113192 (accessed 6 March 2011).

110. Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria, 186.
111. Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria, 186; Dragieva, Political Corruption Practices, 58.
112. For Filchev’s brother leaving the country, see Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria, 186; for

prosecutor Ivanov’s promotion, see Dragieva, Political Corruption Practices, 58.

113. Several buyers thank Filchev’s brother by his first name in the transaction feedback, eBay,

“eBay My World”; MyVisaJobs.com, “Silenos Coins and Antiquities.”

114. MyVisaJobs.com, “Silenos Coins and Antiquities.”
115. Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria, 186.
116. Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria, 186.
117. “Publications against Nikola Filchev.”
118. “Widow Accuses Bulgarian Ex Secret Agent of Plotting Murders,” Sofia News Agency, 11
February 2010, http://www.thebulgariannews.com/view_news.php?id⫽113032 (accessed 6 March
2011).
119. “Bulgaria Ex Chief Prosecutor”; “Widow Accuses Bulgarian”; “The Attacks against Prosecu-
tor General Nikola Filchev and the Shortcomings of Media Coverage,” Anticorruption.bg, 2003, http://
www.anticorruption.bg/index.php?id⫽918 (accessed 4 February 2011).

120. eBay, “Feedback Profile.”
121. Gavrilova, “Bulgaria Takes Back.”
122. eBay, “Feedback Profile.”
123. ForgeryNetwork, “Item: 7090”; S*P*Q*R, “Feedback Profile.”
124. “Bulgaria to Recover Smuggled.”
125. eBay, “Feedback Profile.”
126. eBay, “Feedback Profile.”
127. Dimitrov, “Antiques Are Smuggled.”
128. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 8.
129. Pastore et al., “Schengen’s Soft Underbelly,” 98.
130. For subsistence looters, see Dikov, “Bulgaria: An Archaeology”; Gabriel Hershman, “Risky
Business,” Sofia Echo, 30 October 2009, http://sofiaecho.com/2009/10/30/806677_risky-business (ac-
cessed 18 January 2011); for well-funded looters, see Marion Kraske, “Bulgaria Plagued by ‘Grave
Robbers,’” Spiegel International, 21 December 2007, http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe
/0,1518,524976,00.html (accessed 15 January 2011).

131. Moore, “Tomb Raiders Strip Bulgaria”; Dimitrov, “Antiques Are Smuggled.”
132. Dragieva, Political Corruption Practices, 58.
133. Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria, 186; Dragieva, Political Corruption Practices, 58.
134. SalaryList.com, “Silenos Coins and Antiquities.”
135. eBay, “eBay My World.”
136. Pastore et al., “Schengen’s Soft Underbelly,” 107. Demonstrated in antiquities trafficking by
interactions between tombaroli and intermediaries in Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspir-
acy, 78–79, 316

137. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 10.
138. Department of Defense, “Several Theories Justifying.”
139. Brodie et al., Stealing History, 19; Ruiz, “My Life as a Tombarolo”; “Spanish Cops Bring Down
Ring That Sold Looted Antiquities,” Latin American Herald Tribune, 11 December 2010, http://
www.laht.com/articl.asp?CategoryId⫽12395&ArticleId⫽381239 (accessed 11 April 2011).

140. Ruiz, “My Life as a Tombarolo.”
141. Kaplan, “Paying for Terror”; Deeti Ranjita Ray, “Cultural Crime: Reaching New Heights,”
Institute of Peace & Conflict Studies, 3 September 2003, http://www.ipcs.org/article/India/cultural
-crime-reaching-new-heights-1122.html (accessed 6 April 2011).
142. “Kunst als Terrorfinanzierung?” Der Spiegel, 18 July 2005, http://www.spiegel.de/spiegel
/print/d-41106138.html (accessed 11 January 2011).
143. “Kunst als Terrorfinanzierung”; Ruiz, “9/11 Hijacker Attempted to Sell Afghan Loot,” 1.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

144

PETER B. CAMPBELL

144. For several references by writers, see Ruiz, “9/11 Hijacker Attempted”; Cindy Ho quoted in

De La Torre, “Terrorists Raise Cash,” 10.

145. “Al Qaeda-Linked Militants.”
146. Anand Gopal, “The Most Deadly US Foe,” Christian Science Monitor, 1 June 2009, http://
www.csmonitor.com/World/Asia-South-Central/2009/0601/p10s01-wosc.html (accessed 1 April 2011).

147. “Antiquities Smuggling Case”; “Al Qaeda-Linked Militants.”
148. Brodie, “Pity the Poor Middlemen.”
149. Peters, “Crime and Insurgency,” 36.
150. Craig Whitlock, “Afghan Insurgents’ Diverse Funding Sources Pose Challenges,” Washington
Post, 27 September 2009, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/09/26
/AR2009092602707.html?sid⫽ST2009092602905 (accessed 11 April 2011).

151. Sedra, “Introduction,” 9.
152. Collins and Ali, “Financing the Taliban.”
153. Kaplan, “Paying for Terror.”
154. Andrea Loebbecke, “Germany Returns Antique Battleaxe to Iraq,” Boston Herald, 9 February
2011, http://www.bostonherald.com/news/international/europe/view.bg?articleid⫽1315631 (ac-
cessed 1 April 2011); Bootie Cosgrove-Mather, “Looted Iraqi Art Funds Terrorism,” CBS News, 23
June 2005, http://www.cbsnews.com/2100-500257_162-703841.html (accessed 10 April 2011).

155. Thorpe and Doeser, “UK Scholars Linked.”
156. Jacob Stockinger, “Recovering Pillaged Iraqi Art is Expert’s Goal,” Capital Times, 17 April
2006, http://www.madison.com/tct/news/index.php?ntid⫽80428&ntpid⫽0 (accessed 2 April 2011).
157. Matthew Bogdanos, “The Terrorist in the Art Gallery,” New York Times, 10 December 2005,
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/12/10/opinion/10bogdanos.html?_r⫽2&scp⫽5&sq⫽bogdanos&st
⫽nyt (accessed 12 January 2011).

158. “Stealing Undiscovered History”; Atwood, Stealing History, 4–6.
159. Johnson, “The Smash of Civilizations.”
160. Bogdanos, “The Terrorist in the Art.”
161. WikiLeaks, “Raid by 2005-06-03.”
162. WikiLeaks, “Friend Action Confiscation RPT 2009-08-18.”
163. WikiLeaks, “Criminal Event Smuggling RPT 2009-06-07”; WikiLeaks, “Criminal Event Smug-

gling RPT 2008-01-27”; WikiLeaks, “(Friendly Action) Arrest RPT Kirkuk 2007-12-27.”

164. WikiLeaks, “In An Nasiriyah (South Part) 2004-10-28.”
165. WikiLeaks, “(Friendly Action) Raid RPT 2007-12-07.”
166. WikiLeaks, “Threat Warning: Poss Attk on 2005-12-28.”
167. WikiLeaks, “(Friendly Action) Cache Found 2008-11-02.”
168. WikiLeaks, “(Friendly Action) Cache Found 2008-05-28.”
169. WikiLeaks, “Threat Warning: Poss Attk on 2005-12-28.”
170. Shelley, “The Globalization of Crime.”
171. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 16; Bogdanos, “The Terrorist in the Art.”
172. Baker and Anjar, “Syria’s Looted Past.”
173. Baker and Anjar, “Syria’s Looted Past.”
174. Baker and Anjar, “Syria’s Looted Past.”
175. Baker and Anjar, “Syria’s Looted Past.”
176. For crime on the net, see Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 12; for antiquities
sales online, see “Bulgarian Police Bust Priest for Illegal Antiquities Trading,” Sofia News Agency, 29
May 2010, http://www.novinite.com/view_news.php?id⫽116671 (accessed 6 March 2011); “Italy Seizes
Looted Artifacts for Sale on e-Bay,” Deseret News, 14 January 2009, http://www.deseretnews.com
/article/705277533/Italy-seizes-looted-artifacts-for-sale-on-e-Bay.html (accessed 18 December 2010).

177. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 12.
178. Stanish, “Forging Ahead.”
179. eBay, “Feedback Profile”; Nadira Hira, “Really Old Money,” Fortune, 23 October 2008, http://
money.cnn.com/2008/10/23/magazines/fortune/antiquities_hira.fortune/index.htm (accessed 15 Jan-
uary 2011).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

145

180. Hira, “Really Old Money”; Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy, 122.
181. eBay, “Feedback Profile.”
182. Dimitrov, “Antiques Are Smuggled.”
183. “Canada Seizes Bulgarian Archaeology Items in Smuggling Attempt,” Sofia News Agency, 5

August 2010, http://www.novinite.com/view_news.php?id⫽118873 (accessed 3 November 2011).

184. eBay, “What Percentage of People.”
185. eBay, “Feedback Profile,” 1–212.
186. eBay, “Feedback Profile,” 1–212.
187. “eBay Registers 212 Million Users,” BBC News, 18 October 2006, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2

/hi/business/6064718.stm (accessed 3 March 2011).

188. “Bulgaria to Recover Smuggled.”
189. Bowman Proulx, “Organized Criminal Involvement.”
190. McCalister, “Organized Crime and the Theft.”
191. Charney, Art Crime in Context, xxii.
192. MacKenzie, “Identifying and Preventing Opportunities,” 48.
193. MacKenzie, “Identifying and Preventing Opportunities,” 48.
194. For looters, see Ruiz, “My Life as a Tombarolo”; Ariel David, “Modern-Day ‘Tomb Raiders’
Feel the Heat,” MSNBC, 6 July 2007, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/19585643/ns/technology
_and_science-science/t/modern-day-tomb-raiders-feel-heat/#.T1d1FUrGaGh (accessed 2 January
2012); for late stage intermediaries, see McNall and D’Antonio, Fun While It Lasted; Van Rijn, Hot
Art, Cold Cash; and Hecht’s memoir in Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy; for collec-
tors, see Hoving, Making the Mummies Dance.
195. Doole, “In the News”; Paul Sussman, “Antiquities Smuggling: ‘A Crime Against Humanity,’”
CNN, 12 December 2006, http://www.articles.cnn.com/2006-12-11/world/illegal.antiquities_1
_antiquities-ancient-artifacts-parthenon?_s⫽PM:WORLD (accessed 2 April 2011); Rory Carroll,
“Loot,” Guardian, 4 May 2002, http://arts.guardian.co.uk/arttheft/story/0,,1034288,00.html (ac-
cessed 3 March 2011).

196. Brody et al., Stealing History, 16; McNall and D’Antonio, Fun While It Lasted, 48; Van Rijn,
Hot Art, Cold Cash, 31, 33; Lo, The Politics of Cross-Border, 23; “Spanish Cops Bring Down”; “Nine
Arrested in Drug Bust in Bulgarian Town of Blagoevgrad,” Sofia Echo, 26 July 2010, http://sofiaecho
.com/2010/07/26/937695_nine-arrested-in-drug-bust-in-bulgarian-town-of-blagoevgrad (accessed 2
April 2011).

197. Drake, “Italy Awaits Biggest”; Lo, The Politics of Cross-Border, 23; Shentov, Organized Crime in
Bulgaria, 194; Associated Press,“Italian Art Police Recover 60,000 Stolen, Looted Works, Artifacts,” Dal-
las Morning News, 15 January 2010, http://www.dallasnews.com/news/nation-world/world
/20100115-Italian-art-police-recover-60-000-2510.ece (accessed 1 April 2011).
198. “Publications against Nikola Filchev”; Cook, More Dangerous Ground, 204; Michael Back-
man, “Mysterious Deaths, the Marquess and the Forbidden Treasure,” Age, 10 November 2006, http://
www.theage.com.au/news/business/mysterious-deaths-the-marquess-and-the-forbidden-treasure
/2006/11/09/1162661830797.html?page⫽fullpage#contentSwap1 (accessed 16 January 2011).

199. For general definitional debates, see Van Dijck, “Discussing Definitions of Organized Crime”;
Finckenauer, “Problems of Definition.” For definitional issues regarding antiquities trade research,
see Bowman Proulx, “Organized Criminal Involvement.”

200. Merryman et al., Law, Ethics, and the Visual Arts, 289–290.
201. Keefe, “The Idol Thief.”
202. McNall and D’Antonio, Fun While It Lasted, 65.
203. Van Rijn, Hot Art, Cold Cash, 31, 33.
204. Baker and Anjar, “Syria’s Looted Past.”
205. Similar to Filchev’s brother, the author has chosen not to use active criminals names, though
sources clearly state them, Friedman, Red Mafiya, 177–178; Robert Friedman, “The Most Dangerous
Mobster in the World,” The Village Voice, May 1998.

206. Finckenauer and Waring, Russian Mafia; Williams, “Transnational Criminal Networks,” 88–91.
207. Friedman, Red Mafiya, 60.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

146

PETER B. CAMPBELL

208. Friedman, Red Mafiya, 152–165.
209. Friedman, Red Mafiya, 8, 152, 154–156, 163, 164.
210. Friedman, “The Most Dangerous”; Friedman, Red Mafiya, 152.
211. Friedman, Red Mafiya, 199–200.
212. McNall and D’Antonio, Fun While It Lasted, 65; Jason Felch, “Raids Suggest a Deeper Net-
work of Looted Art,” Los Angeles Times, 25 January 2008, http://articles.latimes.com/2008/jan/25
/local/me-museums25 (accessed 20 January 2011).

213. S. Fidler, “A Black Art: How the Trade in Stolen Artifacts Aids Money Laundering, Organized

Crime, and Terrorism,” Financial Times, 24 May 2003.

214. Slayman, “The Trial in Rome.”
215. Felch, “Raids Suggest a Deeper.”
216. The trade is “in itself (as a criminal market) an example of organised crime,” in MacKenzie,

“Identifying and Preventing Opportunities,” 41.

217. Coluccello and Massey, “Out of Africa,” 89.
218. Watson, Sotheby’s; Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy; McNall and D’Antonio,

Fun While It Lasted; Shentov, Organized Crime in Bulgaria.

219. Elia, “A Seductive and Troubling,” 61.
220. Williams, “Networks, Markets, and Hierarchies,” 62; Coluccello and Massey, “Out of Africa,”

89.

221. Williams and Godson, “Anticipating Organized and Transnational,” 314.
222. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 8, 12, 15.
223. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 9.
224. Bowman Proulx, “Organized Criminal Involvement,” 3.
225. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 12.
226. Watson and Todeschini, The Medici Conspiracy.
227. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 12.
228. As shown in eBay, “Uncleaned Crusty Roman”; and described in Gill, “The Portable

Antiquities.”

229. Williams and Godson, “Anticipating Organized and Transnational,” 351.
230. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 9.
231. Illicit populations are extremely difficult to estimate and this exercise is only to paint a broad
picture since correlate numbers from source to market chain are not available. Therefore, these pop-
ulations are based on single country estimates for each stage. Stage one is based on Bulgarian esti-
mates of 30,000 looters in Moore, “Tomb Raiders Strip Bulgaria”; stage two is based on Haqqani
network’s membership of 15,000 in National Public Radio, “Deadly Insurgents with Ties to U.S.
Dollars,” National Public Radio, 29 September 2011, http://www.npr.org/2011/09/29/140872030
/deadly-insurgents-with-ties-to-u-s-dollars (accessed 2 March 2012); stage three is based on the UK’s
18 members of the Antiquities Dealers Association, Antiquities Dealers Association, http://www
.theada.co.uk/, 2012 (accessed 2 March 2012), and 350 members of the British Antique Dealers’
Association, http://www.bada.org (accessed 2 September 2012); stage four is based on United States’
Ancient Coin Collectors Guild purported membership size of 10,001 in Ancient Coin Collectors
Guild, Ancient Coin Collectors Guild, March 2012, http://www.linkedin.com/company/ancient-coin-
collectors-guild (accessed 2 March 2012).

232. Subsistence digging includes Afghanistan (35%) and postinvasion Iraq (near 70%). Tombaroli-
type looting occurs in Italy (8.2%) and Peru (6.8%). This relates to law enforcement capabilities and
social issues in a foundering economy rather than directly to unemployment. Central Intelligence
Agency, “World Factbook”; McCalister, “Organized Crime and the Theft,” 36.

233. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 11.
234. For example Al Serkel, “Federal Law Needed.”
235. Felson, Crime and Nature, 6–7.
236. Felson, “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime,” 12.
237. GlobalWitness.org, “Conflict Diamonds”; Slocum-Schaffer, “Animal Rights,” 230; Brulle,

Agency, Democracy, and Nature.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

147

238. Keith and Carrell, “Going, Going, Gone”; Brems and Van den Eynde, Blood Antiquities.
239. “Egyptians Form Chain to Protect King Tut,” Herald Sun, 30 January 2011, http://www
.heraldsun.com.au/ipad/egyptians-form-chain-around-museum-to-protect-king-tut/story-fn6s8
50w-1225996801338 (accessed 12 January 2012).
240. For example Marilee Enge, “Whale House Series: The Sale of the Whale House Legacy.” An-
chorage Daily News, 1993, http://www.ankn.uaf.edu/curriculum/Tlingit/WhaleHouse/part1.html (ac-
cessed 2 August 2012); Atwood, Stealing History, 7; “Qianlong Chinese Porcelain Vase Sold for £43m,”
BBC News, 12 November 2010, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-11739781 (accessed
24 January 2012).

241. For Colonial collecting and archaeology as domination, see Meskell, “Pharaonic Legacies,”
150–151. For an example of Southeast Asia, see Miksic et al., Rethinking Cultural Resource Manage-
ment, 68–69; Anderson, Imagined Communities, 182–184. For a description of the British Museum
as a state-funded patriotic center that revised historical narratives, reconstructing artifacts toward
the goal of displaying “the forward march of human civilization from its classical origins in Greece
and Rome, through Renaissance Italy, to modern-day London,” see Colla, Conflicted Antiquities, 5.
242. For the origin of the “gentleman-scholar,” see Pearce and Arnold, The Collector’s Voice, xiv;
for a description of gentleman collectors, see Pearce and Arnold, The Collector’s Voice, 29–32. For
current collectors known to purchase looted antiquities described as preservationists and interested
in scholarship, see Hira, “Really Old Money.”

243. McIntosh et al., “The Good Collector.”
244. Williams and Godson, “Anticipating Organized and Transnational,” 331.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Adler, Christine, and Kenneth Polk. “The Illicit Traffic in Plundered Antiquities.” In Handbook of
Transnational Crime and Justice, edited by Philip Reichel, 98–113. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2005.

Alderman, Derek, and Rachel Campbell. “Symbolic Excavation and the Artifact Politics of Remem-
bering Slavery in the American South: Observations from Walterboro, South Carolina.” Southeastern
Geographer 48 (2008): 338–55.

Alderman, Kimberly. “Honor Amongst Thieves: Crime and the Illicit Antiquities Trade.” Indiana
Law Review 45 (2012): 602–27.

Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism.
London: Verso, 2006.

Antoniadou, Ioanna. “Reflections on an Archaeological Ethnography of ‘Looting’ in Kozani, Greece.”
Public Archaeology: Archaeological Ethnographies 8, no. 2–3: 246–61.

Atwood, Roger. Stealing History: Tomb Raiders, Smugglers, and the Looting of the Ancient World. New
York: St. Martin’s, 2004.

Baker, Aryn, and Majdal Anjar. “Syria’s Looted Past: How Ancient Artifacts Are Being Traded for
Guns.” TIME World. http://world.time.com/2012/09/12/syrias-looted-past-how-ancient-artifacts-are-
being-traded-for-guns (2012; accessed 3 December 2012).

Bator, Paul. “An Essay on the International Trade in Art.” Stanford Law Review 34 (1982): 275–384.

Bell, Duncan S. A. “Mythscapes: Memory, Mythology, and National Identity.” British Journal of So-
ciology 54 (2003): 63–81.

Bessieres, Michael, “‘We Have to Change the Buyer’s Attitude’ Investigative Journalist Ozgen Acar
Interview,” UNESCO Courier, April 2001.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

148

PETER B. CAMPBELL

Bowman, Blythe. “Transnational Crimes Against Culture: Looting at Archaeological Sites and the
“Grey” Market in Antiquities.” Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice 24 (2008): 225–42.

Bowman Proulx, Blythe. “Organized Criminal Involvement in the Illicit Antiquities Trade.” Trends in
Organized Crime 14 (2011): 1–29.

Brems, Peter, and Wim Van den Eynde. Blood Antiquities. Surrey, UK: Journeyman Pictures, 2009.

Brodie, Neil. “Pity the Poor Middlemen.” Culture Without Context 3 (1998): 7–9.

———. “The Market in Iraqi Antiquities 1980–2008.” In Organised Crime in Art and Antiquities,
edited by Stefano Manacorda, 63–74. ISPAC: Milan, 2009.

Brodie, Neil, Jenny Doole, and Peter Watson. Stealing History: The Illicit Trade in Cultural Material.
Cambridge, UK: MacDonald Institute for Archaeology Research, 2000.

Brulle, Robert. Agency, Democracy, and Nature: The US Environmental Movement from a Critical Theory
Perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.

Calvani, Sandro. “Frequency and Figures of Organized Crime in Art and Antiquities.” In Organised
Crime in Art and Antiquities, edited by Stefano Manacorda, 29–40. ISPAC: Milan, 2009.

Central Intelligence Agency. “The World Factbook: Unemployment Rate.” Central Intelligence Agency.
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2129rank.html (January 2012;
accessed 10 January 2012).

Charney, Noah. “Art Crime in Context.” In Art and Crime, Exploring the Dark Side of the Art World,
edited by Noah Charney, xvii–xxv. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 2009.

Chippendale, Christopher, and David W. J. Gill. “Material Consequences of Contemporary Classical
Collecting.” American Journal of Archaeology 104 (2000): 463–511.

Colla, Elliot. Conflicted Antiquities: Egyptology, Egyptmania, Egyptian Modernity. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2007.

Collins, Catherine, and Ashraf Ali. “Financing the Taliban: Tracing the Dollars Behind Insurgencies
in Afghanistan and Pakistan.” Counterterrorism Strategy Initiative Policy Paper. Washington, DC: New
America Foundation, 2010.

Coluccello, Salvatore, and Simon Massey. “Out of Africa: The Human Trade Between Libya and Lampe-
dusa.” Trends in Organized Crime 10 (2007):77–90.

Conklin, John. Art Crime. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1994.

Cook, Roger. More Dangerous Ground: The Inside Story of Britain’s Best Known Investigative Journal-
ist. Brighton, UK: Book Guild, 2007.

De La Torre, Laura. “Terrorists Raise Cash by Selling Antiquities.” GSN: Government Security News,
February 2006.

Department of Defense. “Several Theories Justifying Our Need to Respect and Safeguard Cultural
Property.” Department of Defense. http://www.cemml.colostate.edu/cultural/09476/chp03iraqenl.html
(2011; accessed 27 March 2011).
Doole, Jenny. “In the News.” Culture Without Context. http://www.mcdonald.cam.ac.uk/projects/iarc
/culturewithoutcontext/issue4/news.htm (1999; accessed 14 January 2011).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

149

Dragieva, Lina. Political Corruption Practices in Bulgarian Post-Communist Executive Power: Case Study
Analysis of Bulgaria. Budapest: Central European University, 2008.

Drake, Cathryn. “Italy Awaits Biggest Ever Trial of Tomb Robbers.” The Art Newspaper (2008) 187:
11.
eBay. “eBay My World: SilenosCoins.” http://myworld.ebay.com/silenoscoins (accessed 6 January 2011).
———. “Feedback Profile.” http://feedback.ebay.com/ws/eBayISAPI.dll?ViewFeedback2&ftab
⫽AllFeedback&userid⫽silenoscoins&iid⫽-1&de⫽off&items⫽200&interval⫽0&mPg⫽212&page
⫽3 (accessed 6 January 2011).
———. “Uncleaned Crusty Roman Coins.” http://www.ebay.com/itm/UNCLEANED-CRUSTY
-ROMAN-COINS-/370508691269 (16 July 2011; accessed 24 January 2012).
———. “What Percentage of People Leave Feedback?” eBay Forums. http://forums.ebay.com/db2
/topic/Ebay-Stores/What-Percent-Of/520090737 (16 February 2009; accessed 8 April 2011).

Eichstedt, Jennifer, and Stephen Small. Representations of Slavery: Race and Ideology in Southern Plan-
tation Museums. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 2002.

Elia, Ricardo. “A Seductive and Troubling Work.” In Archaeological Ethics, edited by Karen Vitelli,
54–61. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press, 1996.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. “Iraqi Artifacts Seized.” Federal Bureau of Investigation. http://
baltimore.fbi.gov/dojpressrel/pressrel10/ba102510a.htm (25 October 2010; accessed 12 January 2011).

Felch, Jason, and Ralph Frammolino. Chasing Aphrodite: The Hunt for Looted Antiquities at the World’s
Richest Museum. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011.

Felson, Marcus. Crime and Nature. London: SAGE, 2006.

———. “The Ecosystem for Organized Crime.” HEUNI Paper no. 26 (2006). Helsinki: The Euro-
pean Institute for Crime Prevention and Control.

Felson, Marcus, and Rachel Boba. Crime and Everyday Life. London: SAGE, 2010.

Finckenauer, James O. “Problems of Definition: What is Organized Crime?” Trends in Organized
Crime 8 (2005): 63–83.

Finckenauer, James, and Elin Waring. Russian Mafia in America. Boston: Northeastern University
Press, 1998.
ForgeryNetwork. “Item: 7090.” ForgeryNetwork.com. http://www.forgerynetwork.com/asset.aspx
?id⫽qgR8EHp4XvA⫽ (2010; accessed 20 February 2011).

Friedman, Robert. Red Mafiya: How the Russian Mob Has Invaded America. Boston: Little, Brown,
2000.

Friedman, Robert. “The Most Dangerous Mobster in the World,” The Village Voice, 26 May 1998,
http://www.villagevoice.com/1998-05-26/news/the-most-dangerous-mobster-in-the-world/full/ (ac-
cessed 21 April 2013).

Gill, David. “The Portable Antiquities Scheme and the Treasure Act: Protecting the Archaeology of
England and Wales?” Papers from the Institute of Archaeology University College London 20 (2010): 1.

Gill, David W. J., and Christopher Chippendale. “Material and Intellectual Consequences of Esteem
for Cycladic Figures.” American Journal of Archaeology 97 (1993): 602–73.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

150

PETER B. CAMPBELL

GlobalWitness.org. “Conflict Diamonds.” http://www.globalwitness.org/conflict-diamonds (accessed
21 January 2012).

Green, Timothy. The Smugglers. New York: Walker, 1969.

Greenhalgh, Michael. Marble Past, Monumental Present: Building with Antiquities in the Mediaeval
Mediterranean. Boston: Brill, 2009.

Guineva, Maria. “Illegal Antiques Channels and Lyudmila Zhivkova’s Role Part V,” Novinite, 5 June
2008, http://www.novinite.com/view_news.php?id⫽93830 (accessed 21 April 2013).

Harris, Lucian. “German Court Orders Return of Ancient Vessel to Iraq,” The Art Newspaper, 18
November 2009, http://www.theartnewspaper.com/articles/German-court-orders-return-of-ancient-
vessel-to-Iraq/19796 (accessed 21 April 2013).

Hoving, Thomas. Making the Mummies Dance: Inside the Metropolitan Museum of Art. New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1993.

ICOM. Red List of Afghanistan Antiquities at Risk. Paris: International Council of Museums, 2008.

Kaplan, David E. “Paying for Terror: How Jihadist Groups Are Using Organized Crime Tactics and
Profits to Finance Attacks on Targets Around the Globe.” U.S. News & World Report, November 2005.

Keefe, Patrick Radden. “The Idol Thief: Inside One of the Biggest Antiquities-Smuggling Rings in
History.” The New Yorker. http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2007/05/07/070507fa_fact_keefe
?currentPage⫽all (7 May 2007; accessed 8 December 2012).

Keith, Donald, and Toni Carrell. “Going, Going, Gone: Underwater Cultural Resources in Decline.”
International Handbook of Historical Archaeology, edited by T. Majewski and D. Gaimster, 105–39.
New York: Springer, 2009.

Kersel, Morag. “From the Ground to the Buyer: A Market Analysis of the Illegal Trade in Antiqui-
ties.” In Archaeology, Cultural Heritage and the Antiquities Trade, edited by Neil Brodie, Morag Kersel,
Christina Luke, and Katheryn Walker Tubb, 188–205. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2006.

Kletter, Raz. “The Friends of Antiquities: The Story of an Israeli Volunteer Group and Comparative
Remarks.” Journal of Hebrew Scriptures 8 (2): 2–20.

Kline, Thomas. “Art Market.” In Yearbook of Cultural Property Law, edited by David Tarler and Sherry
Hutt, 101–18. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2008.

Lo, Shiu Hing. The Politics of Cross-Border Crime in Greater China: Case Studies of Mainland China,
Hong Kong, and Macao. Armonk: M.E. Sharp, 2009.

MacKenzie, Simon R. M. Going, Going, Gone: Regulating the Market in Illicit Antiquities. Leicester,
UK: Institute of Art and Law, 2005.

———. “Identifying and Preventing Opportunities for Organized Crime in the International An-
tiquities Market.” In Organised Crime in Art and Antiquities, edited by Stefano Manacorda, 41–62.
ISPAC: Milan, 2009.

McCalister, Andrew. “Organized Crime and the Theft of Iraqi Antiquities.” Trends in Organized Crime
9 (2005): 24–37.

McIntosh, Roderick, Téréba Togola, and Susan Keech McIntosh. “The Good Collector and the Prem-
ise of Mutual Respect Among Nations.” African Arts 28 (1995): 60–112.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

151

McNall, Bruce, and Michael D’Antonio. Fun While It Lasted: My Rise and Fall in the Land of Fame
and Fortune. New York: Hyperion, 2003.

Merryman, John Henry. “Two Ways of Thinking about Cultural Property.” American Journal of In-
ternational Law 80 (1986): 831–53.

Merryman, John Henry, Albert Edward Elsen, and Stephen K. Urice. Law, Ethics, and the Visual Arts.
Frederick, MD: Kluwer Law International, 2007.

Meskell, Lynn. “Pharaonic Legacies: Postcolonialism, Heritage, and Hyperreality.” In The Politics of
Archaeology and Identity in a Global Context, edited by Susan Kane, 149–71. Boston, MA: Archaeo-
logical Institute of America, 2003.

Miksic, John N., Geok Yiah Goh, and Sue O’Connor. Rethinking Cultural Resource Management in
Southeast Asia: Preservation, Development, and Neglect. London: Anthem Press, 2011.

MyVisaJobs.com. “Silenos Coins and Antiquities—H1B Visa and Green Card Profile.” MyVisaJobs
.com. http://www.myvisajobs.com/Visa-Sponsor/Silenos-Coins-and-Antiquities/489743.htm (accessed
1 April 2011).

Pastore, Ferruccio, Paola Mozini, and Giuseppe Sciortino. “Schengen’s Soft Underbelly? Irregular Mi-
gration and Human Smuggling Across Land and Sea Borders to Italy.” International Migration 44
(2006): 95–119.

Pearce, Susan M., and Kenneth Arnold, The Collector’s Voice: Early Voices, Vol. 2. Aldershot, UK:
Ashgate, 2000.

Peters, Gretchen. Crime and Insurgency in the Tribal Areas of Afghanistan and Pakistan. New York:
West Point Combating Terrorism Center, 2010.

———. “More than 1,500 Stolen Afghan Artifacts Return to Kabul.” National Geographic (March
2009).

———. Seeds of Terror: How Drugs, Thugs, and Crime Are Reshaping the Afghan War. New York:
Picador, 2010.
Ruiz, Cristina. “9/11 Hijacker Attempted to Sell Afghan Loot.” The Art Newspaper 210 (2010): 1.

———. “My Life as a Tombarolo.” The Art Newspaper 112 (2000): 36–38.
S*P*Q*R. “Feedback Profile.” eBay. http://feedback.ebay.com/ws/eBayISAPI.dll?ViewFeedback2&ftab
⫽AllFeedback&userid⫽s*p*q*r&iid⫽-1&de⫽off&items⫽25&interval⫽0&mPg⫽920&page⫽3 (ac-
cessed 9 March 2011).
SalaryList.com. “Silenos Coins and Antiquities.” SalaryList.com. http://www.salarylist.com/company
/Silenos-Coins-Antiquities/Antiquities-Appraiser-Salary.htm (1 October 2001; accessed 9 March 2012).

Schetter, Conrad. “The ‘Bazaar Economy’ of Afghanistan: A Comprehensive Approach.” In Afghan-
istan: A Country Without a State?, edited by Christine Noelle-Karimi, Conrad Schetter, and Reinhard
Schlagintweit, 1–19. Frankfurt am Main: IKO, 2004.

Sedra, Mark. “Introduction.” In Confronting Afghanistan’s Security Dilemma: Reforming the Security
Sector, edited by Mark Sedra, 8–16. Bonn: Bonn International Centre for Conversion, 2003.
Shelley, Louise. “The Globalization of Crime and Terrorism.” America.gov. http://www.america.gov
/st/business-english/2006/February/20080608103639xjyrreP4.218692e-02.html (1 February 2006; ac-
cessed 26 February 2011).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

152

PETER B. CAMPBELL

Shentov, Ognian. Organized Crime in Bulgaria: Markets and Trends. Sofia: Center for the Study of
Democracy, 2007.
Slayman, Andrew. “The Trial in Rome.” Archaeology http://archive.archaeology.org/online/features
/italytrial/ (6 February 2006; accessed 21 April 2013).

Slocum-Schaffer, Stephanie. “Animal Rights: Subordinate or Equal Species?” Moral Controversies in
American Politics, edited by Raymond Tatalovich and Byron Daynes, 227–81. New York: M.E. Sharpe,
2011.

Stanish, Charles. “Forging Ahead: Or, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love eBay.” Archaeology
http://archive.archaeology.org/0905/etc/insider.html (May 2009; accessed 21 April 2013).

Tijhuis, Antonius. Transnational Crime and the Interface between Legal and Illegal Factors: The Case
of the Illicit Art and Antiquities Trade. Nijmegen, Netherlands: Wolf Legal, 2006.

UNESCO. International Flows of Selected Cultural Goods and Services, 1994–2003: Defining and Cap-
turing the Flows of Global Cultural Trade. Montreal: UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 2005.

United Nations. United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols
Thereto. New York: United Nations, 2004.

van Dijck, Maarten. “Discussing Definitions of Organised Crime: Word Play in Academic and Po-
litical Discourse.” HUMSEC 1 (2007): 65–90.

Van Rijn, Michel. Hot Art, Cold Cash. London: Little, Brown, 1993.

Watson, Peter. Sotheby’s: The Inside Story. New York: Random House, 1997.

Watson, Peter, and Cecilia Todeschini. The Medici Conspiracy: The Illicit Journey of Looted Antiquities
from Italy’s Tomb Raiders to the World’s Greatest Museums. New York: BBS Public Affairs, 2007.
Waxman, Sharon. “Chasing the Lydian Hoard.” Smithsonian. http://www.smithsonianmag.com
/history-archaeology/Loot-Chasing-the-Lydian-Hoard.html (14 November 2008; accessed 21 April
2013).
WikiLeaks. “Criminal Event Smuggling RPT 2008-01-27.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (27 Jan-
uary 2008; accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “(Criminal Event) Smuggling RPT 2008-4-3.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (3 April 2008;
accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “Criminal Event Smuggling RPT 2009-06-07.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (7 June 2009;
accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “During op. 2004-02-20.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (20 February 2004; accessed 16
December 2010).
———. “Friend Action Confiscation RPT 2009-08-18.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (18 Au-
gust 2009; accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “Friendly Action Arrest RPT 2008-03-18.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (18 March 2008;
accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “(Friendly Action) Arrest RPT Kirkuk 2007-12-27.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (27
December 2007; accessed 16 December 2010).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015

THE ILLICIT ANTIQUITIES TRADE AS A TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL NETWORK

153

———. “(Friendly Action) Cache Found 2008-05-28.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (28 May
2008; accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “(Friendly Action) Cache Found 2008-11-02.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (2 Novem-
ber 2008; accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “(Friendly Action) Raid RPT 2007-12-07.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (7 December
2007; accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “Friendly Action Raid RPT 2008-7-3.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (3 July 2008; ac-
cessed 16 December 2010).
———. “(Friendly Action) Detain RPT 2008-10-19.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (19 October
2008; accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “In An Nasiriyah (South Part) 2004-10-28:1.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (28 October
2004; accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “Materials Recovered by 2004-02-20.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (20 February 2004;
accessed 16 December 2010).
———. “Raid by 2005-06-03.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (3 June 2005; accessed 16 Decem-
ber 2010).
———. “Raid by Wolf BDE 2005-07-18.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (18 July 2005; accessed
16 December 2010).
———. “Threat Warning: Poss Attk on 2005-12-28.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (28 Decem-
ber 2005; accessed 16 December 2010).

———. “UK Possession of Arts Works Looted from Iraq: Schoyen UCL Inquiry Report 2009.”
WikiLeaks. http://wikileaks.org/wiki/UK_possession_of_art_works_looted_from_Iraq:_Schoyen_UCL
_Inquiry_report,_2009 (11 November 2009; accessed 12 March 2012).
———. “WikiLeaks Iraq War Logs.” WikiLeaks. http://warlogs.owni.fr (23 October 2010; accessed
16 December 2010).

Williams, Phil. “Networks, Markets, and Hierarchies.” In Combating Transnational Crime: Concepts,
Activities, and Responses, edited by Phil Williams and Dimitri Vlassis, 57–87. London: Frank Cass,
2001.

———. “Transnational Criminal Networks.” In Networks and Netwars: The Future of Terror, Crime,
and Militancy, edited by John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, 61–97. Santa Monica: RAND, 2001.

Williams, Phil, and Roy Godson. “Anticipating Organized and Transnational Crime.” Crime, Law &
Social Change 37 (2002): 311–55.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000015


