Evaluating  Cultural  Property:
The Economic Approach
Bruno S. Frey*

Abstract: The preservation  of cultural heritage is costly and  one  has
to decide if and which  items of cultural  heritage  are worth  preserv-
ing. A method for determining the value of cultural heritage  is there-
fore  needed.  In  economics,  several  evaluation  procedures  are  ap-
plied.  This  article  briefly  comments  on  impact  studies  and  willing-
ness-to-pay  studies  (hedonic  market  approach  and  the  travel  cost
approach)  and  then  focuses  on  contingent  valuation  surveys.  The
application  of contingent valuation  on the arts and related  problems
are  discussed.  Finally,  the  article  combines  the  evaluation  methods
with democratic decisions by referenda.  Switzerland presents an ex-
ample of referenda  held on art policy.

1  Economics  and Cultural  Property-
Decisions concerning cultural property are continually made by gov-
ernments and public administrations. Preservation  implies maintain-
ing  the  stock  and  hindering  its  dilapidation  and  deterioration.  Up-
keep  of  the  stock  creates  cost  as the  resources  involved,  especially
the  sites  in  the  case  of  historic  monuments,  could  potentially  be
used  for  alternative  purposes.  The cost  involved  consists  of  missed
opportunities. They are real but not monetary  costs, and they  do not
show  up  on  any  balance  sheet.  These  opportunity  costs,  as  econo-
mists  call  them,  are  often  neglected  in  political  and  administrative
decisions but should be taken  into account  in a socially  sound  deci-
sion. In addition,  the preservation  of cultural  property  also  requires
current funds to repair and safeguard  objects. In order for these deci-
sions  to  be  made  rationally,  an  evaluation  of  the  value  of  cultural
heritage, compared  to relevant  alternatives, is  required.

Economics  offers  a wide  range  of  approaches  and  techniques  to
help in this  decision.  The goal  is always to assess how much  satis-

*  Institute for Empirical  Economic Research; University of Zurich. I am  grateful
to  Isabelle  Vautravers-Busenhart  and  Felix  Oberholzer-Gee  for  their  helpful
comments.  Financial  support  by  the  Swiss  National  Fund,  Project  No.
12-42480.94,  is gratefully  acknowledged.

231

Bruno  S. Frey

faction  individuals  derive  from  cultural  property.  Section  2 of  this
paper  presents  a  short  overview  of  the  economics  of  art,  a  special
branch  of  economics  which  has  recently  emerged.  Section  3  criti-
cally  analyses  various procedures  used  in  economics  for  evaluating
cultural  property.  Section  4  focuses  on  the  specific  problems  when
these  procedures  are  applied  to  cultural  issues.  Section  5  presents
a  policy  approach  based  on  constitutional  choice.  It  proposes  an
integration  of  evaluation  and  decision  by  using  direct  democratic
institutions,  i. e.,  popular  initiatives  and  referenda.  Section  6  offers
conclusions.

2  Economics  of Art

The application of economic thinking to cultural issues has, over the
last few years, become  a well-established  field.  It is part of a move-
ment  designed  to  generalize  economics  as  a  social  science  not just
restricted to  'the economy'  but to all  areas where  human beings act.
The Economic Approach to Human Behavior  (Becker  1976; see also
Hirshleifer  1985; Frey  1992) is based  on the notion  that  individuals
act rationally  in the sense that they  are  able and willing to compare
the  benefits  and  costs  of  the  alternatives  available  to  them.  This
rational  choice  methodology  has been  transferred,  and  it now plays
a significant  role in the neighbouring  disciplines of political science,
sociology  and history  (see Coleman  1990). It  has  also been used in
legal  studies  where  it  is  called  'Law  and  Economics'  (see,  e. g.,
Posner  1986; Cooter and Ulen  1988). A large variety of social issues
has  been  studied  using  the  economic  approach  such  as  education,
the natural  environment,  the family  and  crime.

The  economics  of  art  is  a relative  latecomer  in this  movement.'
The  "classic" contribution  is by  Baumol  and  Bowen  (1966)  on the
recurrent financial problems of the performing  arts. It sparked imme-
diate  interest  and  led  to the  evolution  of  an  (admittedly  still  small)
field  within economics. Surveys of art economics  are provided in an
article  by Throsby (1994)  and  in various  monographs  such as those
by Throsby and Withers (1979), Frey and Pommerehne  (1989), Pea-
cock (1993), Heilbrun and Gray (1993), and Benhamou (1996). Col-
lections  of  articles  have  been  edited  by  Blaug  (1976)  and,  more
recently, by  Towse  and  Khakee  (1992),  Peacock  and Rizzo (1994),
and Ginsburgh  and Menger (1996).

The Association of  Cultural Economics,  International  organises a
biannual world conference  with a corresponding  volume of selected
contributions  and  edits  the Journal  of  Cultural  Economics.2  There
is an increasing number of conferences  devoted to specialized issues
in the  arts. Somewhat  surprisingly,  the topic  of cultural  property, at
least in the sense of heritage, has so far  received  scant attention, but
there are  signs that the situation  is beginning  to change.

232

Evaluating  Cultural  Property

3  Evaluation  Procedures
3.1  Impact  Studies
The most popular way to measure the "value" of a piece of cultural
property is to look at the monetary revenue created. Thus, for exam-
ple, one looks at the expenditures incurred by the visitors to a theatre
or  opera  house  (entry  price,  restaurant  meals,  transportation,  hair-
dressing,  formal  clothes,  etc.)  and  calculates  the  multiplier  effect
induced  by  these  expenditures  (e. g., the  restaurant  has to  consider
various resources  and pay various persons). The way impact studies
measure  the  monetary  income  is  not  correct  because  they  fail  to
record  the  social  surplus  (i. e.,  the  difference  between  gross  social
value and cost; income for  labour is a cost, not a benefit).

Though  such  studies  are  largely  in  demand  by  the  suppliers  of
cultural services (see, e. g., Vaughan  1980 for the Edinburgh Festival
or O'Hagan  1992 for the Wexford  Opera Festival), they do not ade-
quately  capture  the  social  value  of  a cultural  object.  These  studies
completely  disregard those values not reflected in the market:

(1)  A person  may  benefit  from  the  supply  of culture  even  if he or
she does not  currently  use it. This  option value is not  reflected
in the market because no effective  demand  is exerted.

(2)  A positive  existence value of  art  exists  which  also prevails  for
those  not  using  the  art.  In  particular,  this  value  may  exist  for
historic buildings which, once destroyed, are difficult  or impos-
sible to rebuild.

(3)  The  preservation  of  art  may  have  a  positive  bequest value  for
future generations which cannot express their preferences  in cur-
rently existing markets.

(4)  Cultural  property  and  other  art  objects  may  have  a  significant
prestige  value even  for  those  who  do not  use  their  services  or
who  are  not  interested  in  art  at  all.  Examples  are  the  Scala  in
Milan  or  the  Louvre  in  Paris  which  both  provide  a  sense  of
national  pride and help to maintain  national  cultural  identity.

(5)  Artistic buildings and activities may have an educational value.
They  help  a  society  foster  creativity,  improve  the  capacity  of
cultural  evaluation  and  develop  aesthetic  standards  and  aspects
which benefit  all persons in a society and which are unlikely to
be adequately  internalized  by the price  system.

Empirical  research has shown that, depending on the cultural  sector
considered,  these  non-market  values  are  often  of  significant  size.
They need to be taken  into account when undertaking  a  benefit-cost
calculation  of whether a cultural  activity or a price of cultural prop-
erty  should  be  supported  by  the  public.  The  use  of  impact  studies
which disregard these values risks a great peril. It may well turn out
that a non-artistic  activity or object  generates  even higher revenues.
If  one  relies  exclusively  on the  logic  of  impact  studies,  one  would

233

Bruno  S. Frey

then undertake  these non-artistic  activities, e. g.,  demolishing  a his-
toric building and substituting it with a sports stadium or a shopping
centre.  (Good)  economists take great pains not to fall  into this trap,
though  they  are  often  offered  substantial  grants  to  perform  such
studies.

3.2  Willingness-to-Pay
There  is  a  well-established  way  to  evaluate  non-marketed  goods:
willingness-to-pay  values measure the maximum  price which  a per-
son would pay for the object or project  in question. Several methods
are  available  and  have  been  employed  empirically  (Cropper  and
Oates  1992; see also Pommerehne  1987; Mitchell and Carson  1989).
The two most  widely-used procedures are:

(1)  The  hedonic  market approach which  derives  the  values  attrib-
uted  to  a  cultural  object  by  looking  at  private  markets  which  indi-
rectly  detect  the  utility  persons  enjoy.  Consider  a  historic  palace
situated  in  a  beautiful  park  located  in  the  city  centre.  If  all  other
things  are  equal,  an individual  attributing  a value to the palace and
the  park  would  be  prepared  to  accept  an  equivalent  job  near  the
palace  at a lower wage than  elsewhere. The difference  between this
lower wage and the wage elsewhere constitutes an indirect monetary
measure  of  that  particular  individual's  evaluation  of the palace  and
the  park.  The  value attributed  can  also  be  derived  from  the higher
rents,  house  and  land prices  which  people  are  prepared  to pay  be-
cause they enjoy  the palace and the park. Again, the price  difference
compared  to  an  equivalent  apartment,  house  or  piece  of  land  else-
where  constitutes  a monetary  evaluation  of the palace and the park.
While such an indirect measure of the value of culture is intriguing,
it  is  not  able  to  capture  the  values  mentioned  above.  The  option,
existence  and  prestige  values  as  well  as  the  bequest  value  and  the
educational  value  in the  case  of house  and  land prices  are not inte-
grated.

The  hedonic  market  approach  is quite  intricate.  Its reliability  de-
pends  on  two  major  conditions:  the  private  markets  for  labour  and
housing  or  land  must  be  in  perfect  equilibrium,  and  the  "ceteris
paribus" (all else equal) assumption needed for the comparison must
be  fulfilled.  These conditions  are rarely  completely  met  so that  the
corresponding  monetary  evaluation  of  the  cultural  object  is biased,
often  to an unknown extent.

(2)  Another widely-used method is the travel cost approach. It lends
itself  in  particular  to measuring  the  value  of  an  object  of  historic
heritage,  e. g.,  a  castle  situated  in  the  countryside.  People  spend
money on the trip leading to the castle as well as for the entry ticket.
This  constitutes  a bottom measure  for  the utility  they  expect  to de-
rive  from  the  visit.

234

Evaluating  Cultural  Property

The travel  cost method  relies on two major  assumptions: the ob-
ject  in  question  must  be  the  only  purpose  of  the  trip  and  the  trip
itself does not yield any pleasure. In many cases, these  assumptions
do  not  hold  because  people  tend  to  combine  various  goals  when
making a trip. Moreover, the castle, in our example, may be located
in an attractive  landscape  or the trip  is pleasurable because  of one's
company  so  that  the  cost  expended  no  longer  reflects  the  utility
attributed  to  the  castle.  Moreover,  few  of  the  non-market  values
listed  above  are  taken  into  account;  the  method  captures,  at  best,
part of the  prestige  and  educational  value. Even under  ideal  condi-
tions,  the cost  expended  does not reveal  the full  value  attributed  to
the  cultural  object  because  it  may  well  be  that  people  would  have
been  willing  to  travel  longer  distances  and  to  pay  a  higher  entry
price in order to enjoy  the  object.

As the essential  assumptions  required by the two procedures  are,
in many cases, not sufficiently  met in practice to make the respective
methods seriously applicable, most economists have turned to "Con-
tingent Valuation" (CV). It uses sample surveys to elicit the willing-
ness-to-pay  for  cultural  objects. The questionnaire  involves a hypo-
thetical  situation, and the term  'contingent'  refers  to the constructed
or simulated market presented  in the survey.

3.3  Contingent Valuation  Surveys
Surveys  have been  widely used by economists  to estimate  people's
willingness-to-pay. Over the years, considerable experience has been
gained.  In their bibliography,  Carson,  et al. (1994)  list  almost  1700
studies  in over 40 countries. Early  examples  include  evaluations  of
a  reduction  in  household  soiling  and  cleaning  (Ridker  1967),  the
right to hunt waterfowl  (Hammack  and  Brown  1974), reduced  con-
gestion  in  wilderness  areas  (Cicchetti  and  Smith  1973),  improved
air  visibility  (Randall,  Ines  and  Easterman  1974)  and  the  value  of
duck  hunting  permits  (Bishop  and  Heberlein  1979).  Most  survey
studies  evaluate  objects  in  the natural  environment;  however,  there
are also other applications  including the reduced  risk of dying  from
heart  attack  (Acton  1973),  the  reduced  risk  of  respiratory  disease
(Krupnick  and Cropper  1992) and even improved information  about
grocery  store prices (Devine and Marion  1979).

A  politically  important,  recent  Contingent  Valuation  study  (Car-
son et al. 1992) has been used to measure the environmental damage
caused  by  the  supertanker  Exxon  Valdez  which  ran  aground  in
March  1989  in  Prince  William  Sound,  Alaska,  spilling  11 million
gallons  of  crude  oil  into  the  sea.  The  enormous  sums  of  money
involved  in  the  litigation  associated  with  the  Alaska  oil  spill  has
further  drawn the attention of the economics community to this par-
ticular  survey  method.  As a consequence, the  Contingent  Valuation
method  has  come  under  careful  scrutiny  in  the  profession.  The
United  States  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration

235

Bruno  S. Frey

(NOAA) hired two Nobel prize winners (Kenneth Arrow and Robert
Solow) to co-chair a panel with the task of assessing the Contingent
Valuation  method.  The  bottom  line  of  the  panel  report  (Arrow  et
al.  1993) concludes "that CV studies can produce estimates  reliable
enough  to be  the  starting point  of a judicial  process  of damage as-
sessment,  including lost passive-use values." The term  "passive-use
values" refers  to  the non-use  values  of  the  environment  composed
of existence, option and bequest benefits. However, the report stated
a large number of stringent requirements for that conclusion to hold.
The most  important are:

(1)  personal interviews rather than telephone surveys which, in turn,

are preferable  to mail surveys;

(2)  the  environment  in which  the  object  to be evaluated  is  situated

must be described  accurately  and  understandably;

(3)  it must be made clear for what other purposes the money can be
spent  if the project  or policy  is not undertaken,  i. e., the budget
constraint  must be well  specified;

(4)  the respondents must be reminded of the substitutes for the com-
modity  in question, e. g., it must be stated what other castles or
palaces  can be visited if the one in question  were  demolished;
(5)  it must be ascertained that the respondent  understands the ques-

tion and the underlying choice.

4  Applications of Contingent  Valuation  Surveys

to the Arts

4.1  Existing  Studies
To date, only a few studies use the Contingent Valuation procedure for
issues of culture. There have been attempts to measure the broad sup-
port for the arts in terms of the desired government expenditures (e.g.,
Throsby and Withers  1983, Morrison and West  1986). I am aware of
only two  serious  studies in which the procedure has been  applied to
measure  the  willingness-to-pay  for  specific  cultural  objects:  Bille
Hansen  (1995)  uses it  for  the  Royal  Danish  Opera  in  Copenhagen,
and Martin (1994) uses it for the Musee de la civilisation in Quebec.
Yet, in cultural  policy, decisions are continually  made whether to
preserve  an  object  of cultural  heritage,  to  demolish  it  or at  least  to
let it deteriorate  beyond repair. Relevant  examples are the castles or
palaces  mentioned  above.  Others  are  villas  in  the  "fin-de-siecle"
style  or  "Jugendstil" which,  on the  one  hand,  are worth  preserving
and which, on the other hand, are situated in locations which can be
most profitably  used for other purposes and are often  very expensive
to  repair  and  put  to good  use. Another  example  are  the  "galleries"
(shopping malls of the late  19th and early 20th centuries) in Paris and
elsewhere  which  are dilapidated  but  which  could  still  be  restored.

236

Evaluating  Cultural  Property

It makes less sense to evaluate the benefits and costs of preserving
the Colosseum or the Tour Eifel  because it is beyond one's imagina-
tion that they would be torn down. If,  for some  reason, a demolition
were planned,  a Contingent Valuation  survey would not  change the
result a bit.

4.2  Problems of  Survey  Studies in the Arts
In  this  section,  the  paper  concentrates  on  specific  problems  which
arise when Contingent Valuation is applied to cultural heritage. Four
issues will be  discussed.

4.2.1  Marginal versus Total Choices
Survey  studies  typically  confront  the  respondents  with  an  "all  or
none"  choice  or  with  an  indivisible  good.  Either  the  villa  or  the
gallery  is to be totally  preserved  or not  at  all. Bille  Hansen  (1995)
explicitly states, for  example, that the Royal Danish Theatre is to be
run at the present activity level. Clearly, it is always possible to vary
the level, although that option is routinely  and fervently  rejected  by
the suppliers. One possibility  would be to give up the ballet  section
or  the  opera  section,  and  the  respondents  could  then  be  asked  for
their  willingness-to-pay  for  these  different  activity  levels.  Even  a
villa  or  a  gallery  could  be  partially  preserved  without  completely
destroying  the  respective  historical  value.  Constructing  such  a  de-
mand curve for various "sizes" or "qualities" of the cultural good is,
in principle,  possible  but  would  involve  much  additional  work be-
cause the survey must exactly specify  the various levels and do it in
a form  understandable  to the respondents.

4.2.2  Non-Optimising  Choices
This second issue is closely connected to the first but is not identical.
The survey approach does not include an optimising algorithm, i. e.,
the historic  object  is presented  to the respondents  as it is. It is (im-
plicitly) assumed that supply is already  efficient  in two respects:

(1)  The object's  activities  are so perfectly  run that no  improvement
is possible without having to give up some other goal. This assump-
tion  is, to say the  least, heroic; it is known from  extensive  research
in  the  economics  of  art  that  there  exist  considerable  opportunities
for  improvements  in technical  efficiency.
(2)  Contingent Valuation studies also assume efficiency  in the sense
that the consumers'  preferences  are met. Again, art economists pro-
vide  overwhelming  evidence  to the  contrary.  In particular,  not only
the directors of theatres and museums  but  also the  directors  of his-
toric cities tend to follow  their own preferences  which may system-
atically  and  significantly  deviate  from  what  the  average  citizens,
who are relevant  in willingness-to-pay  studies, desire.

237

Bruno  S. Frey

Survey studies  do not take  into account much of the insights and
knowledge  which  have  been  accumulated  in  cultural  economics.
Thus,  excellent  opportunities  for  improvements  in the  presentation
and, therefore  also, preservation of art are overlooked. A most  useful
contribution of an economist in safeguarding  our cultural heritage is
to  suggest  already known or innovative  ways to put it to good use.
Thus, for example, a Roman arena can be employed for all kinds of
artistic  and popular  sports  performances  and  festivities  so that the
respondents  are likely to have a much  larger willingness-to-pay be-
cause the arena has been filled with  life.

4.2.3  What values?
It is not obvious what preferences  should enter Contingent Valuation
studies  in the arts and elsewhere. Two aspects are of particular im-
portance:

(1)  Psychological  anomalies3  play  a major  role.  Most  importantly,
the disparity between gains and losses matters. This endowment  ef-
fect  leads to a major difference  between willingness-to-pay and will-
ingness-to-accept  which,  according  to  standard  economic  theory,
should be roughly equal. In a study of the valuation of the environ-
ment  by duck  hunters,  for example, the willingness-to-pay  to  save
marsh  area used by ducks was, on average,  $47 per hunter,  but the
hunters would, on average, demand $ 1,044  (or 22 times as much) to
accept  the identical  loss  (Hammack  and Brown  1974). The endow-
ment  effect  has  been  associated  with  the  idea  of  the  'patrimoine
nationale'  of  art  (Frey  and  Pommerehne  1987).  A  loss  is  highly
valued. Imagine France losing the Mona Lisa, Rome losing the Col-
osseum  or Florence  losing  the Uffizi.  Imagine,  however,  that  none
of these historic treasures ever existed.  Does France really need the
Mona  Lisa?  It has hundreds  of other  masterpieces  in its museums.
Does  Rome  really  need  the  Colosseum?  It  has  the  whole  Forum
Romanum  nearby with spectacular  triumphal  arches. Does Florence
really need the Uffizi?  It has other important museums as well as the
Dome. If this were true, citizens would express a low willingness-to-
pay to acquire these objects of culture. The question is what evalua-
tion  is to count  or, equivalently,  what  initial  state  is envisaged. Ta-
king the status quo and enquiring how high would be the evaluation
of  a  loss  speaks  much  for  itself.  However,  under  a  long-term  per-
spective,  the issue  looks  different.  Once  it is hypothesized  that an
art  object  has  never  existed  or  has been  lost  for  a  long  time, the
endowment  effect  vanishes and the evaluation  of the respective art
object  becomes  dramatically  lower.
(2)  Art is international, and it is no rare occurrence that a country's
culture  is more  highly  valued by foreigners  than by the inhabitants
of the country itself. Yet, Contingent Valuation studies normally sur-
vey  only  the inhabitants.  Thus, Bille  Hansen  (1995)  only  surveyed

238

Evaluating  Cultural  Property

residents  of  Denmark  for  her  study  of  the  Royal  Theatre.  While  it
may  be  admissible  in  this  case,  in other  cases  it  would  be  wholly
mistaken.  The  Maya  ruins  in  the jungles  of  Central  America,  for
example,  are  probably  valued  less  by  the  inhabitants  than  by  the
North  Americans  and  Europeans  who  would  probably  express  a
rather high  willingness-to-pay  for the ruins'  existence.

It  might  be  argued  that  at  least  part  of  that  willingness-to-pay
would be expressed by local respondents who include  the prospects
of attracting tourists in their evaluation. Option values, however, are
not  taken  into  account  as  they  do  not  lead  to  actual  visits.  Even
under ideal conditions, only a minor part of the option value can be
appropriated  by  the  local  residents  in  the  form  of  royalties  for  the
pictures taken and films  made of the art.

A  similar  problem  arises  with  future  generations  who cannot  be
surveyed at all. Part of the value is taken into account by the bequest
motive of the respondents, but the questionnaire again has to be very
carefully  designed.  For objects  of cultural  heritage,  the problem  of
capturing the willingness-to-pay  of future  generations  is particularly
intense  because  the  issues  involved  are  often  extremely  long-term
and it is known that future  preferences  with respect to art systemati-
cally deviate from  the values of the living generation.  Older people
tend to attach much less value to contemporary  art than is attributed
by  subsequent  generations,  at  least  from  the  vantage  point  of  the
latter.4

4.2.4  Specific  versus  Statistical  Values
Individuals  evaluate  specific  objects,  such  as  a  particular  cultural
monument, quite differently  than a non-specified  or statistical object.
This disparity was first  found  in the case of human  lives (Schelling
1984). People are prepared to spend enormous  sums to save the  life
of  an  identified  person  such  as  a child  who  has  fallen  into a well.
They are prepared to spend much less on efforts  to save yet uniden-
tified  lives by, for example, spending resources to reduce the number
of deadly  accidents  on a road.  This disparity  mirrors  the two kinds
of  Contingent  Valuation  studies  in art  mentioned  at  the  beginning.
It would follow  that respondents would indicate a much higher will-
ingness-to-pay  for  the  Royal  Danish  Theatre  and  the  Musee  de  la
civilisation  Quebec than  for public art expenditures  in general.

4.3  Beneficial  Aspects
As with any other evaluation  method, Contingent  Valuation  surveys
are confronted  with problems and difficulties.  Yet, it is important to
see that they  also provide major  insights.

4.3.1  Serious Research  Effort
Contingent  Valuation  studies  promise  to  yield  worthwhile  results
because  they  force  the  researchers  to  undertake  a  determined  and

239

Bruno  S. Frey

extensive  analysis  of  the  art  object  in  question.  The  questionnaire
has  to  meet  stringent  requirements  to  be  usable  at  all.  Even  more
importantly, the representative  survey approach addresses both visi-
tors and non-visitors. The usefulness  of a Contingent Valuation study
is  increased  further  if  the  assumptions  made  in  the  course  of  the
analysis  are  discussed  and  systematically  varied  so that  the  robust-
ness of the results can  be  evaluated.

4.3.2  Indirect  Benefits
Contingent Valuation studies have the major advantage of being able
to capture existence, option and bequest values: "the contingent val-
uation method would appear to be the only method capable of shed-
ding  light  on  [such]  potentially  important  values"  (Portney  1994:
14).  That  such  non-use  values  are  of  particularly  great  importance
in the arts has already  been pointed  out.

4.3.3  Quality  not only  Quantity
A frequent  charge by "arts people" is that economic approaches can
only measure the quantity of art but not the quality. Contingent Val-
uation proves such accusations to be wrong. The number of visits to
a theatre, a museum or a monument does not matter as much as how
highly a visit is valued by the individuals concerned. Moreover, non-
use  values  are  also integrated.  The  respective  evaluations  are  made
comparable  to  alternatives,  in  particular  to  other uses  of  tax  funds
or to lower  taxes and higher private  consumption.

5  Combining  Evaluation  and. Decision by  Referenda

Public  decisions  on culture  are taken  in the politico-economic  pro-
cess  in  which  politicians,  public  officials,  interest  groups  and  citi-
zens/taxpayers  interact  within  a  given  constitutional  framework.
Thus,  some  cultural  decisions  are  to  be  taken  on  the  local  level,
others at the regional, cantonal  or provincial  level and still others at
the  national  level. These  decisions  are  normally  very  complex  due
to  the  many  interactions.  However,  the budgetary  situation  and  the
administrative  constraints  are  always  highly  significant,  and  they
determine,  to  a  large  extent,  how  much  money  is  spent  in  various
ways for the arts. In contrast, willingness-to-pay studies which relate
to  social  welfare  and  not  to political  exigencies are of  little  impor-
tance.  Some  actors  may  under  some  circumstances  use  the  results
of  such  studies  to bolster  their  arguments  provided  they  suit  their
interests.

The  major  problem  with  the  willingness-to-pay  studies  based  on
social  welfare  is  that  they  are  divorced from  political  decisions.
Therefore,  it is proposed here that the willingness-to-pay  is revealed

240

Evaluating  Cultural  Property

and,  at  the  same  time,  the  decision  is  taken  by popular referenda.
This  proposal  is  theoretically  cogent.  Indeed,  the  NOAA-panel
headed  by  Arrow  and  Solow  (Arrow  et  al.  1993)  demanded  that
'contingent  valuation  should  [use] the referendum  format'  (Portney
1994: 9). A well-designed  Contingent  Valuation  study thus  imitates
a  popular  referendum.  Why  then  should  it  not  be  employed?  As a
decision-making  mechanism,  referenda  have many  advantages  over
democratic  decisions  via  representation.  In  particular,  referenda
avoid the principal-agent problem and constitute an effective  barrier
against the  'classe politique'  (see, e. g., Frey  1994; Bonnet and Frey
1994). Both aspects are of particular importance with respect to cul-
tural decisions because politicians and bureaucrats tend to have more
room  for  discretion  in this  area  than  elsewhere. It has been  empiri-
cally  shown  (Frey  and  Pommerehne  1990,  chapter  10)  that  indivi-
dual  citizens  not  only  evaluate  the  user-values  but  also  existence,
option  and bequest values in their vote.

Five  arguments  are  often  raised  against  the  use  of popular  refer-

enda  for  cultural  policy.

5.1  Incapable  Citizens
It is claimed that voters are both uninformed  and unintelligent  with
respect  to cultural  affairs  and, therefore,  cannot  be trusted  to  make
"good"  decisions.  The criticism  concerning  the  lack  of  information
is  doubtful  because  when  citizens  are  given  the  power  to  decide,
they will inform  themselves. Citizens do not acquire much  informa-
tion today as they cannot decide anything.  The state of  information
is not given but endogenous. The discussion process induced by the
referendum  produces  the necessary  information  to decide, a service
which the researcher has to perform  artificially  when undertaking a
survey. As for  the  lack of intelligence with  respect  to art,  referenda
are, of course, in exactly the same position as all  willingness-to-pay
. methods. In all cases, individual preferences  and not the  supposedly
superior  insights of a cultural/political  elite are important.

5.2  Superficial  Citizens
It is also claimed that voters do not take referendum  decisions seri-
ously.  It  is  quite  true  that  they  are  "low  cost"  (see  Kliemt  1986;
Kirchgassner  and  Pommerehne  1993),  but  this  applies  equally  to
Contingent  Valuation  procedures  (but not to the travel  cost  method
which  looks at revealed behaviour). One may argue that  individuals
take the response to a survey still more lightly because the situation
is purely  hypothetical.  Referendum  voting  is, moreover,  connected
with  significant  personal  cost  when  the  pre-referendum  discussion
is intensive. In that case, not having  and not being able to defend  a
particular  position  (and  vote  decision)  is  negatively  sanctioned  by
the citizen's  social  environment  (for  this  argument,  see  Frey 1994).

241

Bruno  S. Frey

Intensive discussions are not atypical for referenda on culture. An ex-
ample is the vote on the purchase of two Picasso paintings in the city
of Basle (see Frey and Pominerehne  1990, chapter 10).

5.3  Propaganda  Influence
In  referenda,  the  interest  groups  and  parties  seek  to  affect  the  vote
by  newspaper,  radio  and  television  campaigns.  However,  an  open
society  is  defined  by  admitting propaganda  from  all sides and  it is,
therefore,  not  a  priori  clear  what  the  effect  of  propaganda  is  on
referendum  decisions. Normally,  the cultural  interests are well orga-
nized  and  motivated;  they  emanate from the  highly  subsidised  cul-
tural institutions such as museums, theatres, orchestras and other arts
organizations.  Individuals  uninterested  or  opposed  to  the  arts  are
generally less educated with lower income and lower levels of politi-
cal  participation.  They  are  often  weakly  organized,  so  their  propa-
ganda  influence  is  small.  Art  lovers should  not, therefore,  be  afraid
of the propaganda  activity  associated  with  referenda.

5.4  Restricted  Participation
Referendum  participation  is constrained  in two ways:
(1)  Citizens  decide not to  -vote. Non-participating  citizens are paral-
lel  to  those  individuals  who  refuse  to  answer  the  survey  questions
in a Contingent  Valuation  study. The motivation  is not the same but
is likely to be  similar.  The  major  reason  for non-participation  is the
lack  of  interest  in  cultural  issues  and  it  may,  therefore,  be  argued
that  it is not  as  detrimental  if  such people do not vote or respond.
(2)  Some  people,  especially  foreigners  and  future  generations,  are
formally  excluded  from  voting.  As we  have  seen,  this  also  applies
to surveys.  Some of these  interests are, however, taken  into account
by the  voters.  As  far  as  these  interests  are  connected  with  business
(tourism),  propaganda  is  used  to  motivate  voters  to  decide  in  their
favour.

5.5  Amount  of Knowledge  Gained
In a popular  referendum,  voters may only decide between "yes" and
"no," while  in  surveys  more  information  can  be collected. This is a
clear  advantage  of  such  studies.  However,  referenda  outcomes  can
be  analysed  by  cross-section  (and  sometimes  time-series)  methods
which  yield  additional  information.  It  has,  for  instance,  been  pos-
sible to  isolate  various  non-user  effects  (see  Frey  and  Pommerehne
1990, chapter  10). Moreover,  while the referendum  decision  itself is
restricted  to yes  or no, preference  intensity  is partly reflected  in the
decision whether to participate, and the fact that the exercise of one's
preference  is connected  with  a binding democratic decision tends to
increase the  seriousness  with  which the decision  is taken.

242

Evaluating  Cultural  Property

The  five  arguments  often  raised  against  the  use  of  referenda  in
the arts are thus not compelling.  Either they are unfounded  as such,
for  example,  the  citizens  are  incapable,  or  the  shortcomings  are
shared  by  other  methods  of  evaluating  cultural  property.  No  ap-
proach  is  ideal, yet  we  should  use  those  methods  which  best  serve
the  purpose  at  hand.  Popular  referenda  are  certainly  a  good  pro-
cedure  in  many  cases,  especially  as  they  combine  evaluation  and
decision  making. This  is the  crucial  advantage  over  all  other meth-
ods, including Contingent Valuation  surveys.

6  Conclusions

Our  discussion  has  shown  that  willingness-to-pay  procedures  and,
in  particular,  Contingent  Valuation  are  useful  but  have  a  decisive
disadvantage in that they are not related to political decisions. Popu-
lar referenda  combine the evaluation of competing  alternatives with
democratic  decisions.  It  has  been  argued  that  this  combination  is
particularly relevant and beneficial  for cultural decisions. Academics
who  want  to  contribute  to  preserving  the  cultural  heritage  should
not restrict themselves to undertaking willingness-to-pay  studies but
should  suggest  constitutional  changes  allowing  and  prescribing  the
use of popular referenda  for  cultural  decisions.

Referenda  on issues of culture and cultural heritage, in particular,
are feasible.  Indeed, in Switzerland  such referenda  are routinely  un-
dertaken  at all  governmental  levels. While  at  the national  level  the
propositions  relate to general  laws  and  constitutional  provisions  on
the  support  of  the  arts,  at  the  cantonal  and  even  more  so  at  the
communal  level  citizens  decide directly  on the amount  of  subsidies
and  other  monetary  support  for  culture.  As  empirical  research  has
shown (see Frey and Pommerehne  1995), voters are prepared to sup-
port  a  substantial  share  of  such  cultural  outlays.  Indeed,  they  tend
to be more favourably  inclined to support culture as opposed to other
types of  expenditures.  It can,  of course, be argued  that  Switzerland
is  different  from  other  countries.  This  is  certainly  true.  What  the
Swiss  example  does  show,  however,  is  that  referenda  on  issues  of
cultural heritage can be undertaken and that one can put trust in the
voters' judgement.

Notes

1  There  are  precursors  in  Europe.  Thus,  early  contributions  in  German  are

Kindermann  (1903),  Lux  (1906)  and  Drey  (1910).

2  The  addresses  are:  Professor  Neil  O. Alper,  Executive  Secretary-Treasurer,
Association for  Cultural  Economics  International,  Department  of  Econom-
ics,  Northeastern  University,  Boston,  Massachusetts  02115; Journal  of  Cul-
tural  Economics,  Kluwer  Academic  Publ.,  P. O.  Box  322,  3300  AH  Dor-

243

Bruno  S. Frey

drecht,  The Netherlands, or P. O. Box  358, Accord  Station,  Hingham, Mass.
02018-0358.

3  See, e. g.,  Kahneman, Slovic and Tversky  1982; Arkes and Hammond  1986;
Bell,  Raiffa  and  Tversky  1988;  Dawes  1988;  Frey  and  Eichenberger  1989;
Thaler  1992.

4  Today's  younger  generation  values Jugendstil-monuments  more  highly  than
the  past  generation  which  produced  it.  On  the  other  hand,  not  all  that  was
called  'art'  in  the past is considered  as such  today.

References

Acton, Jan (1973). Evaluating Public Progress to Save Lives: The Case of Heart
Attacks, RAND Research Report R-73-02. Santa Monica: RAND  Corporation.
Arkes,  Hal  R. and  Kenneth  R. Hammond  (eds) (1986). Judgement  and  Decision
Making:  An  Interdisciplinary  Reader.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University
Press.

Arrow,  Kenneth  J.,  Robert  S. Solow, Edward  Learner,  Paul  Portney,  Ray  Radner
and  Howard  Schuman  (1993).  "Report  of  the  NOAA-Panel  on  Contingent
Valuation," Federal  Register 58  (10): 4601 -4614.

Baumol,  William  J. and William G. Bowen  (1966). Performing  Arts  -  The Eco-

nomic  Dilemma.  Cambridge, Mass: Twentieth  Century  Fund.

Becker,  Gary  S. (1976).  The Economic  Approach  to Human  Behavior. Chicago:

Chicago  University Press.

Bell, David  E., Howard Raiffa  and Amos Tversky (eds) (1988). Decision  Making.
Descriptive,  Normative and Prescriptive  Interactions.  Cambridge:  Cambridge
University  Press.

Benhamou,  Francoise  (1996). L'economie  de  la  culture.  Paris:  Editions  La  De-

couverte.

Bille  Hansen,  Trine  (1995).  A  CV  Study  of  Willingness-to-pay  for  the  Royal
Theatre  in Copenhagen. Mimeo. AKF, Institute  of Local Government  Studies,
Copenhagen.

Bishop,  Richard  C.  and  Thomas A. Heberlein  (1979).  Measuring  Values  of  Ex-
tramarket  Goods:  Are  Indirect  Measures  Biased?  American  Journal  of Agri-
cultural Economics 61: 926-30.

Blaug, Mark (ed.) (1976). The Economics of the Arts. London: Martin  Robertson.
Bohnet,  Iris  and  Bruno  S. Frey  (1994).  Direct-Democratic  Rules:  The  Role  of

Discussion.  Kyklos  47: 341-354.

Carson,  Richard,  et  al.  (1992).  A  Contingent  Valuation  Study  of  Lost  Passive
Use Values Resulting From the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill, Report to the Attorney
General of the State of Alaska, prepared by Natural Resource Damage Assess-
ment,  Inc., La  Jolla,  California.

Carson,  Richard,  et  al. (1994). A  Bibliography  of  Contingent  Valuation Studies
and Papers.  La Jolla, California:  Natural  Resources Damage Assessment, Inc.
Cicchetti, Charles J. and Kerry Smith (1973). Congestion, Quality  Deterioration,
and Optimal  Use: Wilderness Recreation in the Spanish Peaks Primitive Area.
Social  Science  Research 2:  15—30.

Coleman,  James  S. (1990). Foundations  of Social  Theory. Cambridge, MA:  Har-

vard  University  Press.

Cooter,  Robert  D. and Thomas Ulen (1988). Law and Economics.  Glenview,  IL:

Scott,  Foresman.

Cropper,  Maureen  L.  and William  E. Oates  (1992).  Environmental  Economics:

A  Survey. Journal  of Economic Literature  302:675-740.

244

Evaluating  Cultural  Property

Dawes,  Robyn  M.  (1988).  Rational  Choice  in  an  Uncertain  World.  San  Diego

and  New York: Harcourt,  Brace,  Jovanovich.

Devine,  D. Grant,  and  Bruce  Marion  (1979).  The  Influence  of  Consumer  Price
Information  on  Retail Pricing and Consumer  Behaviour. American  Journal  of
Agricultural  Economics  61 (May): 228—37.

Drey, Paul (1910). Die wirtschaftlichen  Grundlagen  der Malkunst.  Stuttgart  and

Berlin:  Cotta.

Frey,  Bruno  S.  (1992).  Economics  as  a  Science  of  Human  Behaviour.  Boston

and  Dordrecht:  Kluwer.

Frey,  Bruno  S.  (1994).  Direct  Democracy:  Politico-Economic  Lessons  from

Swiss  Experience. American  Economic  Review  84 (May): 338—348.

Frey,  Bruno  S.  and  Reiner  Eichenberger  (1989).  Should  Social  Scientists  Care

about Choice  Anomalies? Rationality  and Society  1:  101 — 122.

Frey,  Bruno  S.  and  Werner  W. Pommerehne  (1987).  International  Trade  in  Art:
Attitudes  and  Behaviour.  Rivista  Internazionale  di  Scienze  Economiche  e
Commerciali  34 (6):  465-486.

Frey,  Bruno  S. and  Werner  W. Pommerehne  (1989).  Art: An  Empirical  Inquiry.

Southern  Economic  Journal  56 (Oct.): 396—409.

Frey, Bruno S. and Werner W. Pommerehne  (1990). Muses and Markets.  Explor-

ations  in the Economics  of Art. Oxford:  Blackwell.

Frey,  Bruno  S.  and  Werner  W. Pommerehne  (1995).  Public  Expenditure  on  the
Arts  and  Direct  Democracy:  The  Use  of  Referenda  in  Switzerland.  Cultural

.  Policy  2 (1): 55-65.
Ginsburgh, Victor A. and Pierre-Michel  Menger (eds) (1996). Economics  of Arts.

Selected  Essays.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier/North  Holland.

Hammack, J. and Gardner Brown (1974).  Waterfowl and  Wetlands: Toward Bioe-

conomic Analysis.  Amsterdam:  North  Holland.

Heilbrun, James and Charles M. Gray (1993).  The Economics  of Art and Culture
•  —  An American  Perspective.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press.
Hirshleifer,  Jack  (1985). The Expanding  Domain  of  Economics. American  Eco-

nomic Review  75 (May): 53—68.

Kahneman,  Daniel,  Paul  Slovic  and Amos Tversky  (eds) (1982). Judgement  un-
der  Uncertainty:  Heuristics  and  Biases.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University
Press.

Kindermann,  Carl  (1903).  Volkswirtschaft und  Kunst.  Jena:  Fischer.
Kirchgassner, Gebhard  and Werner W. Pommerehne  (1993). Low-cost  Decisions

as  a Challenge  to  Public  Choice. Public  Choice  11 (September):  107-115.

KJiemt, Hartmut (1986). The Veil of Insignificance.  European Journal  of  Politi-

cal Economy  2/3:333 — 344.

Krupnick,  Alan  and  Maureen  Cropper  (1992).  The  Effect  of  Information  on

Health  Risk Valuation. Journal  of Risk  and  Uncertainty  2: 29—48.

Lux,  Joseph  A.  (1906).  Volkswirtschaft  des  Talents:  Grundsdtze  einer  Volks-

wirtschafslehre  der Kunst.  Leipzig:  Voigtlander.

Martin, Fernand  (1994). Determining the Size of Museum  Subsidies.  Journal  of

Cultural Economics  18: 255-270.

Mitchell, Robert C. and Richard T. Carson (1989). Using Surveys  to  Value Public
Goods:  The Contingent  Valuation Method.  Washington,  D. C:  Resources  for
the  Future.

Morrison,  William  G.  and  Edwin  G. West  (1986).  Subsidies  for  the  Performing
Arts:  Evidence  on  Voter  Preferences.  Journal  of  Behavioral  Economics  15
(Fall):  57-72.

O'Hagan, John W. (1992). The Wexford  Opera Festival: A Case for Public Fund-
ing?  In:  Ruth  Towse  and  Abdul  Khakee  (eds),  Cultural  Economics.  Berlin:
Springer: 61—66.

245

Bruno  S. Frey

Peacock,  Alan  T.  (1993):  Paying  the  Piper,  Culture,  Music  and  Money.  Edin-

burgh:  Edinburgh  University  Press.

Peacock,  Alan  and  Idle Rizzo (1994). Cultural  Economics and  Cultural  Policies.

Dordrecht:  Kluwer.

Pommerehne,  Werner W. (1987). Prdferenzen fur  Offentliche  Giiter.  Ansdtze  zu

ihrer Erfassung.  Tubingen:  Mohr (Siebeck).

Portney,  Paul  R.  (1994).  The  Contingent  Valuation  Debate:  Why  Economists

should  Care.  Journal  of Economic Perspectives  8 (4): 3—17.

Posner,  Richard  A.  (1986).  The Economic  Analysis  of Law.  3rd ed.  Boston:  Lit-

tle  &  Brown.

Randall,  Alan,  Berry  C. Ives,  and  Clyde  Eastman  (1974).  Bidding  Games  for
Valuation of Aesthetic Environmental  Improvements. Journal  of Environmen-
tal Economics  and Management  1:  132-149.

Ridker,  Ronald  (1967). The Economic  Cost of Air Pollution.  New York:  Praeger.
Schelling, Thomas C. (1984). The Life  You Save May  Be Your Own.  In: Choice
and  Consequence.  Perspectives of an Errant Economist.  Cambridge, MA and
London,  England:  Harvard  University  Press:  113 — 146.

Thaler,  Richard  H.  (1992).  The  Winner's  Curse.  Paradoxes  and  Anomalies  of

Economic  Life.  New York:  Free Press.

Throsby, David C. (1994). The Production  and Consumption  of the Arts: A View

of  Cultural  Economics. Journal  of Economic  Literature  33:  1—29.

Throsby,  David  C. and Glenn A. Withers (1979).  The Economics  of the Perform-

ing Arts.  London  and  Melbourne:  Arnold.

Throsby,  David  C. and Glenn A. Withers (1983). Measuring  the Demand  for  the
Arts as a  Public  Good: Theory  and Empirical  Results,  In: William  S. Hendon
and  James  L. Shanahan  (eds), Economics  of  Cultural  Decisions.  Cambridge,
MA.:  Abt,  177-191.

Towse,  Ruth  and  Abdul  Khakee  (eds.)  (1992).  Cultural  Economics.  Berlin:

Springer.

Vaughan,  David  Roger  (1980).  Does  a  Festival  Pay?  In:  James  L. Shanahan,
William  S. Hendon  and  Alice  J. MacDonald  (eds),  Economic  Policy for  the
Arts.  Cambridge,  Mass.: Abt:  319-331.

246


