CASE NOTE

End of the Era of Denial for 

Buyers of State-Owned Antiquities:

United States v. Schultz

 . . *

In a decision rendered even more forceful by its brevity, the Federal District Court
for the Southern District of New York has again said that a foreign law declaring
state ownership of antiquities can make an object “stolen” for purposes of U.S.
law—even if the object was not “stolen” in the traditional sense.1 The case is a
ﬁrst for New York in basing a criminal conviction on a foreign “patrimony” law
claiming state ownership of antiquities, following United States v. McClain.2 But it is
another opportunity for Manhattan’s lower federal court, following on the heels of
its recent rulings in two other art law cases, United States v. An Antique Platter of Gold
and United States v. Portrait of Wally, to again tell the unbelieving that McClain is good
law in New York.3

The Schultz decision, now on appeal, hands back to the U.S. Court of Appeals
for the Second Circuit a question it recently avoided: whether it is right or wrong
to base a violation of the U.S. National Stolen Property Act (NSPA) on a foreign
law declaring state ownership of antiquities.4 Critics of McClain have argued that
such “patrimony” laws should not be “enforced” in the United States,5 but the
Schultz court looked unblinkingly to Egyptian law to ﬁnd that the Egyptian gov-
ernment owned the antiquities Schultz sold. It then held that the NSPA applies
to foreign thefts. The court then swept away Schultz’s argument that the Conven-
tion on Cultural Property Implementation Act (CCPIA), which restricts imports
of certain antiquities,6 precludes NSPA-based prosecutions of stolen, state-owned
antiquities. More than one law can cover stolen imported antiquities, the court
said, citing a Second Circuit decision, United States v. Stephenson.7

As the antiquities trade faces increased scrutiny, and foreign nations such as
Italy, Egypt and Turkey seek to uphold their patrimony laws by legal actions in the
U.S., the Schultz decision and its immediate consequence—the criminal conviction
of a prominent New York art dealer for selling stolen Egyptian antiquities—

*Attorney at law, Lincoln, Massachusetts; legal correspondent, Art Newspaper.

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 11, No. 2, 2002, pp. 305– 322
© 2002 International Cultural Property Society

305

306     

mean that changing legal realities may no longer be denied by buyers of state-
claimed antiquities.8 Collectors, dealers and museums may no longer be able to ac-
cept antiquities as arguably “not stolen” under U.S. law if they come from coun-
tries with patrimony laws unless the objects have clear written provenance.9 After
Schultz there is no quarter for the “not stolen” argument in the Southern District
of New York.

1  

The indictment charged that Schultz conspired to violate the NSPA by knowingly
receiving, possessing, and selling goods worth $5,000 or more that had crossed a
U.S. boundary “after being stolen,” speciﬁcally, “Egyptian antiquities” unlawfully
removed from Egypt after 1983.10

The indictment cited Egyptian Law 117, enacted in 1983, relating to the pro-
tection, registration, preservation, and discovery of Egyptian antiquities.11 Accord-
ing to the indictment, Law 117 declared all newly discovered antiquities to be pub-
lic property. After its passage, the indictment stated, the possession, ownership,
transfer or trade of antiquities was illegal. Although antiquities could be kept if
acquired before 1983, owners had to notify the antiquities authorities of such items
and not remove them from Egypt. “Antiquity” was deﬁned to include any movable
object having “archaeological or historical value or signiﬁcance” as a relic of a civ-
ilization historically in Egypt. The law placed no restrictions on antiquities re-
moved from Egypt before 1983. Egypt maintained records of known antiquities
but had no record of antiquities found in the ground and not reported to the 
government.12

The indictment alleged the following facts. Frederick Schultz, head of a New
York gallery that sold Egyptian and other antiquities, had been past president of
the National Association of Dealers in Ancient, Oriental and Primitive Art, a
prominent association of dealers in ancient art based in New York.13 He began ob-
taining antiquities from an unindicted coconspirator, Jonathan Tokeley-Parry, who
removed the objects from Egypt, including objects recently found in the ground by
farmers and builders.14 Egyptologists examined the objects for Schultz to deter-
mine whether the objects came from a tomb for which there was a documentary
record. Among other communications to Schultz, Tokeley-Parry faxed a letter say-
ing that the “boys have just returned from the hills above Minea, which is bandit
country . . . and we are offered a large hoard.”15

To  make  it  seem  that  the  objects  left  Egypt  before  Law  117  was  enacted,
Schultz falsely told buyers that the objects were from the ﬁctitious “Thomas Al-
cock” collection, which he said belonged to an English family since the 1920s.
Tokeley-Parry supplied “Thom. Alcock” labels.16

According  to  the  indictment,  among  the  objects  was  a  stone  head  of the
pharaoh Amenhotep III, which Schultz sought to sell to two museums as “the

  307

ﬁnest ancient Egyptian head on the market” at a price of $2.5 million. He ulti-
mately sold it to a London buyer for $1.2 million. Schultz also bought two Old
Kingdom painted reliefs taken from a tomb apparently unknown to the Egyptian
government, a Sixth Dynasty limestone striding ﬁgure, and a faience ﬁgure.17

     

Schultz sought to dismiss the indictment for failure to state a conspiracy claim
under the NSPA. Therefore, all alleged facts were taken as true for purposes of the
decision.18

.1  MCCLAIN 
Schultz argued that an NSPA prosecution cannot be based on a foreign law which
merely declares ownership of antiquities, when U.S. citizens would not think of
such objects as “stolen.”19 Like art dealer groups, which ﬁled a friend-of-the-court
brief in the case, Schultz grounded his attack in McClain.20

2.1.1 The McClain Decision
In United States v. McClain, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit upheld
a dealer’s conviction under the NSPA for bringing Pre-Columbian antiquities into
the U.S. The court’s theory was that the objects belonged to Mexico under Mexi-
can law and were therefore “stolen” property illegally imported in violation of the
NSPA.21 The McClain court said that a foreign government’s law would have to de-
clare ownership of antiquities, not just bar their export, before an illegal export
could be considered theft and, critically, that any such declaration would have to
be stated “with sufﬁcient clarity to survive translation into terms understandable
and binding upon American citizens.”22 The McClain court found that Mexican
law’s statement of ownership was sufﬁciently clear to support an NSPA prosecu-
tion based on it.

2.1.2 The Comity Argument against McClain
Schultz argued that McClain violated rules of comity, because it recognized foreign
patrimony laws. Such “artiﬁcial” laws clash with how the U.S. treats its own cul-
tural and private property and are “antithetical to the ways Americans think about
ownership.”23 Instead, Schultz argued, such foreign laws “are not automatically en-
forceable in this country” and can be applied only where consistent with U.S. law
and policy.24 In the U.S., discovered objects of archaeological interest belong to the
property owner, and any government claim would violate the Takings Clause of
the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.25 Instead, Schultz claimed that
U.S. laws protect only cultural archaeological and Native American objects found
on land controlled by the federal government or Indian tribes.26

308     

2.1.3 The “Foreign Law Does Not Apply” Argument against McClain
Schultz argued that the application of the NSPA cannot depend on foreign laws
and that the NSPA “does not once make reference to foreign laws.”27

Contrary to Schultz’s argument, however, to operate at all, the NSPA must
necessarily intend reference to foreign law. Section 2314 of the NSPA makes it a crime
for a person to transport in “foreign commerce” any goods worth $5,000 or more
“knowing the same to have been stolen.”28 Under section 2315, “[W]hoever receives
. . . any goods . . . which have crossed a State or United States boundary after being
stolen . . . knowing the same to have been stolen . . . [is guilty of a crime].”29

The sections apply to stolen goods moving either out of, or into, the U.S. after
being “stolen.”The prohibited actions thus speciﬁcally include importation of ob-
jects stolen abroad. How is an object to be considered stolen outside the U.S.
without some sort of reference to foreign law? 

2.1.4 The “Multiplicity of Foreign Laws” Argument against McClain
Schultz argued that because 160 nations have differently drafted, “vaguely worded”
patrimony laws, following McClain would introduce unacceptable “vagueness and
uncertainty into the NSPA” by allowing varying foreign laws to determine its ap-
plication.30 Schultz further claimed that McClain would give “inadequate notice to
American citizens as to what cultural objects qualify as ‘stolen’” under U.S. crim-
inal laws. He predicted that U.S. museums and dealers would have “no way of
knowing which of these laws will be criminally enforced here under the NSPA.”31
In making this argument, Schultz seemed unconcerned to address the recent
explanation, by judges of the same federal district court weighing his case,32 of
how the NSPA does operate fairly when applied in conjunction with McClain even
if a multitude of foreign laws may be referenced. 

Just two years before Schultz, in United States v. Portrait of Wally, the government
sought to conﬁscate a painting said to have been looted from its owner by a Nazi
and imported into the United States in violation of the NSPA by an Austrian mu-
seum.33 Signiﬁcantly, the Wally court rejected the argument of the United States
that Austrian law would determine whether the painting was “stolen” under the
NSPA. Instead, the court said, Austrian law determined only whether anyone—in
this case, the claimed former owner—had an ownership interest in the painting,
and U.S. law determined whether the object was stolen. To reach this conclusion,
the Wally court looked, as McClain had done, to a U.S. Supreme Court case, United
States v. Jerome.34

In Jerome the Supreme Court examined the federal Bank Robbery Act, which
made it a crime to enter a bank intending to commit a felony therein. The question
was whether, for purposes of that act, the felony had to be a federal felony or could
be a state felony, which might vary among jurisdictions. The Supreme Court held
that the underlying crime had to be a federal felony, because it had to be assumed

  309

that Congress in enacting statutes “is not making the application of the federal act
depend on state law.”35

Basing its conclusion on Jerome, the McClain court held that Mexican law could
be examined to see if the artifacts were owned by Mexico, but not to determine
whether the objects were stolen under the NSPA. Reference to a foreign nation’s
declaration of ownership “does not create the state-by-state divergence avoided in
Jerome,” the McClain court said.36 Although the antiquities laws of different coun-
tries might lead to different results under the NSPA, the McClain court said, the
NSPA’s  “speciﬁc  scienter  requirement—knowledge  that  the  stolen  goods  are
stolen—” protects defendants from being trapped by such a divergence of foreign
law.37

As the Wally court then demonstrated, the federal case law of New York ac-
cords with this analysis, as seen in United States v. Long Cove Seafood, Inc.38 In Long Cove,
the  court  dismissed  an  NSPA  prosecution  of clam  diggers  who  had  received
wildlife allegedly taken in violation of state conservation laws. The court looked
to local law to determine whether anyone owned the clams but then to the NSPA
to see if they were stolen. Since no ownership interest was found, such as the Mc-
Clain court found that Mexico had asserted for its artifacts, the Long Cove court de-
nied the prosecution.39 Looking to Long Cove, the Wally court concluded that under
the NSPA, federal law determines “whether an item is stolen, and local law”—
which in the Schultz case would be Egyptian law—determines only who owns the
item.40

2.1.5 The “Not in a Criminal Case” Argument against McClain
Schultz attacked McClain as having been applied only once in a U.S. criminal pros-
ecution.41 Not “a single court’s decision” now favored the application of McClain,
and those that did had applied McClain only in civil cases.42

However, the court in Wally followed McClain in a civil forfeiture proceeding
based on violation of a criminal statute—the NSPA. Since McClain had been fol-
lowed in a forfeiture proceeding based on a criminal violation, it is hard to see why
McClain could not also be followed in a criminal proceeding. 

2.1.6 The “Outdated” Argument against McClain
Schultz called the McClain decision “outdated, ﬂawed and widely discredited.”43
He claimed that McClain was “now considered an obsolete aberration in art law ju-
risprudence.”44 Yet as recently as 2000 the U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of New York (though not a federal appeals court as the McClain court
was) followed McClain in Wally.

310     

.     MCCLAIN
The court should not follow McClain, Schultz argued, because after the case was
decided, the U.S. adopted the CCPIA, which, Schultz and the art dealers said, pre-
empted using the NSPA with a foreign patrimony law to prosecute antiquities
cases.45 Patrimony laws fundamentally conﬂict with the CCPIA and should not be
enforced here.46 McClain would make the CCPIA superﬂuous, Schultz argued, be-
cause foreign nations would have no reason to seek import restrictions under it
from the U.S. and could instead threaten to seek U.S. criminal prosecution “to
pressure museums, dealers and collectors to return objects.”47

2.2.1 CCPIA—Sole U.S. Statute Applicable to Foreign Patrimony Laws?
A brief summary of the CCPIA is useful here. The statute was enacted in 1983 to
implement U.S. adoption of the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership
of Cultural Property.48 The CCPIA prohibits two categories of imports into the
U.S.: ﬁrst, “stolen cultural property,” deﬁned to mean cultural objects documented
as stolen from museums or religious, secular, or public institutions in countries
which are parties to the convention. Second, it prevents the import of speciﬁc
classes of foreign materials with respect to which the U.S. has placed import re-
strictions in cases of serious situations of pillage, following approval of a request
from a foreign signatory, which demonstrates, among other things, that it has
taken sufﬁcient measures to protect its cultural patrimony.49 Cambodia, Italy, Mali,
Canada, Nicaragua, Cyprus, Guatemala, Peru, El Salvador and Bolivia have re-
quested and been granted U.S. import restrictions under the mechanism provided
in the statute.50 The CCPIA, Schultz said, showed that Congress “squarely rejected
blanket ownership claims of foreign antiquities.51

2.2.2 Comment on Schultz’s CCPIA Argument
As basis for this interpretation of the CCPIA, Schultz cited only the explanation
of a State Department representative, who helped draft the legislation, that “we,”
perhaps referring to either Congress or the State Department, “were not prepared”
to “automatically enforce, through import controls, whatever export controls were
established by the other country.”52 But this is hardly the level of evidence, such as
a congressional committee report, traditionally given weight in citing congres-
sional intent; moreover, it refers to the enforcement of export controls, whereas the
question in Schultz was the application of a foreign ownership law to a U.S. an-
titheft statute.

Schultz did further quote from the CCPIA Senate Report that U.S. actions
“need not be coextensive with the broadest declarations of ownership” of other nations,
and that “U.S. actions in these complex matters should not be bound by the charac-
terizations of other countries” (emphasis added).53 However, such general state-

  311

ments say nothing of the CCPIA’s impact on the NSPA. The latter quote, for ex-
ample, does not speciﬁcally say that the U.S. should not be bound by foreign prop-
erty laws in determining who owns property under the NSPA. 

 ’    MCCLAIN 

The government argued that the NSPA is the appropriate vehicle for prosecuting
the knowing receipt of looted, state-owned antiquities and that Egyptian law was
not being “enforced” by its prosecution of Schultz. Courts have long recognized
that patrimony laws establish government ownership of antiquities in NSPA and
civil cases, the government said.54

.1      
Contrary to Schultz, the government said that for comity reasons, U.S. courts
must recognize a foreign sovereign’s declaration of ownership over property.

The government took issue with Schultz’s comity argument that enforcement
of foreign patrimony laws would violate the Takings Clause of the U.S. Constitu-
tion. Courts must give “absolute recognition” to foreign laws operating within a
nation’s territory “and do not view them through the lens of the United States
Constitution”:55

There was simply no “taking” or conﬁscation from the defendant in this case.
There was no “taking” by the United States government. And there was no
“taking” anywhere within the United States. . . . [The defendant] does not
and cannot claim to have any prior, existing right, claim or interest in any of
the property at issue in this case. The passage of Law 117 did not in any way
. . . constitute a taking of his property interests.56

.      
The United States argued that criminal NSPA prosecutions are not inconsistent
with the CCPIA. In its 1983 passage of the CCPIA, Congress neither overruled Mc-
Clain nor limited the NSPA, the government said, and the legislative history of the
CCPIA shows that it did not affect such preexisting remedies.57 Congress never
mentioned foreign patrimony laws, the NSPA or McClain in enacting the statute
and, in the legislative history, instead expressly stated that the CCPIA did not pre-
empt other remedies, the government said.58

.     “ 
  ” 
The U.S. disagreed that it was “enforcing” Egyptian law; instead, “foreign law is
relevant to only one issue: whether the foreign nation has clearly declared owner-

312     

ship of its antiquities, which Egypt has done here.”59 The government reiterated
that in the Wally decision, McClain was cited for holding that foreign law would be
examined to see only if artifacts were owned by any person, leaving federal law to
determine if the objects were stolen.60 The Second Circuit’s decision in Long Cove
accorded with this analysis, the government said.61

As evidence that foreign patrimony laws may be referred to in NSPA cases, the
government cited United States v. Hollinshead, which upheld an NSPA conviction of
dealers and smugglers who conspired to transport in foreign commerce a Mayan
stele owned by Guatemala.62 The government also cited the Southern District
Court’s Antique Platter of Gold decision, holding that an imported object could be
conﬁscated under the NSPA because it may be considered “stolen” if a foreign na-
tion has declared ownership through patrimony laws.63

      

As a second arm of the motion to dismiss, Schultz and the dealers said that even
if McClain were followed, Egypt’s Law 117 did not meet McClain’s standards for clar-
ity in notifying U.S. citizens that Egypt owns its antiquities.64

Schultz argued that Law 117 was too ambiguous and that its vague application
to items of “archaeological or historical value or signiﬁcance” made it “impossible
to know” which objects would qualify. Schultz added that it was “questionable
whether the objects mentioned in the Indictment” would be so considered. He
called the law principally an export control regulation, which failed to assert true
ownership. Further, Schultz said, Egypt does not even enforce its antiquities own-
ership law, internationally or internally.65 He also argued that  “Once removed
from [their archaeological] locations, the objects lose archaeological importance.”66
This latter argument was highly dubious. It is precisely the loss of archaeo-
logical information that occurs when antiquities are taken from their sites that
makes antiquities theft so devastating, archaeology groups told the Schultz court, in
a friend-of-the-court brief.67 The ﬁrst sentence of Judge Rakoff ’s opinion in Schultz
suggests that, on this point, he could not have disagreed with Schultz more.68

The United States argued that Law 117 was clear enough to put a person of
ordinary intelligence—“not to mention the experienced antiquities dealer”—on
notice that Egypt owns antiquities discovered after 1983.69 The U.S. further argued
that Egypt sufﬁciently enforces its antiquities laws.70

    

The court found for the United States, going immediately to the protection of an-
tiquities  as  the  motivation  for  the  indictment,  which  the  court  found  legally
unﬂawed: 

  313

The marvelous artifacts of ancient Egypt, so wondrous in their beauty and
in what they teach of the advent of civilization, inevitably invite the
attention, not just of scholars and aesthetes, but of tomb-robbers,
smugglers, black-marketers, and assorted thieves. Every pharaoh, it seems,
has a price on his head (at least if the head is cast in stone); and if the price
is right, a head-hunter will be found to sever the head from its lawful owner.
So, at least, is the theory of the instant indictment, which alleges, in effect,
that the defendant and one or more co-conspirators arranged to steal highly
valuable ancient Egyptian artifacts—including a million-dollar head of
Amenhotep III—and fence them in New York.71

.1     11  
   
The court ﬁrst rejected Schultz’s argument that Law 117 is too vague to give fair
notice of which objects have “archaeological or historical importance,” explaining
that “none of the ancient Egyptian artifacts that is the subject of the instant in-
dictment . . . such as a pharaoh’s head and two Old Kingdom painted reliefs . . . re-
motely raises questions of fair notice under any reasonable interpretation of that
deﬁnition.”72 Law 117 was not, the court said, primarily regulatory in nature. By its
very language it “unequivocally asserts state ownership of all antiquities,” requires
their recording with the state, prohibits private ownership, possession, or disposal,
and requires prompt notiﬁcation to the Antiquities Authority of discoveries, which
are taken into physical possession and stored in museums and storage facilities.
The law, the court said, “vests with the state most, and perhaps all, the rights or-
dinarily associated with ownership of [antiquities], including title, possession, and
right to transfer.”73

This is far more than a licensing or export regulation, the court said, even if
the law relaxes some aspects of state ownership where practical, for example in the
case of immovable antiquities or antiquities discovered before 1983.74 The law’s
purpose, the court concluded, is to transfer ownership to Egypt.75

.     11    
The court rejected Schultz’s argument that Egypt itself did not give effect to the
law, on the basis of evidence produced by the government at a hearing convened by
the court. The most evidence that the defendant could adduce, the court said, had
been a “hypothetical” opinion by an Egyptian law professor at a U.S. law school
that Law 117 does not stop Egypt from leaving post-1983 antiquities in private
hands so long as state authorities are notiﬁed.76 The United States, on the other
hand, presented testimony from the Secretary General to Egypt’s Supreme Coun-
cil of Antiquities that the state takes immediate custody of newly discovered an-
tiquities, “sometimes by the tens of thousands.” In addition, the director of crim-
inal investigations for Egypt’s Antiquities Police, which employs more than four

314     

hundred police ofﬁcers, testiﬁed that his department prosecutes dozens of serious
violations of Law 117, most for trafﬁcking within Egypt.77 Contrary to Schultz’s
assertions, the court said, the law requires just compensation for takings, just like
U.S. law. Law 117, the court concluded, actually is  “a transfer of ownership of
Egyptian antiquities to the state, effective 1983.”78

It should be noted that while the court summarized the evidence for its con-
clusion that Egypt enforces Law 117, it did not state such enforcement by a for-
eign nation as a requirement.

.  MCCLAIN  
The court did not even discuss Schultz’s arguments against McClain. Instead, it
simply cited McClain for the proposition that the NSPA, 

which expressly refers to foreign commerce, has consistently “been applied
to thefts in foreign countries and subsequent transportation into the United
States” . . . : an implicit recognition of the interest of the United States in
deterring its residents from dealing in the spoils of foreign thefts.79

Why should it make any difference, the court asked, 

that a foreign nation, in order to safeguard its precious cultural heritage, has
chosen to assume ownership of those objects in its domain that have histori-
cal or archaeological importance, rather than leaving them in private hands?
If an American conspired to steal the Liberty Bell and sell it to a foreign
collector of artifacts, there is no question he could be prosecuted under
section 2315. Mutatis mutandis [with the respective differences having been
considered], the same is true when, as here alleged, a United States resident
conspires to steal Egypt’s antiquities.80

The court’s choice of this artifact for its analogy is interesting, because the
Liberty Bell was never acquired by a government from a private owner but instead
was  originally  commissioned  and  always  owned  by  a  government  entity.81 The
court seems to be saying that there is no difference between undiscovered antiq-
uities claimed by a government, sight unseen, and an object that is openly govern-
ment property.

.   
The court repeated the scienter requirement for the NSPA, stating that the gov-
ernment had to prove that Schultz “knew he was dealing in stolen goods, an es-
sential element of a section 2315 violation.”82

  315

.  
The court rejected Schultz’s arguments that enactment of the CCPIA superseded
the application of McClain in NSPA proceedings.

Here, too, the court appeared even impatient with Schultz’s arguments, dis-
missing them in a few brief sentences. “[S]ufﬁce to say,” the court wrote, “that
there is nothing in the language or history of the Cultural Property Implementa-
tion Act to support th[e] unlikely result” that a civil customs law could supersede
the criminal NSPA when applied to the same subject matter. The Senate report ex-
pressly stated that the act “neither pre-empts state law in any way, nor modiﬁes any
Federal or State remedies.”83

The court also stated, citing United States v. Stephenson, that there was no incon-
sistency in applying both the CCPIA and the NSPA to imported stolen antiqui-
ties.84 The CCPIA “is chieﬂy concerned with balancing foreign and domestic im-
port and export laws and policies, not with deterring theft.”85 By contrast, the
NSPA “only applies in cases of intentional theft and knowing disposal of stolen
goods,” the court said, adding that even the primary academic proponent of the
CCPIA, Paul M. Bator—quoted by Schultz as a critic of McClain—agreed that
criminal prosecution was appropriate in such cases.86

The court’s rejection, citing Stephenson, of Schultz’s CCPIA argument suggests
an uphill battle for this theory on appeal. In Stephenson, the defendant, an ofﬁcial
at the Commerce Department, was charged with violating the Hobbs Act, which
prohibits obstruction of commerce by extortion. The defendant argued that Con-
gress did not intend the Hobbs Act to apply to public ofﬁcials and, as evidence for
this, cited the later enactment of milder criminal statutes that did expressly apply
to federal ofﬁcials. However, the Second Circuit rejected this argument, citing a
U.S. Supreme Court decision that refused “to narrow the plain meaning of even
a criminal statute on the basis of a gestalt judgment as to what Congress proba-
bly intended.”87 Stephenson could cite no legislative history, the Second Circuit
said, that the later, more speciﬁc act should prevail where the earlier, more general
one was silent; his argument therefore ignored the basic principle that overlapping
statutes “should be construed to coexist” where there is “no contrary legislative in-
tent and no repugnancy between the provisions.”88 Though the statutes were simi-
lar, they “serve somewhat divergent purposes and easily coexist,” the Stephenson
court said, concluding that the government could “prosecute under whichever sec-
tion is more suitable to the acts committed.”89

Invoking Stephenson, the Schultz court found sufﬁcient “divergent purposes” al-
lowing coexistence between the CCPIA and NSPA, contrasting the former’s “nu-
anced and complicated approach” to import controls on cultural property with the
NSPA’s concern with deterring theft. 

316     

.    
The court dismissed Schultz’s other arguments as “sufﬁciently meritless as not to
warrant discussion.” Among other things, Schultz had argued that he could not be
prosecuted because Egypt had not named him as a coconspirator when it prose-
cuted other members of the conspiracy. The court said that this did not bind it
and that Schultz was not even a party to the other proceeding.90

   

In February 2002 Schultz was convicted on the conspiracy count alleged in the
government’s indictment. At sentencing, Schultz claimed that the head of Amen-
hotep III, which he sold for $1.2 million, was worth only $20,000–$30,000 because
Tokeley-Parry had restored it.91 However, Judge Rakoff rejected this, ﬁnding that
the stolen antiquities Schultz conspired to receive were worth more than $1.5 mil-
lion, including objects of archaeological and historical importance. Schultz was
sentenced to thirty-three months in prison and ﬁned $50,000. He was also ordered
to return an ancient Old Kingdom relief to Egypt as restitution.92

  “ ”  
  

Art dealers had argued that permitting the NSPA indictment based on Egyptian
law would “have a catastrophic impact on the art world and the public interests it
serves” and would make it impossible for dealers to “risk handling” antiquities.
“Dealers, collectors and museums will be forced to abandon the trade and collec-
tion of any objects that any foreign government may ultimately claim,” the deal-
ers said. “Existing collections also will be affected: collectors and museums that
acquired objects in good faith reliance on U.S. law will be placed at risk” of NSPA
prosecution or forfeiture, they added.93

In theory, this is not a problem for honest buyers, as the Schultz court took
pains to reiterate the “scienter” requirement that in any NSPA prosecution the de-
fendant must have known the objects to be stolen. However, the jury instructions
in the Schultz case may give pause to buyers. 

In instructing the jury, the court said that the government had to prove that
Schultz, even if he did not speciﬁcally know Egyptian law, “was at least aware . . .
that under Egyptian law the Egyptian government owned all recently discovered
antiquities of any archaeological or historical importance.”94

As Schultz had argued that there was no proof that he did know the gist of
this law, the instructions stated that if Schultz “honestly believed, even if erro-
neously” that the antiquities, even if smuggled out of Egypt in violation of an

  317

Egyptian customs or export law, “were not obtained in violation of any Egyptian
ownership right,” he would not be guilty.
However, the instructions continued, 

a defendant may not purposefully remain ignorant of either the facts or the law
in order to escape the consequences of the law. Therefore, if you ﬁnd that
the defendant, not by mere negligence or imprudence but as a matter of choice,
consciously avoided learning what Egyptian law provided as to the ownership of Egyptian an-
tiquities, you may infer, if you wish, that he did so because he implicitly knew
that there was a high probability that the law of Egypt vested ownership of
these antiquities in the Egyptian government. You may treat such deliberate
avoidance of positive knowledge as the equivalent of such knowledge, unless
you ﬁnd that the defendant actually believed that the antiquities were not
the property of the Egyptian Government.95

The instruction creates several concerns for antiquities buyers, including collec-
tors, dealers and museums.

.1 : “ ”   ?
Must an antiquities buyer learn all the facts? In stating that a defendant “may not
purposefully remain ignorant of . . . the facts” in order to escape legal consequences,
the instruction suggests that if Schultz had known the law but had “as a matter
of choice, consciously avoided learning” the facts of the objects’ excavation, he
might equally be in deep water. Under the instruction, a curator who remains
“purposefully ignorant” of the facts and “consciously avoid[s] learning” them may
be inferred to have “implicitly know[n] that there is a high probability” that the
facts are bad. A jury may treat “such deliberate avoidance of positive knowledge”
as actually knowing the bad facts.

This does not appear to suggest that honest buyers must dig up all the facts,
which they might never be able to know, but it does say that a buyer who has a
pretty good hunch that the facts are bad and yet “purposefully remains ignorant”
will be presumed to know the “unlearned” bad facts. 

.     ?
Does the instruction mean that buyers must learn the law of a foreign nation be-
fore dealing in or acquiring its antiquities? Although the buyer is not deemed to
know the law if he or she “actually believed” the objects were not government
owned, it may be hard to prove such actual belief, because, according to the in-
struction, a suspicion that ownership laws “probably” apply, coupled with a “con-
scious avoidance” of ﬁnding out, means that the buyer knew the law. On a prac-
tical level, it is hard to know how far a prosecutor would have to go to prove guilt
on this point.96

318     

The instruction appears to carry a strong caution to antiquities buyers, in-
cluding those who may previously have seen their investigative role as limited to
questions such as authenticity. A buyer who knows enough to ask about a nation’s
ownership laws, but deliberately fails to do so, cannot claim he did not know there
were any. On the other hand, for the totally scrupulous, and the totally unin-
formed, the Schultz decision poses no worries.



1. United States v. Schultz, 178 F. Supp. 2d 445 (S.D.N.Y. 2002) [hereinafter Schultz].
2. 545 F.2d 988 (5th Cir. 1977) [“McClain I”]; 593 F.2d 658 (5th Cir. 1979) [“McClain III”] cert. de-
nied, 444 U.S. 918 (1979).
3. United States v. An Antique Platter of Gold, , a/k/a Gold Phiale Mesomphalos c. 400 B.C.,
991 F. Supp. 222 (S.D.N.Y. 1997), aff’d on other grounds, 184 F.3d 131 (2d Cir. 1999), cert. denied, 528
U.S. 1136 (2000) [hereinafter “District Court Antique Platter decision”]. United States v. Portrait
of Wally, a painting by Egon Schiele, defendant in rem, 105 F. Supp. 2d (S.D.N.Y. 2000) [here-
inafter “District Court Wally decision”].
4. In United States v. An Antique Platter of Gold, a/k/a Gold Phiale Mesomphalos c. 400
B.C., 184 F.3d 131 (2d Cir. 1999) [hereinafter “Antique Platter of Gold, Second Circuit decision”],
the Second Circuit avoided reaching this question. See Martha Lufkin, Forfeiture of an Antiq-
uity Claimed by Italy with Help from the U.S. National Stolen Property Act: the Steinhardt
Case, 5:1 Art, Antiquity & Law 57 (March 2000). National Stolen Property Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2314.
5. See, e.g., United States v. An Antique Platter of Gold, a/k/a Gold Phiale Mesomphalos c. 400
B.C., Appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, Brief of amici curiae Ameri-
can Association of Museums et al., March 6, 1998, at 37 et seq., calling McClain “widely discred-
ited” and citing criticisms from Paul M. Bator, An Essay on the International Trade in Art, 34
Stanford Law Review 275, 347– 54; James F. Fitzpatrick, A Wayward Course: The Lawless Customs
Policy Toward Cultural Properties, 15 New York University Journal of International Law and Politics 857,
862– 64, 874– 75 (1983); and James R. McAlee, The McClain Case, Customs, and Congress,
15 New York University Journal of International Law and Politics 813, 822– 28 (1983). 
6. 19 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
7. 895 F. 2d 867, 872 (2d Cir. 1990).
8. These efforts by foreign nations can be seen in Antique Platter of Gold, Second Circuit deci-
sion (Italy successfully joined federal conﬁscation action as claimant and obtained the claimed
platter); Republic of Turkey v. OKS Partners, 1994 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 17032 (D. Mass. 1994)
(Turkey brought replevin suit in Massachusetts to recover ancient coins); and the Schultz deci-
sion. For details of the dealer’s conviction, see Martha Lufkin, New York Dealer is Sentenced
to 33 Months in Prison for Selling Illicitly Excavated Egyptian Antiquities, <http://www.
theartnewspaper.com>, June 2002.
9.  Lufkin, supra  note  8; also  based  on  the  author’s  conversations  with  museum  attorneys,
March–June 2002. 
10. Indictment, Schultz, 01 Cr. 863(JSR) [hereinafter “Indictment”].

  319

11. Id.
12. Id.
13. Id.
14. Tokeley-Parry  was  not  identiﬁed  in  the  indictment  but  was  identiﬁed  in  the  press.  See
Cristina Ruiz, in Martha Lufkin, Test Case for the Trade, 121 Art Newspaper, January 2002, at 14. 
15. Indictment.
16. Id.
17. Id.
18. The defendant was found guilty in any event. See Martha Lufkin, New York Dealer, Fred-
erick Schultz, Found Guilty of Dealing in Stolen Egyptian Antiquities, 123  Art  Newspaper,
March 2002, at 15.
19. Memorandum in Support of Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss the Indictment, in Schultz
[hereinafter “Schultz’s Brief ”], passim.
20. Brief of the National Association of Dealers in Ancient, Oriental & Primitive Art, the Art
Dealers Association of America, the International Association of Professional Numismatists,
and Christie’s Inc. as amici curiae in Support of Defendant, Schultz [hereinafter “Dealers’ Amicus
Brief ”], passim. 
21. Schultz’s Brief, passim.
22. To be considered theft, id. at 34, citing McClain I, 545 F.2d at 1000. Quote is id., citing McClain
III, 593 F.2d at 670.
23. Schultz’s Brief at 15– 16.
24. Id. at 14.
25. “[N]or shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.”
26. Schultz’s Brief at 17, referring to the Archaeological Resources Protection Act, 16 U.S.C. 
§ 470aa et. seq., and the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, 25 U.S.C. §
4001 et. seq. 
27. Schultz’s Brief at 29.
28. 18 U.S.C. § 2314.
29. 18 U.S.C. § 2315.
30. Schultz’s Brief at 30– 31.
31. Id. at 31.
32. Decisions of judges of a federal district court are not binding precedent governing later de-
cisions of any federal district court, including the very district court that made the earlier de-
cision. 
33. United States v. Portrait of Wally, 105 F. Supp. 2d (S.D.N.Y. 2000).
34. 318 U.S. 101 (1943).
35. Id. at 104, not quoted by the Wally court.

320     

36. McClain I, 545 F.2d at 1001 n.30, quoted in the District Court Wally Decision, 105 F. Supp.
2d at 291.
37. Id.
38. 582 F.2d 159 (2d Cir. 1978).
39. Id. at 165, not quoted in the District Court Wally Decision.
40. District Court Wally Decision, 105 F. Supp. 2d at 292. For a more detailed discussion of the
Wally and Long Cove cases, see Martha Lufkin, Why Nazi Loot Ceased Being “Stolen” when U.S.
Forces Seized It in Austria: The Federal “Schiele” Case, 5:3 Art, Antiquity & Law 305 (2000).
41. Schultz’s Brief at 14.
42. Id. at 22.
43. Id.
44. Id. at 23.
45. Convention on Cultural Property Implementation Act, see supra note 6. Schultz’s Brief and
Dealers’ Amicus Brief, passim.
46. Schultz’s Brief at 15– 16.
47. Id.
48. 823 U.N.T.S. 231 (1971).
49. 19 U.S.C. §§ 2601 to 2609.
50. See Chart of Current and Expired Import Restrictions Under the Convention on Cultural
Property Implementation Act, <http://exchanges.state.gov/culprop/chart.html>, U.S. De-
partment of State, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs.
51. Schultz’s Brief at 15.
52. Id. at 15, citing Leonard D. Duboff, Proceedings of the Panel on the U.S. Enabling Legis-
lation of the UNESCO Convention, 4 Syracuse Journal of International Law and Commerce 97, 110113
(1978) (statement of Mark B. Feldman, Deputy Legal Advisor for the United States Depart-
ment of State).
53. Id. at 16, citing S. Rep. No. 564-97, at 27 (1982).
54. Government’s Memorandum in Opposition to Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss the Indict-
ment, in Schultz, [hereinafter “Government’s Brief ”] at 3– 14.
55. Id. at 19– 21.
56. Id. at 21; emphasis in original. 
57. Id. at 30– 33.
58. Id. at 25.
59. Id. at 2.
60. Id. at 7, quoting District Court Wally Decision at 292, 291.
61. Id. at 8.
62. Id. at 10, citing 495 F.2d 1154, 1155 (9th Cir. 1974).

  321

63. Id. at 11.
64. Schultz’s Brief at 33– 43.
65. Id. at 42– 43. 
66. Id. at 39 n.32.
67. Brief of the Archaeological Institute of America, the American Anthropological Associa-
tion, the Society for American Archaeology et. al., amici curiae in support of the United States in
Schultz at 1– 3. 
68. See section 5, infra.
69. Government’s Brief at 33.
70. Id. at 33– 45.
71. Schultz, 178 F. Supp. 2d at 446.
72. Id. 
73. Id.
74. Id. at 446– 447.
75. Id. at 447.
76. Id. 
77. Id. at 448.
78. Id. at n. 5; Id. at 448.
79. Id., citing McClain, 545 F.2d at 994.
80. Webster’s Third International Dictionary; Schultz, 178 F. Supp. 2d at 448.
81. The Liberty Bell was commissioned “By order of the Assembly of the Povince [sic] of
Pennsylvania for the State house in the City of Phila 1752” from Whitechapel Foundry in En-
gland. After it cracked from a single stroke of the clapper, it was recast twice with the addi-
tion of various metals. The remolded bell remained in the then tower of what is now Inde-
pendence Hall. It was eventually bought as part of the State House by the City of Philadelphia
in 1816, which owns it today, with the U.S. National Park Service as custodian. See David Kim-
ball, The Story of the Liberty Bell 13– 39 (Eastern National, Philadelphia 1989). 
82. Schultz, 178 F. Supp. 2d at 449.
83. Id., citing S. Rep. No. 97-564, at 25 (1982).
84. See supra note 7. United States v. Stephenson, 895 F.2d 867 (2d Cir. 1990).
85. Schultz, 178 F. Supp. 2d at 449.
86. Id., citing Paul M. Bator, An Essay on the International Trade in Art, 34 Stanford Law Review
275, 353 (1982); cited in Schultz brief at 24– 25.
87. Stephenson, 895 F.2d at 872, quoting Garcia v. United States, 469 U.S. 70, 78 (1984). 
88. Id., quoting United States v. Bradley, 812 F.2d 774, 779 (2d Cir.), cert. den., 484 U.S. 832
(1987), citing United States v. Batchelder, 442 U.S. 114 (1979). 
89. 895 F.2d at 872.

322     

90. Schultz, 178 F. Supp. 2d at 449.
91. Martha Lufkin, New York Dealer Is Sentenced to 33 Months in Prison, supra note 8.
92. Statement of James B. Comey, U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, June
11, 2002.
93. Dealers’ Amicus Brief at 1, 9. 
94. Schultz, The Court’s Instructions of Law to the Jury, Second Element—Membership in the
Conspiracy.
95. Id.; emphasis added.
96. Hurdles could arise in proving lack of knowledge. A museum professional has wondered
aloud how difﬁcult, or legally costly, it might be for an innocent museum curator to prove lack
of knowledge to a jury if faced by a zealous prosecutor. There may be no procedural shortcut
to settle this fact, short of trial.


