    (2015)   22:  163– 176 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2015               

    Cultural Co-Ownership: Preventing and 
Solving Cultural Property Claims 
       Marc-André     Renold   *   

   

              INTRODUCTION 

 Cultural property claims are numerous and of very different nature. Some relate 
to recent trafficking of cultural property;  1   some are based on ancient legal grounds 
which are contested today;  2   others relate to past wars and colonial times;  3   others, 
still, relate to mass spoliations in times of conflict.  4   In general, though, the orig-
inal owner seeks to recover what was taken from him, or at least to obtain some 
form of compensation.  5   The present owner or possessor is as a matter of principle 
interested in keeping his possession.  6   These conflicting positions are often seen as 
irreconcilable and, indeed, litigation in a traditional manner will bring to the typ-
ical “either/or” solution: either I am the owner, or you are. There is no in-between 
solution. 

 Observing some of the more recently adopted solutions leads to asking whether 
sole ownership should not be revisited in a certain number of cases, in particular 
where there have been several possessors for long periods of time. My hypothesis 
is that these cases can probably be solved if we start thinking in terms of   cultural 
co-ownership  , i.e. where both parties’ claims to the whole can be taken care of by 
some form of sharing among these claims. This is the principal assumption behind 
the present contribution. 

 As a preliminary matter it might be useful to restate what is meant by ownership 
and possession. Ownership as understood here is a legal right on a particular object 
or chattel, opposable  erga omnes.   7   Possession, on the other hand, is the physical 
control over an object or chattel, and it is not an actual right.  8   Rights and duties can 
nevertheless be linked to the possession of the object. 

 I shall first start by looking at the practice in this area, the “either/or” solution 
that prevails in ownership claims before courts (I), and if this practice can give way, 

  *  Director of the Art-Law Centre and holder of the UNESCO Chair in the International Law of the 
Protection of Cultural Heritage ,  University of Geneva ; Email:  marc-andre.renold@unige.ch  

163

 164   

 MARC-ANDRÉ RENOLD

when the parties agree to negotiate, to co-ownership, or some form of co-ownership 
or co-possession, as a solution to solve difficult issues (II). Once we have under-
stood the technicalities of these case-based answers, we can turn to attempting to 
propose a solution to more complex cases (III). The solution will not only depend 
on general principles of property, but also on very clear practical elements, which 
will help taking care of cultural co-ownership in practice (IV). We shall terminate 
by  reviewing  a  specific  case,  that  of  the  Rosetta  Stone,  and  trying  to  determine 
whether and how it could be solved by co-ownership (V).   

 I.     RESTITUTION CASES BEFORE THE COURTS 

 Taking the matter to court is still a serious option in a relatively important number of 
cases, even if it can be the first step which might later lead to a negotiated or 
mediated solution.  9   In addition, a court decision is not necessarily the end of the 
matter. The saga of the Marquis de Sade manuscript,  Les 120 Journées de Sodome , is 
significant  in  that  respect.  10    The  manuscript,  once  owned  by  the  French  aristo-
cratic de Noailles family, was stolen from them and sold to a  bona fide  collector in 
Switzerland. A long battle followed before the French Courts (which saw the thief 
convicted) and the Swiss Courts (which confirmed the Swiss purchaser’s title based 
on his good faith acquisition).  11   After the Swiss collector’s death, the family sold 
his collection but kept the manuscript.  12   After his wife’s death, the children even-
tually decided to sell the manuscript and one of the interested parties was no other 
than the descendant of the initial French owner, who sought to buy it in order for 
this important piece of French cultural heritage to be brought back to its home 
country. The sale failed, but a French collector bought it, before going bankrupt, 
so that the manuscript will eventually be on the market again... In the end, what 
this shows is that the Swiss Supreme Court decision, taken in May 1998, was not 
the end of the matter and the parties continued to negotiate long after the matter 
was judicially settled. 

 The difficulty with going to court to solve an ownership issue, though, is that it 
is a “yes or no” situation: either the court will recognize the initial owner’s title or 
it will give effect to the present possessor’s claim. And the scale can tilt both ways, 
depending on several factors, including the applicable law to the transfer of owner-
ship of the object.  13   As an example of a restitution to the previous owner one might 
cite the  Mendel v. List  decision,  14   a classic in holocaust art matters: the descendants 
of the victim of an act of looting by the Nazis claimed for the restitution of their 
ancestor’s Chagall and were eventually successful thanks to the  nemo dat quod non 
habet  rule of US law. The painting by Chagall was returned to them. 

 Among the many examples going the other way, i.e. where restitution is refused, 
one could mention the ancient gold coins case in Switzerland:  15   two magnificent 
and enormous gold coins (one weighed more than 10 kilograms), minted in the 
17th century, belonged to the nizam, the then ruler of the state of Hyderabad. 
Although Hyderabad joined the newly founded state of India in 1948, the coins 

CULTURAL CO-OWNERSHIP  

  165 

remained in the possession of one of the nizam’s descendant who, after having 
tried unsuccessfully to sell them at auction, used them as security for a loan from 
a bank in Switzerland. When it came to selling the coins to pay the bank, India 
claimed the coins and the case was fought all the way to the Swiss Supreme Court 
which rejected India’s claim, mainly on the basis of the bank’s good faith when 
the security was established.  16   The gold coins were kept by the bank and eventu-
ally sold to a third party. 

 So, as a general rule, these examples show that there is no third solution before 
a court. After sometimes many years of litigation, the result is either the claimant 
wins and gets his property back or he loses and the present possessor keeps the 
object. This can lead to a certain dissatisfaction and, given the possibility, parties 
will more often than not try to follow an alternative route.  17     

 II.     SHARED OR CO-OWNERSHIP AS A SOLUTION TO OWNERSHIP 

CLAIMS 

 Scholars  and  researchers  have  shown  the  dissatisfaction  caused  by  the  situation 
described above and an interesting debate took place around 2005 on the “Caring 
and Sharing” alternative to the restitution/retention debate. For example, the 
International  Law  Association’s  Committee  on  Cultural  Heritage  Law  worked 
on the topic and a resolution was adopted in 2006 at the 72nd Conference of the 
International Law Association.  18   Although its resolution does not refer expressly 
to co-ownership, it nevertheless deals with alternatives to the transfer of cultural 
material and states:

  Museums and other institutions shall develop guidelines consistent with 
those  of  the  International  Council  of  Museums  (ICOM)  for  respond-
ing to requests for the transfer of cultural material; these guidelines may 
include  alternatives  to  outright  transfer  such  as  loans,  production  of 
copies, and  shared management and control .  19    

  Although  it  is  not  absolutely  clear  what  the  committee  was  referring  to  with 
“shared management and control”, it goes clearly in the direction of co-possession 
or co-ownership.  20   The example which all had in mind at the time were the agreements 
entered into between US museums and Italy which set out broad schemes of coop-
eration between Italy and the concerned museums.  21   

 There are only a handful of cases in which shared property or co-ownership is 
recorded as having been used to solve complex claims relating to a work of art. It 
is interesting to have a look in some detail at those rare cases where the question 
was raised.  22    

 Landscape with Smokestacks  by Degas  

 One  of  these  is  the  Searle/Gutmann  litigation  relating  to  the  Degas  painting 
 Landscape with Smokestacks  (“Paysage avec Cheminées”). The painting had belonged 

 166   

 MARC-ANDRÉ RENOLD

to Friederich Gutmann, a German Jewish banker who was killed in the concentra-
tion camp of Theresienstadt in 1943. The painting had been sent to Paris in 1939, 
where its track was later lost. In 1995, the two surviving Gutmann children traced 
the Degas to the collection of Daniel Searle, a Chicago collector who had bought 
it in 1987 from a reputable US dealer. The litigation that ensued determined that 
the  painting  had  entered  the  United  States  in  1951  where  it  had  been  acquired 
by a New York collector who had allegedly bought it from the brother-in-law of 
Hans Wendland, a Swiss-based German dealer who had been involved in selling 
many of the works of art looted and seized in France by the  Einsatzstab Reichsleiter 
Rosenberg .  23   

 After litigation had begun in New York and Chicago, the case was eventually 
settled through a form of co-ownership: the ownership of the work of art was 
allotted to the claimants and the defendant in equal shares, each being given free-
dom as to what he wanted to do with his share. Searle gave his “half” of the painting 
to the Chicago Art Institute (of which he was a trustee) and the Art Institute bought 
the  Gutmann  heirs’  second  “half,”  which  was  evaluated  at  fair  market  value. 
A label was attached to the painting exposing its history, the misappropriation of 
the Gutmann art collection and the settlement entered into.  24     

  The Marriage of Tobias and Sarah  by Steen 

 Another  co-ownership  case  was  that  of  the  Jan  Steen  painting,   The  Marriage  of 
Tobias and Sarah , which was the result of a rather unusual procedure of reunifica-
tion of two parts of the original painting which had been separated long before the 
Second World War. After they were reunified through a relatively complex resto-
ration in 1996, a claim was made on one of the parts by the heir of the Dutch dealer 
Goudstikker, which ended up in a co-ownership between the heir of Goudstikker 
and the City of The Hague, at a ratio of 76%/24%. A 2008 binding advice of the 
Dutch Restitution Committee ordered the dissolution of the co-ownership and the 
sale of the 24% of the painting to the heir of Goudstikker.  25     

 The Teotihuacan Mosaics 

 An interesting case, taken from the field of antiquities is that of the Murals of 
Teotihuacan. A long dispute between Mexico and the San Francisco Museums of 
Fine Arts on the ownership of mural paintings coming from the famous Teotihuacan 
temples in Mexico.  26   In 1981 an agreement was entered into according to which 
a minimum of 50% (in the end almost 70%) of the murals were to be returned to 
the Anthropological Institute of Mexico and the rest were to be retained by the San 
Francisco Museums.  27   A participant to the lengthy negotiations commented in the 
following way: “Showing a great cultural and political sensitivity, all the involved 
parties finished by agreeing to say they would not be able to agree ... on the owner-
ship issue. We came to agreeing, however, on the importance of the collection and 

CULTURAL CO-OWNERSHIP  

  167 

on the necessity to work together in order to protect and preserve it; it is therefore 
on this basis that we cooperated.”  28     

 The Macchiaioli Paintings 

 A less-known case relates to Macchiaioli paintings which had been acquired by the 
Dunedin Public Art Gallery in New Zealand. It appeared, while the paintings were 
on loan to an Italian museum, that they had actually been looted during the Second 
World War from Cino Vitta’s private collection. In order to unblock the matter, and 
after three years of litigation, the Italian Court suggested that a negotiated settlement 
would be far better and the parties did as a matter of fact come to an agreement 
according to which the paintings were apportioned among the parties, two going to 
the family and three to the Museum.  29   

 It  therefore  appears  that  some  cases  have  actually  been  solved  by  a  common 
or shared ownership regime. Such a regime is not necessarily meant to last very 
long, especially when the interests of the co-owners do not coincide. But the most 
interesting aspect of these cases is that they show the emergence of a   common (or 
shared) cultural interest   which can be useful in resolving the dispute among the 
parties. Such an interest was the subject of a publication co-authored by the under-
signed and Marie Cornu of the French CNRS, and our conclusion was that own-
ership by one or the other should probably not be the preferred solution anymore 
and that the terms of the equation might not contain sole ownership, at least in the 
classical Roman law understanding of “ usus and abusus. ”  30   

 A highly interesting case where such an interest was identified, is the Machu Picchu 
matter which saw the state of Peru opposed to Yale University with regards to many 
objects which the US archaeologist Hiram Bingham had taken to the United States after 
re-discovering the now famous Inca site in Peru.  31   In the partnership agreement that 
was entered into between the parties in 2011 several elements were of importance, and 
not only the restitution of a certain number of the archaeological objects: a common 
international research center was established in Cusco and several academic exchanges, 
not  only  of  objects,  but  also  of  researchers,  were  made  possible.  32    The  cooperation 
between the Universidad Nacional de San Antonio Abad del Cusco and Yale University 
was recently reinforced by a 4 June 2015 “Memorandum of Understanding.”  33   

 It thus appears that the issue of actual ownership was not, in all these case, per-
ceived as the central one, much more importance being given to issues of cultural 
cooperation.    

 III.     CO-OWNERSHIP AS AN ALTERNATIVE SOLUTION TO COMPLEX 

MATTERS 

 There are a certain number of cases which were eventually resolved, even though 
they could have been more solidly and convincingly finalized through an agreement 
on cultural co-ownership. I will take the following three examples:  

 168   

 MARC-ANDRÉ RENOLD

 The Swiss Ancient Manuscripts Case 

 In  this  particular  case,  the  claim  related  to  mediaeval  manuscripts  taken  as  war 
booty by the Zurich army during its victorious occupation of St. Gallen around 
1710. Many years later, after numerous unsuccessful attempts to obtain restitution 
by St. Gallen, a mediation took place between the two Cantons, under the auspices 
of the Swiss Confederation. The mediation agreement eventually entered into by 
the Cantons in 2004 provided that Zurich was to be considered the owner of the 
manuscripts, even though Zurich had been the party to loot the objects. However, 
Zurich simultaneously agreed to lend the manuscripts on a long term basis to 
St. Gallen. In addition, there is language in the agreement to the effect of a rec-
ognition by Zurich of the cultural significance of the manuscripts for St. Gallen. 
Special provisions are also set forth regarding the Terrestrial and Celestial Globe of 
Prince-Abbey Bernhard Muller by which Zurich agreed to create a duplicate at its 
own cost and offer it to St. Gallen.  34   

 In a way this agreement is very exceptional,  35   but I tend to think its contents 
could have been even better. After almost 200 years, it remains quite surprising 
that the property is left in the hands of the looters with an actual legal title. Today 
things might seem acceptable because Zurich had to relinquish its possessory right 
over the manuscripts for 37 years, the period during which the agreement cannot 
be renegotiated. But what if after that time has lapsed Zurich obtains a cancellation 
of the loan and a full-fledged restitution of the manuscripts? This basically would 
mean that through a series of subtle steps Zurich would have managed to secure an 
undisputable title over property looted during a conflict. 

 The question therefore is: would an appropriate answer not have been to recog-
nize a form of co-ownership between the two Cantons and to work on a specific 
agreement relating to the sharing of the objects amongst them?   

 The Korean Uigwe Manuscripts Case 

 In 1866 the French army sacked the island of Kanghwa in Korea, where ancient 
royal manuscripts were kept in archives. Several French priests had been killed 
and the French army ordered the invasion of this island and the taking of the 
manuscripts as a punitive measure against Korea. These manuscripts were then 
completely forgotten until 1975 when a Korean researcher found them in the French 
national library stacks in Versailles. Thereafter, Korea had been claiming their 
restitution when eventually a loan agreement was entered into between France 
and Korea. This was in February 2011. The loan is for a period of five years and 
is renewable.  36   

 Upon receiving the loan the Koreans celebrated the “restitution” of the manu-
scripts and it is clear that they do not envisage returning them to France. Indeed, 
several politicians said at the time that this was to be considered as an outright 
restitution  and  not  as  a  simple  loan.  37    Why  not  be  more  realistic  and  accept 

CULTURAL CO-OWNERSHIP  

  169 

a co-ownership of the manuscripts? This would have enabled a restitution of the 
manuscripts, but a connection with France, where they had been kept for many 
decades, would also have been preserved.   

 The Makonde Mask Case 

 A theft at the national museum of Dar-Es-Salaam led to the disappearance in 
1984 of a Makonde mask. Very soon thereafter the Swiss Barbier-Müller Museum 
acquired this same mask. In 1990 an Italian scholar identified the mask as the 
one that had been stolen in Tanzania and the Barbier-Muller Museum informed 
the Tanzanian authorities. Long discussions followed, as the museum initially 
intended  to  return  the  mask  as  a  loan  to  Tanzania,  which  was  refused.  The 
UNESCO Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural 
Property to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in case of Illicit Appropri-
ation (ICPRCP) was notified of the dispute and eventually,  38   with the help of 
the International Council of Museums (ICOM), an agreement relating to the 
donation of the mask by the Barbier-Müller Museum to Tanzania was entered 
into in 2010.  39   

 The overall contents of the agreement are not known, but the main difference 
between restitution and donation is that the latter implies that there was a valid 
acquisition by the Swiss museum, which it had always said it wanted to see recog-
nized. On the other hand the state of Tanzania accepted only with difficulty the fact 
that an object that belonged to Tanzania could be “given” to it. 

 Here again, such difficulties might have been avoided with a decision to opt for 

a co-ownership.    

 IV.     CO-OWNERSHIP IN PRACTICE 

 Have  we  made  any  progress  in  identifying  the  existence  in  certain  cases  of  a 
common cultural interest making co-ownership possible? Some might say that this 
does not change anything, but I see it differently: recognizing such a common 
interest is a major step in enabling the reconciliation of opposing interests. 

 Having identified such a common interest, we can now attempt to proceed to 
the establishment of a co-ownership regime, which will organize the rights and 
obligations of the parties in the co-ownership. The central issue will be that of 
the actual possession of the property, but other questions, such as loans to third 
parties,  restoration,  insurance,  the  termination  of  the  co-ownership,  choice  of 
law, and dispute resolution must be dealt with in some detail.  

 The Possession of the Property 

 This  is  quite  obviously  one  of  the  most  important  questions  and  might  very 
well be the main bone of contention between the parties. The advantage is that 

 170   

 MARC-ANDRÉ RENOLD

with a co-ownership regime the parties are forced to find a solution, whereas if 
there is no legal relationship amongst the parties a status quo might probably be 
the best one could expect. 

 There are many possible practical solutions. If the property can be divided, on 
could easily imagine a shared possession, each party receiving the custody of a part 
of the property. This is in a way what happened with the Teotihuacan frescoes. The 
division can be 50/50, but any proportion is of course possible. 

 Another option is a shared possession in time: co-owner A can possess for 
6 months (or 3 years) and co-owner B will follow by possessing for the following 
6 months (or 3 years). 

 In very complex cases one could also imagine that the parties agree on sharing 
the original and a duplicate on a similar time-basis. This is in a sense what Zurich 
and St. Gallen agreed upon: before receiving the copy made by Zurich, St. Gallen was 
granted the right to expose the original at the St. Gallen monastery library during 
a temporary exhibition.  40   

 It is interesting to note that some important legal texts could be seen as leaving 
open the option of an alternative arrangement as to ownership, in particular art. 
6 § 3 of the 1995 UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural 
Objects  41   according to which the parties can agree, instead of an indemnification, 
to a transfer of ownership to a third party. This shows that the authors of the Con-
vention had in mind that arrangements other than a simple transfer of ownership 
or indemnification of the good faith possessor could be envisaged.   

 Loan to Third Parties 

 While  the  cultural  object  is  in  the  possession  of  one  of  the  co-owners  it  might 
appear that a third party (state, museum, etc.) asks for the object to be loaned to 
it, e.g. for a temporary exhibition. Nothing prevents the parties to agree on this. 
Seeing the importance of this, the co-owners should agree to the loan and also, 
possibly, to any immunity from seizure during the loan.  42     

 Restoration 

 What about restoration? If important work is to be performed, the agreement of 
both co-owners would be necessary. If, on the other hand, one is only speaking of 
“maintenance,” or if the matter is urgent, I would tend to consider that the person 
in possession of the object is to handle such matters.  43     

 Insurance 

 In order to avoid any trouble, an agreement by the parties to the co-ownership 
would need to be entered into at the outset as to the actual and insurance value of 
the object at stake and the consequences of any damage suffered.   

CULTURAL CO-OWNERSHIP  

  171 

 Termination of the Co-Ownership 

 In most cases (apart from the case where the parties agree to a co-ownership in 
view of selling the property) a co-ownership will be a long term relationship. Its 
termination should therefore only be possible under very specific circumstances 
and with a long notice period.   

 The Day-to-Day Running of the Co-Ownership 

 A good idea might be to appoint a particular person or institution for the day-to-
day running of the co-ownership. And the parties could also adopt internal regula-
tions relating to the practical issues of the co-ownership (maintenance, etc.).   

 Applicable Law and Arbitration 

 The co-ownership agreement would have to select an applicable law and provide 
for  a  dispute  resolution  mechanism.  A  mediation  and  arbitration  clause  would 
seem a good idea.    

 V.     A POSSIBLE TEST CASE: THE ROSETTA STONE 

 Let us try to apply the above principles to a test case, that of the Rosetta Stone. 
The Rosetta Stone was discovered in Egypt in July 1799 by a French soldier during 
Napoleon’s military campaign in Egypt. It was discovered in Rosetta, in the Nile delta 
in Egypt, and its peculiarity is that it contains the same text (a Ptolemaic decree) in 
three different languages: hieroglyphic, demotic Egyptian, and Greek. It was orig-
inally part of a temple, but it had since been used as construction material for the 
fortifications of the city of Rosetta.  44   

 The Rosetta Stone was clearly useful in the discovery by Champollion of the 
translation of hieroglyphs and it plays therefore an important role in the history 
of Egypt and of mankind.  45   Apart from its exhibition at the British Museum, as 
part of its permanent collection, the stone is reproduced in many other contexts, 
including the village of Figeac (from which Champollion originated) and where 
a reproduction of the stone covers the floor of a small square, next to the Cham-
pollion Museum.  46   

 Because of the war over the colonies between France and the United Kingdom 
and the 1801 Treaty of Alexandria, the stone eventually came under British control 
and ended up in the British Museum.  47   It has been the object of a claim for restitu-
tion by the Government of Egypt for quite some time. 

 It would be difficult to consider the stone as being of purely British or French 
ownership. The link with Egypt is obvious, even though the fact that it was reused 
for  construction  rather  than  kept  as  an  important  piece  of  Egyptian  cultural 
heritage slightly loosens its link to the country’s history. The common cultural 

 172   

 MARC-ANDRÉ RENOLD

interest is that this particular stone was the beginning of our understanding of 
the Egyptian hieroglyphs, which is indeed an incredible advancement of knowl-
edge not only for Egypt, the United Kingdom, and France, but for the entire 
world community. 

 How could the Egyptian claim be resolved under cultural co-ownership? First, 
one might suggest that two perfect copies should be made. As a matter of fact, 
the French made a copy at the time and it would clearly, for historical reasons, 
be appropriate to use that very same copy. The difficult question is of course: 
who  shall  be  entitled  to  the  original?  I  would  tend  to  propose  a  circulation  of 
the original between the parties and a change of location every four months or 
every  year.  The  expenses  of  the  circulation,  as  well  as  of  the  execution  of  the 
copies, would be borne in equal shares by the three states of Egypt, France, and 
the United Kingdom. 

 A multilateral agreement could, it seems to me, be relatively easily entered 
into and solve the questions of loan, restoration, insurance, termination, and 
day-to-day running of the co-ownership. The applicable law might be a bone 
of contention as the three involved legal systems have quite different rules on 
ownership, so applying a third country’s legislation as being “neutral” might be 
a solution. And an arbitration clause rather than a choice of jurisdiction clause, 
should clearly be preferred. 

 The simplicity of the above-mentioned clauses seems to contrast with the dif-
ficult and sometimes tense atmosphere surrounding the claim for the restitution 
of the stone. For instance, in 2003, Zahi Hawass, the then Egyptian Secretary Gen-
eral  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  Antiquities,  affirmed,  “Otherwise  I  will  have  to 
approach them using a different strategy... The artefacts stolen from Egypt must 
come back.”  48   Of course, the involved parties would have to show a minimum of 
goodwill and accept competing claims over the stone. But, with that in mind, an 
agreement on the cultural co-ownership by the three countries involved might be 
easier to achieve than expected.   

 CONCLUSION 

 There is much talk today about the cultural heritage of mankind, promoted in 
several of the UNESCO conventions, including those of 1954 and 1972. That some 
specific  objects  belong  to  mankind  and  its  common  cultural  heritage  should 
be of little doubt, be it the Rosetta Stone, the Parthenon Marbles, the head of 
Nefertiti, the mask of Montezuma and many other, perhaps less emblematic, 
objects. The fact that a particular object belongs to mankind’s heritage does not, 
however, mean that it should not be legally owned by one or several parties or 
states. And, before they become part of the  res commune  of humanity, an inter-
mediate step, after a purely nationalistic and unilateral claim on them, might 
be to consider that these pieces of our common heritage belong to several of the 
states involved. 

CULTURAL CO-OWNERSHIP  

  173 

 A  cultural  co-ownership  could  possibly  be  the  best  way  to  solve  relatively 
short-term claims and to enable that in the long run their possession be shared 
by several of those involved. This would hopefully enable a satisfactory and viable 
conciliation of the interests in presence.  49      

  ENDNOTES 

 2  .   The seminal example of this is the case of the Parthenon marbles. The bibliography on this is 

 3  .   One can refer in this respect to the case of the Venus of Cyrene discovered in today’s Libya when 

 5  .   Schönenberger  2009 , 56–74.   
 6  .   Ibid., 94–137.   
 7  .   Steinauer  2012 , note 1002 ff.; Foëx and Marchand  2010 , 168–69.  
 8  .   Steinauer  2012 , note 159 ff.; Foëx and Marchand  2010 , 172–74.   
 9  .   See the results of the ArThemis research: many cases start with litigation, but do not necessarily 

  
 1  .    Although  many  cases  can  be  cited  in  this  respect,  one  of  the  most  prominent  ones  was  the 
 Medici  affair, subject of several publications, among others Watson and Todeschini  2006 . The matter 
was followed up with regards to US museums by Felch and Frammolino  2011 .  
  
huge, see among many St. Clair  1998 .  
  
Libya was an Italian colony. See Chechi  2008 .  
 4  .   Examples here are also numerous. Perhaps the Altmann litigation on the Klimt paintings is one 
  
of the most well-known cases, especially given that a film was released recently on the story:  Woman 
in Gold , by Simon Curtis (2015).  
  
  
  
  
  
end with a court decision. Renold  2012 , 289.  
 10  .   See Nathaniel Herzberg, “Caché, volé, racheté: l'histoire folle d'un manuscrit de Sade , ”  Le Monde,  
  
1 October 2012,  http://www.lemonde.fr/livres/article/2012/10/01/cache-vole-rachete-l-histoire-folle-
du-manuscrit-de-sade_1767353_3260.html  (accessed 30 July 2015); “Le plus sulfureux des manuscrits de 
Sade, de retour à Paris,”  Le Monde,  4 April 2014,  http://www.lemonde.fr/livres/article/2014/04/03/le-plus-
sulfureux-des-manuscrits-de-sade-de-retour-a-paris_4394810_3260.html  (accessed 30 July 2015).  
  
 11  .   N. de N. v. N. et al., Swiss Supreme Court, 28 May 1998, Semaine judiciaire 1999, 1–6.   
  
 12  .   On this occasion a beautifully illustrated book was published by the family on the collection: 
“Eros Invaincu. La Bibliothèque Gérard Nordmann” (see 116–23 for the Marquis de Sade manuscript 
and its first editions).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(Toronto), 337–38.  
  
[emphasis added].  
 20  .   See Nafziger, Patterson, and Enteln  2010 , 610; Nafziger and Patterson  2014 , 16–17.  
  
  
 21  .   The agreement between the Met and Italy was reproduced in the  Journal du Droit International  
(Clunet) 2009, 527–29. Since then several agreements have been entered into by Italy with the Boston 
Museum of Fine Arts, the Getty Institute, the Cleveland Museum, the University of Princeton, etc.  
  
of Geneva ArThemis database at  www.unige.ch/art-adr .  
  
 23  .   The  Einsatztab Reichsleiter Rosenberg  (EER), established in 1940 and led by the fanatical 
anti-Semitic Alfred Rosenberg, was tasked with tracking, destroying, or transferring to Germany 
all artworks belonging to Jewish people or made by Jewish artists. See Palmer  2000 , 110–11.   

 13  .   Renold  2004 , 251–63.  
 14  .   Menzel v. List, 267 N.Y.S. 2d 804 (1966); see Merryman, Elsen, and Urice  2007 , 24–29.   
 15  .   Union de l'Inde c. Crédit Agricole Indosuez (Suisse) SA, ATF 131 III 418, JdT 2006 I 63.  
 16  .   Renold  2006 , 361–69.  
 17  .   Renold  2012 , 289.  
 18  .   See the 2006 International Law Association “Report of the Seventy-Second Conference” 

 19  .   See the International Law Association Resolution no. 4/2006, Cultural Heritage Law (Section 3) 

 22  .   The cases analyzed here are the subject of detailed presentations and analysis in the University 

 174   

 MARC-ANDRÉ RENOLD

  
 24  .   See Anne L. Bandle, Alessandro Chechi, and Marc-André Renold, “Case Landscape with 
Smokestacks — Gutmann Heirs and Daniel Searle,” Platform ArThemis, Art-Law Centre, University 
of Geneva,  http://unige.ch/art-adr .  
 25  .    See  the  Binding  advice  concerning  the  dispute  over  The  Marriage  of  Tobias  and  Sarah 
  
by Jan Steen (no. 3.93) published by the Dutch Restitution Committee on 6 October 2008,  http://www.
restitutiecommissie.nl/en/recommendations/recommendation_393.html  (accessed 30 July 2015); 
see the related press release,  http://www.restitutiecommissie.nl/en/pressreleases/press_release_rc_393.
html  (accessed 30 July 2015).  
 26  .   See Chechi  2014 , 191.  
  
  
 27  .   See the “Agreement Relating to the Return of the Teotihuacán Murals of 7 December 1981,” 
in Merryman, Elsen, and Urice  2007 , 368. See also Caroline Renold, Alessandro Chechi, and Marc-
André  Renold,  “Case  Murals  of  Teotihuacán:  Fine  Arts  Museums  of  San  Francisco  and  National 
Institute of Anthropology and History,” Platform ArThemis, Art-Law Centre, University of Geneva, 
 http://unige.ch/art-adr .  
 28  .   Berrin  2007 , 13 [translated from French by the author].  
  
 29  .   See Palmer  2000 , 17; see also, Chechi  2012 , 163.  
  
 30  .   This notion was first discussed in Cornu and Renold  2012 , 251 ff.   
  
 31  .   See Chechi  2014 , 196–97.  
  
  
 32  .   See the agreement and related issues discussed and presented under Alessandro Chechi, Liora 
Aufseesser, and Marc-André Renold, “Case Machu Picchu Collection – Peru and Yale University,” 
Platform ArThemis, Art-Law Centre, University of Geneva,  http://unige.ch/art-adr .  
  
 33  .   “Memorandum of Understanding Regarding the UNSAAC-Yale University International 
Center for the Study of Machu Picchu and Inca Culture,”  Yale News , 5 June 2015,  http://news.yale.
edu/2015/06/04/universidad-nacional-de-san-antonio-abad-del-cusco-yale-university-memorandum-
understandi  (accessed 30 July 2015).  
 34  .   Anne L. Bandle, Raphael Contel, and Marc-André Renold, “Case Ancient Manuscripts and 
  
Globe  –  Saint-Gall  and  Zurich,”  Platform  ArThemis,  Art-Law  Centre,  University  of  Geneva,  at 
 http://unige.ch/art-adr .  
 35  .   Cornu and Renold  2010 , 1–31.  
  
  
 36  .   Raphael Contel, Anne Laure Bandle, and Marc-André Renold, “Affaire Manuscrits Coréens – 
France et Corée du Sud,” Plateforme ArThemis, Centre du droit de l’art, Université de Genève, 
 http://unige.ch/art-adr .  
  
with the Yonhap News Agency.  
 38  .   See among others the reports of the UNESCO’s ICPRCP at  http://www.unesco.org/new/
  
en/culture/themes/restitution-of-cultural-property/committes-successful-restitutions/
restitution-of-the-makonde-mask/ .  
  
 39  .    Anne  L.  Bandle,  Raphael  Contel,  and  Marc-André  Renold,  “Affaire  Masque  Makondé  — 
Tanzanie et Musée Barbier-Mueller,” Plateforme ArThemis, Centre du droit de l’art, Université de 
Genève,  http://unige.ch/art-adr .  
  
aus Zürich” (St. Gallen 2006).  
 41  .   24 June 1995, 34 ILM 1322 (1995).  
  
 42  .   On that issue, see van Woudenberg  2012 .  
  
  
 43  .   In that respect the distinction that one finds in the Swiss Civil Code between “ actes d'administration 
courante ” (article 647a of the Swiss Civil Code) and “ actes d'administration plus importants ” (article 
647b of the Swiss Civil Code) could be of use here. In the first case each co-owner can perform such 
acts, whereas in the second case such acts can only be performed if a majority of the co-owners agree 
to them. On co-ownership in Swiss law, see Steinauer  2012 , note 1115 ff.; Foëx and Marchand  2010 , 
235–37.  
  
  

 44  .   For a fascinating history of the Rosetta Stone, see MacGregor  2010 , 209–14.  
 45  .   See Lacouture  1989 .  

 37  .   Indeed the French ex-Minister of Culture Jack Lang said that in an interview on 11 June 2011 

 40  .   See the Exhibition Catalogue “Von der Limmat Zurück an die Steinach — St.Galler Kulturgüter 

CULTURAL CO-OWNERSHIP  

  175 

 46  .    See  the  Champollion  Museum’s  website  at   www.musee-champollion.fr/decouvrir-le-musee/

  
hors-les-murs/ .  
 47  .   Maget  2009 , 79.  
  
 48  .    Charlotte  Edwardes  and  Catherine  Milner,  “Egypt  Demands  Return  of  the  Rosetta  Stone,” 
  
 The Telegraph , 20 July 2003,  http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/
egypt/1436606/Egypt-demands-return-of-the-Rosetta-Stone.html  (accessed 30 July 2015).  
  

 49  .   Cornu and Renold  2012 , 262–63.   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Berrin  ,    Kathleen  .   2007 .  “ San  Francisco,  le  Mexique  et  les  peintures  murales  de  Teotihuacán .” 
 Museum International   235 :  8 – 20 .  

    Chechi  ,   Alessandro  .  2008 . “ The Return of Cultural Objects Removed in Times of Colonial Domina-
tion and International Law: The Case of the Venus of Cyrene .”  Italian Yearbook of International Law  
 18 , no.  1 :  159 –81.  

    ——— .  2012 . “ The Role of Domestic Courts in Resolving Restitution Cases: Unveiling Judicial Strat-
egies for Culture-Sensitive Settlements .” In  Resolving Disputes in Cultural Property, Studies in Art Law , 
Vol.  23 , edited by   M.-A.     Renold  ,   A.     Chechi  , and   A. L.     Bandle  ,  147 –74.  Zurich :  Schulthess Verlag .  

    ——— .  2014 .  The Settlement of International Cultural Heritage Disputes .  Oxford :  Oxford University 
Press .  

    Cornu  ,    Marie    and    Marc-André      Renold  .   2010 .  “ New  Developments  in  the  Restitution  of  Cultural 
Property: Alternative Means of Dispute Resolution .”     17 , 
no.  1 :  1 – 31 .  

    ——— .  2012 . “ La mise en forme d'un intérêt commun dans la propriété culturelle: des solutions 
négociées aux nouveaux modes possibles de propriété partagée .” In  Resolving Disputes in Cultural 
Property, Studies in Art Law , Vol.  23 , edited by   M.-A     Renold  ,   A.     Chechi  , and   A. L.     Bandle  ,  251 –64. 
 Zurich :  Schulthess Verlag .  

    Felch  ,   Jason  , and   Ralph     Frammolino  .  2011 .  Chasing Aphrodite: The Hunt for Looted Antiquities at the 
World's Richest Museum.   Boston :  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt .  

    Foëx  ,   Benedict  , and   Sylvain     Marchand  .  2010 . “ Switzerland .” In  National Reports on the Transfer of 
Movables in Europe. Volume 6: The Netherlands, Switzerland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Malta, Latvia , 
edited by   W.     Faber   and   B.     Lurger  ,  159 – 254 .  Munich :  Sellier, European Law Publishers .  

   International Law Association .  2006 . “ Report of the Seventy Second Conference ” (Toronto).  

    Lacouture  ,   Jean  .  1989 .  Champollion: Une vie de lumières .  Paris :  Grasset .  

    MacGregor  ,   Neil  .  2010 .  A History of the World in 100 Objects .  New York :  Penguin Books .  

    Maget  ,   Antoinette  .  2009 .  Collectionnisme public et conscience patrimoniale: Les collections d'antiquités 
égyptiennes en Europe .  Paris :  Harmattan .  

    Mason  ,   Rainer M.  , ed.  2004 .  Eros Invaincu: La Bibliotheque Gerard Nordmann .  Geneva :  Fondation 
Bodmer/Paris Editions Cercle d’Art .  

    Merryman  ,   John H.  ,   Albert     Elsen  , and   Stephen     Urice  .  2007 .  Law, Ethics and the Visual Arts .  5 th ed. 
Alphen aan den Rijn,  The Netherlands :  Kluwer Law International .  

 176   

 MARC-ANDRÉ RENOLD

    Nafziger  ,   James  , and   Robert     Patterson  , eds.  2014 .  Handbook of the Law of Cultural Heritage and Inter-
national Trade .  Northampton, MA :  Edward Elgar Publishing .  

    Nafziger  ,   James  ,   Robert     Patterson  , and   Alison     Renteln  .  2010 .  Cultural Law: International, Compara-
tive and Indigenous .  Cambridge, UK :  Cambridge University Press .  

    Renold  ,   Marc-André  .  2004 . “ Stolen Art: The Ubiquitous Question of Good Faith .” In  Resolution of 
Cultural Property Disputes: The Permanent Court of Arbitration/Peace Palace Papers , Vol.  7 , edited by 
 the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration ,  251 –63.  The Hague :  Kluwer Law 
International .  

    ——— .   2006 .  “ An  Important  Swiss  Decision  Relating  to  the  International  Transfer  of  Cultural 
Goods: The Swiss Supreme Court’s Decision on the Giant Mogul Gold Coins .”  International Journal 
of Cultural Property   13 , no.  3 :  361 –69.  

    ——— .  2012 . “ ArThemis: How We Got There and Whereto From Now .” In  Resolving Disputes in 
Cultural Property, Studies in Art Law , Vol.  23 , edited by   M.-A     Renold  ,   A.     Chechi  , and   A. L.     Bandle  , 
 289 –95.  Zurich :  Schulthess Verlag .  

    Palmer  ,   Norman  .  2000 .  Museums and the Holocaust .  Leicester :  Institute of Art and Law .  

    Schönenberger  ,   Beat  .  2009 .  The Restitution of Cultural Assets .  Utrecht :  Eleven International Pub .  

    St. Clair  ,   William  .  1998 .  Lord Elgin and the Marbles: The Controversial History of the Parthenon Sculp-
tures .  3 rd ed.  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

    Steinauer  ,   Paul-Henri  .  2012 .  Les droits reels . Tome I,  5 th ed.  Bern :  Stämpfli .  

    Watson  ,    Peter  ,  and    Cecilia      Todeschini  .   2006 .   The  Medici  Conspiracy:  The  Illicit  Journey  of  Looted 
Antiquities, from Italy's Tomb Raiders to the World's Greatest Museums .  New York :  BBS PublicAffairs .  

    van  Woudenberg  ,    Nout  .   2012 .   State  Immunity  and  Cultural  Objects  on  Loan .   Leiden :   Martinus 
Nijhodd .    


