International Journal of Cultural Property (2007) 14:279–282. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2007 International Cultural Property Society
DOI: 10.1017/S094073910707018X

Introduction: Hunting as Heritage:
“Save a Whale, Harpoon a Makah”
Patrick J. O’Keefe*

Abstract: This set of articles is not intended to deal comprehensively with the
totality of the relationship between heritage and hunting. Rather, it is designed
to emphasize the connection and bring out aspects such as sustainability,
ethics, respect, and civility. The role of hunting as a way of life is emphasized.
This creates heritage even if its practitioners do not recognize it as such. The
heritage so created can take many forms; but in particular hunting has
produced an important intangible heritage expressed through art, music,
poetry, and literature to name but a few of its aspects. Finally, the set of papers
shows that mandated changes affecting hunting need careful consideration;
there is much to be lost if the creating force for this heritage disappears.

“SAVE A WHALE, HARPOON A MAKAH”

In some parts of the world, current tensions between hunting and cultural heri-
tage are encapsulated in this statement. The Makah tribe of Native Americans from
Washington state were resurrecting their traditional whale hunting, a central part
of their religion and lives until it came to an end as a result of commercial whal-
ing, which virtually wiped out the whales on which they relied. Their attempt to
revive these traditions met with fierce resistance from people who saw any killing
of whales to be totally condemned, hence the slogan.1

But the killing of whales as part of religious and traditional practices is only
one aspect of the often intimate connection between hunting and the cultural her-
itage of a person, a people, a community, and a nation. “All Eskimo men hunt—or
they dream of hunting. To lose touch with the white tracks and the blood in the
snow is to lose touch with your culture. Hunter and Eskimo are synonymous.”2
The Mexican novelist and screenwriter, Guillermo Arriaga, is quoted as saying, “I

*Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University; School of English,
Media Studies and Art History, University of Queensland. Email: p.okeefe@uq.edu.au

279

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910707018X

280

PATRICK J. O’KEEFE

know its something terrible, it’s something cruel, but I would not be able to un-
derstand the human condition without hunting, because hunting brings you closer
to the big truths of life.”3

But the taking of life in hunting is not to be lightly regarded. Kato’s article il-
lustrates the respect that traditional Japanese whalers afforded their victims. Me-
morials were erected and even today their spirits are prayed for by Buddhist nuns.
The taking of these whales is reflected in both the material cultural heritage of
Japan and its intangible cultural heritage.

Many indigenous peoples and tribal people seek to preserve their communities
while living in a largely homogeneous external society. To do this, traditional ways
of life are emphasized and followed to the largest extent possible. Hunting with its
associated rituals is often central to such activities. For example, in February 2007
the state government of New South Wales in Australia entered into an agreement
with the Githabul Aboriginal people giving them native title to 112,000 hectares
of national parks and state forests in the northeast of the state.

The pact enables the Githabul to practise their traditional customs, in-
cluding the right to camp, hunt and fish. . . . Talk for a while to Liam and
his mates, and it soon becomes clear that the community has not lost
touch with many of the traditional Githabul hunting practices. . . . They
know the best ways to catch turtles, echidnas, goannas, and witchetty
grubs.4

Once again, knowledge, part of the intangible cultural heritage, is preserved by
allowing these traditional practices to take place. But there are often complex prob-
lems when indigenous and traditional peoples have the right to hunt when mem-
bers of the larger community do not. How can that right be justified?

Fenstemaker considers the Hopi capturing of golden eagle hatchlings by young
men scaling the cliffs where their nests are located in Arizona’s Wupatki National
Monument. The captured birds are raised on the reservation until the time of a
religious ceremony when they are smothered, freeing their spirits to carry mes-
sages between the physical and spiritual worlds. This practice is controversial be-
cause it is seen as contrary to the concept of the park’s status as a national wildlife
reserve. Conversely, it raises issues of Native American religious rights. Fenste-
maker argues that the practice should be allowed to continue, thus protecting not
only religious rights but also the intangible cultural value of the eagles to society.
The intangible cultural heritage is a central aspect of hunting in many parts of
the world. Shyllon writes of the Argungu Fishing Festival in north-western Nige-
ria. Dating from the sixteenth century, this festival is part of an ancient fertility
ritual; but it has only attracted outside attention in the past 70 years. The ritual,
performed before the fishing commences, is associated with a prayer “to the an-
cestral spirits of the Kebbawa people to send peace, health, progress, and fortune
during the coming year.” The actual fishing, accompanied by music and song, takes
place over a 1-mile stretch of the Matan Fada River and lasts only 1 hour. Fishing
in that place is forbidden for the remainder of the year. It is a cultural means of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910707018X

INTRODUCTION: HUNTING AS HERITAGE

281

preserving natural resources through hunting and participation by the commu-
nity. There are moves to make it more attractive for tourists, and Shyllon warns
that these must be carefully managed to prevent damage to the nature and even
the very existence of the festival.

Ritual, part of the intangible cultural heritage, was also an essential element of
foxhunting in England as shown in Marvin’s article. The very nature of the hunt
was governed by specific rules known to all participants. The dress of the hunters,
the fox hounds bred for the purpose, the literature and art which celebrates it are
all part of the heritage of foxhunting. But the people who participated in the pro-
cess did not appeal to heritage to justify their actions. For them foxhunting “was a
present and immediate life.” But Marvin also notes, “Although nobody in the fox-
hunt world articulated to me a specific notion of heritage, it was certainly there in
terms of their beliefs, activities, and concerns.” This way of life has been put under
threat by legislation prohibiting foxhunting apart from limited circumstances. In
the eyes of its supporters, the legislation “has stripped the fox of its cultural status
and reduced it to that of an animal that can be unceremoniously killed if it is
deemed to be a nuisance or a pest.”

Marvin refers at one point to the affect of foxhunting on landscape. This is the
central topic of Finch’s article on hunting, landscape character, and the politics of
place. The effect of hunting on landscape, a major element of the cultural heri-
tage, has been noted in many places. For example, in Australia Aboriginals burned
the land to improve their hunting opportunities. This selectively encouraged the
growth of eucalypts, which is a ionic feature of the Australian landscape.5 Finch
examines the effect of foxhunting on the evolution of the landscape of the Mid-
lands area of England. “Foxhunting greatly increased the extent of woodland cov-
erage within the Midland shires, and it did so in a distinctive manner with small
patches of regularly spaced woodland.” Also of significance are hedgerows, playing
a major role in hunting mythology. This landscape and foxhunting activities have
been celebrated in song and in paintings. However, the role of hunting in forming
the landscape during the past 200 years appears to have been ignored in current
official studies of management of the historic landscape. Finch states that if the
authorities “are committed to supporting sustainable management practices [in
protecting the cultural landscape], they must acknowledge the role of the hunts in
creating and sustaining the landscape of the shires.”

Finally, Prott makes a brief study of Internet sites on hunting, drawing conclu-
sions on the antiquity and ubiquity of hunting practices and imagery. She writes
of its dynamism, evolution, and changing forms and, having related them to the
UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage
2003, points to its overlap with certain other heritage instruments. This may cre-
ate some interesting dilemmas for governments planning to nominate items for
the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.

This collection of articles is intended to illustrate and examine the complex set
of relationships between hunting and cultural heritage. Those relationships have

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910707018X

282

PATRICK J. O’KEEFE

been little acknowledged in the literature nor in administrative practice. Many peo-
ple are totally opposed to hunting in any way or form. They seek, as in England
with foxhunting, to have all forms of hunting banned, possibly through legislative
means enforced by criminal sanctions. The legislator must be aware of the wider
ramifications of such prohibitions: There are aspects of society that could well be
destroyed and with them the life of a community.
The articles are not intended to examine the morality of hunting although this
is part of Kato’s article. She argues that the human/nature relationship must be a
reciprocal one containing a quality that is “dialogical, sensory/experiential, and
place specific.” Humans cannot remain external to the natural world and are re-
sponsible for that world which creates both rights and obligations. The latter may
be discharged through spiritual practices.

There are many other aspects of the relationship between cultural heritage and
hunting that might be examined. These could be the subject of future articles or
of comments on the present set of articles. But whatever form it takes, further
work is needed. Hunting goes to the traditional core of humankind’s existence
and forms the basis of much that has come down to us from the past. We need to
establish how that heritage will survive and define our relationship to the natural
world so that the future is better assured.

ENDNOTES

1. Miller, “Exercising Cultural Self-Determination,” 244.
2. Gill, “Nowhere Land,” 65.
3. Sibree, “Hunting Brings You Closer to the Big Truths of Life,” 5.
4. Meade, “Old Ways the Best for Boys Living Off Their Land,” 5.
5. Andrews, Back from the Brink, 151, 160.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Andrews, P. Back from the Brink: How Australia’s Landscape Can be Saved. Sydney: ABC Books, 2006.

Gill, A.A. “Nowhere Land.” The Bulletin, March 28, 2006.

Meade, K. “Old Ways the Best for Boys Living Off Their Land.” The Australian, March 1, 2007, 5.

Miller, R. “Exercising Cultural Self-Determination: The Makah Indian Tribe Goes Whaling.” Amer-
ican Indian Law Review 25 (2000–2001): 165.

Sibree, B. “Hunting Brings You Closer to the Big Truths of Life.” The Sydney Morning Herald, Arts
and Entertainment, May 13–14, 2006, 4–5.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073910707018X


