 

Saving Hasankeyf: Limits and Possibilities 
of International Human Rights Law
Bahar Aykan*

 

Abstract: This article explores the limits and possibilities of international human 
rights law in protecting cultural heritage from state-led destruction. It does so 
by focusing on two attempts by activists and non-governmental organizations to 
have the United Nations and the Council of Europe intervene to save the ancient 
city of Hasankeyf in Turkey’s southeast region, which will soon be flooded by 
the reservoir waters of the Ilısu Dam. Adopting a heritage rights focus, these 
grassroots initiatives have argued that Hasankeyf’s destruction would constitute 
a violation of human rights because it would deprive people of their right to 
participate in, and benefit from, cultural heritage. I suggest that, as powerful 
attempts to link cultural heritage and human rights, these cases demonstrate the 
need for more effective and legally binding international frameworks to protect 
heritage rights as an aspect of human rights.

Keywords: heritage rights, human rights, international human rights law, Turkey, 
Hasankeyf

INTRODUCTION

The ancient city of Hasankeyf is situated along the banks of River Tigris in the 
southeastern part of Turkey in Batman province. Its predominantly Arab and 
Kurdish population is just over 6,500 people. Hasankeyf is often described as an 
open-air museum with a history dating back to at least 10,000 years. It was the first 
capital of Artuqids, and the remains of the four-arch bridge built by them in the mid-
twelfth century still stands on the River Tigris.1 The Roman, Byzantine, Seljuk, 
and Ottoman Empires left their marks there. Some of Hasankeyf’s archeological 

*Department of Sociology, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey; Email: aykanbahar@gmail.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The author would like to thank Zeynep Ahunbay, Veysi Ayhan and Murat 
Cano for their generosity in giving their valuable time for interviews and sharing their thoughts.

1Çevik 2012, 1.

11

 (2018) 25:11–34. Printed in the USA.Copyright © 2018 BAHAR AYKAN

masterpieces  are  human-made  cave  dwellings  from  the  Neolithic  period;  the  
medieval citadel; the Sultan Süleyman mosque built by the Ayyubids in the fifteenth 
century; and the tomb of Zeynel Bey, a unique example of Timurid architecture of 
Iran in Turkey from the Akkoyunlu period.2 Due to these characteristics, Turkey’s 
Ministry of Culture declared Hasankeyf a first-degree protected site in 1978 to be 
preserved in situ. Nevertheless, the lower levels of the town will soon be flooded 
by the reservoir waters of the Ilısu dam when the Turkish government finalizes its 
construction on the River Tigris.3 The minister of forestry and water affairs, Veysel 
Eroğlu, has recently announced that the dam construction is expected to be com-
pleted by the end of 2017.4 As I will detail later, the only possibility that remains 
to  save  Hasankeyf  from  destruction  seems  to  be  the  decision  that  could  come 
from the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in response to a lawsuit filed 
against Turkey demanding the annulment of the Ilısu dam project (see Figure 1).

For the government, the Ilısu dam is needed to supply Turkey’s energy needs. 
Furthermore, as the first dam on the River Tigris, Ilısu is key to the completion 
of the Southeast Anatolia Project (Güneydoğu Anadolu Projesi [GAP]), one of the 

Figure 1.  A view of Hasankeyf (photo courtesy of Mehmet Masum Süer, May 2010).

2Ahunbay and Balkız 2009.
3The  Ilısu  dam  will  not  only  destroy  Hasankeyf,  but  around  300  other  historic  sites  will  also  be 
flooded. Starr 2013, 67. According to former World Bank specialist Ayşe Kudat, the dam would affect 
up to 78,000 people. Cited in Eberlein et al. 2010, 296.
4“Çevreye zarar verecek hiçbir projenin içinde yer almadık” [“We have never been involved in a project 
that would harm the environment”], Yeni Akit, 25 September 2017, http://www.yeniakit.com.tr/haber/
cevreye-zarar-verecek-hicbir-projenin-icinde-yer-almadik-379586.html (accessed 7 April 2017).

SAVING HASANKEYF 

13

most  comprehensive  regional  development  programs  in  the  world.5  There  is 
also a state-led project to construct a “New Hasankeyf” from scratch about three 
kilometers away from the ancient city. The government claims that the resettle-
ment  of  Hasankeyf’s  inhabitants  will  increase  their  living  standards.  Moreover, 
there is a government program to transfer all movable monuments to a cultural 
park near the new town, in the same way that the Pharaonic temples were relocated 
following the construction of the Aswan dam in the 1960s.6 The upper town that 
would stay above the water will also be preserved as an archeological park (see 
Figure 2). According to Veysel Eroğlu, the Ilısu dam will actually save the heritage 
of Hasankeyf:

Even if it is not our duty, we will try to rescue historical monuments. … 
We will relocate the ones we can, protect the rest under the water and 
exhibit  their  replicas  in  a  cultural  park.  We  will  build  an  outstanding 
museum for the artifacts found in archaeological excavations … Besides, 
is it possible to compare old houses with a brand new settlement area? 
We are conducting a project that will introduce Hasankeyf to the world. 
The Ilısu Project is an opportunity to save Hasankeyf.7

Figure 2.  A view of Hasankeyf with Sultan Süleyman mosque (photo courtesy of 
Mehmet Masum Süer, June 2011).

5Öktem 2002, 311.
6I thank the anonymous reviewer who brought my attention to the similarities between the actions of 
Turkish and Egyptian governments with respect to the Ilısu and Aswan dam projects.
7“100 milyon dolara Hasankeyf’teki eserleri kurtaracağız” [“We will save Hasankeyf’s monuments for 
100 million dollars”], Batman Çağdaş Daily, 29 August 2012, http://www.batmancagdas.com/lince-
ramak-kalm-h22356.html (accessed 7 April 2017).

14 

BAHAR AYKAN

The government’s approach, however, does not take into account that it is 
impossible  to  replicate  elsewhere  Hasankeyf’s  living  heritage  and  its  unique 
cultural and historical atmosphere. What is more, once completed, the Ilısu dam is 
expected to have a functional life of only 30 to 50 years.8 The project is unsustain-
able from an archeological point of view as well. According to Zeynep Ahunbay, 
even if modern technology offers several methods to move the monuments, they 
would not have the same topographic relationship to the new site, plus exhibiting 
them as museum pieces would reduce their integrity and dignity (Figure 3).9 Equally 
important,  while  the  human-made  caves  engraved  into  dolomitic  limestone 
will stay above the water, studies show that limestone’s contact with reservoir 
water will seriously aggravate its deterioration and will possibly lead to a rapid 
collapse of the caves.10 Last but not least, the majority of Hasankeyf’s residents 
are unwilling to move to the new town, claiming a strong sense of attachment 
to their cultural heritage. According to a survey conducted with 357 residents 
by Doğa Derneği (Nature Association) in 2012, only 21 percent of them want 
to live in New Hasankeyf, while 11 percent are indecisive.11 For the 68 percent 
who want to stay, the major reasons are their love of Hasankeyf and connection 
to their past, holy places, and graves. In the words of Veysi Ayhan, a local activist 
born in Hasankeyf, the town is an essential part of its inhabitants’ identity and 
sense of community:

A  human  being  is  his/her  past.  Our  history  and  the  region  that  we 
live  in  are  elements  that  determine  our  future.  Without  them,  we 
could  neither  build  our  future,  nor  enjoy  our  lives.  We  can’t  build 
a  strong  social  structure,  can’t  be  a  healthy  community  …  I  mean 
this is about the right to life. I have lived in Hasankeyf for years. One 
day you would wake up and boom! All your memories, your past is 
below the water. You would not really breathe. You would feel like   
choking.12

Turkey’s  determination  to  build  the  Ilısu  dam  met  with  strong  resistance 
from human rights and heritage activists and non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) at regional, national, and international levels. Even though these wide-
spread campaigns have been a major factor in the delays in the dam’s construc-
tion, they have been unable to convince the Turkish government to cancel the 
project so far. At the time of writing, both the construction of the dam and New 
Hasankeyf are near completion. Zeynel Bey tomb has been moved to its place 
in New Hasankeyf in May 2017, and preparations are in progress for relocat-
ing eight other historic monuments (including Artuqid Hammam and El Rizk, 

8Ahunbay 2008, 157.
9Ahunbay 2008, 156.
10See Topal and Kaya 2016.
11See  “Hasankeyf  Survey  Report,”  http://www.dogadernegi.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/
HASANKEYF-SURVEY-REPORT-Summary.pdf (accessed 7 April 2017).
12Personal communication, 2 November 2016.

SAVING HASANKEYF 

15

Figure 3.  The Tomb of Zeynel Bey (photo courtesy of Mehmet Masum Süer, September 
2013).

16 

BAHAR AYKAN

Sultan Süleyman, and Kızlar mosques).13 The owners of souvenir shops in the 
lower town have recently been given a final notice to evacuate their shops and 
move to New Hasankeyf.14

In this article, I explore the limits and possibilities of international human rights 
law to save Hasankeyf from state-led destruction. To do that, I look at two attempts 
by activists and NGOs to have the United Nations (UN) and the Council of Europe 
cancel the Ilısu project on the grounds that destroying Hasankeyf’s cultural heri-
tage would be a breach of Turkey’s obligations under international human rights 
law. I begin by reviewing the recent debates and developments in international law 
over  the  recognition  and  protection  of  cultural  heritage  as  human  rights.  Then  
I move on to provide a brief historical background to the Ilısu dam. Subsequently, 
I detail the applications submitted to the UN Committee on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (CESCR) and the ECtHR to stop the Ilısu dam project and discuss 
the  ways  in  which  they  pressured  the  UN  and  the  Council  of  Europe  to  recog-
nize the right to cultural heritage as an aspect of human rights. Overall, I suggest 
that these cases not only testify to the top-down processes of heritage making and 
unmaking in Turkey today but also demonstrate the need for more effective and 
legally enforceable international instruments to prevent the state-led destruction 
of cultural heritage.

HERITAGE RIGHTS AS HUMAN RIGHTS

Cultural  heritage  rights—people’s  rights  to  participate  in,  and  benefit  from, 
cultural heritage of their choice—have in recent years become increasingly iden-
tified with human rights in the critical heritage literature.15 Emphasizing the key 
role of heritage in the construction, legitimation, and maintenance of individual 
and group identities, many scholars now frame various heritage inequities—
destruction or exploitation of heritage resources, forced evictions from heritage 
places, exclusion from decision-making processes, and so forth—as human rights 

13“Zeynel Bey Türbesi’nden sonra 8 tarihi eser daha taşınacak” [“8 Other Historic Monuments Will Be 
Relocated Following the Zeynel Bey Tomb”], NTV News Portal, 13 May 2017, https://www.ntv.com.tr/
galeri/sanat/zeynel-bey-turbesinde-sonra-8-tarihi-eser-daha-tasinacak%2cmdbBjgEzG0e0eHvubLCU-g 
(accessed 7 April 2017).
14Hatice Kamer, “Sulara gömülecek olan Hasankeyf’te son durum” [“Latest Situation in Soon to 
Be Flooded Hasankeyf”], BBC Turkey, 7 September 2017, http://www.bbc.com/turkce/haberler-
turkiye-41182227 (accessed 7 April 2017).
15This definition is derived from Ian Hodder, who argues against the dominant tendency in both 
heritage literature and international legal instruments to define cultural heritage rights through 
ownership and descent. Hodder 2010. According to him, heritage rights should be considered in 
terms of both benefit from and participation in cultural heritage (i.e., study, appreciate, experi-
ence, practice, and access to heritage) as well as the recognition of other’s right to same heritage: 
“Everyone has a right to participate in and benefit from cultural heritage that is of consequence 
to their well-being, and everyone has a duty towards others with respect to that right” (Hodder 
2010, 876).

SAVING HASANKEYF 

17

abuses.16 In their pioneering work investigating the links between heritage and 
human rights, Helaine Silverman and D. Fairchild Ruggles suggest that heritage 
constitutes an important aspect of human rights because it closely relates to the 
recognition of an individual or group’s essential worth. “Freedom of religion, 
political expression, movement, and freedom from violence, torture, and hunger 
are human rights of paramount importance and correctly deserving of protec-
tion, vigilance, and continued analytical study. But heritage ought to rank with 
these as an essential component of human rights because the very concept of her-
itage demands that individual and group identities be respected and protected.”17 
Scholars investigating cultural property and heritage have long been interested in how 
particular histories manifested in various objects, places, and traditions serve as 
crucial identity markers.18 Property, in its general and historical sense, has always 
been about the validation of ownership over things. However, the growth of global 
capitalism has expanded the scope of property relations to new areas when all sorts 
of tangible and immaterial things—such as technical know-how, information, 
cultural artifacts and expressions, and body parts—came to be exposed to own-
ership claims as “property objects.”19 The emergence of new property claims and 
relations has received increased attention in the related literature over the last two 
decades. This literature calls for a relational and situational understanding where 
neither things as properties nor the relations through them can be treated as 
neutral, given, or static.20

In the introduction of the volume Property in Question, Caroline Humphrey 
and Katherine Verdery provide one such critical account of the notion of property. 
They call into question the basic assumptions inherent in the classical property 
theory with regard to “persons,” “things,” and “relations.”21 Arguing that classical 
property theory assumes relationships among already-existing, distinctly separate, 
and internally uniform entities, they posit instead that things or persons might 
as well become bounded units as a consequence of property relations, given that 
“positing certain things as unitary enables the appearance of unity for the persons 
to whom the things are linked.”22

This approach enables us to situate the emergent cultural property claims in their 
political context. It opens up a possibility to explore how the ownership claims 
over heritage allow for its use as a political resource to construct and validate col-
lective identities, where the group difference is affirmed through claims to distinct 

16See, e.g., Vrdoljak 2006; Silverman and Ruggles 2007a; Langfield, Logan, and Nic Craith 2010; Blake 
2011; Logan 2014; Ekern et al. 2015a.
17Silverman and Ruggles 2007b, 5.
18See, e.g., Harrison 1999; Rowlands 2004; Brown 2005; Smith 2006; Ashworth, Graham, and Tunbridge 
2007; Graham and Howard 2008; Anico and Peralta 2009.
19Humphrey and Verdery 2004.
20See, e.g., Hann 1998; Hirsch and Strathern 2004; Verdery and Humphrey 2004.
21Humphrey and Verdery 2004, 6.
22Humphrey and Verdery 2004, 7.

18 

BAHAR AYKAN

pasts that are materialized in cultural objects, practices, and experiences. Annette 
Weiner coined the term “inalienable possessions” to define the objects that circu-
late among generations and, as such, play a key role in the assertion of a group’s 
cultural distinctiveness.23 Drawing from her, Simon Harrison labels symbolic prac-
tices such as festivals, rituals, speech acts, and dress styles as “identity symbols” and 
investigates the various ways in which the ownership claims over them contribute 
to the creation of a shared sense of belonging and identity.24 The significance of 
heritage in identity construction processes makes it an indispensable component 
of human rights because it entails one’s personal and collective right to exist.25 
Moreover, as Janet Blake explains, heritage has a strong human rights dimension 
due to its insistence on protecting human dignity, and, thus, it should be viewed as 
an aspect of right to cultural identity that includes the right of everyone to choose 
cultural identit(ies) alone or together with others; the right of groups to develop 
and maintain their culture; and the right of individuals to freely take part in the 
cultural life of their choice.26

The relationship between heritage and human rights, however, is not without 
complexity. As William Logan suggests, one major difficulty lies with the conflict 
between the collective and individual dimension of heritage rights as a form of 
human rights,27 which adds to the continuing debate over whether the rights of 
the group or the individual should take precedence when they come into conflict 
with each other.28 The issue is further complicated by the disjuncture between the 
universality of human rights and cultural, temporal, and geographical specificity 
of heritage.29 Logan cites the Academy of European Law in 2005 to further explain 
these two linked but contradictory meanings: “[F]irst, as a sub-category of human 
rights, cultural rights are endowed with universal character … second, cultural 
rights are clearly related to cultural diversity and cultural diversity is an obvious 
challenge to the very idea of universal human rights.”30

Janette Philp’s discussion on the politicization of Burma’s cultural heritage by the 
military regime illustrates this uneasy relation between cultural specificity and uni-
versality of human rights in heritage contexts.31 As she explains, the regime used the 
concept of “Asian” values in response to criticisms of human rights abuses due 
to the use of forced labor in the restoration of the Theravada Buddhist monuments.32 

23Weiner 1992.
24Harrison 1999.
25Rowlands 2004, 209.
26Blake 2011, 205.
27Logan 2014, 161.
28See, e.g., Ignatieff 2001; Rowlands 2004; Marko 2008; Blake 2011; Tavani 2012; Jakubowski 2016.
29Logan 2007, 39.
30Logan 2007, 39.
31Philp 2010.
32For a discussion of policies in China and southeast Asia to promote “Asian” values as an alternative 
to the “Western” notion of human rights, see Logan 2016.

SAVING HASANKEYF 

19

According to the military regime, the issue should be considered as part of Burmese 
culture of merit making, which, however, is a violation of Article 4 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights that prohibits slavery in all forms.33

At the practice level, incorporation of human rights frameworks into heritage 
might also lead to new inequalities and conflicts of ownership. Lynn Meskell dis-
cusses the Makuleke Contractual Park in South Africa as a case in point.34 Located 
in the northern sector of Kruger National Park, Makuleke is often hailed as a suc-
cessful case by anthropologists and activists where the traditional owners obtained 
the land title, commercial rights, and co-management of the park following a land 
claim agreement with the South African National Parks Board. Meskell’s research, 
however, shows that the commercial benefits actually rest with a few local black 
elites, while only a small number of people from Makuleke are employed in menial 
jobs or in the luxury lodges located in the park. Furthermore, these privileges have 
been afforded to Makuleke at the expanse of the rights of other “equally indigenous” 
neighbors, including the Shangaan and Venda groups, who are excluded from 
employment or financial benefits.

While heritage rights have been largely overlooked in international law until 
recently, a change is slowly taking place. At the UN level, the Universal Declaration 
on Human Rights recognizes the right to freely participate in the cultural life of 
the community in Article 27, but it gives no specific reference to heritage rights. 
The same goes for the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which 
mentions the right to enjoy one’s own culture in Article 27 in relation to minority 
groups.35 Similarly, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights (ICESCR) does not explicitly refer to the right to heritage but protects the 
right to take part in cultural life in Article 15.36 As I will explain in the next section, 
however, there has been some improvement in this regard following the adoption 
of General Comment no. 21 in 2009, which asserts the right to heritage as part of 
Article 15.37

The only UN human rights treaty that explicitly mentions the right to heritage 
is the 2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.38 In Article 8, 
Indigenous peoples and individuals have the right not to be subjected to destruc-
tion of their culture, while Article 11 recognizes the right to intangible heritage 
by stating that Indigenous peoples have the right to practice and revitalize their 
cultural traditions and its manifestations in archeological sites, artifacts, visual and 

33Philp 2010, 94. Universal Declaration of Human Rights, UN Doc. A/810, 10 December 1948.
34Meskell 2010, 849–51.
35International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 16 December 1966, 999 UNTS 171.
36International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 16 December 1966, 993 UNTS 3.
37General Comment no. 21 on the Right of Everyone to Take Part in Cultural Life, Doc E/C.12/GC/21, 
21 December 2009.
38United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, GA Res 61/295, UN GAOR, UN 
Doc A/RES/61/295, 13 September 2007.

20 

BAHAR AYKAN

performing arts, ceremonies, and so forth. And, finally, in Article 31, Indigenous 
peoples have the right to “maintain, control, protect and develop their cultural 
heritage.”

Several UN heritage treaties have also included references to human rights instru-
ments in recent years. One prominent example is the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization’s (UNESCO) 2003 Convention for the Safeguard-
ing of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, which refers in its preamble to the Interna-
tional Bill of Human Rights.39 It further states in Article 2 that the Convention 
only considers cultural traditions and practices that are compatible with human 
rights instruments. A similar trend can be observed in UNESCO’s flagship Con-
vention Concerning the Protection of the World Heritage and Natural Heritage 
(World Heritage Convention),40 whose top-down processes have drawn criticism 
for allowing states to violate local groups’ right to enjoy and maintain control over 
their heritage.41 Its recent “Policy for the Integration of a Sustainable Development 
Perspective into the Processes of the World Heritage Convention” adopts a human 
rights-based approach in the “full cycle of World Heritage processes from nomina-
tion to management.”42

As Meskell states, however, perhaps more important than the recognition of 
heritage rights as human rights in the international legal framework is the extent 
to which such recognition is translated into practice.43 The state plays a dominant 
role in the administration and implementation of international law. Given that 
international law is made by the states, the national level (that is, the state) remains 
primary  to  the  enactment  of  any  international  legal  framework.44  According 
to Meskell, this state-led enforcement constitutes a central problem with human 
rights, given that they are “directly connected to the nation state and thus operate on 
a state-to-state basis, rather than empowering communities, minorities, or indige-
nous groups who might propose counter claims.”45

The UN legal instruments are technically binding, but they lack enforcement 
mechanisms for non-conforming actions. Their implementation at the domestic 
level depends therefore on the willingness of states parties. As such, they may 
not protect individuals and groups from human rights abuses when it is the states 
themselves that are practicing them. Turkey provides a case in point. While the 
country ratified all of the aforementioned UN treaties and voted in favor of the 
UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, none of these commitments 

39Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage, 17 October 2003, 2368 UNTS 1.
40Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Heritage and Natural Heritage, 16 November 
1972, 1037 UNTS 151.
41See Logan 2014; Ekern et al. 2015b; Sinding-Larsen 2015; Ween 2015; Zalasińska and Piotrowska 
2015.
42United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 2015, 7.
43Meskell 2010.
44Blake 2009, 47.
45Meskell 2010, 849.

SAVING HASANKEYF 

21

discouraged the Turkish government from building the Ilısu dam. However, this 
does not mean that international law, and, particularly, international human 
rights law, is completely impotent in preventing heritage inequities and injustices. 
As  discussed  in  the  following  section,  international  human  rights  law  is  still 
significant because it provides a way for activists, NGO groups, and individ-
uals to communicate alleged human rights abuses by the states to international 
legal authorities. Furthermore, although the UN plays a major role in setting 
worldwide a policy and legal framework on human rights, there are other, fully 
binding, international human rights instruments that could be evoked against 
Turkey’s heritage rights violations. The Council of Europe’s European Convention 
on Human Rights (ECHR) is one example.46

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND TO THE ILISU DAM

The National Water Administration began studies for building the dam in the 
1950s, which was incorporated later into the GAP project in the 1980s as one of the 
22 dams—and 19 hydroelectric power plants—to be built in the southeast region 
of Turkey.47 The costly armed conflict with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party in the 
region, however, prevented the Turkish government from financing the project 
on its own.48 A World Bank loan was removed from the table since the organiza-
tion had decided not to provide funding for the GAP project due to protests from 
Turkey’s downstream neighbors, Syria and Iraq, on the grounds that the Ilısu dam 
would reduce the Tigris’s water flow.49 In 1996, the project was offered to the pri-
vate sector as a build-operate-transfer arrangement, and the contract was awarded to 
an international consortium consisting of Sulzer Hydro and ABB Power Generation, 
which subcontracted the construction of the Ilısu dam to, among others, Balfour 
Beatty (United Kingdom), Impregilo (Italy), Skanska (Sweden), Nural, Kiska, and 
Tekfen (Turkey).50 Not willing to carry the risks themselves, these companies applied 
to secure export credits from national export credit agencies in 1998.51

These events aroused considerable international opposition. Arguing that the 
Ilısu dam would give absolute control of the Tigris’s river water flow to Turkey, 
Iraq and Syria jointly sent protest letters to the companies involved and to their 
governmental backers.52 Equally important was the pressure from environmental 
and human rights groups. The London-based Ilısu Dam Campaign, a coalition 

46Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 4 November 1950, 
213 UNTS 222.
47Öktem 2002, 311.
48Hildyard et al. 2000.
49Warner 2012, 239.
50Bosshard 1999.
51Warner 2012, 240.
52Warner 2012, 237.

22 

BAHAR AYKAN

of NGOs, including the European Rivers Network, Public Eye (formerly the Berne 
Declaration), the Kurdish Human Rights Project, and Corner House, was particu-
larly effective in targeting European governments, public sympathies, and the com-
panies involved.53 Their campaign aimed to stop British involvement in the Ilısu 
dam project, arguing that the dam was a violation of environmental and human  
rights because it would result in the massive displacement of local inhabitants and 
destruction of their cultural heritage.54

This international pressure made the export credit agencies request four condi-
tions to be met before giving export credit guarantees: developing a resettlement 
program conforming to internationally accepted standards; providing provisions 
for upstream water treatment plants to maintain water quality; ensuring that ade-
quate downstream flows are kept at all times; and producing a detailed plan to pre-
serve as much of Hasankeyf’s archaeological heritage as possible.55 When Turkey 
could not meet these conditions, the credit agencies declined to fund the project, 
and the consortium came to an end in 2002. Nevertheless, it only took three years 
for the government to establish a new consortium with Austrian (VA Tech), Swiss 
(Alstom, Stucky, Colenco and Maggia), German (Ed. Züblin AG), and Turkish 
(Nurol, Cengiz, Celikler and Temelsu) companies.56 The construction of the dam 
began in 2006, but this consortium also dissolved in 2009 when the export credit 
agencies pulled their credit from the project for similar reasons. The then German 
minister of development, Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul, explained: “If the protec-
tion of people, the environment and cultural heritage cannot be ensured, then the 
supply and loan guarantee agreements for the dam must be terminated.”57 Despite 
this, the government carried on building the Ilısu dam with financing from various 
domestic banks.

INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS LAW AND THE DESTRUCTION OF 

HASANKEYF

Hasankeyf before the CESCR

One attempt to stop the Ilısu dam project via invoking Turkey’s obligations under 
international human rights law was the application made by local and international 
activists and NGO groups to the CESCR. Turkey ratified the ICESCR in 2003, 
which requires states parties to submit periodic reports to the CESCR on their 

53Shoup 2006, 247.
54See “Ilisu Dam Campaign,” http://www.ilisu.org.uk/index.html (accessed 7 April 2017); see also 
Atakuman 2010.
55Hildyard et al. 2000.
56Scheumann 2008, 71.
57“The Turkish Dam That ‘Would Never Have Been Permitted’ in Germany,” Spiegel Online, 8 July 
2009,  http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/the-world-from-berlin-the-turkish-dam-that-would-
never-have-been-permitted-in-germany-a-635054.html (accessed 7 April 2017).

SAVING HASANKEYF 

23

implementation of the treaty at the domestic level. The first report submitted by 
Turkey in 2008 did not explicitly refer to the case of Hasankeyf, yet it highlighted 
the rescue excavations held before the flooding of various other archeological sites 
in the region as part of efforts to protect cultural heritage.58 The report also men-
tioned the Ministry of Culture and Tourism’s endeavor to protect cultural and 
archeological heritage in the prospective dam areas by conducting “documentation 
and property-saving works.”59 In relation to Turkey’s obligations under Article 15—
the right to take part in cultural life—the report emphasized that the protection of 
natural and cultural heritage constitutes an indispensable part of Turkey’s cultural 
policy.60

The ICESCR allows NGOs and other civil society groups to submit written infor-
mation to the CESCR on states parties’ compliance with human rights obligations. 
In response to Turkey’s report, a German network of NGOs called CounterCurrent 
and the Initiative to Keep Hasankeyf Alive, a collation of activists and 86 organi-
zations from the regions to be affected by the Ilısu dam, submitted a report to be 
considered in the CESCR’s forty-fourth pre-sessional working group. The report 
concluded that the flooding of Hasankeyf and the surrounding Tigris Valley would 
constitute a violation of Articles 11, 12, and 15 of the ICESCR:

With regards to the population affected by dam construction in Turkey 
and specifically by the Ilisu dam project, we have to conclude that the 
State party has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 11 of the Cove-
nant, concerning the rights to an adequate standard of living, including 
adequate food and housing, and to the continuous improvement of 
living conditions. We also conclude that the State party has failed to fulfil 
its obligation under Article 12 of the Covenant, concerning the right to 
the highest attainable standard of health … We also question Turkey’s 
claim that the protection of the historical, natural and cultural heritage 
is guaranteed by existing Turkish procedures and conclude that the State 
party has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 15 of the Covenant, 
concerning the right of everyone to take part in cultural life.61

Article 15 does not explicitly mention heritage rights. However, the CESCR 
adopted General Comment no. 21 on Article 15 in its forty-third session in 2009, 
which recognizes the right to heritage as part of the right to take part in cultural 
life.62 The Comment emphasizes states parties’ obligations to guarantee the right of 
everyone, individually or in association with others, to access to, and benefit from, 
their own heritage and that of others. It requests states parties to respect the rights 
of Indigenous groups and minorities to their culture and heritage and to protect the 
cultural heritage of all groups in economic development programs.

58Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) 2009, para. 663.
59CESCR 2009, 138, para. 661.
60CESCR 2009, 134, para. 639.
61Initiative to Keep Hasankeyf Alive and CounterCurrent 2010, 2.
62General Comment no. 21.

24 

BAHAR AYKAN

The report by CounterCurrent and the Initiative to Keep Hasankeyf Alive specifi-
cally refers to this content of General Comment no. 21.63 It states that the flooding 
of Hasankeyf and the surrounding Tigris Valley is in direct contradiction with 
the Turkish government’s claim in its initial report that Turkish law guarantees the 
protection of cultural heritage. In addition, the report highlights that the destruc-
tion of Hasankeyf would constitute a violation of the heritage rights of the local 
population as protected under Article 15 of the ICESCR, explaining that for the 
majority of the affected population Hasankeyf should be preserved as part of their 
right to access their cultural heritage. It specifically argues that the destruction of 
Hasankeyf would breach Turkey’s obligations to respect and protect cultural heri-
tage at all times; to ensure, and not to intervene in, everyone’s right to access their 
cultural goods; and to take part freely in decision making with respect to matters 
affecting their heritage.

The CESCR took this into consideration in its forty-fourth pre-sessional working 
group, which was held in May 2010. In the list of issues to be taken up in connec-
tion with the consideration of Turkey’s report, the Committee asked Turkey to 
indicate the “policies and measures [it] has undertaken to ensure that the Covenant 
rights  of  people  affected  by  large  infrastructure  construction  projects,  including 
the Ilısu Dam, are protected.”64 The Turkish government replied in November  
2010, explaining that the resettlement action plan for the Ilısu dam, which was 
prepared in 2005 by the National Water Administration, details “the establishment 
of the villages and/or districts that were affected by this action plan, the affected 
population, the number of households, the selection of new residential areas and 
activities aimed at increasing the living standards and income levels in these new 
residential areas.”65

In March 2011, CounterCurrent, in corporation with the Initiative to Keep 
Hasankeyf  Alive  as  well  as  Doğa  Derneği  and  five  other  local  NGOs  from  the 
affected region, submitted yet another report to be considered by the CESCR’s 
forty-sixth  session.66  This  time,  the  report  included  seven  case  studies  from 
across Turkey to demonstrate how the construction of dams and hydroelectric 
power plants violate Articles 11, 12, and 15 of the ICESCR. With respect to the 
latter, it argued that the Ilısu dam threatened a “tremendous” cultural heritage 
and concluded once more that the destruction of Hasankeyf, despite the oppo-
sition from local populations and without assessing possible alternatives, would 
violate the right to take part in cultural life:

While the Turkish government has promised to save Hasankeyf by trans-
posing some of the monuments to an archaeological park, international 
experts came to the conclusion in 2009 that there was no proof of the 

63Initiative to Keep Hasankeyf Alive and CounterCurrent 2010, 6–7.
64CESCR 2012, 4, para. 26.
65CESCR 2010, 27, para. 131.
66CounterCurrent 2011.

SAVING HASANKEYF 

25

feasibility of these plans; according to the International Council on 
Monuments  and  Sites  Turkey  (ICOMOS)  most  of  the  monuments 
even cannot be transposed without causing serious damages. This means 
that the cultural goods will be submerged and inaccessible if construc-
tion is continued. In the affected region and throughout Turkey, there is 
widespread opposition against the flooding of Hasankeyf due to its cul-
tural significance. The affected population insists that Hasankeyf must 
be preserved in situ in order to provide access to its cultural heritage. 
An alternative plan to build five smaller dams instead of the big Ilısu dam 
which would save Hasankeyf was presented by scientists from the Middle 
East Technical University in Ankara, but has been ignored by the State 
authorities.67

The  issue  was  also  raised  during  the  forty-sixth  session  when  the  CESCR 
requested further explanations as to how the resettlement plan would increase the 
living standards of the evicted population, what the environmental impacts of the 
project would be, and what kind of measures were envisaged to protect the cul-
tural heritage of the affected region?68 In summing up the government’s view on 
the issue, Ali Onaner, the former head of the Human Rights Department of the 
Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, explained that one of the government’s prin-
cipal aims in the dam’s construction was to promote economic development in 
the southeastern regions.69 Without giving direct answers to the aforementioned 
inquiries, he instead claimed that “the benefits brought by the energy generated 
by the dam would enhance the economic, social and cultural rights of many of the 
inhabitants of the region in question.”70

In the concluding observations, the CESCR sided with the NGO groups. It expressed 
deep concerns over the potential impact of the Ilısu dam on the enjoyment of rights 
under the ICESCR and urged the government to “take account of a human-rights 
based approach” in its dam projects.71 In its short reply to the concluding observa-
tions, however, the government chose not to mention the issue.72 Since Turkey has 
not yet submitted its second periodic report that was due in July 2016, the issue has 
not been further addressed by the CESCR since then, leaving it entirely in the gov-
ernment’s hands. Moreover, because Turkey did not ratify the Optional Protocol 
to the ICESCR, which entered into force in 2013, the committee cannot examine 
complaints from individuals alleging Turkey’s covenant violations.73 Yet, even if 
such communication was possible and if the committee decided that Turkey’s Ilısu 
project violated the Covenant’s rights, the committee can only give recommendations, 
without enforcement and binding effect.

67CounterCurrent 2011, 34.
68CESCR 2011c.
69CESCR 2011d, 3, para. 13.
70CESCR 2011d, 3, para. 14.
71CESCR 2011b, 7, para. 26.
72CESCR 2011a.
73Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, UN 
Doc. A/RES/63/117, 10 December 2008.

26 

BAHAR AYKAN

Hasankeyf before the ECtHR

Another legal attempt to link the destruction of Hasankeyf to international human 
rights law is the ongoing lawsuit before the ECtHR, whose judgment was pending 
as of October 2017. Two things make this attempt noteworthy. First of all, Turkey 
ratified the ECHR in 1954, and unlike in the case of CESCR, the ECtHR’s judg-
ments are fully binding, and Turkey is obliged to execute them. Second, since the 
ECHR mentions neither cultural rights nor heritage rights, the lawsuit is notable in 
its attempt to interpret the Convention with a view to further expand its scope with 
respect to heritage rights. Özcan Yüksek provides this explanation:

We filed this lawsuit by linking the case of Hasankeyf to human rights. 
People are not only exposed to physical torture, they may face cultural 
torture as well. The destruction of a person’s cultural heritage should 
also be considered a violation of human rights.74

While the Convention does not recognize the right to culture or heritage, this 
does not mean that the question of cultural rights has no weight in the ECtHR’s 
decisions.  The  2011  report  of  the  ECtHR’s  Research  Division  on  cultural  rights 
addresses this issue in particular, explaining that the Court’s case law has evolved 
over time toward a gradual recognition of “substantive rights which may fall under 
the notion of ‘cultural rights’ in a broad sense,” particularly in the areas of artistic 
expression, cultural identity, access to culture, linguistic rights, education, historical 
truth, academic  freedom,  and  cultural  and  natural  heritage.75  The  report  details 
the Court’s approach to the latter under a special section entitled “Right to the 
Protection of Cultural and Natural Heritage.”76 This section analyzes a series of 
court decisions concerning  property  rights  enshrined  in  Article  1  of  Protocol 
no. 1, where the applicants complained of the expropriation of heritage objects 
or buildings by the state for a public use.77 In such cases, the Court recognized 
cultural heritage as a universal value of humanity. It stressed that protecting cul-
tural heritage and allowing the public to have access to it are legitimate aims of the 
state when interfering with individual rights. In its Grand Chamber judgment in 
Kozacıoğlu  v.  Turkey,  for instance, the Court highlighted the importance of the 
protection of cultural heritage by public authorities:

The Court points out … that the conservation of the cultural heritage and, 
where appropriate, its sustainable use, have as their aim, in addition 
to the maintenance of a certain quality of life, the preservation of the 
historical, cultural and artistic roots of a region and its inhabitants. 

74Quoted  in  “Hasankeyf  için  Avrupa’dan  Büyük  Umut”  [“A  Major  Hope  from  Europe  for 
Hasankeyf”],  Magma  Dergisi,  15  December  2015,  http://www.magmadergisi.com/direndoga/
hasankeyf-icin-avrupadan-buyuk-umut (accessed 7 April 2017).
75European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) 2011, 4, paras. 1–2.
76ECtHR 2011, 31–33, paras. 78–84.
77Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms Protocol No. 1 - 
Protection of Property (Article 1), https://rm.coe.int/168007b031 (accessed 7 April 2017).

SAVING HASANKEYF 

27

As such, they are an essential value, the protection and promotion of 
which are incumbent on the public authorities.78

In March 2006, Zeynep Ahunbay (professor of restoration architecture at Istanbul 
Technical University who conducted excavation and restoration work in Hasankeyf 
between 1998 and 2000); Oluş Arık (professor of archeology and art history who 
organized and conducted excavations in Hasankeyf between 1985 and 2003); Metin 
Ahunbay (retired architect-archeologist who carried out excavation and restora-
tion work in Hasankeyf between 1986 and 1991 and 1998 and 2001); Özcan Yüksek 
(journalist and ex-editor in chief of a prominent Turkish travel and geography  
magazine  called Atlas);  and  Murat  Cano  (lawyer  at  the  Istanbul  Bar  special-
izing in cultural heritage law) filed an appeal with the ECtHR against Turkey, 
Austria, and Germany.79 The applicants also requested the Court to prioritize 
the case to speed up its resolution and to indicate an interim measure to the 
Turkish government for suspending the construction of the Ilısu dam during 
the examination of the case.

According to the rules of the ECHR, only individuals who are personally and  
directly a victim of a violation of the ECHR can lodge a complaint before the ECtHR. 
The applicants claimed that due to Hasankeyf’s utmost historical and scientific 
importance, they have the status of victim because, just as the rest of humanity, 
they would personally suffer from the destruction of Hasankeyf.80 In their applica-
tion, they requested the cancelation of the Ilısu dam project by the ECtHR on the 
grounds that Hasankeyf constitutes a common heritage of both present and future 
generations of Europe, and its destruction would breach their right to understand, 
maintain, and access cultural heritage. Zeynep Ahunbay further explains why they 
chose to take the issue before the ECtHR:

For instance, Hasankeyf was a very important castle during the Roman 
Period. This means it is not only part of Islamic culture, but also part of 
European culture. We formulated our case emphasizing how [Hasankeyf] 
constitutes heritage of all the European people … When we saw that 
there was no solution in Turkey, we applied to the ECtHR arguing that 
both present and future generations have the right to this heritage. They 
have to see it, understand it, learn from it. It is important to recognize 
the right to access to cultural heritage. Therefore a project that deprives 
people of all these should be considered a violation of human rights.81

The applicants invoked several articles under the ECHR to justify their position. 
They argued that the destruction of Hasankeyf would be a violation of the Conven-
tion’s Article 1 (obligation to respect human rights) and Article 2 (right to life). 
While the latter strictly refers to the biological sense of the term—that is, to be 

78ECtHR 2011, 33, para. 81.
79ECtHR, Ahunbay and Others v. Turkey, Austria and Germany, Application no. 6080/06, 3 March 
2006.
80ECtHR 2016, 29, para. 86.
81Personal communication with Zeynep Ahunbay, 27 February 2017.

28 

BAHAR AYKAN

alive82—the applicants claimed that Article 2 should have a more inclusive meaning 
to encapsulate not only the physical, but also the cultural, survival of human beings, 
guaranteeing the protection of “human values and the need to pass them on to 
future generations.”83 They further claimed that Hasankeyf’s destruction would be a 
breach of their rights under Article 5 (right to liberty and security), Article 9 (freedom 
of thought, conscience and religion), and Article 10 (freedom of expression).

In fact, none of these articles give an explicit reference to cultural heritage. 
Article 5 defines the deprivation of liberty and security of a person strictly in judi-
cial terms, while the other two articles do not mention cultural values, beliefs, 
or expressions as an aspect of freedom of thought and expression. The applicants 
argued that the right to heritage should be considered an inherent part of these 
rights and called for expanding their scope to cover the right to freely share and 
transmit cultural values and information.84 Lastly, drawing on Article 2 of Protocol 
no.1 (right to education), the applicants argued that the destruction of a piece 
of archaeological heritage of thousands of years, which should rather be subject to 
permanent study, would violate both the present and future generations’ right 
to learn and study cultural heritage.85 In the words of Murat Cano,

[o]ur case file is very powerful. While none of the Convention’s Articles 
directly protect heritage rights, we interpreted them in such a way that 
heritage rights became part of the right to life, the right to education, the 
prohibition of discrimination, and so forth … The right to life shouldn’t 
be understood solely as physical or biological survival. The right to ed-
ucation  shouldn’t  be  restricted  to  curriculums  …  Destroying  cultural 
heritage, preventing people from accessing it, all these crimes against 
cultural heritage are in fact crimes against the humanity.86

The ECtHR accepted the case in July 2006 but declined the requests for urgent 
examination and interim measures. It asked the Turkish government to inform it 
urgently on the measures taken to protect Hasankeyf. In its very long and detailed 
reply, the government argued for the inadmissibility of the complaint, stating that 
because the allegations did not concern the rights defined in the ECtHR, the Court 
could not examine the subject matter.87 The government’s reply also acknowledged 
the significance of Hasankeyf’s heritage, explaining that US $80 million had been 
allocated to relocate all movable archeological material to a nearby cultural park. 
Claiming to have the authority to decide “in such situations where the balance 
between the preservation of history and the region’s economic enrichment should 

82Santosuosso 2009, 345.
83ECtHR 2016, 30, para. 88.
84ECtHR 2016, 30, para. 88.
85ECtHR 2016, 30, para. 87.
86Personal communication with Murat Cano, 6 October 2016.
87“Hükümetten Hasankeyf İçin AİHM’e 6.5 Kiloluk Savunma” [“6.5 kilos of defense from the gov-
ernment to the ECtHR for Hasankeyf”], Haberler News Portal, 9 January 2007 http://www.haberler.
com/hukumetten-hasankeyf-icin-aihm-e-6-5-kiloluk-haberi/ (accessed 7 April 2017).

SAVING HASANKEYF 

29

be considered in favor of wider public good,” the government stated that the public 
benefits of the Ilısu dam would outweigh the destruction of Hasankeyf because 
the GAP project, which would bring increased economic prosperity to the region, 
could not be completed without it.88

No verdict came from the ECtHR for nearly a decade, while the construction of 
the dam continued. In 2015, the applicants resubmitted to the Court their request 
to prioritize the case, which was accepted this time. Finally, a decision came from the 
ECtHR in June 2016. It declared the complaints against Austria and Germany inad-
missible, stating that the Turkish government was responsible for all of the disputed 
measures  and  legal  proceedings.89  The  Court  further  decided  that  the  applicants’ 
complaints against Turkey fell within the scope of Article 8 (the right to respect for 
private and family life) and Article 10 (the right to freedom of expression) in isola-
tion or in combination.90 It subsequently gave notice to the Turkish government 
and  invited  it  to  submit  written  observations  on  the  matter  in  accordance  with 
Rule no. 54, paragraph 2(b), of the Rules of Court before issuing a final judgment 
on whether the case of Hasankeyf violates Articles 8 and/or 10.91 The government 
requested extra time to submit its observations to the Court, which was granted 
until 15 January 2017.92 While the Court’s judgment is still pending, according to 
Murat Cano, there is hope that Hasankeyf may be saved:

The Court’s [July 2016] decision is just wonderful! It is thirty-seven pages 
long, a common decision of ten judges. I wouldn’t write it differently.  It 
shows the importance of international law; it carries the issue to a universal 
level … It accepts our arguments, mentions one by one all the relevant 
Conventions ratified by Turkey, and then asks, what did you do to pro-
tect this site and how will you protect it from now on?93

CONCLUSION

Examined together, these two attempts to save Hasankeyf demonstrate not only 
the limits, but also the possibilities, of international human rights law in prevent-
ing heritage from being destroyed by state-led action. The irreversible loss of this 
ancient city could constitute a violation of human rights under the ICESCR and 
the ECHR. Both the CESCR and the ECtHR have moved toward recognizing her-
itage rights as part of human rights in recent years. The ECtHR’s acknowledgment of 
heritage rights in its case law and the CESCR’s adoption of General Comment no. 21, 

88“Hükümetten Hasankeyf.”
89ECtHR 2016, 31, para. 94.
90ECtHR 2016, 32, para. 95.
91ECtHR, Rules of Court, http://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Rules_Court_ENG.pdf (accessed 7 April 
2017).
92Personal communication with Zeynep Ahunbay, 27 February 2017.
93Personal communication with Murat Cano, 6 October 2016.

30 

BAHAR AYKAN

which refers to heritage rights as an aspect of the right to take part in cultural life, 
are  illustrative  of  this  trend.  In  addition,  while  the  ECtHR  does  not  specifically 
refer to cultural rights or heritage rights, the fact that it dismissed the inadmissibility 
claims by the Turkish government and decided to examine the case as a violation of 
human rights is notable. The same goes for the CESCR that decided to support the 
claims of the activists and NGO groups and called for Turkey to adopt a rights-based 
approach in its dam projects.

At  the  same  time,  the  CESCR’s  case  shows  that  this  recognition  of  heritage 
rights by international human rights frameworks might not always translate into 
practice. One major obstacle is the lack of enforcement in the UN’s human rights 
instruments due to their “soft law” character. Yet, as Blake aptly explains, despite 
its shortcomings, human rights law still constitutes one of the most effective avail-
able  tools  to  curtail  state  dominance  in  the  administration  and  implementation 
of international law because it is the only area of international law in which states 
have accepted fully binding obligations and allowed international regulation to 
interfere  between  the  state  and  its  citizens.94  The  ECHR  is  one  example,  as  it 
permits citizens to bring before the ECtHR individual rights complaints against 
their governments, and the judgments are legally binding and enforceable on the 
governments. Although it was slow in coming, the Court’s decision on Hasankeyf 
is promising. One need not give up hope.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ahunbay, Zeynep. 2008. “Hasankeyf, a Site Threatened by the Ilısu Dam Project.” In Heritage at Risk: 
ICOMOS World Report 2006–2007 on Monuments and Sites in Danger, edited by M. Petzet and J. Ziesemer, 
156–57. Altenburg: E. Reinhold Verlag.

Ahunbay, Zeynep, and Özge Balkız. 2009. “Outstanding Universal Value of Hasankeyf and the 
Tigris Valley.” Doğa Derneği. http://www.dogadernegi.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Outstanding-
universal-value-of-hasankeyf-and-the-tigris-valley.pdf (accessed 7 April 2017).

Anico, Marta, and Elsa Peralta, eds. 2009. Heritage and Identity: Engagement and Demission in the 
Contemporary World. Abingdon: Routledge.

Ashworth, G. J., Brian Graham, and J. E. Tunbridge. 2007. Pluralising Pasts: Heritage, Identity and 
Place in Multicultural Societies. London: Pluto Press.

Atakuman, Çiğdem. 2010. “Value of Heritage in Turkey: History and Politics of Turkey’s World 
Heritage Nominations.” Journal of Mediterranean Archaeology 23, no. 1: 107–131.

Blake, Janet. 2009. “UNESCO’s 2003 Convention on Intangible Cultural Heritage: The Implications of 
Community Involvement in ‘Safeguarding.’” In Intangible Heritage, edited by L. Smith and N. Akagawa, 
45–73. New York: Routledge.

Blake, Janet. 2011. “Taking a Human Rights Approach to Cultural Heritage Protection.” Heritage and 
Society 4, no. 2: 199–238.

94Blake 2011, 231.

SAVING HASANKEYF 

31

Bosshard, Peter. 1999. “A Test Case of International Policy Coherence: A Case Study of the Ilisu 
Hydropower  Project  (Turkey).”  https://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm199900/cmselect/
cmtrdind/200/200ap07.htm (accessed 8 April 2017).

Brown, Michael F. 2005. “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work on the Protection of Intangible Cultural 
Property.”  12, no. 1: 40–61.

Çevik, Adnan. 2012. “Hasankeyf: The Capital of Civilizations.” Doğa Derneği. http://www.dogadernegi.
org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Hasankeyf-The-Capital-of-Civilizations.pdf (accessed 8 April 2017).

CESCR. 2009. “Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights, Initial Reports Submitted by States Parties under Articles 16 and 17 of the Covenant, Turkey,” Doc. 
E/C.12/TUR/1, http://www.refworld.org/docid/4d8b2f072.html (accessed 7 April 2017).

CESCR. 2010. “Replies by the Government of Turkey to the List of Issues.” Doc. E/C.12/TUR/Q/1. 
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC.12%2f
TUR%2fQ%2f1%2fADD.1&Lang=en (accessed 7 April 2017).

CESCR. 2011a. “Comments by the Government of Turkey on the Concluding Observations of the 
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.” Doc. E/C.12/TUR/CO/1. http://tbinternet.
ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC.12%2fTUR%2fCO%2f1
%2fADD.1&Lang=en (accessed 7 April 2017).

CESCR. 2011b. “Concluding Observations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights,  Turkey.”  Doc.  E/C.12/TUR/CO/1.  http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/
Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC.12%2fTUR%2fCO%2f1&Lang=en (accessed 7 April 2017).

CESCR. 2011c. “Forty-Sixth Session Summary Record of the Fourth Meeting.” Doc. E/C.12/2011/
SR.4. http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC. 
12%2f2011%2fSR.4&Lang=en (accessed 7 April 2017).

CESCR. 2011d. “Forty-Sixth Session Summary Record of the Fifth Meeting.” Doc. E/C.12/2011/SR.5. 
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=E%2fC.12%2f2011%
2fSR.5&Lang=en (accessed 7 April 2017).

CESCR. 2012. “List of Issues to Be Taken Up in Connection with the Consideration of the Initial 
Report  of  Turkey.”  Doc.  CCPR/C/TUR/1,  4  May.  http://www.refworld.org/docid/506437672.html 
(accessed 7 April 2017).

CounterCurrent. 2011. “Dam Construction in Turkey and Its Impact on Economic, Cultural and Social 
Rights.” http://www.gegenstroemung.org/drupal/sites/default/files/CESCR_Parallel%20report%20
by%20CounterCurrent%20on%20Turkish%20dams_2011-03-15.pdf (accessed 7 April 2017).

Eberlein, Christine, Heike Drillisch, Ercan Ayboga, and Thomas Wenidoppler. 2010. “The Ilisu Dam 
in Turkey and the Role of Export Credit Agencies and NGO Networks.” Water Alternatives 3, no. 2: 
291–312.

ECtHR. 2011. “Cultural Rights in the Case-law of the European Court of Human Rights.” Research 
Division.  http://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Research_report_cultural_rights_ENG.pdf  (accessed 
7 April 2017).

ECtHR.  2016.  Deuxième  Section  Décision  Requête  no  6080/06.  http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng# 
{“fulltext”:[“ahunbay”],”documentcollectionid2”:[“DECGRANDCHAMBER”,”ADMISSIBILITY”,” 
ADMISSIBILITYCOM”],”itemid”:[“001-165187”]} https://hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng#{“appno”:[“6080/06”],” 
itemid”:[“001-165187”]} (accessed 7 April 2017).

32 

BAHAR AYKAN

Ekern, Stener, William Logan, Birgitte Sauge, and Amund Sinding-Larsen, eds. 2015a. World Heritage 
Management and Human Rights. London: Routledge.

Ekern,  Stener,  William  Logan,  Birgitte  Sauge,  and  Amund  Sinding-Larsen.  2015b.  “Human 
Rights and World Heritage: Preserving Our Common Dignity through Rights-Based Approaches to 
Site Management.” In World Heritage Management and Human Rights, edited by S. Ekern, W. Logan, 
B. Sauge, and A. Sinding-Larsen, 1–13. London: Routledge.

Graham, Brian, and Peter Howard, eds. 2008. The Ashgate Research Companion to Heritage and Identity. 
Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing.

Hann, C. M., ed. 1998. Property Relations: Renewing the Anthropological Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.

Harrison, Simon. 1999. “Identity as a Scarce Resource.” Social Anthropology 7, no. 3: 239–51.

Hildyard, Nicholas, Antonio Tricarico, Sally Eberhardt, Heike Drillisch, and Douglas Norlen. 2000. 
“The Ilisu Dam, the World Commission on Dams and Export Credit Reform.” Corner House. http://
www.thecornerhouse.org.uk/resource/ilisu-dam-world-commission-dams-and-export-credit-
reform (accessed 8 April 2017).

Hirsch, Eric, and Marilyn Strathern, eds. 2004. Transactions and Creations: Property Debates and the 
Stimulus of Melanesia. New York: Berghahn Books.

Hodder, Ian. 2010. “Cultural Heritage Rights: From Ownership and Descent to Justice and Well-being.” 
Anthropological Quarterly 83, no. 4: 861–82.

Humphrey,  Caroline,  and  Katherine  Verdery.  2004.  “Introduction:  Raising  Questions  about 
Property.” In Property in Question: Value Transformation in the Global Economy, edited by K. Verdery and 
C. Humphrey, 1–28. Oxford: Berg.

Ignatieff, Michael. 2001. “Human Rights as Politics.” In Human Rights as Politics and Idolatry, 
edited by A. Gutmann, 3–52. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Initiative to Keep Hasankeyf Alive and CounterCurrent. 2010. “Proposed Questions to the Govern-
ment of the Republic of Turkey Regarding Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the Population  
Affected by Large Dams, Notably the Ilisu Hydropower Plant.” http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/
CESCR/Shared%20Documents/TUR/INT_CESCR_NGO_TUR_44_10183_E.pdf (accessed 7 April 2017).

Jakubowski, Andrzej, ed. 2016. Cultural Rights as Collective Rights: An International Law Perspective. 
Leiden: Brill.

Langfield, Michele, William Logan, and Máiréad Nic Craith, eds. 2010. Cultural Diversity, Heritage 
and Human Rights: Intersections in Theory and Practice. Abingdon: Routledge.

Logan, William S. 2007. “Closing Pandora’s Box: Human Rights Conundrums in Cultural Heritage 
Protection.” In Cultural Heritage and Human Rights, edited by H. Silverman and D. F. Ruggles, 33–52. 
New York: Springer.

Logan, William S. 2014. “Heritage Rights: Avoidance and Reinforcement.” Heritage and Society 7, 
no. 2: 156–69.

Logan, William. 2016. “Collective Cultural Rights in Asia: Recognition and Enforcement.” In Cultural 
Rights as Collective Rights: An International Law Perspective, edited by A. Jakubowski, 180–203. Leiden: 
Brill.

SAVING HASANKEYF 

33

Marko, Joseph. 2008. “Constitutional Recognition of Ethnic Difference: Towards an Emerging Euro-
pean Minimum Standard?” In The Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities: 
A Useful Pan-European Instrument?, edited by A. Verstichel, A. Alen, B. De Witte, and P. Lemmens, 
19–32. Antwerpen: Intersentia.

Meskell, Lynn. 2010. “Human Rights and Heritage Ethics.” Anthropological Quarterly 83, no. 4: 
839–60.

Öktem, Kerem. 2002. “When Dams Are Built on Shaky Grounds: Policy Choice and Social Performance 
of Hydro-Project Based Development in Turkey.” Erdkunde 56, no. 3: 310–25.

Philp, Janette. 2010. “The Political Appropriation of Burma’s Cultural Heritage and Its Implications 
for Human Rights.” In Cultural Diversity, Heritage and Human Rights: Intersections in Theory and 
Practice, edited by M. Langfield, W. Logan, and M. Nic Craith, 83–100. Abingdon: Routledge.

Rowlands, Michael. 2004. “Cultural Rights and Wrongs: Uses of the Concept of Property.” In Property 
in Question: Value Transformation in the Global Economy, edited by K. Verdery and C. Humphrey, 
207–26. Oxford: Berg.

Santosuosso, Amedeo. 2009. “Reasonableness in Biolaw: Is It Necessary?” In Reasonableness and Law, 
edited by G. Bongiovanni, G. Sartor, and C. Valentini, 351–62. London: Springer.

Scheumann, Waltina. 2008. “How Global Norms for Large Dams Reach Decision-Makers.” In Water 
Politics and Development Cooperation: Local Power Plays and Global Governance, edited by W. Scheumann, 
S. Neubert, and M. Kipping, 55–80. New York: Springer.

Shoup, Daniel. 2006. “Can Archeology Build a Dam? Sites and Politics in Turkey’s Southeast Anatolia 
Project.” Journal of Mediterranean Archeology 19, no. 2: 231–58.

Silverman, Helaine, and D. Fairchild Ruggles, eds. 2007a. Cultural Heritage and Human Rights. 
New York: Springer.

Silverman, Helaine, and D. Fairchild Ruggles, eds. 2007b. “Cultural Heritage and Human Rights.” 
In Cultural Heritage and Human Rights, edited by H. Silverman and D. F. Ruggles, 3–22. New York: 
Springer.

Sinding-Larsen, Amund. 2015. “Lhasa Community, World Heritage and Human Rights.” In World 
Heritage Management and Human Rights, edited by S. Ekern, W. Logan, B. Sauge, and A. Sinding-
Larsen, 85–94. London: Routledge.

Smith, Laurajane. 2006. Uses of Heritage. Abingdon: Routledge.

Starr, Fiona. 2013. Corporate Responsibility for Cultural Heritage: Conservation, Sustainable Development, 
and Corporate Reputation. New York: Routledge.

Tavani, Claudia. 2012. Collective Rights and the Cultural Identity of the Roma: A Case Study of Italy. 
Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

Topal,  Tamer,  and  Yavuz  Kaya.  2016.  “Assessment  of  Deterioration  and  Collapse  Mechanisms  of 
Dolomitic Limestone at Hasankeyf Antique City before and after Reservoir Impounding (Turkey).” 
Environmental Earth Sciences 75: 131.

UNESCO. 2015. “Policy for the Integration of a Sustainable Development Perspective into the 
Processes of the World Heritage Convention.” Doc WHC-15/20.GA/INF.13. http://whc.unesco.
org/document/139146 (accessed 7 April 2017).

34 

BAHAR AYKAN

Warner, Jeroen. 2012. “The Struggle over Turkey’s Ilısu Dam: Domestic and International Security 
Linkages.” International Environmental Agreements 12: 231–50.

Ween, Gro B. 2015. “World Heritage and Indigenous Rights: Norwegian Examples.” In World Heritage 
Management and Human Rights, edited by S. Ekern, W. Logan, B. Sauge, and A. Sinding-Larsen, 
45–58. London: Routledge.

Weiner, Annette B. 1992. Inalienable Possessions: The Paradox of Keeping-While-Giving. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.

Verdery, Katherine, and Caroline Humphrey, eds. 2004. Property in Question: Value Transformation 
in the Global Economy. Oxford: Berg.

Vrdoljak, Ana Filipa. 2006. International Law, Museums and the Return of Cultural Objects. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Zalasińska, Katarzyna, and Katarzyna Piotrowska. 2015. “Kalwaria Zebrzydowska Cultural Landscape.” 
In World Heritage Management and Human Rights, edited by S. Ekern, W. Logan, B. Sauge, and 
A. Sinding-Larsen, 95–103. London: Routledge.


