 International Journal of Cultural Property   (2015)   22:  131– 151 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2015 International Cultural Property Society 
 doi:10.1017/S0940739115000041 

                 

    Indonesia’s Implementation of Inventory 
Obligation under UNESCO’s Intangible 
Cultural Heritage Convention: Problems 
in the Online Inventories 
       Rangga     Dachlan   *   

   

         Abstract:     Article 12 of the Convention on the Safeguarding of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage, 2003, provides that the States Parties are under obligation at 
the national level to draw up one or more inventories of the intangible cultural 
heritage present in their respective territories. Indonesia has been a State Party to 
the Convention since 2007, but until now, no specific law on intangible cultural 
heritage has been enacted. In 2010, the Indonesian Ministry of Education 
and Culture, jointly with UNESCO, published the Practical Handbook for 
Inventory of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Indonesia. With the legal vacuum, 
the Handbook became a source for guidelines on the implementation of the 
inventory obligation in Indonesia; it provides that there shall be a manual 
inventory and an online inventory. However, in practice, there are two web 
sites functioning as online inventories, and the contents of the two web sites do 
not seem to reflect one of the Convention’s purposes, which is awareness. This 
article scrutinizes the contents of the publicly accessible online inventories and 
finds that the absence of statutory regulation has resulted in difficulties for those 
inventories to fulfill the purpose of awareness as mandated by the Convention.      

   I.     THE INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE CONVENTION 

IN INDONESIAN LAW 

 In  2003,  at  its  32nd  session,  the  General  Assembly  of  the  United  Nations 
Educational,  Scientific,  and  Cultural  Organization  (hereinafter  “UNESCO”) 
adopted the Convention on the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage 

  *  Faculty of Law ,  Universitas Gadjah Mada ,  Republic of Indonesia . Email:  rdachlan@ugm.ac.id  

131

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 132   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

(hereinafter “ICHC” or “Convention”).  1   The Convention was the first interna-
tionally binding instrument centering on the protection of intangible cultural 
heritage (hereinafter “ICH”), which includes musical works, dances, rituals, and 
ceremonies, as well as all the tangible elements associated with them,  2   and to this 
day it remains the only treaty focused on the subject. For a multilateral treaty, the 
ICHC is very successful: as of May 2014 it had 161 States Parties  3   and counting. 
The Convention focuses on “safeguarding,” which it defines as:

  [M]easures aimed at ensuring the viability of the intangible cultural 
heritage, including the identification, documentation, research, preser-
vation, protection, promotion, enhancement, transmission, particularly 
through formal and non-formal education, as well as the revitalization of 
the various aspects of such heritage.  4    

  The core of the Convention is a series of interconnected activities to ensure for ICH 
not only survival, but also sustainability. The Convention intends for ICH to be 
maintained by (to “live” among) the peoples, and to be inheritable to their future 
generations. 

 The safeguarding-centric obligations binding upon the States Parties under the 
Convention are two-tiered: obligations at the national level and those at the inter-
national level. At the national level, States Parties are expected to,  inter alia , draw 
up one or more inventories listing all identified elements of ICH that are present 
in their respective territories. At the international level, they are,  inter alia , encour-
aged to nominate their items (“elements”) of ICH for inscription—depending 
on the situation with respect to each element—on one of the lists: the Represen-
tative List of the ICH of Humanity  5   (hereinafter “Representative List”) or the List 
of ICH in Need of Urgent Safeguarding  6   (hereinafter “Urgent Safeguarding List”). 
 Indonesia  delivered  its  instrument  of  acceptance  of  the  ICHC  to  UNESCO 
on  October  15,  2007,  7    and  the  Convention  entered  into  force  for  the  State  on 
January 15, 2008.  8   For implementation of this Convention at the national level, the 
Presidential Regulation 78 of 2007 was enacted.  9   This is a peculiar move, because 
Article 11 of the Indonesian Treaty Act provides that Presidential Regulations shall 
be enacted for implementation of treaties at the national level only in cases where 
the treaty in question does not belong in any of the following categories of treaty 
subject to adoption by an Act under Article 10:  10  
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
  The ICHC should have been treated as a treaty under (d), because one of its most 
determined goals is to ensure the right of the relevant communities or groups 

  a.       Political affairs, national peace, defense, and security;  
  b.       Modification to or determination of the Indonesian national territory;  
  c.       Sovereignty and the sovereign rights of the State;  
  d.       Human rights and the environment;  
  e.       Enactment of a new legal norm; and  
  f.       Foreign loans and/or grants.   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    133 

or individuals to partake in the management of their ICH.  11   Indonesia has yet 
to enact a specific statutory regulation with respect to ICH. There is Act 11 of 
2010,  12    enacted  in  repeal  of  Act  5  of  1992,  13    on  cultural  objects,  but  neither 
it nor its 1992 predecessor affords any protection for intangible culture, as they 
focus on cultural sites and objects, i.e., the  tangible . Acceptance of the ICHC by 
Indonesia therefore should have presented an opportunity for the State to enact a 
new legal norm specifically in order to deal with the safeguarding of ICH; to adopt 
the Convention by means of an act, instead of a presidential regulation, would have 
been more consistent. However, Indonesia’s inconsistent practice with respect 
to national instruments implementing treaties at the national level  14   suggests 
that even though it was adopted via Presidential Regulation, it was nevertheless still 
possible for the ICHC to inspire the enactment of a new law specifically on ICH. 
In 2009, the Joint Regulation by Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for 
Culture and Tourism numbers 40 and 42 on Guidelines to the Conservation of 
Culture (hereinafter “Joint Ministerial Regulation”) was issued. While the Joint 
Ministerial Regulation indeed takes the ICHC into consideration  15   and defines 
inventorying as a necessary activity in the conservation of culture,  16   it does not 
specify  how  an inventory should be drawn up and  what  information should be 
provided on it. So far, no institution under either ministry has issued any regula-
tory document on the drawing up of national ICH inventory. This means that, 
on the one hand, there is a clear international obligation for Indonesia as a State 
Party to the ICHC, but that, on the other hand, there is a lacuna in Indonesian 
law as to how that obligation should be carried out. 

 This apparent gap in the law was allegedly caused by a consistent lack of funding 
for the cultural sector.  17   The enactment of new legislation would be consequent 
of the establishment of State agencies for the implementation thereof; in this case 
there would be (a) committee(s) which would oversee the safeguarding of ICH 
in Indonesia and make sure the State fulfills its national obligation under the 
Convention. It is ironic that the government seems to perceive cultural affairs as 
an afterthought, because since 2008, tourism has been the second biggest contrib-
utor to the Indonesian national income after the export of natural resources,  18   and 
cultural tourism is an elemental part thereof. With the 2014 national budget not 
seeming to allocate a specific portion of spending for cultural affairs,  19   one might 
be inclined to conclude that no such regulation concerning ICH would be enacted 
any time soon, even though the State already has enough motivations to do so: it 
would be an effective means to ensure legal certainty for the protection of ICH as a 
vital part of the income source from cultural tourism, as well as show that Indonesia 
is wholesomely fulfilling its obligations under the ICHC.   

 II.     INDONESIA’S ICH INVENTORIES 

 The  drawing  up  of  inventories  of  intangible  cultural  heritage  by  Indonesia  had 
in  reality  been  done  long  before  the  ICHC.  20    Efforts  have  been  made  in  both  a 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 134   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

centralized and a non-centralized manner to list the elements of cultural heritage 
found in the respective areas. Before the entry into force of ICHC for Indonesia, 
the  ministry  had  already  prepared  an  ICH  Inventory  Unit  for  the  collection  of 
ICH  data  all  over  the  country.  21    Following  Indonesia’s  acceptance  of  the  ICHC 
the drawing up and maintenance of national inventory became organized under a 
different arrangement. 

 Pertinent  in  the  discourse  concerning  Indonesia’s  implementation  of  the 
inventory obligation under the ICHC is the Practical Handbook for Inventory of 
ICH of Indonesia (hereinafter “Handbook”). Published jointly by UNESCO and 
the Indonesian government following Indonesia’s acceptance of the ICHC,  22   the 
Handbook contains the result of a comparative study by the Indonesian govern-
ment toward implementing the inventory obligation under the ICHC, in which 
the respective Chinese, Japanese, and Korean inventories were studied, as well as 
guidelines for the establishment of national ICH inventories.  23   The absence of stat-
utory regulation with regard to ICH inventory in Indonesia makes the Handbook 
the go-to source—a “soft law”—for the implementation of the inventory obligation 
under the ICHC. 

 The  Handbook  provides  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  inventory  for  Indonesia: 
the  manual  inventory  and  the  online  inventory.  The  manual  inventory  shall  be 
filled with elements of ICH by anyone who has identified an element on Indone-
sian soil, completed a standard form, and submitted them to the  Sekretariat Pusat 
Pencatatan Warisan Budaya Takbenda Indonesia  (lit. “Central Secretariat for Doc-
umentation  of  the  ICH  of  Indonesia”)  under  the-then  Ministry  of  Culture  and 
Tourism (now Ministry of Culture, Primary and Secondary Education, hereinafter 
“Ministry”).  The  information  submitted  will  be  assessed  by  a  verification  team 
and, if all requirements are met, will be recorded in the inventory. This manual 
inventory is kept in the form of a database accessible to four categories of user: 
UNESCO (for documentation), government (for guidelines in policymaking), 
researchers, and the public.  24   

 It is not uncommon for ICHC States Parties to draw up online inventories of the 
ICH present in their respective territories;  25   the second variant of the Indonesian 
ICH inventory takes shape precisely in this online form. In fact, the initiative by 
Indonesia before the entry into force of ICHC was in the form of an online inven-
tory; a map of Indonesian culture was initiated as an ICH Inventory (ICHI) of 
Indonesia in 2004 by the Directorate for Art and Cultural Values and Film under 
the ministry. ICHI was planned for a 2008 launch, but in 2014 no trace thereof was 
found online.  26   

 In the Handbook it is provided that any member of the public may contribute to 
the identification of ICH present in the Indonesian soil by submitting a completed 
form (hereinafter “reporter” and “form,” respectively) on the web site  http://www.
budaya-indonesia.org   (hereinafter  “Online  Inventory  1”).  There  will  be  a  Super 
Administrator (indicated in the Handbook as an “Expert Team”), which will 
“finalize information regarding cultural elements to be inventoried as ICH.”  27   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    135 

The inventoried elements will be “published in the interactive page” and available 
to everyone who visits the web site.  28   

 The  web  site  seemingly  contains  elements  of  ICH  identified  as  present  on 
Indonesian territory. The elements are distributed under two classes:  Kategori  
(lit. “category”) or  Provinsi  (lit. “province”). As of November 30, 2014, under 
 Kategori , there are the following families containing clickable elements of cultural 
heritage:
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   

  •        Alat Musik  (lit. “musical instrument”), 600 elements;  
  •        Cerita Rakyat  (lit. “folktale”), 495 elements;  
  •        Makanan Minuman  (food and beverages), 1897 elements;  
  •        Motif Kain  (lit. “clothing motive”), 665 elements;  
  •        Musik dan Lagu  (lit. ‘music and song’), 531 elements;  
  •        Naskah Kuno dan Prasasti  (lit. “ancient scripture and inscription”), 121 elements;  
  •        Ornamen  (lit. “ornament”), 350 elements;  
  •        Pakaian Tradisional  (lit. “traditional clothing”), 190 elements;  
  •        Permainan Tradisional  (lit. “traditional game”), 189 elements;  
  •        Produk Arsitektur  (lit. “architectural product”), 479 elements;  
  •        Ritual  (lit. “rite”), 447 elements;  
  •        Seni Pertunjukan  (lit. “performance art”), 250 elements;  
  •        Senjata dan Alat Perang  (lit. “weapons and war equipment”), 150 elements;  
  •        Tarian  (lit. “dance”), 679 elements; and  
  •        Tata Cara Pengobatan dan Pemeliharaan Kesehatan  (lit. “medical and healthcare 

procedure”), 38 elements.   

   
  If  one  of  the  elements  is  clicked,  details  pertaining  thereto  would  be  revealed: 
 Kategori ,  Elemen Budaya  (lit. “cultural element,” but it often shows the same infor-
mation as  Kategori ),  Provinsi , and  Asal Daerah  (lit. “area of origin,” which basically 
is the more detailed area within the province). Under the four points is usually a 
description of what the element is, how it is used/maintained, etc., and in some 
cases, photographs showing the element in use/practice. As of November 30, 2014, 
Online Inventory 1 stores a total of 7,084 elements of ICH.  29   So far, it looked quite 
simple: there were two kinds of inventory, the manual and the online. However, the 
case with the online inventory had not been as straightforward as it seemed, because 
a second web site, which seems to also function as an inventory, had been found. 
 At an unknown date, the Directorate of Cultural Internalization and Diplo-
macy, under the Ministry’s Directorate-General of Culture, launched the web 
site  http://warisanbudayaindonesia.info   30   (hereinafter “Online Inventory 2”), 
titled   Registrasi  Warisan  Budaya  Tak  Benda   (lit.  “registry  of  ICH”).  The  web 
site lists, as of November 30, 2014, 2,661 elements of ICH present in Indonesian 
territory,  in  a  table  consisting  of  five  columns:   No.   (lit.  “number”),   Nama 
Karya Budaya  (name of the element),  Lokasi  (lit. “location”),  Tanggal Registrasi  
(lit. “registration date”), and  Keterangan  (remarks). 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 136   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

 The web site also provides a brief explanation regarding what it is and what it 

does in the manner of a frequently asked questions (FAQ) section:
   
    
   
   

  1.        Apa itu Warisan Budaya Takbenda?  (lit. “What is ICH?”)  
  2.        Wujud Warisan Budaya Takbenda  (lit. “The forms of ICH”)  
  3.        Apa itu Registrasi Warisan Budaya Takbenda Nasional?  (“What is the registry 

   

   

   

of the national ICH?”)  

  4.        Apa Tujuan Registrasi Warisan Budaya Takbenda Nasional?  (lit. “What are the 

objectives of the registry of the national ICH?”)  

  5.        Apa  Saja  yang  Perlu  Dicatat?   (“What  are  the  elements  that  need  to  be 

documented?”)  

  6.        Mengapa Perlu Didaftar dan Dicatat?  (lit. “Why does there need to be docu-

mentation and registration?”)  

  7.        Siapa yang Harus Mendaftar?  (lit. “Who should register?”)  
  8.        Bagaimana Cara Melestarikan?  (“How does one safeguard?”)   

   
   
   
  The explanation under each of the questions is either an almost-direct translation 
of ICHC provisions—specifically Article 2, paragraphs 1–2, Article 12, and Article 15—
or an elucidation of the Convention’s provisions. 

 Each of the elements of ICH listed on Online Inventory 2 is clickable. If one is 

clicked, a new page will open to reveal details about that element:
   
    
   
   

  1.        Kode  (numerical designation of the element);  
  2.        Warisan Budaya  (name of the element);  
  3.        Kategori  (the category in which the element belongs, as provided in Article 2, 

paragraph 2 of the Convention);  

  4.        Sejarah  (lit. “history”; brief historical account of the element);  
  5.        Nama Komunitas/organisasi /asosiasi /badan /paguyuban /kelompok social, atau 
perorangan penanggung jawab warisan budaya  (lit. “name of the community/
organization/association/body/neighborhood/social  group/individual  respon-
sible for the element”);  

  6.        Persetujuan Pengusulan WARBUDNAS  (lit. “approval of ICH nomination”);  
  7.        Referensi  (lit. “reference”); and  
  8.        Links Terkait  (lit. “relevant links”).   

   
   

   
   
   
   

  The ICHC provides that the States Parties thereto shall draw up “one or more 
inventories of the ICH present in its territory.”  31   Therefore, there should be no 
question as to which one the official inventory is, as the manual inventory, Online 
Inventory 1, and Online Inventory 2 could  all  be official inventories of ICH identified 
within the Indonesian territory, provided that they be drawn up by the Indonesian 
government. 

 While neither of the online inventories uses the official domain name system 
for governmental web sites (which, in Indonesia’s case, is “.go.id”), we can see that 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    137 

they both are inventories drawn up by the State. Online Inventory 1 is expressly 
referred to as an inventory in the Handbook,  32   which, as previously indicated, is an 
official publication of the government of Indonesia and UNESCO. Similarly, while 
Online Inventory 2 does not use the governmental domain name system either, 
there are aspects within the web site that are indicative of its official status as an 
online inventory:
   
    

  1.       It contains an FAQ section using the terms of the ICHC. Online Inventory 1 

   

   

does not contain any such section;  

  2.       It also contains details on the identified elements of ICH, e.g., the date the 
element is registered, the name of the community responsible for its mainte-
nance, etc. This proves that Online Inventory 2 is functional, perhaps more 
so than Online Inventory 1, because the latter offers considerably fewer stan-
dardized headings of information on each element.  

  3.       The web site puts forth the name of Directorate of Cultural Internalization 
and Diplomacy under the ministry’s Directorate-General of Culture. This 
should be proof of official government support. In the case of Online Inven-
tory 1, there is a specific  Tentang  (similar to “About Us”) page, which, once 
opened, shows that the web site is part of an independent effort called  Inisiatif 
Budaya Kepulauan Indonesia  (lit. “Indonesian Archipelago Cultural Initiatives/
IACI”), run by three independent nongovernmental institutions: 
  a.        Perhimpunan Budaya Indonesia  (lit. “Association of Indonesian Culture”);  
  b.       Jaringan Budaya Indonesia  (lit. “Network of Indonesian Culture”); and  
  c.        Satuan Ekonomi Kreatif IACI  (lit. “IACI Union for Creative Economics”).   

    
   
   
     
  The fact that Online Inventory 2 seems to carry more governmental elements than 
Online Inventory 1 should not mean that the latter is not official or less official 
than  the  former,  because  (1)  as  previously  mentioned,  the  drawing  of  multiple 
inventories is allowed by the ICHC so long as they are drawn by a State Party; and 
(2) it is evident that both web sites are official, government-endorsed inventories. 
So far, these are the only two web sites that have been identified as online inven-
tories of ICH. If, in the future, more such web sites emerge, they could also be part 
of the Indonesian online inventory if they are indeed drawn up by the Indonesian 
government.   

 III.     THE CONSEQUENCES OF AWARENESS-RAISING FOR THE 

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INVENTORY OBLIGATION 

 In accordance with the Practical Handbook, if an element has been reported online, 
and the Form accessed and approved of by the Expert Team, then it must be pub-
lished on the Online Inventory web site along with all the information provided 
and approved in the Form. This is in accordance with one of the ICHC’s purposes, 
which is the raising of awareness.  33   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 138   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

 The literal meaning of “aware” is “having or showing realization, perception, 
or knowledge.”  34   Awareness is comprehension of a certain situation. Without 
realization, perception, or knowledge with regard to something, someone cannot 
be considered aware. If awareness is set as a purpose, then the distribution of as 
much information as possible to as many people as possible becomes necessary; 
the more people with the realization, perception, or knowledge of something, the 
more awareness is realized as a purpose. 

 In the context of the Convention, this refers to the visibility of ICH and its value 
at the local, national, and international levels.  35   The ICHC aims at promoting the 
importance of cultural heritage, which is not primarily tangible, to a world that is 
modernizing and therefore tends to put aside everything it considers ancient or 
outdated if it “get[s] in the way.”  36   Safeguarding is regulated in the Convention at 
the local, national, and international levels, which,  inter alia , is to invoke awareness 
of ICH in all people, whether in remote islands or the big cities. People who are 
uninformed will tend to view other cultures as “bad” or even “primitive” simply 
because they are different from their own;  37   the public at large needs to understand 
that there are many longstanding, “living” elements of culture that may be very 
different from one another, and that they need to be recognized, appreciated, and 
safeguarded. The more that information regarding elements of ICH is made avail-
able to the public at the local, national, and international levels, the better. 

 Awareness raising is one of the things the ICHC and the 1972 World Heritage 
Convention  38   (hereinafter “WHC”) have in common: both aim for the general 
public to be informed about cultural heritage both tangible and intangible.  39   The 
term “visibility” has also been used frequently in intergovernmental meeting ses-
sions in preparation for the Convention to refer to the promotional effect of ICH 
safeguarding.  40   Clearly, this poses as confirmation that the purpose of the ICHC is, 
indeed, for as many people as possible to be aware of the values and importance of 
ICH; this, in turn, accords prestige, honor, and recognition to the communities/
groups/individuals of the ICH.  41   

 The drawing up of ICH inventories is essential as a step in sustaining the study of 
cultural resources,  42   and in this case, as a safeguarding measure, it must be used for 
awareness-raising. Members of the public must be made aware of ICH; they must 
be allowed access to the inventory(ies) in which the elements of ICH within the 
State are stored, and they must be able to access as much information as possible. 
People should understand which elements of ICH are maintained by which com-
munities in which part of the State, which ones are in need of urgent safeguard-
ing, and so on. In terms of inventory, members of the general public should enjoy 
a  more  transparent  inventory;  therefore,  all  of  the  information  on  the  elements 
should be provided for anyone to access. 

 Indeed, there are instances where an inventory of ICH is closed, i.e., where the 
community/group/individual  responsible  for  the  ICH  element  does  not  want  it 
to be publicly disclosed.  43   This means that States Parties are allowed to make 
inventory(ies) of secret elements of ICH, and such inventories, along with the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    139 

elements inventoried therein, are not made available to the public unless there 
is free, prior, and informed consent by the relevant community/group/individual 
responsible for the element. In Indonesia’s case, this is made possible by means of 
the manual inventory. As the inventory is available only to the four groups of users, 
access may be denied to users who wish to access the inventories in which secret 
elements of ICH are contained. However, because the online inventory is publicly 
accessible, it must not be a closed one. Therefore, the general public must be made 
aware of the inventory, and most importantly, of the elements of ICH identified 
therein. 

 An important point to note is that the raising of awareness in the Convention 
means that the safeguarding of the ICH is meant to be leveled: safeguarding at the 
local level is expected to lead to safeguarding at the national level, which in turn 
is expected to pave the way to safeguarding at the international level.  44   Article 29, 
which states that each States Party is to provide a report “on the legislative, regu-
latory and other measures taken for the implementation of [the] Convention,”  45   
also illustrates that States Parties’ activities in implementation of the ICHC at 
the national level are subject to an international obligation of reportage to the 
Intergovernmental Committee  46   of the Convention. 

 While it is true that inventories are to be drawn up “in a manner geared to its 
own situation,”  47   which means that the contents of a State Party’s inventory may 
differ from those of another State Party, it does not mean that there is no standard 
as  to  what  needs  to  be  contained  in  an  inventory.  A  State  Party’s  inventory 
(i.e.,  a safeguarding of ICH at the national level) must lead to said State Party’s 
nomination  and  inscription  of  its  ICH  onto  one  of  the  Convention’s  lists.  48    Of 
course, inscription of a State Party’s element of ICH onto one such list is subject 
to nomination by that State Party’s initiative, but one of the main purposes of the 
Convention remains awareness; anything a State Party does in terms of safeguard-
ing must be done for the raising of awareness among as many people as possible 
regarding their ICH. With more information provided on the online inventory, the 
public is allowed a more-transparent access to the safeguarding of the ICH. With 
enough information, the public could become aware of which elements of ICH on 
the inventory are in need of urgent safeguarding and therefore urge the govern-
ment  to  immediately  nominate  said  elements  for  inclusion  on  the  Urgent  Safe-
guarding List. All this is in line with the Convention’s purpose of raising awareness 
of the general public regarding the importance of the ICH.  49   

 Bearing in mind the ideal that national inventories should prepare States Parties 
for nomination, the contents of the inventory must correspond with those in the 
forms that States Parties fill in nomination of an element of ICH (hereinafter ‘nom-
ination files’).  50   The nomination files for inscription of an element on the Represen-
tative List contain the following details, to be provided by the State(s) Party(ies):  51  
   
    
   

  A.       “State(s) Party(ies)”;  
  B.       “Name of the element”;  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 140   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

   
   
   
   
   

   
    
   
   
    
    

  C.       “Name of the communities, groups, or, if applicable, individuals concerned”;  
  D.       “Geographical element and range of the element”;  
  E.       “Contact person for correspondence”;  
  1.       “Identification and definition of the element”;  
  2.       “Contribution  to  ensuring  visibility  and  awareness  and  to  encouraging 

dialogue”;  

  3.       “Safeguarding measures”; 

  a.       “Past and current efforts to safeguard the element”;  
  b.      “Safeguarding measures proposed”;  
  c.       “Competent bodies involved in safeguarding”;   

  4.       “Community participation and consent in the nomination process”; 

  a.       “Participation of communities, groups, and individuals concerned in the 

nomination process”;  

  7.       “Signatures on behalf of the State(s) Party(ies)”.   

  5.       “Inclusion of the element in an inventory”  
  6.       “Documentation”; 

  a.       “Appended documentation (mandatory)”;  
  b.      “Principal published references (optional)”;   

  b.      “Free, prior, and informed consent to the nomination”;  
  c.       “Respect for customary practices governing access to the element”;  
  d.      “Concerned community organization(s) or representative(s)”;   

   
   
   
    
   
    
   
    
   
  The  nomination  files  for  inscription  of  an  element  of  ICH  on  the  Urgent  Safe-
guarding List contain pieces of information similar to those on the Representative 
List,  except  that  the  former  contains  “E.  Domains  represented  by  the  element,” 
“2. Need for urgent safeguarding,” and the modification of several terms without 
change to the meaning of the words. In the Practical Handbook, the Form for a 
reporter to submit an ICH element contains 17 headings of information, all almost 
identical to those provided in the nomination files.  52   In order to prepare States for 
nomination of their ICH, the information on the Form must correspond to what 
is expected to be on the nomination files. 

 Harmonization of national inventories with the international Lists is, above all 
else, logical, because both the national inventories and the international Lists are 
basically registries of ICH. It is only right that the public be made aware of ICH 
through the provision of harmonious information thereof at the local, national, 
and international levels. It is therefore necessary for the Inventory to contain details 
that are needed for the State Party to nominate any of the inventoried elements of 
ICH to one of the Convention’s Lists.   

 IV.     CONTENT PROBLEMS IN THE INDONESIAN ONLINE INVENTORIES 

 It  has  been  established  that  Indonesia  has  two  kinds  of  inventory  of  ICH:  the 
manual and the online. Based on the Convention’s purpose to raise awareness, the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    141 

manual inventory must contain details that correspond to those on the nomina-
tion files, and all of those details must be made available to any requester from the 
four categories of user, provided that the details are regarding a non-secret element 
of ICH. Similarly, the online inventory must contain details that are expected to 
be on the nomination files, and, since the inventory is accessible on an interactive 
page on the Internet, the details must be displayed in their entirety on the web site. 
While it is evident that the categories of information contained in the Form for 
Indonesian online inventory correspond well enough to those in the nomination 
files for inscription on one of the ICHC’s Lists, the same cannot be said about the 
 content  of information displayed on the online inventories themselves. The infor-
mation provided online for the public has not quite lived up to the Convention’s 
expectation of awareness-raising.  

 IV.1. Online Inventory 1 

 As introduced above, the elements of ICH here are organized here into 15 categories. 
These categories are loosely based on but ultimately different from the domains 
of ICH as provided in the Convention: oral traditions and expressions; perform-
ing arts; social practices, rituals, and festive events; knowledge and practices con-
cerning nature and the universe; and traditional craftsmanship.  53   As many as 160 
elements  (2.25%)  are  incorrectly  inventoried;  some  54    belong  in  a  different  but 
existing category on the Inventory, while others  55   belong in a category that corre-
sponds to a domain under the ICHC but is not available on the Inventory, e.g., 
cultural space, language, or handicrafts. Meanwhile, 452 elements (6.38%) do not 
belong to any ICH category or domain. These elements, a majority of them under the 
“Produk Arsitektur” category, are more suitably categorized as “cultural heritage” 
under the WHC.  56   Their inaccurate categorization is due to the error in the redaction 
of the category’s name; “Architectural Products” refers to architectural works, which 
in themselves do not fall under any ICH domain. This has evidently led contribu-
tors to erroneously submit architectural works, for example, traditional adat houses, 
monuments, and so forth, into this category. It would be better if the elements were 
reorganized into categories that follow the ICH domains as provided in the Conven-
tion. If this were implemented, such disorganization could have been prevented. 

 The second problem in Online Inventory 1 concerns the consistency (or the 
lack thereof) of the extent of information provided with respect to the inventoried 
elements:
   
    

  a.        Explanatory text.  More than 98 percent of the entries contain explanatory 
passages of varying lengths, but this is not a problem, because each ICH ele-
ment will have its own amount of information, depending on how much can 
be described or is known about it. A problem occurs when there is an entry 
of an ICH element that contains no explanatory text. Such is the case with 
591 entries (8.34%)  57   that do contain a text, but text that is not explanatory. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 142   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

Meanwhile, 626 entries (8.83%)  58   contain only documentary/illustrative aids, 
such as photographs or video; these do not have any textual passages what-
soever. The most extreme manifestation of this problem may be seen in four 
empty entries (0.05%),  59   each of which contains no textual information.  

   

   

  b.        Documentary evidence.  More than 70 percent of all elements are inventoried 
with documentary/illustrative evidence accompanying the explanatory pas-
sage; this evidence ranges from photographs (66%)  60   to video clips (4.05%),  61   
audio recordings (2.61%),  62   and even PDF attachments (0.05%).  63   This leaves 
1,925 entries (27.17%) inventoried without any documentary evidence, which 
is one of the essential elements that must exist in an inventory, according to 
the nomination file, in order to fulfill the requirements of awareness.  

  c.        Source.  Only 884 entries (12.47%) mention a source for the information they 
contain, with sources ranging from museum data to more unreliable sources 
such as blogs, social media platforms, and interviews. Problems regarding the 
sources shall be addressed further below.   

   
  Additionally, the following pieces of information, which according to nomination 
files  should  be  explained  in  an  inventory,  are  entirely  missing  from  Online 
Inventory 1: “Contact person for correspondence”; “Contribution to ensuring 
visibility and awareness and to encouraging dialogue”; “Safeguarding measures”; 
and “Community participation and consent in the nomination process.” 

 The next awareness-related problem regards the guarantee of the authenticity of 
the information provided on the online inventory. Since this is a publicly available 
web site, any Internet user who has registered may submit an element for inclusion 
in the inventory. This is why there needs to be a web site administrator to make 
sure that the information submitted is sufficiently extentsive and, most important, 
correct. Instead, many forms of error are found on Online Inventory 1. This sug-
gests that the Expert Team as designated by the Handbook has not been perform-
ing its task to,  inter alia , keep organized the information on the web site and verify 
the information submitted by users who access the web site.  64   The errors found on 
Online Inventory 1 are as follows:
   
    

  a.        Multiplication of an entry of an element already inventoried.  As many as 
1,823 entries (25.73%)  65   concern elements that have already been invento-
ried. In most cases, the same entry is featured only twice, but there are a few 
elements whose entries are replicated in considerably large numbers.  

   

  b.        Separate entry of a variation of an element already inventoried.  Ideally, an 
entry shall contain details on the element along with all of its known varia-
tions. This will make it easier for members of the public to identify an ICH 
element. Instead of having one entry that includes all of its variations, many 
of the entries on Online Inventory 1 are mere variations of an element that 
has already been inventoried. Such is the case with 1,549 entries (21.86%). 
This  phenomenon  is  largely  misleading,  especially  in  the  determination  of 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    143 

how many ICH elements have actually been inventoried in Indonesia. Having 
many of the elements inventoried as separate entries when they are, in fact, 
variations of already-inventoried elements will doubtless result in the oppo-
site of public awareness of ICH. Examples of separate variation entries are as 
follows: 
  1.       Wayang: 15 different entries, including three multiplications of the same 

variation;  66    

  2.       Angklung: 16 different entries, including five multiplications of the same 

variation;  67   and  

  3.       Batik: 160 different entries.  68     

  c.        Grammatical error.  

  1.       Diction error. This is when an element is entered into the inventory using 
improper wording. There are 302 entries (4.26%) that are titled or termed 
peculiarly  69   or use words that may mislead the reader.  70    

  2.       Spelling mistake: 167 entries (2.35%).  71    
  3.       Use of informal or colloquial language: 45 entries (0.63%).  72     

  d.        Problematic source.  Out of the 884 entries that do mention a source, 269 
(3.74%) provide a source that is problematic. These sources include Wikipedia;  73   
online personal blogs;  74   social media platforms such as Facebook,  75   Twitter,  76   
Instagram,  77   and even the now-defunct MySpace;  78   and interviews with per-
sons whose credibility or expertise in the subject matter is unexplained.  79    

  e.        Regional misidentification.  There are 17 instances where the element entered 
into the inventory is not Indonesian. The most prominent examples of this 
are as follows: 
  1.       “Hanzell and Gretell.”  80   This is an obvious mistype of “Hansel and Gretel,” 
which  is  a  world-renowned  folktale  by  German  authors  the  Brothers 
Grimm. The entry in this inventory, however, does not concern the tale 
itself; rather, it concerns a piece of clothing that advertises itself using the 
story of Hansel and Gretel. It would be a mistake to enter this into an 
inventory as an Indonesian element of ICH.  

  2.       “Seni  Makyong  Teater  Khas  Melayu.”  81    This  element  is  mistakenly  entered 
into this inventory because it was already inscribed on the Representative 
List by Malaysia in 2008.  82   It is ironic that Indonesia has protested many 
times  about  Malaysia  “claiming”  “its”  ICH,  83    while  at  the  same  time 
Indonesia  itself  has  unlawfully  84    claimed  as  its  own  an  element  that  has 
gained international status as being from Malaysia.   

    

   

   
    
    

   
   
    

   

    

   

     

  Lastly,  though  it  is  a  direct  implementation  of  an  ICHC  obligation,  Online 
Inventory 1 does not seem to acknowledge the ICHC. This is proven by the fact 
that, while the ICH elements from Indonesia that have been and are in the process 
of being inscribed on the ICHC Lists have indeed been entered into the inventory, 
there  is  no  harmonization  between  the  information  contained  in  the  inventory 
and that contained in the nomination files of the respective elements. Ideally, the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 144   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

information contained in the nomination file should be obtained from data in the 
inventory. Curiously, this is not the case with Online Inventory 1.   

 IV.2. Online Inventory 2 

 Problems similar to those in Online Inventory 1 are also found in this inventory. 
Online Inventory 2, as introduced above, and unlike Online Inventory 1, does not 
categorize the inventoried elements. All elements are numbered, which makes it 
easier to see how many of them have been identified as being found on Indo-
nesian  soil;  however,  this  also  makes  it  more  difficult  to  identify  how  many 
elements have been identified and inventoried  for each ICH domain . This general 
difficulty is problematic for people who access the web site and seek to assess 
this inventory, and the elements it contains, in an organized manner. The same 
suggestion as above would therefore apply here: it would be better for Online 
Inventory  2  to  follow  the  categorization  according  to  the  ICH  domains  pro-
vided in the Convention.  85   Overall, this inventory is more disorganized than 
Online  Inventory  1,  as  the  elements  are  listed  neither  alphabetically  nor—
though each entry contains the date on which the element is registered in the 
inventory—chronologically. 

 As  mentioned  above,  the  content  of  each  entry  of  inventoried  elements  in 
Online Inventory 2 is standardized in eight headings. This makes it more inclu-
sive than what is generally provided in Online Inventory 1, but, according to the 
nomination file and overall goal of awareness-raising, it still lacks “Contribution to 
ensuring visibility and awareness and to encouraging dialogue”; “Safeguarding 
measures”; and “Documentation.”  86   The contrast can be seen in “Documenta-
tion,” because, whereas upwards of 70 percent of entries in Online Inventory 1 
contain documentary evidence, no such evidence can be found in any entry in 
Online Inventory 2. 

 Several  headings  in  this  inventory  are  misleadingly  named.  For  example, 
“History” of the element often does not contain history, but simply descriptions of, 
for instance, what the element is, how it is performed, and the types of instruments 
involved in the proceeding.  87   Additionally, “Reference” and “Relevant Links” are 
interchangeable; both are used to mention the sources of the information about 
the element.  88   It is likely that the separation of these categories was intended so that 
“Links”  would  contain  online  sources,  while  “Reference”  would  list  non-online 
ones, such as books or museum data. 

 Not unlike Online Inventory 1, the next problem in this inventory concerns 
the extent of information contained in each entry. While the content is already 
standardized  in  headings,  only  six  89    entries  provide  information  under  all  eight 
headings. Most of the entries in Online Inventory 2 are incomplete:
   
    
   

  a.       “Category” missing 69 entries (2.59%);  90    
  b.       “History” missing 364 entries (13.68%);  91    

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    145 

  c.       “Name of the community/organization/association/body/neighborhood/
social group, or individual responsible for the element” missing 464 entries 
(17.44%);  92    

  d.       “Approval of ICH Nomination” missing 1,294 entries (48.63%).  93   Moreover, 
while 303 entries mention that approval by the relevant community is “not 
yet obtained,”  94   they are still featured on the web site; this denies the “widest 
possible  participation  of  communities,  groups  and  […]  individuals,”  as 
expressly mandated by the ICHC.  95   An element for which approval by the 
relevant community is not yet obtained by the state must not be inventoried.  

  e.       “Reference” missing 331 entries (12.44%);  96   and  
  f.       “Relevant Links” missing 2,597 entries (97.59%).  97   Out of the 64 entries that 
do provide a link, 50 (1.88%)  98   lead to web addresses that can no longer be 
found.   

   

   

   
   

   

  The authenticity of information provided in this inventory is also problematic, 
as illustrated by the following errors, which prove that, like Online Inventory 1, 
there is no web site administrator tasked with verifying the information or keeping 
the information organized:
   
    
   

  a.       Multiplication of an element already inventoried: 93 entries (3.49%).  99    
  b.       Separate  entry  of  a  variation  of  an  element  already  inventoried:  73  entries 

(2.74%).  100    

  c.       Grammatical errors: 

  1.       Diction error: 146 entries (5.49%);  101    
  2.       Mistype: 12 entries (0.45%).  102     

  d.       Problematic source: Most of the entries in this inventory (89.97%) contain a 
source. However, of those 2,394 entries, 617 (23.19%) contain sources that 
are problematic. These entries list as sources Wikipedia,  103   online personal 
blogs,  104    and  interviews  with  persons  whose  credibility  or  expertise  in  the 
subject matter is unexplained.  105     

   
    
   
    

   

  While  its  FAQ  section  illustrates  that  the  web  site  is  more  loyal  than  Online 
Inventory 1 to the ICHC, this inventory does not seem to acknowledge the Con-
vention. While the elements from Indonesia that have been inscribed on the ICHC 
Lists were all inventoried, there is still no harmonization between the information 
of said elements in the inventory and that contained in the nomination files of the 
respective elements. 

 The relationship between the two online inventories is evident in some respects. 
Up to 20 percent of the elements in Online Inventory 2 are also present in Online 
Inventory 1. Two entries  106   in Online Inventory 1 credit Online Inventory 2 as 
their sources, while two entries  107   in Online Inventory 2 refer to Online Inventory 
1. Meanwhile, whereas both web sites are operational, Online Inventory 1 is signif-
icantly more active than Online Inventory 2:     

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 146   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

 Table 1.      Comparison of elements inventoried in both online inventories in eight months’ 
time.  

Online Inventory 1  

Online Inventory 2  

April 30, 2014:  
3,269 entries 

November 30, 2014:
7,084 entries

April 30, 2014:
2,649 entries

November 30, 2014: 
2,661 entries  

 The ICHC provides that a State Party may draw up more than one inventory of 
ICH present in its respective territory; it is therefore implied that if a State Party 
decides to draw up more than one inventory, each of the inventories must serve a 
specific and distinct purpose, simply to prevent confusion on the part of society at 
large and, consequently, to raise awareness.    

 V.     CONCLUSION 

 Both  online  inventories  suffer  from  problems  that  are  unfortunately  found  in 
nearly all aspects of their respective contents. Both are taking cues from the ICHC, 
but neither is being faithful to it. That makes sense, because they were never obli-
gated to be faithful. The problems in Indonesia’s implementation of the inventory 
obligation all stem from the absence of regulation. The best thing Indonesia has 
right now regarding its ICH inventories is the Joint Ministerial Regulation, which, 
however, does not specify how an inventory should be drawn up. As a result, the 
government  has  been  highly  erratic  in  the  implementation  of  this  obligation. 
Because there is no set standard of implementation, it is impossible to legally deter-
mine what to do and what not to do with the inventories. There are, indeed, hints 
in  the  Handbook,  the  Operational  Directives,  and  the  ICHC  itself  as  to  what  a 
national inventory should be, but these hints are implied and indirect. An explicit 
regulation would put legal emphasis on those hints and provide straightforward 
rules on the drawing up of inventories. 

 It is of paramount importance that there be a clear regulatory framework for the 
drawing up of ICH inventory in Indonesia. The Handbook is a sufficient starting 
point, as it provides a comparative study on how other ICHC States Parties draw 
up their respective ICH inventories, but there needs to be something firmer that 
will allow much more to be done. A specific national regulation on ICH that is 
loyal to the ICHC would make clear the implementation of Indonesia’s interna-
tional obligations under the Convention because it would provide legal certainty. 
 An   Undang-Undang   (national-level  statutory  act)  is  necessary  to  establish 
national ground rules for ICH. An agency must be established or appointed to work 
under the relevant ministry(ies) as overall administrator of the traffic of ICH within 
the state and any attempts at nomination for inscription on the ICHC Lists. This 
may include quite a handful of institutions in the current government, in addition 
to from the revamped Ministry of Culture, Primary and Secondary Education: the 
newly-established Coordinating Ministry of Human Development and Culture; 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    147 

the  now-stand-alone  Ministry  of  Tourism;  and  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs. 
 Peraturan  Pemerintah   (lit.  government  regulation)  and  lower-level  regulations 
need  to  be  enacted  for  implementation of the statutory Act at the enforcement 
level, laying down detailed, technical instructions for any agency involved in the 
safeguarding of ICH at the national level. 

 Ultimately, the aim of this article is to look critically at current conditions in order 
to  see  how  improvements  can  be  made.  The  government  needs  to  allocate  more 
money for the management of its cultural heritage, both tangible and intangible, and 
it needs to start acting on the legislation. Indonesia has spared no expense when it 
comes to cultural rhetoric: “traditional” songs and dances performed at practically 
any formal event; “ethnic” handicrafts delivered personally to foreign heads of state; 
lavish,  “exotic”  shirts  and  dresses  worn  by  high-ranking  officials  at  international 
events. Ironically, very little real, legal effort has been put forth by the government for 
the safeguarding of cultural elements. What Indonesia needs now is to walk the talk.    

  ENDNOTES 

 2  .   Ibid. ,  Article 2, paragraph 2.  
 3  .    “States  Parties  to  the  ICHC,”   http://www.unesco.org/eri/la/convention.asp?KO=17116&

 4  .   ICHC, Article 2, paragraph 3.  
 5  .   Ibid., Article 16.  
 6  .   Ibid., Article 17.  
 7  .   “States Parties to the ICHC.”  
 8  .   ICHC, Article 34.  
 9  .   “Treaty Room,”  http://treaty.kemlu.go.id/index.php/treaty/index .  
 10  .   Republic of Indonesia, Act no. 24 of 2000 on Treaties, State Gazette 2000, no. 185, Articles 10–11.  
 11  .   ICHC, Articles  inter alia  1 (b), 11 (b), and 15.  
 12  .   Republic of Indonesia, Act no. 11 of 2010 on Cultural Heritage Object, State Gazette 2010, no. 130.  
 13  .   Republic of Indonesia, Act no. 5 of 1992 on Cultural Heritage Object, State Gazette 1992, 

  
 1  .   Convention on the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, United Nations Educa-
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 17 October 2003, UN Treaty Series, Vol. 2368 (hereafter 
“ICHC”), 3–94.  
  
  
language=E .  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
no. 27.  
  
 14  .   Agusman  2010 , 84–93.  
  
 15  .   Republic of Indonesia, Joint Regulation by Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Culture 
and Tourism nos. 40 and 42 of 2009 on Guidelines to the Conservation of Culture (hereafter “Joint 
Ministerial  Regulation”),   http://kesbangpol.kemendagri.go.id/files_arsip/PBM_no.42_dan_no_.40-
2009_1.pdf , Acknowledgment para. 11.  
  
Article 23, paragraph 2.  
 17  .   Hastanto  2008 , 7.  
  
  
 18  .    Rangking Devisa Pariwisata terhadap Komoditas Ekspor Lainnya  (lit. “Income Rank of Tourism 
in Comparison with Other Export Commodities”) (sic.),  http://www.parekraf.go.id/asp/detil.asp?c=
117&id=1198 .  
  
go.id/Page/infografis-apbn-2014 .  
  

 16  .   Joint Ministerial Regulation, Article 1, paragraphs 9 and 22; Article 8, paragraphs 1, 13, 14; and 

 19  .   “Infografis APBN 2014 (Infographics of the 2014 National Budget)” (sic.),  http://www.kemenkeu.

 20  .   Hastanto  2008 , 3.  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 148   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

 31  .   ICHC, Article 12, paragraph 1.  
 32  .   Practical Handbook, 20.  
 33  .   ICHC, Article 1 (c) and preamble clause 10.  
 34  .   “Aware,”  Merriam-Webster’s Online Dictionary ,  http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/

 26  .   Hastanto  2008 , 9.  
 27  .   Practical Handbook, 19–20.  
 28  .   Ibid., 31.  
 29  .     Perpustakaan  Digital  Budaya  Indonesia   (lit.  “Digital  Library  of  Indonesian  Culture”), 

 21  .   Ibid., and Hastanto  2005 .  
  
  
 22  .    Practical  Handbook  for  Inventory  of  ICH  of  Indonesia,  (Jakarta:  Minister  of  Culture  and 
Tourism and UNESCO Office, 2010) (hereafter “Practical Handbook”), last modified July 19, 2012, 
 http://portal.unesco.org/geography/en/ev.php-URL_ID=12535&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_
SECTION=201.html .  
 23  .   Ibid., 19–20.  
  
 24  .   Ibid.  
  
 25  .    For  example,  see  the  Netherlands’  online  inventory  at   http://immaterieelerfgoed.nl ;  South 
  
Korea’s at  http://www.ichpedia.org ; or the UK initiative for online documentation of ICH in Scotland 
at  http://www.unesco.org.uk/documenting_intangible_cultural_heritage_(ich)_in_scotland .  
  
  
  
  
 http://www.budaya-indonesia.org  (hereafter “Online Inventory 1”).  
  
 30  .     Registrasi  Warisan  Budaya  Tak  Benda  Nasional   (lit.  “Registry  of  the  National  ICH”), 
 http://warisanbudayaindonesia.info  (hereafter “Online Inventory 2”). Currently, the site has been 
taken  down  and  is  unavailable  for  access.  However,  a  version  of  the  site  from  December  2014  is 
available for viewing on the Internet Archive at  https://web.archive.org/web/20141218074231/  http://
warisanbudayaindonesia.info/ .  
  
  
  
  
aware .  
 35  .   Blake  2006 , inter alia 16, 21.  
  
 36  .   Brown  2012 , 95, and Kurin  2004 , 68.  
  
 37  .   Ember and Ember  2013 , 14.  
  
  
 38  .   Convention on the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 1037, I-15511 
(hereafter “WHC”), 151–211.  
 39  .   Frey  2011 , 558.  
  
 40  .   Ibid., 30.  
  
 41  .   Kurin  2007 , 16 and Sedyawati  2012 , 330.  
  
 42  .   Sedyawati,  2012 , 163.  
  
 43  .   Blake  2006 , 63; Rudolf and Raymond  2013 , 155–57.  
  
 44  .   ICHC, Article 1 (c) and preamble clause 10, and Blake  2006 , 30.  
  
 45  .   ICHC, Article 29.  
  
 46  .   Ibid., Article 5.  
  
 47  .   Ibid., Article 12.  
  
 48  .   Blake  2006 , 30.  
  
 49  .   ICHC, Article 14 (a) (i).  
  
  
 50  .   “Operational Directives for the Implementation of the Convention on the Safeguarding of the 
ICH, adopted by the General Assembly of the States Parties to the Convention at Its Fourth Session 
(Paris, France, 4 to 8 June 2012)” (hereafter “Operational Directives”),  http://www.unesco.org/culture/
ich/index.php?lg=en&pg=00451 .  
  
ich/index.php?pg=00184 .  
  
  
  
Paksinagaliman,” and “Tari Serumpai.”  

 52  .   Practical Handbook, 21–26.  
 53  .   ICHC, Article 2, paragraph 2.  
 54  .   Online  Inventory  1’s  entries  on  (inter  alia)  “Baju  Adat  Jawa  Tengah,”  “Kereta  Kencana 

 51  .   “Nomination Files for Inscription onto the Representative List,”  http://www.unesco.org/culture/

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    149 

 58  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Asinan Bogor,” “Tari Topeng Puteri,” and “Piso 

 61  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Tengkuluk,” “Hajat Babarit,” and “Pesta Babi 

 63  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Dongeng Sampan Tidur,” “Bahasa Petjo/Bahasa 

 59  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on “Potong Gigi,” “Ritual Tiwah,” “To Messawe,” and “Pedang 

 55  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Seni Kriya Dayak,” “Bahasa Sunda,” and “Saung 

 62  .    Online  Inventory  1’s  entries  on  (inter  alia)  “Gamelan  Renteng,  Cirebon,”  “Alusi  Au,”  and 

 64  .   Practical Handbook, 19–20.  
 65  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on “Jb_ina” (replicated 37 times) and “Endit” (replicated 88 

 56  .   WHC, Article 1.  
 57  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Banji Buket,” “Kembang Jekeng,” and “Manuk 

 66  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on (inter alia) “Wayang Kulit.”  
 67  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on (inter alia) “Angklung.”  
 68  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on (inter alia) “Batik Beras Tumpah Sampang.”  
 69  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Kenapa Harus Takut Dengar Gending Jawa?” and 

  
Angklung Udjo.”  
  
  
Cuwiri.”  
  
Gaja Dompak.”  
  
Jenawi.”  
  
 60  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Tangge Wule” (containing 1 photograph), “Cukie 
Salapah-salapah Songket Minang” (containing 3 photographs), and “Salinan Naskah Kakawin 
Desawarnana” (containing the largest number of photographs, 142).  
  
Suku Muyu.”  
  
“Bengawan Solo.”  
  
Pecok,” and “Sosio-Historiografi Kehidupan Omelanden Batavia.”  
  
  
times).  
  
  
  
  
“Protagonis di Mahabarata juga di Pewayangan Indonesia.”  
  
“Lezat dan Gurihnya Geblek khas Kulonprogo.”  
  
and “Kyiai Slamet Solo” (correct spelling: “kiai”).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
pg=00011&RL=00167 .  
  
 83  .   See (inter alia) “Mensesneg: Lagu “Rasa Sayange” Sudah Ada Sejak 1922,”  http://www.setneg.go.id/
index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=979&Itemid=26 ;  “Malaysia  Sudah  Tujuh  Kali  Meng-
klaim Budaya RI,”  http://www.tempo.co/read/news/2012/06/21/078411954/Malaysia-Sudah-Tujuh-
Kali-Mengklaim-Budaya-RI ; and “Malaysia Kecam Protes di Kedutaannya di Jakarta,”  http://www.bbc.
co.uk/indonesia/dunia/2012/06/120625_malaysia_protes.shtml , last accessed December 28, 2014.  
  
  
  
  
“Hileiya.”  

 72  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Tanjung Marthafonz,” “Bika Ambon,” and “Ketupat.”  
 73  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on (inter alia) “Martabak Aceh.”  
 74  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on (inter alia) “Hiasan Kepala Perang Nias.”  
 75  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on (inter alia) “Selendang Mayang.”  
 76  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on (inter alia) “Kaligrafi Aksara Jawa.”  
 77  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on (inter alia) “Tempayan Peninggalan Majapahit.”  
 78  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on “Beluk.”  
 79  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on (inter alia) “Kedok Janggananom.”  
 80  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on “Hanzell and Gretell.”  
 81  .   Online Inventory 1’s entry on “Seni Makyong Teater Khas Melayu.”  
 82  .    “Inscribed  elements:  Mak  Yong  Theatre,”   http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/index.php?lg=en&

 84  .   ICHC, Articles 11–12.  
 85  .   Ibid., Article 2, paragraph 2.  
 86  .   Practical Handbook, 19–20.  
 87  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Gendang Beleq,” “Nyedekah Adat Bayan,” and 

 71  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Peyeum Ciruluk” (correct spelling: “peuyeum”) 

 70  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on (inter alia) “Berbuka Puasa dengan Kanji Rumbi di Aceh” and 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

 150   

 RANGGA DACHLAN

 94  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Upacara Baayun Maulud,” “Batu Betarub,” and 

 90  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Bambu Gila,” “Upacara Anta Mangaji,” and “Pencak 

 92  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Sutra Mandar,” “Lariangi,” and “La Tobajak Ri 

 93  .    Online  Inventory  2’s  entries  on  (inter  alia)  “Tali  Tandu,”  “Lawang  Sakepeng,”  and 

 91  .    Online  Inventory  2’s  entries  on  (inter  alia)  “Songket  Sambas,”  “Tari  Merak,”  and  “Kuda 

 88  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Adok Marga,” “Kacapi Suling,” and “Bebegig.”  
 89  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on “Rencong,” “Reog Ponorogo,” “Rumah Rakit,” “Arsitektur Rumah 

 95  .   ICHC, Article 15.  
 96  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Calung Renteng,” “Kujang,” and “Nasi Astakona.”  
 97  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Onduo,” “Upacara Ngebat Padi,” and “Seni 

  
  
Suku Bangsa Aceh,” “Tari Samrah,” and “Ritual Ngikis Situs.”  
  
Silat Rebas Tebang.”  
  
Lumping.”  
  
Soppeng.”  
  
“Odong-odong.”  
  
“Tuyang Papan.”  
  
  
  
Tradisional Sastra Kulawi Sulawesi Tengah.”  
  
and “Tenun Ikat Sikka.”  
  
    100  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Pantan Persiapan Pernikahan,” “Gasing Yogya,” 
and “Kuluk Deragam.”  
    101  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Permainan Anak-anak,” “Tari Tradisional,” and 
“Tombak.”  
    102  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Hukum Waris Melayu Kaung,” “Nalam Tari Inai,” 
and “Upacaara Kwangkai (Dayak Tunjung).”  
    103  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Randai,” “Saluang,” and “Tari Seudati.”  
    104  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Cerita Rakyat Batu Gantung,” “Honai,” and 
“Festival Nyimar Lumar.”  
    105  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Merawai,” “Adat Betanggas,” and “Ingkiwanata.”  
    106  .   Online Inventory 1’s entries on “Gulat Bob,” and “Topeng Kinang Putra.”  
    107  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on “Tari Zapin,” and “Puteri Junjung Buih.”   

 98  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Assung-assung,” “Tomate (Perisai Suku Komoro),” 

 99  .   Online Inventory 2’s entries on (inter alia) “Badawang,” “Tari Zapin,” and “Kain Cual.”  

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Agusman  ,   Damos Dumoli  .  2010 .  Hukum Perjanjian Internasional: Kajian Teori dan Praktik Indonesia . 
 Jakarta :  Refika Aditama .  

    Blake  ,   Janet  .  2006 .  Commentary on the UNESCO 2003 Convention on the Safeguarding of the ICH . 
 London :  Institute of Art and Law .  

    Brown  ,   Michael F  .  2012 . “ Safeguarding the Intangible .”  Museum Anthropology Review   6 , no. 2:  93 –7.  

    Ember  ,   Carol R.   and   Melvin     Ember  , trans.  2013 . “ Konsep Kebudayaan .” In  Pokok-pokok Antropologi 
Budaya , edited by   T. O.     Ihromi  .  Jakarta :  Yayasan Pustaka Obor ,  13 – 32 .  

    Frey  ,   Bruno S  .  2011 . “ World Heritage List: Does It Make Sense? ”  International Journal of Cultural 
Property   17 , no. 5:  555 –73.  

    Hastanto  ,   Sri  .  2005 .  “Inventory of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Indonesia.” Presentation at the 
Sub- Regional Experts Meeting in Asia on Intangible Cultural Heritage: Safeguarding and Inventory-
Making Methodologies, Bangkok, Thailand, December 13–16 .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041

PROBLEMS IN INDONESIA’S ONLINE INVENTORIES OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE    151 

    ——— .   2008 .   “Map  of  Indonesian  Culture  as  Intangible  Cultural  Heritage  Inventory  (ICHI)  of 
Indonesia.” Presentation at the 53rd Society of Ethnomusicology Conference, Connecticut, United 
States, December 25–28 .  

    Kurin  ,   Richard  .  2004 . “ Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage in the 2003 UNESCO Convention: 
A Critical Appraisal .”  Museum International   56 , no. 1–2:  66 – 77 .  

    ——— .  2007 . “ Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage: Key Factors in Implementing the 2003 
Convention .”  International Journal of Intangible Heritage   2 :  10 – 20 .  

    Rudolf  ,   Britta   and   Susanne     Raymond  .  2013 . “ A Community Convention? An Analysis of Free, Prior 
and Informed Consent Given under the 2003 Convention .”  International Journal of Intangible 
Heritage   8 :  154 –64.  

    Sedyawati  ,   Edi  .  2012 .  Budaya Indonesia: Kajian Arkeologi, Seni dan Sejarah .  Jakarta :  Rajawali .  

   UNESCO .  2003 .  Convention on the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. October 17. 
United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 2368, 3–94 .  

    ——— .  2012 .  Operational Directives for the Implementation of the Convention on the Safeguarding 
of the ICH, adopted by the General Assembly of the States Parties to the Convention at its Fourth 
Session. Paris, France, June 4–8 .  http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/index.php?lg=en&pg=00451 .  

    ——— .  Convention on the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage. United Nations 
Treaty Series, Vol. 1037, I-15511, 151–211 .  

    ——— .   Nomination  Files  for  Inscription  onto  the  Representative  List .   http://www.unesco.org/
culture/ich/index.php?pg=00184  ( accessed 16 November   2014 ).  

    ——— .  Practical Handbook for Inventory of ICH of Indonesia .  http://portal.unesco.org/geography/
en/ev.php-URL_ID=12535&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html .  

   “Perpustakaan Digital Budaya Indonesia.”   http://www.budaya-indonesia.org  ( accessed 30 November  
 2014 ).  

   “Registrasi  Warisan  Budaya  Tak  Benda  Nasional.”    http://warisanbudayaindonesia.info   ( accessed 
30  November    2014 ).   Can  be  found  via  Internet  Archive  at    https://web.archive.org/web/
20141218074231/  http://warisanbudayaindonesia.info/  ( accessed 16 March 2015 ).    

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000041


