Israeli Law, Jewish Law and
the Archaeological  Excavation
of Tombs
Talia Einhorn*

Summary: The  author  discusses  the  conflict  in  Israel  between  the
public  interest  in  archaeological  research  and the  religious  convic-
tions that  human  remains, once  buried,  should  not  be touched.  The
conflict  is exacerbated by urban development, which, in this ancient
land,  necessitates  rescue  excavations  of  tombs,  thus  bringing  the
problem  to  a head.  The  article  examines,  first,  the  rules  of  Jewish
law, which, the author contends, have made it possible to accommo-
date the interests of the living, and, secondly, the scientific  value of
the  archaeological  excavation  of  tombs,  using  recent  examples  as
illustrations.  The  author  concludes  that  Jewish  law  could  be  inter-
preted  and applied  more flexibly  and could then be reconciled  with
Israeli  law. However,  even  if  such  a development  were  not  to  take
place, then, in keeping with democratic values, government  officials
and  the  courts  would  be  required  to  follow  the  policies  established
by the  legislator,  a balance between  the conflicting  interests  having
already been embodied  in the law.

1  Introduction

Thousands  of  years  of  living  cultures  have  made  Israel  the  site  of
many  graves,  whose  importance  for  the  study  of  archaeology  and

*  Dr. iur. (Hamburg).  Senior  lecturer in law, The Institute for  Law and  Business
Administration  affiliated  with the University of Manchester. The author would
like  to  express  her  thanks  to  the  following  persons  for  valuable  information
and helpful  discussions: adv. Y. Barsela, legal  advisor to the Israel  Antiquities
Authority  (1AA); Mr.  A. Drori,  Director  of  the  IAA;  Mr.  Y. Einhorn,  scholar
of  Jewish  art  and  folklore;  Mrs.  C.  Katz,  State  Curator,  IAA;  Professor
A. Kirschenbaum, Tel Aviv University Law Faculty; Professor  A. Kloner, IAA
and  Bar  Ilan  University,  Department  of  Eretz  Israel  Studies;  Rabbi  I. Kolitz,
Chief  Rabbi  and  Head  of  Rabbinical  Courts,  Jerusalem;  Professor  H. Liicke,
Max Planck Institute, Hamburg; Dr. R. Reich,  IAA and Haifa  University  Insti-
tute  of  Archaeology;  Rabbi  D. Schmidl,  Athra  Kadisha,  Israel;  Rabbi  Dr.
M. Zemer,  Director  of the  Institute  for  Contemporary  Halakha.

47

Talia  Einhorn

"Hither  were  brought
the  bones  of  Uzziah,
K.ing  of  Judah-do
not  open."
Aramaic  burial
inscription,  Second
Temple  period.  Mount
of  Olives,  Jerusalem
©  Courtesy  of the
Israel  Museum,
Jerusalem

anthropology  cannot  be  overstated.  As  they  were  located  outside
cities, graves  were less prone  to destruction,  and they often  contain
an  abundance  of  objects  and  inscriptions.  For  anthropologists,  the
bones  are  an  indispensable  source  of  information  regarding  the  life
history  of  individuals  and  populations,  their  origins,  age,  health
status,  dietary  habits  and  genetic  affinities.  While  Israeli  law  ac-
knowledges the significance  of this kind of scientific  research, some
Orthodox Jews, a minority of Israel's population, vehemently oppose
the excavation  of graves on religious grounds. Led by Athra Kadisha
(Aramaic for "The Holy Site") Society for the Preservation of Jewish
Holy  Sites,  they  strive  to  protect  ancient  Jewish  tombs  from  the
hazards  of  development  and,  even  more  so,  from  the  hands  of  the
scientists.  Human  remains, they  aver,  should  not  be  disturbed.  The
problem has intensified  in recent years. Urban development, necessi-
tated  by  the  substantial  growth  of  the  Israeli  population,  mandates
the  construction  of new roads  and  buildings.  The density  of graves
in certain areas, especially around Jerusalem, makes it impossible to
carry  out  such  development  projects  without  bulldozers  "discover-
ing"  grave  sites.  Unless  these  sites  are  excavated,  the  information
they contain will be lost or even destroyed. It is difficult  to see how
the public  interest  in the promotion  of  scientific  research,  acknowl-
edged  by  Israeli  law,  can  be  reconciled  with  these  deeply-rooted
religious  convictions. The proposals  made  by the  Orthodox,  on  the
one hand, and the practices of the Israel Antiquities Authority (IAA),
on the other,  present a solution  acceptable  to neither.

48

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law and  Burials

2  Religious  Convictions  and Jewish  Law (Halakha)

2.1  The Attitude of the Orthodox Jewish  Opposition  to the

Excavations

The  attitude  of  the  Orthodox  opposed  to  the  excavations  is  well
reflected  in  a  rabbinical  decision  handed  down  in  1975  by  Rabbi
Ovadia  Yossef, Chief  (Sephardi)  Rabbi  of Israel  {Rishon  Le-Zion).1
It reads:

1.  The clearing of bones of the dead from  their tombs is forbid-
den under Jewish Halakha, the Jerusalem Talmud and the litera-
ture of Jewish law, and it is a grave offence  for which the public
as  a whole  is punished.  There  are  some  exceptional  cases,  for
example,  when  this  is  necessary  for  the  dignity  of  the  dead
themselves,  or  other  similar  cases,  permitted  according  to  the
principles mentioned in the Talmud and in the literature of Jew-
ish law. Even in these cases, the clearing would only be permit-
ted  if an authorized  Rabbi has so decided.
2.  Under  no  circumstances  is  it  allowed  to  clear  bones  from
their tombs for the purpose of any kind of research. Even when
it  is  permitted  to  transfer  the  bones  of  the  dead  from  their
tombs, they may not be moved for  the sake of tests that  offend
the  dignity  of  the  dead.  They  must  be  reburied  immediately
with due respect.
3.  The determination  whether the bones  are Jewish  is a halak-
hic  decision  and  may  only  be  made  by  an  authorized  Rabbi
according to the principles mentioned  in the Talmud and in the
literature  of Jewish  law.
4.  Rummaging in tombs  is a severe offence  to the peace of the
dead  and  the  living  according  to tractate  Yevamot  63b  and  se-
verely offends  the feelings  of the observers.

A similar answer was given in  1981 by Rabbi  Shlomo Goren, Chief
Ashkenazi  Rabbi  of  Israel.2  Rabbi  Goren  states  that  the  opening  of
any grave is prohibited under Jewish halakha and violates the prayer
said  at  the  funeral  service,  "May  he  (or  she)  come  to  his  (or  her)
place in peace." It is therefore  strictly  forbidden  to clear graves and
carry out any kind  of scientific  research.

Whenever  tombs  or  human  bones  are  found  and  there  is  doubt
whether or not they are Jewish, Jewish  law must be applied in mak-
ing the determination. Even in cases where clearing graves is permit-
ted under Jewish halakha, an opinion  must be sought, as every case
raises  very  complicated  issues  regarding  the  identity  of  the  graves
and  whether  or  not  they  are  considered  a  cemetery.  Halakha must
also decide the future  of the place, whether it may be used after  the
grave has been cleared, and its degree of ritual cleanliness. The Chief
Rabbinate  is  the  only  institution  authorized  to  decide  these  issues.

49

Talia  Einhorn

In another decision, Rabbi Goren  stressed the prohibition of deriving
any  benefit  from  the  dead  and  considered  whether  this  prohibition
extends  to  the  earth  underneath  a  cemetery.3  Depending  upon  the
situation,  this  prohibition  may  include  the  whole  area  around  the
graves and may extend deep into the earth below the graves. Accord-
ing  to  Rabbi  Goren's  decision,  where  such  a  prohibition  exists,  it
applies  to  scientific  study,  especially  to  archaeology,  since,  unlike
medicine,  archaeology  is pursued  merely  out  of  self-interest,  either
to  earn  one's  living  or  in  order  to  satisfy  curiosity,  both  of  which
are considered  benefits.

2.2  The Historical  Perspective4
2.2.1  Biblical  Times
The  Bible  devotes  considerable  attention  to  burial.  In  that  respect,
the  attitude  of the  Israelites  was  similar to that of the other  peoples
of  the  ancient  Near  East.  The  Patriarch  Abraham's  purchase  of  the
Machpela  Cave  in  Hebron  as  a  family  tomb  is  described  in  detail
(Genesis  23).  The  later  Patriarchs  also  ensured  their  burial  there
(Genesis  49:29-33;  50:25-26).  Biblical  biographies  usually  end
with  an  account  of  the  person's  burial.  When  describing  the  death
of Moses, who was denied  entrance to the Promised Land, the Bible
says  that  he  was  buried  "in  the  land  of  Moab, opposite  Beth-Peor,
and no  man  knows  his burial  place, to this day" (Deuteronomy  34;
Numbers 21:\2fj).  In Judaism, this has been taken to indicate a nega-
tive  attitude  toward  the  veneration  of  graves  based,  in part,  on  the
fear  that  such veneration  would  lead to a belief  in the apotheosis of
Moses.5  Tombs  of  the  Israelite  period  show  that  considerable  care
was  invested  in  planning  the  caves  and  in providing  the  dead  with
personal  objects,  light,  food  and  drink,  which  seems  to  reflect  a
belief  in  some  kind  of  life  after  death.  In  the  same  way  that  the
family  had to provide for  its  members during lifetime,  so it was also
hoped  that,  even  after  death,  a person  might  still  be able to depend
upon his family,  and it alone, to satisfy  his needs. It has been argued
that  this  attitude,  as  well  as  the  biblical  texts, do not  fit  a belief  in
individual  resurrection.6  Later  biblical  texts  that  mention  resurrec-
tion  {e.g.,  Ezekiel  37:1 — 14)  refer  to  it  in  an  allegorical  manner,
meaning  the  resurrection  of  the  nation  as  a  whole.7  Not  all  could
afford  a  family  burial,  and  the  Bible  mentions  the  graves  of  the
common  people  (Kings  II  23:6;  Jeremiah  26:23).  Indeed,  archaeo-
logical  excavations  discovered  a part  of a cemetery  west of  Jerusa-
lem that seems to have served the lower classes of the late Iron Age.
Those tombs were of inferior  quality as compared with other tombs;
only very little jewelry was  found and few objects other than pottery
vessels.8  The  Bible  says  little  about  the  rules relating  to burial, ex-
cept  for  showing  concern  to  avoid  defilement  through  the dead.

50

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law  and  Burials

2.2.2  The Mishnaic and Talmudic  Periods (ca.  1—470 CE)
During  the  period  of  the  Second  Temple,  the  customs  of  burial
changed. Burial  now took place in two stages: primary  interment in
burial niches {loculi or kokhim), followed  by the collection  of bones
into ossuaries  (a stone box  for  collecting  bones)  after  the  flesh  had
decomposed. This custom may have been rooted in the need to spare
the  land  for  the  needs  of the  living while  also  showing  respect  for
the  dead.9  It may  also  reflect  a belief  in  individual  resurrection,  as
the ossuaries made  it possible  to preserve  the bones  of each indivi-
dual  separately.  This  belief  is  also  evidenced  in  written  records.10
Many ossuaries, however,  contained  bones  of  several  individuals.11
By the 4th-5th  centuries  CE, the  belief  in resurrection  had  become
independent  of  the  preservation  of  the  bones. The  Babylonian  Tal-
mud tells the story of 400 boys and girls who were taken as captives
in a ship. The girls, in danger of having to  surrender themselves to
their  captors, jumped  into  the  sea,  only  however  after  being  prom-
ised  that  resurrection  applies  also  to  those  swallowed  by  lions  and
drowned  in the sea. The boys then decided to follow  them (Babylo-
nian Talmud,  Gittin 57b).

The Tractate "Mourning," generally referred  to by its euphemistic
title  "Semachot"  ("Rejoicing"),  is  the  classic  Rabbinic  text  stating
the rules regarding death and mourning.12 It is a collection of berai-
tot, that is tannaitic rules not included in the Mishnah, the compila-
tion of Jewish law in six orders completed by Rabbi Yehuda Ha-Nasi
at the beginning of the 3rd century. The beraitot were interpreted and
applied by the post-mishnaic scholars insofar as they did not  conflict
with the Mishnah. The Tractate reads:

Rabbi  'Akiva  says:  "The  bones  may  not  be  gathered  until  the
flesh  has wasted  away;  once  it  has, the  features  are  no  longer
recognizable  in  the  skeleton"  (XII,  7).  The  ossilegium  [i.  e.,
gathering of the bones  -  TE] of two corpses may take place at
the  same time,  as  long  as the  bones  of  one  are put  at the  one
end  of  a  sheet  and  those  of  the  other  at  the  other  end  of  the
sheet.  So Rabbi  Johanan  ben  Nuri.  Rabbi  'Akiva  says: "In  the
course of time, the sheet will waste away; in the course of time,
the  bones  will  intermingle.  Let  them  rather  be  gathered  and
placed  in ossuaries." (XII, 8).

As a rule, the  transfer  of a  dead  body  or  of  remaining  bones  from
one grave to another  is  forbidden:

Whosoever  finds  a corpse  in  a tomb  should  not  move  it  from
its place, unless he knows that this was a temporary grave (XIII,
5); whosoever  finds  bones  in a tomb  should place them  on  an
arcosolium. So  Rabbi  'Akiva.  The  sages  say:  "He  should  not

51

Talia  Einhorn

move  them  from  their place." If he found  them  in a koch or in
a  loculus,  he  should  not  move them  from  their place  (XIII, 6).
Neither  a corpse  nor the  bones  of a corpse  may be  transferred
from  a  wretched  place  to  an  honoured  place,  nor,  needless  to
say, from  an honoured  place  to a wretched place (XIII, 7).

The  rules  also  forbid  the  selling  of  grave  sites,  considering  such
sales null  and  void:

Ossuary  of Yehosef,  son  of  Caiapha  (1st century  CE); ©see  next  page

52

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law  and  Burials

Ossuary  of Yehosef,
son  of  Caiapha  (1st
century  CE)
©  Courtesy  of  Israel
Antiquities  Authority

A new tomb13 may be measured,  sold or divided.  An old  tomb
may be neither measured, nor sold, nor divided (XIV, 3). Who-
soever  sells the path  to his tomb to  another  has  made  no  sale.
Whosoever sells the ground set aside for his funeral  oration  has
made no sale (XIV, 11).

There  were,  however,  also  exceptions  to  the  rule.  The  dead  were
buried outside the city. When the city expanded, the sages were able
to give the interests of those living in the city priority over the dead.
In Semachot, one finds the following  passage:

A tomb flanked by a town on three sides, or on two sides  facing
each other, need not be cleared out if it is more than fifty  cubits
away  from  each  side. If less than this, it must be  cleared  away
(XIV, 9). All tombs (within a city) may be cleared out (XIV, 10).

Of  the  latter,  there  is  another  version:  "All  tombs  may  be  cleared
except that of a king or a prophet.  Rabbi  'Akiva  said:  'The  tomb  of
a king or prophet may also be cleared.'"14  The bones  cleared  out  of
a tomb were collected and moved to a new location  for reburial. An
Aramaic  burial  inscription  of  the  Second  Temple  period  found  on
the  Mount  of  Olives  reads: "Hither  were  brought  the  bones  of  Uz-
ziah,  King  of Judah  —  do not open."15  This  inscription  proves  that
the  bones  of  King  Uzziah  (8th  century  BCE,  Kings  II  14:21-22)
were  removed  in  the  period  of  the  Second  Temple  from  their  first
tomb to a new  location.

The  opinions  presented  in  the  Tractate  regarding  the  transfer  of
the  bones  show  the  concern  of  the  sages  for  the  ritual  purity  or

53

Talia  Einhorn

impurity  of  the  site of  the  grave  thereby  cleared.  They  were  intent
on maintaining their daily life  and routine  in ritual cleanliness. Here
also their pragmatic approach is evidenced by the  following  incident,
related  in the Babylonian  Talmud  (Zebachim  113a-b):16

On one occasion they found  [human] bones in the Wood Cham-
ber,17  and  they  desired  to  declare  Jerusalem  unclean.  Where-
upon  Rabbi  Joshua  rose  to  his  feet  and  exclaimed:  Is  it  not  a
shame and disgrace to us that we declare the city of our  fathers
unclean!  Where  are  the  dead  of  the  Flood,  and  where  are  the
dead of Nebuchadnezzar?

The  sages  were  not  occupied  with  securing  the  resurrection  or  the
comfort  of the dead in the afterlife.  The Talmud permits the crushing
of bones, so that  they can  be  put in a basket  when  transferred  from
one place to another {Shekalim 8,  I).18 Regarding coffins, Semachot
states (XVIII, 9), "It is forbidden  to use a coffin  that has been cleared
out.  If  it  is  of  stone  or  clay,  it  should  be  shattered;  if  of  wood,
burned."19

2.2.3  The  Status of the  Rules  in Halakha  (Jewish Law) Today
The  halakha  is  the  product  of  the  efforts  of  many  generations  of
scholars  without  any  legislative  institution  empowered  to  enact  a
systematic  code of laws. To date, there  is no code that combines all
of  the  rules  in  a  way  that  eliminates  the  need  to  have  recourse  to
other  sources.  In  the  16th century,  the  halakha  was  codified  in  the
Shulchan  'Arukh, a codification  which  was  finally  accepted  in  the
17th  century  by  world  Jewry  following  the  incorporation  of  later
authoritative  commentaries  into  its  final  structure.20  Yet,  even  the
Shulchan  'Arukh has  never  been  considered  binding  law,  although,
to  be  sure,  later  authorities  would  depart  from  its  rulings  only
with  reluctance. This has made it, together  with  the  many  commen-
taries  written  on  it, the  starting  point  for  every  inquiry  into  Jewish
law.

As a starting point, it is therefore  important to see, from  a halakhic
point of view, which of the rules mentioned in the  Tractate Semachot
were  incorporated  into the  Shulchan  'Arukh. The  rule regarding the
duty to clear away a tomb flanked  by a town  on  three sides was not
incorporated  into  the code,  which  only  mentions  that tombs  should
be  placed  at  least  50  cubits  from  towns.  One  of  the  commentaries
to the Shulchan  'Arukh  states that even this has ceased  to be the rule
{Shulchan  'Arukh, Yoreh De'ah  365).21  Other  rules  were  incorpo-
rated. Thus, where a grave  cannot  be preserved  or if there is danger
of  plunder  or  of  water  penetration,  then  the  grave  must  be  cleared
{Shulchan  'Arukh, Yoreh De'ah  363). A tomb creating  a public nui-
sance,  such  as  a tomb that  is  situated  near  a  road,  may  be  cleared,

54

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law  and  Burials

and  its  place  then  becomes  ritually  clean  (Shulchan 'Arukh,  Yoreh
De'ah  364).

However,  to render a decision  in Jewish  law, one must also  con-
sult  the  Talmudic  commentaries,  the  novellae  ("additions"  to  the
commentary  on the  Talmud), and  the  responsa  literature  (all  of  the
recorded  rulings  and  decisions  rendered  by  halakhic authorities  in
the post-Talmudic era in response to questions submitted in writing),
as well as legislation  and customs that followed  the code. This pro-
cess  is further  complicated  by the  existence  of  conflicting  opinions
among the  authorities  who made the  decisions.  Since the middle of
the  11th  century,  there  has  been  no  single  spiritual  centre,  at  any
given  time,  whose  decisions  were  considered  authoritative  for  the
whole Jewish  world. As a result  of the two thousand years  spent  in
the Diaspora and the lack of central institutions which could exercise
authority  over the whole of the Jewish world, Jewish  law is charac-
terized  by  a lack  of hierarchy.  Therefore,  on many matters  there  is
no  settled  halakha  at  all.  The  Chief  Rabbinate  in  Israel  does  not
command  such  authority.22  Not  even  all  of  Israel's  Orthodox  reli-
gious public recognizes the exclusive halakhic authority of the Chief
Rabbinate,  nor  does  this  include  the  different  approaches  taken  by
the  leaders  of  Conservative  and  Reform  Judaism.23  In  Israel,  these
movements bear little weight; yet in the United  States they represent
the majority  of the Jewish communities. Therefore, the opinions and
decisions  cited  above  of both  former  Chief  Rabbis cannot be  taken
as conclusive of the attitude of Jewish law towards the clearing and
excavation  of graves.

For example, there  are halakhic opinions, such as those  given  in
1992 by Rabbi I. Kolitz, Chief Rabbi and Head of Rabbinical Courts,
Jerusalem,  Israel, concerning  the  Jewish  cemetery  in Ottensen,  Al-
tona  in Germany, and that in French  Hill  in Jerusalem. In these two
cases,  Rabbi  Kolitz  opposed  the  clearing  of  the  graves  and  rein-
terment  of  the  bones  in  another  place.  The  Ottensen  cemetery,  al-
ready  desecrated  by  the Nazis  during  the  Second  World  War,  was
sold  after  the  War by the Jewish  Community  in Hamburg. The  site
was eventually  bought by a German  company  that planned  to build
on  the  site  a building  with  two  floors  underground. Athra Kadisha
started a demonstration on the site, claiming that according to Jewish
law,  the  sale  of  the  cemetery  was  null  and  void  ab  initio.  Rabbi
Kolitz, asked  to give  an opinion  stating the  halakha  on this  matter,
wrote that according to Jewish law, the Ottensen cemetery had to be
covered  with cement, and building would  be allowed over it but no
digging would be allowed  underneath.24

In  the  case  of  French  Hill  in  Jerusalem,  where a road  had  to  be
constructed  to  connect  the  newly-built  northern  neighbourhoods  of
Jerusalem  with  the  city,  Rabbi  Kolitz  decided  that the  grave  caves
discovered while the ground was being leveled  should not be touch-
ed.  Instead,  another  route  should  be  chosen  and  a bridge  built  to

55

Talia  Einhorn

solve  the transportation  difficulties.25  Rabbi  Kolitz made it  clear in
his decision that he was aware of the difficulties  created by his deci-
sion.  As  it  eventually  turned  out,  those  difficulties  entailed  signifi-
cantly  higher  costs  and  a three  years'  delay  of  the project,  thereby
causing  considerable  inconvenience  to  those  living  in the  northern
neighbourhoods.26  Following the decision, the ossuaries, along with
bones which had previously been removed  from the site, were rebur-
ied.  The  new  route  chosen  did  not  solve  all  the  problems.  As evi-
denced  in  an  affidavit  presented  by  the  Jerusalem  Municipality  in
one  of  the  cases  brought  before  the  Israeli  Supreme  Court  in  that
matter, another grave cave was discovered on the new route.27 How-
ever, Athra KadisHa  made no  protests  this  time, the  cave was  duly
excavated,  and construction works were eventually completed. Both
decisions, though reasoned, are rather cryptic in that they cite neither
any  sources  of  Jewish  law nor  any  precedents  upon which  they  are
based.28

Different  decisions, preferring  the clearing of graves and reburial
of  the bones  to  the covering  of graves  with  cement, were given by
notable  rabbis  of  previous  generations.  In  all  these  decisions  the
rabbis debated the question very seriously, expressing the reluctance
and  inherently  negative  approach  of  Jewish  law  to  the removal  of
bones  from  one  site  to  another.  Yet,  when  the  situation  seemed  to
require  the  clearing  of  graves  it  was  allowed.  Rabbi  Shemuel  Lan-
dau,  son  of  Rabbi  Yechezkel  Landau,  decided  in favour  of  clearing
in  a  case  where  a  road  had  to  be  built  passing  over  a cemetery,29
and  so  did  Rabbi  Moshe  Schick.30  Rabbi  Lerner,  Chief  Rabbi  of
Germany,  when  faced  with  a  similar  problem  in  1905,  sent  his
proposed  decision  to  famous  rabbis  all  over  Europe,  the  United
States  and  Israel.31  He  then  wrote  an  opinion  discussing  the  (on
the  whole)  concurring  opinions.32  Rabbi  Lerner  pointed  out  that
the  transferral  of  the  bones,  including  those  not  directly  affected
by  the  new  road,  if properly done, would be more respectful  to the
dead, than merely covering them. Rabbi  Lerner argued that he could
see  no  worse  degradation  of  the  dead  than  leaving  them  covered
under  the  newly  constructed  road.  Some  of the  rabbis also  stressed
that  his  solution  is  preferable,  for  it  allows  the  remaining  family
members  to  visit  the  graves  of  their  ancestors  and  thereby  console
themselves.33

Another  decision  by  a very  prominent  halakhic  authority,  Rabbi
Moshe Schreiber (the Chatam  Sofer), concerns a Jewish cemetery in
Vienna  especially  allotted to the Jewish  Community  for the purpose
of  burying  those  of its members who  died  in a cholera epidemic.34
It  would  have  been  very  costly  for  the  Jewish  community  to  take
the  precautions  needed  to  preserve  that  cemetery,  and  therefore
Rabbi Eliezer Horowitz of Vienna sought the opinion of the Chatam
Sofer  whether  it  would  be  permitted  according  to  the  halakha  to
clear  the  cemetery  and  transfer  the  bones  to  the  Jewish  cemetery

56

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law  and  Burials

regularly  used  by  the  Community.  Rabbi  Schreiber  took  the  view
that since the cemetery  in its current  state could not be preserved, it
was  therefore  a religious  duty  to  transfer  the  bones.  The  expenses
involved  in the preservation  of the cemetery  should not be imposed
on the public.

With  respect  to  ossuaries,  the  Shulchan  'Arukh rules  that  it  is
prohibited to derive a benefit  from  a coffin  that has been  cleared. If
the ossuary was made of stone or clay, it should be shattered and, if
made  of  wood,  burned  (YD  363).  Rabbi  Yechiel  Michel  Epstein
ruled  that it is not necessary  to destroy  the coffin,  provided  that no
benefit  be derived  from  it.35  Based  upon  a decision  of  Rabbi  Uziel
in a different  matter,36 it has been argued that the study and research
carried out by archaeologists on the ossuaries should not be regarded
as benefit  derived  from  the dead and are thus  permitted.37

It is not too surprising therefore  to find that Rabbi Y. M. Toledano,
Chief  Rabbi  of  Tel-Aviv,  wrote  an  article  in  1951,  in  which  he
describes  with  enthusiasm  the  excavations  of the  extensive  ancient
necropolis  in  Tiberias.38  The  catacombs  in  Tiberias  on  the  Sea  of
Galilee  and  in  Bet  She'arim,  situated  on  the  southern  slope  of
Lower  Galilee,  contain  the  graves  of  revered  Jewish  sages  from
Mishnaic  and  Talmudic  times,  not  the  least  important  of  which  is
the grave of Rabbi Yehudah Ha-Nasi, Patriarch of Judea and redactor
of  the Mishnah (2nd  —  beginning  of  3rd  century  CE).  Rock-hewn
catacombs  were prepared  to provide  burial  places to sell  to persons
outside Bet  She'arim  and Tiberias, and coffins  were sent to Tiberias
and  Bet  She'arim  from  the  Jewish  Diaspora  in  the  neighbouring
countries  and  even  from  Babylonia.  It  is noteworthy  that  these  ex-
cavations were intentionally  carried  out  at grave  sites and were  not
the  result  of  any  pressing  public  necessity.  Yet Rabbi  Toledano, an
important Orthodox rabbinic authority, saw no problem with the ex-
cavations  from  a halakhic point of view. He even relates that  in his
presence  ossuaries were opened  in Tiberias  and their contents  were
checked.39

This exposition  demonstrates that under Jewish law different  atti-
tudes  have  been  adopted  to  the  problem  at  hand.  The  existence  of
such differences  of opinion and even the acknowledgment that under
Jewish  law the problem  does not readily  lend  itself to one clear-cut
solution  with  which  all  religious  persons  would  agree  do  not  help
solve the conflict  for those who remain deeply convinced that bones
should not be disturbed  except  in cases of dire necessity  (for  exam-
ple,  if the grave  is  in  danger  of being  flooded  and  there  is no  way
to  avoid  the  hazard), that  no effort  should  be  spared  to  avoid  such
disturbance,  that  no  regard  should  be  paid  to  the  costs  involved
in keeping  the graves  in place, and  that  archaeological  excavations
of  graves  must  be  strictly  forbidden,  even  when  the  bones  must
be  transferred.  Jewish  halakha  further  complicates  this  problem,
because  while  belief  is  an  important  element  in  religion, the ha-

il

Talia  Einhorn

lakha  is  not  opposed  to  coercion  in  order  to  achieve  the  desired
behaviour,  even  for  those  who  deny  the  principles  of  faith.40  This
approach  is  reinforced  by  the  principle  of  collective  responsibility
applicable  to  the  Jewish  people,  as  "all  Israel  are  surety  for  one
another"  (Babylonian  Talmud,  Shevu'ot  39a).  There  are  thousands
of persons  who are so strongly opposed to the excavations that they
are  willing  to  demonstrate  and  even  use  violence  to  enforce  their
way.41 To be sure, there are still more persons who sympathize with
the notion of allowing the dead to rest in peace. Treating the graves
of  the  dead  with  awe is not  an uncommon  feeling.  Before  we turn
to examine the ways in which this attitude has come to affect  Israeli
law  and  practice,  we  shall  first  examine  the  other  public  interest
involved.

3  The  Scientific  Value of Archaeological  Excavation

of  Graves

According  to  the  records  of the  Israel  Antiquities  Authority (IAA),
there are in Israel some 15,000 antiquity sites. As Israel was continu-
ously  settled  throughout  history,  each  living  culture has in turn  left
its  remains  in  the  soil,  including  remains  from  the  emergence  of
homo sapiens  to those left  by  the Patriarchs  and the generations  of
their Jewish descendants, Egyptians, Canaanites, Philistines, Phoeni-
cians,  Assyrians,  Babylonians,  Persians,  Greeks,  Romans,  Naba-
taeans,  Byzantines,  Arab  Moslems,  Christian  Crusaders,  Mamluks,
and  Ottomans.  Even the  Mongols  invaded  Israel  but  were  defeated
by the Mamluks  in  1260. With so many peoples  living and  fighting
in this land, it is difficult  to carry out excavations without finding  at
least  some  graves.  There  are  areas,  especially  around  Jerusalem,
where  this  is  virtually impossible. The Jerusalem  Necropolis  forms
a belt  3 kilometres wide around the city.42

The  study  of  archaeology  would  suffer  a  major  setback  if  the
digging  of  grave  sites were  prohibited,  especially  because  they  are
so numerous. As a normal part of the daily life of any culture, burial
deserves  careful  study and  attention.  There  is  more  to  it,  however.
Grave  sites  contain  much  information  often  not  found  in  other
sites.43  Each  successive  culture  of  the  past  tended  to  destroy  and
loot  the  treasures  of preceding  cultures  or to  make  new  use  for  its
own  purposes  of  the  remains,  such  as  parts  of  buildings  or  road
pavement.  However,  tombs  were  generally  located  outside  cities
which  made  them  less vulnerable.  The  new  settlers  would  not  nor-
mally  place  the  foundations  of  their  homes  in  the  graves  of  their
predecessors, nor did they tend to destroy the graves.44 Where burial
caves  were  used,  preservation  is  at  its  best,  because  the  cave  pro-
tected its contents. Although many tombs were broken into and plun-
dered  over  time,  a  considerable  number  remained  undisturbed,  and

58

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law  and  Burials

these provide valuable and even unique information  and evidence of
the past.

It is not only the objects  found  in the burial caves that are impor-
tant.  The  human  remains  found  in the graves may  help  reconstruct
the life  history  of individuals  and populations through the examina-
tion of their bones and teeth. The analysis of the bones in an archaeo-
logical  context  provides  the  only  direct  evidence  of  human  evolu-
tion.  It  may  also  serve  to  verify  the  accuracy  of  written  records
regarding the origin, health, causes of death, and age distribution of
past populations.  Since physical anthropology  is based on statistics,
there  is a direct  correlation between  the accuracy  of the  results and
the  size  of  the  population  of  all  different  categories  (men,  women,
children)  analyzed.

Epigraphy,  the  reading  and  interpretation  of  old  inscriptions,  is
another  tool  of  great  importance  that  contributes  to  our  knowledge
of history. It involves the deciphering and understanding of inscrip-
tions. The epigraphic  study of the inscriptions engraved on sarcoph-
agi  and  ossuaries  requires  that  those  be  kept  in  research  institutes,
rather  than  in  the  ground.  Photographs  are  inadequate  substitutes,
since  there  are  often  scratches  on  the  ossuaries  that  resemble  the
lines of  the engravings.  Only  if the original  inscription  is made ac-
cessible to researchers can gross mistakes be avoided. A few  exam-
ples, to be discussed  below, will  give  an idea of the valuable  infor-
mation  that  may  be  gathered  from  an  archaeological  and  anthropo-
logical  study  of grave sites.

3.1  The Tomb of Yehosef,  Son of Caiapha45
Buried in an ancient cave near Jerusalem, the family  tomb of Joseph
Caiaphas,  High  Priest  (18—36  CE)  at  the  time  of  Jesus'  activity
and  crucifixion,  was  excavated  by  Israeli  archaeologists.  Caiaphas
is reported as having said (John  11:49—50): "It is better for you that
one man die for  the nation than that the entire nation  be  lost." The
family bones were sealed in ornate and elaborately carved ossuaries.
This  accords  with  predominant  Jewish  custom  during  the  Mishnaic
and Talmudic periods.46 The age of the bones, the method of burial,
the inscriptions, the type of writing on the ossuaries, and the artifacts
found  in the  cave  all  indicate  that  it served  an  influential  family  of
that  period.  The names  used and the  location  of  the bones  indicate
that these are indeed  the remains of that High  Priest.

3.2  Evidence  of  Crucifixion
Historical reports of crucifixion  are numerous. Yet, only archaeology
could provide  tangible  proof of how this mode  of execution  was in
fact carried out. The bone of a crucified  person, perforated  by a nail,
found  in Jerusalem  provides  the necessary  evidence.

59

Talia  Einhorn

Heel  of  crucified
person  perforated  by
an  iron  nail,  10.5 cm
long,  Jerusalem
(1st  century  CE)
© Courtesy  of  Israel
Antiquities  Authority

3.3  The Ancient  Burial  Ground in the Mamilla  Neighbourhood

of Jerusalem

The massacre of Christians during the Persian conquest of Jerusalem
in 614 CE has been well  documented  in historical  records. Accord-
ing to  these  records, Jerusalem  was besieged  in April  614 CE. The
siege  lasted  some 20 days and ended with a Persian victory. During
the battle, the Persians slew every Christian they captured. The bod-

"For the  redemption
and  salvation  of those,
God  knows  their
names"
Greek  inscription,
614  CE,  Mamilla
neighbourhood,
Jerusalem
©  Courtesy  of  Israel
Antiquities  Authority

60

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law and  Burials

ies were then buried in various sites, only some of which are listed in
the records. The excavation  carried out in Mamilla, an area near the
Jaffa Gate of the Old City, yielded the first archaeological evidence of
the massacre.47 A mass grave of hundreds of bodies was discovered
together with a Greek inscription, reading "for the redemption and sal-
vation of those, God knows their names," a formula well known from
other  contemporaneous  inscriptions,  akin  to  the  tribute  commonly
made to the unknown soldier; a mosaic floor with crosses depicting a

Gold coin  minted by
the Emperor  Phocas
(602-610  CE),
providing  the
connection  to 614 CE
massacre  in Jerusalem.
Mamilla
neighbourhood,
Jerusalem
© Courtesy  of Israel
Antiquities Authority

Cache of  late
Byzantine  "slipper-
shaped" oil  lamps
(7th century CE)
Mamilla
neighbourhood,
Jerusalem
© Courtesy of Israel
Antiquities Authority

61

Talia  Einhorn

part of what may have been  the Annunciation  scene; a cache of late
Byzantine  "slipper-shaped"  oil  lamps,  the  nozzle  of  many  adorned
with a cross or a palm leaf motif; cross-shaped pendants found among
the bones, and some 130 coins. The date of the latest coin is of impor-
tance, since the bodies could not have been placed in the burial cave
before that date. This was a gold coin minted by the  Emperor  Phocas
(602—610  CE), which  seems  to provide  a connection  to the  events
of 614 CE in Jerusalem.  The  anthropologists who studied the bones
concluded  that  the  grave  contained  a  relatively  young  population,
younger  than  the normal  age  distribution  expected  to be found  in a
cemetery of that period. This further  suggests that those buried here
were killed  in a battle  or in  another,  similar catastrophe.

Pool of

Mamilla•
t

•iIM

0
1 
0

The  Mamilla
Neighbourhood
opposite  Jaffa  Gate,
just  west  of the  Old
City  walls
©  Courtesy  of Dr.
Ronny  Reich

Mamilla 
Street 
\ 
\ 

\ 
>  Old City wall
< 

_ , . „.
y

\y

&/S/ 
/ 

mass 
grave 

^f* 
\ 
\ 

parking 
garage 

400 m 

• 
M
^™————' 

i 
1200ft 

X  Jaffa Gate

li'David's Tower
i
t
1
I

1
1
1
(

3.4  The Akeldama  Tombs48
Akeldama  is  situated  in  the  Kidron  Valley,  on the  periphery  of  the
Silwan  village  south  of  the  Old  City  of  Jerusalem.  It  contains  one
of Jerusalem's  richest  concentrations  of rock-hewn tombs. The IAA

Map  of the  Akeldama
area
©Courtesy  of Dr.
Gideon  Avni/Israel
Antiquities  Authority 

I

62

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law  and  Burials

discovered there an unplundered large burial complex with an abun-
dance of  artifacts.

The complex included three separate burial caves. Each cave con-
tained  two  or three  chambers  with  burial  niches  (loculi or kokhim)
and  an  inner  chamber  hewn  with  arcosolia  (arched  shelves)  and
burial  troughs.  Special  chambers  served  as  ossuary  repositories.
Some of the chambers  had  decorated  stone  doors  fitted  with  pivots
and  hinges.  The  caves  were  part  of  a Jewish  burial  ground  of  the
Second Temple period (which ended in 70 CE, with the conquest of
Jerusalem and the destruction of the Temple by the Romans). A large
number of ossuaries containing bones were found  in the caves, some
of  them  richly  decorated  and  inscribed  with  the  names  of  the  de-
ceased  in  Hebrew  and  Greek.  The  high  quality  of  the  architecture
and  decoration  of  the  caves  indicates  that  they  may  have  served
affluent  Jewish  families.  The  name  "Ariston  of  Apamea"  inscribed
on  an  ossuary  found  in  one  of  the  caves  may  be  identified  with  a
wealthy Apamean Jew bearing that name and described in the Mish-
nah as bringing gifts  from  Apamea in northern  Syria to the  Temple
in  Jerusalem  (Mishnah, Zera'im,  Hallah  4,  11). In  addition  to  the
ossuaries, there were also bowls, storage jars, oil  lamps, glass ves-
sels and jewelry.  The findings  reflect  Jewish  customs  and  traditions
on the eve of the destruction  of the Temple.

Schematic  plan  of  the
Akeldama  caves
© Courtesy  of  Dr.
Gideon  Avni/Israel
Antiquities  Authority

63

Talia  Einhorn

While Jewish  burial  in the  caves  came to an  end  in  70 CE, there
is  evidence  that  use  of  the  caves  in  the  form  of  cremation  burials
resumed  somewhat later. Since cremation was prohibited under Jew-
ish  law, it  is probable  that  these  remains  were those  of pagans, per-
haps  Roman  soldiers.  The  ossuaries  were  used  to  keep  the  charred
bones. Burial was again resumed in the 5th-6th centuries CE (Byzan-
tine  period),  and,  at  that  time,  was  carried  out  in  wooden  coffins.
The  objects  found  dating  to  this  period  included  many  oil  lamps
decorated  with  crosses,  indicating  that these were  Christian  burials.
It  is  noteworthy  that  the  later  burials  did  not  displace,  damage  or
destroy  the old  remains  of former  periods.

3.5  A Burial  Cave of the  Late First  Temple  Period,  Mount Zion49
This unplundered  burial  cave is an important  link in the study of the
late  First  Temple  period  necropolis  that  surrounded  Jerusalem.  The
cave  probably  contained  the  remains  of  at  least  43  persons—26
adults and  17 youngsters and children. Two-thirds of the adults were
males.  The  maximum  age  was  60  for  males,  and  they  measured
1.57 — 1.67  m. The  maximum  age  for  the females  was  50, and they
measured  1.44—1.52  m.  According  to  anthropological  analysis,  at
least  some  of  the  interred  individuals  belonged  to the  same  family,
which  supports  the  prevalent  opinion  that  the  First  Temple  period
caves  were  family  sepulchers.  An  examination  of  dental  remains
revealed  that,  unlike  most  of  the  population  of  the  later  Roman
world, those buried  in that  cave  did  not  suffer  from  dental caries.

The  skulls  were  concentrated  in  one place.  The  other  skeletal  re-
mains covered the entire floor  surface. The findings  included pottery,
jewelry  and  other  personal  objects  originally  buried  with  the  de-
ceased, as well  as a scaraboid  seal  made  of bone, with an engraving
of  a fish  with  fins  and  tail  on  one  side  and  the  names  (in  Hebrew)
of both  the owner and her  father  on the  other. The epigraphy  is that
of  the First Temple period.  The  seal  is of  special  importance,  since
it  was  found  in  a  well-defined  archaeological  context,  unlike  most
First  Temple  period  seals  which  have  not  been  found  in  situ  but
rather  appeared  on  the  antiquities  market.50  Three  arrowheads, dis-
covered in the cave, probably caused the deaths of individuals buried
in it. The burial cave was used in the 8th and 7th centuries BCE—the
time  of  Jerusalem's  maximum  expansion  during  the  First  Temple
period.  The  discovery  of  the  burial  cave  in this  area  is  further  evi-
dence  of the  westward  expansion  of  the  city, a conclusion  corrobo-
rated  by other  excavations.

4  Israeli  Law  and  Practice  Regarding  the  Excavation

of Tombs

The  relationship  between  religion  and  state  in  Israel  is a  somewhat
troubled  one. The  interrelation  among  state, nationality  and religion

64

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law  and  Burials

cannot be completely  severed,  as it is inherent  in the very nature of
Israel  as the state of the "Jewish" people.51 The historic right of the
Jewish  people  to  return  to  its  ancient  homeland,  acknowledged  as
such  by  the  international  community,  is  deeply  rooted  in  religion.
Israel  maintains  strong  connections  with  all  segments  of  Diaspora
Jewry  scattered  throughout  the  world  yet  constituting  one  nation
with  common  values  and  heritage.  On  the  other  hand,  Israel  is  a
secular  state  guided  by  democratic  principles.  This  means  that  in-
dividuals and authorities alike are subject to the rule of law emanat-
ing from  the  secular  legislator  rather than to religious  law of divine
origin. An Israeli judge confronted  with a lacuna is instructed, under
the  Foundations  of  Law  Act,  5740—1980,52  to  reach  a  decision  in
the light of the principles  of liberty, justice, equity, and peace of the
Jewish Heritage. Interpretations of this section conflict  as to whether
these principles  should be used as an inspiration, combining  the ha-
lakhic  heritage  with  that  of,  for  example,  Maimonides,  Spinoza,
Mendelssohn, and Herzl,53 or whether the court should make gener-
ous  use  of  these  principles  so as  to bring  the underlying  values  of
Israeli  law  closer  to  those  of  Jewish  law.54  This  legal  formalistic
aspect is, however, just one side of the coin. In the absence of formal
legal  status  accorded  to  religion,  the  religious  parties  have  under-
taken, from  the earliest days of the state, to protect  and enhance the
influence  of  Jewish  law  over  the  Jewish  state.  Since  the  religious
parties are represented  in the  Israeli  Parliament  and also  participate
in  the  Israeli  government  and  administrative  authorities,  their  suc-
cess  has  come  to  depend  on  the  strength  of  their  political  power
which may vary  from  one  administration  to another yet at all  times
has commanded  appreciable  weight. When analysing Israeli  legisla-
tion, the case  law interpreting  the legislation  and the practice  of the
administrative  authorities, account  must be taken  of both aspects.

4.1 

Israeli Legislation  and Its Interpretation  by the  Supreme
Court

4.1.1  The Antiquities  Law,  5739-197955
The scope and purpose  of the Antiquities Law: The Antiquities Law
was enacted with the purpose of promoting and protecting the public
interest in antiquities and archaeological research. As an integral part
of these concerns, the law regulates the licencing and conducting of
archaeological  excavations,  as well  as the management  of archaeo-
logical  sites.  Private  persons  and  state  authorities  are  subject  to  a
series of duties ranging from  the notification  of the finding  of antiq-
uities to the halting of all development works until the site has been
duly excavated and the findings properly documented. The law takes
account  of  religion  insofar  as  the  excavation  of  a  place  serving  a
religious purpose is concerned, yet politics played its most important
role  in one  specific  aspect  of the  drafting,  namely  in the  definition
of "antiquity."

65

Talia  Einhorn

Human  remains as  "antiquities": Section  1 defines  "antiquities"

as  including

(1)  any object, whether detached or fixed,  which was made by
man  before  the year  1700 of the general  era, and includes any-
thing  subsequently  added thereto which  forms  an  integral  part
thereof;  . . .
(3)  zoological  or botanical  remains  from  before  the  year 1300
of the general  era.

When  the  Government  introduced  the bill  in Parliament, the  defini-
tion  included  also  "human  remains  from  before  the  year  1300."56
This definition  met with objections  from  those Members of the Isra-
eli  Parliament  belonging  to  the  Jewish  Religious  Front  Party,  who
found  it  inconceivable  to treat human bones  in the  same manner as
one  would  treat  animal  remains  or other  ancient  objects.57  Eventu-
ally, it was agreed in the Parliament to delete "human remains" from
the definition.  This was a departure from  the former  law enacted by
the  British  Mandate  regime.  The  Antiquities  Ordinance,  1929,  in
force  before  the  Antiquities  Law,  read:58  "'antiquity'  includes  ...
human and animal remains of a date earlier than the year 600 A. D."
This  omission  was lamented  by the Minister  of Education, who  ar-
gued  that  the  new  definition  deviated  from  the  original  purpose  of
the  Antiquities  Law  and  was detrimental  to  archaeological,  anthro-
pological  and medical  scientific  research.59

According  to  anthropological  theory,  human  beings  comprise  the
zoological  family  Hominidae.60  From  an  anthropological  point  of
view,  human  remains  would  therefore  be  considered  "antiquities."
Nevertheless, in view of the history of the legislation, such an inter-
pretation  would  not be plausible. In cases brought before  the Israeli
Supreme  Court,  the  IAA  has  argued  that  despite  this  legislative
history,  human  remains  should nevertheless be  considered  "antiqui-
ties."61  The  Supreme Court has not yet decided  this issue.

Tombs as  "antiquity sites":  According  to  the  same  section  1, an
"antiquity  site" is an area which  contains  antiquities  and which  has
been  declared  as  such  by the Director  of the  Antiquities  Authority.
An  area  containing  tombs  may  therefore  be  declared  an  "antiquity
site."  The  tomb  itself  and  all  other  objects  made  before  1700  are
"antiquities." The same holds true for artificially  made burial caves.
Private  persons  as well  as public  authorities  are  under  a duty  to
notify  the  Director  of the Antiquities  Authority  of any discovery  of
an  antiquity  (sections  3, 6). Since  tombs  fall  within  the  definition,
their  discovery  must  be  reported,  and  the  Director  may  declare  the
place  of  discovery  an  antiquity  site  (section  28).  Following  such a
declaration,  the land may not be further  developed without the writ-
ten approval of the Director (section 29(a)). In some cases, the Min-
ister of Education may decide that the site is of such importance that

66

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law  and  Burials

it  should  be  expropriated  for  the  purpose  of  conservation  and  re-
search,  and  the  laws regarding  land  acquisition  for  public  purposes
then  become applicable. This is not often  done.

In the typical situation, the Director will initiate a "rescue  excava-
tion," so called because it rescues the scientific  information  existing
at the site. The excavation is carried out at the expense of  the person
or authority that has undertaken the development  of the area.  During
the  excavations, no person, except the occupier  and  whoever  is  au-
thorized  under  the  excavation  licence,  may  enter  the  site  (section
10). The tombs and their contents are examined by the archaeologists
of the IAA or by a team from a university department of archaeology
licenced by the Director. These archaeologists document the  findings
on the  site  in detail,  accompanying  their  work with  sketches,  plans
and pictures. They then remove the discovered  artifacts  to the  safe-
keeping  of the  IAA  storage rooms. The most  significant  finds  may
eventually  be  exhibited  in  a museum.  The  bones  are  examined  by
anthropologists, if possible on the site, otherwise within the premises
of the  IAA  or the  appropriate  university  departments. According  to
IAA practice, the bones are then placed in rigid containers and trans-
ferred  as quickly as possible to the Ministry of Religious Affairs  for
reburial. The empty burial place is then measured, and  the  site  may
finally  be  returned  to  the  construction  contractors.  When  feasible,
the archaeologists will seal the empty tomb. It is more typical,  how-
ever, that the contractors will cut away and destroy the  empty tomb.
The  Antiquities  Law  prescribes  special  rules  for  antiquity  sites
used  for  religious  requirements  or  devoted  to  a  religious  purpose
(section 29(c)). At such sites, the Director may only  licence  excava-
tion  with  the  approval  of  a  committee  of  Ministers  consisting  of
the Minister of Education, the Minister of Religious  Affairs  and  the
Minister of Justice. It has often  been claimed by the groups  opposed
to  the  excavation  of  graves, that  grave  sites  should  be  regarded  as
devoted  to religious purposes. This issue has come twice before  the
Supreme  Court.

The first  such case concerned a decision of the Minister of Educa-
tion  to  suspend  the  licence  previously  granted  to carry  out  excava-
tions in the City of David in Jerusalem.62  The decision  of the Minis-
ter  was  made  following  violent  riots  of  Orthodox  Jews  against  the
excavations and a decision  of Chief Rabbi Goren declaring  the  City
of David an ancient Jewish cemetery and prohibiting the  excavation
of  the  site.63 Under  section  29(c), the  impact  of  such  a  declaration
would  have  meant  that  the excavation  could only be continued  if a
committee of Ministers, as previously  described, approved  it.  While
all judges agreed that the Minister's decision was flawed,  there were
important  differences  of opinion among them. Two Justices were of
the  opinion  that,  as  Israel  is  not  a  theocracy,  the  decisions  of  the
Chief  Rabbinate  could  not  fetter  in  any  manner  the  discretion  of
officers  of  the  state  in  the  exercise  of  their  discretionary  powers

67

Talia  Einhom

under state law. Whatever the importance  of the Chief Rabbis' deci-
sions  for  the  faithful,  the  Chief  Rabbis  are  not  authorized  to  make
factual  determinations that may influence  the performance  of a legal
duty, as, in this particular case, in declaring  the site to be an ancient
Jewish cemetery. Administrative officials,  including the Minister, are
not  subject  to  halakhic  decisions.64  If  the  decision  is  based  upon
clear-cut  evidence, then  that  evidence  may  be  taken  into  consider-
ation, but  the  riots of  the  Orthodox  should  not  have  influenced  the
decision  at all. The Justices  cautioned  that  taking  into  account pos-
sible riots could undermine  the whole  essence  of the  rule of law. In
a  democratic  state, no  solution  may  be  sought  by  way  of  physical
pressure  created  by  illegal  demonstrations  and  violent  riots.  This
may prompt  anti-religious circles to use counter-violence  to prevent
the demands  of religious circles'  being  met.

The third Justice, on the other hand, concluded that, when exercis-
ing his discretionary powers, the Minister may make use of halakhic
decisions  of the  members  of  the  Chief  Rabbinate  Council,  who  are
themselves  competent  halakhic  authorities.  This Justice was also of
the  opinion  that  taking  account  of  the  strong  emotions  of  a part  of
the  public,  even  if that  part  is  only  a  minority  of  the  population,
does  not  amount  to  a  surrender  to  violence.  The  authorities  must
exercise  discretion according  to the pertinent  law  and  may take  into
consideration those beliefs of a part of the public which are sincerely
held and are relevant  to the  issue at hand; this applies  even  if those
beliefs  are  rejected  by  scientists.  In  such  a  case,  it  is  incumbent
upon the authority to find the proper balance between the  conflicting
interests  of  science and of  faith.

The role of the court is perceived  very differently  by the Justices.
Under the first  approach, the role of the court is a legally  formalistic
one.  The court  is to maintain  the public  interests  in  the  same  order
of  priority  chosen  by  the  democratic  legislator.  Under  the  second
approach,  first  the  public  authority  and  then  the  court  are  called
upon  to  consider  also  beliefs  and  convictions  not  embraced  by  the
legislator and then to strike another balance. This is a highly political
role  heavily  charged  with  open-ended  discretion,  especially  since
there is no clear guideline as to how to strike the balance.  Reasoning
of this kind  is dangerous in that  it encourages  and may  even reward
pressure.  At  the  end of  the  day,  not  even  the  court  will  be  able  to
provide  a peaceful  resolution  of  such  a dispute.

In  the  second  case,  regarding  the  burial  caves  discovered  in
French  Hill  near  Jerusalem,  the  interpretation  of  this provision  was
heavily  debated.65  The  IAA  argued  that  section  29(c)  applies  only
to  sites  that  at  present  serve  religious  purposes  or  are  otherwise
devoted  to  such.  This  is  supported  by  both  a  textual-grammatical
interpretation  and a teleological  one. According  to  its  language, be-
fore  such a site may be excavated,  the approval  of the  committee of
Ministers  should be sought. As for  places  that  once  served  religious

68

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law and  Burials

purposes  but  are  now  concealed  in  the  ground,  no  such  approval
could be sought prior to discovery.  Such places are often  discovered
during archaeological excavations. This includes not only tombs, but
synagogues,  churches,  other  places  of  prayer  and  worship,  ritual
baths,  etc.  If  section  29(c)  were  to  apply  to  all  of  these,  it  would
mean  that  almost  all  excavations  would  need  to be  stopped  repeat-
edly  until  approval  was  obtained,  and  the  need  to  seek  approval
would become the rule rather than  the exception.

Furthermore, it is questionable whether even functioning  cemeter-
ies  come  within  the  ambit  of  this  section.  The  burial  ceremony  in
Israel  is  performed  according  to  religion.  The  cemetery,  however,
serves burial purposes rather than religious ones. In any case, a place
in which formerly  unknown graves were suddenly  discovered  could
hardly  be  called  a  place  "used  for  religious  requirements"  or  "de-
voted  to  a  religious  purpose."  In  the  French  Hill  case,  the  Court
decided that article 29(c) did not apply. Had this site of graves been
known as a place of visit for worshipers, who came to offer  prayers
at the graves, the conclusion  might  have been  different.

4.1.2  The Protection  of Holy Places Law, 5727-196766
According  to  this  law,  Holy  Places  are  protected  from  desecration
and  any  other  violation  (section  1). The  law  was  enacted  after  the
Six  Day  War,  with  the  purpose  of  protecting  the  Holy  Places  that
came  under  Israeli  control  in  the  aftermath  of  that  war.  The  Holy
Places to which  this law applies  are  in all  probability  those  subject
to the principle  of status quo, that  is the maintenance of the  factual
situation  established  during the  Ottoman  rule  over  Palestine.67  This
principle  was  established  by  a  decree  of  the  Sultan  in  1757,  reaf-
firmed  by a. firman in  1852, and  officially  adopted  by the Treaty of
Berlin in  1878 (article LXII).68 The British  Order-in-Council  (Holy
Places),  1924,  (still  in  effect)  limited  the  courts'  jurisdiction  over
conflicts  concerning  these  places.69  Could  the  Israeli  enactment  be
taken  to relate  to additional  Holy  Places? No list  of  Holy  Places  is
specified  in  the  law.  Yet,  this  is  not  very  likely,  if  one  takes  into
account  the threefold  character  of these places: the notion  of status
quo; the right of free  access; and  the  limitation  of the courts' juris-
diction.70  It would  be rather  difficult  to extend  all  these  guarantees
to every grave site considered  holy by some. It should, however, be
mentioned  in  this  context  that  the  Minister  of  Religious  Affairs,  in
charge  of  the  implementation of  this  law,  enacted  the  Regulations
for the Protection of Places Holy to the Jews, 5741 —1981, the annex
to  which  contains  a  list  of  places  holy  to  the  Jews  that  were  not
included  in the original status quo arrangements. The list includes a
number of tombs of great significance.  It is doubtful  whether it was
within  the  Minister's  powers  to  make  such  a  list.  However,  by  no
means  are  all  tombs  in  Israel,  those  already  discovered  and  those
not yet discovered,  included  within the  scope of protection.

69

Talia  Einhorn

4.1.3  The  Basic  Law:  Human  Dignity  and  Liberty71
Constitutional  protection  for  the  right  to human  dignity  was estab-
lished in this basic law,  which safeguards  not only the dignity of the
living  but,  according  to  the case  law  of the  Israeli  Supreme  Court,
extends  also  to  the  dignity  of  the  dead.72  This  law  embodies  the
principles of a liberal secular state and should be interpreted as treat-
ing  all  tombs,  of  Jews  and  non-Jews  alike,  in an  equal  manner. As
long  as  the  IAA  treats  all  human  remains  in  a  dignified  manner,
from  the point  of view  of a modern  liberal  democratic  society, then
its actions  cannot be  attacked  under this law.

4.1.4  Penal  Law,  5737-197773
Trespassing  on  places  of  worship  and  burial,  with  the  knowledge
that  the  feelings  of  a person  or his religion  are likely to be insulted
thereby,  is  prohibited  (section  172). Archaeologists  carrying  out  li-
cenced  excavations  on  an  antiquity  site  are  permitted  to  do  so  and
could  not therefore  be  considered  trespassers.

4.1.5  Planning  and  Building  Law, 5725-196574
According  to  section  100(3)  of  this  law,  a  public  or  professional
group may file objections to a deposited district outline scheme (lay-
ing  down  the  planning  for  a district  in Israel), local  outline  scheme
or detailed  scheme,  if  the  group  is generally  approved  for  that  pur-
pose by the Minister of  the Interior and the group has a public inter-
est  in the  scheme.

In  1993, the Minister  of the Interior, himself a leading member of
a  strictly  Orthodox  party,  approved  Athra Kadisha as  such  a  body
authorized  to  file  objections  to planning  and building  schemes  if it
has a public  interest in  that  scheme. So far, Athra Kadisha has made
no  use  of  this  authorization,  since  at  the  time  of  deposition  of  a
planning  scheme,  it  is  not  yet  known  whether graves  will  be  found
in  the  area  subject  to  the  scheme.  It  is  usually  only  later,  after  the
scheme has been approved  and construction  is under way, that tombs
are  encountered.  According  to  the  language  of the  law, the  general
approval does not in itself prove the public interest of Athra Kadisha
in any  given case, yet  it does reflect  a certain political  acknowledg-
ment  thereof.  Moreover,  the  authorization  to  file  an objection  does
not  in  itself  indicate  how  the  commission  charged  with  handling
such  objections  is  supposed  to  handle  a  particular  objection.  The
debates  in the  commission  are open  to political pressure.

4.2  Practice regarding  the  Excavation  of Grave  Sites
This  survey of Israeli  legislation  shows that the legislator has not in
any  way  restricted  the  archaeological  excavation  of  tombs. Human
remains  have been  excluded  from  the  scope of the Antiquities Law.

70

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law  and  Burials

This  in  itself  does  not  exclude  the  anthropological  study  of  bones.
From  a  formalistically  legal  point  of  view,  there  is  no  provision
concerning the treatment of bones after research has been completed.
Yet, political  pressures  have been continually  applied to restrict  the
free  hand  given  by  the  legislator  and  shape  a  practice  more  con-
scious of the demand to show respect  for the dead.

As early  as  September  1955, a memorandum  was made of  meet-
ings held between  the Minister of Education  and Culture,  Professor
Ben-Zion  Dinur,  and  the  deputy  Minister  of  Religious  Affairs,  Mr.
Z. Wahrhaftig.  At  the  time, human  bones  were  considered  antiqui-
ties. The memorandum  reads:

It was agreed:  (a)  Care  must  be taken  that  in the  treatment  of
cemeteries  and  tombs  of  Jews,  bones  of  the  dead,  discovered
during archaeological  excavations, are gathered and cleared ac-
cording to Jewish  halakha. (b) To give  effect  to the  above, an
intergovernmental  committee  will  be  established,  whose  mem-
bers will  include  the representatives  of the  Ministry  of  Educa-
tion, the Ministry of Religious Affairs,  and the Ministry of For-
eign Affairs  [sic!].

Such  a committee  was  never  established.  In  1969, the  Government
asked the Minister of Religious Affairs  and the Minister of Education
to study the matter of the treatment of human remains discovered in
archaeological  excavations  and to recommend  an agreed  procedure.
The  Ministers  adopted  the  memorandum  of  1955  but  introduced
some  changes: the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  was  replaced  by  the
Minister  of Justice.  The  head  of the  committee  would  be  the  Head
of  the  Antiquities  Department  at  the  Ministry  of  Education  [which
was  in charge of antiquities  prior  to the  establishment  of the IAA],
who would  give  the  committee  all  pertinent  information.  The com-
mittee would ensure the interest in enhancing scientific  research, on
the one hand, and would also strictly ensure respect  for the tradition
of proper burial  of Jewish  bones, on the other  hand. Upon  comple-
tion  of  scientific  research,  Jewish  bones  would  be  brought  to  the
Ministry  of Religious  Affairs  to be buried  at a place determined  by
the committee. On 9.9.1970, the Government  secretariat notified  all
members  of  the  Government  that  the  above  decisions  had  been
adopted  and  were  now  accepted  procedure.  Once  again,  however,
no committee was  established.

Yet,  the  practice  of  the  IAA  has  in  fact  been  very  mindful  of
the Orthodox opposition  to its activities. It has accordingly  adopted
restrictions  on  its  scientific  work,  not  at  all  called  for  under  the
existing legislation. Following the decision of Rabbi Kolitz regarding
the grave cave on French Hill,75 and demands of Athra Kadisha that
the bones, handed over to the Ministry of Religious Affairs, be rebur-
ied in their ossuaries, the Director of the IAA  finally  yielded  to the
pressure. The IAA  removed  16 ossuaries  from  the Rockefeller  Mu-

71

Talia  Einhorn

seum  in  Jerusalem,  where  they  had  been  placed,  and  gave  them  to
Athra  Kadisha  for  reburial.  The  ossuaries  were  immediately  rebur-
ied. The Archaeologists  Society brought a petition before  the Israeli
Supreme  Court,  arguing  that  burying  the  ossuaries  was  tantamount
to  destroying  them,76  an  act  exceeding  the  powers  of  the  Director.
The issue  was  not  decided  by the Court.

On  22.7.1994,  the  Attorney  General  gave  an  opinion  in  the
matter.77  He  reiterated  the  history  of  the  policies  adopted  by  the
Government and issued guidelines for the treatment of human bones.
Such  guidelines  are  binding  on  public  authorities.  According  to
these,  as  soon  as  human  remains  are  found,  they  are  to  be  turned
over to the representatives  of the Ministry  of Religious Affairs.  The
determination  whether  the  remains  are human  can  usually  be made
at  the  site  itself.  When  further  testing  is necessary,  it may be  done
at the  IAA's  offices.  As  soon  as  a determination  is reached  that the
remains  are  human,  they  must  be  handed  over  immediately  to  the
Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs.  It  is  also  obligatory  to  ensure  that
the  treatment  of  human  bones, their gathering  and  clearing  is done
according  to the  halakha.

This  opinion  seems  to  have  gone  much  further  than  any  of  the
former  policies.  It  precludes  anthropological  study.  Neither  does  it
help  solve the problem,  since the Orthodox  insist that only they are
capable  of  determining  whether  such  remains  are Jewish.  Although
a  legal  opinion  written  by  a jurist,  the  Attorney  General's  opinion
nevertheless  makes  rules  that go way beyond  interpreting  the exist-
ing  law. Indeed,  it may  be  suggested  that the  guidelines  exceed the
powers  of  the  Attorney  General.  If  so,  they  could  be  challenged
before  the  Supreme  Court.

The opinion  of the  Attorney  General  is not as such binding upon
persons,  other  than  the  IAA, who are  licenced  to carry  out  excava-
tions, such  as university  professors.  Yet, the  IAA has issued  similar
regulations  which  are made  part of every licence to excavate. These
guidelines  do permit  the  study of human bones according to current
scientific  disciplines  and  methods, prior  to their being  handed  over
to the Ministry  of Religious  Affairs  for  reburial.

Looked  at  from  a  wider  perspective,  the  treatment  of  human  re-
mains  has  changed  significantly  over  the  years.  During  the  British
Mandate, excavations were intentionally carried out in Jewish tombs.
Famous  examples  are  the  excavations  of  the  extensive  ancient  ne-
cropolis  in Tiberias  on the Sea of Galilee and  in Bet She'arim, situ-
ated  on  the  southern  slope of  Lower Galilee.78  At present,  such ex-
cavations  would  be  impossible.  Due  to  the  sensitivity  of  the  issue
and  the  controversy  over  its legitimacy,  planned  excavations  are no
longer  directed  at  tombs.  A  rescue  excavation  is  conducted  only
when  it  is  feared  that  a  tomb  site  will  be  damaged  or  destroyed
through  development  or  plunder.  The  action  taken  in  such  a  case
must  be  as  quick  as  possible,  so that  the  land  owners  and the  con-
tractors  engaged  in  the  development  will  not  suffer  disproportion-

72

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law and  Burials

ately  heavy  losses, which  may  tempt  them  in the  future  to  conceal
their  discoveries  and  let  the  heavy  mechanical  equipment  destroy
them. About 200 such excavations  are carried out  annually.

In  most  cases,  the  bones  have  to  be  removed  and  reburied,  if
development  is to be carried out at reasonable cost. Different  routes
for roads or locations for houses may often  be found.  These involve
more  costs,  and,  as  evidenced  in  the  French  Hill  case,  even  then
there  is no guarantee that other tombs will not be found  on the new
route. The solution of covering all discovered tombs with cement is
often  not  feasible,  since  development  frustrates  any  possibility  of
preserving the tombs. Furthermore, once graves are discovered, they
are  in  danger  of  attracting  robbers  who  will  plunder  them,  taking
advantage  of the  opportunity  that  discovery  has made  the treasures
so  easily  accessible.  The  bones,  so  it  seems,  will  not  enjoy  much
rest under these circumstances one way or another. All too often  the
question  is  only  whether  the  contents  of  the tombs  will be  studied
or otherwise  forever  lost.

In fact,  it could be argued that the situation would be much worse
if such rescue excavations were prohibited. The IAA would have no
more  interest  in those  sites. Accelerated  development  and construc-
tion  activities  will  then  destroy  not only  the  abundance  of  informa-
tion buried  in the ground but also scatter the human remains or turn
them into dust. It is only the Antiquities Law that prevents this  from
happening today. By treating not only Jewish but all human remains
with  equal  respect  and by  gathering  all  of  them  and  handing them
over for  reburial, the IAA is of the opinion that it shows the utmost
respect  for  all  human  remains, regardless  of  their  religion  and  na-
tional  identity,  and  that  its  actions  merit  commendation  rather than
condemnation.

4.3  The Rejection  of the Practice by the  Orthodox
The Orthodox  opposed  to the excavations  are not  satisfied  with  the
policies  as they are. They view the archaeologists  with  distrust  and
refuse  to  rely  on  factual  findings  made  by  them.  Accordingly,  in
1993,  an  Orthodox  Member  of  Parliament,  A. Ravitz,  proposed  a
draft  bill stating that the powers of the IAA regarding antiquity sites
that  are also  Jewish  tombs  should  be transferred  to the  Minister of
Religious  Affairs.  Furthermore,  in  case  of  dispute,  it  is  the  Chief
Rabbinate  that  will  decide  the  scope  of  the  authority  shifted  from
the IAA to the Ministry. This proposal  has not been  adopted.

The  activities  of  Athra  Kadisha  involve  aggressive  riots.  Al-
though,  according  to the Antiquities  Law, entry  to antiquity  sites is
reserved  only  to  those  carrying  out  excavations,  Athra  Kadisha
members  enter  these  sites  and  harass  the  archaeologists  and  their
staff to the point that they can only continue their work under police
protection.79  For  political  reasons,  such  protection  has  not  always
been readily given.80 It has been observed that Athra Kadisha tends

73

Talia  Einhorn

to choose as sites for confrontation  those sites where major develop-
ment  projects  are  under  way,  regardless  of  whether  the  tombs  are
Jewish  according  to the  archaeological  studies.81  This  is  not  at  all
surprising. Choosing the sites in this manner is in line with a strategy
of  creating  as  much  political  pressure  as possible.  It  is  also  in  line
with  the  demand  that  only  the  Orthodox  themselves  should  be  the
ones  to  decide  which  tombs  are  Jewish.  Alas,  it  indicates  a  poor
understanding  of the democratic process.

5  Conclusions

The  Israeli  Antiquities  Law  has  been  drafted  to  accommodate  the
interests  of the  public  at  large. It promotes  archaeological  research
yet  pays  heed  to  the demands  of  the Orthodox  by  excluding  bones
from  the definition  of "antiquities." Moreover, the IAA has adopted,
for the excavation  of graves, a practice that ensures respect and con-
cern for the dead, irrespective of religion and nationality. Excavation
of  graves  is  carried  out  only  when  the  graves  will  otherwise  be
destroyed  through  development  or  plunder.  All  bones  are  handed
over for reburial to the Ministry of Religious Affairs,  as soon as their
study  has  been  completed.  These  facts  notwithstanding  Orthodox
groups  strongly  opposed  to the  excavation  of graves not  only  exert
political  pressure  but  also  use  physical  violence  to  obstruct  ex-
cavations permitted under the law.

There seem to be significant  differences  of opinion within Jewish
law  whether  and  under  what  circumstances  it  is permitted  to  clear
tombs and transfer  the bones for  reburial. Distinguished  rabbis have
decided that the clearing of tombs and reburial  of bones are permis-
sible, when required, for  example, by the high costs involved  in the
preservation  of the existing  tombs. This does not seem to matter to
those  who  are  utterly  convinced  that  bones  must  not  be  disturbed
except  in  extreme  cases of necessity,  which  in modern  times  rarely
occur.  Modern  technology  makes  it  possible  to  build  bridges,  dig
tunnels, and change plans in ways that were once not available. Yet,
the  number  and  density  of  tombs  in  certain  areas  of  Israel  make
these solutions  costly and often  ineffective.  More tombs are discov-
ered,  and  the  problem  must  be  faced  anew.  Once  discovered,  the
tombs  are  also  in  danger  of  being  plundered.  Where  the  personal
convictions  of a minority are sought to be enforced  and imposed on
the rest of the population, regardless  of the written  letter of the law,
a struggle  over  power ensues that  ill fits a democratic,  liberal  state.
It is a sad consequence  that the issues concerning the excavation  of
tombs cannot be peacefully  resolved in a manner that will accommo-
date  all  the  interests  involved.  In  the absence  of  such  agreed  rules,
it  seems  that  the  conflict  between  the  IAA  and  the  Rabbinate  will
remain  a bone  of  contention.  It  is to be hoped  that  such  confronta-
tions  will  only  take  place  in  the  courts  of  law,  and  that  the  courts
will  follow  the balance  of interests  struck by the Knesset.

74

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law and Burials

Notes

1  O. Yossef, Halakhic  Opinion and Judgment,  18 Shevat  5741 (1981) (unpub-

lished) (in Hebrew, translated by the author).

2  S. Goren,  Halakhic  Opinion,  15.4.1981,  Question  (1) -  167/81  (unpub-
lished);  S. Goren,  The Archaeological  Excavations  in the City of David in
the Perspective of Truth and Halakha,  in S. GOREN, SEFER TORAT  HA-MEDI-
NAH  (THE  BOOK  OF POLITICAL  THEORY)  245 (Tel-Aviv, Ha-Idra Rabba  1995)
(in  Hebrew)  [hereafter  S. Goren, Archaeological  Excavations].

3  S. Goren, Archaeological Excavations,  supra  note 2, at 271—76.
4  L. Y.  Rahmani,  Ossuaries  and Bone-gathering  in the Late  Second  Temple
Period, 11 QADMONIOT  102 (1978) (in Hebrew) [hereafter  Rahmani, Ossuar-
ies]; D. R.  Hillers, Burial, 4  ENCYCLOPEDIA  JUDAICA 1519.

5  Moses,  12 ENCYCLOPAEDIA JUDAICA 387; R. TOVIAH B. ELIEZER, 3  MIDRASH
LEKAH  TOV (PSIKTA  ZUTRETHA),  Deut.  34:6  (Rom,  Vilnius  1880)  (in  He-
brew);  L. GINZBERG, 6 THE LEGENDS  OF THE JEWS  164 (952)  (Philadelphia,
The Jewish  Publication  Society of America  1928).

6  G. Barkay,  Burial  Caves and Burial  Practices  in Judah  in the Iron Age, in
GRAVES  AND BURIAL  PRACTICES  IN  ISRAEL  IN THE ANCIENT  PERIOD  96
(I.  Singer ed., Jerusalem,  Yad Izhak  Ben-Zvi/ The Israel  Exploration  Society
1994) (in Hebrew).

7  Rahmani,  Ossuaries, supra  note 4, at  102.
8  R. Reich,  The Ancient Burial  Ground in the Mamilla Neighbourhood,  Jerusa-
lem,  in ANCIENT  JERUSALEM  REVEALED  111  (H. Geva  ed.,  Jerusalem,  Israel
Exploration  Society  1994) [hereafter  Reich,  Ancient  Burial  Ground  in  the
Mamilla  Neighbourhood].

9  N. Rubin, Secondary Burials  in the Mishnaic and Talmudic Periods: A Pro-
posed  Model of the  Relationship  of Social  Structure  to Burial  Practice, in
GRAVES  AND BURIAL  PRACTICES  IN ISRAEL  IN THE ANCIENT  PERIOD  248,
263-68  (I. Singer ed., Jerusalem,  Yad Izhak  Ben-Zvi/The  Israel  Exploration
Society  1994) (in Hebrew)  [hereafter  Rubin, Secondary  Burials].

10  Rahmani, Ossuraries, supra  note 4, at 102-03; Resurrection,  14 ENCYCLO-

PAEDIA  JUDAICA  96.

11  A. Kloner,  Burial  Caves and Ossuaries from  the Second  Temple Period on
Mount  Scopus,  in JEWS AND JUDAISM  IN THE SECOND TEMPLE, MlSHNA AND
TALMUD  PERIOD:  STUDIES IN HONOR  OF SHMUEL SAFRAI 75,  105 (I.  Gafini,
A. Oppenheimer  & M. Stern  eds., Jerusalem,  Yad Izhak  Ben-Zvi  1993);
R. Hachlili,  Changes in Burial  Practices  in the Late Second  Temple Period:
The Evidence from  Jericho,  in  GRAVES  AND BURIAL  PRACTICES  IN  ISRAEL
IN  THE ANCIENT  PERIOD  173, 187-88  (I. Singer  ed., Jerusalem,  Yad Izhak
Ben-Zvi/The  Israel  Exploration  Society  1994);  Rubin,  Secondary  Burials,
supra  note 9, at 268.

12  THE TRACTATE "MOURNING" (REGULATIONS RELATING TO DEATH, BURIAL,
AND  MOURNING)  (translation  and commentary  by D. Zlotnik)  (New Haven,
Yale  1966). Zlotnik  dates the tractate to the 3rd century  CE, id. at 9.

13  That  is, a tomb yet undesignated  and unused.
14  This version  is taken from  THE  MINOR  TRACTATES  OF THE TALMUD  (transla-

tion by Rev. Dr. A. Cohen)  (London,  Soncino  1971).

15  The inscription  was translated  by W. F. Albright,  The Discovery of an Ara-
maic  Inscription  relating  to King  Uzziah, 44 BULLETIN  OF THE AMERICAN
SCHOOLS OF ORIENTAL  RESEARCH 8,  10 (1931).

16  THE  BABYLONIAN  TALMUD  (translation  by  Rabbi  Dr.  H.  Freedman)

(I.  Epstein  ed., London,  Soncino  1948).

75

Talia  Einhorn

17  Where the wood  was kept  for the Altar in the Holy Temple of Jerusalem.
18  Rabbi  David  ben Zimra  (Ha-Radbaz)  (1479-1573)  views  the crushing of
the  bones  prior  to transfer  and reburial  in the Land  of Israel  as an honour
done to the dead  (Resp. 611). See also  additional  responsa presented by P. B.
Toledano,  Pinnuy  Atzmotav  shel  Montefiori  La-aretz  (Clearing  Montefiori's
bones to Israel), 8 TECHUMIN  382,  384 (1987) (in Hebrew)  [hereafter  Toled-
ano,  Pinnuy  Atzmotav  shel  Montefiori  La-aretz].

19  According to  another  version,  a stone  coffin  should  be buried. See M.  HIG-

GER,  TREATISE  SEMACHOT  XIII, 9  (New  York, Bloch  1931) (in Hebrew).

20  M.  ELON,  3  JEWISH  LAW: HISTORY,  SOURCES,  PRINCIPLES  1417-22  (Phila-

delphia,  The Jewish  Publication  Society  1994).
21  Rabbi  Zecharia  Mendel,  author  of Ba 'er Heitev.
22  See  A.  RUBINSTEIN,  THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW OF THE  STATE  OF ISRAEL
157-60  (5th ed., Tel-Aviv,  Schocken  1997) (in Hebrew);  I. Englard, The
Relationship  between  Religion  and State  in Israel,  XVI SCRIPTA  HIEROSO-
LYMITANA  254  (1966),  reprinted  in  JEWISH  LAW IN ANCIENT  AND MODERN
ISRAEL  (SELECTED  ESSAYS)  168,  184 (New Jersey,  Ktav  1971)  [hereafter
Englard,  Relationship  between  Religion  and State}; I. ENGLARD,  RELIGIOUS
LAW  IN THE  ISRAEL  LEGAL  SYSTEM  3 0 - 31  (Jerusalem,  Sacher  Institute  for
Legislative  Research and Comparative  Law, Law Faculty, Hebrew  University
1975).

23  Rabbi  Dr.  M.  Zemer,  Archaeology  according  to  Halakha,  HA-ARETZ
4.2.1993 (in Hebrew)  [hereafter  Zemer, Archaeology according to Halakha].
Rabbi  Zemer  is a Reform  Rabbi  and Director  of the  Institute for Contempo-
rary  Halakha.

24  The  decision  is  presented  in  I.  LORENZ  &  J. BERKEMANN,  2  STREITFALL
JUEDISCHER  FRIEDHOF  OTTENSEN:  WIE  LANGE  DAUERT  EWIGKEIT  362-63
(Hamburg,  Doelling  und Galitz  1995) [hereafter  LORENZ  &  BERKEMANN,
STREITFALL  JUEDISCHER  FRIEDHOF  OTTENSEN];   DER JUEDISCHER  FRIEDHOF
IN  OTTENSEN  1582-1992:  EINE  DOKUMENTATION  (erstellt  von U. Hinnen-
berg)  (Hamburg-Altona,  Stadtteilarchiv  Ottensen  1992).

25  The decision  has not been  reported.
26  See affidavits  filed  by Mayor  of Jerusalem,  Mr. Teddy  Kollek  (1.1.1993),
notice  given  on behalf  of the  Municipality  of Jerusalem  (1.1.1993),  and
notice given on behalf of the building company in charge of the construction
(12.1.1993)  in Athra  Kadisha  v. Director  of the  IAA, HCJ [Israeli  Supreme
Court  sitting  as High  Court  of Justice]  6259/92  (unreported).  The assess-
ments  made in these  documents  regarding  the extra  costs  involved  (NIS 30
million, which amount to about $10 million, instead of NIS  18 million, about
$6  million)  were  accurate.

27  See the affidavit  of Professor  Kempiniski  (12.1.93) in Athra  Kadisha  v.  Di-
rector  of the  IAA, HCJ 6259/92,  and HCJ 6272/92  (unreported).  See also
affidavits  given  in The  Communal  Administration  Pisgat-Ze'ev  v.  Prime
Minister, HCJ 138/93  (unreported).

28  P. B. Toledano, Pinnuy  Atzmotav  shel  Montefiori  La-aretz, supra  note  18, at
382.  In this  article,  Rabbi  Toledano  cites  the various  decisions  given by
different  rabbis  as to whether  it was permitted,  under  Jewish  law, to clear
Moshe  Montefiori's  grave  in  Ramsgate,  England,  and bring  his bones to
Israel.  While  Rabbi  Ovadia  Yossef  and  Rabbi  Mordechai  Eliahu  were of the
opinion  that  it was permitted  (Rabbi  Ovadia  Yossef  even  considered  it a
religious  duty), Rabbi  Moshe  Feinstein  decided  against.  In his article, Rabbi
Toledano  makes  the observation  that,  since  the decision  of Rabbi  Feinstein
did  not cite any sources  upon  which  it was based, it is impossible to discuss

76

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law and Burials

its  contents  and the opinion  cannot  therefore  be taken  into  consideration to
support a decision  one way or another.

29  Rabbi  Shemuel  Landau  (d.  1834), Chief  Rabbi  of Prague,  Responsa  Shivat
Zion  Nr. 62.  In his response,  Rabbi  Landau  stated  that  under  the circum-
stances  of the  case, the Jewish  Community  should  strive  to have  the route
moved  away  from  the cemetery.  Should  these  efforts  fail,  or should the
expenses  involved  be too high  for the Community  to bear, then  the clearing
of  the graves  is not only  permitted,  it is obligatory.  Moreover,  the Jewish
community  should  make  sure that no graves are left  underneath  the road or
in its immediate  neighbourhood.

30  Rabbi  Moshe  Schick  (1807-1879),  Responsa  Maharam  Schick  Nr. 353. In
this case, a railway had to be constructed  over a part of the Jewish  cemetery.
See also the response of Rabbi Elihahu Gutmacher (1795—1874), permitting
the  clearing  of a  cemetery  to allow  for the enlargement  of the  adjacent
synagogue,  one of the  reasons  being  that  the tombs  now created  a public
nuisance  and may therefore  be cleared,  Responsa Aderet Eilahu,  YD  [Yoreh
De'ah]Nr.  123.

31  GUTACHTEN  RABBINER  ALLER  LAENDER  UEBER  EXHUMIERUNG  UND
ASCHENURNENBEISETZUNG  AUF JUEDISCHEN  FRIEDHOEFEN  (M. Lerner  ed.,
Berlin,  Poppelauer  1905)  (in  Hebrew)  [hereafter  GUTACHTEN  RABBINER
ALLER  LAENDER]. Rabbi Lerner cites a decision rendered by Rabbi Yechezkel
Landau (1713- 1793), Noda Bi-Yehuda, YD Nr. 89, according to which, once
the  flesh  has decomposed  there  is no more  fear  of disturbing  the dead by
removal  and reburial  of the bones.  The decision  has been  extensively dis-
cussed  by a number of very prominent  rabbis in later  responsa. See Y. Cha-
zani,  Pinnuy  Atzmot  Kedoshei  Mezeritz  (Clearing  the bones  of the  Holy
Community  of Mezeritz),  13 TECHUMIN  89, 93 (1992/93)  (in Hebrew).

32  The  opinion 

is  published 

in  LORENZ  &  BERKEMANN,  STREITFALL

JUEDISCHER  FRIEDHOF OTTENSEN, supra  note  24, 333—52  (in  German).

33  GUTACHTEN  RABBINER ALLER  LAENDER, supra  note  31, at  8 2 - 8 4.
34  Rabbi  M. Schreiber (1762-1839),  The Chatam Sofer  Responsa  YD Nr. 334.
'Arukh  Ha-shulchan  YD
35  Rabbi  Yechiel  Michel  Epstein  (1829-1908), 

Nr. 363.

36  Piskei  'Uziel  Nr. 32-33.  Rabbi  Ben-Zion  Me'ir  Chay  Uziel,  Chief  (Seph-
ardi)  Rabbi  of Israel  (Rishon  Le-Zion),  permitted  the carrying  out of autop-
sies,  since the study  and research  involved  are not considered  a benefit de-
rived  from  the dead.  Cf, however,  the opinion  of Rabbi  S. Goren  regarding
the  archaeological  excavation  of tombs  as benefit  derived  from  the dead
and  thus  prohibited,  Goren,  Archaeological  Excavations,  supra  note  2,  at
274-76.

37  Zemer, Archaeology  according  to Halakha, supra  note 23.
38  Y. M. Toledano,  The Holy  Tombs in  Tiberias, in  ERETZ  KINROT  137 (S. Yei-
vin  & H. Z.  Hirschberg  eds., Jerusalem,  Kav Le-kav  1951) (in Hebrew),
reprinted  in ALL THE LAND OF NAFTALI (THE 24TH  ARCHAEOLOGICAL  CON-
VENTION  OCTOBER 1966) 258 (H. Z. Hirschberg ed., Jerusalem,  Israel  Explo-
ration  Society  1967) (in Hebrew)  [hereafter  Toledano,  The Holy  Tombs  in
Tiberias];  N. Avigad,  Bet  She'arim,  4  ENCYCLOPAEDIA  JUDAICA  765;
B.  MAISLER  (MAZAR),  BETH  SHE'ARIM:  REPORT  ON THE  EXCAVATIONS,
1936-1940,  VOL.  I (Jerusalem,  The Jewish  Palestine  Exploration  Society
1944);  THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL  EXCAVATIONS DURING  1953-1958,  VOL. Ill
(Jerusalem,  The  Israel  Exploration  Society  1971) [herafter  MAISLER  (MA-
ZAR),  BETH  SHE'ARIM].

39  Toledano,  The Holy  Tombs in  Tiberias, supra  note  38, at 262.

77

Talia  Einhorn

40  Englard,  Relationship  between  Religion and State,  supra  note  22, at  171.
41  See, e. g., the accounts  given  in the case of the Ottensen Jewish  cemetery in
LORENZ  &  BERKEMANN,  STREITFALL  JUEDISCHER  FRIEDHOF  OTTENSEN,   su-
pra  note  24, at 239—45; the account of Dr. R. Reich  regarding  the excava-
tions  in Mamilla,  Jerusalem,  in R. Reich,  God Knows  Their Names,  22 (2)
BIBLICAL  ARCHAEOLOGY  REVIEW  26 (1996)  [hereafter  Reich,  God  Knows
Their  Names];  and in the judgment  of the  Israeli  Supreme  Court  regarding
the  excavations  in the City  of David,  The Institute  of Archaeology  of the
Hebrew  University  of Jerusalem  v. The Minister of Education  and Culture,
HCJ  512/81,  35(4) P. D.  533.

42  A. Kloner,  The Necropolis  of Jerusalem  in the Second  Temple  Period 269
(doctoral  dissertation  submitted  to the Hebrew  University  of  Jerusalem
1980).

43  See,  e. g.,  R.  REICH,  INVITATION  TO  ARCHAEOLOGY  150—51  (Tel  Aviv,  Dvir

1995).

44  There  are exceptions,  however.  Many  Iron Age tombs  found  in the Mamilla
neighbourhood  of Jerusalem  were  damaged  by quarrying  in the Roman and
Byzantine periods.  Reich, Ancient  Burial  Ground  in the Mamilla Neighbour-
hood, supra  note 8.

45  M. Specter,  Tomb May  Hold  the Bones  of Priest  who Judged  Jesus,  N. Y.

TIMES,  August  14, 1992, at Al.

46  See supra  section  2.2.2.
47  Reich,  God Knows  Their Names, supra  note 41.
48  G. Avni  & Z. Greenhut,  Architecture,  Burial  Customs  and Chronology, THE
AKELDAMA  TOMBS,  IAA  REPORTS  1 (Jerusalem,  Israel  Antiquities  Authority
1996).

49  A. Kloner  & D. Davis, A Burial  Cave of the  Late  First  Temple Period on
the  Slope  of  Mount  Zion,  in ANCIENT  JERUSALEM  REVEALED  107  (H. Geva
ed., Jerusalem,  Israel  Exploration  Society  1994); for other important  discov-
eries  from  that  period,  see G. Barkay,  A. Kloner & A. Mazar,  The Northern
Necropolis  of Jerusalem  during  the First  Temple Period, in ANCIENT  JERU-
SALEM  REVEALED  119 (H.  Geva  ed., Jerusalem,  Israel  Exploration  Society
1994).

50  Other  seals  dating  to the First  Temple  period,  discovered  in the excavation
of a tomb  in Ketef  Hinnom  in Jerusalem,  are of great  significance  for  the
evidence  they  provide  concerning  official  administration  and  government.
The  seals  bear  stylized  lotus  bud patterns  common  in Hebrew  seals  of the
late  monarchy  on one side  and a Hebrew  inscription  with  the name  of the
official  engraved  on the other  side.  See G. Barkay,  Excavations  at Ketef
Hinnom  in Jerusalem,  in ANCIENT  JERUSALEM  REVEALED  85 (H. Geva ed.,
Jerusalem,  Israel  Exploration  Society  1994).

51  Englard,  Relationship  between  Religion and State,  supra  note  22; M. ELON,
4  JEWISH  LAW:  HISTORY,  SOURCES,  PRINCIPLES  1898—946  (Philadelphia,
The  Jewish  Publication  Society  1994)  [hereafter  ELON,  JEWISH LAW].

52  Sefer  Ha-Chukkim  [Official  Publication of Israeli  Legislation] 978.
53  A. BARAK,  1 INTERPRETATION  IN LAW 524—32  (Nevo, Jerusalem  1992) (in

Hebrew).

54  ELON,  JEWISH  LAW, supra  note  51, at 1827—97.
55  LSI [Laws  of the  State  of Israel] 32,  93.
56  Draft  Antiquities  Law Bill,  5736-1976,  Hatzaot  Chok  [Draft  Laws] 1250.
57  Divrei  Ha-Knesset 
[Official  Records  of  the  Knesset]  77  (1976)  3762,

3767-8;  Divrei  Ha-Knesset  79 (1977)  2018,  2019.

78

Israeli  Law, Jewish  Law and Burials

58  1 THE LAWS  OF PALESTINE  28 (R. H. Drayton,  revised  edition  of the  Laws

Ordinance,  1934).

59  Divrei  Ha-Knesset  [Official  Records of the  Knesset]  81 (1978)  1446,  1447.
60  See,  e.  g.,  Human  Evolution,  18  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA  803  (15th  ed.,

1994).

61  The Archaeologists Society v. Israel Antiquities Authority, HCJ 5790/92 (un-
reported); Athra Kadisha  v. Israel  Antiquities  Authority, HCJ 6259/92 (unre-
ported).

62  The Institute  of Archaeology  of the  Hebrew  University  of Jerusalem  v.  The
Minister  of  Education  and Culture,  HCJ 512/81,  35(4) P. D.  [Piskei Din,
Collection  of Judgments of the  Israeli  Supreme  Court]  533.

63  For the decision,  see Goren supra  note 2.
64  Indeed,  following  the decision  of Rabbi  Goren,  the Attorney  General pub-
lished  an opinion  that  under  Israeli  law (the Israeli  Chief  Rabbinate Law,
5740—1980)  public  authorities  may seek  advice  from  the Council  of the
Chief  Rabbinate.  Therefore,  no  matter  how it  is  phrased  or  whether  it is
named a decision, a judgment  or an opinion, it is still no more  than  advice.
Such  advice has no legal effect  and is not binding on the Government or on
any  public  authority,  not even  on the authority  that  sought  it  in the  first
place.  See The Attorney  General's  Guidelines  21.633,  vol. 3  (1.11.1981).
The guidelines of the Attorney  General are binding on all public  authorities.

65  Athra  Kadisha v. Israel  Antiquities  Authority,  HCJ 6259/92  (unreported).
66  LSI  21,  76.
67  See I. Englard, Legal Status of Holy Places  in Jerusalem,  28 ISRAEL L.  REV.
589,  591-92  (1994)  [hereafter  Englard,  Legal  Status  of  Holy  Places];
W. Zander,  On the Settlement  of  Disputes  about  the Christian  Holy  Places,
8  ISRAEL  L.  REV.  331  (1973).

68  Article LXII of the Treaty between Austria-Hungary,  France, Germany, Great
Britain,  Italy,  Russia  and Turkey  for the Settlement  of Affairs  in the East,
signed  in  Berlin,  13 July  1878,  153 THE  CONSOLIDATED  TREATY  SERIES  171
(C.  Parry ed.).

69  1 LAWS OF  PALESTINE  1918-1925  (compiled by M. Doukhan) 290 (Tel Aviv,

Rotenburg  1933).

70  Englard,  Legal  Status  of Holy Places,  supra  note  67, at 591.
71  Sefer  Ha-Chukkim 1391.
72  Chevra  Kadisha  v. Kestenbaum,  HCJ 294/91, 46(2)  P. D.  464.
73  LSI  31,  1.
74  LSI 19, 330:  LSI  27, 254.
75  Supra  note 25.
76  The Archaeologists  Society v. Israel Antiquities Authority, HCJ  5790/92 (un-

reported).

77  M. Ben-Yair, the Attorney General, unpublished  opinion  regarding the appli-

cation  of the  Antiquities  Law to human  bones.

78  See, e. g.,  Toledano,  The Holy  Tombs in  Tiberias, supra  note  38; MAISLER

(MAZAR),  BETH  SHE'ARIM, supra  note  38.

79  See the account  of Reich,  God Knows  Their Names, supra  note 41.
80  See Petition  brought by Member of Parliament Naomi  Chazan  regarding the
riots  in  the  French  Hill  case  and the  lack  of  sufficient  police  protection,
Naomi  Chazan  v. Minister of Police, HCJ 52/93  (unreported).

81  Reich,  God Knows  Their Names, supra  note 41, at 33.

79


