 (2011) 18:111–129. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2011 Winning Title to Land but Not to Its
Past: The Toledo Maya and Sites of
pre-Hispanic Heritage
Shoshaunna Parks*

Abstract: The struggle for indigenous rights to pre-Hispanic cultural heritage
parallels the struggle for indigenous land rights in Belize. By Belizean law, mate-
rial objects and sites of activity older than 100 years in age are the property of
the state. Similarly, land inhabited by indigenous communities in southern Be-
lize is held in trust by the government. In 2007 the community of Santa Cruz in
southern Belize won customary land tenure over their lands for the first time
from the Belizean government. This change in land ownership presents new
challenges to the definition of ownership of ancient places in Maya territory. In
particular, the transfer of land rights to the community has potential implica-
tions for the ownership and management of the local pre-Hispanic site of Ux-
benká that may ultimately serve as a paradigm for the future relationship
between Maya peoples and ancestral remains throughout the nation.

In October 2007, the Belizean Supreme Court ruled that the government of Belize
was wrong in failing to recognize, protect, and respect the “traditional” land rights
of two Maya communities in the southern Toledo District (Figure 1). In his 67-
page judgment, Chief Justice Abdulai Conteh ordered the government to demar-
cate and provide official documentation of the title and customary land rights of the
communities of Santa Cruz and Conejo—defined as the collective and individual
rights to community land established through customary indigenous practices—
and to abstain from any acts that might affect Maya existence and values without
their consultation. This monumental ruling was a vital first step toward acknowl-
edging the discrimination historically faced by indigenous Q’eqchi’ and Mopan peo-
ple in southern Belize. Beginning in the late nineteenth century, the government
established Indian reservations for Q’eqchi’ and Mopan settlement in southern Be-

*Research Laboratories of Archaeology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Email: shoshiparks@
hotmail.com

111

112

SHOSHAUNNA PARKS

FIGURE 1. Map of Belize and the Toledo District.

lize but did not grant land title to its residents. As a result, the relationship of the
Toledo Maya—many of whom are subsistence farmers—to their land and natural
resources is precarious, and their territory subject to usurpation by the government
at any time.1

The 2007 ruling has, by no means, brought an end to the struggle of the Q’eqchi’
and Mopan to secure rights to ancestral territory and customary land tenure in
Toledo. In 2010, the Maya people of southern Belize are still entangled in negoti-
ations as to the meaning and reach of the Supreme Court’s ruling. The government’s
refusal to extend the Court’s ruling beyond Santa Cruz and Conejo to apply to all
indigenous communities in Toledo has forced the Maya to bring another lawsuit
against the government.2 After 2 years of waiting, a ruling in favor of the Toledo
Maya has only recently been returned by Chief Justice Conteh (28 June 2010).3
These lawsuits have far-reaching implications for indigenous rights in southern
Belize and provide a point of departure for analyzing the future of Maya cultural
self-determination and heritage management.

WINNING TITLE TO LAND BUT NOT TO ITS PAST

113

This article attempts to draw a parallel between recent and ongoing legal battles
for Maya land rights in Toledo, and the impending struggle for indigenous rights
to ancestral remains and archaeological heritage in Belize. Could the recent judi-
cial victory to customary land tenure for the Maya communities of Santa Cruz
and Conejo logically be extended to create a space for Maya people in the inves-
tigation and management of the pre-Hispanic remains within their territory? Al-
though pre-Hispanic remains blanket the Belizean landscape, Maya people do not
presently have any specialized access that acknowledges their unique relationship
to their ancestral heritage. Legally, the government of Belize owns all ancient mon-
uments and antiquities older than 100 years of age.4 Neither state officials nor
archaeologists, nearly all of whom hail from the United States and Canada, are
required to engage in any process of indigenous consultation prior to, during, or
after the investigation of pre-Hispanic Maya sites or in the management of ar-
chaeological remains. In most cases, officials do not even consider the Toledo Maya
to be a legitimate, indigenous Belizean population as the Q’eqchi’ and Mopan of
southern Belize differ linguistically and ethnically from the pre-Hispanic popula-
tion of Toledo, which is believed to be Chol’an (see below for more details on this
argument). This assertion is further compounded by the large-scale immigration
of Q’eqchi’ and Mopan people from across the Guatemalan border in the late-
nineteenth and twentieth century in search of refuge from military inscription,
violence, and economic duress.

As the Toledo Maya continue to earn recognition of their indigenous rights, the
likelihood increases that the pre-Hispanic remains of Belize will become a symbol
of indigenous rights, as did ancestral human remains and sacred objects in the
United States prior to the passage of the Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) in 1990. To demonstrate the potential implications
of the indigenous land rights battle in southern Belize for the “ownership” of ar-
chaeological heritage, this article explores the approaching debate between the To-
ledo Maya and those responsible for the protection of archaeological heritage in
Belize, beginning with a brief history of the indigenous land rights movement and
the political status of Maya people in Belize. An analysis of the implications of the
land rights struggle on the current relationship of Maya people to archaeological
heritage in Belize follows. Finally, this argument is applied to the Classic Maya site
of Uxbenká (Figure 3), located in the territory of Santa Cruz village, one of the
communities granted customary land tenure in the 2007 lawsuit. In the context of
the Toledo Maya, customary land tenure is defined as “collective and individual
rights to the lands and resources” that Maya villages have traditionally used and
occupied in southern Belize. These resources include forested areas for hunting,
the collection of edible and medicinal plants, construction materials, and fire-
wood; riparian areas for fishing, bathing, and washing clothes; community lands
for village institutions such as churches, corn mills, and community centers; pri-
vate homes, gardens, and domestic animal pens; and agricultural land. The legal
battle seeks to establish collective and individual rights within the community

114

SHOSHAUNNA PARKS

boundaries established through customary indigenous practices and to have those
rights recognized as “property” within the Belize Constitution (sections 3[d] and
17).5

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE INDIGENOUS LAND

RIGHTS MOVEMENT IN TOLEDO

The Q’eqchi’ and Mopan have long struggled for recognition of customary land
rights to traditional territories in the Toledo District, but the battle has been an
uneven one, moving in fits and starts along with changes in local leadership and
the proximity and strength of threats (Figure 2). In 1868, the Lieutenant Gover-
nor of British Honduras recommended that Maya people be prohibited from own-
ing titles to the land they occupied.6 The British colonial government put the
recommendation into action in the late 1880s and 1890s with the establishment
of Indian reservations for Maya people in western and southern Belize. Though
short-lived in the west, sparsely populated but extensive Crown land holdings in
the southern Toledo District were the ideal location for the colonially conceived
Indian reservations and remain in use today. On Indian reservations, Maya people
have historically been prohibited from owning land and thus have no legal re-
course to government infringements of their land rights via parceling, leasing, and
the granting of concessions to natural resources without consent.7

In 2006, the movement to secure indigenous rights to land experienced a re-
naissance that responded to unilateral actions taken by the government years be-
fore. In the mid-1990s, the Belizean government granted a concession to U.S. Capital
Energy-Belize Ltd. for oil exploration on nearly 750,000 acres in the district’s low-

FIGURE 2. Timeline of Maya land rights history.

WINNING TITLE TO LAND BUT NOT TO ITS PAST

115

lands with the caveat that, if commercially viable amounts of oil was located, the
exploration concession would automatically convert to one of extraction. In No-
vember 2005, U.S. Capital Energy-Belize began negotiations to conduct seismic
testing in the region; five months later, in April 2006, the company entered the
Sarstoon-Temash National Park to begin work.8

The Belizean government independently established the Sarstoon-Temash Na-
tional Park as a nature preserve in 1994, failing to consider the longstanding pres-
ence of Maya communities in the territory, and their traditional use of land and
natural resources within park boundaries. The Sarstoon-Temash Institute for In-
digenous Management (SATIIM) was created by local leaders to mitigate the ef-
fect of park regulations on the local indigenous communities. In negotiations with
the government, SATIIM succeeded in securing a comanagement agreement that
required the government to consult with affected villages in decisions about the
park, an arrangement directly violated by granting permission to U.S. Capital
Energy-Belize to explore for oil. SATIIM responded to the 2006 arrival of U.S.
Capital Energy-Belize in the Sarstoon-Temash National Park by suing for judicial
review in the Belizean Supreme Court. Though the lawsuit succeeded in halting
seismic testing, it did so based on the fact that the company began its work with-
out conducting an environmental impact assessment (a requirement under the
2000[1992] Belize Environmental Protection Act). The suit failed to make the di-
rect argument that U.S. Capital Energy-Belize violated the customary rights to land
and resources of Maya people within the Sarstoon-Temash National Park.9

This lawsuit highlighted what had long been seen among leaders as primary to
the survival of Maya people in the Toledo District—the need to secure collective
and individual rights to local land and natural resources. Q’eqchi’ and Mopan ac-
tivism aimed at securing indigenous autonomy over their territory began as early
as 1976. Though this early iteration of the movement never managed to gain sig-
nificant momentum among the Maya populace, interest in securing land rights
resurged in the early 1980s with the creation of the Toledo Maya Cultural Council
(TMCC). The TMCC turned its focus to land rights in 1985 following the pro-
posal of the Toledo Agricultural Marketing Project to establish 50-acre private ag-
ricultural plots on traditional Maya land.10 The Toledo Agricultural Marketing
Project was intended to stimulate commercial cultivation and improve local in-
frastructure, but by affecting the customary system of land tenure practiced by
Maya communities, it also threatened to further impoverish underprivileged fam-
ilies. As an alternative, the TMCC proposed the creation of a 500,000-acre Maya
territory within which the organization would work to foment traditional artisan-
ship and entrepreneurship in indigenous ecotourism at the local archaeological
sites of Lubaantun, Uxbenká, and Nim Li Punit, located on the so-called Ruta
Maya.11

The TMCC’s proposal was rejected by the Belizean government but the desire
remained to secure a Maya homeland where customary land use would be pro-
tected. Throughout the 1990s, under the charismatic leadership of Julian Cho, the

116

SHOSHAUNNA PARKS

FIGURE 3. Group B structure at the Classic Maya site of Uxbenká.

(Photograph by Shoshaunna Parks)

TMCC continued to work toward government recognition of indigenous rights to
land and natural resources in Toledo.12 In late 1997, the TMCC, the Toledo Alcade
Association, and other Maya individuals filed a lawsuit declaring that Toledo land
concessions granted to a Southeast Asian logging company by the government in
the mid-1990s was an infringement on Maya land rights. But the lawsuit stalled in
court and, when no action had been taken by 1998, the claimants petitioned the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, an agency of the Organization of
American States, to intervene.13

TEN POINTS OF AGREEMENT AND THE SANTA CRUZ

AND CONEJO LAWSUIT

With the Inter-American Commission’s assistance, Ten Points of Agreement, a frame-
work to guide future negotiation between the Toledo Maya and the Belizean gov-
ernment, was signed by Prime Minister Said Musa in October 2000.14 Negotiations
failed to advance, however, and in 2003, the Commission issued a recommenda-
tion that the government of Belize adopt the measures necessary to clarify and
protect Maya land in accordance with their customary land tenure, to abstain from
all activities affecting Maya territory until the land had been demarcated and ti-
tled, and to repair environmental damage from the logging concessions granted in
the 1990s.15 By the time SATIIM filed its lawsuit to halt oil exploration in the

WINNING TITLE TO LAND BUT NOT TO ITS PAST

117

Sarstoon-Temash National Park in 2006, the government of Belize still had not
addressed the Commission’s findings; Maya land was no more secure than it had
been a decade before.

The Belizean Supreme Court interpreted SATIIM’s injunction as representa-
tive action taken by the five communities located within the Sarstoon-Temash.
But in the months following the ruling, some villagers went to great lengths to
express their dissatisfaction with SATIIM’s actions. In May 2006, more than 100
Q’eqchi’ and Garifuna (indigenous descendants of Carib and African mix) pro-
tested in front of SATIIM’s Punta Gorda office claiming that they favored the job
opportunities that U.S. Capital Energy-Belize promised to bring to their commu-
nities over the protection of the park forestland and natural resources. U.S. Cap-
ital Energy-Belize found a particularly vocal supporter in the Q’eqchi’ chairlady
of the village of Crique Sarco, Beatriz Bo Canelo. That week, the Amandala news-
paper published a lengthy article in which they interviewed Canelo, then on a
media tour financed by the company, in which she claims that the environmen-
tal impact of oil exploration in the Sarstoon-Temash National Park would be
minimal and that the company would employ up to 70% of the men in her
village.16 Rather than successfully undermining Maya leadership in Punta Gorda,
however, these incidents fanned the flames of the land rights issue. Working with
the Indigenous Peoples Law and Policy Program at the University of Arizona
College of Law and Belizean lawyer Antoinette Moore, two communities—Santa
Cruz and Conejo—were selected as “test cases to obtain a judicial affirmation of
customary land tenure that would serve all Maya communities.”17

In June 2007, the two cases against the Attorney General of Belize and the Min-
ister of Natural Resources and Environment went to trial. Facing the formidable
expert testimony and multinational assistance afforded the communities of Santa
Cruz and Conejo in their litigation, the government’s lawyer sought to clearly il-
lustrate their position that the recent migration of Mopan and Q’eqchi’ people to
Belizean territory negated their indigenous status. Invoking archaeological evi-
dence that the Classic Maya people of Belize were ethnically Chol’an (a fact con-
firmed by the director of the Institute of Archaeology in the second land rights
case), she attempted to communicate the injustice of granting nonnative ethnic
groups specialized rights to national territory and the threat such a decision might
pose to the Belizean nation by both internal and external (i.e., Guatemalan) forces.
The government lawyer further expressed the political nature of the lawsuit and
the challenge it posed to state authority. The fact that legal assistance in the case
came primarily from North America bolstered her assertion that this national issue
was being influenced by those outside the Belizean state.

By October, a judgment had been made. The ruling concluded that, “. . . the
defendants [the government of Belize] are bound, in both domestic law . . . and
international law . . . to respect the rights to and interests of the claimants as mem-
bers of the indigenous Maya community, their lands and resources. . .” and or-
dered that members of the villages of Santa Cruz and Conejo hold collective and

118

SHOSHAUNNA PARKS

individual rights in the lands and resources they use and occupy according to Maya
customary practices. The ruling directed,

. . . the defendants cease and abstain from any acts that might lead the
agents of the government itself, or third parties acting with its acquies-
cence or its tolerance, to affect the existence, value, use or enjoyment of
the property located in the geographic area occupied and used by the
Maya people of Santa Cruz and Conejo unless such acts are pursuant to
their informed consent and in compliance with the safeguards of the
Belize Constitution.18

Among its specifics, the ruling also ordered the government to abstain from “is-
suing any lease or grants to lands or resources under the National Lands Act or
any other Act” and from “issuing any regulations concerning land or resources
use.”19

The emotion and excitement of winning, for the first time, rights to traditional
territory and protection for customary land use was, unfortunately, short-lived.
Soon after the ruling, Attorney General Wilfred Elrington publicly stated that the
Supreme Court’s ruling for Santa Cruz and Conejo would not be extended to other
Maya villages in Toledo until each established their indigenous status before the
court. Maya leaders had no choice but to once again, seek legal recourse to secure
the land rights of all Toledo Maya communities. The second lawsuit was filed in
July 2007 and asked that the government of Belize stop granting leases or other
land permits in the Maya villages of Toledo without villagers’ consent until a mech-
anism was put in place to allow villages to demarcate and register their communal
lands.20 Nearly 2 years later, on 28 June 2010, Maya claimants were finally granted
the same rights to customary land tenure that Santa Cruz and Conejo won in
2007.21

IMPLICATIONS FOR RIGHTS TO PREHISPANIC MAYA HERITAGE

Though never explicitly addressed in the land rights trials of 2007, the question of
indigenous rights to Maya heritage—namely, archaeological resources—closely par-
allels that of the right of Maya people to customary land tenure. The recognition
of rights to indigenous territory is dependent on the establishment of precolonial
relationships between communities and the past. Conversely, pre-Hispanic archae-
ological remains are indicative of a precolonial relationship between indigenous
communities and local territories. Establishing the antiquity of Maya people in
Toledo was a major consideration in the 2007 land rights ruling, as it was in the
2004 ruling of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. A number of
witnesses—Richard Wilk, Elizabeth Mara Grandia, Grant D. Jones, and Joel D.
Wainwright—experts in a variety of aspects of Toledo Maya history, ethnography,
geography, and land use testified as to the presence of customary Maya land ten-
ure and the inhabitance of Maya people in the region from time immemorial.22

WINNING TITLE TO LAND BUT NOT TO ITS PAST

119

Although the Q’eqchi’ and Mopan are not the same Maya groups that inhabited
the region during the Classic period, which were most likely ethnolinguistically
Chol’an or Ch’olti’an (see Houston et al. 2000), many Maya people and their ad-
vocates feel that present national borders and geographic boundaries of linguistic
communities falsely represent Maya peoples who, in the past, would have moved
freely across a shared landscape. This historical perspective is part and parcel of
the “cultural agency” of Maya people working toward the “reconfiguration of cul-
tural spaces that enable subjects. . .to empower themselves.”23 In a variety of con-
texts, including political conflict in the Lacandón Forest of Chiapas and the building
of a democratic state in Guatemala,24 Mayan ethnolinguistic groups have success-
fully established a collective political identity rooted in a common origin, “cul-
tural logic,”25 and colonial-postcolonial experience. This identity is supported by
the testimony of Wilk, Grandia, Jones, Wainwright, and others whose indepen-
dent investigations were witness to the self-determination of the Toledo Maya as
descendants from precolonial peoples whose land and natural resources were not
constrained by present-day geopolitical boundaries.

Community members testifying on behalf of their land rights, particularly those
from Santa Cruz, confirmed their cultural agency referencing descent from the
ancient people who once occupied the landscape in their affidavits. “I think we are
related to the ancient Maya people,” stated Higinio Teul, an elder and traditional
healer, “but we are also different. Columbus and the Spaniards changed the Maya
people so that now they are poor.”26 Another community member, Raymundo
Sho, a recent alcalde (mayor) of the village, testified as to the historic value of
ancient Maya places to their people,

There is a well-known Maya temple in this area (Uxb’enkaj) and many
caves. . . Our grandparents did ceremonies in these caves. My father al-
ways told me that we come from the ancient people.27

Presently, according to Article 4 of the Ancient Monuments and Antiquities Act
passed in 1972 and amended in 2000, “all ancient monuments and antiquities how-
ever situate, whether upon any land or in any river, stream or watercourse, or under
territorial waters of the country, and whether or not before the date of the com-
mencement of this Act in private ownership, possession, custody or control, shall
absolutely vest in the Government.” Title to the land on or in which an ancient
monument is situated may be granted to private owners, but the resources granted
through the title include neither ancient monuments nor antiquities. This policy
is similar to those which vest the rights to subsurface resources such as oil in the
government regardless of their location on private or public lands. This type of
antiquities legislation is also not unique to Belize. Nearly every nation-state has a
law placing antiquities under governmental protection as a means of holding them
in trust for the people of the nation. The legal protections afforded by the Ancient
Monuments and Antiquities Act is both literal (i.e., protecting monuments and
antiquities from vandalism, destruction, and removal from the country) and met-

120

SHOSHAUNNA PARKS

aphorical. For many government officials, as well as archaeologists and other stake-
holders, the contemporary migration of the Toledo Maya into southern Belize
betrays their legitimacy as descendants of the region’s precolonial Maya and is
indicative of political motivations rather than cultural and spiritual ones. As one
representative of the Belizean Institute of Archaeology commented in 2006, “it’s
not debatable whether or not they are descendants of ancient culture or Meso-
american culture . . . what is debatable is the degree of that relationship [to] Be-
lize, specifically.”28 Although this conception of Maya descent echoes the historical
construction of Maya identity by anthropologists and archaeologists that noted
the strength of community and linguistic affiliations among Maya people it fails
to take into consideration recent victories in the recognition of Maya cultural agency
that has created a space for self-determination in the construction of cultural and
ethnic affiliation and descent. With a government dominated by individuals that
self-identify as Creole, Spanish (mestizo), or of mixed ethnicity and an archaeo-
logical record dominated by pre-Hispanic Maya remains, there is an obvious dis-
connection between those who “own” precolonial antiquities and those Maya
communities that consider themselves descendants of the ancient Maya in Belize.

HERITAGE AND HUMAN RIGHTS

Though the 2007 trial was intended to secure customary Maya land tenure, it was
also a trial to win recognition of collective and individual indigenous and human
rights. A number of international declarations and conventions, beginning with
the Universal Declaration on Human Rights in 1948, have sought to define the
rights of all human beings. As Helaine Silverman and D. Fairchild Ruggles point
out, heritage too is an “essential component of human rights” because its recog-
nition in tangible and intangible forms demands respect and protection for indi-
vidual and group identities.29 Recalling the Declaration of Human Rights, in 1989
the International Labor Organization (ILO)’s Convention No. 169, Concerning In-
digenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries applied the standards of
human rights directly to the unique situation of disenfranchisement shared by
indigenous and tribal peoples around the world. Among its terms, Convention
No. 169 establishes that “the social, cultural, religious and spiritual values and prac-
tices of these peoples shall be recognised and protected.”30 In Article 6, the doc-
ument goes on to assert that, in their application of the Convention, states shall

(a) Consult the peoples concerned, through appropriate procedures and
in particular through their representative institutions. . . (b) Establish
means by which these peoples can freely participate, to at least the same
extent as other sectors of the population, at all levels of decision-making
in elective institutions and administrative and other bodies responsible
for policies and programmes which concern them, [and] (c) Establish
means for the full development of these peoples’ own institutions and

WINNING TITLE TO LAND BUT NOT TO ITS PAST

121

initiatives, and in appropriate cases provide the resources necessary for
this purpose.

Belize has never ratified the ILO Convention No. 169 but its principles are heavily
cited not only in the 2007 judgment of Claims 171 and 172, but in the 2004 ruling
against the State of Belize by the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights.
In his 2007 ruling, Chief Justice Conteh grants the villages of Santa Cruz and Conejo
“collective and individual rights in the lands and resources they have used and
occupied.”31 More importantly, in Section D of Article 136, Conteh grants,

An order that the defendants [representatives of the Belizean govern-
ment] cease and abstain from any acts that might lead the agents of the
government itself, or third parties acting with its acquiescence or its tol-
erance, to affect the existence, value, use or enjoyment of the property
located in the geographic area occupied and used by the Maya people of
Santa Cruz and Conejo unless such acts are pursuant to their informed
consent and in compliance with the safeguards of the Belize Constitu-
tion. This order include[sic], but not be limited to, directing the gov-
ernment to abstain from. . .

iii. issuing any regulations concerning land or resources use (emphasis

mine).32

Although this trial did not specifically address the archaeological resources lo-
cated within the geographic area occupied and used by the communities of Conejo
and Santa Cruz, could it logically be expanded to grant these villages a voice in the
investigation and management of the pre-Hispanic remains in their territory?

“THE TIME HAS COME . . .”

Presently Maya people in Belize have no privileged rights to consultation or co-
management of pre-Hispanic Maya sites. Officially, archaeological resources be-
long equally to all Belizean citizens, and are protected and managed by the
democratically elected government (presently, under the authority of the Insti-
tute of Archaeology, an arm of the National Institute of Culture and History
[NICH]). To officials at the Institute of Archaeology, the ubiquitous pre-Hispanic
remains of Belize are a valuable national resource. As one official commented,
Maya sites give “us a sense of who we are, where we’ve been, and what we’re
capable of . . . [they] give us a sense of what we can still achieve.”33 For this
official, pre-Hispanic sites are representative first, and foremost, of “the strug-
gles, the achievements, the successes, [and] the failures of people . . . the fact that
they’re Maya . . . is often secondary.”

State representatives are wary of the language of descent employed by the To-
ledo Maya to discuss their indigenousness to Belize. As a form of identity con-
struction that is relatively new to the Belizean sociopolitical landscape, they envisage
the potential implications of the indigenous land rights movement for archaeo-
logical heritage as a political power play that could “balkanize” the population

122

SHOSHAUNNA PARKS

and, ultimately, have negative repercussions on national places of cultural heri-
tage.34 These considerations influence the Institute of Archaeology’s position that
as the protectors of Belizean archaeological heritage, they must maintain strict
control over the Maya past. Past attempts at shared management of pre-Hispanic
sites with nongovernmental organizations have created a variety of difficulties re-
sulting, ultimately, in poor stewardship over archaeological resources. The fear of
site destruction or mismanagement also guides the Institute’s unwillingness to ne-
gotiate comanagement agreements with descendent communities. This decision is
true to the Institute of Archaeology’s responsibilities to the archaeological record.
At present, the Maya communities of Toledo lack the resources, education, and
administrative skills that are necessary to properly protect finite and uniquely valu-
able ancient sites in Belize.

In recent years, the Institute of Archaeology has tolerated limited assertions of
the relationship between the Toledo Maya and local pre-Hispanic sites. For exam-
ple, the performance of traditional dances at the Classic site of Lubaantun, includ-
ing the Deer Dance in 2008, the Moro Dance in 2009, and the upcoming Monkey
Dance, are permitted. Other demands are ignored, such as those made by the vil-
lage of Indian Creek in 2006 that the Institute of Archaeology respect village land
use and inform and include the community in any future development at the local
site of Nim Li Punit.35 But, the landmark 2007 Supreme Court decision in favor
of customary land rights in Toledo has pushed the relationship between Maya peo-
ple and the pre-Hispanic past in to national dialogue about Maya archaeology via
questions of indigenousness and national belonging

On 30 June 2009, 1 day prior to the annual Belize Archaeological Symposium,
a forum for the presentation of permitted research in the country almost entirely
carried out by North American researchers, the Julian Cho Society and the Maya
Leaders Alliance, two major indigenous rights organizers in Toledo, released a state-
ment intended for the participants of the Symposium. Read aloud at the meeting,
the statement condemns Dr. Jaime Awe, the director of the Institute of Archaeol-
ogy, for presenting a 2009 affidavit before the Supreme Court indicating that the
Toledo Maya are not indigenous to Belize. The message goes on to appeal to the
archaeological community to help educate Belizeans about the continuity be-
tween ancient and living Maya people to advance “the truth” of Maya cultural
heritage and indigenous rights. It points out that,

Archaeologists working in Belize have long collaborated with the Gov-
ernment of Belize (through the IA) in order to maintain their permits and
good political relations. They have often ignored, and alienated the living
Maya communities where they work. Thus the Government’s claim to reg-
ulate archaeological research has been strengthened by archaeology while
Maya communities have been denied opportunities to critical and ratio-
nal dialogue concerning their history and reduced to mere laborers. More-
over, the practices of archaeologists have too often glorified the past
achievements of the Mayas while ignoring the ongoing struggles of Maya
people for cultural expression, such as our present struggle over land.36

WINNING TITLE TO LAND BUT NOT TO ITS PAST

123

“The time has come,” the statement finishes, “for a new form of engagement, one
based on respect and indigenous rights,”37 referring both to the ethical responsi-
bilities of archaeologists and advancing indigenous rights rooted in the acquisi-
tion of customary land tenure.

SANTA CRUZ AND UXBENKÁ IN CONTEXT

The Toledo District of southern Belize is home to four “major” Classic Maya sites—
Lubaantun, Nim Li Punit, Pusilha, and Uxbenká—and a vast number of smaller spir-
itual, residential, and production sites. Nim Li Punit and Lubaantun were both
initially developed for archaeological tourism in the 1970s and remain the only two
archaeological parks (i.e., reconstructed sites open to the public) in Toledo. Inves-
tigators from the United States working at Pusilha during the mid-2000s, engaged
with the local Q’eqchi’ community of San Benito Poite and the Institute of Archae-
ology to develop a small-scale cultural and archaeological tourism program, but the
remoteness of the site and the precariousness of community organization have de-
terred the Institute of Archaeology from investing in an archaeological park at the
site. Only at the site of Uxbenká does the real potential exist for new government-
endorsed archaeological tourism development in Toledo. Coincidentally, Uxbenká
is also located wholly within the territory of the Mopan community of Santa Cruz,
one of the winning claimants of the 2007 customary land tenure trial.

The residents of Santa Cruz have a long and complex relationship with the site
of Uxbenká.38 According to The Maya Atlas,39 the community of Santa Cruz was
established in 1950, but oral histories recorded by an anonymous Peace Corp worker
in 2001, suggest that Santa Cruz began as a hamlet in 1918. In interviews with
residents in 2006 and 2007, many claimed they were not aware of the existence of
Uxbenká prior to its recognition by archaeologists in the mid-1980s (although
looting at the site predates this period, suggesting that local people have long been
aware of the site and its potential economic value). Archaeological investigation
was undertaken at Uxbenká by the Southern Belize Archaeological Project in the
late 1980s. Some residents were in favor of the archaeological presence but others
were unhappy and provoked the project to withdraw after its second field season.
From the late 1980s through the mid-1990s, the government (then the Depart-
ment of Archaeology) opened Uxbenká to the public and installed a caretaker but
the position was dissolved and the site “closed” after community factionalism led
to the damaging of structures and carved stelae. Archaeological and state interfer-
ence at Uxbenká was minimal from 1996 until the 2005 arrival of the Uxbenká
Archaeological Project from the United States.

Uxbenká is an important aspect of the indigenous identity of Santa Cruz villag-
ers because, unlike oral traditions that have slowly disappeared over generations, the
site is a physical aspect of their ancestral heritage. Residents of Santa Cruz perceive
Uxbenká as one of the resources to which their village is entitled because it falls

124

SHOSHAUNNA PARKS

within the boundaries of their land. Residents also recognize Uxbenká as a part of
their history and identity even though they, themselves, have retained little knowl-
edge of their ancient ancestors, and know even less about Uxbenká, specifically. Nev-
ertheless, because Uxbenká is located on Santa Cruz land and its residents are
descendants of the ancient Maya, they believe it belongs to them.

The assertion that Uxbenká belongs to Santa Cruz directly confronts the legal
definition of ancient monuments and antiquities as belonging to the state. As stated
previously, according to Article 4 of the Ancient Monuments and Antiquities Act,
“all ancient monuments and antiquities . . . whether upon any land or in any river,
stream or watercourse, or under territorial waters of the country . . . in private
ownership, possession, custody or control, shall absolutely vest in the Govern-
ment.” Adding to this is the fact that the community of Santa Cruz is located on
an Indian Reservation—land owned by the government until Santa Cruz was
granted customary land title in 2007. For the Institute of Archaeology, not only
did the community not own the ancient cultural remains in its territory, it did not
even technically own its basic subsistence resources until 2007.

From the perspective of the Belizean government, the Ancient Monuments and
Antiquities Act is a legislative tool intended to protect the nation’s invaluable ar-
chaeological and historic resources. Pre-Hispanic remains in Belize are under con-
stant threat of damage and destruction by archaeological looting, urbanization, and
mechanized agriculture, as they are throughout the Maya region. With limited re-
sources to monitor the safety of Belizean heritage places, this legislation provides re-
course for punishment and restitution when national monuments and antiquities
have been compromised. Although many communities and private landowners
would (and in some cases do) provide excellent stewardship over archaeological re-
sources, there is also a significant proportion of the population that would (and in
some cases currently do40) prefer to capitalize privately from such places, or de-
stroy them altogether to make space for industry, agriculture, or residences.

Nevertheless, the recategorization of Santa Cruz territory as customary land
owned by an indigenous community, a land classification never before used in
Belize, could pose a challenge to the 2000[1972] Ancient Monuments and Antiq-
uities Act. The customary land title granted to Santa Cruz is unique in that it
recognizes that Santa Cruz, as an indigenous community, engages in traditional
forms of land use that differ from Western ones. Negotiations with the govern-
ment in the transfer of customary land title to Santa Cruz must, thus, also take in
to account the community’s ability to establish and maintain “traditional” rela-
tionships with natural and cultural resources within their boundaries. Just as the
people of Santa Cruz maintain a distinct relationship with rivers and forestland
informed by indigenous worldview and subsistence, so too do they maintain a
distinct relationship with Uxbenká and other places of pre-Hispanic heritage on
the local landscape such as Oke’bal Ha’ Cave.

The site of Uxbenká is strategically positioned to become a locus for new dis-
course about the role of Maya people in the investigation, interpretation, and man-

WINNING TITLE TO LAND BUT NOT TO ITS PAST

125

agement of all pre-Hispanic heritage in Belize. Winning “traditional” title to land
was a major first step in the impending struggle for rights over the pre-Hispanic
past but a number of obstacles remain before the Toledo Maya can establish them-
selves as legitimate stewards of local archaeological resources, let alone authority
over them. First, Maya leaders acknowledge that, because the Maya communities
of Toledo are some of the poorest and least educated in the nation, Maya people
are at present not prepared to take over the responsibility of managing the nation’s
fourteen archaeological parks and ubiquitous unprotected sites. Presently, there
are no self-identified Belizean Maya individuals with a graduate degree in archae-
ology or a related field; a requirement for conducting investigations in the coun-
try. Whereas the recognition of Santa Cruzenos as stewards over the site of Uxbenká
would be more plausible, given the proximity of the site and the community, the
village is not equipped at this time to take responsibility over the site. Second, it is
important to reiterate that the Q’eqchi’ and Mopan of Toledo are not the only
individuals in Belize that self-identify as Maya. Yucatec and Itzaj communities in
northern and western Belize have been more integrated into mestizo and Belizean
national identity than the Toledo Maya, but language and tradition remain an im-
portant part of life for many. There is little cooperation between Maya leadership
in Toledo and that in the north and west. Though the issue of customary land
rights was specific to existing Indian reservations in Toledo, pre-Hispanic archae-
ological remains are located throughout the country. In order to establish their
legitimacy over the pre-Hispanic past, indigenous Mopan and Q’eqchi’ commu-
nities must work in collaboration with all self-identified Maya communities.

Yet a third obstacle, perhaps the largest of those mentioned thus far, stands in the
way of securing indigenous rights to ancestral heritage in Belize: the government.
As discussed in the beginning of this article, the Toledo Maya have long attempted
to acquire recognition from the government for their rights to traditional land. While
this land is a lucrative resource for the government in terms of its logging potential
and, more recently, possible oil reserves, historically the interior of Toledo has been
too distant from the country’s major population centers to be of any significant de-
velopment value for the state. Conversely, Maya cultural heritage is extremely
lucrative—both in its economic potential through archaeological tourism and in its
historical value as the monumental roots of a burgeoning nation. Gaining greater
access to the interpretation and management of pre-Hispanic heritage will undoubt-
edly be a more immense struggle, even than that required to gain title to a resource
in which the state has more limited ideological interests.

CONCLUSION

The presence of places of pre-Hispanic heritage helped to construct the “primor-
dial” belonging of Maya people to Toledo in recent struggles for customary land
tenure. But, although the struggle for indigenous land rights in southern Belize is
changing the legal relationship between Maya people and their land, the identifi-

126

SHOSHAUNNA PARKS

cation of customary land tenure does not include local cultural heritage resources.
The communities of Santa Cruz and Conejo have received recognition from the
Belizean Supreme Court for the right to customary land tenure, but many gov-
ernment officials—including those in the Institute of Archaeology—remain skep-
tical of the veracity of the connection between the Toledo Maya and the precolonial
past of Belize. Regardless of advances in indigenous rights in southern Belize, pre-
Hispanic Maya sites remain a draw for international tourists and, thus, a major
source of revenue for the nation. Permitting Maya people to have greater access to
ancient places threatens not only the government’s ability to capitalize off of the
past of its territory, but compromises deeply entrenched conceptions of national
identity and history.41

Given the present hierarchy of power that dominates the investigation, inter-
pretation, and management of pre-Hispanic cultural heritage in Belize and through-
out the Maya region, it is unlikely that Maya people will receive greater authority
over ancestral sites without better access to archaeological training and increased
collaboration with archaeological investigators and site managers.42 Essential to
this effort is opening up archaeological projects and the Institute of Archaeology
to include new roles for indigenous people in dialogical public outreach, educa-
tional opportunities, archaeological training, peer-review processes, the develop-
ment of investigatory objectives, and the establishment of archaeological parks.
Slow acknowledgment of the rights of Maya descendants over cultural heritage
may be less threatening to those that currently hold power over the past, thus
creating new opportunities in the future for Maya people to establish legitimacy
in engaging with, and even authority over, ancestral places.

ENDNOTES

1. Wilk, “The Kekchi”; Stone, “La Politica Cultura de Identidad Maya en Belice.”
2. Adolph Lucas Jr., “Mayan Leaders File Another Law Suit,” Reporter, (July 4, 2008). Available at
http://www.reporter.bz/index.php?mod⫽archive&act⫽view&article⫽2806&highlight⫽mayan%20
leaders&match⫽ (accessed February 12, 2010); Jenelle Chanona, “Maya Leaders File Class Action
Law Suit in Indigenous Rights Claim,” Reporter (November 18, 2008). Available at http://www.reporter.
bz/index.php?mod⫽archive&act⫽view&article⫽3100&highlight⫽maya%20leaders&match⫽ (ac-
cessed February 12, 2010).

3. Adele Ramos, “CJ Rules for Maya; Implications ‘Huge,’” Amandala (June 29, 2010).
4. Ancient Monuments and Antiquities Act of 1972, Laws of Belize, rev. ed. 2000, Belize Legal
Information Network. Available at http://www.belizelaw.org/lawadmin/index2.html (accessed May
6, 2009).

5. Maya Village of Santa Cruz v. Government of Belize, Claim No. 171, article 9, 2007; Maya Vil-

lage of Conejo v. Government of Belize, Claim No. 172, 2007.

6. Bolland, Colonialism and Resistance in Belize, 135.
7. Bolland, Colonialism and Resistance in Belize, 138–39; Wainwright, Decolonizing Development.
8. According to a 21 May 2006 article published in The Guardian entitled “SATIIM Takes GOB to
Court Over Oil Exploration”; Anaya, “Reparations for Neglect of Indigenous Land Rights,” 569, 573.

9. Anaya, “Reparations for Neglect of Indigenous Land Rights,” 573.
10. Toledo Maya Cultural Council and Toledo Alcade Association, Maya Atlas; Stone, “La Politica

Cultura de Identidad Maya en Belice,” 195, 197, 199.

WINNING TITLE TO LAND BUT NOT TO ITS PAST

127

11. Stone, “La Politica Cultura de Identidad Maya en Belice,” 201; for more on the Ruta Maya see

Garrett, “La Ruta Maya”; Joyce “Archaeology and Nation Building.”

12. Stone, “La Politica Cultura de Identidad Maya en Belice”; Toledo Maya Cultural Council and
Toledo Alcade Association, Maya Atlas; Wainwright, Decolonizing Development; Anaya, “Reparations
for Neglect of Indigenous Land Rights.”

13. Anaya, “Reparations for Neglect of Indigenous Land Rights,” 570; Wainwright, Decolonizing
Development, 178–201; Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, Maya Indigenous Commu-
nities of the Toledo District Belize, Report No. 40/04, Case 12.053, articles 1–2, 12 October 2004.
14. Government of Belize and the Maya Peoples of Southern Belize, Ten Points of Agreement.
Available at http://www.law.arizona.edu/depts/iplp/international/maya_belize/documents/TEN
POINTSOFAGREEMENT.pdf (accessed February 13, 2009).

15. Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, Maya Indigenous Communities, article 197.
16. Amandala, “Crique Sarco Chairlady Takes on SATIIM,” 4 June 2006.
17. Anaya, “Reparations for Neglect of Indigenous Land Rights,” 572
18. 18.Santa Cruz and Conejo v. Government of Belize, article 135.
19. 19.Santa Cruz and Conejo v. Government of Belize, article 136.
20. Chanona, “Maya Leaders File Class Action Law Suit”; Lucas, “Mayan Leaders File Another

Land Suit.”

21. Ramos, “CJ Rules for Maya.”
22. Wilk, “The Kekchi and the settlement of Toledo,” and Household Ecology; Jones, Conquest of
Last Maya Kingdom; Grandia, Unsettling, and “Milpa Matters”; Wainwright, Decolonizing Development.

23. Arias, “The Maya Movement,” 251.
24. Nash, Mayan Visions; Arias, “The Maya Movement”
25. Fischer, Cultural Logics.
26. Santa Cruz v. Government of Belize, Higinio Teul Affidavit.
27. Santa Cruz v. Government of Belize, Raymundo Sho Affidavit.
28. Personal communication to author by anonymous interview participant, 2006.
29. Silverman and Ruggles, Cultural Heritage and Human Rights, 5; See also Schmidt, “The Human

Right to Cultural Heritage.”

30. International Labor Organization (ILO), Convention No. 169, Article 5.
31. ILO, Convention No. 169, Article 136, Section A.
32. Santa Cruz and Conejo v. Government of Belize, article 136.
33. Institute of Archaeology Official 1, 2006.
34. Institute of Archaeology Official 1, interviewed by author in 2006.
35. Parks, Archaeological Ethics and the Struggle, 170–71.
36. Unpublished press release from the Maya Leaders Alliance, 30 June 2009.
37. Maya Leader’s Alliance Press Release (June 30, 2009).
38. See Parks, Archaeological Ethics and the Struggle.
39. Toledo Maya Cultural Council and Toledo Alcade Association, Maya Atlas, 47.
40. For example, Gilgan, “Looting and Maya Objects”; Matsuda, “Ethics of Archaeology”; Parks

et al., “Conservation of Maya Cultural Heritage.”

41. Medina, “History, Culture, and Place-Making”; Stone, “Becoming Belizean.”
42. For example, Harrison, Decolonizing Anthropology; Swidler et al., Native Americans and Ar-
chaeologists; Nicholas and Andrews, “Indigenous Archaeology”; Smith, Decolonizing Methodologies;
Smith and Jackson, “Decolonizing Indigenous Archaeology”; Atalay, “Indigenous Archaeology as De-
colonizing Practice” and “Multivocality and Indigenous Archaeologies.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anaya, S. James. “Reparations for Neglect of Indigenous Land Rights at the Intersection of Domestic
and International Law—The Maya Cases in the Supreme Court of Belize.” In Reparations for Indig-
enous People: International and Comparative Perspectives, edited by Federico Lenzerini, 567–604. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 2009.

128

SHOSHAUNNA PARKS

Arias, Arturo. “The Maya Movement, Postcolonialism and Cultural Agency.” Journal of Latin Amer-
ican Cultural Studies 15, no. 2 (2006): 251–62.

Atalay, Sonya. “Indigenous Archaeology as Decolonizing Practice.” American Indian Quarterly 30,
no. 3&4 (2006): 280–310.

———. “Multivocality and Indigenous Archaeologies.” In Evaluating Multiple Narratives: Beyond
Nationalist, Colonialist, Imperialist Archaeologies, edited by Junko Habu, Clare Fawcett, and John M.
Matsunaga, 29–44. New York: Springer Science ⫹ Business Media, 2008.

Bolland, Nigel O. Formation of a Colonial Society. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1977.

Fischer, Edward F. Cultural Logics and Global Economies: Maya Identity in Thought and Practice. Aus-
tin: University of Texas Press, 2001.

Garrett, Wilbur E. “La Ruta Maya.” National Geographic 176, no. 4 (1989): 424–79.

Gilgan, Elizabeth. “Looting and the Market for Maya Objects: A Belizean Perspective.” In Trade in
Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological Heritage, edited by Neil. Brodie, J.
Doole, Colin. Renfrew, 73–88. Cambridge: McDonald Institute Monographs for Archaeological Re-
search, 2001.

Grandia, Liza. “Unsettling: Land Dispossession and Enduring Inequity for the Q’eqchi’ Maya in the
Guatemalan and Belizean Frontier Colonization Process.” PhD diss., Department of Anthropology,
University of California-Berkeley, 2006.

———. “Milpa Matters: Maya Communities of Toledo v. Government of Belize.” In Waging War,
Making Peace: Reparations and Human Rights, edited by Barbara Rose Johnston and Susan Slyomov-
ics, 153–82. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2009.

Harrison, Faye V., ed. Decolonizing Anthropology: Moving Further Toward an Anthropology for Liber-
ation, 1–15. Arlington, VA: American Anthropological Association, 1991.

Houston, Stephen D., John Robertson, and David Stuart. 2000. The Language of Classic Maya In-
scriptions. Current Anthropology 41:321–356.

Jones, Grant D. The Conquest of the Last Maya Kingdom. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 1998.

Joyce, Rosemary A. “Archaeology and Nation Building: A View from Central America.” In The Pol-
itics of Archaeology and Identity in a Global Context, edited by Susan Kane, 79–100. Boston, MA:
Colloquia and Conference Papers 7, Archaeological Institute of America, 2003.

Matsuda, David. “The Ethics of Archaeology, Subsistence Digging, and Artifact Looting in Latin Amer-
ica.”  7, no. 1 (1998): 89–98.

Medina, Laurie Kroshus. “History, Culture, and Place-Making: ‘Native’ Status and Maya Identity in
Belize.” Journal of Latin American Anthropology 4, no. 1 (1998): 134–65.

Nash, June C. Mayan Visions: The Quest for Autonomy in an Age of Globalization. New York: Rout-
ledge, 2001.

Nicholas, George, and Thomas Andrews. “Indigenous Archaeology in a Post-Modern World.” In At
A Crossroads: Archaeology and First Peoples in Canada, edited by George Nicholas and Thomas An-
drews, 1–18. Burnaby: SFU Archaeology Press, 1997.

WINNING TITLE TO LAND BUT NOT TO ITS PAST

129

Parks, Shoshaunna. “Archaeological Ethics and the Struggle for Community Legitimacy in the Maya
Archaeoscape.” PhD diss., Department of Archaeology, Boston University, 2009.

Parks, Shoshaunna, Patricia A. McAnany, and Satoru Murata. “The Conservation of Maya Cultural
Heritage: Searching for Solutions in a Troubled Region.” Journal of Field Archaeology 31, no. 4 (2006):
425–32.

Schmidt, Peter R. “A Human Right to a Cultural Heritage: African Expressions and Configurations.”
In the East African Journal of Peace and Human Rights, vol. 2, no. 1, 1995, pp. 41–52.

Silverman, Helaine, and D. Fairchild Ruggles, eds. Cultural Heritage and Human Rights. New York:
Springer, 2007.

Smith, Claire, and Gary Jackson. “Decolonizing Indigenous Archaeology: Developments from Down
Under.” American Indian Quarterly 30, no. 3&4 (2006): 311–49.

Smith, Linda Tuhiwai. Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples. London: Zed
Books, 2002.

Stone, Michael. “La Politica Cultura de la Identidad Maya en Belice.” Mesoamerica 29 (1995): 167–214.

———. “Becoming Belizean: Maya Identity and the Politics of a Nation.” The Maya Diaspora: Gua-
temalan Roots, New American Lives, edited by James Loucky and Marilyn M. Moors, 119–40. Phila-
delphia: Temple University Press, 2000.

Swidler, Nina, Kurt E. Dongoske, Roger Anyon, and Alan S. Downer, eds. Native Americans and Ar-
chaeologists: Stepping Stones to Common Ground. Walnut Creek, CA: Alta Mira Press, 1997.

Toledo Maya Cultural Council and Toledo Alcade Association. Maya Atlas: The Struggle to Preserve
Maya Land in Southern Belize. Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, 1997.

Wainwright, Joel. Decolonizing Development: Colonial Power and the Maya. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell,
2008.

Wilk, Richard R. “The Kekchi and the Settlement of Toledo District.” Belizean Studies 15, no. 3 (1987):
33–50.

———. Household Ecology: Economic Change and Domestic Life Among the Kekchi Maya of Belize.
Arizona Studies in Human Ecology. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1991.


