 (2012) 19:1–31. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2012 Lifting the Lid on “The Community”:
Who Has the Right to Control Access
to Traditional Knowledge and
Expressions of Culture?
Miranda Forsyth*

Abstract: This article explores some key considerations around determining
who should have the right to control access to, and benefit from, traditional
knowledge and intangible cultural heritage. It highlights the complexities
involved in these considerations by examining in detail the different claims to
control by different segments of the population in regard to two case studies:
Samoan tattooing and the Vanuatu land dive. It uses insights from this analysis
to problematize the assumptions about the use of concepts such as
“community” in legislation designed to protection traditional knowledge and
expressions of culture, and it also reflects on what effect such legislative
developments may have on the cultural industries initiative and the
implementation of the Convention on Intangible Cultural Heritage.

The global interest in protecting traditional knowledge and intangible cultural
property has been increasingly manifest in the Pacific Islands region over the
past decade.1 It has led to three categories of current developments: the drafting
of regional and national legislation to vest ownership and exclusive control of
traditional knowledge in its customary owners, the promotion of cultural indus-
tries as a means of sustainable development for the region, and the implemen-
tation of the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage
2003 (ICH Convention) through the creation of inventories and registers of in-
tangible cultural heritage. The stimulus for all of these has been multifaceted,
combining concerns about ongoing misappropriation of traditional knowledge,
decreasing transmission of traditional knowledge to future generations, dilution

*School of Regulation, Justice and Diplomacy, College of Asia and the Pacific, Australian National
University. Email: Miranda.forsyth@anu.edu.au

1

2

MIRANDA FORSYTH

and loss of culture as a result of the forces of globalization, and the hope that
traditional knowledge may be a resource that can be tapped to provide eco-
nomic opportunity for local communities. Moreover, all have been primarily ini-
tiated and driven at international, regional, and to a lesser degree, national levels,
rather than being in response to grassroots activism, as has occurred in countries
with indigenous minorities such as Australia and New Zealand.

These three categories of development are currently proceeding on the assump-
tion that they are mutually compatible. For example, the UNESCO Program Spe-
cialist for Culture in Pacific Islands Region stated that “the two approaches—
ICH safeguarding and IP protection of TK and TCEs through sui generis system—
currently taken by the Pacific region are complementary.”2 This assumption also
prevails in the international context: The head of the Traditional Creativity, Cul-
tural Heritage and Cultural Expressions Section of the World Intellectual Prop-
erty Organization (WIPO) has stated that the work of WIPO on the protection
of traditional knowledge through a treaty and the safeguarding of intangible her-
itage are not “at odds” but are “two sides of the same coin.”3 This article seeks to
test this assumption. It does so by analyzing two examples of traditional knowl-
edge in the region and asking, with regard to each: Given the particular objec-
tives of each development, who ideally should have the right to benefit from,
use, and control access to traditional knowledge? If the answers to this question
are different for each category of development, it would suggest that they are not
mutually supportive, or at least neutral with regard to their effect on each other.
Early recognition of any tensions that may exist between these different develop-
ments is crucial to prevent them from undermining each other in their respec-
tive implementation.

The first case study is situated in the Melanesian country of Vanuatu and con-
cerns the practice of land diving (nagol ); and the other is the practice of tattoo-
ing (tatau) from the Polynesian country of Samoa. Having two case studies from
culturally distinct areas in the South Pacific allows us to gauge more accurately
the extent to which the issues raised are shared throughout the region. These
case studies are also used to explore in more detail the notion of “community”
that forms an important, although differing, part of the regulation and policies
of all three developments. Community or group ownership, voice, or control is
increasingly seen to offer a solution to the problems involved in giving such rights
to the state on the one hand4 or to individuals on the other.5 Kurin, for exam-
ple, argues that the “community” is “a rising, alternative holder and centre of
power to the state.”6 Community ownership is also seen to closely map custom-
ary notions of regulation of traditional knowledge that are understood as com-
munal rather than individualistic.7 Theoretically, therefore, community ownership
or control of traditional knowledge is appealing; the problem is that implement-
ing any laws based on such concepts is immensely complicated. To date, these
complications have been largely glossed over both in the region and internation-
ally, with policymakers and legislative drafters making assumptions about the

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

3

homogeneity and boundedness of local communities that overlook the com-
plex realities of group dynamics.8 The danger of proceeding along such a path
is not simply that initiatives to protect traditional knowledge will fail to work
in practice, but that attempts to implement them may foment local conflict
and so threaten the existing social and regulatory structures in which much
traditional knowledge is currently embedded.9 These concerns are explored in
this article by “lifting the lid” on the “the community” involved in each case
study to demonstrate the range of competing views about the regulation of tra-
ditional knowledge, varied personal interests, power dynamics, and interconnec-
tions that can be involved in even very small and local groups of people. These
case studies build upon the work of Noyes and Tauschek, who have demon-
strated how, in the context of two European festivals, introduction of legal rules
has led to changes in control over, and beneficiaries of, those festivals.10 Taus-
chek argues that those who determine the rules “postulate that they are in pos-
session of a hegemonic interpretation of a given cultural practice. Social conflicts
may ensue.”11

Although the analysis in this article is situated in the Pacific Islands region, it
has relevance beyond this context in a number of ways. It seeks to challenge por-
trayals of relationships between indigenous communities and traditional culture
that are based on idealized notions of custodianship and intragroup responsibil-
ity. Such portrayals are not uncommon in the literature on, and political state-
ments around, traditional knowledge. For example, Juan Jintiach, Coordinator of
Indigenous Organization of the Amazon Basin, commenting on the 18th session
of the WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Traditional Knowledge stated, “I
think what [negotiating governments] might be afraid of is that indigenous peo-
ples might act like them, [but] . . . I don’t think indigenous peoples have ever in-
dicated they would act like them.”12 This is perhaps a result of what Sunder refers
to as “a problem in the context of postcolonial identity politics, where Third World
countries find themselves in the discursive trap of defining a nation and its people
in opposition to the West.”13 However, while potentially helpful for political pur-
poses, setting up idealized notions of community cohesion tends to obscure issues
of intracommunity disputes over ownership and control,14 which can lead to se-
rious problems with implementation of legislative achievements. As Noyes argues,
“we will not correct the outdated paradigm of the modern individual by attaching
to it the equally antiquated epicycle of the traditional community.”15

The article also seeks to contribute to the growing literature on the benefits or
disadvantages of the propertization of cultural property.16 The two case studies
illustrate that indigenous people are not immune from seeking to capitalize on
control over traditional knowledge in order to commodify and profit from it, and
that state laws and foreign purses can become very effective tools in manipulating
claims by one individual against another. The detailed accounts of the local pol-
itics involved in each example demonstrate the potential for state or international
interventions to wittingly or unwittingly strengthen the hands of some members

4

MIRANDA FORSYTH

of the community vis-à-vis others, resulting in the exclusion of some who believe
they too have traditional knowledge rights.17,18

The final contribution of this article is to show that traditional knowledge is
currently not an unregulated field, once a broad view is adopted of regulation as
“a social activity that includes persuasion, influence, voluntary compliance and
self-regulation.”19 Any state initiative is therefore likely to be entering an area that
is already the subject of regulation, possibly from a number of different sources,
albeit of a nonstate or nonformal type. Moreover, in many cases these existing
regulatory structures are under pressure from a range of factors, including loss of
authority of traditional leaders, fragmented populations, and pressures from the
cash economy, meaning that they are vulnerable to being undermined by the en-
trance of new sources of authority.20

PART 1: PACIFIC ISLANDS CONTEXT

This article focuses on two countries in the Pacific Islands region. The different
countries in the region have considerable historical and cultural links that have
been reinforced through trade networks, war and occupation, and, more recently,
the development of regional bodies. With the exception of Tonga, each country
was colonized by Europeans during the course of the nineteenth century, and all
achieved independence or became self-governing between 1962 and 1994. Prior to
colonization, each state was comprised of a number of different island groups,
within which people tended to live in separate communities under the control of
separate leaders and communities. Corrin Care et al. argue, “Although the indig-
enous inhabitants of each island group in the South Pacific were basically of the
same racial category, there was no concept within each island group of a unified
society, let alone a unified state.”21 Thus, unlike many other indigenous voices in
international debates over traditional knowledge and intangible culture, Pacific
Islanders do not comprise minority nations within a larger state, but live in au-
tonomous nation-states that contain many different communities, each with its
own culture and sense of identity. This presents opportunity in terms of diversity,
but also challenges in balancing local claims to traditional knowledge with those
of the broader community, especially given the constant movements of people over
the past century as a result of plantation labor, missionization, overseas migra-
tion, and, recently, urban drift.

All the countries in the region are developing countries, although with differing
economic positions, and all face challenges associated with dispersed populations,
small size, and lack of infrastructure. Techera argues that “each state is currently
confronting similar social, economic and environmental concerns including large
and rapidly growing indigenous populations (following a period of outward mi-
gration), urbanization, limited land and financial resources, environmental fragil-
ity and the desire for economic development.”22 In part as a response to these

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

5

concerns, traditional knowledge is being promoted as an important potential de-
velopmental resource at national and regional levels.

All three of the initiatives outlined in this section have development as a stated
common overarching goal. However, what is meant by development in these var-
ious initiatives is likely to differ quite significantly, although it has not been clearly
articulated in any of them. At least two different viewpoints about what develop-
ment means in the context of cultural industries have recently been identified.23
The first is the prevailing neoliberal viewpoint that espouses the argument that
by “drawing on the creative resources of human capital, nation states are focusing
on what distinguishes them from each other in order to derive economic purchase
in a global marketplace.” The second viewpoint is described as a more holistic
one, and “highlights the role culture plays in all aspects of life . . . Rather than
being position as by-products of economic growth strategies, social cohesion and
wellbeing are pursued in their own right.” This latter view of development has
been promoted nationally, regionally and internationally by Vanuatu MP Ralph
Regenvanu, who argues that the traditional economy continues to be a crucial
although undervalued resource in the region.24 This viewpoint is also being sup-
ported by the Alternative Indicators of Well-Being for Melanesia Project based in
the Vanuatu Office of Statistics, which aims to “focus on factors not currently cap-
tured by the Human Development Index or accounted for within the Millennium
Development Goals—factors including free access to land and natural resources,
community vitality, family relationships, and culture.”25 These two different view-
points on development also reflect a fundamental “contestation over the orienta-
tion of ‘law and development’” in the relevant literature.26 Importantly, different
visions of development are likely to lead to different emphases in any initiative
concerning traditional knowledge: the former using it to generate more per-capita
GDP (gross domestic product), and the latter for more cultural and local uses.
Thus, as with community, development is another concept in this area that needs
clarification.

PART 2: THREE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE BASED DEVELOPMENTS

This section describes the three categories of developments based on tradi-
tional knowledge current in the region and elucidates their different objectives.27
Only the national and regional legislation explicitly seek to create property rights
in traditional knowledge and thus contain “a core negative right to exclude oth-
ers from the imitative production of the intangible.”28 However, the implemen-
tation of the other two developments also involves the development of regulatory
frameworks that will necessarily determine who has the right to benefit from,
and control, traditional knowledge. They therefore involve questions of “sym-
bolic ownership” as a form of possession that “establishes an authority over the
use of a resource.”29

6

MIRANDA FORSYTH

(a) The Sui Generis Development

Sui generis development is the drafting of regional and national legislation to pro-
tect traditional knowledge (sui generis legislation). At a regional level, there are
three relevant pieces of legislation: the Regional Framework for the Protection of
Traditional Knowledge and Expressions of Culture (2002) (“Regional Frame-
work”), adopted by the Forum Trade Ministers in 2003; the Traditional Biological
Knowledge, Innovations and Practices Model Law (“Model Law”), adopted by the
Forum Trade Ministers in 2008; and the Melanesian Spearhead Group’s draft Treaty
on Traditional Knowledge 2011 (“Treaty”) that has been approved by in principle
by its members in April 2011, but not as yet signed by all of them. The Treaty will
only apply to the Melanesian countries in the region.

At a national level, since 2010 seven countries in the region have started to draft
legislation to protect traditional knowledge and expressions of culture under the
Pacific Island Forum’s Traditional Knowledge Implementation Action Plan (2009)
(“Action Plan”).30 Samoa’s Law Reform Commission is also currently working on
developing Traditional Knowledge policy and legislation.31 In addition, in Van-
uatu, a section on indigenous knowledge already exists within the Copyright Act
2000, which legally came into force in 2011, although there are plans for a sepa-
rate piece of legislation solely concerned with traditional knowledge. Although
the Regional Framework has provided the starting point for the development of
national legislation, countries in the region are taking quite different paths toward
its development. Some, for example, Kiribati and Cook Islands, are working on
developing a policy on traditional knowledge as a preliminary step; while others
such as Fiji have developed legislation first. It is highly likely that the ultimate
forms of these national laws will therefore be quite diverse (although both the
Treaty and the Traditional Knowledge Action Plan refer to “uniform legislation”).
However, in most cases they are likely to follow the general approach of the Re-
gional Framework, the Treaty and the UNESCO-WIPO Model Provisions for Na-
tional Laws on the Protection of Expressions of Folklore Against Illicit Exploitation
and Other Prejudicial Actions (1985) of conferring upon owners of traditional
knowledge the right to authorize others to exploit their traditional knowledge,
and to prevent others from exploiting it without their free, prior informed and
full consent.32 This has been confirmed by a consultant working on the Kiribati
Traditional Knowledge project, who remarked that the approach adopted “in-
volves putting the interests of owners at the forefront, so they have the decision-
making powers” and also by the Director i-Taukei Institute of Language and Culture
in Fiji who stated that the draft Fijian legislation is based very significantly on the
Regional Framework.33 This approach is also clear in Section 41 of the Vanuatu
Copyright Act and in the draft Palau legislation.34

The aims of the Regional Framework and the Treaty are broad. Both aim to
prevent the misappropriation of traditional knowledge, and to facilitate the com-
mercialization of traditional knowledge so that it will contribute to sustainable

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

7

development for the region.35 The Treaty is also concerned with “protection, pres-
ervation, safeguarding and promotion” of traditional knowledge (Article 1.2). The
question of whether all these (quite divergent) objectives can be successfully met
under the proposed legislation is debatable.36

(b) The Cultural Industries Development

The development of cultural industries in the region is being shaped largely through
the framework of the Structuring the Cultural Sector in the Pacific for Improved
Human Development project funded by the European Union. It follows a series of
high-level declarations about the importance of culture to development, such as
the 2002 Declaration of Pacific Ministers of Culture that the promotion of sus-
tainable and cultural industries is a priority,37,38 This initiative conceptualizes cul-
ture as a means of generating economic growth for the region as a whole, for
example, through the development of indigenous handicrafts and ethno-tourism.39
For example, the Cook Islands draft National Policy on Traditional Knowledge
2011 states that “Traditional knowledge has become the backbone to our tourism
industry, our primary source of income and foreign exchange.” The stakeholders
involved in this project are quite broad: Teaiwa and Mercer note that “the ultimate
goal is for all stakeholders in culture—including the government, communities,
individuals, artists, academics, traditional knowledge holders and leaders—to have
ownership of, and thus ongoing investment in, ‘a cultural sector.’”40 The Cultural
Industries development is currently taking the form of “cultural mapping” pro-
grams in a number of countries to determine what cultural resources actually exist.
As with the sui generis development, a proprietary approach is also evident in this
process, as Teaiwa and Mercer note that it is intended that through mapping “an
understanding of culture as ‘wealth’ or an ‘asset’ or ‘resource’ becomes clear.”41

(c) The Implementation of the ICH Convention

The third development is the implementation of the ICH Convention, which aims
to “safeguard”42 intangible cultural heritage for the benefit of humanity. To date it
has been ratified by Vanuatu, Papua New Guinea, Tonga, and Fiji. The Convention
largely sidesteps questions of its relationship with intellectual property rights43
and issues about who controls the direction any safeguarding mechanisms may
take, referring both to the state and to communities, groups and individuals. Kono
argues that “despite heated debate during its drafting, the Convention lacks oper-
ational definitions, clear answers and workable solutions to identify the holder,
owner or steward of intangible cultural heritage.”44 However, as seen in the case
studies below, questions about who has the right to decide which particular safe-
guarding measures are put into place cannot be avoided when the Convention is
being implemented. For example, the Convention requires states to make inven-
tories of their intangible cultural heritage, and provides the opportunity to list

8

MIRANDA FORSYTH

particular examples on the List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.45
Bortolotto argues that such fixation of traditional practices in a new heritage sta-
tus “presupposes and fosters a form of appropriation by a group.”46

As we can see, the objectives of the three developments overlap to an extent,
but have quite different emphases. For example, while the ICH Convention is pre-
dominantly about preservation, the cultural industries initiative is primarily con-
cerned with commercialization, and the sui generis legislation with prevention of
misappropriation and commercialization. While Sunder argues “commerce and
culture are not necessarily at odds,”47 there are clearly potential tensions between
these different objectives, and these need to be acknowledged and worked through,
rather than ignored as is currently the case. One important reason for doing so is
that these issues will soon come to the fore in implementation when practical de-
cisions need to be made about who has the right to decide, or to participate in
deciding, inter alia whether traditional knowledge is disseminated, what restric-
tions are placed on it, for whose benefit is it used, and for what purposes. The
next section draws on detailed ethnographic data concerning two examples of tra-
ditional knowledge to explore how such questions manifest themselves in practice
and what conflicts can emerge when the potential for traditional knowledge to be
commercially exploited arises. It will first detail the different claims of various
members of the community over the particular practice, and then relate these back
to the objectives of the three developments.

PART 3: CASE STUDIES

(a) Tatau: Samoan Traditional Tattooing

I use the Samoan practice of tatau as a case study because it is well documented
and is referenced in all three developments outlined above. It is also the subject of
a number of (conflicting) calls for regulation. Historically, it takes two forms: a
male pe’a that is comprised of “areas of dense shading and fine parallel line-work,
interspersed with a wide range of motifs and geometric patterns”48 that covers the
area from the waist to the knee; and a female malu that is less elaborate and ap-
pears between the knees and the top of the thighs. The tatau is performed by
tattooing specialists known as a tufuga, and in the nineteenth century and to a
great extent up to the present, these tufuga are associated with two main ‘aiga
(extended family) in Samoa: the ‘aiga Sa Tulou’ena and the ‘aiga Sa Su’a. Mallon
states “the organization of these families is comparable to artisan guilds in other
societies. Tattooing ‘families’ shared continuity over time as a group and were or-
ganized in a hierarchical master craftsman-apprentice fashion, each with particu-
lar rules, standards and distinctive trademarks.”49 The tattooing combs traditionally
used by the tufuga were made from boar’s tusks and the ink was made from can-
dlenut soot mixed with water. Historically, tatau was performed as a rite of pas-

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

9

FIGURE 1.

Sign for tatau services, Apia, Samoa. (Photograph by the author.)

sage to adulthood and would take place over a number of days, often accompanied
by feasts and celebrations.50 The tufuga were paid both during the process and at
its completion with customary objects of high value such as prized fine mats and
food. The missionaries who came to Samoa in the 1830s tried to suppress the

FIGURE 2. Back tatau in progress, Apia, Samoa. (Photograph by the author.)

10

MIRANDA FORSYTH

practice and it went underground until the 1870s when the Catholic church began
to tolerate tattooing.51 Elsewhere in the Pacific (e.g., Tonga, Tahiti, and the Mar-
quesas) the traditional practice of tattooing was completely lost and was revived
only recently through the assistance of Samoan tufuga in the 1980s.52

Local and international interest in tatau has grown from the early 1960s until
today. The practice has changed over this period, sometimes controversially. Tatau
is increasingly being worn as a statement of Samoan heritage and identity, partic-
ularly among those in migrant Samoan communities,53 rather than as a ritual en-
trance to manhood, and is also now being regularly performed on non-Samoans.
Some non-Samoan tattoo artists have been given a Samoan title, which carries
with it the right to tattoo others using Samoan tools,54 and some have interpreted
this right to include performing a pe’a.55 Traditional pe’a designs are currently
being performed on women, and traditional malu designs are being performed on
men and on fafafine (the “third sex” in Samoa).56 Also, pe’a and malu designs are
being done on nontraditional body parts such as the top of the arm and ankles
and wrists. In some contexts, tatau is now being performed using modern tattoo
needles and modern ink. Western and other Polynesian (such as Maori) designs57
are being incorporated into the tatau design, although this seems to have been
occurring since at least the 1930s.58 Finally, cash is increasingly being used to pay
for tatau, either exclusively or together with customary objects of value (a full pe’a
today costs on average AUD 3000, but prices vary widely).

Interviews from my recent fieldwork reveal much division in opinion concern-
ing these different developments.59 In general, there is a great deal of concern
among non-tufuga concerning the new directions tatau is taking. This is often
expressed in the context of disquiet over the loss of Samoan identity in the face
of changes wrought by modernization and greater interaction with the western
world. For example, a member of the Samoan Law Reform Commission working
on an enquiry into traditional knowledge stated that people have expressed con-
cerns about tatau being performed on foreigners and male designs on women
and vice versa, saying “it is destroying the culture, it is not right.”60 A Facebook
page called “Stop idiots from getting a Tatau or Malu” argues “We also want to
stop people who are trying to acquire these traditional tattoos without proper
cultural etiquette/knowledge of Tatau/Malu and their sacred significance. . . . As
Samoans we are all co-owners of that intellectual cultural property. And we don’t
want our treasured jewel being dragged through the mud anymore.”61

In contrast, the tufuga in general have a very open-minded attitude toward these
new developments, and take the view that they—as traditional practitioners—
have to move with the times. However, there are significant disagreements be-
tween them about how far to take this, particularly in regard to the bestowal of
tufuga titles on non-Samoans.62 Mallon argues that “some Samoan tufuga who
claim authority over the arts of tatau are seeking to share it with the wider world.
They are active agents in its dissemination and dispersal.”63 We see this in the
example of the Suluape family (of the ‘aiga Sa Su’a), which is behind the market-

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

11

ing of the “Suluape Black Tattoo Pigment” by the international INTENZE brand
of tattoo ink.64 A member of this family also initiated an annual international
tatau festival in 2006 that claims to celebrate both “Samoan culture and impor-
tance of tatau in the Samoan heritage” and also “how tatau has . . . transcended
geographical boundaries to connect the international tattooing community.”65 Tuf-
uga also regularly attend international tattooing festivals and travel around the
world to perform tatau on international clients. Another member of the Suluape
family has, for example, participated in the University of Auckland’s Heritage Art-
ists in Residence program, where he plans to create a full tatau on one of the
students in a series of workshops “designed to maintain heritage arts and make
them more accessible to Pacific communities and the wider public.”66

There are at least three distinct sets of claims over tatau. The first is that of the
tufuga from the two main families associated with the tufuga ta tatau title. These
two families trace their “gift” back to a mythical story in which the twin goddesses
Taema and Tilafaiga came to Samoa from Fiji and gave a basket of tatau combs
and instructions on how to use them to their ancestors.67 There is disagreement
between the two families over which family’s representative was given the combs
first of all.68 Members of these two families argue that they alone have rights over
the practice of tatau because of their historical connections. Va’a reports that one
tufuga, currently resident in New Zealand, argues that the goddesses gave the trade
to the Faleula (Two Houses) “for their exclusive use; it was not given to the people
of Samoa at large. Therefore, the tufuga of the Faleula have the exclusive right to
tattoo in the traditional manner anyone they so wish, including foreigners.”69 It is
unclear to what extent the tufuga have sought to enforce their rights over the ex-
clusive practice of tatau to date.70 According to Mallon, there were three tattooing
parlors in the capital, Apia, in 2008, although only one was connected to the two
main tattooing families.71 One tufuga reported that there is no law the tufuga can
use to stop people practicing, but they use heavy persuasion to get tattoo artists to
do an apprenticeship with them and then give them the family title, thus incor-
porating them into the family. As this has numerous advantages for the apprentice
as well, it appears to have worked to some extent, at least within Samoa.72 An-
other tufuga, however, sees unauthorized tatau as a problem and stated, “I want to
stop people from practicing without the permission of the two families.”

Some tufuga also claim ownership over the designs used in the tatau. One
stated “I want to copyright these two families’ designs.”73 The use of word “copy-
right” is illustrative of the ways in which state-sponsored notions of property
rights over intangible works have permeated every-day discourse. However, as
Gaillot argues, “Due to its mode of transmission, it is nowadays neither possible
to identify precedence nor to allocate ownership of certain tattoo motifs and
designs to a given family. In recent years, this situation has created some conflict
between tufuga. The present context can be defined as a sort of status quo.”74
Another tufuga raised concerns over the use of tatau designs on imported cloth
and on the Samoan currency and said that this should not occur without their

12

MIRANDA FORSYTH

permission. One tufuga also indicated that he wished to limit the creation of
new designs, arguing “I feel that in the next ten years the art form will change.
People will create new designs and that will damage the skeleton of the tattoo
from the start.”75 However, another well-respected tufuga living in New Zealand
has freely admitted that he occasionally invents new designs and motifs,76 dem-
onstrating that there are inconsistent views among the tufuga about the future
direction tatau should take.

The second ownership claim comes from the state. It promotes tatau as a na-
tional marker of its culture and heritage through its tourism office, at inter-
national sporting events and in other international forums. For example, a
traditional tatau demonstration was declared to be the highlight of Samoa’s Na-
tional Day at the Shanghai World Expo in 2010.77 Tatau designs are also incor-
porated on Samoan banknotes. All governments in the region struggle with forging
a national identity from a composite of essentially stateless societies that, espe-
cially in Melanesia, are often in conflict with each other. The idea of “national
culture” is thus oftentimes a fraught one, and involves creatively drawing upon
and transforming specifically local or place-based cultures.78 Leach argues that
“the process of creating nation states and cultural groups whose basis for cohe-
sion is in identity and tradition, makes the elements which embody that identity
and tradition, morally, and not just circumstantially, attached to them as enti-
ties.”79 It is therefore not surprising that Samoa seeks to elevate and appropriate
an art form that has proved to be much admired by outsiders and can be un-
ambiguously identified with its geographical state.

The third claim to ownership is made by the general public, both in Samoa and
in migrant communities overseas. For example, Mallon argues that “there is a deep
sense of ownership [in the community] over tatau and in particular the pe’a.”80
Elsewhere he observes “Samoan critics argue that contemporary tufuga do not
own Samoan tattooing—it is owned by the Samoan people.”81 This is also dem-
onstrated by statements by high-ranking chiefs,82 heated exchanges in social media
sites (see above and below), and the increasing numbers of Samoans who are being
tattooed in Samoa and across the Samoan diaspora.83 Mallon states “In an inter-
national context the distinctiveness of the tatau makes it valuable as a marker of
ethnic and cultural identity. The more people feel they are becoming the same as
others, the more they want to hold on to what makes them distinctive.”84 As noted
above, many community members are concerned about the new directions in which
the tufuga are taking tatau and accuse them of doing it for commercial reasons.
For example, a Samoan academic commented “People are also using tattooing as
a way of making money. . . . We have to look at a way to protect it within the con-
text of the Samoan people.”85 In the context of performing tatau on non-Samoans,
Mallon observes “In the minds of many Samoans, it is as though members of the
‘aiga Sa Su’a were breaking from some kind of long-held essentialist tradition and
code of practice,”86 although he demonstrates that historically the tattooing of
non-Samoans is well established.

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

13

Thus tatau is a practice over which there are multiple, often conflicting, claims
and aspirations: There is the desire to preserve and limit the practice to its pre-
modern form to reinforce a Samoan sense of identity and cultural pride; there is
the desire to exploit it for commercial gain (through marketing opportunities
such as the ink, tatau festivals, and performing tatau); and there is the desire to
use it to market the state and to distinguish it as a tourist destination. Interest-
ingly, all the advocates for these different perspectives are calling for the intro-
duction of legal rules to limit the practice to accord with their particular view of
what tatau should stand for. In doing so, they are drawing on new discourses,
such as those surrounding traditional knowledge, copyright, and intangible cul-
tural heritage.

Having lifted the lid on the complex reality of competing visions of control
over tatau, we now turn to the exercise of imagining how the three developments
could each be applied in such a context.
(i) The Sui Generis Development

All the regional sui generis legislation, and most likely the national legislation
currently being developed, would vest proprietary rights over all aspects of tatau
to the knowledge holders/owners in perpetuity. A preliminary question therefore
is how to decide who the members of this group are, especially given the lack of
geographical boundaries for the practice.87 The Regional Framework (Article 4)
defines a traditional owner as being “the group, clan, or community of people
in whom the custody or protection of the traditional knowledge or expressions
of culture are entrusted in accordance with the customary law and practices of
that group, clan or community.” As we saw in the preceding lid-lifting exer-
cise, the potential claimants include the tufuga within the two main families,
all members of these families (complicated by the fact that membership is not
strictly hereditary), or a number of other families who have raised claims to prac-
tice tatau as well. During my fieldwork there were consistent references to a
possible unnamed “third” family, and Mallon states that today “the claims of
the Sa Su’a are contested by some leading matai (village chiefs) and by some
within the tattooing families themselves. There are at least three other families in
Samoa with claims to prominent roles and influence in tattooing.”88 In addition,
there is the question of what rights Samoan tufuga living overseas have over the
practice, and how these should be balanced with those who are still resident in
Samoa.

Assuming that satisfactory determinations of ownership could be made,89 the
result of sui generis legislation would be to allow the owners to determine who is
allowed to practice tatau and, arguably, who can use tatau motifs.90 Although this
would facilitate implementation of the owners’ vision of protection of tatau (as-
suming this could be agreed upon), it would not necessarily benefit the state or
any broader development strategy as desired by the cultural industries initiative.
There is no rational basis or customary norm on which to ground an assumption

14

MIRANDA FORSYTH

that knowledge holders will necessarily act in ways that benefit the population as
a whole, especially given the fragmented nature of many Pacific Island countries.
For example, Kaplan argues, “Ethnic Fijians in their relations to land and water
are highly creative in using shareholder models to disenfranchise other citizens.”91
The model of land in the region suggests a likelihood of boundaries being drawn
in ever-decreasing circles as attempts are made to lessen the number of people
with whom the resource “pie” must be shared.92

Such legislation may also have a negative impact on the current dynamic de-
velopment of tatau. As all the legislation treats the knowledge holders as a single
group, each time anyone (even one of the knowledge holders) wanted to use tatau
for a noncustomary purpose, they would need to get the consent of all the other
knowledge holders. The pace of change of the practice would therefore be deter-
mined by the most conservative of the knowledge holders, whereas in the past as
we have seen it has often been forced by a particular individual running with an
initiative.
(ii) The Cultural Industries Development

The cultural industries development is concerned with creating opportunities for
a broad spectrum of the population to exploit traditional knowledge for com-
mercial gain. For example, Teaiwa and Mercer argue that creation of cultural
industries is about “encouraging participation in creation by traditionally ex-
cluded groups.”93 It will therefore require a pool of traditional knowledge from
which the general public can draw inspiration, just as creative industries else-
where require a rich public domain.94 The UNCTAD Creative Economy Report
(2010) states that “traditional cultural expressions and other elements of intan-
gible cultural heritage is . . . a mainspring of creativity as they are in a permanent
cumulative process of adaptation and re-creation.”95 Noyes also relevantly ob-
serves that communities “do not create their culture sui generis from their unique
soil: they select and combine forms in general circulation according to their pos-
sibilities and with a competitive eye on the creations of their neighbors.”96

An optimal regulatory framework for cultural industries should therefore
ensure widespread access to traditional knowledge by all community members,
rather than allowing aspects of it to be cordoned off in perpetuity by certain
segments of the population as would be done in the sui generis legislation.
The current nonproprietary attitude toward traditional knowledge has to date
fostered a number of cultural revitalization schemes, such as the Women in
Business fine mat project based in Samoa.97 This initiative is based on the
willingness of a handful of old weavers of fine mats to teach their craft to a
group of women. Today it provides an income for many village weavers. How-
ever, according to oral history, the mat originally came from a single village in
American Samoa, and so potentially the program could be at risk if a propri-
etary rights approach were adopted and that village decided to exercise its right
to block access. Brown has similarly argued “efforts to regulate ‘traditional’ ex-

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

15

pressive culture are bound to have a chilling effect on fair use and artistic ex-
pression, especially given the constantly changing, entirely negotiable content of
heritage.”98,99

One of the main problems for the cultural industries initiative with the adop-
tion of the sui generis initiative is that it has a potential to transform the way that
local people think about their traditional knowledge. This is because, as Merry
argues, “law is not simply a set of rules exercising coercive power, but a system of
thought by which certain forms of relations come to seem natural and taken for
granted.”100 There is thus a clear danger than once the idea of a “traditional knowl-
edge owner” takes hold across the Pacific, many initiatives such as the cultural
industries initiative and also climate change adaptation programs and so on will
meet with far less willingness to share access to traditional knowledge for the com-
mon good. For example, such a transformation has occurred in Vanuatu in the
past 30 years as a result of the Constitution recognizing customary “land owners.”
McDonnell argues:

The idea that this landownership is based in custom creates a legal no-
menclature that at once looks like offering a model of recognition for
the “other” indigenous identity, while at the same time destabilising the
foundation of this identity, reconfiguring indigenous relationships to land
by asserting that land must be “owned.”101

Finally, as the cultural industries initiative must translate into economic success
and social unity,102 circumventing potential sites of conflict should also be part of
its regulatory requirements. This provides another reason to suggest that the in-
terests of the cultural industries development are at odds with the sui generis de-
velopment, as it is hard to see how conflicts over ownership can be avoided once
the potential for economic exploitation is imagined or realized and ownership rights
are being enshrine in state law.
(iii) The ICH Convention Development

The Convention aims to “safeguard intangible cultural heritage” and this is de-
fined as, inter alia, “identification, documentation, research preservation, protec-
tion, promotion, enhancement and transmission.” The Convention envisages that
primary responsibility goes to the state, and it is the state that is held accountable
for failure to implement appropriate measures.103 The Convention prioritizes trans-
mission and access to intangible cultural heritage for the population at large and
provides that “the safeguarding of intangible cultural heritage is of general inter-
est to humanity” (Article 19) although it recognizes the need to respect and work
with communities, groups and individuals “that create, maintain and transmit such
heritage” (Article 15). However, as Kono observes, “individual community own-
ership directly contradicts the ideal of universal ownership for the good of all hu-
manity.”104 These tensions are illustrated by the different desires for access and
control over tatau by the tufuga, the population at large and the state outlined
above. A related consideration is the increasing advocacy of the importance of

16

MIRANDA FORSYTH

culture for human diversity and as a human right,105 neither of which can be guar-
anteed by giving control to a group of individuals. An optimal regulatory frame-
work for the purposes of ICH Convention would therefore be one that balances
the interests of the state, the national population, humanity in general, and those
of the specific traditional knowledge holders.

If, by contrast, the sui generis approach is adopted, the owners of traditional
knowledge (assuming they can be identified) will have the exclusive right to say
what (if any) safeguarding measures are put in place. Moreover, if the ability to
claim proprietary rights in traditional knowledge is realized through national leg-
islation, the creation of inventories of intangible cultural heritage will no longer
be seen as neutral endeavors, but are likely to be used as evidence of ownership. A
useful parallel to the contemporary inventory problem is the detailed descriptive
work of European ethnographers of Pacific Island societies in the nineteenth cen-
turies. They too were prompted by the concern to record what they feared was a
dying culture. These ethnographies are often used in the region today as primary
evidence in land and title disputes, and what has been written is treated as a highly
authoritative record. For example, an informant complained that the German eth-
nographer Kraemer recorded incorrect facts about his family 150 years ago, and
that this has been a continuing problem for his family ever since. He observed,
“People nowadays refer to these old books as bibles.” Indeed, reflecting on the
Fijian Cultural Mapping program, the Director of the Institute of Fijian Language
and Culture noted that disputes by communities over ownership are an ongoing
problem.106

The creation of inventories and databases, as well as being of questionable util-
ity107 may also raise issues regarding ownership of intellectual property rights as-
sociated with the material collected in those countries in the region that have
Western-style intellectual property regimes. The owner of the copyright in any
recordings of expressions of traditional culture will belong to the person making
the recording, which is most likely to be the state and not the traditional knowl-
edge holder. Consequently, once the recording is made the state has the ultimate
power to decide what is done with the recording. Recording traditional knowl-
edge in an inventory may also raise prior art issues for patent law, and may take
away any protection that may have existed under trade secrets legislation. The end
result may be that such inventories or databases may cause more uncertainty, rather
than less, over rights to use traditional knowledge.

Further tensions may also be generated over future uses of traditional knowl-
edge recorded in the inventory. For example, Fiji’s cultural mapping initiative feeds
into its Living Human Treasures program by identifying custodians of significant
traditional knowledge and skills. Revival workshops are then held that “focus on
the dissemination of this cultural heritage.”108 While it may well be that such cus-
todians are happy for their knowledge to be disseminated, it is possible that they
may not be, thus necessitating a balance between the rights of the community at
large and the knowledge holder.

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

17

(b) Nagol: The Pentecost Land Diving Ceremony

The nagol land diving ceremony is used as a second case study because, like tatau
in Samoa, it is a source of national pride and its contemporary practice is con-
tested by a range of interest groups within Vanuatu. The nagol originates on
Pentecost, one of the islands in Vanuatu, and is associated with the South of that
island in particular. Today it is one of the country’s major cultural attractions and
so is an important source of tourist income both for South Pentecost and for Van-
uatu as a whole. The nagol ritual involves building a high tower from which men
jump with vines tied to their ankles, ideally at exactly the right length that the
men neither crash to their death nor are jerked back violently into the tower. The
origin of the nagol is that a woman was unhappy with her husband’s treatment of
her, and so she ran away from him into the forest. When she realized that he was
chasing her, she climbed up into a banyan tree, but he climbed after her. She then
climbed to the top of the tree and tied vines to her ankles. When her husband
followed her and lunged at her, she jumped. Her husband followed, but as he had
not tied his ankles with vines, he fell to his death while she survived. Today, how-
ever, it is only men who jump from the tower, in a ceremony that is a celebration
of a particular form of masculinity.109 The nagol is performed in April to June
each year at the time of the yam harvest when the vines have the right amount of
strength and spring to support the jumpers.

Like tatau, there have been many changes to the nagol over time, transforming
it from an intensely local celebration to a tourist event taking place many times a
year and attended by hundreds of spectators. On several occasions the nagol has
been performed outside South Pentecost, its customary performance ground. In
1972 it was performed in February, outside its customary time, for the visit of
Queen Elizabeth II, and this resulted in the tragic death of a young diver.110 In the
late 1960s a journalist for the National Geographic, Kal Muller, performed the jump,
the first foreigner to do so.111

Such changes to the practice of nagol have occurred amid much community
debate about the benefits and disadvantages of increased tourist presence since at
least the 1970s, when the tourist companies in the capital started to exert pressure
to regularize and expand the tourist market.112 This debate escalated publicly early
in 2011 when a radio report announced that the Council of Chiefs of South
Pentecost had decided that there would be just four nagol ceremonies for tourists
this year (as opposed to the 26 planned by the South Pentecost Tourism Council).
In a letter to travel and tourist agents, the chairman of the council, Chief Telkon
Watas, said the cuts were are an effort to preserve the traditional value of nagol,
and he claimed that the numbers of dives planned were a “prostitution” of their
tradition.113 He also told the travel agents that the Council of Chiefs is the sole
custom owner of nagol, and they have to respect its decision. Chief Watas was
reported to say that any visitor who arrives on the island without the approval of
his council will not be allowed to see the nagol.114

18

MIRANDA FORSYTH

At first glance, this would appear to be an excellent example of “the commu-
nity” exercising agency over its traditional knowledge. However, a different per-
spective is given by an anthropologist who has spent over a decade working in this
community.

Telkon Watas was the very individual who re-introduced the gol on
Pentecost’s more easily accessible West coast to attract tourists in the sev-
enties. The massive inflation of gol performances is thus to a large extent
his work, or at least an outcome of his initial initiative. He has always
benefitted immensely—and often exclusively—from it, while the people
actually doing the performance, have not—or not much. . . . A ban on
commercial filming that was put in place by the Vanuatu Cultural Coun-
cil in 2006, was to a large extent a reaction to Telkon Watas’ long time
mismanagement. He never obeyed this ban but rather did what he could
to undermine it. Telkon Watas is a much feared man on Pentecost. . . . As
far as I see it, this is yet another move by Telkon Watas, now a man in
his seventies, to secure this “kastom as commodity” for himself and some
of his sons. It has nothing to do with an interest in this outstanding and
intricate performance itself. What would be much more (!) needed, and
would make more sense, is transparency with regards to what happens
with the enormous influx of money that the gol tourism generates.115

The president of the South Pentecost Tourism Association dismisses claims of own-
ership and control by Watas and argues that his claims have also been rejected by
the chiefs and the community. He argues that it is the association that should
control land diving and to maintain and protect some of the cultural values in it.
Some of the challenges to its values that he identified are the desire of TV crews to
film the preparation of the nagol tower, which is considered to be a technology
belonging to the people of South Pentecost; the movement of the nagol to North
Pentecost or even other islands; and the time of year it can be performed. He also
said that there is a traditional festival that occurs every year where the nagol is
performed just for the community without tourists to ensure the custom remains
strong. According to him, neither the state nor the Vanuatu population at large
have any rights over the nagol—it belongs solely to the people of South Pentecost
and should be regulated by the South Pentecost Tourism Association.116

A third claim to control comes from a few individuals who claim to be the own-
ers of the “copyright” of the nagol. At least one such claimant has tried to register
his name as the owner with both the Vanuatu Cultural Centre and the Vanuatu
Intellectual Property Office, although there is no legislation currently in place to
facilitate this. According to the director of Tourism, the quest to find the “owner”
of the nagol started in 2000, the year that the Copyright Act was passed by par-
liament (but not gazetted) and the discourse of intellectual property entered the
public arena. This quest has recently been reinvigorated as a result of the gazetting
and entry into force of this law in 2011, and also as a result of perceived unfair-
ness in the distribution of benefits arising from the nagol. He argues that it will be
impossible to trace the descendant of the original jumper, and also that there are
no advantages to be gained by identifying a particular owner, pointing out that

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

19

the position of customary “owner” of land in Vanuatu has given rise to numerous
problems. He suggests the nagol should be seen as belonging to South Pentecost as
a whole, and strongly resists the notion of legislation introducing new rights such
as the application of the concept of “copyright owner” to traditional knowledge.117
A final claim to rights over the nagol comes from the Vanuatu population as a
whole, many of whom see it as a tradition belonging in some respects to the coun-
try as a whole, and to the state. As with tatau, it has been adopted as a state em-
blem of sorts. Tabani argues that it is “an emblem of the state’s measures in favour
of the promotion and protection of Melanesian values.”118 This is most clearly
demonstrated by the widespread belief that the nagol has been misappropriated
by those who set up commercial bungee jumps around the world. According to
Soden the nagol is in fact the original inspiration for the bungee jump, as it was
Muller’s (the first foreigner to perform the jump) account of his own land diving
that “would provide the detonator for the next blast in the chain reaction that
would lead to the invention of bungee jumping.”119 This view led the Vanuatu
prime minister in 1995 to issue a formal protest about the bungee jumping busi-
ness’ misappropriation of Vanuatu’s cultural heritage and, according to Tabani,
led to Vanuatu’s desire to join the WTO.120 No financial compensation was re-
ceived, and indeed it is highly arguable whether there is enough of a connection
between nagol and bungee to justify such a claim.

Thus lifting the lid on nagol, like tatau, highlights the difficulties of deciding
who comprises “the community” in a particular context, who speaks for it, and
what power dynamics are involved in questions of rights to control particular as-
pects of traditional knowledge. It also shows the importance of interrogating how
benefits are internally shared, rather than assuming that community agency will
necessarily result in all members of the community having the chance to benefit
from a particular resource. This is an important point to emphasize as the sub-
verting potential of local politics is often not appreciated by those advocating
changes in intellectual property rules.

I turn now to an analysis of regulation of the nagol from the perspective of the
three different initiatives. As with the tatau example, it is clear that these will not
all dictate the same approach.
(i) The Sui Generis Development

Vanuatu’s Copyright Act currently adopts a sui generis approach to traditional
knowledge, although there is very little detail on how the regulatory scheme should
operate. It provides that a person should not reproduce an expression of indig-
enous culture if he or she is not one of the custom owners, has not been sanc-
tioned to do the act, and has not done the act in accordance with custom. There
is no guidance provided about how to identify a particular custom owner, and the
term is not defined in the act. Section 42(1), however, provides that if it is not
possible to identify the custom owners, or if there is a dispute about ownership,
the National Cultural Council or the National Council of Chiefs may institute pro-

20

MIRANDA FORSYTH

ceedings as if it were the owner and any damages must be used for indigenous
cultural development. If such an approach were applied to the nagol, it would mean
that the custom owners, assuming there could be agreement over who they are—
which seems unlikely from the discussion above—would have absolute control
over any noncustomary use of the nagol. If there could not be agreement, control
would be in the hands of the state, as has frequently occurred in the case of land,
often with disastrous results.121 In either case, decisions concerning the number of
jumps, filming rights, location of the nagol and so forth would all be dependent
upon the views of a few individuals. This clearly opens up new rent-seeking op-
portunities for these individuals, and the history of the management of revenue
from the nagol to date demonstrates potential for considerable financial exploita-
tion. There is no room in this model for the type of communal decision making
and distributive sharing mechanisms advocated by the South Pentecost Tourism
Authority and the Director of Tourism. If agreement could not be reached about
who the owners are, then these decisions will be given to one of two national
bodies, with no directions to act in the best interests of the people of South
Pentecost. Seen in this context, the potential for such legislation to create a mo-
nopolistic model of traditional knowledge ownership is apparent.
(ii) The Cultural Industries Development

The cultural industries initiative seeks to maximize opportunities for the popula-
tion as a whole to financially benefit from traditional knowledge. It would there-
fore favor an approach that would stretch the benefits from the nagol over as much
of the population as possible. For example, this development might encourage the
villagers that currently perform the nagol to tourists to teach adjacent villagers
how to do it, so as to ensure that the financial benefits are shared more widely.
This apparently occurred in 1972 after the unfortunate death of the diver who
performed for Queen Elizabeth. The cultural industries development would not
be served by a sui generis approach as this would almost inevitably lead to a con-
centration of the financial benefits in the hands of a few who can set the terms on
which others can perform.
(iii) The ICH Development

The Convention obliges state parties to designate or establish one or more com-
petent bodies for the safeguarding of the intangible cultural heritage present in its
territory. This may mean that the responsibility for the nagol is taken over by a
state authority, which would prioritize its safeguarding over financial benefits ac-
cruing to individual owners. Indeed, this occurred in a way in 2006 when the Van-
uatu Cultural Centre established a “moratorium” on the making of commercial
films and audiovisual productions of the nagol. The intention was “to ensure that
its cultural meaning is not lost, the customary knowledge associated with it con-
tinues to be transmitted to younger generations, the bush resources required to
build the nagol towers are preserved and the significant cash revenues earned from

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

21

tourism and other commercial activities associated with the nagol are properly
channeled into appropriate and sustainable development for the communities of
the area.”122 This is a clear example of the clash of interests between “customary
owners” and the state that may arise in relation to traditional knowledge when
desires for preservation and commercialization are pulling in different directions.
Creating proprietary rights in the owners would leave the state with very little
recourse in such a situation, as the owners would have the exclusive right to de-
cide whether, and on what terms, the traditional knowledge is exploited.

Vanuatu’s greatest experiences with the Convention to date come from the in-
scribing of the traditional practice of creating sand drawings onto the Represen-
tative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. Interestingly, the issue
of ownership of particular sand drawings was avoided by the leaders of the sand
drawing project by working with local cultural representatives to generate around
80 different sand drawings that could be considered to be “in the public domain”
and could be used freely in festivals and in promotional materials and activities
for tourists. This meant that the ownership of the countless other “secret” sand
drawings was not an issue for the purposes of safeguarding activities. It is harder
to see how such a balancing approach could apply to a single ritual such as the
nagol, but it points toward the benefits of developing regulatory models that pro-
vide room to balance the interests of different segments of a community and the
broader public interest.

CONCLUSION

This article has shown that although all three current developments based on tra-
ditional knowledge in the Pacific Islands region are proceeding on the assumption
that they are mutually compatible, in fact, the objectives of each suggest very dif-
ferent answers about who should benefit from, and control the use of, traditional
knowledge. In particular, there are potential tensions between the interests of the
nation as a whole with various local groups closely identified with the particular
manifestations of traditional knowledge, and also between those who want to com-
mercialize traditional knowledge and those who want to preserve it. The two case
studies have demonstrated that the implementation of these different develop-
ments in practice would result in different claims over traditional knowledge being
promoted to the exclusion of others. They also point unavoidably to the conclu-
sion that implementation of the sui generis legislation would severely hamper the
implementation of the other two developments, as it would prioritize the interests
of a narrow group of individuals over the broader national public interest. For
example, sui generis legislation would pave the way for certain right-holders to
refuse to allow either tatau or the nagol to be listed by the ICH Convention or to
be developed as part of the cultural industries initiative, or to allow it only on
condition of payment. While it may be possible in practice to resolve these differ-

22

MIRANDA FORSYTH

ences, a first step toward doing so must be to recognize that the potentials for
conflict exist, as new forms of state intervention lead to new decisions being made
over rights to control and benefit from traditional knowledge. Interventions such
as sui generis legislation and cultural mapping also lead to changes in attitudes
toward traditional knowledge that will trickle through into other uses of it, cus-
tomary and otherwise. In particular, the pervasive influence that the creation of
new forms of proprietary rights can have on the ability to manage intangible cul-
tural resources for broader developmental objectives cannot be underestimated.
As Leach argues, “the problematic object-ownership language in the new policy
guidelines and laws, including UN terms such as TCE, introduce visions of exclu-
sive and transactable ‘property’ into cultural arenas and groups formerly more con-
cerned with communicating knowledge and defining relationships from which
material flowed.”123

Such influence can be countered in part by explicit discussions about the com-
peting visions concerning the “protection” of traditional knowledge, and identifi-
cation of the different choices and trade-offs between different objectives that will
need to be made. Some useful lessons can be learned from the development of
western intellectual property laws which, in theory at least, are predicated on the
need to balance the interests of creators of intellectual property with users. Such a
balancing exercise in relation to traditional knowledge in the Pacific Islands could
lead to the development of a regulatory framework for it based on a consideration
of all potential users, and all possible objectives, and which would balance the
interests of the broader community and the state with those of particular groups.
It should be noted that such a strategy may not be appropriate for countries out-
side the region where indigenous communities are in the minority. In developing
such a framework, serious consideration should be given to whether a range of
regulatory strategies, such as recognition of customary laws, development of re-
search permit schemes, introduction of authenticity branding schemes, controls
on imported handicrafts and so on, could not be utilized to meet the desire to
protect against misappropriation and help to promote commercialization, with-
out the need to create a new property right. This “regulatory toolbox” option is
outlined in greater detail elsewhere.124

The article has also shown that providing for communal rights over traditional
knowledge is likely to be very difficult to implement in practice. In both case stud-
ies we saw multiple groups who could claim to be the relevant “community” for
the purposes of the sui generis legislation and the ICH Convention. For example,
with regard to tatau even if “the community” is defined at its most narrow point
as being the tufuga, this would still leave the boundaries of the group incredibly
difficult to determine. With regard to the nagol, we saw that at least two groups
have claimed rights over it in the name of “the community.” Moreover, these sub-
groups present radically different views about how use of their traditional knowl-
edge should be regulated. These insights suggest proceeding in this direction with
caution, particularly bearing in mind Comaroff and Comaroff ’s warning that “it

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

23

is yet to be seen whether ethno-prise actually will increase the general prosperity,
the commonweal of those who look to it for a panacea—or whether it will exac-
erbate, even re-invent, long-standing forms of extraction and inequality.”125 Fur-
ther, any regulatory initiative based on recognizing communal rights, particularly
ones that would enshrine new rights in formal laws, should at the very least con-
tain workable mechanisms for determining entitlement to those rights, which is
not presently the case. A number of options for doing so are set out by the author
elsewhere.126

The two case studies also demonstrate that many manifestations of traditional
knowledge are already intensely regulated, often through traditional mechanisms
such as the tufuga’s apprenticeships and the Pentecost Council of Chiefs, but some-
times also by newer institutions such as the South Pentecost Tourism Authority.
Moreover, these nonstate institutions may be operating under considerable stress
and may be more or less effective as a result. It is important for any new initiatives
that seek to regulate traditional knowledge to be aware that they may be entering
what is already a contested regulatory space, and that their presence may affect the
balance of power that currently prevails. For example, in both case studies we saw
key actors making reference to “copyright” as a potential way to strengthen their
claims for control. We also saw that different individuals within affected commu-
nities have different abilities to make their voices heard and to access any new
resources or rights that are being created. For example, well-connected men (such
as Chief Watas) may be better able to communicate with state authorities or re-
gional funding bodies than women. Consequently, any new initiative should pro-
ceed only on the basis of an understanding of local politics, obtained by lifting the
lid on the community through ethnographic research, rather than making assump-
tions about group homogeneity, to avoid the risk of disenfranchising those who
lack the power to speak for themselves. Thus, the complexities of local politics
must be taken into account in all regulatory and developmental programs con-
cerning traditional knowledge because, as Tamanaha reminds us, “[law] swims in
the social sea with everything else.”127

ENDNOTES

1. The terms traditional knowledge and cultural property are used broadly and interchangeably
in this article to include all practices, representations, expressions, knowledge and skills that com-
munities and groups recognize as part of their cultural heritage. See article 2 of the Convention for
the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage 2003.

2. UNESCO, Implementation of the 2003 UNESCO Convention in the Pacific, 90.
3. Wendland, “Managing Intellectual Property Options,” 95.
4. Leach, “Arts and Owners,” 614.
5. Githaiga, “Intellectual Property Law”; Posey, “Commodification of the Sacred”; Samoa Law

Reform Commission, Protection of Samoa’s Traditional Knowledge.

6. Kurin, “Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage,” 15.
7. Gibson, “Intellectual Property Systems.”
8. See, for example, Yu, “Cultural Relics, Intellectual Property, and Intangible Heritage,” 458–459.

24

MIRANDA FORSYTH

9. See Forsyth, “How Can Traditional Knowledge Best Be Regulated?” for a further elaboration

on the potential dangers involved.

10. Noyes, “The Judgment of Solomon”; Tauschek, “Cultural Property as Strategy.”
11. Tauschek, “Cultural Property as Strategy,” 77.
12. New, “Indigenous Peoples Won’t Be ‘Wished Away’ In Traditional Knowledge Treaty Talks.”

See also Carpenter at al., “In Defense of Property,” 1084 and throughout.

13. Sunder, “Intellectual Property and Identity Politics,” 92.
14. See Chanock, “Branding Identity and Copyrighting Culture,” 179.
15. Noyes, “Hardscrabble Academies,” 41; see also Noyes, “The Judgment of Solomon.”
16. Brown, Who Owns Native Culture?, “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work”, “Culture, Property, and
Peoplehood”;, Carpenter et al., “In Defense of Property.”, and Comaroff and Comaroff, Ethnicity, Inc.

17. See Brown, “Culture, Property, and Peoplehood,” 576.
18. For example, Cang, “Defining Intangible Cultural Heritage,” 54, discusses the “local preserva-
tion groups” in Japan whose “prestige and power” have been unwittingly reinforced by the government’s
ICH program; Wendland, in “Managing Intellectual Property Options,” p. 134, asks, “How do such
projects transform social relationships, power dynamics, cultural development and exchanges within
such communities?” in the context of reflecting upon a WIPO initiative to help a Masai community
record its own ICH.

19. Braithwaite, “Ten Things You Need to Know About Regulation,”19.
20. See Chanock, “Branding Identity and Copyrighting Culture,” 178; Tauschek, “Cultural Prop-

erty as Strategy,” 74.

21. Corrin Care et al., Introduction to South Pacific Law, 1.
22. Techera, “Legal Pluralism, Indigenous People and Small Island Developing States,” 174.
23. Synexe Consulting Limited, Valuing Culture in Oceania, 24–26.
24. Regenvanu. Panel Session on “Indigenous and Local Communities’ Concerns and Experi-
ences in protecting their Traditional Knowledge and Cultural Expressions” and “The Traditional Econ-
omy as the Source of Resilience in Melanesia.”

25. Vanuatu Statistics, Alternative Indicators of Well-Being for Melanesia, 2.
26. Tamanaha, The Primacy and the Failure of Law and Development,” 9.
27. In addition to these three initiatives, there are numerous other programs involving traditional
knowledge, including arts festivals, revitalization initiatives, cultural tourism, the teaching and study
of cultural heritage at primary, secondary and tertiary levels, and the use of traditional knowledge in
climate change adaptation programs. Many different foci are identifiable in these projects: some are
concerned with ensuring traditional knowledge is used to create a rich cultural life and is passed
down to succeeding generations, others are aimed at making an economic return from it, and yet
others to document and record it, ensuring its preservation in the face of increased challenges to its
transmission.

28. Drahos, “An Alternative Framework,” 3.
29. Bortolotto, “The Giant Cola Cola in Gravina,” 83.
30. These countries are: Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Cook Islands, Palau and Papua

New Guinea.

31. Samoa Law Reform Commission, Protection of Samoa’s Traditional Knowledge.
32. A broadly similar approach is being taken by WIPO’s Intergovernmental Committee on Tra-
ditional Knowledge that is developing draft treaties on Traditional Cultural Expressions and Tradi-
tional Knowledge. The most recent drafts (July 2011) of these treaties are available in the appendices
to document WO/GA/40/7 on the WIPO web site. A further discussion of the international devel-
opments in this area is beyond the scope of this article.

33. Interview with Setareki Tale, Director i-Taukei Institute of Language and Culture, 29 Septem-

ber 2011, Suva, Fiji.

34. A Bill for an Act to establish a sui generis system for the protection and promotion of Tradi-
tional Knowledge and Expressions of Culture for the people of the Republic of Palau (2005). Avail-
able at http://www.palauoek.net/senate/legislation/sb/sb_7-3.pdf. Details of other national legislation
are currently not publicly available.

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

25

35. See articles 1 and 2 of the Treaty. The Regional Framework does not specify any objectives,
but accompanying Guidelines (Secretariat of the Pacific Community 2006, 2.1) state the objectives
are “to protect the rights of traditional owners in their [traditional knowledge] and provide them
with the means to control the commercialisation of their [traditional knowledge] and ensure that
such commercialisation is subject to their prior informed consent and the fair and equitable sharing
of benefits arising from that utilisation with the traditional owners.”

36. See also Forsyth, “The Traditional Knowledge Movement in the South Pacific.”
37. George et al., Situational Analysis of the Cultural Industries in the Pacific.
38. It also follows an international trend in this area. For example, the Convention on the Protec-
tion and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions 2005 focusses upon the integration of
culture in sustainable development. Techera (“International Heritage Conservation,” 49) argues: “The
Convention suggests aiding the emergence of viable cultural industries, strengthening cultural ac-
tivities and the production and distribution of cultural goods and services, facilitating wider access
to global markets and networks, and encouraging appropriate collaborations between developed and
developing countries in areas such as music and film.” See also United Nations 2010.

39. See Teaiwa and Mercer, Pacific Cultural Mapping; Synexe Consulting Limited, Valuing Culture

in Oceania, 27–28.

40. Teaiwa and Mercer, Pacific Cultural Mapping, 7.
41. Teaiwa and Mercer, Pacific Cultural Mapping, 9.
42. Safeguarding is defined (art 2.3) as meaning “measures aimed at ensuring the viability of the
intangible cultural heritage, including the identification, documentation, research, preservation, pro-
tection, promotion, enhancement, transmission, particularly through formal and nonformal educa-
tion, as well as the revitalization of the various aspects of such heritage.”

43. See article 3 of the ICH Convention. See also Wendland, “Managing Intellectual Property

Options,” 133.

44. Kono, Intangible Cultural Heritage and Intellectual Property, 29.
45. Both the Vanuatu Sand Drawings and The Lakalaka, Dances and Sung Speeches of Tonga
were inscribed on the list in in 2008. See http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/index.php?lg⫽en
&pg⫽00011#results (accessed November 2011).

46. Bortolotto, “The Giant Cola Cola in Gravina,” 90.
47. Sunder “Intellectual Property and Identity Politics: Playing with Fire,” 112.
48. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,” 145.
49. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,” 147.
50. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,”150.
51. Gaillot, Tattooing in Samoa, 10.
52. Utanga and Mangos 2006
53. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,” 153.
54. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,” 163.
55. Mallon, Tatau, 29.
56. See Farran, “Pacific Perspectives,” 13–28.
57. Va’a, “Five Days with a Master Craftsman,” 311.
58. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,” 151.
59. I spent three weeks in Samoa in April 2011 and conducted thirty seven interviews with a
broad range of stakeholders including tufuga, officials in relevant government departments, custom-
ary leaders, and those involved in tourism and culture.

60. Interview with officer in the Samoan Law Reform Commission, April 2011, Samoa.
61. http://www.facebook.com/StopIdiotsFromGettingATatauOrMalu (accessed August 2011).
62. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,” 158.
63. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,” 167.
64. http://www.tattoosuperstore.com (accessed August 2011).
65. http://internation-samoan-tatau-festival.com (accessed August 2011).
66. http://www.arts.auckland.ac.nz/uoa/home/about/news/news/template (accessed August 2011).
67. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,” 148.

26

MIRANDA FORSYTH

68. Va’a, “Five Days with a Master Craftsman,” 302–303.
69. Va’a, “Five Days with a Master Craftsman,” 311–312; see also Mallon, Tatau, 55.
70. See Gaillot, Tattooing in Samoa, 7.1.
71. Mallon, Tatau, 21.
72. See also Gaillot, Tattooing in Samoa, 7.
73. Interview with Master Tatau Artist, Sua Suluape Alaivaa Petelo Sulupae, 14 April 2011, Apia,

Samoa.

74. Gaillot, Tattooing in Samoa, 7.3.
75. Interview with Master Tatau Artist.
76. Mallon, Tatau, 56.
77. Telefoni, “China is a Friend Indeed.”
78. See Hirsch, “Looking Like a Culture,” 227, 234.
79. Leach, “Owning Creativity: Cultural Property,” 136.
80. Mallon, “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice,” 149.
81. Mallon, Tatau, 30.
82. Mallon, Tatau, 30.
83. Va’a, “Five Days with a Master Craftsman,” 297.
84. Mallon, Tatau, 30.
85. Similar sentiments are expressed on social networking sites, such as these comments posted
on 31 March 2011 by “inkonmyas”: “Do yourself and everyone else a favour, leave it 2 the REAL
tufuga, youre just a money hungry little shit and if ever i see you around ill say it to your face and
we’ll take it from there, I hear story after story about you and all of them not good. I’m glad a Real
Su’a put Samoa’s mark on me and i have continued with my own family’s tradition, Your work is
crap, the end results are not even remotely close to what a pe’a should look like, i wish you nothing
but shit money & a smack in the chops.” http://finddragonflytattoos.com/articles/samoan-tatau-bill-
puta-pea-journey-snippets-1/ (accessed August 2011).

86. Mallon, Tatau, 26.
87. Cf Noyes, “The Judgment of Solomon”; Tauschek, “Cultural Property as Strategy.”
88. Mallon, Tatau, 16.
89. This is a major assumption and is discussed at length in Forsyth, “How Can Traditional

Knowledge Best Be Regulated?”

90. As many designs and motifs, such as those in tatau, are common throughout the region and

so ownership may be difficult to prove.

91. Kaplan, “Fijian water in Fiji and New York,” 698.
92. See, for example, Filer, “The Bougainville Rebellion” and “Grass Roots and Deep Holes.”
93. Teaiwa and Mercer, Pacific Cultural Mapping, 12.
94. Oseitutu, in “A Sui Generis Regime for Traditional Knowledge,” 207, argues “Intellectual prop-
erty law strives to maintain a balance between the public good of access and the free movement of
information with the need to protect creators and innovators. It does so with a view to stimulating
further creative activity. A predominantly creator-focused approach, which is the approach some
traditional knowledge proponents tend to take, leads to an intangible rights regime that is tilted
heavily in favour of the right holder.”

95. UNCTAD Creative Economy Report 2010:181
96. Noyes, “The Judgment of Solomon,” 37.
97. See http://www.womeninbusiness.ws/ (accessed August 2011).
98. Brown, “Heritage Trouble,” 51.
99. See also Oseitutu, “A Sui Generis Regime for Traditional Knowledge,” 187, 191.
100. Merry, “Legal Pluralism,” 889.
101. McDonnell, “Masters Not Mistresses Of Modernity,” 7.
102. Synexe Consulting Limited, Valuing Culture in Oceania, 24.
103. The state is also implicated in other aspects of control of the exercise of traditional knowl-
edge, for example through issues of public health. This is relevant for tattooing where unclean in-
struments can cause serious illness and even death (see, e.g., McLean and D’Souza, “Life-Threatening

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

27

Cellulitis After Traditional Samoan Tattooing”) and also for traditional healers. They argue “Balanc-
ing the fundamental right to perform a traditional cultural practice with the need for up-to-date
infection control techniques and appropriate regard to health and safety requires care and is essen-
tial.” (29).

104. Kono, Intangible Cultural Heritage and Intellectual Property, 33.
105. For a complete list of the relevant international agreements relevant to this area see Coombe
(“Protecting Traditional Environmental Knowledge,” 118–119). Shaheed (Report of the Independent
Expert in the Field of Cultural Rights, 6) argues that “The right of access to and enjoyment of cultural
heritage forms part of international human rights law, finding its legal basis, in particular, in the
right to take part in cultural life, the right of members of minorities to enjoy their own culture, and
the right of indigenous peoples to self-determination and to maintain, control, protect and develop
cultural heritage.” In addition, a 2011 General Assembly resolution on culture and development (A/
RES/65/166) recognizes that culture is an essential component of human development, represents a
source of identity, innovation and creativity for the individual and the community and is an im-
portant factor in the fight against poverty.

106. Qereqeretabua, “The Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Fiji,” 4. See also UNESCO,

Implementation of the 2003 UNESCO Convention, 73.

107. See Brown, “Heritage Trouble,” 47–48; Noyes, “Hardscrabble Academies,” 50.
108. Techera, “Safeguarding Cultural Heritage,” 330.
109. Jolly, “Kastom as Commodity,” 134.
110. Jolly, “Kastom as Commodity,” 138.
111. Soden, Falling: How Our Greatest Fear Became Our Greatest Thrill, 4.
112. Jolly, “Kastom as Commodity,” 138.
113. Bule, “Pentecost Chiefs to Halt Nangol Exploitation.”
114. “Vanuatu Chiefs Limit Pentecost Land Dives,” Radio New Zealand. Posted at 03:24 on 16
February 2011 UTC. http://www.rnzi.com/pages/news.php?op⫽read&id⫽58805 (accessed Novem-
ber 2011).

115. Post by Thorof Lipp on ASAONET Email Discussion List on 19 February 2011. See also

Pigliasco and Lipp (2011) 392–394, 397–398.

116. Interview with the President of the South Pentecost Tourism Association, 30 July 2011,

Vanuatu.

117. Interview with the Director of Tourism, 28 July 2011, Vanuatu.
118. Tabani, “The Carnival of Custom,” 313.
119. Soden, Falling: How Our Greatest Fear Became Our Greatest Thrill, 5.
120. Tabani, “The Carnival of Custom,” 317.
121. See Haccius, “The Interaction of Modern and Custom Land Tenure Systems in Vanuatu.”
122. “Moratorium (Ban) on Commercial Filming of Nagol.” Vanuatu Cultural Centre website.

http://www.vanuatuculture.org/site-bm2/film-sound/20051122_pentecost_land_dive.shtml

123. Leach, “Arts and Owners,” 611.
124. Forsyth, “How Can Traditional Knowledge Best Be Regulated?”
125. Comaroff and Comaroff, Ethnicity, Inc., 142.
126. Forsyth, “How Can Traditional Knowledge Best Be Regulated?”
127. Tamanaha, “The Primacy and the Failure of Law and Development,” 43.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bortolotto, Chiara. “The Giant Cola Cola in Gravina: Intangible Cultural Heritage, Property and
Territory Between UNESCO Discourse and Local Heritage Practice.” Ethnologia Europaea 39, no. 2
(2009): 81–94.

Braithwaite, Valerie. “Ten Things You Need to Know About Regulation and Never Wanted to Ask.”
Australian Law Librarian 14, no. 3 (2006): 19–28.

28

MIRANDA FORSYTH

Brown, Michael. Who Owns Native Culture? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.

———. “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work on the Protection of Intangible Cultural Property.” Inter-
national Journal of Cultural Property 12 (2005): 40–61.

———. “Culture, Property, and Peoplehood: A Comment on Carpenter, Katyal, and Riley’s ‘In De-
fense of Property.’”  17 (2010): 569–579.

Bule, Hilaire. “Pentecost Chiefs to Halt Nangol Exploitation.” Vanuatu and Region News and Sport,
2011. http://www.vanuatunews.com/vanuatu-news/565-110210-pentecost-chiefs-to-halt-nangol-
exploitation (accessed November 2011).

Cang, Voltaire. “Defining Intangible Cultural Heritage and Its Stakeholders: The Case of Japan.” In-
ternational Journal of Intangible Cultural Heritage 2 (2007): 46–55.

Carpenter, Kristen, et al. “In Defense of Property.” Yale Law Journal 118 (2009): 1022–1125.

Chanock, Martin. “Branding Identity and Copyrighting Culture: Orientations Towards the Custom-
ary in Traditional Knowledge Discourse.” In Traditional Knowledge, Traditional Cultural Expressions
and Intellectual Property Law in the Asia-Pacific Region, edited by Christoph Antons, 177–193. The
Netherlands: Kluwer law International, 2009.

Comaroff, John, and Jean Comaroff. Ethnicity, Inc. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2009.

Coombe, Rosemary. “Legal Claims to Culture in and Against the Market: Neoliberalism and the
Global proliferation of Meaningful Difference.” Law, Culture and the Humanities 1 (2005a): 35–52.

———. “Protecting Traditional Environmental Knowledge and New Social Movements in the Amer-
icas: Intellectual Property, Human Rights, or Claims to an Alternative Form of Sustainable Devel-
opment?” Florida Journal of International Law 17 (2005b): 115–135.

Corrin Care, Jennifer, Tess Newton, and Don Paterson. Introduction to South Pacific Law. Marshall
Cavendish, Tarrytown, NY, 1999.

Drahos, Peter. “An alternative Framework for the Global Regulation of Intellectual Property Rights.”
Working Paper: October 2005, Centre for Governance of Knowledge and Development, Austra-
lian National University. https://www.anu.edu.au/fellows/pdrahos/articles/pdfs/2005analternative
framework.pdf (accessed November 2011).

Farran, Sue. “Pacific Perspectives: Fa’afafine and Fakaleiti in Samoa and Tonga: People Between
Worlds.” Liverpool Law Review 31, no. 1 (2010): 13–28.

Filer, Colin. “The Bougainville Rebellion, the Mining Industry and the Process of Social Disintegra-
tion in Papua New Guinea.” Canberra Anthropology 13, no. 1 (1990): 1–39.

———. “Grass Roots and Deep Holes: Community Responses to Mining in Melanesia.” The Con-
temporary Pacific 18, no. 2 (2006): 215–231.

Forsyth, Miranda. “The Traditional Knowledge Movement in the South Pacific: The Challenge of
Localism.” Prometheus 29, no. 3 (2011): 269–286.

———. “How Can Traditional Knowledge Best Be Regulated?” The Contemporary Pacific (2012
forthcoming).

Gaillot, Sebastien. Tattooing in Samoa: Custodianship, Intangible Cultural heritage and Creative In-
dustry (2010) (unpublished manuscript on file with author)

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

29

George, Helene, et al. Situational Analysis of the Cultural Industries in the Pacific. (2010) (unpub-
lished manuscript on file with author)

Gibson, Joanna. “Intellectual Property Systems, Traditional Knowledge and the Legal Authority of
Community.” European Intellectual Property Review 26 (2004): 280–292.

Githaiga, J. “Intellectual Property Law and the Protection of Indigenous Folklore and Knowledge.”
Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law 5, no. 2 (1998). http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/
MurUEJL/1998/13.html (accessed November 2011).

Haccius, Justin. “The Interaction of Modern and Custom Land Tenure Systems in Vanuatu.” Discus-
sion Paper 2011/1, State Society and Governance in Melanesia. http://ips.cap.anu.edu.au/ssgm/
papers/discussion_papers/2011_01_haccius.pdf (accessed November 2011)

Hirsch, Eric. “Looking Like a Culture.” Anthropological Forum 17, no. 3 (2007): 225–238.

Jolly, Margaret. “Kastom as Commodity: The Land Dive as Indigenous Rite and Tourist Spectacle in
Vanuatu.” In Culture, Kastom, Tradition: Developing Cultural Policy in Melanesia, edited by Lamont
Lindstrom and Geoffrey White, 131–144. Institute of Pacific Studies, University of the South Pacific,
Suva, Fiji, 1994.

Kaplan, Martha. “Fijian Water in Fiji and New York: Local Politics and a Global Commodity.” Cul-
tural Anthropology 22, no. 4 (2007): 685–706.

Kono, Toshiyuki (ed.). Intangible Cultural Heritage and Intellectual Property: Communities, Cultural
Diversity and Sustainable Development. Intersentia, Antwerp, Belgium, 2009.

Kurin, Richard. “Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage: Key Factors in Implementing the 2003
Convention.” International Journal of Intangible Heritage 2 (2007): 10–20.

Leach, James. “Owning Creativity: Cultural Property and the Efficacy of Custom on the Rai Coast of
Papua New Guinea.” Journal of Material Culture 8, no. 2 (2003): 123–143

———. “Modes of creativity and the register of ownership.” In CODE: Collaborative Ownership and
the Digital Economy, edited by Rishab Ghosh, 29–44. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.

———. “Arts and Owners: Intellectual Property Law and the Politics of Scale in Indonesian Arts.”
American Ethnologist 35, no. 4 (2008): 607–631.

Mallon, Sean et al. “Samoan Tatau as Global Practice.” In Tattoo: Bodies, Art and Exchange in the
Pacific and the West, edited by Nicholas Thomas et al., 145–239. Durham: Duke University Press,
2005.

———. Tatau. New Zealand: Te Papa Press, 2010.

McDonnell, Siobhan. “Masters Not Mistresses of Modernity: Preliminary Thoughts on the ‘Cultural
Power’ of Land Law in Vanuatu.” Paper presented at the Sally Engle Merry Workshop, 9 March 2011,
Australian National University.

McLean, Margot, and Amanda D’Souza. “Life-Threatening Cellulitis After Traditional Samoan Tat-
tooing.” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health 35 (2011): 27–29.

Merry, Sally Engle. “Legal Pluralism.” Law & Society Review 22 (1988): 869–896.

National Policy on Traditional Knowledge 2011, Cook Islands.

30

MIRANDA FORSYTH

New, William. “Indigenous Peoples Won’t Be ‘Wished Away’ in Traditional Knowledge Treaty Talks.”
Intellectual Property Watch. 14 May 2011. 具http://www.ip-watch.org/weblog/2011/05/14/indigenous-
peoples-won%E2%80%99t-be-%E2%80%9Cwished-away%E2%80%9D-in-traditional-knowledge-
treaty-talks/典 (accessed November 2011).

Noyes, Dorothy. “The Judgment of Solomon: Global Protections for Tradition and the Problem of
Community Ownership.” Cultural Analysis 5 (2006): 27–56.

———. “Hardscrabble Academies: Towards a Social Economy of Vernacular Invention.” Ethnologia
Europaea 39, no. 2 (2009): 41–53.

Oseitutu, Janewa. “A Sui Generis Regime for Traditional Knowledge: The Cultural Divide in Intel-
lectual Property Law.” Marquette Intellectual Property Law Review 15, no. 1 (2011): 147–215.

Pigliasco, Guido, and Thorolf Lipp. “The Islands have Memory: Reflections on Two Collaborative
Projects in Contemporary Oceania.” The Contemporary Pacific 23, no. 2 (2011): 371–410.

Posey, Darrell. “Commodification of the Sacred Through Intellectual Property Rights.” Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 83 (2002): 3–12.

Qereqeretabua, Misiwaini. “The Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Fiji.” Paper pre-
sented at the International Seminar on the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage: Current
Situations and Challenges on the Safeguarding measures in the Asia-Pacific Region, 14 January 2010.
http://www.tobunken.go.jp/⬃geino/e/ISSICH/IS2010.html (accessed November 2011).

Regenvanu, Ralph. “Panel Session on “Indigenous and Local Communities’ Concerns and Experi-
ences in protecting their Traditional Knowledge and Cultural Expressions.” 9th Session of the Inter-
governmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and
Folklore of the World Intellectual Property Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 24 April 2009a.

———. “The Traditional Economy as the Source of Resilience in Melanesia.” Paper presented at
the Conference on The Pacific Islands and the World: The Global Economic Crisis. Lowy Institute,
Brisbane, Australia, 2009b. http://www.aidwatch.org.au/publications/the-traditional-economy-as-
the-source-of-resilience-in-melanesia (accessed November 2011).

Samoa Law Reform Commission. The Protection of Samoa’s Traditional Knowledge and Expressions
of Culture, Issues Paper IP 08/10. 具www.ag.gov.ws/Portals/136/Traditional%20Knowledge%20Issues
%20Paper%20(Final).doc典 (2010) (accessed February 2011).

Secretariat of the Pacific Community. Guidelines for Developing National Legislation for the Protec-
tion of Traditional Knowledge and Expressions of Culture based on the Pacific Model Law 2002. Noumea,
New Caldonia, 2006. http://www.spc.int/hdp/Documents/5th_CPA_Exec_Board/TKEC%20
Guidelines_final.pdf (accessed November 2011).

Shaheed, Farida. Report of the Independent Expert in the Field of Cultural Rights. United Nations
General Assembly, Human Rights Council, seventeenth session. Doc A/HRC/17/38, 2011.

Soden, Garrett. Falling: How Our Greatest Fear Became Our Greatest Thrill. New York: Norton, 2003.

Sunder, Madhavi. “Intellectual Property and Identity Politics: Playing with Fire.” Journal of Gender,
Race and Justice 4 (2000): 69–98.

Synexe Consulting Limited. Valuing Culture in Oceania: Methodology and Indicators for Valuing Cul-
ture, Including Traditional Knowledge, in Oceania. New Caledonia: Secretariat of the Pacific Com-
munity, 2002.

LIFTING THE LID ON “THE COMMUNITY”

31

Tabani, Marc. “The Carnival of Custom: Land Dives, Millenarian Parade and Other Spectacular Rit-
ualizations in Vanuatu.” Oceania 80, no. 3 (2010): 309–328.

Tamanaha, Brian. “The Primacy and the Failure of Law and Development.” St John’s Legal Studies
Research Paper Series Paper #09–0172 July 2009. http://www.snap-undp.org/lepknowledgebank/
Public%20Document%20Library/The%20Primacy%20of%20Society%20and%20the%20Failure%20
of%20Law%20and%20Development.pdf (accessed November 2011)

Tauschek, Markus. “Cultural Property as Strategy: The Carnival of Binche, the Creation of Cultural
Heritage and Cultural Property.” Ethnologia Europaea 39, no. 2 (2009): 67–80.

Teaiwa, Katerina, and Colin Mercer. Pacific Cultural Mapping, Planning and Policy Toolkit (2011).
http://www.spc.int/hdp/index.php?option⫽com_docman&task⫽cat_view&gid⫽107 (accessed No-
vember 2011).

Techera, Erika. “Legal Pluralism, Indigenous People and Small Island Developing States: Achieving
Good Environmental Governance in the South Pacific.” Journal of Legal Pluralism 61 (2010): 171–201.

———. “International Heritage Conservation: National and International Legal Contexts.” In Island
Futures: Conservation and Development Across the Asia-Pacific Region, edited by Daniel Niles and
Godfrey Baldacchino, 37–51. Springer Link, 2011a.

———. “Safeguarding Cultural Heritage: Law and Policy in Fiji.” Journal of Cultural Heritage 12
(2011b): 329–334.
Telefoni, Misa. “China is a Friend Indeed.” Samoa Observer, 2010 http://www.samoaobserver.ws/
index.php?option⫽com_content&view⫽article&id⫽28416:china-is&catid⫽64:sunday-reading&
Itemid⫽82 (accessed November 2011).

UNCTAD. Creative Economy Report, 2010.

UNESCO. Implementation of the 2003 UNESCO Convention in the Pacific With Special Emphasis on
Multinational Nominations, 2010.

Utanga, John, and Therese Mangos. “the Lost Connections: Tattoo Revival in The Cook Islands.”
Fashion Theory 10, no. 3 (2006): 315–31.

Va’a, Unasa. “Five Days with a Master Craftsman.” Fashion Theory 10, no. 3 (2006): 297–313.

Vanuatu Statistics. Alternative Indicators of Well-Being for Melanesia: Changing the Way Progress Is
Measured in the South Pacific. (2010) (unpublished manuscript on file with author)

Wendland, Wend. “Managing Intellectual Property Options When Documenting, Recording and Dig-
itizing Intangible Cultural Heritage.” In Intangible Cultural Heritage and Intellectual Property: Com-
munities, Cultural Diversity and Sustainable Development, edited by Toshiyuki Kono, 77–100.
Intersentia, Antwerp, Belgium, 2009.

Yu, Peter. “Cultural Relics, Intellectual Property, and Intangible Heritage.” Temple Law Review 81
(2008): 433–506.


