 (2009) 16:273–290. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2009 Keeping Rong from Wrong:
The Identification and Protection of
Traditional Intellectual Property in
Chuuk, Federated States of Micronesia
James D. Nason*

Joakim Peter**

Abstract: This discussion reviews the differences between traditional
Micronesian principles regarding traditional knowledge, or ‘esoteric’
knowledge, and Western copyright laws, which have been used in the
expropriation and legal alienation of traditional knowledge. We consider this
conflict in relation to contemporary Native American intellectual property
issues and tribal responses for the protection of such knowledge and to control
research activities. This is compared with the recent international and Pacific
Islands governments’ concerns and actions regarding commodification and
misappropriation of traditional knowledge, including the new Pacific Model
Law. Finally, we review the nature of traditional knowledge in Chuuk State and
its current status and recommend specific steps that the Federated States of
Micronesia might take legislatively to protect traditional knowledge as part of
its significant cultural heritage.

INTRODUCTION

Legal systems in non-Western indigenous communities represent a complex of
principles and precedents that correspond to common and civil law systems in
Western developed nations. These principles and precedents provide for the or-

*Burke Museum & University of Washington. Email: jnason@myuw.net
* *Micronesian Community College. Email: jojo@comfsm.fm

273

274

JAMES D. NASON AND JOAKIM PETER

derly regulation of society, including rights in real and intellectual property.
Although the exact nature of a legal system may vary significantly from one so-
ciety to another, it ordinarily defines property rights and protections for those
rights.

This article examines the fundamental differences between American legal con-
cepts regarding intellectual property and those in the traditional legal system of
the communities of the Mortlock Islands, Chuuk State, Federated States of Mi-
cronesia. Today these differences disadvantage indigenous traditional law and per-
mit the expropriation and alienation of traditional knowledge. Both ethical and
legal remedies are required to protect traditional intellectual property rights and
prevent their unauthorized use. This perspective draws on recent worldwide
indigenous rights movements and examples from Native American communi-
ties in the United States and elsewhere where this has also been a significant
issue.1

COLONIAL LEGAL HISTORY IN MICRONESIA

Historically, colonial regimes had overall control of judicial matters in Chuuk.
During the German administration, the local imperial administrator dealt with
all legal matters, and there was no court system. Outer island communities, such
as those in the Mortlocks, continued to handle their own internal affairs.2 This
changed with the Japanese administration’s “Treatment of Judicial Affairs in the
South Seas Islands” ordinances in 1923. This system gave authority to local chiefs
for many types of judicial proceedings at the local and district level, while also
limiting their power, and established Japanese courts with Japanese judges in major
island centers.3

After World War II, an interim American judicial system was put into effect in
1948, with local courts using military government judicial procedures. After 1951
civil administration courts were created in the new United States Trust Territory
of the Pacific Islands (USTTPI). Village leaders were authorized to judge all minor
offenses in outer islands, and these chiefs and magistrates primarily followed local
traditional law in reaching decisions: “Local courts need not follow American legal
procedures precisely, but must abide by generally recognized local custom, pro-
vided that such Local custom does not mitigate against a just determination of
the issue.”4 The new civilian USTTPI administration recognized that there were
conflicts between the introduced American criminal code and the unwritten body
of law known as “local custom” (i.e., traditional law), which was recognized by
policy and upheld by local courts.5 On outer island communities, local judges in
most cases followed traditional law. On Ettal Island in the Mortlocks, for example,
a respected man selected by the community as judge continued to use the Japanese-
period land tenure book and oral histories maintained by chiefs in settling land
disputes, as well as other customary laws.6

KEEPING RONG FROM WRONG

275

POSTCOLONIAL LAW IN THE FEDERATED STATES OF MICRONESIA

A key Micronesian issue in the future political status discussions in the 1970s was
control of laws, leading in part to a rejection of commonwealth status, because it
would have meant mandatory American approval of all Micronesian laws.7 By the
1960s, in fact, the Congress of Micronesia was acting legislatively towards a goal of
self-determination, and by 1979 the former districts of Yap, Chuuk (Truk), Pohnpei
(Ponape), and Kosrae (Kusaie) became the states of the Federated States of Mi-
cronesia as a constitutional government. In 1986 a compact of free association
with the United States was concluded.8

The first Legal Code of the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) was com-
pleted in 1982 and revised in 1997.9 The code addresses intellectual property in
Title 36—Copyrights, Patents, and Trademarks, in a largely American way, and
traditional intellectual property issues are not addressed. In October 2003 the FSM
also became a member to the Berne Convention, thus reinforcing the commit-
ment to a Western legal approach to intellectual property to protect the new cre-
ative works of its citizens.10

Yet, some aspects of traditional culture are addressed by the FSM Code in Title
26, Historical Sites and Antiquities: “It is the policy of the Federated States of Mi-
cronesia to protect and preserve the diverse cultural heritage of the peoples of
Micronesia,” while also establishing the Institute for Micronesian History and Cul-
ture which has the responsibility of providing “professional guidance regarding
historic and cultural affairs and recommendations to all levels of government and
the agencies thereof, as well as to foreign governments and businesses operating in
Micronesia.”11

Traditional knowledge has also recently come up in several national contexts.
In August, 1998, Pacific non-governmental organizations met in Pohnpei to ad-
dress, among other issues, intellectual property rights. They called on the South
Pacific Forum to develop a strategy to protect intellectual property rights and tra-
ditional knowledge of indigenous communities.12 In 1999 representatives of the
FSM along with those from 20 other states and territories took part in a Sympo-
sium on the Protection of Traditional Knowledge and Expressions of Indigenous
Cultures in the Pacific Islands in Noumea. This produced a Final Declaration, which
proposed that “a policy for regional harmonization of the protection of tradi-
tional knowledge and expressions of traditional and popular culture” be devel-
oped, along with “practical measures of technical assistance and support for the
organization of a homogenous system of legal protection, identification, conser-
vation and control of the exploitation of indigenous culture.”13 In 2001 Pacific
nation members of the Pacific Islands Forum were urged to address intellectual
property rights: “Pacific Islanders should take a greater leadership role in the de-
velopment of their intellectual property systems. By doing so, Pacific Islanders will
enjoy more of the benefits, rather than leaving it for others to decide how these
valuable resources are used.”14 One response was the creation of the Model Law

276

JAMES D. NASON AND JOAKIM PETER

for the Protection of Traditional Knowledge and Expressions of Culture in 2002,
under the auspices of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community.15 And in 2002 the
FSM government completed its National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, which
also addressed the loss of traditional ethnobiological knowledge.16 An earlier Mi-
cronesia Ethnobotany Project report stated the following:

The traditional leaders we spoke to in Micronesia were concerned with
a related, but qualitatively and quantitatively different phenomenon. In-
stead of their culture changing and evolving at a relatively slow “back-
ground” rate, over the last two generations a large percentage of traditions
and skills specific to Micronesia have not been passed on, and will be-
come extinct if an active program is not put into place to keep them an
active part of local life.17

The potential loss of traditional knowledge through a lack of preservation is thus
another area of concern, reflecting the speed with which culture change has oc-
curred in the FSM. Yet another important factor is the relocation of traditional
knowledge holders beyond their home islands, or beyond Micronesia. As Marshall’s
recent demographic data for just one Mortlockese island shows, the extent of
relocation has increased significantly in just the last 10 years.18 If this continues,
fewer holders of traditional knowledge will be left to share it with younger gen-
erations on home islands, as well as fewer children there who would grow up
appreciating the value of such knowledge and learning it in their turn. Region-
ally, discussions involving FSM representatives have focused on the need to pro-
tect traditional knowledge, a process supported by the World Intellectual Property
Organization and the Pacific Islands Forum as legislation to protect traditional
knowledge is considered.19

Beyond the legal code, the FSM Constitution also refers to traditional culture,
stating that the “traditions of the people of the Federated States of Micronesia
may be protected by statute. If challenged, the protection of Micronesian tradition
shall be considered a compelling social purpose warranting such governmental
action.”20 The Chuuk State Constitution also calls for respect for existing Chuukese
custom and tradition, and, under a proposed new Section 7 to Article XI, the leg-
islature is directed to protect intellectual property rights of people by statute, en-
suring that just and fair compensation is provided to the owners of intellectual
property rights.21

These constitutional and legal code provisions can provide the basis for the pro-
tection of traditional intellectual property rights in the Federated States of Micro-
nesia, but only with further legislative action. Recent governmental activity in the
FSM and in other Pacific Islands states show a growing concern about intellectual
property protection and extends this to traditional knowledge. The Culture in a
Pacific Plan document states:

Traditional knowledge and expressions of culture have been increas-
ingly appropriated and commercialized for profit by outside interests.
In many Pacific Island countries and territories, handicrafts and souvenirs

KEEPING RONG FROM WRONG

277

are being replicated and imported for sale to an unknowing tourist in-
dustry. Music and songs are recorded for publication and designs and
images are being reproduced on gift-wrapping, carpets, and t-shirts. Med-
icines and plants have been patented overseas for commercial gain. All
this has been occurring without the permission of traditional owners,
frequently out of cultural context and without any benefits being shared
with traditional owners.22

The value of traditional knowledge and expressions of culture as a
source of revenue is immense. Pacific Islanders are vulnerable to dispos-
session of their traditional knowledge and expression of culture until
their rights over their own intellectual property is recognized.23

and

As a rich and diverse source of creativity and innovation, traditional
knowledge and expressions of culture deserve the same legal protection
as provided to other forms of intellectual property.24

The current international debate is less about whether measures to protect tradi-
tional knowledge are necessary than how best to achieve the protection and pres-
ervation goals that have been identified. These deliberations reflect an array of
cultural and political concerns, including the eradication of colonial legacies; sov-
ereignty; cultural and ethnic identities; and, vigorous new reexaminations of cul-
tural heritage and its preservation.

CULTURAL PROPERTY AND ESOTERIC KNOWLEDGE

Most indigenous cultural property legislation over the last three decades has fo-
cused on the related issues of the looting or other misappropriation of significant
archaeological, historic, and contemporary objects, and the subsequent acquisi-
tion of those objects in the international marketplace for arts and antiquities. The
1970 UNESO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export, and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, the more recent
1995 UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects,
and a variety of national laws implementing these conventions are all examples of
such legislation. One unique and ground-breaking national law is the Native Amer-
ican Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA, 25 USC 3001 et. seq.)
passed by the United States Congress in 1990. This law fundamentally changed
the status of certain Native American cultural properties, and requires their repatria-
tion from American museums, government agencies, and educational institutions
to Native American tribes. NAGPRA is relevant here because it has prompted fur-
ther consideration of Native American intellectual property rights for traditional
knowledge.

NAGPRA emphasizes tribal sovereignty, establishes an inalienable status for cer-
tain cultural properties considered sacred or patrimonial or funereal, and requires

278

JAMES D. NASON AND JOAKIM PETER

their return to affiliated communities. Its property aspects have affected not only
Native Americans and their representative governments and agencies, but also non-
native scholars, museums, educational institutions, government agencies, and sev-
eral scholarly and professional organizations, as well as the manner in which
researchers and educational institutions conduct their work. The full implications
of some aspects and regulations of NAGPRA continue to be assessed, but one im-
portant implication for scholars is that research interests and scholarly rights are
secondary to tribal heritage interests.

Many Native American communities are aware of beneficial anthropological and
other research but are also well aware of many cases where traditional knowledge,
including sacred knowledge, was inappropriately taken, published, and essentially
removed forever from their direct control. These cases are sufficiently numerous
to have created a climate where outside research is suspect, often subject to tribal
controls over research ethics and methods, and even involves tribal controls over
or ownership of data regarding traditional knowledge.

Because this discussion centers on traditional knowledge, it is important to
define what this might encompass. Micronesian communities have accumu-
lated extensive and detailed knowledge about the world, their history in and re-
lationships to it, and how to effectively comprehend and use physical and
nonphysical environments for their benefit. Much of this knowledge is clearly
mundane, but other significant elements of this corpus of information are eso-
teric knowledge.

Esoteric knowledge here, as in Native American communities, is traditional
valued knowledge owned by individuals or groups in accord with traditionally
established rules of property ownership. Some knowledge, such as medicine, tech-
nologies, or oral accounts, may be highly systematic as well as cumulative in
nature, and would be specifically owned or held in trust by a kinship group or
by an individual representing and acting on the community’s behalf. Other eso-
teric knowledge may be specifically created by or otherwise owned by an indi-
vidual and passed on in inheritance to descendants or sold.

There are several important features of this kind of traditional knowledge that
command our attention. First, this is knowledge that is traditional in the sense
that its origins are found in a period prior to extensive contact with and subjuga-
tion to foreign culture and law. Second, this knowledge is commonly understood
as subject to traditional ownership laws by virtue of its specialized and valued
character. This also means that such knowledge can neither be appropriated nor
alienated by others without the approval of its owners or without due compensa-
tion. Third, access to or use of some esoteric knowledge may require specialized
training or other special conditions, such as being in a particular kinship relation-
ship to the current owner. Fourth, this is a growing body of knowledge that is
accretive and cumulative through time. Fifth, traditional ownership rights associ-
ated with it are held in perpetuity unless otherwise assigned or transferred in a
culturally appropriate manner.

KEEPING RONG FROM WRONG

279

TRADITIONAL INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CHUUK

In Chuuk State traditional knowledge is called rong. Rong, information/magic, has
varied applications and is traditionally a valuable form of property. The kinds of
traditional knowledge making up rong involve sailing canoe construction, build-
ing construction, detailed clan genealogies and land tenure, navigation and sailing
information, knowledge of herbal medicine and healing arts, spirit divination, love
magic, and itang, or specialized military knowledge. Related magical knowledge
and songs or chants are components of all these types of rong.25

Rong has a number of characteristics:

• It is specialized knowledge requiring expert training.
• It usually requires mature age.
• Unless obtained from a close immediate kinsman, it must be purchased.
• Its use must be compensated by payments of valued goods.
• It is a valuable resource for the family or clan.
• It is private (i.e., not shared within the public arena except when being

executed).

Thus, rong had clearly sanctioned traditional methods for the creation and trans-
mission of ownership rights in it and for its use. In other words, a traditional set
of legal protections akin to copyright continues to exist for this intellectual prop-
erty. It is difficult to state definitively how many individuals might possess such
knowledge, but Caughey suggested that in the Chuuk community he studied about
one-third of adults older than age 30 possessed some form of traditional knowl-
edge.26 The ideal specialist is described by him as a

a person of respectfulness, bravery, and strong thought who also con-
trols abundant valuables. He fulfills his obligations generously, cares for
numerous dependents, makes grand gifts of land, outdoes his rivals in
competitive projects, and, with his bravery and special knowledge, he
defeats his enemies by direct attack or sorcery.27

Therefore, the possessor of rong in Chuuk and in the Mortlocks has been regarded
as an exemplar of what it means to be a successful and significant person in so-
ciety, someone to be admired and emulated. Traditional knowledge confers cer-
tain attributes to its possessor and is in turn made even more valuable by the
admired attributes of those who possess it and who successfully use it.

Today, many forms of rong are deeply buried under the cloak of current reli-
gious movements in the islands. Traditional knowledge for curing and even sorcery
are still used, but these uses are not always publically acknowledged in today’s
communities. People are concerned about making traditional knowledge public,
and especially that knowledge related to medicinal plants. To what extent rong
survives the twenty-first century may therefore depend as much on local commu-
nity attitudes about it as on governmental actions taken to ensure its protection

280

JAMES D. NASON AND JOAKIM PETER

and preservation. It is also worth noting that aspects of heritage little regarded
today may be seen to be of great value in the future, making preservation against
that possibility even more important.

ETHICS, COPYRIGHT, AND TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE

Micronesian traditional knowledge was at risk beginning in the late nineteenth
century. Missionary activities undermined group ownership of property and ideas
about magic and religion. Colonially introduced Japanese and American educa-
tional systems supplanted, or tried to supplant, the value of such knowledge with
putatively more valuable foreign knowledge. The post-1960s boom in government
employment and all that such wages brought emphasized nontraditional learning.
Young people on outer islands might leave for school and thus were not in their
home communities to learn it. This was compounded by the deaths of older spe-
cialists who have had no apprentices, and by the out-migration of specialists to
the United States. The introduction and importance of many foreign goods (i.e.,
motorboats and medicines) has led to the reduction or end of the application and
use of some traditional skills in various communities (i.e., canoe building and
traditional healing).

Another obvious risk to traditional knowledge comes about because Western
concepts of copyright do not recognize traditional legal standards. Therefore, West-
ern copyright law can be used by outsiders who gain access to such knowledge to
expropriate it. For example, where a researcher draws the line on what informa-
tion is acquired or used depends on several factors, including the degree to which
the researcher is aware of restricted status of such information; how it is acquired
(i.e., by purchase); and the nature of the relationships between an informant and
researcher, or the family (or community) and the researcher, and whether true
informed consent has been obtained. These issues are rooted in the nature of pro-
fessional ethics.

The discussions in American Anthropology about research ethics and related
guidelines date especially from the Principles of Professional Responsibility of the
American Anthropological Association in 1971. Some disagreement and uncer-
tainty about several 1971 principles include who has access to information, who
should determine what is or is not in a community’s best interests, and the pro-
motion of community interests.28 Obviously, there is a wide range of individual
discretion with regard to these ethical principles, just as there is no disciplinary
mechanism when ethical guidelines boundaries are thought to have been crossed.
This has contributed to the widely held impression in Native American and other
indigenous communities that anthropologists and other outsiders will violate com-
munity trust, acquire inappropriate and restricted traditional knowledge, and pub-
lish and copyright such information for their own benefit without compensation
to community or individuals. Unfortunately, this perspective is bolstered by sev-

KEEPING RONG FROM WRONG

281

eral cases where all this has occurred. There is an increasingly widespread inter-
national indigenous belief that misappropriation, expropriation, and misuse of
traditional knowledge has occurred and will continue unless it is prevented by
proactive steps which are either ethical, legal, or both. This is in turn driven by the
fact that Western copyright law permanently alienates any traditional owner’s rights
to such knowledge once it has been acquired by an outsider and copyrighted.

Any researcher can publish data they have acquired through their research and
receive copyright for that data as the original creator of that information, with a
current duration of protection of their lifetime plus 70 years (in the United States,
17 USC §106 et. seq.). This is usually because there has been no prior recording or
other tangible, fixed form of that information that has received comparable legal
protection.

Copyright does not and cannot inherently protect most if not all of the esoteric
knowledge that comprises traditionally recognized and protected intellectual prop-
erty. Copyright does not apply because there usually is no single original creator
but rather a traditional group of holders and creators who, through time, have
created a particular body of knowledge, with generational trustees who hold the
knowledge. Further, the rights of owners are not temporally limited in traditional
law, nor is all such esoteric knowledge eligible by traditional standards to be re-
corded in some fixed format for transmission. From another perspective, Western
copyright laws are ideologically intended to ensure that artistic, literary, and other
innovations are, by virtue of the protection of their creators’ rights, made avail-
able for the enrichment of all in society, while ultimately placing these products in
the public arena. In contrast, traditional indigenous legal protections for intellec-
tual property are designed to protect and preserve valued cultural heritage of last-
ing importance to the society, as well as ensuring its appropriate performance or
use in society through specified group or individual ownership through time, with-
out the possibility of such knowledge entering the public arena.

Commercial and academic research seeking traditional knowledge has increased
exponentially since World War II as more and more researchers enter indigenous
communities and the monetary value of especially ethnopharmaceutical knowl-
edge increases. The absence of means to acknowledge, protect, and preserve tra-
ditional rights and requisite compensation for the acquisition of such knowledge
has heightened community concerns and forms the basis for recent actions to en-
sure its protection.

In the United States, for example, many Native American governments have in-
stituted a variety of measures to control access to and ownership and copyright of
traditional knowledge, including their own mandatory ethical codes for research-
ers and legal contracts requiring various degrees of oversight of and/or involve-
ment in research activities, as well as their ownership of research data.29 What has
not occurred yet is the development of tribally originated laws, such as tribal copy-
right laws that would institute broadly applied tribal legal protections for tradi-
tional knowledge, as opposed to individual contractual agreements.

282

JAMES D. NASON AND JOAKIM PETER

CHARACTERISTICS OF AN INDIGENOUS
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS LAW

Indigenous communities have explored legal mechanisms that would ensure their
rights of ownership for valued cultural property, including intangible cultural prop-
erty. International attention on this issue has been highlighted by the work of the
Commission on Human Rights in the United Nations, and the 2007 adoption of
the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.30 Of key interest here are
two of its articles. Article 11 states the following:

Indigenous peoples have the right to practice and revitalize their cul-
tural traditions and customs. This includes the right to maintain, pro-
tect and develop the past, present, and future manifestations of their
cultures, such as archaeological and historical sites, artifacts, designs, cer-
emonies, technologies and visual and performing arts and literature. States
shall provide redress through effective mechanisms, which may include
restitution, developed in conjunction with indigenous peoples, with re-
spect to their cultural, intellectual, religious, and spiritual property taken
without their free, prior, and informed consent or in violation of their
laws, traditions, and customs.31

The Third Ministerial Meeting of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in Seattle
in early December 1999 also prompted the release of an Indigenous Peoples’ Se-
attle Declaration and Recommendations, which included the following recom-
mendation for an amendment to Article 27.3.b. of the Trade Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights Agreement of the WTO:

2.3.c.—It should ensure the exploration and development of alternative
forms of protection outside of the dominant western intellectual rights
regime. Such alternatives must protect the knowledge and innovations
and practices in agriculture, health care, and conservation of biodiver-
sity, and should build upon indigenous methods and customary laws
protecting knowledge, heritage, and biological resources.32

In the Pacific, these concerns were earlier expressed in the 1993 Mataatua Decla-
ration on Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which
set forth basic principles that were submitted to the United Nations group con-
sidering indigenous rights. Among these basic principles are the fundamental rights
of indigenous people to define, control, manage, and benefit from their own tra-
ditional knowledge. These principles reflect continuing concerns with the expro-
priation of traditional knowledge, especially with the commercialization of such
knowledge. Haira, who worked with the South Pacific Forum on the development
of the Model Law, has discussed the possibility of sui generis law, contracts, and
other mechanisms to protect indigenous traditional knowledge.33 Reviewing the
issues she suggests that it will be necessary to use a package of measures, including
contracts, trademarks of motifs, codes of ethics, databases of traditional knowl-
edge, certification registers for authenticity, benefit-sharing legislation, informed
consent, legal applications of such principles as breach of confidence and unfair

KEEPING RONG FROM WRONG

283

competition, standard Western copyright law protections for new works derived
from a traditional knowledge context, and new intellectual property laws contain-
ing unique components related to traditional knowledge.34

These suggestions mirror the recommendations made at the 1999 Pacific Re-
gional Seminar on initiatives to safeguard and preserve traditional culture and its
possessors. Proposals included documentation as well as promotion of relevant
cultural agencies and also new approaches to monitor and insure accountability
of foreign researchers. This also led to resolutions to develop copyright laws with
sui generis protections for traditional knowledge and create government policies
to protect cultural heritage and its owners.35

Finally, a Model Law emerged from the partnership of the Cultural Affairs Pro-
gramme of the South Pacific Community with the Pacific Islands Forums Secre-
tariat and UNESCO. This was, as noted earlier, the result of interests expressed by
Pacific Island nations to create ways to keep control over and profit from any com-
mercial activity in their traditional knowledge. The Model Law for the Protection
of Traditional Ecological Knowledge, Innovations, and Practices, also known as
The Pacific Model Law, has several key features.36 It would retroactively return to
traditional control knowledge that was misappropriated and is now in the public
domain and create a criminal offence for any unauthorized use of such knowl-
edge. It provides mechanisms to establish ownership to traditional knowledge; pro-
vides for perpetual ownership; establishes a register for such knowledge; provides
for appropriate commercial use of such knowledge; and suggests amendments to
existing copyright, patent, and other intellectual property laws to protect tradi-
tional knowledge.37 Since 2002 the Model Law has been finalized and a toolkit
created to alert governments to key policy issues that should be considered when
instituting the law.38

Five features of the Pacific Model Law deserve close attention, including its pro-
posed application to knowledge in the public domain if: (1) the owner did not
intend to share it, or understand the purposes of the sharing; (2) no permission
was given to disseminate it; (3) the owner did not know that it might be used for
commercial purposes; (4) the owner did not understand that sharing would result
in a loss of ownership rights; and, (5) the extent to which unauthorized use might
undermine the spiritual and cultural integrity of the owner(s).39 For data col-
lected in the past, any of these conditions might be exceptionally difficult for a
researcher to later disprove. The Model Law also stipulates that it would be ret-
roactive (i.e., not applicable only to knowledge created subsequent to the law’s
passage), provides for ownership conflict resolution, and also establishes criminal
penalties for violations.

Attempts like this to create unique versions of Western copyright law must be
adapted to each specific cultural context in which it is to be applied. As a result,
considerable attention should be paid to consultations with relevant groups and
individuals to ensure that the law is appropriate for the protection and/or pres-
ervation goals of that community. An additional question is whether or not such

284

JAMES D. NASON AND JOAKIM PETER

a law and its penalties can be applied to individuals beyond the jurisdictional con-
trol of the country.

MICRONESIAN TRADITIONAL PROPERTY LAW

The question of whether or not an indigenous copyright law to protect tradi-
tional knowledge is either desirable or necessary, beyond whatever other govern-
mental policies might be put into effect, will require serious consultation and
consideration within several Micronesian contexts at every level from the local
community to state and national governments. In broad outline, a new form of
indigenous copyright law in Micronesia might have several key features, as we
have seen in the Model Law. First, it would start with the basic premise that
there are existing traditional legal (i.e., customary) protections for esoteric knowl-
edge, and that traditionally defined owners (whether community, kin group,
or individual) are acknowledged. Second, a legal definition of traditional intel-
lectual property would recognize all the various categories that exist in all
their various forms and ownership types. Third, it would recognize that tradi-
tional knowledge might be cumulatively created by more than one individual in
a family line or by a group of individuals in a kin group through time as owners
who traditionally held ownership rights to such property such that the property
could not be used, modified, or otherwise alienated without appropriate in-
formed consent and approval and/or payments associated with use rights or the
transfer of such property. Fourth, to be effective, it must grapple with the diffi-
cult issues surrounding the retroactive assigning of ownership rights to the prod-
ucts of such knowledge, including sound or film recordings, and applicable
manuscripts and publications. For example, would the Model Law’s conditions
regarding public domain issues be incorporated? And, finally, what agency or
agencies would implement, supervise, and enforce such a law, with what penal-
ties for violation? Would there be one national law, assigning certain jurisdic-
tional rights to each of the culturally diverse states in the FSM, or state laws
which were specific to each? And what role would local communities play in
these matters?

In their discussion of NAGPRA, Sherry Hutt and C. Timothy McKeown elo-
quently state: “The preservation of cultural property rights is essential to give mean-
ing to human existence and as a bond against enslaving a people by diminishing
the definition of their existence.”40 This perspective clearly applies to traditional
intellectual property, and particularly to what we have described as esoteric or
traditional knowledge. Modern governments have taken legal steps to protect their
citizens’ intellectual property, but only in Western legal terms that do not encom-
pass indigenous traditional property on its own terms. As sovereign entities, Mi-
cronesian governments have the authority to implement whatever is deemed
necessary to protect traditional knowledge. What is needed is a serious consider-

KEEPING RONG FROM WRONG

285

ation of what best serves the long-term heritage interests of Micronesian commu-
nities with respect to traditional knowledge.

NEXT STEPS

As national or state governments in Micronesia consider the implementation of
legislation to protect traditional intellectual property, a number of prior steps can
be taken. Using the Protocols for Native American Archival Materials as a model,
these steps would seek knowledge repatriation and restoration of community/
family rights to intellectual property.41 This approach would include the follow-
ing steps:

1. Locate authors of works that include rong using bibliographic references, a
general note to the Association for Social Anthropology in Oceania email
net (ASAONET), and FSM college student searches of their institution’s li-
braries and archives as independent research projects. Contact authors about
voluntary transfers of copyright for such materials or the transfer or rights
to or copies of unpublished data concerning rong.

2. Concurrently, identify or establish a repository in Chuuk where materials
can be stored, and clarify the ownership role of local communities or fami-
lies in such materials. Where informants or their descendants or communi-
ties have ownership according to traditional law, the repository could house
materials as an in-trust holding on their behalf.

3. Select a repository oversight board of specialists to contact libraries and
archives known to have significant Pacific Islands holdings to seek reviews
of collections and consultations regarding access and use of collections
containing rong. Clarify that the library or archive has copies of original
research agreements, informed consent informant documents, or other com-
munity agreements from the researcher. The board, repository staff, or their
designees should seek evaluation of such collections and request temporary
access and use restrictions pending a determination of whether or not
repatriation of such materials is warranted. If not, seek requests for copies
of materials with a memorandum of agreement concerning any future
acquisitions.

In the meantime, legal protections for existing and future traditional intellectual
property should be expanded through both national and state constitutional au-
thority (e.g. by enabling, in Chuuk, passage of the formerly proposed section 7 of
article XI of the state constitution), which would provide statutory protection for
intellectual property rights and just compensation for any use of such knowledge.
The possible adoption of a Micronesian version of the Pacific Model law should
also be seriously considered. Whatever legislative action is taken, it’s implementa-

286

JAMES D. NASON AND JOAKIM PETER

tion should include a number of features. Based on what has been developed within
Native American tribal and other communities thus far, consideration should be
given to at least the following 10 issues:

1. Clarification of the role of the government in establishing research permits
and agreements, ethical policies for researchers, contracts and enforcement
bonds, and other mechanisms and procedures related to research requests.
2. Clarification of the rights of community members as research participants,
and the role of government in enforcing those rights as well as ensuring the
limitation of researcher access to certain types of information without spe-
cial permission or other controls.

3. The clarification of national, state, community, or individual rights in con-
trolling access to and the copying of defined and protected intellectual
property data, and its copyright, with specific regard for traditional owner
copyright of any such data.

4. Legal requirements for community members to be involved in research as
research collaborators and community representatives to ensure that tradi-
tional intellectual property guidelines are followed.

5. Clarification of the ultimate rights of the government or community or
individual owner(s) over the disposition and ownership of information ob-
tained during research, including restrictions on use.

6. Outlining specific agreements regarding copyrights to research data and the

publication of any research findings.

7. The identification by community representatives or other specialists of cat-
egories of culturally sensitive data and the development of guidelines, dif-
ferential or otherwise, specifically related to access and/or use.

8. Stipulation of community or individual rights to prior review and concur-
rence or the incorporation of dissenting community comment in research
reports or publications that uses traditional knowledge.

9. Stipulation of community or individual interests in and rights to any pat-
ents or other commercial products that might emerge from research activity.
10. The creation of government or community guidelines for compliance and
the enactment of governmental mechanisms to carry out oversight and in-
tervention in approved research.

Such legislation would ideally come about with a consensus regarding not only
the definition of what constitutes traditional intellectual property, but also its tra-
ditional characteristics, ownership, uses, and continuing value to the cultural her-
itage of the people. Such a consensus should emerge through the active participation
of community representatives in broader state or national forums. We believe that
it is time to recognize that new steps, including new legislation, must be taken to
protect Micronesian rights in their traditional intellectual property in the Feder-
ated States of Micronesia.

KEEPING RONG FROM WRONG

287

In concert with any legislative discussions and action, it is also important to
consider other measures related to the preservation of traditional knowledge. The
continuing and understandable reliance on Western educational content and as-
sociated values places traditional knowledge in a potentially secondary position,
as does the loss of specialists through the expanding out-migration that contin-
ues. Other related factors must be taken into account, including the intermarriage
of islanders with foreigners and even the ultimate draconian risks of global warm-
ing, with loss of lands and forced relocations. New heritage education programs
comparable to those already in place in Native American communities might be
one answer, in company with a contemporary survey and assessment of existing
traditional knowledge and specialists, community by community, with the related
discussion as to what is still regarded to be of lasting significance. By using a di-
verse approach to the assessment, preservation, and protection of traditional knowl-
edge, future generations in the communities of the Federated States of Micronesia
will continue to have access to and benefit from the knowledge that their ances-
tors have accumulated over thousands of years.

ENDNOTES

1. See, for example: Greaves, Intellectual Property Rights, or Nason, “Traditional Property and

Modern.”

2. See, for example, Nason, Clan and Copra, 188–90.
3. US Navy, Civil Affairs Handbook, 77–83.
4. US Navy, Handbook on the Trust, 108.
5. Richard, US Naval Administration, 433–37.
6. Nason, Clan and Copra, 254.
7. McHenry, Micronesia, Trust Betrayed, 106, 116.
8. Kiste, “United States,” 229–39.
9. FSM, Code of the Federated.
10. The FSM does not have World Trade Organization status, see United Nations, Programme

Planning and Evaluation.

11. FSM, Code of the Federated.
12. Anonymous, “American NGOs Held Parallel.”
13. UNESCO, Symposium on the Protection.
14. Pacific Islands Forum, Intellectual Property Reform.
15. Haira, Using Intellectual Property Rights.
16. FSM, National Biodiversity Strategy.
17. Lee and colleagues, “Cultural Dynamics and Change,” 287.
18. Marshall, Namoluk beyond the Reef, 74–76.
19. WIPO, Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual.
20. FSM, Constitution of the Federated.
21. FSM, Constitution of the State.
22. Pacific Islands Forum, “Culture,” 167–68.
23. Pacific Islands Forum, “Culture,” 169.
24. Pacific Islands Forum, “Culture,” 171.
25. See, for example, Burrows and Spiro, An Atoll Culture, 154; Caughey, Fa’a’nakkar: Culture
Values, 60–61; Fischer, The Eastern Carolines, 141; Mahony, A Trukese Theory; and Nason, Clan and
Copra, 108–9.

288

JAMES D. NASON AND JOAKIM PETER

26. Caughey, Fa’a’nakkar: Culture Values, 61.
27. Caughey, Fa’a’nakkar: Culture Values, 61.
28. American Anthropological Association, Commission to Review.
29. See, for example, Nason, “Tribal Methods for Controlling.”
30. United Nations, United Nations Declaration.
31. United Nations, United Nations Declaration, 5.
32. Center for World Indigenous Studies, A Treaty between Indigenous.
33. Haira, Using Intellectual Property Rights.
34. Haira, Using Intellectual Property Rights.
35. Tora, Report on the Pacific.
36. Pacific Islands Forum, Model Law for the Protection.
37. Pacific Islands Forum, Model Law for the Protection.
38. SPC, Cultural Affairs Programme.
39. Pacific Islands Forum, Intellectual Property Reform.
40. Hutt and McKeown, “Control of Cultural Property,” 364.
41. First Archivists Circle, Protocols for Native American.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

American Anthropological Association. Commission to Review the AAA Statements on Ethics Final
Report. Arlington, VA: American Anthropological Association, 1995.

Anonymous. “Pacific NGOs Held Parallel Forum.” Europe Pacific Solidarity Bulletin 6, no. 4 (1998).
Available at www.hartford-hwp.com/archives/24/164.html (accessed October 2006).

Burrows, E.G., and M.E. Spiro. An Atoll Culture. New Haven, CT: Human Relations Area Files, 1957.

Caughey, John L. Fa’a’nakkar: Culture Values in a Micronesian Society. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Publications in Anthropology, 1977.

Center for World Indigenous Studies. A Treaty between Indigenous Nations on the Protection of Cul-
tural Property and Traditional Resource Rights: Asserting Indigenous Nation Sovereignty. Briefing Mem-
orandum, prepared jointly by the Center for World Indigenous Studies, Morning Star Institute and
the Northwest Indian Applied Research Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia, February 23–26, 2000.
Available at http://www.cwis.org/ (accessed October 2006).

First Archivists Circle. Protocols for Native American Archival Materials. 2006. Available at
www2.nau.edu/libnap-p/endorsements.html (accessed October 2006).

Fischer, John L. The Eastern Carolines. New Haven, CT: Human Relations Area Files Press, 1957.

FSM (Federated States of Micronesia). “Chuuk State Code.” Draft Version. Legal Information System
of the Federated States of Micronesia, 2005. Available at http://www.fsmlaw.org/chuuk/code (ac-
cessed October 2006).

———. Code of the Federated States of Micronesia. Legal Information System of the Federated
States of Micronesia, 2005. Available at http://www.fsmlaw.org/fsm/code (accessed October 2006).

———. Constitution of the Federated States of Micronesia. Legal Information System of the Fed-
erated States of Micronesia, 2005. Available at http://www.fsmlaw.org/fsm/constitution (accessed Oc-
tober 2006).

———. Constitution of the State of Chuuk. Legal Information System of the Federated States of
Micronesia, 2005. Available at http://www.fsmlaw.org/chuuk/constitution (accessed October 2006).

KEEPING RONG FROM WRONG

289

———. National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan. Palikir, Pohnpei: Federated States of Micro-
nesia, 2002.

Greaves, Tom, ed. Intellectual Property Rights for Indigenous Peoples: A Source Book. Oklahoma City,
OK: Society for Applied Anthropology, 1994.

Haira, Anne. Using Intellectual Property Rights to Protect Traditional Knowledge. Wellington: Ministry
for Economic Development, New Zealand, 2005. Available at www.med.govt.nz/templates/
Page_14620.aspx (accessed October 2006).

Hutt, Sherry, and C. Timothy McKeown. “Control of Cultural Property as Human Rights Law.” Ar-
izona State Law Journal 31, no. 2 (1999): 353–98.

Kiste, Robert C. “United States.” In Tides of History: The Pacific Islands in the Twentieth Century,
edited by K.R. Howe, Robert C. Kiste, and Brij V. Lal, 227–57. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press,
1994.

Lee, R., M.J. Balick, D.L. Ling, F. Sohl, B.J. Bronsi, and W. Raynor. “Cultural Dynamism and Change:
An Example from the Federated States of Micronesia.” Economic Botany 55, no. 1 (2001): 9–13.

McHenry, Donald F. Micronesia, Trust Betrayed: Altruism vs. Self Interest in American Foreign Policy.
New York: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 1975.

Mahony, Frank Joseph. A Trukese Theory of Medicine. PhD thesis, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA,
1969.

Marshall, Mac. Namoluk beyond the Reef. Cambridge, MA: Westview Press, 2004.

Nason, James D. Clan and Copra: Modernization on Etal Island, Eastern Caroline Islands. PhD thesis,
University of Washington, Seattle, 1970.

———. “Traditional Property and Modern Laws: The Need for Native American Community In-
tellectual Property Rights Legislation.” Stanford Law and Policy Review 12, no. 2 (2001): 255–266.

———. “Tribal Methods for Controlling Research.” Journal of American Indian Higher Education 2
(1996): 17–20.
Pacific Islands Forum. “Culture.” n.d. http://www.pacificplan.org/tiki-download_file.php?fileId⫽38
site later taken down (accessed October 2006).
———. Intellectual Property Reform. Press Statement no. 113/01. 2001. Available at http://www.
forumsec.org.fj/news/2001/Dec07.htm (accessed October 2006).

———. Model Law for the Protection of Traditional Ecological Knowledge, Innovations, and Prac-
tices. 2001. Available at http://www.grain.org/brl/?docid⫽698&lawid⫽1430 (accessed October 2006).

Richard, Dorothy E. US Naval Administration of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, Volume 3.
Washington, DC: Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, 1957.

SPC (Secretariat of the Pacific Community). Cultural Affairs Programme, 2003–2005: Triennial Progress
Report. 2005. Available at www.spec.int/AC/CRGA%2035%20-%20Progress%20report%202003-
05%20Culture%20E.pdf (accessed October 2006).
Tora, Sivia. Report on the Pacific Regional Seminar. 1999. Available at: http://www.folklife-si.edu/
resources/Unesco/tora.htm (accessed October 2006).

290

JAMES D. NASON AND JOAKIM PETER

UNESCO. Symposium on the Protection of Traditional Knowledge and Expressions of Indigenous Cul-
tures in the Pacific Islands. 1999. Available at http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php-URL_
ID⫽14264 (accessed October 2006). (See also Final Declaration. Available at http://portal.unewsco.org/
culture/en/ev.php-URL_ID⫽14264&URL_DO⫽DO_TOPIC&URL_Section⫽20%.html [accessed
October 2006].)

United Nations. Programme Planning and Evaluation: Monitoring and Evaluation: Review of Selected
Projects in the Thematic Area of Managing Globalization. Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific, no. E/ESCAP/CMG(2)11. New York: United Nations, 2005. Available at http://
www.UNESCAP.org/cmg/2005/english/cmg2_11E.pdf (accessed October 2006).
———. United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, no. A/61/L.67. New York:
United Nations, 2007. Available at http://www.iwgia.org/sw248.asp (accessed October 2006).

US Navy. Civil Affairs Handbook, East Caroline Islands. OPNAV P22–5. Washington, DC: Office of
the Chief of Naval Operations, 1944.

———. Handbook on the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. Washington, DC: Office of the Chief
of Naval Operations, 1948.

WIPO (World Intellectual Property Organization). Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual, Prop-
erty and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, Seventh Session, Geneva, 1–5 Novem-
ber 2004. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/7/15 Prov.2. March 11, 2005. Geneva: World Intellectual Property
Organization.


