The Protection  of Australia's
Movable Cultural Heritage**
Hugh H. Jamieson*

1  The Importance  of Cultural  Heritage

On 14 November  1970 the General Conference of UNESCO adopted
the  Convention  on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Preventing  the Il-
licit Import, Export and Transfer  of Ownership of Cultural  Property
("the  Convention"). The Convention  recognized  in its preamble:

"That  the  interchange  of  cultural  property  among  nations  for
scientific,  cultural  and  educational  purposes  increases  the
knowledge  of the civilization  of Man, enriches the cultural  life
of  all  peoples  and  inspires  mutual  respect  and  appreciation
among nations."

The preamble went on to say:

"That  it  is  incumbent  upon  every  State  to  protect  the  cultural
property existing within its territory against the dangers of theft,
clandestine  excavation  and illicit  export."

That  there  may  in  practice  be  a  tension,  or  even  a  contradiction,
between  these  two  principles  is  clear  enough.  It  is  also,  moreover,
implicit in the Convention that action required of States that become
parties  to  it  may  interfere  with  the  exercise  by  its  citizens  of  their
right to dispose of their property  freely  and as they wish.

The Convention was a response to widespread concerns expressed
over many years  about the growing  trade  in  items of cultural  prop-
erty  illegally  or  improperly  removed  from  their countries of origin.
Poorer, or exporting, countries were (and unfortunately  still  are) es-
pecially  vulnerable  to this trade, which  was  not  so much  a trade  in
culture as a one way flow  in valuable objects out of the countries in
question.

*  Partner,  Allen  Allen  &  Hemsley,  Sydney.
**  Acknowledgement:  I  have  been  greatly  assisted  in  the  preparation  of  this

paper by  my research  assistant,  Malcolm  Stephens.

215

Hugh  H. Jamieson

The Convention  sought to protect from  export the most important
cultural  treasures  of the  States  Parties to the Convention  and to en-
sure  that  they  were preserved  for  the  benefit  of  future  generations.
As at  31 December  1993, 81  countries  had  signed  the  Convention.
Exporting  countries,  naturally  enough,  are  heavily  represented
among  them,  but  one  notes  that  there  are  quite  a  few  of  the  more
economically  powerful  or  importing  nations  missing  from  the  list,
notably  Great  Britain,  France,  Germany,  Switzerland,  the  Nether-
lands,  Denmark,  Sweden,  Norway  and  Japan.  Australia  acceded  to
the Convention  on 30 October  1989, effective  30 January  1990. The
complete  list  is to be found  in Appendix I to this paper.

2  The  Continuing  Trade  in Illegally  Exported  Items

Despite  the  Convention  the  illicit  trade  continued,  one  might  say
almost unabated. Anyone who has been in an antique shop in Singa-
pore,  Thailand  or  Hong  Kong will  be aware  that  extensive  trade  is
continuing  to this day in beautiful  sculptures  and other works of art
from  Cambodia  and  Burma  (Myanmar).  Advertisements  are  fre-
quently  seen  in  specialist  magazines  for  sales  of  such  objects  at
auctions,  especially  in  Europe  and  America.  These  objects  may  be
sold quite  legally  in non-signatory nations1.

During  the  recent  war  in  Lebanon  treasure  hunters  were  able  to
export  illegally  numerous  items  from  Lebanon's  ancient  past.  One
such  shipment  from  Lebanon  to  Britain  by  way  of  Cyprus  was  of
eleven tonnes  of  ancient  Greek  and  Roman artefacts.  The  shipment
included  Roman  glass,  gold  and  stones  from  a  Byzantine  church.
The  British  police  did  show  some  interest  in  the  cargo  —  but  for
taxation  purposes.  Lebanese  officials  stated  that  if  Britain  had rati-
fied  the  1970  UNESCO  Convention,  they  could  have  recovered
these  objects.2

There are similar examples in Australia. An Ediacaran  fossil  from
the Flinders Ranges, regarded as the best impression of a sea pen in
the  world,  was  a  few  years  ago  cut  out of the  ground  and  illegally
taken  to Japan.3

A  most  topical  example  occurred  recently  when  the  Australian
Government  failed  in attempts to persuade Christie's  in London not
to  proceed  with  the  auction  of  three  sacred  Aboriginal  tjuringas
("tjuringa"  normally  means  a  carved  wooden  block).  The  incident
may  have  a  somewhat  happy  ending, however,  as the  purchaser  of
one  of  the  objects  is  reported  to  be  a  London  based  Australian
businessman  who paid as little as $2,000.004 for  the object:  he told
the  press  that  he  would  be  returning  it  to  the  Aborigines  later  this
year. The press report quoted the Director of the Australian Museum
as saying that  several  thousand  sacred Aboriginal  items are thought
to  be  held  by  museums  and  individuals  outside  Australia  and  that

216

Australia's  Movable  Cultural  Heritage

there  continues  to  be  an  enormous  trade  in  such  items,  a  lot  of  it
being  in private hands.5

The value of fossils has also led to their being used for laundering
drug  money.  In  the  United  States  there  have  even  been,  on  a  few
occasions, gunfights  at fossil  sites.6 It is unlikely that the black mar-
ket  in  fossils  would  be  so lucrative  if  international  collectors  were
not  so willing to turn  a blind eye to the source of objects  they pur-
chase,  or  if  the  items  could  be  forcibly  returned  to  the  country  of
origin (as under the UNESCO convention).

3  Australian  Cultural  Heritage

It  was  not  until  quite  recently  that  Australia  decided  to  ratify  the
Convention.  This  may  have  been  due to  the  opinion  held  by  some
people  that  Australia  had  no  significant  heritage  worth  protecting:
European  settlement  occurred just  over two hundred years ago, and
it might have been thought  that that was too recent  for  many items
of  great  cultural  importance  to  have  come  into  existence.  Dr Jean
Battersby  commented:

"Ours was a disposable  and discounted  culture  —  all the more
so because  of the  colonial  status which  carried  with  it  a sense
of cultural  inferiority."7

This perceived  link between  the age of an item  and  its cultural  im-
portance  might  also  explain  why  the  early  legislation  in  Australia
which protected cultural  heritage  was concerned  mainly with Abor-
iginal culture.8

In  1986 the Australian  Parliament  passed  the Protection of Mov-
able  Cultural Heritage  ("PMCH")  Act. This  is  the  legislation  cur-
rently governing both the protection  of Australia's movable  cultural
heritage and its obligations under the UNESCO Convention to return
items illegally exported from  other countries. Previously, Australia's
cultural  heritage  had  been  protected  on  an  ad  hoc basis  mainly  by
regulations under the Customs Act  1901 (Cth).9

An  example  of  the  previous  situation  was  when  items  from  the
Riversleigh  fossil  project,  which  contain  many  examples  of  Aus-
tralia's  prehistoric  "megafauna",  were  protected  by  the  Customs
regulations. The scheme was largely reactive, with categories being
added  from  time  to  time,  as  a  particular  case  arose.10  One  conse-
quence  of  this  approach  was  that  it  was  difficult  for  potential  ex-
porters of items to discover whether the export was legal. As Dr Jean
Battersby  has  written,  items  of  cultural  importance  tended  "to  be
tucked away among coffee  beans, salami, red wine and knuckle dus-
ters  and  other  things  that  cannot  be  brought  into  or  taken  out  of
Australia".11

217

Hugh  H. Jamieson

4  Outline  of the Act

The  PMCH  Act  commenced  on  1  July  1987.  It  is  concerned  with
both  the  protection of Australia's  cultural  heritage  and that of other
countries. Its obligation  to other  countries under the UNESCO con-
vention  is set out in section  14 of the Act. This section goes beyond
the requirements of the Convention in prohibiting import after  1  July
1987  of  all  foreign  cultural  property  which  was  exported  illegally
from  the country of origin at any time, not, as under the Convention,
merely  from  the  date  of  entry  into  force  of  the  Convention  in  the
State  of origin.

Most  of  the  Act, however,  is  concerned  with  the  protection  of
Australia's  heritage.  The  Act  required  the  creation  of  a  National
Heritage  Control  List divided  into two classes.

The  full  Control  List  was  promulgated  by  regulations  that  came
into effect  on  1  August  1988. Class A objects  cannot be exported at
all  unless  they  are  the  subject  of  a certificate  of  exemption  issued
by  the  responsible  Minister.  A  certificate  can  only  be  issued  in
respect  of  objects  that  are  currently  outside  Australia.  They  are
obtained  by  applying  directly  to  the  Minister.  Class  A  objects  are
determined  by  regulations  issued  under  the  Act,12  and  are  cur-
rently  the  following  items  of  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander
Heritage:13

1.  sacred  and secret ritual  objects;
2.  bark  and  log coffins  used as traditional  burial  objects;
3.  human remains;
4.  rock art; and
5.  dendroglyphs.

For  items  which  fall within  Class  B, export without  a certificate  or
a permit  is  illegal, and  leads  to  immediate  forfeiture  of that  object.
This  provision  for  immediate  forfeiture  is  designed  to  overcome
problems  highlighted by  the  Ortiz case.14 That  litigation  concerned
five  wooden  panels carved by Maoris which were illegally exported
from  New  Zealand. The relevant  New Zealand  legislation  provided
that  items  illegally  exported  "shall  be forfeited",  but  forfeiture  was
defined  in  related  legislation  to  take  effect  when  an  item  was  "se-
ized"  by  New  Zealand  authorities,  and  the  attempt  in  the  English
Courts to recover the panels for the New Zealand people failed. The
Australian  legislation  was  therefore  drafted  to  have  forfeiture  take
effect  immediately the item was put in an aircraft/ship/post  box with
the  intention  of being exported.15

A  certificate  to  export  a  class  B  object  is  obtained  in  the  same
way  as  a  certificate  to  export  a  class  A  object.  As  with  class  A
objects,  a  certificate  can  only  be  obtained  in  respect  of  items  cur-
rently outside Australia. A permit is required to export objects which

218

Australia's  Movable  Cultural  Heritage

are not the  subject  of  a certificate  of exemption.  The procedure  for
obtaining a permit involves the following  steps:

1.  The  item  is  examined  by  "expert  examiners"  to  determine
whether the item is in fact  covered by the National Heritage
Control List. The examiners then submit to the National Cul-
tural Heritage Committee a written report on the application.
2.  The Committee  forwards  the  report  to the Minister  with  its

own  recommendations.

3.  The Minister makes the final  decision.

In the first few  years  of  the Act's  operation,  the  majority  of  appli-
cations  were from public  collecting  institutions  seeking  to  lend ob-
jects  for  research  or  public  exhibition.  To  streamline  these  appli-
cations, the PMCH Act was amended to enable "general permits" to
be granted to public institutions. This allows institutions to lend ob-
jects  for  research  or  public  exhibition  abroad  without  obtaining  a
permit  for  each item.

5  The Scope of the Act

The main  issue confronting  governments  in protecting their cultural
heritage  is  to  decide  what  may  not  be  exported.  Article  5  of  the
Convention  required  the  States  Parties  to  the  Convention  to
undertake:

"as appropriate  for  each country, to set up within their  territor-
ies  one  or  more  national  services,  where  such  services  do not
already exist, for  the protection  of the cultural  heritage, with a
qualified  staff  sufficient  in  number  for  the  effective  carrying
out of the following  functions:
(a)  ...
(b)  establishing  and  keeping  up  to  date,  on  the • basis  of  the
national  inventory  of protected property, a list of important
public  and  private  cultural  property  whose  export  would
constitute  an  appreciable  impoverishment  of  the  national
cultural  heritage.

(c)  ..."

However  Dr  Battersby,  who  was  an  enthusiastic  proponent  of  the
PMCH  legislation  and,  with  Dr Lyndel  Prott, played  a  leading  role
in its development,  noted  in her paper16:

"We  looked  at  the  possibility  of  having  an  itemised  inventory
of cultural  property. But we felt  that  that was difficult  and im-
practical  and  finally  so  foreign  to  our  national  ethos  that  we
would not go that way."

219

Hugh  H. Jamieson

The Australian legislation therefore prescribes classes of items which
require  permits  for  export.  This  list  is  very  wide  —  the  types  of
objects  protected  include those in the fields  of:

•  archaeology, generally  objects  which  have  been  for  at  least

fifty years  in the place from  which they are recovered;

•  ethnography,  to  the  extent  that  they  are  of  non-Australian
origin, have been in Australia  for at least fifty years and are
not adequately represented  in Australian  institutions;

•  natural  science,  including  minerals  above  specified  values
industrial  use,  fossils  and

that  are  not  intended  for 
meteorites;

•  applied science and technology, if the objects are  sufficiently
important and if they were built in Australia before  a certain
date;

•  military  and heraldry;
•  decorative  arts, including  objects  created  overseas that have
been  in  Australia  for  at  least  35 years  and  which  have  cul-
tural  significance  for  Australia. There are 26 sub-categories,
and  each  provides  a  monetary  limit  which  determines
whether a permit is needed;

•  fine  arts, including objects  created  overseas but  which have
been in Australia for  at least 35 years. This group  is divided
into  13  sub-categories,  with  monetary  limits  as  above.  For
example, any painting  that has been  in Australia  for  at least
35 years will require  an export  permit  if it is valued at over
$500,000. If the painting is related to Australia (for  example
by an Australian  artist) then the monetary  limit  is $150,000;
•  social  history, if  the  object  is  "of  significance"  and at  least

75 years old;

•  philately,  if  such  objects  are  sufficiently  rare,  culturally  or
historically  important,  or if they belong to a particularly  im-
portant  collection;

•  numismatology, if the objects are sufficiently  valuable or his-

torically  important; and

•  "documents",  which includes books, records, journals, pam-
phlets  etc. This includes  documents  more  than  75 years old
that were made in Australia, relate to Australia or have been
in Australia for at least 35 years.

In  relation  to  objects of  fine  and  decorative  art,  a permit  is not re-
quired  if the  artist  is still  alive or if the object  is  less than  30 years
old.17

6  The Bath of Diana

The first item to be refused  an export permit was John Glover's  oil
painting  The Bath of Diana,  Van Diemen's Land, 1837. Other  items

220

Australia's  Movable  Cultural  Heritage

for  which  a  permit  was  not  granted  will  be  discussed  later.  There
has yet to be a refusal  to issue a  certificate.

The Bath of Diana is classified  under the Control  List as a Class
B  Object,  Category  IX  -  Objects  of  Fine  Art  -  Division  A  -
Aboriginal  and  other  Australian  or  Australia-related  objects;  Item
No.2

The painting is based on the classical myth of Diana and Actaeon
and shows the Tasmanian Aborigines living in an idyllic state on the
eve  of  the  destruction  of  their  society  following  the  arrival  of  the
Europeans.

The painting  had been  offered  for  sale by a mortgagee  company,
after  it  had  been  purchased  in  Australia  four  years  earlier  by  the
owner, Mr David  Waterhouse,  for  $580,000. The painting  was  sold
by  Sotheby's  at  a  public  auction  in  April  1989  for  a  record  $1.76
million,  the  highest  price  ever paid  for  an  Australian  painting. The
purchaser was a citizen of the USA.

The  purchaser  lodged  an  application  for  a  permit  to  export  the
painting  under  the  Act, the  permit  being  required  for  an  Australian
painting,  proposed  to  be  exported,  that  has  not  been  painted  by  a
living  artist,  was  more  than  30  years  old  and  valued  at  more  than
$150,000.  The  application  was  forwarded  to  the  National  Cultural
Heritage  Committee  and  subsequently  to  four  expert  examiners  to
advise  the  Committee  on  whether  the  removal  of  the  painting
"would  significantly  diminish the cultural  heritage of Australia".

The four  expert examiners consulted were:

The National  Gallery  of Australia
The National  Library  of Australia
Professor  Bernard  Smith
The Tasmanian  Museum  and Art Gallery

Three  of the examiners expressed  the view that the painting was of
such  importance  to  Australia  that  its  export  would  represent  a sig-
nificant  loss to Australia's cultural heritage and that an export permit
should  therefore  be  refused.  The  fourth  examiner  agreed  that  the
work was of the highest quality but that, for that reason, it would be
an excellent  example  of Australian  art for  an overseas art museum.
After further  discussion with the applicant for the permit and  after
considering  his  representations,  the  Committee  decided  that  the
painting  was "a  unique painting  of the  greatest  importance  to Aus-
tralia's  cultural  heritage  from  an  ethno-historical  and  artistic  view-
point  ...  its  loss  to  Australia  would  significantly  diminish  the  cul-
tural  heritage  of  Australia".  The  Committee  recommended  to  the
Minister that a permit not be granted to allow the permanent  export
of the painting.

On  26  September  1989  the  Minister  refused  the  permit  and  in-
formed  the applicant  of his decision. The applicant  did  not exercise
his right to appeal the decision under Section 48 of the Administrat-
ive  Appeals  Tribunal  Act  1975.  Later  on  Mr Waterhouse  himself

221

Hugh  H. Jamieson

made an  application, which  was again refused.  He lodged an appli-
cation  for  review  by the  Tribunal,  but,  after  the  Federal  Court  of
Australia  determined  a point  of  law  against  him,  the  review  appli-
cation  did not proceed.

It was reported recently in the press that Waterhouse had sold "The
Bath  of  Diana"  to the National  Gallery  of  Australia  for  $780,000,
a  markdown  of  almost  $1  million  on  the  1989  auction  price.18

7  Other Items  Refused  a Permit

A  list  of  applications  for  permits  and  certificates  under  the  PMCH
Act, compiled from the Department's19 Annual Reports, is in Appen-
dix 2 to this paper.

In  the  1993—94 financial  year,  there  were  three  further  objects

whose  export  was prohibited.  These were:

1.  A  Decauville  small  gauge  steam  locomotive.  It  was  very
important  in the  early  development  of Australia's  sugar  in-
dustry, and is one of only two nineteenth century Decauville
engines  in  Australia.  An  appeal  against  this  decision  was
made  to  the  Administrative  Appeals  Tribunal  (AAT).  This
appeal  has not yet been  decided.

2.  A World War II Japanese fighter  aeroplane. It is one of very
few  undisturbed  physical  remnants  of  the  air  war  fought
over northern Australia.

3.  Two  pairs  of wings  from  United  States  aircraft.  These  are
rare  physical  remnants  of  the  role  played  by  American  air-
craft  in  Australia  during  World  War  II. The  items  are  also
important  to the  local  aboriginal  community,  and  serve  as
physical  reminders  of  the  role  played  by  aboriginal  com-
munities  in assisting allied pilots in World War II.

Since  June  1994,  there  have  been  four  further  occasions  where  a
permit was refused.  These were  for:

1.  An  oil  painting  of  Sydney  from  about  1800, that  has  been
loosely  attributed  to  a  convict  artist.  An  appeal  has  been
made to the AAT.

2.  A steam  hoisting engine used  in Melbourne  in the  1850s.
3.  A  Victoria  Cross  awarded  in  World  War  I to E. T. Towner.
This  was  sold privately,  and  the  new  owner  apparently  in-
tends to donate it to the War Memorial.

4.  An Avro Anson aircraft,  used in World War II and the early
civil aviation industry. There has been an appeal against this
decision  to the AAT.

In the six years that the Act has been fully  operational, permits have
been  refused  for  only eight items. This  figure  is, to an extent, mis-

222

Australia's  Movable  Cultural  Heritage

leading, as the Minister responsible for the Act will sometimes indi-
cate in advance that the export of an object will not be allowed. For
example,  when  the  ferry  South Steyne  (which  operated  on  Sydney
Harbour  for  many  years)  was  advertised  for  sale,  the  regulations
were  quickly  amended  to cover the  ferry.  This was a clear  warning
to potential  overseas purchasers that the Government  was most un-
likely  to  allow  its  export.  Similarly,  the  legislation  originally  pro-
tected military objects only from  before  1920. A week before  a Vic-
toria Cross awarded in 1962 (to Kevin "Dasher" Wheatley) was to be
auctioned,  this temporal  restriction  was  removed.  In  case  potential
purchasers did not get the hint, the Minister for Arts said that it was
"unlikely" that a permit would  be granted to export  it.

Nevertheless, the operation of the Act has not been in accord with
the  Government's  original  expectations.  The  Minister  introducing
the Act stated in his second reading speech that:

"In drawing up the arrangements  for Australia we have  studied
Canada's  experience  with  similar  legislation.  There,  in  any
given  year,  fewer  than  20  objects  are  prevented  from  export
...  I  would  expect  the  Australian  experience  to  be  somewhat
similar."20

8  Penalties

The PMCH Act prescribes harsh penalties for  illegally  importing or
exporting  cultural  property.  A  person  who  exports,  or  attempts  to
export, a protected  item otherwise than  in accordance with a permit
or  certificate  is  liable  to  be  imprisoned  for  up  to  five  years  and  to
be  fined  up  to  $100,000.  For  a  corporation  the  potential  fine  is
$200,000.  The  same  penalties  apply  to  a  person  who  imports  an
object  that was illegally  exported  from  another country.

9  The National  Cultural  Heritage Fund

Article  14 of the Convention  provided that:

"Each  State Party to the Convention  should, as far as it is able,
provide  the  national  services  responsible  for  the  protection  of
its cultural  heritage  with an adequate budget  and, if  necessary,
should set up a fund  for  this purpose."

Likewise,  in  introducing  the  Bill  into  the  Federal  Parliament  the
Responsible Minister, Mr Cohen  said:

"I made reference  earlier to the national  cultural  heritage  fund.
The decision to establish the fund  addresses two important mat-
ters of principle. The first  is to ensure that important objects of

223

Hugh  H. Jamieson

the  national  heritage  which  are  barred  from  export  should  be
readily  available  to  the  Australian  public.  Where  objects  are
refused  export permits, they will be acquired wherever possible
for  display  in a public  collection.  The fund  will  help  facilitate
these  acquisitions."21

Dr Battersby  in her article also dealt with this.22  She said that there
were two main  reasons behind  the original  intention  of the Act that
items  whose  export  was  prohibited  would  be  purchased  by  public
institutions  with  the  assistance  of  a  Fund  set  up  for  the  purpose.
These were:

"The only reason for having this legislation at all is to preserve
the most important objects of our cultural heritage for the  future
enjoyment  of  the citizens  of  this  country.  The  logical  conse-
quence  of  that  is that  where  possible  we  want  to  see  objects
prohibited from export ultimately finding a home in a collecting
institution  to which the public has access."
"The  legislation  intervenes  in  the  rights  of  individuals  to  dis-
pose of their property as they wish.  ...  Therefore  we have  ...  a
general  obligation  to  compensate  them  for  depriving  them  of
their  rights  in the situation."

Again,  in his  speech in Parliament,  Mr Cohen  said:

"The  second  principle  relates  to the rights  of owners. The Bill
is  designed  to recognise  an  individual's  right  to  enjoyment  of
property  while  establishing  the  nation's  right  to  restrict  the
movement  of that property where it represents  an  irreplaceable
part of the cultural heritage. We realise that, by imposing export
controls,  we  are in a sense  intervening  in the  right  of  individ-
uals to dispose of property as they see fit.  We therefore  believe
that  a  means  should  exist  of helping  an  owner  to  reach  a  fair
price  on  the  local  market  for  an  object  which  he  may  have
wished  to  sell  internationally."23

Despite  all  this,  funds  have not  been  provided  by  the  Government.
In  1988 an in-principle agreement was reached by the Cultural Min-
isters'  Council  to  contribute  monies  to  the  Fund.  It  was  envisaged
by the  Council  that $0.5 million  would be contributed  by the Com-
monwealth  and  $0.5 million by the States and Territories, each con-
tributing  proportionately  in  accordance  with  its  population  size.
However,  to  date  no Government  has  contributed  to  the  proposed
initial  $1 million  Government  seeding grant to establish  the Fund.

There has been only one request  for assistance from  the Fund and
that  was  in  respect  of  "The  Bath  of  Diana".  The  request  was  not
made  by  the  purchaser,  but  by  the  owner  —  Mr Waterhouse.  The
request was refused.  As mentioned  earlier, Waterhouse recently sold
the painting to the National Gallery  of Australia.

224

Australia's  Movable  Cultural  Heritage

Many  interested  parties have expressed  concern  that the Govern-
ment's  original  intention  to  benefit  the  public  and  assist  owners  to
realise a fair price  for  objects  for  which an export permit  is  refused
is not  being  met  by the  present  PMCH  Scheme. They  say  that  this
undermines the credibility  of the scheme, as the present  situation  is
seen as being unfair to the individual owner who is refused  an export
licence  for  an object  he or  she owns, and  there  is  little  inducement
to comply  with  the  Act. This  is  said  to constitute  a serious  flaw  in
the scheme.

It  is  widely  believed  that  after  the  spectacular  failure  of  certain
entrepreneurs  in  Western  Australia  substantial  collections  of  paint-
ings, other works of art and  silver collectibles  were  sent to London
for  sale, without the  export permits which would  undoubtedly  have
been required under the Act.

10  The British  Position

A  fairer  approach  is  adopted  by  the  regulations  in  Britain,  which
merely  suspend  export  of  an  object  pending  an  offer  by  a  public
institution  for  the  recommended  fair  market  price.  If  such  an  offer
cannot  be made, then  an export  licence will  normally  be  granted.24
This represents  what  seems a fair  compromise between  the compet-
ing interests of the property owner and the public interest. The Aus-
tralian Government  did not see fit  to adopt this compromise.

11  The Canadian  Legislation

A comparison of the Australian Legislation with the equivalent Can-
adian legislation is instructive.25 This legislation followed  the "Wav-
erley  Rules",  formulated  by  Waverley  V-C  in  a  British  report  in
1952. In particular:

1.  A country has a right, in special circumstances, to delay the
export of objects  by preventing export  for  a "delay  period";
2.  if  the  export  of  an  object  is  prevented,  the  owner  must  be

assured  of a fair price for  it;

3.  the  fair  price  must  relate  to  the  market  price,  unless  there

are conditions which make the market price  unreasonable.

By  adopting  these  rules,  the  Canadian  Government  has  provided
substantial26 financial  backing of its commitment  to preserve  Cana-
da's cultural heritage. A second, and related,  important difference  is
the  use  of  a  "delay  period".  Under  the  Canadian  legislation  this
period  may  not  exceed  six  months,  and  if  no  reasonable  offer  has
been made in that time, an export permit must be issued.

The  Canadian  legislation  does  not,  however,  provide  complete
protection  against  loss to the owners  of property  which  may not be

225

Hugh  H. Jamieson

exported.  For  example,  the  determination  of  a  "reasonable  price"
may  be  considerably  less than  that  originally  offered  to the  owner.
Nevertheless,  it  evidences  a  concern  for  private  proprietary  rights
which,  presumably,  was  shared  by  the  framers  of  the  Australian
legislation,  but  which  is  not  being  given  effect  to  in  the  current
administration  of the Act.

12  Operation  of the PMCH  Scheme

Sufficient  time  has now elapsed  to justify  examination  of  how  the
Scheme has operated  in practice. In  1991 Mr John F Ley was com-
missioned  to  conduct  an  independent  review  of  the  efficiency  and
effectiveness  of the Act and regulations "having regard to the Com-
monwealth's  role  in protecting  movable  cultural  heritage  from  un-
lawful  export or import". Mr Ley's report, from which I have already
quoted,  reached  the overall conclusion  that:

"Although  the goal and objectives  of the scheme are well sup-
ported by the heritage community and no evidence has emerged
suggesting  that  the Act  is being  deliberately  flouted  on  a sub-
stantial  scale, the Act does not appear to be providing adequate
protection  of Australia's cultural treasures."27

Before  dealing with the reasons for this conclusion, I should say that
anyone  who  is  interested  in  this  topic  would  be  well  advised  to
obtain a copy of the Ley Report. I have myself found  it of immense
assistance  in preparing this paper and wish to acknowledge my con-
siderable  indebtedness to it.

The  principal  factors  that  the  Report  considered  had  contributed
to  making  the  PMCH  Scheme  less effective  than  it should  be were
dealt  with  under  several headings, including:

Awareness  of the Scheme
Administration
Role  and  Composition  of  the  National  Cultural  Heritage
Committee
The  Control List
Role of the Australian  Customs  Service
The  PMCH Fund

13  Awareness  of the Scheme

A major  obstacle to enforcing  the legislation  has been public  ignor-
ance  of  its  provisions. There  has  been  only  modest  expenditure  by
the Cultural Heritage Section of the Department. The Director of the
Section  pointed  out not long ago that currently the priorities for  the

226

Australia's Movable Cultural Heritage

Section  lie  in  getting  the  Act  working  efficiently  and  dealing  with
enquiries though  the Customs and dealer networks.28

Even  some  of  those  who  are  involved  with  the  operation  of  the
Act  sometimes  seem  confused  about  it.  Annette  Wiltshire  relates
how two people she spoke to claimed to be members of the PMCH
Committee  —  and  on  that  basis  discussed  its  efficacy  -  when  in
fact  they  had  never  been  members  of  the  Committee:  they  were
expert  examiners.29

Customs officials  are not well informed about the Act. The Annual
Reports  on  the  working  of  the  Act  refer  to  items  that  have  been
illegally  exported  during  the  year.  Some  of  these,  like  the  fossils
mentioned earlier, were probably removed secretly. Others, however,
are not so easy to disguise  —  for  example, during the  1991 -2  year
some trams may have been illegally  exported!

14  Administration

It seems quite clear that the centralised  and somewhat complex  nat-
ure  of the  system  of  administration  of  the  Scheme  means  that  it  is
too  remote  from  interested  collectors,  dealers  and  institutions  and
not  as  efficient  in  its  operation  as  it  should  be.  The  Ley  Report
recommended  that the Heads of  State and Territory collecting  insti-
tutions  be  given  delegated  ministerial  authority  to  grant  (but  not
refuse)  permits  in  specified  circumstances, subject  to PMCH  Com-
mittee  supervision.

15  Role and Composition  of the National  Cultural

Heritage  Committee

The ten member committee is drawn from four categories of persons:

•  representatives  of four  different  collecting  institutions
•  a member of the Australian  Vice-Chancellors'  Committee
•  a nominee  of the Minister  for  Aboriginal  Affairs,  who  is  an
Aboriginal or a descendant of an indigenous inhabitant  of the
Torres Strait  Islands

•  four  persons having experience  relevant  to the cultural  heri-

tage of Australia.

Some of  the  members  from  time  to  time  have  been  involved,  on  a
day to day basis, in commercial  activity  in relation  to cultural  heri-
tage  material;  for  instance  there  have  been  representatives  of  the
major  auction  houses  in  Australia,  Sotheby's  and  Christie's,  on  it.
The directors of the collecting institutions are also involved ifi  com-
mercial  activity,  although  this  does not  form  the  main  part of  their
work.30

227

Hugh  H. Jamieson

Some  commentators  have  contended  that  it  is  inappropriate  for
persons  who  work  in  the  commercial  sector  to  be  members  of the
Committee, regarding  this  as  placing  them  in a position  of  conflict
of  interest.  The  Act  requires  that  members  who  have  a  direct  or
indirect  interest  in a matter being considered by the Committee dis-
close the nature of the interest to the Committee at the earliest poss-
ible opportunity.  The disclosure  must  be recorded  in the minutes of
the  meeting  and,  unless  the  Minister  or  the  Committee  otherwise
determines, the member must not be present  during any deliberations
of the Committee  in respect  of that  particular  matter  or take part in
any  Committee  decision  on  it.  It  has  not  been  seriously  suggested
that the current procedure  has been  ineffective  or abused or that the
members  of the Committee  from  time  to time  have been other than
conscientious  about conflicts,  but the Ley Report made a number of
suggestions for  improvement:

•  in  a  case  in  which  the  Committee  is  considering  an  appli-
cation  for an export permit, a member who is a director of a
public  institution  which  collects  objects  of  the  kind  under
consideration  must not participate  in  the deliberations  or the
decision  of  the  Committee  concerning  the  provision  of  ad-
vice to the  Minister;

•  Committee  members  who  are  actively  involved  in  commer-
cial  activities  should  not participate  in the  Committee delib-
erations  and decisions where they, personally  or the organis-
ation by which they  are  employed,  or a major  competitor of
the  member or  of his  or  her  organisation  has  some  involve-
ment with the applicant  or the object  which  is the subject of
the  application.31

The  Ley  Report  also  suggested  that  in  relation  to  the  handling  of
future  applications for export permits, it would  be good  administrat-
ive  practice  and  of  assistance  to  applicants  if  the  procedures  for
considering  and  determining  applications  were  set out by the Com-
mittee in a public document which  is made readily available to inter-
ested  persons.  Information  concerning  the  vast  majority  of  appli-
cations is not as a matter of course made public, except to the extent
that  reference  is  made  to  the  applications  dealt  with  by  the  Com-
mittee  in the Annual Reports  on the working  of the Act.

16  The Control  List

There  has been  some  criticism  of  the  fact  that  monetary  values are
used as a threshold  for  determining  significance  in many  categories
of the Control  List. Annette Wiltshire  points  out that the market  for
heritage objects  is volatile and liable to wild  fluctuations. As a result
of this, and the specific  age threshold  limits placed on some categor-
ies  of  objects  under  the  Control  List,  some  important  objects  are

228

Australia's  Movable  Cultural  Heritage

excluded from its scope. Annette Wiltshire suggests that the problem
can  be minimised  by  ensuring  that  annual  reviews,  in particular  of
monetary thresholds, are carried  out.32

Another  difficulty  with  restricting  export  only  on  the  basis  of
classification  is  that  there  will  also  be  parts  of  a  nation's  cultural
heritage  that  are not  included.  There  is no restriction,  for  example,
on the export of Don Bradman  (our famous  cricketer)  memorabilia.
A  sensible resolution  of this problem  would  be  to have  a  list  (lim-
ited, one hopes) of specific  items to supplement  the broad  scope of
categories.

17  Role of the Australian Customs  Service

Under  the  scheme  officers  of  the  Australian  Customs  Services
("ACS")  do not  play  any part  in enforcing  the  Act at  the  Customs
barrier, whereas the Australian Federal Police and State and Territory
Police  are  inspectors  under  the  Act  with  investigative  and  enforce-
ment  functions  to  perform.  Customs  officers  do  not  take  action  to
seize or forfeit  objects unless those objects are the subject of a notice
signed in accordance with  s 203A of the Customs Act.

Under  the  Canadian  scheme,  in  operation  since  1977,  Customs
officers  have  the  primary  role  of  enforcing  the  legislation  at  the
Customs barrier. They also have the responsibility  and resources for
making  decisions  as to the issuing of export  permits. The Canadian
Review Board has the responsibilities of an appeal body. It is gener-
ally accepted that the Canadian  scheme has been  successful.

The  National  Cultural  Heritage  Committee,  the  Department,  ob-
servers  and  interested  parties  generally  consider  that  Customs  offi-
cers  should  have an  active  role  at the Customs  barrier  in  enforcing
compliance  with  the Act.  It has been  suggested  that  this  would  not
impose too heavy a cost burden on the ACS if the Department were
able to provide  detailed  information  to the ACS  regarding  the Aus-
tralian Bureau of Statistics classifications  of goods exported and im-
ported  which  may  require  an  export  permit  under  the  Act.  This
would  involve  the  Department  becoming  a  "permit  issuing  auth-
ority"  and  "user" under  the  ACS  electronic  export  control  network
known  as the "Exit" system.

As to imported objects, there are no satisfactory  arrangements be-
tween  the  Department  and  the  ACS  for  identifying  imports  of cul-
tural  heritage  material  which  require  an  export  permit  from  the
country of origin.33 There has not yet been a foreign  object  forfeited
under the provisions of  Section  14 of the Act!

18  The Test of  Significance

The Act provides  that,  in considering  an application  for  export, the
expert examiners, the Committee  and the  Minister:

229

Hugh  H. Jamieson

"...if satisfied that the object is of such importance to Australia,
or a part of Australia  ...  that its loss to Australia would  signifi-
cantly  diminish  the  cultural  heritage  of  Australia  ...  shall  not
recommend  the grant of a permit, or grant a permit, as the case
may be, to export the object  permanently."34

The  use  of  the  word  "significantly"  here  and  elsewhere  does  not
help  much.  Some  commentators  argue,  I  would  have  thought  cor-
rectly, that what the Act seeks to protect from export are objects the
export of which would constitute an irreparable loss to the Australian
cultural  heritage.  Indeed,  this  is  what  the  Minister  himself  said  in
his speech  in Parliament  in 1985:

"I  should  say at the  outset  that the  Government  is not  seeking
to  stop  movement  of  all  cultural  material  or  even  most  of  it.
We are  concerned  only  to  see that  those  objects  the  export  of
which  would  constitute  an irreparable  loss to our cultural heri-
tage remain  in Australia."35

The commentators urge that the operation of the Act should be con-
fined to  such  objects,  and  not extend  to what  might  be regarded  as
a  desirable  harvest  of  cultural  objects  for  housing  in  public  insti-
tutions. These fears may be overstated  in that since the inception of
the Act only a relatively  modest  number of export permits has been
refused:  there has hardly been a harvest.

19  PMCH  Fund

In the end it is all a matter  of money being  available to address and
remedy  the deficiencies  that  have been  exposed  in the  operation of
the Act. It is easy to say that there is no money in times of economic
constraint.  Yet  a  large  sum  of  money  is  appropriated  annually  for
the  arts,  both  by  the  Commonwealth  and  the  State  Governments,
and one  is forced  to wonder  whether sufficiently  determined  efforts
have been made to ensure that there is proper funding  for the PMCH
scheme.

The  Ley  Report  canvassed  a  number  of  options  for  the  future
funding  of assistance to owners of objects refused  export permits in
obtaining a fair  market price  for them. I will not go into the options
here,  but  merely  note  the  Report's  recommendation  that  the  Com-
monwealth  Government:

"...either  adopt  and  announce  an  appropriate  mechanism,  or
seek early agreement from State and Territory Governments to
contribute financially to  one of those mechanisms  for  assisting
the acquisition of those objects by public collecting  institutions
for  public display  in  Australia."36

230

Australia's  Movable Cultural  Heritage

The  enactment  of  the  legislation  and  the  subsequent  establishment
of  the  administration  needed  to  implement  it  required  a great  deal
of  strenuous  effort  on  the  part  of  many  people.  One  has  the  im-
pression  that  that  degree  of  effort  has  not  subsequently  been  sus-
tained and that the PMCH scheme is not regarded as of high priority
in  Canberra.  The  recommendations  of  the  Ley  Report  have  been
under consideration by the National Cultural Heritage Section of the
Department  and by the  Committee  since  1991, but  very  few  of the
suggested  changes have been made. I understand  that  consideration
is presently being given to appointing  a consultant or consultants to
advise the Section on desirable changes to the content of the control
list. This will doubtless take some time.

20  Conclusion

Australia's  action in introducing the PMCH scheme and making ar-
rangements  for  its  administration  can  be  regarded  as  praiseworthy.
Indeed,  its  performance  is  superior  to  that  of  many  other  nations.
However,  it is clear that there are deficiencies  in the scheme and in
its performance  and these have been recognised  by many  interested
observers for a considerable time. The Ley Report identified  a num-
ber of areas where  changes were required  if the  scheme's  perform-
ance  was  to  be  improved,  and  presented  the  Government  with  a
number of detailed recommendations  as to those changes. The time
has come for the Government to make decisions on the subject  mat-
ter  of  those  recommendations  and  then  to  implement  its  decisions
without  further  delay.

Appendix 1

Updated  31 December  1993
U17

Convention  on the Means of Prohibiting  and
Preventing the Illicit  Import, Export and Transfer  of
Ownership  of Cultural  Property

(Paris,  17 November  1970)

Entry  into force  generally: 24 April  1972.
Entry into force  for  Australia:  30 January  1990.
Text: ATS  1990 No. 2; UNTS 823 p. 231; ILM  10 p. 289; TC 38/8,
64E/22.
92/14838

231

Hugh H. Jamieson

Participant

Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belize
Bolivia
Bosnia  and  Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina  Faso
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Centra  African  Republic
China
Colombia
Cote  d'lvoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech  Republic*
Dominican  Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El  Salvador
Georgia
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Honduras
Hungary
India
Iran
Iraq
Italy

Ratification/Acceptance/
Accession  Succession(s)

24 Jun  1974
7 Nov  1991
11 Jan 1973
5 Sep 1993(s)
30 Oct 1989
9 Dec 1987
28 Apr 1988
26 Jan 1990
4 Oct 1976
12 Jul 1993(s)
16 Feb 1973
15 Sep 1971
7 Apr 1987
26 Sep 1972
24 May 1972
28 Mar 1978
1 Feb 1972
28 Nov 1989
24 May 1988
30 Oct 1990
6 Jul 1992(s)
30 Jan 1980
19 Oct 1979
26 Mar 1993(s)
7 Mar 1973
24 Mar 1971
5 Apr 1973
20 Feb 1978
4 Nov 1992(s)
5 Jun 1981
10 Sep 1992
14 Jan 1985
18 Mar 1979
19 Mar 1979
23 Oct 1978
24 Jan 1977
27 Jan 1975
12 Feb 1973
2 Oct 1978

*  Instrument  of  accession  was  deposited  for  Czechoslovakia  on  14  February
1977.  Note:  Instrument  of  accession  was  deposited  for  German  Democratic
Republic  on  16 January  1974  but  no  longer  applies.

232

Jordan
Korea, Dem. People's Rep. of
Korea, Republic of
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Madagascar
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Peru
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Slovakia*
Slovenia
Spain
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United  States of America
Uruguay
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia

rtusirana  s  lviovauie  i^un

15 Mar  1974
13 May  1983
14 Feb  1983
22 Jun  1972
25 Aug  1992
9 Jan  1973
21 Jun  1989
6 Apr  1987
27 Apr  1977
27 Feb  1978
4 Oct  1972
23 May  1991
23 Jun  1976
19 Apr  1977
16 Oct  1972
24 Jan  1972
2 Jun  1978
30 Apr  1981
13 Aug  1973
24 Oct  1989
31 Jan  1974
9 Dec  1985
20 Apr  1977
6 Dec  1993
28 Apr  1988
8  Sep  1976
9 Dec  1984
31 Mar  1993(s)
5 Nov  1992(s)
10 Jan  1986
7 Apr  1981
21 Feb  1975
28 Aug  1992(s)
2 Aug  1977
10 Mar  1975
21 Apr  1981
28 Apr  1988
2 Sep  1983
9 Aug  1977
3 Oct  1972
23 Sep  1974
21 Jun  1985

*  Instrument  of  accession  was  deposited  for  Czechoslovakia  on  14  February
1977.  Note:  Instrument  of  accession  was  deposited  for  German  Democratic
Republic  on  16 January  1974 but  no  longer  applies.

233

Hugh  H. Jamieson

Appendix  2

Applications  for  permits  and  certificates  under  the  Protection  of
Movable  Cultural  Heritage Act  1986 (Cth)  that  were  dealt  with  by
30 June  1993.

There  are  three  types  of  application  that  can  be  made  under  the

Act. They are:

1.  An application  for  a permit  for  permanent  export;
2.  an application  for  a permit  for  temporary  export; and
3.  an application for a certificate to export an object before that

object  is imported.

The  following  lists  do  not  include  applications  which  were  later
withdrawn or which were in respect of objects that did not fall within
the  scope  of  the  Act. The  list  has  been  compiled  from  the  Annual
Reports on the Workings of the Act.

Applications  for Permanent  Export

Paintings and Other Exhibitions
Paintings came within the scope of the Act towards the end of Aus-
tralia's bicentenary celebrations in  1988. Therefore  some of the first
applications under the Act were for the export of items that came to
Australia  as  part  of  exhibitions.  These  were  from  the  Netherlands
("Shipwreck"),  Britain  ("The  Great  Australian  Art  Exhibition",
"Captain James Cook —  Navigator" and "The First Impressions: The
British Discovery of Australia") and Ireland ("The Irish Gold, Silver
and Bronze Exhibition").

The only  other  application  for  permanent  export  in  1988-9  was

by C. Condon  for  "The Bath of Diana". This was  refused.
1990-91:  "Little  Red  House"  (M. Chagall),  "Au  Docteur  Forest-
Dep Paye &  Soit  Reconnaisant".
1992-3:  "Cruach  en  Mahr,  Matin"  by  Russell,  J. P.;  17th  century
Dutch  landscape  by  van  de  Velde;  "Garden  in  Granada"  by  Lord
Leighton.
1993-4:  "St  Paul's Cathedral  and  London  Bridge", an  oil  painting
by Joli  from  about  1750.

Aboriginal  and  Indigenous  Artefacts
One application  in  1988-9  (no detail  given).
1989—90: A collection of Papua New Guinea artefacts;  A Kwakiutl
Indian ceremonial  mask (from  British Columbia).
1990—1: African  Congo fetish  objects.

234

Australia's  Movable  Cultural  Heritage

1991—2: Pair  of  18th century  ivory  pectoral  pendants;  repatriation
of  Macgregor  collection  of  Ethnographic  material  to  PNG  national
museum.
1992—3: Two native human  crania repatriated  to Hawaii.
1993—4: Repatriation of artefacts  from  Macgregor collection  to Pa-
pua New Guinea; repatriation of a maori patu by the Australian mu-
seum; a collection  of aboriginal  artefacts. 

*

Transport and Military  Aircraft
1989-90:  John  Fowler  Steam  Tractor  (c.1909);  Belgian  metallur-
gique  motor  vehicle  (c.1910);  12/16hp  Sunbeam  motor  vehicle
(c.1913) and a  12hp Talbot motor vehicle (c.1916).
1990-1:  2  coal  fired  bulk  carriers;  Rover  12 hp  motor  car  1912;
Vinot & Deguingand  12 hp Special Torpedo motor car.
1991-2:  Mark  20  Canberra  Jet  Bomber;  1912  Renault  car  rolling
chassis  and  parts;  1907  Brush  Runabout  single  cylinder  car;  1916
Buick Roadster (6 cylinder); Rolls Royce Kestrel Aero-engine Mark
V; 2-wheeled  hand drawn fire cart  1920.
1992—3: many  more  motor  vehicles;  six  W-class  trams; WWII Ja-
panese  Nakajima  K143  fighter  aircraft;  WWII  Mustang  aircraft
wings; remains of WWII Mk IV Mosquito aircraft;  dismantled Can-
berra bomber.
1993—4: Parts  from  aircraft;  a few  complete  aircraft;  two  Darracq
motor cars (from  1904 and  1907).

Military  Objects
1989-90:  A collection  of over 2,500  items (no more detail).
1990—1: some more (no detail).
1991-2:  Australian  army  Union  Jack  and  Battalion  flags  1914—8;
Army uniform  accessories.
1993—4: A collection  of ANZAC  memorabilia.

Fossils and Geological  Specimens
1992—3:  geological  specimens  (no  further  detail);  two  sandstone
slabs with fossil  crinoid Jimbacrinus Bostocki; tektites.
1993-4: The monetary restrictions on palaeontological  items which
required  permits  were  lifted  in  August  1993.  This  resulted  in  an
explosion  of  applications  in  respect  of  palaeontological  items.  In-
cluded  in  the  permits  granted  were  over  four  tonnes  of  petrified
wood  from  Chinchilla  in  Queensland,  over  six  tonnes  of  fossilized
Glossopteris leaves in matrix, over 20 kilograms of Henbury meteor-
ite,  100 kilograms  of Miles meteorite  and numerous other  fossils.

Miscellaneous  Items
The Catalpa Flag was returned to Ireland  in 1988—9.
1991—2:  The  Longueville  collection;  The  "Galaxy"  boulder  opal;
Books by John  Gould.

235

Hugh  H. Jamieson

1992—3: 16th century Ming blue and white dragon saucer dish; three
19th  century  gold  trophies  (two  by  Fischer,  one  by  Steiner);
"Wentworth  Indenture"  (document  drawn  up  in  1840  for  purchase
of part  of  South  Island  of NZ).
1993—4: five works of fine  art from  the Christensen collection;  four
examples  of ecclesiastic plate; a number  of William Morris textiles;
a  Ming  cup;  films  from  Britain,  France,  Canada  and  the  United
States repatriated  by the National  Film and  Sound Archive.

Applications  for  Temporary  Export

General  Exhibitions
1988-9:  "Mutiny  on the  Bounty  Exhibition"  (including  art,  manu-
scripts and archaeological  artefacts)  in the United Kingdom; "Sister
Cities"  "Queensland  Cultural"  and  "The  Arrival  of  the  Europeans"
exhibitions  in Japan.

Repairs  and  Refurbishments
1988-9: CAC-19-1945  Boomerang  Fighter Aircraft  frame to USA.

Aboriginal  and  Indigenous  Artefacts
1989-90:  Aboriginal  artefacts  for  display  in Japan.
1990—1: 37 artefacts  from  Oceania; plaited  leaf and human hair fan
from  New Zealand; Bustard-wing  fan  from  Alligator River region.
1992—3: Collection  of  aboriginal  artefacts  from  Shark Bay (WA).

Paintings
1988—9: "Victorian Dreamers" exhibition in Japan; "Dreamings: the
Art of Aboriginal  Australia" to USA.
1989-90: nineteen paintings for display in USSR; collection of Aus-
tralian artworks  in France.
1990-1:  eight William  Blake Watercolours  for exhibition  in Tokyo;
"Pegasus" by  Redon,  "Melancolia  I"  by  Durer;  25 Watercolours by
Horace Moore-Jones  (official  Australian  war artist).
1991—2: eleven  paintings  for  exhibition  in Japan; painting by Fred-
erick  McCubbin.
1992-3:  "Meningoort  Homestead" by  Eugene Von Guerard.

Transport
1988-9:  1899  Shearer  Steam  Carriage to United  Kingdom.
1989-90:  Beech  C17 B aircraft  (c.1936).
1992-3:  1914 Rolls Royce  tourer.
1993-4:  "W" class tram  body.

236

Australia's  Movable  Cultural  Heritage

Stamps
1989-90:  two stamp exhibitions  in the United  Kingdom;
1990-1: selection from  Chapman collection; Queensland postal his-
tory; pre-1870  stamps from NSW; Victorian  stamps  from  1850-5;
26  collections  to  New  Zealand;  Queensland  Railway  parcel  and
Tramway  stamps (1894-1965);  "owl" stamps to New Zealand.
1991-2:  stamps for exhibition at "Grenada 92" exhibition in Spain;
Collections of postal histories of NSW, SA and WA and the collection
"The Kangaroo and King George" for "Phila Nippon  '91" in Japan.
1992-3:  postal  history  of NSW  since  1813; various collections  for
exhibition  in Kuala Lumpur and US.
1993-4:  collection  of  airmail  covers  and  four  other  collections  to
Bangkok;  collection  of  stamps  from  New  Guinea  and  Papua  for
exhibition  in New Zealand

Fossils
1988—9: Holotype specimens from the Tasmanian Herbarium to the
USA.
1989—90: Numerous holotype  specimens  and microscope  slides.
1990—1: Numerous holotypes; partially opalised Plesiosaur skeleton
1993—4: A collection  of rare  fossil  bryozoans  for  research  in New
Zealand

Miscellaneous  Items
1989—90: piece of timber from shipwreck  "Batavia".
1990—1: two silver medals won at  1896 Olympics by Ewin  Flack.
1991-2:  Grandfather  Fincham  Organ  from  the  Uniting  Church,
Carlton, George  Fincham  pipe  organ  from  St Mary's  Church, West
Melbourne.
1992—3: Titan  —  a heavy  lift  floating  crane.

Applications  for  Certificates  of Exemption

1988—9: two paintings  and two holotypes.
1993—4:  A  Canberra  jet  bomber,  for  appearances  at  air  shows;  a
Robert  Prenzel  wood  carving  and  36  carved  panels  by  Prenzel  for
exhibition  by the National  Gallery of Victoria.

Notes

1  But reference  should be made to the obligations of some States arising under
"The  Protocol  to  the  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Cultural  Property  in
the  Event  of  Armed  Conflict  (The  Hague  Convention)  1954", described  by
Lyndel  V  Prott  as "an  underused  and  revolutionary  legal  agreement"  which
deals "with the return to the authorities of the occupied or formerly  occupied

237

Hugh  H. Jamieson

territory  of  cultural  objects  illicitly  exported  from  that  territory".  Lyndel  V
Prott,  Paper  presented  to  the  Committee  on  Cultural  Property  Law  of  the
International  Bar  Association,  Melbourne,  October  1994, Summary  page.

2  The  problems  created  by  the  war  in  Lebanon  were  discussed  by  Fisk,  R.
"Lebanon  war  covers  pillage  of  ancient  treasury"  The Age,  31  July  1991  at
p 8.  This was  in  turn  taken  from  The  Independent.

3  Southward,  J. "Stolen  fossils  lost to  black  market" Sun  Herald, 8  December

1991, at pp  12-13.

4  All  monetary  amounts  in  this  paper  are given  in Australian  Dollars.
5  Sydney  Morning  Herald, 6 October  1994, p 8.
6  Walker,  F. "US  Crime  Lords  target  fossils",  Sun  Herald,  8 December  1991

at p 12.

7  Jean  Battersby, "Legislative  developments  in Australia", Protection or  plun-
der?  Safeguarding  the future  of  our  cultural  heritage:  papers  of  the  UN-
ESCO  Regional  Seminar  on  the  Movable  Cultural  Property  Convention,
Brisbane  1986,  (eds)  Lyndel  V  Prott  and  James  Specht  (Canberra:  AGPS,
1989), p 86.

8  For  example,  the  Native  and  Historical  Objects and  Areas  Ordinance  1962
(NT)  and  the  Archaeological  and  Aboriginal  Relics  Preservation  Act  1972
(Vic).  When  the  Protection  of  Movable  Cultural  Heritage  Act  1986  (Cth)
was  passed  it  initially  only  protected  items  of  Aboriginal  culture,  and  fol-
lowed  the  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  Heritage  Protection  Act
1984 (Cth).

9  Customs  (Prohibited  Exports)  Regulations  1958 No.5, made  under  s.112  of

the  Customs  Act  1901  (Cth).

10  J. F  Ley,  "Australia's  Protection  of  Movable  Heritage",  Australian  Govern-

ment  Publishing  Service,  Canberra,  July  1991, at p 21.

11  Jean  Battersby,  op. cit.,  at  pp  8 9 - 9 0.
12  PMCH  Act  (1986) (Cth)  s.8.
13  PMCH  Regulations  (Amendment)  1993  (No.215).
14  Attorney-General  (NZ)  v  Ortiz  [1983]  2  All  ER  93, 2  WLR  809, 2  Lloyd's

Rep 265.

15  PMCH  Act,  s 9.
16  Jean  Battersby,  op, cit.,  at  p 88.
17  Schedule  to  PMCH  Regulations,  Parts  VIII  and  IX.
18  Sydney  Morning  Herald,  7 June  1994.
19  The Commonwealth  Department  of  Communications  and the Arts is respon-
sible  for  the  administration  of  the  PMCH  Act.  The  Department's  name  has
changed  frequently  over  the  years.

20  Hansard,  27 November  1985, p  3740.
21  Hansard,  House  of  Representatives,  27  November  1985,  p3741.
22  Jean  Battersby,  op. cit.,  pp  8 9 - 90
23  Hansard,  27 November  1985  p 3741.
24  See the  discussion  of the  British  experience  by  Senator  Puplick  in  Hansard,

Senate  1 May  1986 at  pp  2228-9.

25  The  following  discussion  of  the  Canadian  legislation  is  mainly  based  on
Clark,  I. C.  "Establishing  Export  Controls:  The  Canadian  Experience"  in
"Protection  or  Plunder:  Safeguarding  the  Future  of  our  Cultural  Heritage"
ed. Prott, L. V. and Specht, J. (1986 Australian Government Printing Service)
at  p 70.

26  In  the article  above  it  was  stated  to  be  currently  more  than  CADS2  million

per  year.

27  J. F. Ley op. cit.,  p xvi

238

Australia's  Movable  Cultural  Heritage

28  Annette Wiltshire, "Movable Cultural Heritage", (1993)  1  Arts and Entertain-
ment  Law  Review  p  1. Also  note  her  article  in  the  same  Review  No.  3 of
December  1992.

29  A. Wiltshire  "Movable  Cultural  Heritage"  [1993]  1 Arts  and  Entertainment

Law  Review  p 1.

30  J. F. Ley, op. cit., pp  72-73.
31  J. F. Ley, op. cit., pp  68-69
32  A. Wiltshire  op. cit.,  February  1993 p 2.
33  J. F. Ley, op. cit., pp  119-122.
34  PMCHAct,  s.lO(6)(b).
35  Hansard,  House  of  Representatives,  27 November  1985, p 3740.
36  J. F. Ley, op. cit., p 113.

239


