IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 52

1 the situation

United States Cultural 
Property Legislation: 

Observations of a Combatant

clemency chase coggins*

A consideration of the U.S. initiatives in response to the loss of cultural property in Latin Amer-
ica and Canada, as seen by a participant in their formulation and implementation from 1969
to 1994; cultural and aesthetic viewpoints are seen to divide the cultural property constituen-
cies, although the former is prevailing. The signiﬁcance of the U.S. UNESCO cultural property
implementing legislation for ﬁve requesting countries and for Mexico is discussed, with a ﬁnal
recommendation for its emendation so as to allow the United States to respond immediately to
the requests of all parties to the convention. 

almost thirty years ago the resounding declaration “[N]ot since
the sixteenth century has Latin America been so ruthlessly plundered” ap-
peared in an article in the Art Journal.1 As an art historian I had written a jere-
miad directed at my own profession, which seemed to me implicated in the
burgeoning trafﬁc in plundered pre-Columbian antiquities. This was news,
and the dramatic assertion and subsequent enumeration of looted monuments
in American museums was picked up by the press, with its appetite for scan-
dalous and illegal enterprises, especially if they involve revered institutions like
museums.

In the sixties, large carved Maya monuments (stelae) were being cut up and
smuggled from Guatemala, Mexico, and Belize (then British Honduras) in
steadily increasing numbers. Not a few of these were well-known, published
stelae with documented provenience,2 and some had appeared in museums in
the United States as had been described in a 1968 resolution passed at the
Thirty-ninth International Congress of Americanists in Munich concerning
museum acquisitions. As a graduate student in Maya art and archaeology, I
became involved when it was clear there would be few Maya sites left intact
to study if the trafﬁc were to continue at the same rate—and because I began
to realize that many large American museums were acquiring these dismem-
bered stone portraits and truncated texts, thinking only to cover their own
tracks by hiding whatever documentation might exist.

Some university and research museums responded, in the next few years,

*Professor of Archaeology and of Art History, Boston University

©  1998 International Cultural Property Society

52

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 53

to this critical problem of the acquisition of plundered antiquities by adopt-
ing acquisition policies that followed the principles of the new UNESCO
Convention on Cultural Property (1970),3 although more museums went un-
derground and stopped publishing, or even exhibiting, their questionable new
acquisitions from the New World and the Old. These acquisitions, it must be
emphasized, were not illegal in the United States, although such objects had,
in most cases, been exported illegally from their countries of origin. The ac-
quisition of plundered, illegally exported antiquities is a time-honored prac-
tice that art museums are exceedingly reluctant to eschew.

1.1 the unesco convention

Starting in 1969, the American Society of International Law formed the Panel
on the International Trade in National Art Treasures to work on a U.S. re-
sponse to the preliminary draft of the proposed UNESCO Convention on
Cultural  Property.  Chaired  by William  D.  Rogers,  an  Arnold  and  Porter
Washington lawyer, the reporter for the panel was Paul Bator, Professor of
Law at Harvard University, and included Mark Feldman, a U.S. State De-
partment lawyer, and Ashton Hawkins, lawyer for the Metropolitan Museum
of Art, among others. The panel also comprised art dealers, collectors, and
museum-related people, including me, an art historian with Peabody Museum
connections at Harvard. I was included because the article mentioned above
indicated that American museums were often the ﬁnal destination of docu-
mented monuments from within a deﬁnable cultural region, and represented
the only known attempt to quantify the plunder.4 A serious drawback in at-
tempts at reforming this situation has always been the lack of data—as is not
surprising with a disorganized and clandestine trafﬁc in which every partici-
pant conspires to hide whatever he or she may know. In 1969, museums were
still publishing such acquisitions in their bulletins, but these announcements
stopped when it became clear the museums were risking bad publicity, al-
though the acquisitions continued.

Professor Paul Bator’s report on the panel’s deliberations led to his ap-
pointment to the U.S. delegation to the UNESCO special committee that ne-
gotiated and drafted the ﬁnal UNESCO Cultural Property Convention of
19705 and formed the basis for his thoughtful and innovative analysis, The 
International Trade in Art.6 The United States ratiﬁed the UNESCO Cultural
Property Convention in 1972 with the understanding that it was not self-
executing, making implementing legislation necessary. It was eleven long years
before the essential implementing legislation was ﬁnally passed in the Senate
in 1983. During those years the Washington, D.C.‒based law ﬁrm of Arnold
and Porter represented a coalition of antiquities dealers, collectors,7 and art
museums who were determined to restrict U.S. participation in the UNESCO
Convention, thus protecting their continued access to the international art
market. Many U.S. professional organizations representing archaeologists, his-

united states cultural property legislation

53

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 54

torians, and museums, as well as research universities and the Department of
State, which had drafted the legislation, fought for as few restrictions as pos-
sible. In the end, many of the requirements of the convention that would
likely have been unenforceable in the United States—where trade is “free,”
export controls are abhorrent, and most museums are not subject to federal
control—were omitted from the implementing legislation. Instead, the law
provided for temporary U.S. import controls only for those signatory coun-
tries that made detailed requests documenting the crisis proportions of their
loss of cultural property. 

1.2 the pre-columbian monumental art law

In the same year the United States ratiﬁed the UNESCO Convention, Con-
gress passed a law dealing with the speciﬁc crisis situation in Latin America.
Acknowledging that the United States was the principal market for monu-
mental art exported illegally from all archaeologically rich Latin American
countries, Congress passed the Regulation of Importation of Pre-Columbian
Monumental or Architectural Sculpture or Murals law,8 which prohibited the
importation of such materials into the United States. On the whole this law
was dramatically successful, as it was deﬁned in the title. While Maya stelae
and architectural sculpture were diverted to Europe, the total volume of the
trafﬁc was apparently diminished. There were, however, hideous unintended
consequences. 

The culture of looting and its market had been thriving for a decade in
the Maya regions of Guatemala, Mexico, and Belize, and when the looters
were deprived of the relatively accessible standing sculpture and architecture,
they turned to grave goods. The depredations that followed and still continue
at an accelerating rate made the earlier monument hunting seem almost be-
nign. It was not difﬁcult to explain to the public that the monument removal
represented the clear theft of what was often registered cultural patrimony.
Nor was it difﬁcult to explain  that cutting up a stela and discarding most of
its  mutilated  text  constituted  serious  defacement  and  was  destroying  the
recorded, but still undeciphered, history of ancient Maya culture. However, it
was, and is, exceedingly difﬁcult to explain to collectors and the public about
the kinds of loss and destruction that ensued as the looters turned to gutting
buildings in their search for tombs and caches, in place of the newly protected
monuments. The plundered stelae may have been reduced to thinned, portable
blocks once they arrived at a museum, whereas most of the exhibited jades and
painted vessels from tombs are apparently in perfect shape, often due to ex-
tensive and invisible restoration. So what has been lost? Most of what has been
lost is intangible and existed only in the complete context itself. For instance,
in the relationship between two vessels and a carved jade, and their relationship to
the person in the burial whose identity lies in the burial’s position in the build-
ing and the building’s location at the site—such historical clues are further elab-

clemency chase coggins

54

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 55

orated by hundreds of humble and ephemeral burial objects that are of no
more interest to looters than is the discarded skeletal material that might have
provided a fund of physical and genetic background. All of this is lost in every
looter’s trench, and even though most such operations are considered sterile
when they do not produce marketable objects, they are equally destructive.

The looting of subsurface deposits was one result of the 1972 U.S. law.
Burials had always been looted, but more casually and opportunistically. And
while the supply of monuments was limited and the expanding market would
have eventually depleted them,  the change in style of looting (along with the
change in the type and smaller size of the objects) that occurred in the 1970s
was pronounced.

1.3 the black market

What is driving this black market? Is it the poverty of the looters? Although
this is a popular explanation, which is apparently supported by the devastated
economies of most archaeologically rich countries, it is more of a rationaliza-
tion than an explanation. Since casual ﬁnds are worth very little locally, it is
only when looters are employed or approached by a middleman that they may
earn a wage, however small, and dispose of their ﬁnds, which will then be
shipped to the city and/or smuggled out of the country. Is the looting driven
by the antiquities market’s desire to improve the economy by employing the
local citizenry? No.

Is the black market driven by the helpless cravings of collectors, as some
dealers assert—speaking of addiction? Many collectors have been cultivated
and selectively educated by dealers to collect certain things. These are the mag-
niﬁcent unique objects that can only come from new, clandestine excavations.
The dealers whet the desire for these, and then they supply them. This is ad-
diction only as long as the supply continues—withdrawal is not injurious to
a collector’s health.

Is the black market caused by export controls as asserted by Paul Bator?9
and John Merryman?10Yes and no. If the free export of cultural property were
possible, then there would be no black market by deﬁnition. However, as long
as the robust international antiquities market exists, the lack of controls will
simply expedite the complete plunder of a country. If export were selectively
possible, the most unusual and desirable pieces would never be allowed to leave
most archaeologically rich countries because they do not have such pieces in
their own impoverished national museums. If, however, the country were to
sell legally excavated objects of less signiﬁcance and beauty, the high end of
the market would never want them.

It is the antiquities market itself that drives and thrives on the black mar-
ket. The  modern  international  antiquities  market  is  a  black  market.11 The
American ideal of free trade is entirely misplaced in this context. The highest
prices may induce competition, but the highest prices are paid for the newest

united states cultural property legislation

55

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 56

2. the two
cultures 

and ﬁnest objects, so more extensive plunder is necessary in order to compete.
The result is the bargain employment of a gang of impoverished looters in a
remote country, the devastation of a cultural heritage, a happy collector and
an enriched dealer, and ﬁnally, perhaps, a tax-deductible role for the object in
the local museum, where the citizenry gets to subsidize the entire operation.
This is free trade?

2.1 interests

In the 1960s, the English scientist C. P. Snow wrote a book, The Two Cultures and
the Scientiﬁc Revolution, that describes the estrangement between scientiﬁc and
more humanistic (in his case literary) points of view.12 To some degree, this
is the kind of division that characterizes the intractable debate over the role of
antiquities in modern society, in which the argument centers on both the pur-
pose and the meaning of cultural property. In an effort to mediate between
these cultures, the legal mind treats antiquities as a commodity that must be
shared, Solomonically, between “interests”—all of which are accorded equal
validity and may each consider itself of primary importance: the country of
origin, archaeologists, the market, collectors, art historians.13

The oldest of these interests are certainly the collector and the dealer—
a chronological priority that is seen to justify the two roles as inevitable. Next
came the antiquarians who were, at ﬁrst, neither art historians nor archaeolo-
gists, or were both. The discipline of the history of art grew from the neo-
classical European passion for ancient art. Most of this ancient art in Italy was
simply there, and had been cherished since the Renaissance, but covetous ad-
miration led to the removal of the Elgin Marbles14 and the altar of Pergamon,
among many others. These monuments and smaller sculptures and vessels
were admired for their ancient classical beauty—their original contexts were
secondary. The national museums of Europe ﬁlled with such collections, often
removed in war and by occupation. The discipline of the history of art was
born  and  developed  within  these  collections,  whose  intrinsic  beauty  and
grandeur were emphasized while provenience and circumstances of removal
had been lost or suppressed, the focus instead remaining on the surviving frag-
ments of a glorious mythical past.

European antiquarianism spread to the United States and Mexico around
1800, but it lacked the historical and textual framework of Greece and Rome,
and thus foundered in the unwritten mysteries of the indigenous cultures. In
this century, however, anthropology has preempted archaeology in the United
States, changing the focus from monuments and texts to the ancient cultures
and people they comprised. In the United States, archaeology is usually taught
in anthropology departments, with some Classics and Near East departments
training their own archaeologists.

clemency chase coggins

56

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 57

2.2 archaeology is anthropology

In the classic Method and Theory in American Archaeology, Gordon Willey and Philip
Phillips asserted that “American archaeology is anthropology or it is noth-
ing.”15 This seemed to be a primitive territory-marking statement to those
working in ancient American art, and as a student of the art historian George
Kubler who disagreed strongly with Willey and insisted a work of art tran-
scends culture,16 I resisted this formulation of the anthropologists. But, I have
come to see that they were exactly right, and that the statement applies to all
archaeology, not only American. “The subject matter of anthropology is both
society and culture,”17 and “archaeology, of necessity, deals very largely with
patterned behavior in its cultural aspect.”18 The work of art is the expression
of extraordinary patterned human behavior; it can be no more. The principles
of scientiﬁcally designed, problem-oriented anthropological archaeology are
now practiced around the world, but the antiquarian, object-oriented view of
the ancient world persists in museums, many art history departments, and in
the antiquities trade.

These are the two basic cultures that deﬁne the interests. They might be
described as scientiﬁc versus humanistic, but they are closer to cultural versus
aesthetic. It was the switch from the classical monument and text interests in
the 1972 U.S. law (as deﬁned by mutilated ﬁgural stelae with inscriptions) to
the anthropological cultural and contextual interests represented by plundered
burials that lost the attention and support of the museums and art historians
(who tend to be more focused on the isolated object than on what has been
lost). This is a matter of formación, or education and training. The differences
are exempliﬁed by the difference between the stark English provenience, meaning
the original context of an object, and the more melodious French provenance,
used by the art world, which may include the original source but is primarily
concerned with a history of ownership. 

Among these interests the countries of origin tend, increasingly, to em-
brace the anthropological view, since it focuses on cultural heritage in the
broadest  sense.19 In  the  principal  archaeologically  rich  countries  of Latin
America—Mexico, Guatemala, and Peru—antiquarian pursuits were tradi-
tionally found among the wealthy and educated who collected antiquities, and
these still represent the most powerful constituencies against the prohibitions
of national cultural property laws. In this century, however, the indigenous
cultures of these countries have acquired potent new political meaning—
especially in Mexico, where the attempt to forge a national consciousness em-
phasized the native Mexican cultures and their ancient roots in a movement
originally called indigenismo. Initially, indigenismo provided a framework for an-
thropological archaeology as the discovery and reconstruction of the common
Mexican past, but, in recent years, it has been subordinated as a government
policy to the overwhelming demands of tourism; the demand for tourists’ dol-
lars represents an updated antiquarianism in which the money for archaeology

united states cultural property legislation

57

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 58

3 the u.s.
response

is  spent  on  consolidating  monuments  and  displaying  isolated  objects  in 
museums.

In 1970, the United States responded to the loss and illegal export of Mexican
cultural property by signing a bilateral treaty that pledged to help Mexico re-
cover illegally exported materials. In 1972, the United States responded sym-
pathetically, if cautiously, to the worldwide crisis that had engendered the 1970
UNESCO Convention by ratifying it—the ﬁrst art-importing country to do
so.20 In the same year. the U.S. pre-Columbian monumental art law21 focused
narrowly and successfully on the problem of the destruction of monumental
cultural property, without thought to possible long-term consequences, as
discussed above. The next eleven years were spent debating the implementing
legislation for the UNESCO Convention, which was ﬁnally passed in 1983. 22

3.1 el salvador

Four years later, in 1987, El Salvador made the ﬁrst request to the United
States for the imposition of import controls, under article 9 of the conven-
tion, to exclude antiquities from an important archaeological site known as
Cara  Sucia  and  its  immediate  region  on  the  southwest  coast,  next  to
Guatemala.23 Cara Sucia and neighboring sites had been seriously looted but
were still worth preserving because their occupation had extended more than
three thousand years, from about 1500 B.C. until Colonial times, and important
areas remained untouched. This was a perfect ﬁrst request because the de-
struction was clear, the area was deﬁnable, and the antiquities had low market
value, thus not exciting much dealer opposition.24

With this ﬁrst request it became clear to the committee (a group of ex-
perts established to advise on requests) that it would have to work out the
guidelines for the requesting country, which was expected to explain its cul-
tural heritage and national cultural institutions and inventories; enumerate na-
tional, regional, and local cultural property legislation; describe and illustrate
the location, character, and signiﬁcance of the endangered place and its ar-
chaeological materials; illustrate the destruction convincingly; justify their lack
of protective measures and export controls, promise to do better, and demon-
strate  that  U.S.  import  controls  would  help;  document  the  national  and 
international market in the endangered materials; and propose ameliorative
educational and law enforcement measures, among other requirements. De-
spite the extent of these expectations, El Salvador made a compelling case that
was further documented by committee research in the United States.

After ﬁve years, import restrictions for the Cara Sucia Archaeological Re-
gion  were  extended  for  three  years,  and  in  1995,  El  Salvador  submitted  a 
request for a bilateral cultural property agreement under the U.S. Cultural
Property law. This general agreement (Memorandum of Understanding), again
the ﬁrst of its kind to be signed, imposes U.S. import restrictions on all of El

clemency chase coggins

58

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 59

Salvador’s pre-Hispanic heritage. The two interim emergency requests did
serve to stabilize and protect the Cara Sucia archaeological region, fortunately
located far from the war zones, and in 1993, El Salvador created new cultural
property legislation, which can today be promulgated and enforced in a more
peaceful country, where an active organization of supporters of the cultural
patrimony has been formed, including members who might once have been
collectors.25 Nevertheless, the collecting culture is entrenched, national ap-
preciation of the signiﬁcance and value of the cultural heritage limited, and
the looting of sites continues in El Salvador, where coyotes (scouts for dealers)
have long been active along the Guatemalan border. Now that both El Sal-
vador and Guatemala have bilateral agreements with the United States, it re-
mains to be seen where such objects will go and how they will be “identiﬁed.”

3.2 canada

In 1985, the ﬁrst request, supplemented in 1988, for import controls on a coun-
try’s entire cultural patrimony of archaeological and ethnographic materials
was made by Canada. If creating and documenting a request for a small ar-
chaeological region was difﬁcult, the magnitude of the Canadian request was
daunting, and it became clear that archaeologists and ethnologists would do
the best job of describing each ancient and historic indigenous culture and
the objects they produced. This comprehensive general agreement was not
signed until 1997, twelve years later—perhaps in part because of its precedent-
setting character. It includes the Inuit and Northwest Coast archaeological
and ethnological materials that are so important in the U.S. art market, as well
as the ethnographic Plains and archaeological and ethnographic Woodland 
Indian materials common to both the United States and Canada (and very
difﬁcult to source once on the market).26 However, since much Native Amer-
ican material is protected in the United States as well, this bilateral agreement
promises to afford a signiﬁcant instrument for controlling the trafﬁc. It is im-
portant that the awareness and involvement of the Native American and pro-
fessional archaeological and ethnological communities in Canada is very much
like that in the United States, but that Canada exercises more control over the
export of its own cultural property than does the United States. Nevertheless,
the United States has asked Canada, under this agreement, to prohibit the 
import of U.S. archaeological and cultural resources protected under Federal
legislation.27

3.3 bolivia

In 1988, the ﬁrst request for import restrictions on ethnographic materials was
received from the government of Bolivia on behalf of Coroma, Bolivia, whose
traditional textiles from sacred bundles symbolic of kinship identity and com-
munity history were appearing in U.S. showrooms and traveling exhibitions.
The textiles were originally spotted by American ethnic arts dealers while at-

united states cultural property legislation

59

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 60

tending the All Soul’s Day ceremony in this remote Altiplano community. The
dealers sent Bolivian middlemen to get the desirable weavings from villagers,
who actually had no right to sell this ancestral community property. The Bo-
livian request and its renewal have since expired, but the request resulted in the
return of textiles to the community, registration of the sacred bundles and
their contents, further Bolivian laws to protect such community property, and
both Bolivian and international awareness of the signiﬁcance of such ethno-
graphic material culture. Ethnographic art is usually considered “primitive” by
the art market, and the collecting and appreciation of it thought to express a
preference for folk art, unlike, for example, the collecting of ancient Inca 
ceramics from Bolivia. Ethnographic materials are the “interest” of anthro-
pologists, and their import control is of less concern to the international art
market. This request from Bolivia, and the U.S. response, signiﬁed acknowl-
edgment of the international value of the living heritage of a Native Ameri-
can culture and its right to remain intact—a request generated by the culture
itself. 

This was not the case with El Salvador, where motivation came from the
archaeological community and the government. Here, the goal was to preserve
a signiﬁcant archaeological site of great time-depth and of largely unknown
ethnic afﬁliation, rather than to satisfy any local indigenous identiﬁcation with
the ancient sites of the Cara Sucia Archaeological Region. This distinction
represents a basic division within the “anthropological interests”—although
the Bolivian and Salvadoran requests are both concerned with indigenous cul-
ture. Measures for the protection of the ancient heritage is generated by the
professionals. 

3.4 guatemala

In 1989, seventeen years after the Pre-Columbian Monumental Art law went
into effect, Guatemala made an emergency request for the protection of all ar-
chaeological materials from Petén, the northern state where most of the Maya
stelae were located. This reﬂected the crisis situation that developed after the
1972 law was passed, as discussed above. Classic Maya sites were being plun-
dered at an accelerating rate, and Guatemala asked for U.S. import restrictions
on the movable archaeological objects not covered in the monuments law, since
a bilateral executive agreement with the United States undertaken in 1984 for
help in the recovery of “its stolen cultural property” had been of little help.28
The state of Petén is sparsely populated, and Guatemalan efforts at guarding
the numerous sites were limited to a few permanent guards who needed guns
to be effective. Guatemala documented the looting and illegal export of the
archaeological materials from Petén, and the existence of a U.S. market for the
goods, and the request was granted in 1990, with a renewal in 1995.

During these years Guatemala, involved in a devastating civil war, has ex-
perienced deteriorating economic conditions, and as a consequence the pro-

clemency chase coggins

60

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 61

tection of archaeological sites has not been a high governmental priority. In
December 1996, a peace treaty was signed and today the country is struggling
to move toward stability. In 1997, Guatemala submitted a general request to
the United States for import restrictions on all of the Guatemalan archaeo-
logical heritage. The sad fact is that the plunder in Petén continues, following
local imperatives and patterns, quite independent of the Guatemalan govern-
ment’s intentions. While it is not difﬁcult to document the loss and destruc-
tion of archaeological sites in all parts of Guatemala, it is more difﬁcult to
demonstrate what signiﬁcant protective measures have been taken, and how
they may have been effective, as is required by the U.S. law. Nevertheless, the
United States signed the bilateral agreement (Memorandum of Understand-
ing) for import restrictions on all Guatemalan archaeological materials in Sep-
tember 1997. 

Guatemala adopted stringent new cultural property legislation in April
1997, and as part of the announcement to the country (and to spur a cam-
paign of national education), the Guatemalan Ministry of Culture and Sports
invited Guatemalan, American, and Mexican archaeologists to a conference in
April of that same year to discuss the new law. This conference expressed the
hopes and recommendations of all concerned, and the Guatemalan resolve to
focus more resources on preservation of the cultural heritage.29 However, in
Guatemala the situation is singularly unmanageable. The frontier character of
Petén, surrounded on three sides by unpopulated, forested international bor-
ders, fosters an atmosphere of lawlessness, thus evoking measures of law en-
forcement rather than of education. In the late 1960s and 1970s much of the
looting was inﬂicted by those who earned their marginal living gathering for-
est products or who worked seasonally for foreign archaeologists. Conditions
changed as guerrillas and the army occupied parts of the region in the late
1970s and 1980s. The situation was  further complicated by the movement of
Kekchi Indians from the mountains into the inhospitable lowlands environ-
ment, and by the growing of marijuana and poppies for drugs in the sparsely
populated region; most recently, decommissioned soldiers and guerrillas seek-
ing a livelihood have taken to looting sites. None of these social conditions
has anything whatsoever to do with cultural property, except that the ancient
sites may be exploited to alleviate the local problems—which are not part of
the meager Guatemalan budget for the protection of cultural property.

The state of Petén, three times (or ﬁve times if you count the 1972 law
and a 1984 bilateral Executive Agreement) the object of U.S. protective mea-
sures, was the home of Classic Maya civilization for about six hundred years,30
but for more than a millennium it has been largely uninhabited. Although
Guatemala has a large indigenous Maya population of about ﬁve and a half
million people, the few who live in Petén are concentrated around the capital
city of Flores or are recent emigrants from the mountains. Throughout the
civil war and today, indigenous Maya nationalism ﬂourishes in the mountains

united states cultural property legislation

61

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 62

to the south, among different Maya peoples whose ancestors had nothing to
do with the Classic Period in Petén. 

As in El Salvador, where the movement to protect archaeological sites is
generated by the cultural property constituency, the never-ending efforts to
save the remnants of Maya civilization in Petén have been governmental rather
than indigenous. Again, this is in stark contrast to Bolivia, where both crisis
and solutions were indigenous, contemporary, and of a very small scale in
comparison. Also, like El Salvador and Peru, Guatemala has an entrenched an-
tiquities buying, selling, and collecting community, which is reportedly well ﬁ-
nanced and still little inconvenienced by international laws. 

3.5 peru

In 1990, Peru requested emergency import restrictions on materials from the
recently discovered and heavily plundered Moche culture site of Sipán in the
north coast Lambayeque valley, as looted objects turned up in the capital and
foreign markets. This was a dramatic and deﬁnable situation of crisis propor-
tions, with identiﬁable materials in which further excavations and protection
for the site have proven the value of such a request.

There is relatively little monumental sculpture or wall painting in Peru,
and ancient Andean cultures had no writing systems, so the huge existing col-
lections of plundered Peruvian objects have tended to fall into the purely aes-
thetic, even “primitive,” category of objects about which nothing much can
ever be known. However, as the result of the protected archaeological work
at Sipán, and the unprecedented excavation of complete tombs, it has been
possible to work out the religious and political roles of the occupants of
these tombs in their community through time, and to recognize the elements
of a key ritual as it was illustrated on unprovenienced contemporary vessels
that  are  now  in  collections.31 Although  Peru  has  been  looted  since  the
Spaniards began looking for gold in 1532, and although it is not archaeologists
but looters who ﬁnd the tombs in Peru, this particularly lucky combination
of destruction, international aid and protection, and archaeological excava-
tion and interpretation at Sipán have served to illuminate an unimagined fact
of ancient Moche history. It must be understood, however, that this inter-
pretation depended on a scene painted on a plundered pot. The vessel might
have come from another tomb in another valley, but no one will ever know its
provenience or original signiﬁcance—like the thousands of others in collec-
tions. But in this case, one can see that such objects may have value beyond
the purely aesthetic, and once they are actually in museum collections, it is in-
cumbent on scholars to reconstruct their historic integrity and use them in
any way possible—although they must be viewed as mute casualties of a war
we can never support.

Peru’s  emergency  request  was  renewed,  and  in  June,  1997,  the  United
States signed a bilateral agreement (Memorandum of Understanding) with

clemency chase coggins

62

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 63

Peru to impose import restrictions on all illegally exported archaeological and
certain Colonial ethnographic materials. Like Guatemala, Peru has been in-
volved in civil war, so there are economic consequences that make archaeo-
logical sites especially vulnerable. The Peruvian request features a description
of the designated cultural heritage, which is a model due to its knowledgeable
detail and coverage, and, as with Guatemala and El Salvador, represents the
ideals and motivations of the anthropological community; these are supported
by the government philosophically, although probably not economically, and
they are formulated  in opposition to the antiquarian elements of society that,
as always, would preserve the status quo.

In these four Latin American countries—El Salvador, Bolivia, Guate-
mala, Peru—the conservationist interests—anthropological, archaeological,
governmental—operate in conﬂict with the property interests that express the
rights of collectors and dealers to buy and own and sell the cultural heritage
because they appreciate it, they believe they are preserving it, and they want
to share it with the world, and because they always have. John Merryman, from
within the commodifying constraints of the law, calls the ﬁrst (conservation-
ist) interests “retentive”, and the second (private ownership) interests “inter-
nationalist.”32 But the cultural heritage is a seamless tapestry that cannot be
cut into little squares and shared around internationally. 

3.6 mexico

In  1970,  the  United  States  signed  the  U.S. ‒Mexico Treaty  providing  for 
the Recovery and Return of Stolen Archaeological Historical and Cultural
Properties, the ﬁrst bilateral agreement for the return of stolen artifacts.33
Pre-Columbian materials, Colonial art, and archival materials belonging to 
Mexico and to the United States were covered in this treaty of cooperation. In
1972, Mexico passed a new cultural property law that nationalized all pre-
Columbian materials, known and unknown, including those in private collec-
tions. This brought the U.S. National Stolen Property Act into the McClain
Case, which involved the transportation of (stolen) Mexican artifacts in for-
eign commerce and in which, several appeals, half of the objects in contention
were returned to Mexico.34

Mexico has been a party to the UNESCO Convention since 1971, but has
not made an emergency or general request to the United States under the con-
vention. I suggest there are three reasons for this. The ﬁrst may only be a his-
torical footnote. Mexico had objected strongly to the reservations taken by the
United States in its acceptance of the UNESCO Convention, since they were
seen as “incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention.”35The
second, and most obvious, is that the 1970 Treaty of Cooperation, combined
with the precedent of the McClain case, are believed to sufﬁce as import dis-
incentives, if not controls. The third may involve the detailed explanations,
self-justiﬁcations, and plans for improvement demanded by the request pro-

united states cultural property legislation

63

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 64

4 conclusion

tocol, which can be seen as somewhat demeaning in view of the situation—
asking for help from the perpetrator is a classically touchy situation.

While Mexico resembles the other countries in possessing an endangered
pre-Columbian heritage, it is different in many ways (besides sharing a long
border with the United States). More than the other countries, even Peru,
Hispanic Mexico was always interested in its indigenous cultures until, after
the Mexican Revolution (1910‒1920), Native Americans came to be seen as es-
sential to a new, genuinely Mexican national identity. This appreciation of na-
tive cultures, or indigenismo, came to inform all anthropological and thus 
archaeological work in Mexico, with goals of integrating knowledge of Mex-
ican indigenous cultures into national education and regional museums. In
this, Mexico has been much more purposeful and successful than the other
countries. Although archaeological plunder continues in many parts of Mex-
ico  (especially  in  the  states  of Quintana  Roo  and  Campeche,  bordering
Guatemala and Belize), it varies by state, as does the quality of the control
maintained by the central government; in recent years the government has con-
verted many archaeological goals and resources into touristic goals and re-
sources. Private collections must be registered in Mexico, the export of all cul-
tural property without a certiﬁcate is illegal, and Mexican antiquities do not
seem to be pouring into the U.S. market, at least not directly.36 Perhaps Mex-
ico is adequately protected? 

As far as the law is concerned, the three archaeologically richest, and most se-
riously plundered, countries in Latin America—Guatemala, Peru, and Mex-
ico—now have some kind of U.S. import controls in effect for all of their ar-
chaeological  heritage,  as  does  Canada,  to  our  north.  This  is  the  grand
experiment. Will the international art market saturate Europe and Japan with
pre-Columbian antiquities and turn to the endangered patrimonies of Africa
and the Paciﬁc until those doors are closed? Many will go out of business,
others will conﬁne themselves to recycling old collections (like most art deal-
ers who do not expect a limitless supply of cheap new material to sell). Will
the other market countries like Great Britain, Germany, Belgium, and Switzer-
land follow the United States’ lead in signing the UNESCO Convention as
France has? However ﬂawed it may be, the convention has had a catalytic ef-
fect on international awareness. 

The lobbying group for American antiquities dealers would like to amend
the U.S. UNESCO implementing legislation, perhaps do away with it, even
though this law was originally made to be as weak as possible, and only six
countries have had agreements with the United States out of eighty-eight
UNESCO Convention signatory countries.37 The United States commands
47.34 percent of the world’s auction sales,38 yet the antiquities market cannot
tolerate even this much limitation of trade. Perhaps this is the surest indica-
tion of the law’s success. But it is much too late to try to rescind U.S. efforts

clemency chase coggins

64

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 65

to alleviate this still-expanding international loss. The public understands
much better now what is at stake, and the museums are beginning to realize
that they must change. The hardest part will be the coming years when new ac-
quisition policies will be at odds with long-accepted practice and with the re-
alities of a continuing, if perhaps waning, market in antiquities.

In this essay I have tried to adapt the legal concept of “interests” to my
own perception of the “cultures” or conceptual orientations in conﬂict in the
current international trafﬁc in antiquities, and more particularly in its control.
In the western hemisphere, an anthropological, or social and contextual, kind
of archaeology has prevailed over the traditional classical archaeological focus
on objects. This worldview is integrating and at odds with the study of the
self-sufﬁcient beauty of isolated works of art, as traditionally pursued in the
history of art, which may see a work of art as beyond culture so that it makes
no difference where it is, whereas the ﬁrst view posits that a work of art is in-
extricably bound to and forever signifying its culture. These views need not
be mutually exclusive, but here the law intercedes and decides for the isolated
object by declaring it to be property. Most archaeologically rich countries
adopt the integrating, contextual view of their cultural heritage; since it is
their property, they are prevailing on the legal front and may yet prevail in
their struggle to survive intact.

U.S. efforts to discourage the market, as described above, have been piece-
meal and not yet effective in this goal, although there have been signiﬁcant
changes in attitude and in institutional controls in every country that has made
a request. I believe that there has been progress, but it is very slow. Meanwhile,
more cultural property is being consumed, more history being irretrievably
lost. What is necessary is new legislation to amend the U.S. implementation
law, so as to prohibit the importation of all of the protected archaeological
and ethnographic cultural property of all UNESCO signatory countries, as
originally stipulated by the 1970 convention itself. The United States must
still fulﬁll the goals and realize the principles that impelled it to sign the 
UNESCO Convention in 1972. 

notes

Although my own impressions and opinions are reﬂected in this essay, I wish to acknowl-
edge the contributions of the following archaeologists: Fabio Amador B., Fred Bove, Karen
Bruhns, Miguel Covarrubias, Ricardo Elia, Ian Graham, Ruben Maldonado, John Rick,
Payson Sheets, Carlos Zea Flores (also Guatemalan Vice Minister of Culture), and Maria
Papageorge Kouroupas, Executive Director of the Cultural Property Advisory Committee.
1. Clemency Coggins, Illicit Trafﬁc of Pre-Columbian Antiquities, 29 Art Journal 94 (1969).
2. In this paper provenience means the original location and context of an object; provenance
refers to its history of ownership. 
3. University Museum, University of Pennsylvania (1971); Harvard University Museums
(1971); Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago (1972). 

united states cultural property legislation

65

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 66

4. A more detailed list was published the next year in the Mexican journal Estudios de Cul-
tura Maya 8, 15‒24 (1970). Cautiously entitled “Displaced Maya Sculpture,” this listing in-
cluded more bibliographic information and named the museums involved.

The title annoyed the eminent Mayanist Alberto Ruz L., the editor of Estudios de Cul-
tura Maya, and reasonably so, because the list consisted primarily of looted materials; the
word displaced in the title had been dictated by the inclusion of some monuments removed
legally by archaeologists to museums in Mexico and Guatemala, as well as other interna-
tional museums.
5. UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export, and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, signed Paris on November 14,
1970. The convention is reproduced in Conventions and Recommendations of UNESCO Concern-
ing Protection of the Cultural Heritage 57 (Paris 1983).
6. Paul Bator, The International Trade in Art vii, 94‒108 (University of Chicago Press, Chicago
1982).
7. The National Association of Dealers in Ancient, Oriental, and Primitive Art.
8. Importation of Pre-Columbian Monumental or Architectural Sculpture or Murals
Statute 1972. Public Law No. 92-587, 86 Statute 1297. 
9. Bator, supra note 6 at 41‒43.
10. John Merryman, A Licit International Trade in Cultural Objects, 4 International Journal
Cultural Property 13, 13‒60 (1995). 
11. Except for the very small percentage of objects in old collections, the acquisition of an-
tiquities in the international market is virtually impossible without breaking some law, and
that was even true of most objects in old collections. According to the American Heritage
Dictionary of the English Language (1976), a black market is “an illicit market in which goods
are sold in violation of price controls, rationing or other restrictions.”
12. C. P. Snow, The Two Cultures and the Scientiﬁc Revolution (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, England 1964).
13. Bator, supra note 6, describes these conﬂicting interests in terms of underlying “values,”
but a signiﬁcant problem is that these values (preservation, integrity, accessibility) are
cherished by all of the interests. 
14. Known in Greece as the Parthenon Marbles, these sculptures were taken from the
Parthenon, Athens, and sent to England by Lord Elgin in 1803. See Jeanette Greenﬁeld, The
Return of Cultural Treasures 56 (2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England
1995).
15. Gordon R. Willey and Philip Phillips, Method and Theory in American Archaeology 2 (Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago 1958).
16. George Kubler, History—or Anthropology—of Art, Studies in Ancient American and Eu-
ropean Art: The Collected Essays of George Kubler 409 (T. F. Reese ed., Yale University Press, New
Haven 1985).
17. Willey and Phillips, supra note 15 at 2.
18. Id. at 3.
19. Prott and O’Keefe have pointed out that “cultural heritage” is a better, broader, and
more accurate term for “the manifestations of human life” in a country, than is “cultural
property.” L. V. Prott and P. J. O’Keefe, “Cultural Heritage” or “Cultural Property,”

clemency chase coggins

66

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 67

1 International Journal of Cultural Property 307, 307‒20 (1992). I would argue that “cultural
heritage” should replace “cultural patrimony,” but that “cultural property” will continue
to be a useful term as long as anyone can own parts of the cultural heritage. 
20. The history of the U.S. involvement in the UNESCO Convention on Cultural Prop-
erty is thoroughly described and discussed by Paul Bator, supra note 6 at appendix.
21. Public Law. No. 92-587, supra note 8.
22. Although the United States has imposed emergency (1993, 1995) and general import
restrictions  (1997)  under  the  U.S.  implementation  of the  UNESCO  Convention  on
Mali’s archaeological cultural property, this essay considers only the ﬁve cases in this hemi-
sphere in which I was involved. 
23. Information about the U.S. UNESCO implementation legislation and requests made
under it is available from the Cultural Property Advisory Committee, U.S. Information
Agency, 301 4th Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 20547.
24. I speak as a member of the Cultural Property Advisory Committee for the ﬁrst ten
years of its existence, 1984‒1994. The committee, as dictated by the legislation (section
306), consists of three anthropologists, archaeologists, and/or ethnologists, three experts
in the international sale of art, two museum people, and three representatives of the gen-
eral public.
25. Fundación Nacional de Arqueología (Karen Bruhns, personal communication, 1997). 
26. The Cultural Property Advisory Committee did not grant the requested import re-
strictions on Subarctic and Plains archaeological materials.
27.  Archaeological  Resources  Protection  Act  of 1979 (16 U.S.C.  470aa‒mm),  Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990 (25 U.S.C. 3001‒3013), Aban-
doned Shipwreck Act of 1987 (43 U.S.C. 2101 et seq).
28. Report of the Cultural Property Advisory Committee to the President Regarding the Request of the Gov-
ernment of Guatemala for Emergency Import Restrictions under the Cultural Property Implementation Act
10 (Cultural Property Advisory Committee, United States Information Service, February
1990).
29. Richard D. Hansen, Plundering the Petén, 50:5 Archaeology 48, 48‒49 (1997). This ar-
ticle  describes  current  levels  of destruction  in  Peten,  Guatemala,  and  mentions  the
Guatemalan conference.
30. Although the Maya probably lived in the region by 1000 B.C., and still live there today,
it is the material culture of these six hundred years (A.D. 250‒850) that are the focus of the
looting.
31. Walter Alva, Discovering the New World’s Richest Unlooted Tomb, 174:4 National Ge-
ographic 510‒49 (1988);  Christopher  Donnan,  Unraveling  the  Mystery  of the Warrior
Priest, 174:4 National Geographic 550‒55 (1988). 
32. John Merryman, The Retention of Cultural Property, 21:3 U.C. Davis Law Review 477,
477‒513 (1988).
33. J. Greenﬁeld, The Return of Cultural Treasures 159 (2nd. ed., Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, England 1995).
34. The archaeological objects seized in the McClain case were an uninspiring lot of about
two hundred miscellaneous pieces, of which 75 percent was probably authentic (my opin-
ion). A jade Olmec mask, the only very valuable object, was for some reason given to an-

united states cultural property legislation

67

IJCP.06 Coggins  11/4/98 10:51 AM  Page 68

other dealer who said it was his. Some might laugh at the relatively low quality of the ma-
terials that set such an important legal precedent, but the signiﬁcant point is the destruc-
tion involved in digging for 150 artifacts, not their market value. Most were returned to
Mexico in 1986, after more than a decade in a warehouse. Richard E. W. Adams and
Thomas R. Hester,  “Summary of Notes of an Archaeological Collection: U.S.A. vs.
Simpson et al. September 1984” (in possession of authors).
35. P. J. O’Keefe and L. V. Prott, Law and the Cultural Heritage, vol. 3: Movement, §1473 (But-
terworths, London 1989).
36. In Pre-Columbian Art, showcasing antiquities to be sold at Sotheby’s in New York on
November 24, 1997, there were eighty-seven objects without provenience, which might
have been Mexican in origin, illustrated for the ﬁrst session. About six of these came from
old collections; of the remainder, about thirty-ﬁve looked genuine and could have come
from Mexico anytime. The rest may, in my opinion, be fakes.
37. A seventh, Nicaragua, has very recently made a request.
38. U.S. and U.K. Share 75% of Turnover, 8:77 Art Newspaper 27 (January, 1998).

clemency chase coggins

68


