International Journal of Cultural Property (2009) 16:49–66. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2009 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739109090067

Ethical Rules and Codes of Honor
Related to Museum Activities:
A Complementary Support to the
Private International Law Approach
Concerning the Circulation of
Cultural Property
Manlio Frigo*

Abstract: The role of ethical rules and codes of conduct in the field of art law
and international protection of cultural property, together with the adoption of
the relevant international conventions, has constantly increased in the last de-
cades. This article considers the main codes of conduct drafted by international
organizations as well as international, national, public, and private institutions,
federations, and associations. The focus is on their influence on international
trade as instruments of art market regulation. Specific attention is paid to the
interaction with the private international law approach and to a survey of both
direct and indirect effects of these rules on the international circulation of cul-
tural property.

THE ROLE OF ETHICAL RULES AND CODES OF HONOR

In the last 60 years, we have witnessed an unprecedented proliferation of multi-
lateral international conventions on the circulation of cultural property. The
principal aim of such conventions is to create concrete standards of inter-
national cooperation in the domain of cultural property, in times of peace as
well as armed conflict. These conventions provide a definition of the property in
need of protection, they impose on contracting state obligations concerning the
treatment of the property and they set international rules governing its circula-

*State University of Milan. Email: m.frigo@ludolex.com

49

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

50

MANLIO FRIGO

tion, including its return and restitution, in compliance with its legal regime as
determined by the applicable national law.

In this regard the following contribute to the creation of an articulated system of
specific legal rules: the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict1; the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the
Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property2; the 1995 UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or
Illegally Exported Cultural Objects3; the Paris 2001 Convention on the Protection
of the Underwater Cultural Heritage4; the 2003 UNESCO convention to safeguard
intangible cultural heritage5; and the 2005 UNESCO convention on the protection
and promotion of the diversity of cultural expressions.6 One could also add the 1992
to 1993 directives and community regulations.7 These rules combine themselves with
national applicable statutes on the subject matter; and to a great extent they influ-
ence the content, condition, and applicability of said national statutes.

In addition to this proliferation of norms, which can be equally ascertained in
other areas of social relations, we witness a parallel production of rules of conduct
that, albeit lacking the coercive nature of legal norms, determine binding effects
on certain categories of subjects or significantly influence market regulation. Broadly
speaking, the task of defining the significance of ethical or unethical behavior is
obviously different from—and cannot be confused with—the investigation con-
cerning the definition of legal or illegal conduct. In this regard, and by way of a
general clarification, note that the codes of ethics are obviously aimed at purport-
ing ethical and not legal standards; moreover, as discussed later in the article, they
only address themselves to professionals in general. Accordingly, it appears that
they lack the binding effect of law as well as another typical characteristic of the
legal rules: their general effect, as the rules set forth by codes of ethics are neces-
sarily addressed to a limited universe of addressees. Broadly summarized, law is a
general source of binding obligations, whereas ethical codes are a particular source
of nonbinding invitations. However, this is an imprecise and restrictive definition
that evokes the role of moral suasion, which is usually attributed to the aforemen-
tioned instruments and recalls the hortative effect common to most recommen-
dations of intergovernmental organizations in the international practice.

Conversely, particularly in the field of art law, ethical standards may be much
more detailed and even stricter than legal standards. Thus, the two standards pro-
vide a set of rules that complement one another and aim to create a complete, if
not homogeneous, regulation.

Start with the first experiences like the 1931 Athens Charter for the Restoration
of Historic Monuments or the Venice Charter for the Conservation and Restora-
tion of Monuments and Sites.8 In the concerned domain these rules, which can be
generally classified as ethical, are spontaneously or quasi-spontaneously formed.
Indeed, usually instead of heterogeneous formation, on the basis of a vertical di-
vision of relations between those who govern and those who are governed, they
are horizontally conceived, elaborated, and oriented, like the self-regulation in-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

ETHICAL RULES AND CODES OF HONOR RELATED TO MUSEUM ACTIVITIES

51

struments of people associated or affiliated to the interested category. In other
words, as observed with reference to the lex mercatoria in the context of inter-
national trade, these norms proceed from the same subjects to which they are ad-
dressed, who are obliged to abide by them, especially given the compliance required
within the relevant professional category.

After all, this aspect distinguishes the compliance of an ethical rule from the
compliance with a legal norm, almost as if it were a code of honor. But ethical
codes require something more. One should recognize that they have the capability
of imposing contractual obligations on the associates; and being continuously used
as a benchmark in the usual domain of operations of the relevant categories, they
can become uses comparable to those belonging to international trade.

Besides, this phenomenon is well known in relation to typical sources of inter-
national law. For example, one of the most important conventions on the subject
matter, the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Prevent-
ing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,
provides a specific obligation on contracting states to set up cultural property pro-
tection services consisting of qualified personnel to establish “for the benefit of
those concerned (curators, collectors, antique dealers, etc.) rules in conformity with
the ethical principles set forth in this Convention; and taking steps to ensure the
observance of those rules.”9 Although both legal theory and case law often point
out that the convention is non–self-executing, one cannot deny said norm’s func-
tion as a legal basis—and therefore as a strong pressure instrument—with refer-
ence to the establishment of ethical codes aimed at creating rules of conduct open
to completion by the interested categories.10

Concerning the issue of the origin (and therefore of the identification of the pro-
duction sources), it is interesting to note that the aforementioned ethical rules have
been created in completely different milieux, such as international organizations, spe-
cialized institutes, national and international trade associations and institutions, or
private or public entities. One can illustrate using the following examples:

• UNESCO (International Code of Ethics for Dealers in Cultural Property, No-

vember 6, 2000).

• CINOA (International Confederation of Art and Antiques Dealers).11
• AAM (American Association of Museums), which elaborated three impor-
tant codes: Code of Ethics for Museums (2000), Guidelines on Exhibiting Bor-
rowed Objects (2000), and Guidelines concerning the Unlawful Appropriation
of Objects during the Nazi Era (1999, amended in 2001).

• AAMD (Association of Art Museum Directors) adopted Guidelines on Loans
of Antiquities and Ancient Art 200612 and issue the (revised) Report of the
AAMD Task Force on the Acquisition of Archaeological Material and Ancient
Art (2008).13

• EEA (European Association of Archaeologists) adopted the EEA Code of Prac-

tice (1997).14

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

52

MANLIO FRIGO

• ICA (International Council on Archives), whose general assembly adopted the

International Code of Ethics for Archivists (1996).15

On the contrary, the addressees of the ethical rules are bound to correspond to
those belonging to categories respectively taken into account by the interested in-
stitutions. It is better to point out that these are some of the most important and
qualified players of the art market, especially institutions that run museums and
commercial dealers specialized in the same field. As discussed later in the article,
this implies the need to verify whether the rules are compatible, complementary,
or conflicting.

THE MAIN CONTENTS OF THE REGULATION

This section briefly compares the principal sources to verify if the ethical rules are
capable of creating a sufficiently complete and homogeneous regulation. Thus, in
most sources one can find ethical rules concerning essential aspects already spe-
cifically governed by important international conventions. Such is the case, par-
ticularly, for acquisitions and transfer of collections, the origin of collections, the
professional conduct of the members, and sanctions in the event of noncompli-
ance of the rules.

Acquisition and Transfer of Items and Collections

This is one of the most controversial aspects in international practice, albeit (or,
according to the circumstances, because) the legal rules provided by the national
law and/or by international law should apply, exhaustively regulating the subject
matter. In this regard, the fundamental idea inspiring the ethical code of the In-
ternational Council of Museums (ICOM) is that museums maintaining collec-
tions preserve them for the benefit of society. Thus, in each museum the governing
body must adopt and publish a written collections policy that addresses acquisi-
tion, care, and collections use. The policy should clarify the position of any ob-
jects that will not be cataloged, conserved, or exhibited.

Article 2.2 (Valid Title) provides, “No object or specimen should be acquired by
purchase, gift, loan, bequest, or exchange unless the acquiring museum is satisfied
that a valid title is held. Evidence of lawful ownership in a country is not neces-
sarily valid title.” Article 2.3 (Provenance and Due Diligence) provides the following:

Every effort must be made before acquisition to ensure that any object
or specimen offered for purchase, gift, loan, bequest, or exchange has
not been illegally obtained in or exported from, its country of origin or
any intermediate country in which it might have been owned legally (in-
cluding the museum’s own country). Due diligence in this regard should
establish the full history of the item from discovery or production.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

ETHICAL RULES AND CODES OF HONOR RELATED TO MUSEUM ACTIVITIES

53

At the same time, article 5 of CINOA’s ethical code of conduct states that pro-
fessional antique dealers and traders in works of art “cannot under any circum-
stance participate in transactions which to the best of their knowledge can result
in money-laundering operations” and, pursuant to article 3, “agree to comply with
the laws on the protection of endangered species. They therefore agree not to trade
in objects manufactured from materials that are protected under the Convention
on International Trade in Endangered Species.”16

The (revised) Report of the AAMD Task Force on the Acquisition of Archaeo-
logical Materials and Ancient Art issued on June 3, 2008 by the AAMD, seems to
go significantly further. It recognizes the 1970 UNESCO convention as providing
the threshold date or the application of more rigorous standards to the museums’
acquisitions, helping create a uniform set of expectations for museums as well as
sellers and donors. Moreover, it provides a specific framework for members to
evaluate the circumstances under which a work having an incomplete ownership
history dating to 1970 may be considered for acquisition.17

The concern to protect the integrity of collections is strong in UNESCO’s In-
ternational Code of Ethics for Dealers in Cultural Property. Article 6 reads, “Trad-
ers in cultural property will not dismember or sell separately parts of one complete
item of cultural property.”18

Finally, with reference to U.S. museums, AAM’s code of ethics articulates that
“acquisition, disposal, and loan activities are conducted in a manner that respects
the protection and preservation of natural and cultural resources and discourages
illicit trade in such materials.”

Origin of Items and Collections

First, it must be emphasized that these rules concern the classic problem of return
and restitution of cultural property. From this standpoint it is useful to under-
score that lately the distinction between the case of goods stolen from the owner,
which implies restitution, and that of illicit transfer (or exportation) from the coun-
try of origin, which determines return, is usually accepted even under inter-
national law.19 In this regard, with reference to the rules of conduct, article 6.1 of
ICOM’s code of ethics first of all provides, “Museums should promote the sharing
of knowledge, documentation and collections with museums and cultural orga-
nisations in the countries and communities of origin. The possibility of develop-
ing partnerships with museums in countries or areas that have lost a significant
part of their heritage should be explored.” It is also interesting to note that the
code correctly refers to the notions of return and restitution already employed by
the UNIDROIT convention.

Actually, article 6.2 (Return of Cultural Property) states the following:

Museums should be prepared to initiate dialogues for the return of cul-
tural property to a country or people of origin. This should be under-
taken in an impartial manner, based on scientific, professional and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

54

MANLIO FRIGO

humanitarian principles as well as applicable local, national and inter-
national legislation, in preference to action at a governmental or polit-
ical level.

However, article 6.3 (Restitution of Cultural Property) asserts the following:

When a country or people of origin seeks the restitution of an object or
specimen that can be demonstrated to have been exported or otherwise
transferred in violation of the principles of international and national
conventions, and shown to be part of that country’s or people’s cultural
or natural heritage, the museum concerned should, if legally free to do
so, take prompt and responsible steps to co-operate in its return.

Finally, article 6.4 of the mentioned code (Cultural Objects From an Occupied
Country) refers itself to the international norms of the 1954 Hague Convention
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict by main-
taining, “Museums should abstain from purchasing or acquiring cultural objects
from an occupied territory and respect fully all laws and conventions that regulate
the import, export and transfer of cultural or natural materials.”

It must also be stressed that the Guidelines Concerning the Unlawful Appro-

priation of Objects During the Nazi Era states the following in article 4:

It is the position of AAM that museums should address claims of own-
ership asserted in connection with objects in their custody openly, seri-
ously, responsively, and with respect for the dignity of all parties involved.
Each claim should be considered on its own merits.

Museums should review promptly and thoroughly a claim that an ob-
ject in its collection was unlawfully appropriated during the Nazi era
without subsequent restitution.

In addition to conducting their own research, museums should re-
quest evidence of ownership from the claimant in order to assist in de-
termining the provenance of the object.

If a museum determines that an object in its collection was unlaw-
fully appropriated during the Nazi era without subsequent restitution,
the museum should seek to resolve the matter with the claimant in an
equitable, appropriate, and mutually agreeable manner.

Furthermore CINOA’s Ethical Code of Conduct asserts that if affiliated mem-
bers possess an object likely illegally imported, and the country of origin demands
its returns within a reasonable amount of time, pursuant to article 2 they must
“do everything that is possible to them according to the current laws to cooperate
in returning the object to its country of origin. In the case of a purchase in good
faith by the antique dealer, an amicable refund may be agreed to.” However, it is
understandable that no provision is instead provided for in the codes of conduct
referring to “safe-conduct” for works of art that have been loaned on the occasion
of expositions, especially with respect to seizure.20

Finally, the code of ethics for archivists, in a vague and particularly flexible pro-
vision of article 2, states, “Archivists should appraise, select and maintain archival
material in its historical, legal and administrative context, thus retaining the prin-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

ETHICAL RULES AND CODES OF HONOR RELATED TO MUSEUM ACTIVITIES

55

ciple of provenance, preserving and making evident the original relationships of
documents.”

Professional Conduct

Professional conduct is addressed in ICOM’s code of conduct at article 1.16, con-
cerning the ethical conflict: “The governing body should never require museum
personnel to act in a way that could be considered to conflict with the provisions
of this Code of Ethics, or any national law or specialist code of ethics.” More spe-
cifically, article 7.1. (National and Local Legislation) maintains, “Museums should
conform to all national and local laws and respect the legislation of other states as
they affect their operation”; and article 7.2 (International Legislation) states the
following:

Museum policy should acknowledge the following international legisla-
tion which is taken as a standard in interpreting the ICOM Code of Ethics:

UNESCO Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the
Event of Armed Conflict (The Hague Convention, First Protocol,
1954 and Second Protocol, 1999);

UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property (1970);

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild

Fauna and Flora (1973);

UN Convention on Biological Diversity (1992);
UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen and Illegally Exported Cultural Ob-

jects (1995);

UNESCO Convention on the protection of the Underwater Cultural

Heritage (2001);

UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural

Heritage (2003).

Again, ICOM’s code of ethics (article 8) provides that museums operate in a
professional manner and that members of the museum profession should observe
accepted standards and laws and uphold the dignity and honor of their profes-
sion. They should safeguard the public against illegal or unethical professional con-
duct. Every opportunity should be used to inform and educate the public about
the aims, purposes, and aspirations of the profession to develop a better public
understanding of the museum’s societal contributions.

Besides, the professional conduct is explicitly taken into account by article 8,

which provides for an almost complete regulation, stating the following:

8.1 Familiarity with Relevant Legislation
Every member of the museum profession should be conversant with rel-
evant international, national and local legislation and the conditions of
their employment. They should avoid situations that could be con-
strued as improper conduct.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

56

MANLIO FRIGO

8.2 Professional Responsibility
Members of the museum profession have an obligation to follow
the policies and procedures of their employing institution. How-
ever, they may properly object to practices that are perceived to be
damaging to a museum or the profession and matters of professional
ethics.

8.3 Professional Conduct
Loyalty to colleagues and to the employing museum is an important pro-
fessional responsibility and must be based on allegiance to fundamental
ethical principles applicable to the profession as a whole. They should
comply with the terms of the ICOM Code of Ethics and be aware of any
other codes or policies relevant to museum work.

8.4 Academic and Scientific Responsibilities
Members of the museum profession should promote the investigation,
preservation, and use of information inherent in the collections. They
should, therefore, refrain from any activity or circumstance that might
result in the loss of such academic and scientific data.

8.5 The Illicit Market
Members of the museum profession should not support the illicit traffic
or market in natural and cultural property, directly or indirectly.

One must point out that the provision of article 8.1 appears to envisage an ex-
cessively strict obligation for the members of the museum profession. It provides
for a presumption of knowledge of international, national, and local legislation
concerning the protection and legal regime of cultural property as well as the “con-
ditions of their employment,” an expression that seems to specifically evoke the
knowledge of the case law.

It is also interesting to note that sometimes the codes maintain a distinction
between rules of conduct addressed to society and those concerning professional
conduct, with reference to those that must be complied with when relating to other
professionals. In particular, the European Association of Archaeologists Code of
Practice includes in the former the reference to the provisions provided by the
1970 UNESCO convention regarding any form of activity relating to the trade of
objects of archaeological interest or antiquities; in the latter it includes research
requirements and employment standards recognized by their professional peers.21
At the risk of appearing pleonastic, on behalf of the members, the concern is to
guarantee the respect of the internal provisions concerning the prohibition of any
form of discrimination, on behalf of the members, and, more generally, the con-
ditions of employment. Clearly, this inspires articles 2.9 to 2.10 of the same code.22
Therefore it is possible that the codes of conduct aim to guarantee standard mod-
els of conduct and assure a function as a reminder of certain international and
even national norms that could not be applied in a specific case.

Finally, articles 3, 4, and 5 in CINOA’s code of conduct provide specific rules
concerning the affiliated members’ conduct regarding compliance with the laws

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

ETHICAL RULES AND CODES OF HONOR RELATED TO MUSEUM ACTIVITIES

57

protecting endangered species and prohibiting participation in transactions that
can result in money laundering operations. Article 6 requires affiliated members
to check the authenticity of the objects they possess, as also provided, mutatis
mutandis, by article 3 of the Archivists Code of Conduct.23 Seldom do codes pro-
vide for types of responsibility, regarding living and nonliving species with whom
members work, which are purely ethical and must accounted for on a solely meta-
juridical level.24

Sanctions

Given the peculiarities of the subject matter involved, it would be a vain and use-
less effort to evaluate the effectiveness of the codes of conduct based on sanctions
provided in case of noncompliance. Sanctions are seldom provided for the sus-
pension of the association or the loss of an affiliated member’s status, but even the
procedures for verifying the existence of violations are rarely indicated.

UNESCO’s code of ethics is among the documents that are less vague on this

issue. Article 8 asserts the following:

Violations of this Code of Ethics will be rigorously investigated by (a
body to be nominated by participating dealers). A person aggrieved
by the failure of a trader to adhere to the principles of this Code of
Ethics may lay a complaint before that body, which shall investigate
that complaint before that body, which shall investigate that com-
plaint. Results of the complaint and the principles applied will be made
public.

Regarding ICOM’s code of conduct, refer to ICOM’s statute, specifically article

9 concerning termination of membership:

The membership of an Individual or Institutional Member shall cease if
any of the following circumstances apply:

(a) the member resigns in writing;
(b) the member having been notified by regular post of the annual
subscription payable, fails to pay the subscription within one year
of the due date;

(c) the member has ceased to be qualified for membership of ICOM

by virtue of a change in professional status;

(d) the Executive Council, acting on a recommendation of a Na-
tional Committee or in exceptional circumstances on its own ini-
tiative, terminates the membership of a member for serious
reasons relating to professional ethics or to actions which are sub-
stantially inconsistent with the objectives of ICOM.

Must one conclude, like certain commentators, that the primary function of the
codes of conduct is essentially, if not exclusively, pedagogic?25

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

58

MANLIO FRIGO

CODES OF ETHICS AS ART MARKET REGULATION INSTRUMENTS

After dealing with the sources, areas involved, and aspects concerned by the eth-
ical rules, it is time to briefly discuss the roles that said rules can have as art mar-
ket regulation instruments. First, should the rules contained in the ethical codes
or guidelines (the difference between these two kinds of instruments being none-
theless substantial) influence how international commercial transactions pertain-
ing to the subject matter are carried out? Bearing in mind that these norms concern
the self-regulation of those to whom they are addressed, it is possible to put for-
ward two kinds of remarks. First, the weight carried by these rules must not be
underestimated, given that we are discussing about rules that must be complied
with by those belonging to the category to whom the rules are addressed; they are
binding on the affiliated members, at least when codes create a bond between the
consequences of their violation and specific statutory norms, by making the vio-
lations of the former equal to the violation of the latter.

This last remark implies a second one regarding incomplete nature of these eth-
ical rules. They address only those who carry out activities and act as professionals
of the field, represented, in this instance, by private and public institutions that
run museums and/or traders like antique dealers, art merchants, and so forth. We
shall shortly return to this aspect.

Considering a second issue, it is best to question how these rules influence the
function of the aforementioned commercial transactions. As already discussed,
the subject matter of the ethical rules is sufficiently wide, because it concerns the
acquisition/transfer of goods, the origin of collections, the professional conduct
of the affiliated members, and the sanctions in the event of noncompliance.

Thus, examining the contents of the rules reveals that they are largely drawn on
the norms of the most important international conventions that in the last de-
cades have introduced rules of conduct with reference to the circulation of cul-
tural property. Often they are identical. For example, the norms provided by articles
3 and 5 of the UNIDROIT convention on the restitution and return of cultural
objects as well as the ethical rules of article 6 of ICOM’s ethical code concern the
origin, return, and restitution of collections.

What appears as a weak point intrinsic to ethical rules may transform itself into
an effective strong point. Again, these rules are addressed to the sole associates
and/or structures belonging to the category in question. Nevertheless, remember
that cases are common in which international conventions create norms capable
of influencing market function and encounter significant obstacles to their effec-
tiveness because of state behavior. In this regard, the UNIDROIT case is particu-
larly significant. This convention encounters numerous difficulties caused by the
lack of enthusiasm by important states within the art market that have not yet
ratified the convention. This seems to be a recognized result of the mistrust caused
by certain norms of the convention, specifically concerning giving up the rule pos-
session vaut titre (granting ownership to bona fide possessors) regarding the cir-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

ETHICAL RULES AND CODES OF HONOR RELATED TO MUSEUM ACTIVITIES

59

culation of cultural objects; the inversion of the burden of proof regarding the
good faith possession of goods; and the obligation to return to the legitimate owner,
notwithstanding the buyer’s good faith.

In the cases mentioned, a code of self-regulation addressed to the field’s pro-
fessional dealers and containing clear norms, sufficiently transparent and pro-
vided with sanctions for the event in which they are not complied with, can turn
out to have a positive influence. The code can supplement or substitute binding
norms contained in international conventions that certain states do not want to,
or cannot, ratify or punctually execute.

Indeed, the lack of effective display of sanctions is described as one of the ac-
tual weaknesses of the system. Besides, one must not forget the indirect effect that
can be yielded by the ethical rules. In this regard, specifically referring to the cir-
culation of antiquities, note that with illegal excavations, the doubtful origin of
the objects can only be proved with great difficulty, lacking concrete proof of the
provenance, excavation date, and/or sale or illicit exportation. In such a context,
the failure of a lawsuit aimed at obtaining restitution is almost certain.
A purely private international law approach would obviously focus on the choice
of the law applicable to the title and/or to the contractual obligations of the par-
ties. Nevertheless, remember that international case law, specifically concerning
recovery of objects illegally stolen or exported, clearly illustrates that the outcome
of a claim for recovery or restitution is often unpredictable and uncertain. Also
bear in mind that there are different interpretations and applications of the lex rei
sitae criterion that a priori appears to be neutral and unequivocal.

With reference to the a non domino acquisition, for example, judges coming
from common law countries have sometimes given very different solutions to anal-
ogous cases. In the leading case Winckworth v. Christie, Manson & Woods, the En-
glish judge offered protection to a good faith buyer of objects belonging to a
collection of Japanese art stolen in England, exported, and then bought in Italy
and subsequently sent to London to be sold at Christie’s.

The application of Italian law (lex situs of the objects at the time of the artwork
acquisition by the Italian buyer), and especially of article 1153 of the civil code
(which acknowledges the principle that when it comes to movables possession is
equivalent to title), has determined the rejection of the recovery claim filed by the
deprived legitimate owner.26 On the contrary, Kunstsammlungen zu Weimar v. Eli-
cofon concerns Dürer artwork stolen in Germany during the World War II, moved
to the United States, and here bought by an American citizen. In first and second
degree of adjudication, American judges allowed the recovery claim of the owner,
by applying New York State law, lex situs of the artwork at the time of the execu-
tion of the sale.27

Quite recently, the Queen’s Bench Division’s judgement of the February 1, 2007,
Islamic Republic of Iran v. Berend, concerned a relief fragment of the fifth century
bc from the ancient palace of Persepolis. The fragment was sent to London to be
sold at Christie’s. But the Queen’s Bench Division rejected the recovery claim

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

60

MANLIO FRIGO

brought by the Asian state against the good faith buyer.28 In October 1974 the
defendant bought the fragment in New York; it was delivered in Paris the follow-
ing month and then to London where it remained until December 2005 to be sold
at an auction. Note that the English judge ruled the case based on French law, the
lex situs in November 1974 when the defendant had acquired through possession
the object’s title, and cites article 2279 of the French civil code on good faith
possession.29

Furthermore, note that the application of the lex rei sitae criterion is no less
contradictory if we consider the case law of civil law countries. In 1982 the Tri-
bunal of Turin, in the matter of République of Ecuador v. Danusso, allowed the
recovery claim of the South American state concerning the objects of archaeolog-
ical interest brought into Ecuador by an Italian citizen who had illicitly exported
them to Italy.30 The tribunal decided that the lawsuit pertained to the title on which
the ownership was based and, specifically, the legal facts that enabled to give rise
to property on the objects. Therefore, the applicable lex situs in the given case was
the law of Ecuador (i.e., the law of the place where the property title was acquired).
Conversely, concerning French Minister of Culture v. Italian Ministry of Culture
and De Contessini, the judgement of the 1987 Tribunal of Rome, confirmed by the
Court of Appeal of Rome in 1992 and by the Supreme Court in 1995, has rejected
the recovery claim lodged by the French State to obtain the restitution of tapestries
of the School of Amiens. The tapestries were stolen in the Court of Justice of Riom
and subsequently bought by good faith owners in Italy.31

The aforementioned judgements are based on the application of the lex rei sitae
selected by the Italian conflict of law rules as the lex situs at the time of the sale
and, as a consequence, deemed as the law competent to govern the creation of the
property title. It must be stressed that the Italian judges, in re De Contessini, had
also established that at international level no obligation would have justified the
restitution to France of the stolen goods. Bear in mind that articles 7 and 13 of the
1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property are not self-
executing.32 However, the indirect applicability of the UNESCO 1970 convention
is widely acknowledged by the legal theory as well as case law. In more recent
French case law for example, in an April 5, 2004, judgement concerning Nigeria’s
request to return African statuettes of Nok origin, the Paris Court of Appeal based
on the same reasoning rejected the African state’s recovery claim, and was con-
firmed by the Supreme Court on September 20, 2006.33

Eventually, the restitution of cultural objects claimed by a state is often pre-
vented by the reluctance to give recognition and enforcement to titles obtained
under the law of the country of origin. It is noteworthy that the English Court of
Appeal recently reversed the traditional refusal of recognizing the ownership dec-
larations based on foreign law “penal and public in character,” by granting a claim
in conversion filed by a foreign state. The case of Islamic Republic of Iran v. Bar-
akat concerned some carved jars, bowls, and cups made from chlorite, originating

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

ETHICAL RULES AND CODES OF HONOR RELATED TO MUSEUM ACTIVITIES

61

from recent excavations allegedly unlicensed and unlawful under the law of Iran.
In its decision of December 21, 2007, the Court of Appeal stressed the patrimo-
nial nature of the claim, stating that Iran was declaring itself the owner of all un-
discovered antiquities; but more significantly, as far as the sum of these rights would
amount to ownership under English law, Iran would have a viable claim.34

As authoritatively suggested by some legal scholars and with a different ap-
proach by the Institut de Droit International,35 the departure from the lex rei sitae
tactic and the possible application of a different law—namely the national law of
the object (lex originis)—could provide a more reasonable chance of success when
the controversial issue of restitution of cultural property to the country of origin is
at stake. But even admitting that such a proposal could be accepted by the states’
practice as a positive special conflict of laws rule, the task of determining the “clos-
est connection” with a specific country36 would often prove difficult. Moreover, a
rigid application of the lex originis would not automatically assure the recovery of
the object, as shown by the Kunstsammlungen zu Weimar case discussed earlier.

CONCLUSION

Even in disputes pertaining to recovery claims, or controversies on loans of art-
works or objects of archaeological, historical, or artistic interest, the evidence of
the respect or violation of the ethical rules involved in favor or, respectively, at the
expense of the professional trader involved in such transactions, can actually play
an important role. At least, this is the case with respect to the judicial authority’s
appraisal of good faith and, generally speaking, the parties’ conduct. It is indeed
true that, almost by definition, one party is affiliated to a professional category;
and his or her conduct can be appraised from the perspective of the rules pro-
vided by the codes of conduct of the professional categories involved. To this ex-
tent one can put it in terms of direct effect (i.e., the relevant and usual effect of the
rules consisting of the negative consequences borne by the member in case of se-
rious breach) in all circumstances in which the code or statute of the association/
institute concerned provides sanctions that can lead to the loss of membership in
the category in question.

Practically, this direct effect should exist, at least in cases where the codes of
conduct comprising the ethical rules must be respected by the affiliated members
and governing bodies and applied by the same in a punctual manner. Add to this
the indirect effect that should take place each time said rules of conduct are re-
ferred to, or that the abidance by the same rules is taken into account, as a factual
element to evaluate the conduct of the subjects concerned.

For example, the UNIDROIT convention (article 6, § 2) offers that to deter-
mine whether the possessor knew or reasonably ought to have known that the
cultural object had been illegally exported, “regard shall be had to the circum-
stances of the acquisition.” It is therefore possible that by applying the convention

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

62

MANLIO FRIGO

rules, the national judge may take into account the professional traders’ conduct
with reference to rules provided by the ethical codes. It is noteworthy that often
said ethical codes include more detailed and sometimes stricter rules of conduct
regarding the required diligence than those provided by the law. However, the rules
are not always observed. Besides, the Guidelines on Loans of Antiquities and An-
cient Art drafted by the AAMD specifically imposes on its associates, regarding
acquisition of objects, a level of transparency often higher than that provided for
by a number of national laws. Nonetheless, the code lacks sanctions for breaches
of its norms. It is to be stressed that recently some American museums adopted
stricter acquisition guidelines, likely under the pressure of the aforementioned in-
ternational and national codes.37

Finally, the ethical rules constitute, by definition, the expression of the interests
that they represent and therefore are neither neutral nor necessarily conceived to
safeguard a general interest. It is therefore possible that the professional milieux
involved, whose relevant associations have adopted ethical codes for its associates,
end up expressing vastly different yet fully coherent opinions about the interests
they represent. This may well happen with disputes settled by a judicial authority,
especially in judicial systems that allow a third party with a relevant, albeit ab-
stract, interest to safeguard or intervene in the case either to give the court an
opinion or endorse the position of a party.

Quite recently in the United States a lawsuit was filed between the Federal state
and an important Manhattan antique dealer concerning the appraisal of the dealer’s
importing objects of archaeological interest and the application of the special fed-
eral law (National Stolen Property). The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
was lodged with three amicus curiae briefs: with one by certain private associa-
tions endorsing the defendant’s position (National Association of Dealers in An-
cient Art, International Association of Professional Numismatists, Art Dealers
Association of America, Antique Tribal Art Dealers Association, etc.), with one by
other associations endorsing the state’s position (Archaeological Institute of Amer-
ica, Society for American Archaeology, Society for Historical Archaeology, United
States Committee for the International Council on Monuments and Sites) all of
them representing conflicting interests.38 At this pace we could easily envisage a
conflict between codes of conduct and ask ourselves to determine the criteria aimed
at choosing, between the conflicting interests, the one most worthy of being safe-
guarded. But this is yet another issue.

ENDNOTES

1. See Hague Convention, May 14, 1954, for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict, together with its execution regulation, in force from the August 7, 1956, between
118 states (updated June 2008). The first protocol is in force in 97 states and the second protocol,
signed the March 26, 1999, is in force from the March 9, 2004, between 48 states (updated June
2008).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

ETHICAL RULES AND CODES OF HONOR RELATED TO MUSEUM ACTIVITIES

63

2. See Paris Convention, November 14, 1970, on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the
Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, in force since April 24, 1972,
between 115 states (updated June 2008), including the recent ratification of Germany (November
30, 2007).

3. See Rome Convention, June 24, 1995, on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects, in

force since July 1, 1998, between 29 states (updated June 2008).

4. See Paris Convention, November 2, 2001, on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Her-

itage, ratified by 14 states and not yet in force.

5. The Paris Convention of October 17, 2003, to safeguard intangible cultural heritage, entered

into force on April 20, 2006. As of June 2008 it is in force between 95 states.

6. The Paris Convention of October 20, 2005, on the protection and promotion of the diversity
of cultural expressions. It is in force as of March 18, 2007, between 83 states plus the European
Community (accession on December 18, 2006).
7. See Council Regulation (EEC) n. 3911/92 of December 9, 1992, on the exportation of cultural
goods and Council Directive 93/7 EEC, of March 15, 1993, on the return of cultural objects unlaw-
fully removed from the territory of a member state. About “l’avancée prudente du droit commu-
nautaire” on the subject of the protection of cultural property, see Cornu, “L’Europe des biens culturels
et le marché,” 677 ff. On some interpretation problems concerning community rules and circulation
of cultural property, see Frigo, Cultural Property v. Cultural Heritage, 367 ff.

8. See the Athens Charter for the Restoration of Historic Monuments, adopted at the First In-
ternational Congress of Architects and Technicians of Historic Monuments, and the International
Charter for the Conservation and Restoration of Monuments and Sites, adopted in 1964 by the II
International Congress of Architects and Technicians of Historic Monuments in Venice, at the site
www.icomos.org (accessed March 10, 2009). The new Athens Charter was adopted by the Council
for European Urbanism in 2003.

9. See Article 5 e of the 1970 UNESCO convention.
10. On the indirect applicability within the legal system of the contracting states, see the judge-
ment of the Court of Appeal of Paris of April 5, 2004 (2002/09897), the application of article 13 c.
of the convention by Nigeria who claimed the property of nine African statuettes of Nok origin for
sale in Paris. See also the judgement by the Italian Supreme Court n. 12166 of November 24, 1995
(FI, 1996, I, p. 907), concerning the recovery claim of the French state aimed at obtaining the res-
titution of tapestries stolen in the Court of Justice of Riom and bought in Italy by good faith buyers.
In both cases the restitution claims were rejected, because of the lack of convention application
norms in the law ratifying the 1970 UNESCO convention.

11. The code was approved by the General Assembly in Florence in 1987, amended in Stockholm

on June 26, 1998, and in New York on May 11, 2005.

12. See the text of the code adopted February 27, 2006, at www.aamd.org (accessed March 10,

2009).

13. See the text of the draft adopted June 4, 2008, at www.aamd.org (accessed March 10, 2009).
14. See the text of the code adopted in Ravenna September 27, 1997, at www.e-a-a.org (accessed

March 10, 2009).

15. See the text of the Code of Ethics of the International Council on Archives, adopted in Beijing

at www.ica.org (accessed March 10, 2009).

16. See the text of the code of the CINOA at www.cinoa.org (accessed March 10, 2009).
17. See the text of the Report issued on June 3, 2008, at www.aamd.org (accessed March 10, 2009).

According to Section E of the draft,

Member museums normally should not acquire a work unless provenance re-
search substantiates that the work was outside its country of probable modern
discovery before 1970 or was legally exported from its probable country of mod-
ern discovery. The museum should promptly publish acquisitions of archaeo-
logical materials and ancient art, in print or electronic form, including in these
publications an image of the work(or representative images in the case of groups

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

64

MANLIO FRIGO

of objects) and its provenance, thus making this information readily available to
all interested parties.

Pursuant to the last paragraph of Section F, “The museum must prominently post on the AAMD
website, to be established, an image and the information about the work as described in Section E
above, and all facts relevant to the decision to acquire it, including its known provenance.”
18. See AAM Code of Ethics for Museums, www.aam-us.org/museumresources/ethics/coe.cfm,

p. 3 (accessed March 10, 2009).

19. This well-known distinction is in the UNIDROIT convention where article 3 (which includes
the notion of theft and therefore of an object eligible for restitution: “a cultural object which has
been unlawfully excavated or lawfully excavated but unlawfully retained”) deals with restitution and
article 5 deals with return.

20. Many national laws by now provide for norms that exempt loaned artworks from judicial sei-
zures and other precautionary measures that cannot naturally be governed by codes of conduct. See
Jayme,“L’immunité des oeuvres d’art prétées.” 175 ss; Weller,“Immunity for Artworks on Loan?” 97 ff.
21. The 1997 EEA Code of Practice at articles 1.1 to 1.8 deal with “Archaeologists and Society”

and articles 2.1 to 2.10 with “Archaeologists and Profession.” See article 1.6:

Archaeologists will not engage in, or allow their names to be associated with,
any form of activity relating to the illicit trade in antiquities and works of art,
covered by the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the means of prohibiting and pre-
venting the illicit import, export, and transfer of ownership of cultural property.

Article 2.1 states, “Archaeologists will carry out their work to the highest standards recognised by
their professional peers.”

22. Article 2.9 provides that “In recruiting staff for projects, archaeologists shall not practise any
form of discrimination based on sex, religion, age, race, disability, or sexual orientation,” and article
2.10 “The management of all projects must respect national standards relating to conditions of em-
ployment and safety.”

23. See the CINOA code of ethics, article 3 “The affiliated members of CINOA agree to comply
with the laws on the protection of endangered species. They therefore agree not to trade in objects
manufactured from materials that are protected under the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species”: Article 4 “The members will have to take all the necessary measures to detect
stolen objects and refer, among others, to registers that are published to this effect and to use these
judiciously.”; Article 5 “The members cannot under any circumstance participate in transactions
which to the best of their knowledge can result in money-laundering operations”; Article 6 “It is the
duty of each one of the members to check the authenticity of the objects they possess.” The code of
Ethics for Archivists provides at article 3 that “Archivists should protect the authenticity of docu-
ments during archival processing, preservation and use.”

24. See for example, the American Anthropological Association Code of Ethics of June 1998 at
www.aaanet.org (accessed March 10, 2009); its article III.A “Responsibility to people and animals
with whom anthropological researchers work and whose lives and cultures they study” states, “An-
thropological researchers have primary ethical obligation to the people, species and materials they
study and to the people with whom they work.”

25. See O’Keefe, “Codes of Ethics: Forms and Functions in Cultural Heritage,” 32 ff. at 47.
26. See Winkworth v. Christie’s, Manson & Woods, 1980 2 WLRep, 937 ff.
27. See the judgments of the Eastern District Court of New York of June 12, 1981, 20 ILM (1981),
1122, and of the Court of Appeals for the Second District, 678 Federal Reporter. 2d Series, 1150, 2d
Cir. 1982. Note that had the German law been applied—place of original situation—the request
would have been dismissed because the right of the legitimate owner would have been subject to the
statute of limitations.

28. See England and Wales High Court, Queen’s Bench Division, February 1, 2007, Islamic Re-
public of Iran v. D. Berend [2007] England and Wales HWCH 132, at www.bailii.org (accessed March
10, 2009).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

ETHICAL RULES AND CODES OF HONOR RELATED TO MUSEUM ACTIVITIES

65

29. See Audit, “Le statut des biens culturels en droit,” 405 ff.
30. See Tribunal of Turin, February 22, 1982, RDIPP, 1982, 625.
31. See the Italian Court of Cassation, November 24, 1995, n. 12166, FI, 1996, I, 907.
32. See Tribunal of Rome, June 27, 1987, and Frigo, La circolazione internazionale, 132. Pursuant

to article 7. b. (i), state parties undertake

to prohibit the import of cultural property stolen from a museum or a religious
or secular public monument or similar institution in another State Party to this
Convention after the entry into force of this Convention for the States con-
cerned, provided that such property is documented as appertaining to the in-
ventory of that institution.

According to article 13 c. the states parties to this convention also undertake, consistent with the
laws of each state “(c) to admit actions for recovery of lost or stolen items of cultural property
brought by or on behalf of the rightful owners.”

33. See Court of appeal of Paris, April 5, 2004, and the French Court of Cassation, September 20,

2006, République fédérale du Nigéria c.de Montbrison, JCP, 2006, IV, 3005, 1917.

34. See Court of Appeals December 21, 2007, Islamic Republic of Iran v. Barakat [2007] England

and Wales Court of Appeal 1374. The court noted the following:

[I]t is important to bear in mind that it is not the label which foreign law gives
to the legal relationship, but its substance, which is relevant. If the right given by
Iranian law are equivalent to ownership in English law, then English law would
treat that as ownership for the purposes of the conflict of laws.

35. See Jayme, Neue Anknüpfungsmaximen für den Kulturgüterschutz, 35 ff; and Armbrüster, La
revendication de biens culturels, 723 ff. From a standpoint closer to the UNIDROIT convention ap-
proach, see also the resolution adopted on September 3, 1991, at its Basel session, by the Institut de
Droit International, La vente internationale d’objets d’art sous l’angle de la protection du patrimoine
culturel, (http://idi-iil.org, accessed March 10, 2009) stating the following at article 4 § 1:

If under the law of the country of origin there has been no change in title to the
property, the country of origin may claim, within a reasonable time, that the
property be returned to its territory, provided that it proves that the absence of
such property would significantly affect its cultural heritage.

36. Pursuant to article 1, § b of the Institut de Droit International’s resolution of 1991 the coun-
try of origin is “the country with which the property concerned is most closely linked from the
cultural point of view.”

37. See the example of the Getty Museum of Los Angels in Nafziger, “The Principles for Coop-

eration,” 147 ff., at 152.

38. See United States v. F. Schultz, 333 F3d 393 (2d Cir. 2003); see also the comments of Brodie,
“An Archaeologist’s View of the Trade,” 52 ff, who wonders “what standard of provenance should be
regarded as acceptable for a museum intending to acquire a cultural object? (62). See also I. P. de
Angelis, How much Provenance is Enough? Post-Schultz Guidelines for Art museum Acquisition of Ar-
chaeological Materials and Ancient Art, ibidem, 398.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Armbrüster, C. “La revendication de biens culturels du point de vue du droit international privé.”
Revue critique de droit international privé (2004): 723 ff.

Audit, B. “Le statut des biens culturels en droit international privé français.” Revue Internationale de
Droit Compare (1994).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067

66

MANLIO FRIGO

Brodie, N. “An Archaeologist’s View of the Trade in Unprovenanced Antiquities.” In Art and Cultural
Heritage, Law, Policy and Practice, edited by B. T. Hoffman. Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Cornu, M. “L’Europe des biens culturels et le marché.” Journal du Droit International (2002): 677.

Frigo, M. “Cultural Property v. Cultural Heritage: A Battle of Concepts in International Law.” IRRC
2004, 367.

Frigo, M. La circolazione internazionale dei beni culturali, 2nd ed., (Giuffré), Milano, 2007.

Jayme, E. “L’immunité des oeuvres d’art prétées. Quelques procédures et législations récentes en Eu-
rope.” In Claims for Restitution of Looted Art, edited by M. A. Renold and P. Gabus. Genève, Zürich,
Bâle, 2004.

Jayme, E. Neue Anknüpfungsmaximen für den Kulturgüterschutz im internationalen Privatrecht.
Rechtsfragen des Internationalen Kulturgüterschutzes, Heidelberg: 1994.

Nafziger, J. A. R. “The Principles for Cooperation in the Mutual Protection and Transfer of Cultural
Material.” Chicago Journal of International Law 8 (2007).

O’Keefe, P. J. “Codes of Ethics: Forms and Functions in Cultural Heritage.” International Journal of
Cultural Property 7 (1998).

Weller, M. “Immunity for Artworks on Loan? A Review of International Customary Law and Mu-
nicipal Anti-seizure Statutes in Light of the Lichtenstein Litigation.” VandJTL (2005).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090067


