International Journal of Cultural Property (2005) 12:315–345. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2005 International Cultural Property Society
DOI: 10.1017/S0940739105050186

Gone Digital: Aboriginal Remix
and the Cultural Commons
Kimberly Christen*

Abstract: Recently the commons has become a predominant metaphor for the
types of social relationships between people, ideas, and new digital
technologies. In IP debates, the commons signifies openness, the exclusion of
intermediaries, and remix culture that is creative, innovative, and politically
disobedient. This article examines the material and social implications of these
debates (and the legal copyright regimes they interact with) in the translation
and remix of Warumungu culture onto a set of locally produced DVDs.
Although DVD technology can account for concerns such as monitoring
access, preserving cultural knowledge, and reinforcing existing kinship
networks, it also brings with it the possibility of multiple reproductions,
knowledge sampling, and unintended mobilizations. Tracking the shifting
mandates and emergent protocols in this digital interface redirects the lines of
the debate to include multiple structures of accountability, ongoing systems of
inequity, and overlapping access regimes involved in the always tense processes
of cultural innovation.

Almost eight years after our first meeting, Edith Nakkamarra and I sat in her back-
yard on Smith Street watching an iPhoto slide show on my PowerBook G3.1
Photo after photo—nearly 1,000 in all—prompted discussions of several years’

*Washington State University, Comparative Ethnic Studies. E-mail: kachristen@wsu.edu.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: This research was assisted by grants from the Australian Institute for Ab-
original and Torres Strait Islander Studies (Grant # G2001/6585), the University of California Pacific
Rim Research Pro-gram and the Digital Cultural Institutions Project (DCIP) of the Social Science
Research Council with funds provided by the Rockefeller Foundation. Generous comments by the
coordinators, fellows, and participants at the DCIP workshop, particularly Shannon Jackson, Wil-
liam Warner, and Geoffrey Bowker, helped ground this work. Sirida Srisombati’s enthusiastic sup-
port of this project in its early stages and her editorial eye have been invaluable. Chris Cooney’s
technological guidance, partnership, and tireless work to integrate Warumungu protocols into the
digital architecture of the DVD laid the groundwork for this ongoing project. Jason Jackson’s invi-
tation for me to be part of the Intellectual and Cultural Property colloquium series at Indiana Uni-
versity prompted me to elab-orate on my initial research. His suggestions in the final stages of revisions
were much appreciated. Finally, I’d like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for IJCP whose com-
ments helped me tighten the structure of the article. All quirks are, of course, my own.

315

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

316

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

worth of trips to locations in and around the remote town of Tennant Creek in
Australia’s Northern Territory.2 The photos served as an inventory of sites, stories,
and shared memories for Nakkamarra and me. Since 1995, I had collaborated with
Nakkamarra and a group of Warumungu women to compile a community history
text—Anyinginyi Manuku Apparr: Stories from Our Country—based on their in-
dividual and shared experiences of both traditional life and contemporary dis-
placement and resettlement at the hands of the Australian government.3

It was during my visits between 2001 and 2003 that our catalogue went digital,
allowing me to record and reproduce images and events more easily. Because our
trips usually involved 8 to 10 women, each wanting photos of particular places,
my digital camera served as an impromptu menu of photos. During our trips I
could transfer the images from my Nikon CoolPix 9000 to my PowerBook for
nightly slide shows. As I took “orders” for photos, the women made their own lists
of places we hadn’t been to, sites they wanted photographed, and new opportu-
nities to travel to another “country” (ancestral homeland).4 In addition to the dig-
ital photos, I used a digital video camera to record people talking about country,
documenting their own and collective experiences, and performing songs and
dances associated with those countries.

The images and audio in this emerging archive are of many varieties. Some are
self-conscious narrations of Warumungu life that speak to a non-Warumungu au-
dience whose own Australian history lacks an Aboriginal component.5 These are
open—there are no limits placed on their viewing. Other selections are aimed at
younger Warumungu generations whose territorial instruction is culturally man-
dated but often undermined by town life. Children who spend their days in the
local primary school or young adults who maintain households in town camps
are often less able to travel to their ancestral countries or spend extended time
with elders who hold cultural knowledge. These images are meant for the children
of specific kin groups who share both ancestral lands and family histories. Other
images are restricted based on more specific territorial and kin affiliations; their
availability is limited by criteria such as age, gender, and one’s own ritual knowl-
edge and performance history within a group. Another set of tapes contains pop-
ular events such as the local Eagles footy games, Tennant Creek Aboriginal bands
playing their own music, and the women’s grandchildren playing at my house.
These can often be reproduced with permission of those in the recording—they
are partially closed. And finally, there are recordings that contain intimate ritual
materials such as songs and dances that are closed—only to be viewed by people
with proper ritual standing as dictated by those who are bosses for the specific
knowledge.6

In addition to our own growing visual and aural catalogue, we collected pho-
tos, documents and audiotapes from several of the national archives. In fact, after
one trip to the National Archives in Darwin, we returned to Tennant Creek with
over 600 pages of photocopied documents about Warumungu people—some still
living, others deceased. This paper history, as Nakkamarra labeled it, evoked am-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

317

biguous emotions. It was invigorating for the women to find documentation
concerning relatives and friends. But it was also hard to ignore the stream of de-
humanizing descriptions that filled the papers. Warumungu people’s lives on cat-
tle stations, at missions, and in town camps were monitored, catalogued, and
measured by their “progress” towards assimilation into white Australian society.7
These documents were off-limits to Aboriginal people until very recently. But with
the nation’s recent attempts at reconciliation8 with its indigenous populations, many
Australian archives now have memorandums of understanding (MOUs) with Ab-
original communities. These agreements allow community members to access pre-
viously sealed government files. Along with access comes the potential for Aboriginal
communities to repurpose these records by setting them against their own remem-
berings. These recovered documents, although public in the sense that they are
available to large groups of Aboriginal people, are also inserted into Warumungu
protocols for information distribution. When we returned to Tennant Creek with
the files, for example, I sorted them by place (Banka Banka station, Phillip Creek
mission, etc.) and then listed family names on the top of each set to make iden-
tification easier. Family members could then determine who could and could not
view, copy, and exchange the newly recovered information.
A public/private opposition lacks specificity and erases the vibrant nature of
informational practices embodied in and recorded by an always-changing set of
technologies. Warumungu notions of open and closed knowledge sets are not
either-or propositions. Instead, these English equivalents gesture to a set of stan-
dards by which differently situated community members monitor responsibility,
accountability, and acceptability in relation to knowledge of country and kin. Age,
gender, ritual knowledge, and territorial affiliations: these combine to limit and
produce nodes within the open-closed network. Community practices, national pol-
icies, and various collaborators cooperate to continually redefine how objects, peo-
ple, and information interact. The system is always in negotiation.

Digital technologies offer mobility—new ways to access and extend territorial
networks necessary to maintain and produce cultural practices and products. They
also provoke paralysis and end negotiation when their trajectories seem only future-
oriented and fast-paced, when they are seen as a cultural threat, invasion, or the
inevitable catalyst for the erasure of tradition.9 In this article, I examine the man-
agement of Warumungu cultural knowledge, specifically its reproduction and cre-
ation in relation to digital technologies, cultural tourism, and recent national and
international legislation relating to intellectual property rights. I suggest that, at
their discursive and material intersection, local knowledge regimes redefine na-
tional and global debates concerning the preservation and production of indig-
enous traditional knowledge in the cultural commons. If the colonial idea of the
archive was to collect and store the world’s treasures for the betterment of man-
kind, this emerging Warumungu archive is part of an intimate set of kinship
relations and a dynamic socioterritorial network that rubs up against national ter-
ritorial boundaries and legal structures aimed at protecting indigenous culture.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

318

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

ALLURING PROPOSITIONS

The allure of studying indigenous uses of new technologies lies in the juxtaposi-
tion of two seemingly contradictory elements: the past-oriented, romantic notion
of indigenous peoples who are somehow in modernity but not of it, set against the
future-oriented, equally romantic notion of new technologies as the signifier of a
progressive, fast-paced, global modernity. Images of indigenous people using new
technology conjure this supposed opposition. Intel, IBM, and Compaq are only a few
technology giants who have fed this cultural juxtaposition in their advertisement
campaigns.10 For a contradiction to be imaginable, it must function in a given set
of standards and practices: this one says that indigenous people cannot be simul-
taneously traditional and modern, technologically savvy and politically astute, ma-
terially oriented and authentically indigenous. That logic is wrong.

Over the last two decades, indigenous uses of new technologies have been part
of the emergence of a global politics of indigeneity, a boom in cultural tourism,
and the increased debates over what constitutes—and who owns—intellectual prop-
erty and cultural knowledge.11 Indigenous communities’ integration of digital tech-
nologies into cultural tourism ventures, language revitalization programs, cultural
heritage projects, and land-management schemes foregrounds the multiple layers
of connection between technological innovations, economic sustainability, and cul-
tural production.12

In Australia, as in other settler nations, the complex convergence of traditional cul-
tural materials and digital technologies has produced a tangible shift in archiving
practices and their attendant assumptions about cultural preservation, distribu-
tion, and reproduction.13,14 Readily available digital photos, CDs, DVDs and VHS
tapes as well as digital video recorders, digital cameras, scanners, and database soft-
ware are part of—and at least partially responsible for—institutional and organi-
zational shifts in modes of archiving and remembering. The archive’s history, Diana
Taylor argues, is tainted by its association with “supposedly enduring materials”—
documents, buildings, bones—assumed to be “resistant to change” (2003, 19). Co-
lonial salvage projects and the destruction and erasure of cultural materials and
practices they provoked haunt contemporary archiving practices and products.

But not all haunting inspires fear. Indigenous-run museums, heritage projects,
and cultural centers are now infused with, and grow out of, explicitly political and
economic indigenous practices.15 As James Clifford suggests:

A symptomatic critique of heritage work may see it as occupying a com-
fortable niche in postmodern “multicultural” hegemonies: every iden-
tity gets their exhibition, Web site, coffee-table book, or film. I have argued
that this view, while partly correct, misses a great deal of indigenous cul-
tural process and politics. The old/new articulations, performances, and
translations of identity are not enough to bring about structural socio-
economic change. But they reflect and to a real extent create new con-
ditions for indigenous solidarity, activism, and participation in diverse
public spheres. When they are understood as part of a wider politics of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

319

self-determination, heritage projects are open-ended in their signifi-
cance (2004, 17).

In Clifford’s view, heritage work and the cultural negotiation it entails are
part of a wider set of indigenous politics that should not be assumed to privi-
lege tradition at the expense of emergent articulations and collaborations. The
ideological and conceptual residue of colonial assemblages that once haunted
archiving work are being appropriated by and mixed in (up) with indigenous sets
of motivations.16

As I collaborated with Warumungu community members to produce the Any-
inginyi Manuku Apparr book, we used a range of digital recording equipment to
collect, store, and archive stories, songs, dances, and photos. Like most Warumu-
ngu cultural projects, our book work was a catalyst for traveling. Going to and
maneuvering through country is a crucial part of maintaining community and
kin relations and their material and social benefits. “People gotta keep moving,”
Edith Nakkamarra is fond of telling me. As we traveled, on foot and by Toyota, we
traced histories of personal and communal displacement and replacement, loss,
and suffering as well as happiness and hope. As stories were told, the community
history retraced ancestral dreaming tracks and settler circuits.17 The intersection
and importance of both ancestral territories and settler sites on the landscape marks
a refusal by Aboriginal people to neatly divide their lives into traditional (before
colonization) and modern (everything after). These mobile and placed narratives
are self-conscious reflections on a history of contact: both ancestors and un-
invited guests constitute this community’s legacy.

After dozens of country trips, a mounting stack of MiniDV tapes, and numer-
ous requests for copies of tapes, I realized that a DVD might be one way to pack-
age our growing country catalogue. As I packed up a box with stacks of photos
and PAL VHS tapes for return to Tennant Creek, my son Jakob clicked through
his Lord of the Rings DVD; the making of portions were his favorite parts. He ma-
neuvered through the menu, past the play movie screen to the appendices, where
he scrolled through a list of choices: costume design, script, J. R. R. Tolkien, music,
and so forth. It hit me. Perfect—a medium that allows viewers to choose their
entry points and path through the data while also personalizing their relation to
the data strings. DVD technology could account for the multiple concerns ex-
pressed by Warumungu women: monitoring access, preserving cultural knowl-
edge, and reinforcing existing kinship networks.

Aboriginal constituencies—or mobs in Aboriginal English—have been con-
cerned with the sliding line between preservation and innovation, access and ex-
cess, loss and longevity in relationship to cultural knowledge and cultural sharing
for some time.18 Although the issues of access and accountability are not new, the
scale and scope have shifted. During the 1970s, Aboriginal people collaborated
with lawyers, anthropologists, and various government institutions to document
their spiritual affiliations to land. They did this for practical reasons: to get some
of their land back. The 1976 (Northern Territory) Land Rights Act mandated such

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

320

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

documentation, and thus collaboration, to determine ownership of land (Peter-
son and Langton 1983; Merlan 1998; Povinelli 2002). Proving ownership in Aus-
tralian legal terms is not a new type of cultural translation for Aboriginal people.
But if the land claims process demonstrated anything about Aboriginal modes of
ownership, it was that there are multiple constituencies within Aboriginal group-
ings to whom singular ownership proves hard to determine.19 The law’s standard-
ization has provided some measure of empowerment for those Aboriginal mobs able
to prove their claims; others have been dismissed and disavowed by the nation.20,21
The women I work with were all part of the Warumungu land claims process
and continue to seek collaborative projects that maintain their cultural integrity
while also strengthening and extending their local power and knowledge. While
working on the book project, determining which country sites to include, who
would be invited to participate, and how each place and story would be told meant
consciously debating the structure of cultural openness. The women’s traditional
knowledge—of songs, territories, history, flora and fauna, and the like—was open
for recording, but there would be limits on its reproduction and reception. Deter-
mining the lines between women’s business and men’s business, family and indi-
vidual histories, and preexisting community tensions all played a part in refixing
lines of accountability.22 Negotiating what should be made open and how to re-
strict access to the rest of the material was our starting point. Permission would
be required. Delineating the parameters for levels of openness involved determin-
ing how to standardize the cultural protocols that already sanction the viewing of
territory- and kin-related materials. Early in our work the women decided that
the book should be open, that is, available to both local community members and
outsiders—tourists, other researchers, government officials, and so on. But after
years of work, we had an excess of material, most in digital form.

In the summer of 2003, I suggested the idea of producing a DVD to the main
group of women involved in the book project. The idea was well received, although,
like many types of cultural translations, a tangible object was necessary to test the
concept’s logic. In July 2004, after working with my partner Chris Cooney on a pro-
totype, we returned to Tennant Creek with an initial version of the DVD’s interface,
links, and content to give community members an idea of the proposed product and
its capabilities. If the DVD could provide a way to compile distinct paths through
culturally sensitive visual and aural materials, it could be used by diverse members
of the community and archived for generations to come. Producing a user-friendly,
culturally-appropriate DVD would provide community members with various lev-
els of literacy access to these digital materials in a way that promotes cultural pres-
ervation and leaves open the possibility for new cultural productions.

SOCIALLY NETWORKED INTERFACE

The DVD’s dynamic form is well suited to incorporate and account for Waru-
mungu concerns over viewing practices based on multiple sets of identifiers, such

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

321

as age, gender, and land affiliations. Chris and I knew the infrastructure, design,
and interface needed to address community networks of accountability. One of
the women working on the DVD explained viewing stipulations this way: “see,
cause we’re not supposed to look for other families [country], like I should only
look for mine, not others.” Mundane practices such as the ways people organized
themselves at meetings or how people avoided one another during the viewing of
cultural materials articulated this system of restrictions and served as a guide for
the DVD’s information architecture. The main interface is not a map or replica-
tion of social networks onto digital networks. It is a partial grafting—a selective
process whereby cultural standards are reworked within a digital domain.

This partial grafting was already in place. Warumungu social protocols were
evident in the organization and use of a shared iMac at the Nyinkka Nyunyu Art and
Culture Centre in town. The hard drive on this shared computer is named
wumpurrarni (Aboriginal people), the most basic group identifier for Warumungu
people. It is further partitioned into two sections: kartti (man) and kirriji
(woman). Hundreds of files are placed within each of these categories, with the only
unique identifier being the file name. File names are often very long, for example,
“jampindrovingatrockhampton”—a conflation of name (Jampin), experience (drov-
ing), and place (Rockhampton). The choice of file names reflects community mem-
bers’ attempts to sort information without using mutually exclusive categories or a
standard naming convention, either of which could imply singular ownership, which
no individual can claim within their extended kin network.
Instead of reproducing this standard file/folder “page interface,”23 as the DVD’s
organizational structure, we thought that a filter-inspired interface would allow
users to sort and search based on changing criteria. Although DVD technology
does not afford dynamic searching, it does allow one to manipulate material through
directed choices. Prompted by familiar images and culturally relevant categories,
users can then chart a path through the data on the DVD.

The first prototype tested this logic (see Figure 1). Main Menu Screen: Anying-
inyi Manuku Apparr image—painted by Edith Nakkamarra and reproduced dig-
itally from the front cover of the first version of the book. Half-circles painted in
red ochre—large and small—are surrounded by black and white dots. In the mid-
dle, a dash of blue-green forms a circle.

Click in the circle. Audio: Edith explains the design, “We all sit by a fire, night-

time. Talk about the old days, like one mob and then another.”

Click. Enter the next screen: a series of country names, historical events, and
family names in Warumungu and English with graphical representations. Click
Kunjarra. Next screen. Another set of choices: introduction, Kunjarra stories, Kun-
jarra songs, women’s dance.

(See Figure 2.) Click Kunjarra stories. More choices: dates, personal names, events,
place names. Click Protest. Fade in. 31 July 2000: Kunjarra. We see: clear blue sky,
auburn-red boulders in the background, several women and children walk about.
Nappanangka and Nakkamarra stand in front of a white Toyota Land Cruiser. Watch

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

322

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

FIGURE 1. Main page of the Anyinginyi Manuku Apparr DVD. The background painting
depicts the shared work of many groups who hold up the country.

and listen. For ten minutes the women recount the way they held off miners from
their land in 1989. Fade out. Back to the previous screen. Click photos (same day).
Choose slide show. Click show all. Watch: Nappanangka and Nakkamarra sit near
the old camp that served as their makeshift home for their two-month stand off
with miners. Fade out. And on, twenty-one photos to view from that day. Fade
back to the previous screen. Choose another entry point.

A series of choices directs user movement. Each prompt has a cultural protocol
embedded: gender restrictions, country affiliations, social relations, and the like.
Community members direct their own movements through a compilation of dif-
fering historical moments. In this way, the interface works off an understood VCR
logic—start, play, stop. However, the DVD’s format allows users to access multiple
points of entry and group existing data in variable presentations. The singularity
of the DVD—as one object—masks the multiplicity of cultural work it allows. It
can preserve as well as expand knowledge practices. It is part of a cultural mandate
to both properly distribute knowledge and maintain its integrity along well-
defined (but not unchanging) social networks.

The work involved in production and the process of merging protocols for dis-
tribution, both local Warumungu ones and those attached to the DVD’s techno-
logical format, is never easy or tension free. Those involved in our project are also

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

323

FIGURE 2. Kunjarra “country” page from the Anyinginyi Manuku Apparr DVD. Country
pages contain a variety of information, images, and audio chosen by the custodians for
each location.

simultaneously workers for or collaborators on other projects, including mapping
country sites, compiling Warumungu-language books, producing local compact
discs (CDs), and so forth. Conflict and collaboration were part of our negotiating
process. Individuals and groups have agendas—some overlap, others don’t. With
or without digital archives, culture work is never clear-cut. Disagreements over
access and accountability are not thwarted by this technology. Technological trade-
offs are always inflected by social networks, whereby people integrate their own
mechanisms for control and change into the technology. Use is not predeter-
mined. Unintended outcomes and uses are standard. Both technology and social
protocols shift.

Like other cultural negotiations (human-to-human and human-to-technology),
this one was part of an ongoing Warumungu dialogue with others. Rather than
see the technology as something that might lead to what anthropologist Eric
Michaels called an “electronic invasion” (1994, 81), I suggest that these collabora-
tions are negotiated within a dynamic set of cultural protocols that continually
tack back and forth between innovation and preservation. There are many gradi-
ents between what is assumed to be open—and how it functions in that capacity—
and what may be closed. These women decided, based on their history together,
their combined and individual knowledge of country, and their own ritual obli-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

324

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

gations, how to share and extend knowledge. Others in the community use a sim-
ilar framework to make their own decisions; neither the system nor the knowledge
is static.

New technologies enter into and circulate within indigenous communities in
combination with tourists, researchers, government funding agencies, and local
community members.24 Seeing these as inherently disruptive denies the capacity
of local intellectual property regimes to integrate emerging technologies and re-
work their attendant social relations. Negotiations over access and appropriate-
ness are based on changing sets of conditions from the most hostile (colonialism)
to the seemingly mundane (new technologies). Neither technology nor tradition
holds a trump card. Existing and emerging social and technological relations func-
tion in dialogue with one another; predicting how the conversation will end is
fraught. To be sure, compromise and collaboration will be part of the mix.

SHIFTING MANDATES

One of the challenges we encountered in designing the interface for the DVD was
to link this seemingly contradictory mandate—to preserve cultural knowledge and
promote cultural innovation/reproduction—with existing social networks as well
as the structure of DVD technology. When I previewed the DVD for the group of
women who are “bosses” for most of the material included, they expanded their
focus to include another constituency: tourists. In July 2003, the Nyinkka Nyunyu
Art and Culture Centre opened in Tennant Creek. These same women had been
intimately involved with the conception and production of the centre. This new
venue for Warumungu cultural products brings with it the possibility of an ex-
panded market for the DVD as well as a place where interested community mem-
bers can access repatriated objects, digitally stored photos and video, and the digital
technologies that allow for their combination. With a resource area for local com-
munity members as well as a museum area and gift shop, Nyinkka Nyunyu’s func-
tion is not only (or merely) tourism. Instead, the copresence of repatriated objects
and newly produced ones (like the DVD) points to the already underway pro-
cesses of cultural remix.

As we met with the community members involved, it became clear that the com-
plex structure of the DVD’s interface, although necessary to maintain cultural re-
strictions internally, was not enough to guarantee that proper social etiquette would
be followed by non-Warumungu people who might view the contents. With a tour-
ist audience, local children, and a general Warumungu audience in their view, the
stakeholders decided that the initial DVD, like the book on which it is based, should
be open for a general audience. Like other cultural knowledge that remains open,
available to noninitiated community members and outsiders, the material on the
DVD is part of an extensive social network, one that continues to grow and ex-
pand as it is reproduced and redistributed. Open does not mean free as in no cost

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

325

or free as in no restrictions. But open in this case signals an assumption that trans-
gressions or misuse might occur, but it limits the reach of those breaches to only
specific sets of knowledge and practices. Thus, the DVD could encourage new part-
nerships and the extension of social relations along a large, perhaps global, net-
work at least partially defined by community protocols.

To accommodate this new audience and viewing protocol, we reworked the
interface with three key identifiers suggested by the women: country, history,
and culture. Community members’ choice of key words reflects their position
within this new tourist market, eight years of planning for Nyinkka Nyunyu, and
government-sponsored community projects aimed at preserving culture.25

Country was never in question—it is the main way Warumungu people iden-
tify. “Where’s your country?” is a standard greeting. That people are related to land,
and land to people, is a given, although romantic connotations given to this re-
ciprocal relationship by others distorts both the practicality and spirituality of these
relations. Here country functions as a meta-tag; it encompasses a large set of re-
lations built over intersecting networks.

History in this case refers to stories of contact with outsiders. As we were search-
ing for a key word, people latched on to history as a way to distinguish stories told
about relations with papulanji (non-Aboriginal people).

Culture, on the other hand, is the categorical referent for local Warumungu ac-
tivities such as song, dance, and artwork. Culture, specifically gained prominence
in local usage during the last ten years in conversation with the national boom in
cultural tourism, the rise in popularity of Aboriginal art globally,26 and as prep-
aration for the Nyinkka Nyunyu Art and Culture Centre in town proceeded.

That these terms carry a colonial residue was obvious to both Warumungu and
non-Warumungu constituencies involved. But the Warumungu people who chose
these terms did so both to speak across audiences—to foreign tourists, locals, and
non-Aboriginal Australians—and to speak back to the dominant national assump-
tions associated with the terms. Their purposeful repurposing indicates a reshuf-
fling of historical relations and a counter-narrative, but not one that rejects
indiscriminately. Warumungu residents are involved in an array of culture-making
activities in which new technologies, out-of-town collaborators, national and re-
gional funding agencies and various community interests mingle. In each case,
these joint ventures are scrutinized and negotiated by different mobs; there is never
total inclusion. Power dynamics within the community continue to change and
shift, with new community members taking on leadership and liaison roles. Like
other communities, the Warumungu community in Tennant Creek is made up of
several overlapping and contingent mobs, with a shared, but not the same, history
and vision of the future. In each case, just how Warumungu law should be inter-
preted, preserved, and extended is discussed and debated by insiders as well as
outsiders.

Of central concern to all of us involved with the project was what should be done
with the closed material, the more personal, restricted, and gender-specific media

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

326

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

that would not be a part of the reconceptualized DVD project. The solution is two-
fold: (1) a series of family-specific DVDs and (2) a community media archive that
can be password-protected. The compact size and mobility of a DVD were its al-
luring qualities—people in extended kin networks could share the disc or make mul-
tiple copies for various family members without having to worry about viewing
someone else’s country. These family discs, as they have come to be called, are part
of an emerging genealogical-historical archive. The staff members at Nyinkka Nyu-
nyu have been active in the repatriation of cultural objects, including boomerangs,
axes, and stone knives, along with thousands of photos, as part of the centre’s visual
displays and community resource center.27 The DVD articulates with this local ar-
chival logic as a mechanism to both hold and partition data that now resides on the
hard drive at Nyinkka Nyunyu and on dozens of CDs made by the centre’s staff. Mo-
bility is necessary. Cultural knowledge that remains static for too long can die—its
owners are no longer able to access its power.28 As with people moving across coun-
try, for knowledge to remain powerful, it needs to travel. In Aboriginal sociospatial
systems, “a place,” Francesca Merlan reminds us, “must be learned” (1998, 214).

The idea for the family DVDs incorporates the cultural desire of Warumungu
people to physically travel very specific sets of country tracks and remember per-
sonal histories, often from different starting points. When people follow dreaming
tracks in ritual performances, they do so from a distinct but not wholly unique
vantage point. They must consider the possible interlinking tracks—where they
cross and with whose country. Newly dreamt sequences may be added; those that
are affiliated with people who have passed away may fall into disuse, and so on.29
This same dynamic sociality overlaid by an exclusive, yet not static, set of territo-
rial relations informs the way people interact with images of country on com-
puter screens as well. Viewing strategies incorporate some elements from existing
social practices while also altering those same structures. The interface is dynamic.
As the second part of this project then, the media archive will allow people to
search, sort, and shuffle various media and create their own cultural objects. This
will be an archive whose default is not preservation. Leveraging Apple’s iLife suite
of tools, users will be able to “rip mix burn,” but within a set of parameters dic-
tated by the community. The archive will be password-protected, each data set
tagged with a unique identifier and a range of keywords. The key words will then
allow people to sort through the various media to identify relevant data. In addi-
tion to key words, a description field will be open ended, allowing community
members to add, delete, and edit a string of text. As for now, just how to deter-
mine who will have the power to delete is under debate. A possible technological
solution would be to manage multiple additions, Wikipedia-like, within the ar-
chive for each set of data. In either case, what the community ends up with is a
rich, multilayered text for each image.

Community members we worked with decided family groups would be the best
way to distribute passwords. Each group will eventually decide who will have ac-
cess to the images and sounds and what is appropriate to remix. Together, family

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

327

groups will be able to compile their own historical archive as well as create new
cultural products from the many stored digital images (see Figure 3).

No doubt this emergent type of cultural production will be, like all cultural
change, a process of give-and-take between overlapping interested parties. It is hard
to predict where the lines will be drawn. My initial assumption of a generational
divide did not materialize. In fact, it was some of the most elderly members of the
community who pushed for the innovative, generative aspects of the archive. Part
of the inclusion of new technologies in these ventures is about maintaining con-
trol, both technological and social, over how cultural knowledge is catalogued,
circulated, and cultivated. A community-located digital archive means that people
do not need to travel thousands of kilometers to Canberra or further to access
(some) historical documents and photos. It also means that local mobs—through
their own decision-making channels—can decide how to grant or deny access to
a range of materials.30

The Warumungu social landscape includes objects, people, land, and ancestors
that all comingle to produce and distribute knowledge. Not all networks foster the
same relations. National and international systems for reckoning what counts as
knowledge and property are defined as intellectual property (IP) rights. But these
international rights-based systems are part of dominant histories of colonialism,
neoliberal markets, and specific corporate alliances. Their assumed global appli-

FIGURE 3. Edith Nakkamarra, her daughter and granddaughter view, translate, and de-
cide on images and audio for their custom family DVD.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

328

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

cation circumvents other systems. Warumungu cultural protocols concerning au-
thorship, ownership, viewing practices, and knowledge creation are an intellectual
property rights systems—a set of standards and limits for the use, redistribution,
and reproduction of knowledge in its tangible and intangible forms. But the links
between these Warumungu digital dynamics and the national and international
legal systems in which they circulate are not stable. Both the commercial version
of the DVD and the family versions challenge IP systems that demand a rigid public/
private split and an author-centered notion of production. Furthermore, Waru-
mungu conceptual logics defined by a continuum of access rights and layers of
accountability complicate current assumptions about the parameters of the cul-
tural commons, the opaqueness of the public domain, and the dynamics of indig-
enous knowledge-making protocols.

UNCOMMON INTERESTS

Indigenous knowledge systems are often defined by communal ownership, while
Western systems are usually anchored to individual ownership. This individual/
communal view often masquerades as the inherent differences between indig-
enous peoples and the West. But indigenous concerns do not align neatly with
any one agenda. In fact, attempts by the U.S. recording industry to define file
sharing as “online shoplifting”31—especially in the prominent peer-to-peer (p2p)
file-sharing debates32—resemble the highly visible agendas of some indigenous
leaders to protect their cultural heritage from the same types of stealing.

The 2003 Indigenous Position Paper for the World Summit on the Information
Society (WSIS) states for example, that, “Our collective knowledge is not merely a
commodity to be traded like any other in the market place. We strongly object
to the notion that it constitutes a raw material or commercial resource for the
knowledge-based economy of the Information Society.” Like some of their corpo-
rate counterparts, international indigenous representatives want to limit the cir-
culation of particular ideas, (tech) knowledge, and cultural materials. In fact, they
“strongly reject the application of the public domain concept to any aspect related
to our cultures and identities” and further “reject the application of IPR (intellec-
tual property rights) regimes to assert patents, copyrights, or trademark monop-
olies for products, data, or processes derived or originating from our traditional
knowledge or our cultural expressions” (WSIS 2003).

The particular concerns articulated by indigenous leaders form an odd synergy
with corporate giants, such as the computer software and recording industries, in
their bids to excise certain types of digital materials from the public domain, crack
down on the virtual theft of property, and redefine dominant intellectual prop-
erty regimes. Both want to reroute the neoliberal marketplace in which informa-
tion circulates as a commodity. And both use culture, creativity, and discrete
knowledge claims to make their cases. But the common interests between indig-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

329

enous leaders and their representational bodies and corporations do not suggest
shared motivations. There may be some. But attempts by both to limit and re-
define property, culture, and the public domain underscore their discrepant eco-
nomic and political locations within the global market. Both are caught up in
what legal scholar James Boyle sees as “a conceptual scheme that portrays ‘in-
tellectual property’ as a monopoly, and ‘the public domain’ as its conceptual
opposite—a realm of vaguely defined ‘freedom’” (2003, 8). That is, each must lodge
concerns about their cultural and intellectual property within a narrative defined
by exclusionary endpoints.

From UN documents to national legislation, in courtrooms and in cyberspace,
culture is quickly becoming the interface for maneuvering through and mobiliz-
ing support for both indigenous and corporate economic and political rights.33
But what happens when cultural property and traditional knowledge become the
basis for social justice and economic redress? In his study of efforts to protect
native heritage through intellectual property rights, particularly copyright laws,
Michael Brown asserts that, “novel forms of cultural copyright come with sub-
stantial risks. If we turn culture into property, its uses will be defined and directed
by law, the instrument by which states impose order on an untidy world.” Brown’s
warning against embracing “totalizing solutions to complex social problems” (2003,
8) foregrounds both the contingency and the specificity of connections between
culture and property. If culture is standardized and subject to strict legal condi-
tions of use, the result may be less room to maneuver, create, and repackage culture.
Assessing the range of interests and stakes involved in redefining intellectual
property, Rosemary Coombe argues that however contested the concept of cul-
ture is in anthropological circles, in international law it is “performing an ever-
greater amount of complex ideological work” (2003, 273). Part of this ideological
work is being done at the level of production: new cultural objects that embody/
contain intellectual property—digital archives, DVDs, CDs, Web sites—are quickly
becoming the site for redefining notions of property, ownership, and the public.34
The rapid availability and ease of distribution (legal and illegal) of copyrighted
works and the exploitation of indigenous cultural artifacts find company in these
ideological maneuvers. States that may want to reconcile with their indigenous
populations and appease corporate fears can use the rhetoric of preserving cul-
ture, cultural rights, and cultural creativity as a way to legislate more rigid stan-
dards for digital technological practices. In his examination of national attempts
to address historical injustices, Elazar Barkan suggests that:

Ownership of cultural property has become a prime moral issue in the
international community. This includes discussions about inalienable pat-
rimony, about a possible statute of limitations on amending historical
injustices, and on the relationship between the individual and the com-
munity vis-à-vis ownership of tangible identity. (2002, 17)

International debates, forged from various local concerns, have aligned cultural
property with human rights, morality, and economic justice. Australia is no ex-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

330

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

ception. In 2000, the Australian Parliament passed two amendments to the 1968
Copyright Act: the Copyright Amendment (Digital Agenda) Act 2000 and the Copy-
right Amendment (Moral Rights) Act 2000. The Digital Agenda Act extended the
1968 Copyright Act to “take account of technological developments such as the
Internet and Pay TV.” The “most significant change” to the existing legislation is
the “creation of a new right of communication to the public.” Essentially this gives
copyright owners “the right to control how their work is electronically trans-
mitted to the public or made available online.” (DCITA 2004). There are excep-
tions to this amendment for educational purposes and for institutions such as
archives and museums. What the amendment does, however, is allow copyright
owners to pursue the producers of Web sites or broadcasts who post or transmit
their copyrighted materials without their permission.35

Linked to the Digital Agenda Act, the Moral Rights Act “wants to ensure that the
original creators of works are recognized and have some control over their work
whether or not they are also the copyright owners.” The Act includes “the right of
a creator of a work or maker of a film to: (1) be acknowledged as the creator of the
work or film (right of attribution); and (2) object to derogatory treatment of the work
or film (right of integrity).” (DCITA 2004). Although this legislation is not specific
to indigenous materials, it is at least partially a response to high-profile legal cases
launched by indigenous people over the unauthorized reproduction of cultural
property, such as clan designs, songs, and territorial images.36 Yet the emphasis on
original creators and individual works limits Aboriginal claims that may empha-
size a range of producers and/or nonsingular or accumulated works.

In the years following these amendments, Aboriginal activists and lobbyists scru-
tinized the moral rights agenda. After several years of talks, on 19 May 2003 the
federal government committed itself to amending the original 1968 Copyright Act
again, this time with “Indigenous communal moral rights” (ICMR) in mind. In a
joint statement by the Attorney General and the Minister for Indigenous Affairs,
indigenous communities were promised “new protection for creative works”.37
Seven months later, the first draft version of the Copyright Amendment (Indig-
enous Communal Moral Rights) Bill 2003 was sent to reviewers. The ICMR amend-
ment proposed to use copyright legislation to protect the “traditional culture and
wisdom” of Indigenous communities.38 Attorney General and former Immigra-
tion and Indigenous Affairs Minister Phillip Ruddock, suggests that, “the protec-
tion of Indigenous culture depends upon strong and effective copyright laws”
(2003).

Even with these declarations, the amendment’s efficacy is questionable. After
reviewing the draft version, legal scholar Jane Anderson finds that “it is difficult
to imagine any circumstance arising where remedy [by indigenous communities]
could be attained for infringement.” Further, she argues that in the context of a
national indigenous rights agenda, the draft Bill erects more barriers than it
breaks down. The five formal requirements for a claim to be filed are imprecise
enough to make one wonder just how a community could fulfill them all?—

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

331

(1) there must be a work, (2) the work must draw on traditions and customs of
the community, (3) an agreement must already have been entered into between
the community and the creator of the work, (4) there must be acknowledgement
of the indigenous community’s association with the work, and (5) interested par-
ties in the work must have consented to the rights arising. In each case, the onus
is still (as it has been without legislation) on indigenous communities to get
agreements up front and to define their work in either familiar author-centric
terms or vague traditional ones. Effectively, if the ICMR is passed, the govern-
ment strategically avoids engaging with the extent of copyright issues brought
forth by indigenous communities—nothing seems to have changed.39

Taken together, these amendments signal a shift in Australia’s legal under-
standing of intellectual and cultural property. The slipperiness of the legal jargon,
which aims at balancing “the increased rights of copyright owners and the public
interest in access to information,” and the situations to which it will be applied will
tell a more detailed story. For now, lawmakers and some Aboriginal groups hope that
the new protocols will educate the public to the communal nature of Aboriginal cul-
tural materials and the moral necessity of consultation prior to use. These agendas
may also have the unintended consequence of further entrenching the view of tra-
ditional Aboriginal culture as that which is ancient, nonmodern, and certainly not
for sale. Or it may be that artists and cultural producers who defy the dominant cul-
tural logic of their communities are legally restricted from expressing their aborig-
inality. Some may be too modern and others not traditional enough. Or legal
restrictions may actually keep Aboriginal-owned and produced products out of com-
mercial circulation by curtailing partnerships between nonlocal companies and Ab-
original communities. None of these scenarios can be addressed through stricter, or
more vague, copyright laws.

Yet many nations, prompted by corporate fears over intellectual property theft
as well as indigenous concerns over misappropriate use and distribution of cul-
tural property, have sought solace in stronger copyright laws and more rigid claims
concerning the reuse of some intellectual property. But the protection promised
by these new legal regimes has not been realized by indigenous communities.40
Instead, the rhetoric of communal rights merges with another international move-
ment challenging the reach of intellectual property rights: the cultural commons.

THE COMMONS REMIXED

Michael Brown argues that “the economic injustice associated with the imitation
of indigenous music and art” is derived not from the “taking” of material. Instead,
it is the “appropriators’ social capital” that “leaves them better positioned than
their indigenous counterparts to reap financial reward” (2003, 236). Markets are
not as blind as they are made out to be. The proposed amendment in Australia
maintains the social imbalance between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal cultural

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

332

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

producers within the legal guise of equity. And others have an interest in perpet-
uating inequity through moral agendas as well. For example, where the public
domain and the digital merge for the recording, computer software, and book-
publishing industries, there may be profit loss.41 In this scenario, those who down-
load, share, rip, grab, or otherwise take copyrighted digital information are misusing
the technology and exploiting protected information. Expanding copyright law,
then, means less chance for cultural innovation and sharing of the infamous “rip-
.mix.burn.” sort promoted by Apple. But in the Apple version, consumers are em-
powered to be creators, to rip information and images from the Web, mix them
with others using their iLife tools, and burn a copy with their DVD/CD super
drives standard on many Apple computers. Here Apple promotes creation as a
rotating set of collaborations, but these are virtual alliances where responsibility
and respect are not always part of the code. Other systems of responsible sam-
pling and respectful remix are erased from each of these snapshots. One is either
a pirate or a purchaser.

It is clear that recent U.S. legislation expanding copyright terms and limiting
the reuse capabilities of digital technologies benefit media conglomerates.42 For
many critics, market-driven protectionism is winning. To counteract this presump-
tive victory, the commons is offered as an alternative.43 Where the market is built
on exclusion, the commons is seen as inclusive. Working against the prevalent eco-
nomic notion of the tragedy of the commons44—overuse and depletion of shared
resources—advocates have redefined the commons as a place where innovation
thrives because it is fueled by information, a “nonrivalrous resource.” Information
can be endlessly shared without losing its value.45 As perhaps the most vocal cham-
pion of this position, cyber lawyer Lawrence Lessig promotes the Internet as the
“innovation commons” and uses it as an example of a space where cultural remix
produces knowledge, innovative ideas, and democratic disobedience.

Focusing on this cultural commons, in his latest book, Free Culture, Lessig
argues that “free cultures are cultures that leave a great deal open for others to
build upon.” Free culture is opposed to “permission culture—a culture in which
creators get to create only with the permission of the powerful, or of creators
from the past” (2004a, xiv). “Ours” he says, meaning the United States, “was a
free culture. It is becoming less so” (30). Arguing against the extension of copy-
right laws and legal control over emerging digital technologies, Lessig wants a
return to a more balanced version of copyright within intellectual property law.
While Lessig concentrates on U.S. and European histories of copyright, the mul-
tiplicity of local regimes are out of his view. Yet what he clearly documents is the
global diffusion of American property values. That is, the hegemony of U.S. in-
tellectual property regimes downplays the fact that local intellectual property sys-
tems function in conversation with, and in contradistinction to, these newly
implemented regimes.46

In their critique of the current “romance of the public domain,” legal scholars47
suggest that the prevalent commons talk, especially among the advocates of a dig-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

333

ital commons, ignores the multiple disparities between those assumed to make up
the commons. Mainly they are “concerned that the increasingly binary tenor of
current intellectual property debates in which we must choose either intellectual
property or the public domain obscures other important interests, options, cri-
tiques, and claims for justice” (1334).48 In this sense, the free-culture/permission-
culture binary misses the seepage between the two.49 American intellectual property
regimes overlap with these other social systems, but misrepresent the not-wholly
individual nature of knowledge allocation and distribution within indigenous
knowledge systems.

Romantic notions of sharing aside, indigenous knowledge networks are often
built on a type of “demand sharing,”50 where knowledge is distributed and cre-
ated within systems of accountability. In these networks, past producers must be
acknowledged and accounted for. The option of free doesn’t exist in either of
Lessig’s scenarios: where “one can use it without the permission of anyone else” or
where “the permission one needs is granted neutrally” (my italics 2001, 12).
In the Warumungu system of information circulation and production, there is
both cost (some form of payment/permission) and sets of restrictions that are
biased (i.e. not neutral)—that is, they are applied differently according to multiple
criteria. Elders and knowledge owners who restrict and grant permission provide
a framework for younger generations and others to produce cultural products as
well as preserve older ones. “Creators of the past” are not necessarily restrictive or
hoarders of power. Their influence is not always oppressive, it can be liberating as
well. New visions and versions of tradition are continually produced through this
past-present dialogue. Lessig is partially concerned with what he calls “cultural
lock-down”—where knowledge sharing in the public domain is seriously cur-
tailed by overzealous laws that limit how technology can be used.51 When this
happens, the majority of creators are locked out—only a few have the key (that is,
the corporations that hold copyright). In this scenario, remix culture is vital be-
cause it makes possible the spread of counter-hegemonic ideas and ideally leaves
open the space for innovation and inclusion.

As much as it’s hard to disagree with Lessig that this type of remix is part of po-
litical disobedience and cultural production, his image of the commons takes much
for granted. Individual creators are privileged even as they build on knowledge sets
from the past and work from biased (not neutral) technologies, knowledge prac-
tices, and economic structures. The rhetoric of freedom—free of restrictions—
replays the structure of enclosure, open for some closed for others. Should we
perpetuate the logic that race, gender, and class aren’t part of the digital commons?
That somehow technologies and the infrastructures of design—the code—do not
work to secure and structure moral and political positions? That innovation is not
socially and politically inscribed? Or, that those who are “functionally absent” should
relinquish their place in this commons?52

That there should be limits on, and dialogues about, digital rights, technologi-
cal control, and the circulation of information is certain. But the cultural com-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

334

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

mons solution buys into a mutated colonial logic that once produced the museum
of mankind ideal of cultural collection; innovation and preservation for some,
erasure for others. Instead of reproducing this either-or debate (public/private,
commons/enclosure, pirates/purchasers), we should ask where the lines of this com-
mons are drawn and by whom.53 Revamping legal structures maintains U.S. ver-
sions of property and progress as universal. Instead, as Ted Striphas suggests in his
study of changing copyright laws and e-books, we need to do the “messier work of
mapping more fully the contemporary context and devising strategies for inter-
vention specific to it” (p. 22).

In this case, concerns expressed by indigenous representatives include not just
protection, but also the possibility of equitable collaborations. The goal is not to
shut indigenous cultural products out of the public domain or the market but to
maintain their integrity within several coexisting domains. The Warumungu DVD
is a commercial product, a kin-based archive, and a platform for cultural innova-
tion. It was produced both out of and in spite of ongoing structural inequalities.
As Rosemary Coombe argues, “The demand of indigenous peoples and tradi-
tional communities is not simply for compensation [. . .] but for authorial recog-
nition as peoples, partners, and participants in the preservation of cultural diversity
to serve longer-term objectives for greater distributional justice” (2003b, 7).54 Mar-
ket spaces are not inherently anti-indigenous, and indigenous peoples are not nat-
urally antimarket. But the artificial and romantic division of indigeneity and
commercialism erases the concerns indigenous communities have over negotiat-
ing with and at least partially determining the contours of these (information and
commodity) markets. Michael Brown suggests that, “From an indigenous rights
perspective, the public domain is the problem, not the solution, because it defines
traditional knowledge as a freely available resource” (2003, 237). Legislation that
extends copyright and expands the rights of creators is only a partial answer to
some indigenous claims. While some forms of cultural property may be pro-
tected, others will never stand up to the test of originality or singularity mandated
by the law. The problem may be that opposing notions of the public domain—
who and what counts and in what ways—have been too easily divided into either
open and closed, only one or the other. Warumungu systems of knowledge dis-
tribution, reproduction, and generation, however, rely on a continuum between
open and closed, where responsibility, recognition, and regulation increase but are
never total. Interdependent, and shifting, sets of knowledge practices produce a
sociospatial landscape that is continually refracted through acts of negotiation.

The public domain is not the problem because it assumes knowledge to be
free; it is the problem because it cannot assume knowledge to be otherwise. Our
impoverished understanding of the public domain comes from its genealogy; its
cultural and historical baggage is hard to jettison. Rational, autonomous sub-
jects, calmly debating and discussing the common good is an historical conceit;
the public domain has always been a exclusionary proposition, a space to define
who does not count: women, people of color, primitives, and the like. Sampling

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

335

the archives of the modern ends up replaying the same sound track. We need a
new catalogue.

CREATIVE CATALOGS

This new catalogue could be produced at the intersection of digital technologies
and indigenous initiatives. The production of the Warumungu DVD and the emerg-
ing archive, when taken seriously as viable cultural productions, challenges the
notion of the public domain as the primary space for cultural reproduction and
the creator as the primary agent in cultural creativity. Instead, these objects are
predicated on their multiplicity, or their ability to continually reproduce. They
circulate within overlapping domains of sociality. These cultural objects, I have
been suggesting, offer a way to rethink the spatiality of knowledge in relation to
cross-cutting systems of accountability. Neither a generalized notion of the public
domain nor an unmarked commons can account for the cultural dynamics of these
interconnected networks. New technologies and old cultural protocols merge and
produce dynamic local solutions to variously global issues. The DVD’s digital stor-
age capacities allowed Warumungu concerns about preservation and access to be
accounted for and at least partially integrated. This newly produced digital artifact
cannot be accounted for in a cultural commons where technology and informa-
tion are viewed as neutral. It is, in fact, a testament to the inherent sociality of
technology.

The association of the digital age with a digital divide—technological misappro-
priation and neocolonial agendas—denies the managed mergers of digital tech-
nologies and indigenous agendas across social, commercial, and political domains.
Like indigenous agendas, the digital implies a multiplicity of strategies, technolo-
gies, and tools. Issues of access, audience, and the potential circulation of cultural
materials and knowledge cut many ways. The Internet, digital archives, and DVDs
all invoke divergent answers and questions. In some cases, indigenous communi-
ties, or parts of them, may want to restrict access; in others, they may want to
create their own products or collaborate with outsiders to encourage the circula-
tion of some cultural products over others. As with human-to-human collabora-
tions, digital partnerships continue to challenge and change the intercultural
landscape.

The intersection of digital technologies and indigenous initiatives offers many
scenarios; that is, “specific repertoires of cultural imaginings”.55 Cultural reper-
toires are dynamic; they are continually being reshuffled. The DVD’s various in-
carnations, and the digital archive it postures to, rely on digital technology to
preserve and reproduce cultural knowledge within extended networks that both
include and exclude insiders and outsiders. Distribution is limited and enhanced.
Knowledge preservation is the basis for selective viewing practices at the same time
as it encourages new linkages. Remix happens and is both challenged and con-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

336

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

trolled by changing cultural protocols built from a traditional but not unchange-
able set of standards.

Histories and ongoing legacies of colonialism cannot be jettisoned for the wish
of a global commons. Neither the expansion nor the reduction of copyright law
can deal with the sociality of information encouraged by indigenous protocols.
Calling for a commons where culture is generalized around first-world notions of
public/private accountability denies the multiplicity of both the objects/ideas under
culture’s umbrella and the social modalities in which they circulate. Empowering
local communities to invigorate their own local information regimes means rec-
ognizing that information, in fact, does not want to be free. Nor can it.

In the 1970s, Aboriginal organizations in Australia emerged as a site for self-
determination politics. Although not an unqualified success, these organizations
do serve to merge local information/knowledge regimes with commercial and non-
commercial Aboriginal ventures.56 Many, if not all organizations, in fact, already
have structures for, and strategies aimed at, working with businesses, researchers,
and other outsiders. Researchers sign contracts to “give back” or “return” infor-
mation gathered. Companies work within locally negotiated agendas for sustain-
ability. Governments must negotiate for the use of indigenous-owned land.57 In
these emergent systems, power discrepancies cannot be ignored. Instead, the po-
tential circulation of digital information within overlapping commercial/cultural
spaces pushes us to recognize both the persistence of inequitable resource distri-
bution and the limits of legal solutions. Cultural and intellectual property are man-
aged and mediated within social relations and produced through histories of
ongoing political tensions. If we detach digital culture from its material and social
networks, then the possibility for community content management and cultural
redistribution along the open-closed continuum loses its multiplicity; it becomes
an either-or decision instead of a string of if-then propositions.

ENDNOTES

1. Edith Nakkamarra is a Warumungu woman and one of my main collaborators in Tennant

Creek.

2. Tennant Creek is located five hundred kilometers north of Alice Springs in Australia’s North-
ern Territory. The population is approximately 2500 people—roughly half are Aboriginal. The town
is situated in the traditional country of the Warumungu; however, Warlpiri, Alyawarr, Kaytetye, and
Warlmanpa people live there along with non-Aboriginal people. With sustained contact beginning
in the late 1870s and the incorporation of the town in 1934, Warumungu people were forcibly re-
moved and alternately placed on reserves, government settlements, and Christian missions. For a
history of successive Warumungu displacements, see Stanner, “Report on Fieldwork,” Nash, “The
Warumungu’s Reserves,” Davison, The Manga-Manda Settlement, Edmunds, Frontiers, and Christen,
Properly Warumungu.

3. British settlement of Australia is usually dated from February 7, 1788, when the British flag
was raised at Sydney Cove. Successive claims in 1824, 1829, and 1879 solidified British Crown sov-
ereignty over the continent. Claiming terra nullius (empty land) from its inception, allowed British
colonists to ignore the fact that indigenous peoples had occupied the land for some 40,000 years

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

337

prior to their discovery. Australia’s center was opened to white settlers in 1862. In 1872, the overland
telegraph was complete, and with it, Aboriginal people in the Central Desert, including Tennant
Creek, became an obstacle to a new nation’s emerging frontier. See Reynolds, Frontier and Aboriginal
Sovereignty, Peterson and Sanders, Citizenship, Hardman, Explorations, Madigan, Central Australia
and Murgatroyd, Dig Tree for overviews of this history.

4. Aboriginal people throughout Australia use the English term country as a referent for their
territorial homelands. Fred Myers’s ethnography Pintupi Country provides a rich documentation of
the territorial relations Central Desert Aboriginal people share with land and kin. The Warumungu
term manu, translated to country, for example indexes a range of territories from specific sites on
the land to extended tracts of land. One’s country is both personal and part of a larger kin network
populated by human and other-than-human actors. Used as a translation term, country also resit-
uates national claims over indigenous territory.

5. Since the early 1980s, there has been a conscious effort by Australian historians, Aboriginal
and not, to address the gaping whole in standard Australian contact history that relates to Aborig-
inal people. Australian anthropologist W. E. H. Stanner called the national forgetting of its colonial
past and present “the great Australian silence.” He framed the situation as “something like a cult of
forgetfulness practiced on a national scale,” After the Dreaming, 214. Beginning with sustained land-
rights movements in the 1970s, Aboriginal people have gained a formidable foothold in national
politics. There were several events that marked this shift nationally: the Aboriginal tent embassy in
1972, the massive antibicentennial gatherings in 1988, and Australia’s commitment to reconciliation
in 1991. To be sure, there has also been significant backlash and renewed racism. See Hamilton,
“Fear and Desire,” Gelder and Jacobs, Uncanny Australia, Cowlishaw, Rednecks and Hage, White Na-
tion for details on the resurgence of racism linked to newly visible Aboriginal projects.
6. The English terms owner/boss and manager are often used by Aboriginal people to articulate
the complementary relationships and sets of responsibilities they share with particular kin in main-
taining their ritual responsibilities to their country. For Warumungu, bosses are owners of country
and knowledge in the sense that they have a responsibility to maintain and care for—extend and
police—its use. Managers often stand in a secondary relationship in that they must aid in sustaining
country and knowledge but are directed by the owners. At the most basic level, this complementary
separation is expressed in the division of Warumungu society into patrimoieties: Kingili and Wurlurru.
See Bell, Daughters, Dussart, The Politics of Ritual, and Myers, Pintupi Country for useful discussions
of land ownership complexities in Aboriginal societies.

7. McGrath, “Australian Aborigines Under the British Crown. Sydney: Allen and Unwin.”
8. Australia’s 1991 national pledge of reconciliation with its indigenous population was the cat-
alyst for much of this recent openness by government organizations. See Tickner’s Taking a Stand, a
detailed study of Australia’s bitter battle to legislate reconciliation policies. As the Minister for Ab-
original Affairs during these years, Tickner documents the ambivalence of the government’s com-
mitment to Aboriginal social justice issues. Reconciliation continues to be a fraught terrain in Australia.
For discussions of reconciliation’s ambivalent path, see Gelder and Jacobs, Uncanny Australia, Lang-
ton, “A New Deal?” and Povinelli, The Cunning of Recognition.

9. Michaels, “Tradition, Media and Technological Horizons.” Tafler. “The Use of Electronic Media

in Remote Communities.”

10. Nakamura, “Race, Ethnicity and Identity on the Internet.”
11. Brown, “Who Owns Native Culture?” Coombe, “Authorship, Appropriation and the Law.”

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, “Tourism, Museums, and Heritage.”

12. Smith and Ward, “Indigenous Cultures in an Interconnected World.” Turner, “The Kayapo

Appropriation Video.” Ginsburg, “Media Worlds: Anthropology on New Terrain.”

13. Anderson and Koch, “Researchers, Communities, Institutions, Sound Recordings.”
14. These shifts have been part of an ambiguous state policy of self-determination for Aboriginal
populations since the late 1970s. See Rowse, “Indigenous Citizenship,” Cowlishaw, “Erasing Culture,”
and Tickner, Taking a Stand for accounts of Aboriginal self-determination policies and the state.
Digital technologies, of course, are more recent additions to radio, television and satellite commu-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

338

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

nications systems used in local communities. For histories of new media and Aboriginal communi-
ties see Michaels, Bad Aboriginal Art, Tafler, “The Use of Electronic Media,” Hinkson, “New Media
Projects” and Ginsburg, “Indigenous Media” and “Screen Memories.”

15. Clifford, “Anthropology and Native Heritage in Alaska.” Geismar, “International and Local
Museum Practices at the Vanuatu Cultural Centre and National Museum.” Fienup-Riordan, “Hunt-
ing Tradition in a Changing World.”

16. Cruikshank, “Narrative and Knowledge in the Yukon Territory.”
17. The dreamtime or dreaming is a colonial (mis) translation of Aboriginal relations with and
connections to land and ancestors, including other-than-human relatives. People are related to spe-
cific tracts of land as well as tracks within larger territorial circuits, based on many factors: birth site,
marriage, parents’ homes, ritual affiliations, work patterns. The Warumungu term wirnkarra is trans-
lated as dreaming and law in English. The choice of law as a translation term signals a desire to
imbue ancestral-territorial networks and contemporary practices with the same seriousness given to
Australian national law. See Morphy, “Empiricism,” Swain, “Dreaming” and Wolfe, “On Being” for
accounts of the development and history of the dreaming/dreamtime.

18. The term mobs, commonly used by Aboriginal people, undermines the more romantic con-
notations of Aboriginal communities somehow existing as homogenous, bounded groups without
friction. See Merlan, Caging the Rainbow and Christen, Properly Warumungu.

19. Maddock, “Aborigines, Land and Land Rights.” Merlan, “The Limits of Cultural Construc-

tionism.” Povinelli, “Labor’s Lot.”

20. Gelder and Jacobs, “Uncanny Australia.”
21. From their inception, indigenous land rights movements in Australia have caused unfounded
anxiety and fear from nonindigenous citizens believing that somehow the “other” would reclaim
“their” land. Present legislation, however, doesn’t allow for any such reterritorialization. The 1976
Northern Territory legislation, for example, allows Aboriginal traditional owners (defined by the
legislation through spiritual terms, see Maddock, “Owners”) to lodge a claim over vacant Crown
land only. (See Merlan, Caging the Rainbow and Povinelli, Labors Lot for cases in the N.T. specifi-
cally). Similarly, the 1993 Native Title Act delineates who can claim title based on Aboriginal tradi-
tion and its continuity in the present. For accounts of Native Title cases and the legislation’s history,
see: Strelein and Muir, “Native Title,” Gelder and Jacobs, Uncanny Australia, Povinelli, “Settler Mo-
dernity,” and Merlan, “Entitlement and Need.”

22. In Aboriginal societies, gendered labor divisions are often referred to as women’s and men’s
business. While it is culturally true that Aborigines distinguish between male and female knowledge
and ritual practices, practically speaking, much of this knowledge is held in common (Dussart, The
Politics of Ritual, 59). The crucial factor is that although men may know about women’s business
and women may know about men’s, one group cannot and will not speak for the other. See Pov-
inelli, Labor’s Lot, Merlan, Caging the Rainbow, and Dussart, The Politics of Ritual for detailed eth-
nographic accounts of gender politics and Aboriginal communities.

23. Manovich, “The Language of New Media,” 74.
24. Hinkson, “New Media Projects at Yuendumu.” Ginsburg, “In Media Worlds.” Christensen, “Prop-

erly Warumungu.”

25. During my fieldwork, Warumungu organizations offered cross-culture classes to out-of-town
consultants working on the Alice Springs-to-Darwin railway. They also worked at the local high
school and primary school giving culture lessons. Part of this purposeful usage of the term “culture”
spread from nationally funded Community Development Employment Programs (CDEP) in which
local Aboriginal organizations were able to draw on government funds to pay for traditional and
cultural activities. See Bernardi, “The CDEP Scheme,” Rowse, “Rethinking Aboriginal Resistance,”
Sanders, “Citizenship and the Community,” and Langton, “A New Deal?” for discussions of CDEP
schemes nationally.

26. Myers, “Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self.” Morphy, “From Prehistory to Politics.” Merlan, “The

Limits of Cultural Constructionism.”

27. The Nyinkka Nyunyu Art and Culture Centre’s gallery contains many of the objects that had

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

339

been taken out of Warumungu country by early explorers, anthropologists, and the like. Both the
South Australian Museum in Adelaide and the Museum of Victoria in Melbourne have returned
objects to the centre on a rotating basis. Displays in the gallery portion of the centre mix returned
objects with newly produced ones in various media.

28. The Warumungu women I work with often remark in English that knowledge and country
can die. The English term signals only a partial ending, however, as knowledge can be revived through
ritual strategies. See Bell, Daughters, Dussart, The Politics of Ritual, Merlan, Caging the Rainbow, and
Povinelli, Labor’s Lot for accounts of Aboriginal peoples’ varied relations to land, including the ways
in which country can be refound and reinserted into ritual repertoires after years of nonuse.

29. Bell, “Daughters of the Dreaming.” Merlan, “The Limits of Cultural Constructionism.” Dussart,

“The Politics of Ritual in an Aboriginal Settlement.”

30. Aboriginal constituencies in Tennant Creek forge alliances based not only on kin and country
but also on their affiliations with certain Aboriginal organizations, outside researchers, other local
businesses, and government agencies. For more on local Aboriginal organizations in Tennant Creek,
see Lea, Government and the Community, Edmunds, Frontiers, and Christen, Properly Warumungu.

31. Litman, “Sharing and Stealing,” 20.
32. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act and the Audio Home Recording Act are part of the U.S.
government’s attempts to redefine its own legal notions of intellectual property rights in relation to
new digital technologies. See Lessig, The Future of Ideas and Free Culture and Litman, Digital Copy-
right for overviews and relevant legal cases.

33. Coombe, “Authorship, Appropriation and the Law.” Brown, “Who Owns Native Culture?” Les-

sig, “The Future of Ideas.”

34. Boyle, “The Opposite of Property?” Anderson and Koch, “The Politics of Context.” Rose,

“Romans, Roads and Romantic Creators.”
35. Sony Music Entertainment was one of the first companies to put these new standards to the
test (Australian Digital Alliance, http://www.digital.org.au, accessed March 2004). Sony sought to
bring suit against University students at several universities throughout Australia in an attempt to
curtail websites that promoted copying, transmitting, and downloading copyrighted materials.

36. Most notably, the Bulun Bulun case, in which an Aboriginal artist filed a copyright infringe-
ment action against Flash Screen printers, a large T-shirt design company that had reproduced dream-
ing designs without consulting the Aboriginal owners.

37. McDonald, “Indigenous Communal Moral Rights,” 1.
38. McDonald, “Indigenous Communal Moral Rights,” 2.
39. Anderson, “Indigenous Communal Moral Rights,” 8–9.
40. Coombe, “The Cultural Life of Intellectual Properties.” Coombe, “Fear, Hope and Longing for
the Future of Authorship and a Revitalized Public Domain in Global Regimes of Intellectual Prop-
erty.” Chander and Sunder, “The Romance of the Public Domain.” Anderson, “Indigenous Commu-
nal Moral Rights.”

41. Lessig, “The Future of Ideas.” McLeod, “Freedom of Expression.” Striphas, “Disowning Com-

modities.”

42. Litman, “Digital Copyright.” Lessig, “The Future of Ideas.” McLeod, “Freedom of Expression.”

Striphas, “Disowning Commodities.”

43. Boyle, “The Opposite of Property?”
44. Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons.”
45. Lessig, “The Future of Ideas.”
46. Coombe, “Works in Progress.” Chander and Sunder, “The Romance of the Public Domain.”
47. Chander and Snder, “The Romance of the Public Domain.”
48. In his introduction to a volume of articles dedicated to legal issues concerning the public
domain, James Boyle details the range of assumptions concerning the commons and the public do-
main by legal scholars (to say nothing of anthropologists and cultural critics) involved in these de-
bates in the United States. Summarizing, he states, “The terms ‘public domain’ and ‘commons’ are
used widely, enthusiastically, and inconsistently . . . [but] they are generally used to refer to the ‘out-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

340

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

side’ or ‘opposite’ of intellectual property.” Both terms, he observes, are used in relationship to an
“implicit fear or concern about intellectual property” (Boyle, “Foreword,” 29). That is, they are aim-
ing to shift the way intellectual property is understood or defined in relation to differing spaces.
49. Lessig’s insistence on this binary is tempered by his legal solutions that include the “some
rights reserved options” for copyright holders spearheaded by Creative Commons (http://www.
creativecommons.com).

50. Peterson, “Demand Sharing.”
51. Lessig, “Free Culture.”
52. Nakamura, “Cybertypes,” xii.
53. Boyle, “The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain.”
54. This is clearly the case in Australia, where indigenous communities have fought not only to
regain control of some of their territorial homelands but also to determine the range and compo-
sition of joint ventures on those lands. When indigenous communities who seek out mining and
other projects assumed to be anti-indigenous disturb the romantic version of the green or spiritual
native, the backlash can be deafening. For overviews of several high-profile cases in Australia, see:
Merlan, “The Limits,” Tonkinson, “Anthropology and Aboriginal Tradition,” Bell, Ngarrindjeri Wur-
ruwarrin and Gelder and Jacobs, Uncanny Australia.

55. Taylor, “The Archive and the Repertoire.”
56. Rowse, “Rethinking Aboriginal Resistance.” Langton, “A New Deal?”
57. Merlan, “The Limits of Cultural Constructionism.” Christen, “Properly Warumungu.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Anderson, Jane. “Indigenous Communal Moral Rights: The Utility of an Ineffective Law.” Indigenous
Law Bulletin 5 (30): 8–11, 2004.

Anderson, Jane, and Grace Koch. “The Politics of Context: Issues for Law, Researchers and the Cre-
ation of Databases.” In Researchers, Communities, Institutions, Sound Recordings, edited by L. Bar-
wick, A. Marett, and J. Simpson. Sydney: University of Sydney, 2004.

Barkan, Elazar. “Amending Historical Injustices: The Restitution of Cultural Property—An Over-
view.” In Claiming the Stones, Naming the Bones: Cultural Property and the Negotiation of National
and Ethnic Identity, edited by Elazar Barkan and Ronald Bush, 16–50. Los Angeles: Getty Research
Institute, 2002.

Bell, Diane. Daughters of the Dreaming. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993, 2nd ed.
(1983).

———. Ngarrindjeri Wurruwarrin: A World that is, Was, and Will Be. Melbourne: Spinifex Press,
1998.

Bern, John, and Susan Dodds. “On the Plurality of Interests: Aboriginal Self-government and Land
Rights.” In Political Theory and the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, edited by Duncan Ivison, Paul Pat-
ton, and Will Sanders, 163–82. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Bernardi, Gus. “The CDEP Scheme: A Case of Welfare Colonialism.” Australian Aboriginal Studies 2:
36–46, 1997.

Boyle, James. “Foreword: The Opposite of Property?” Law and Contemporary Problems 66 (1&2):
1–32, 2003a.

———. “The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain.” Law and
Contemporary Problems 66 (1&2): 33–74, 2003b.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

341

Brown, Michael. Who Owns Native Culture? Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003.

Chander, Anupam, and Madhavi Sunder. “The Romance of the Public Domain.” California Law Re-
view 42: 1331–74, 2004.

Christen, Kimberly. “Properly Warumungu: Indigenous Future-Making in a Remote Australian Town.”
Ph.D. dissertation, Santa Cruz: University of California, 2004.

Christensen, Neil Blair. Inuit in Cyberspace: Embedding Offline Identities Online. University of Co-
penhagen: Museum of Tusculanum Press, 2003.

Clifford, James. “Looking Several Ways: Anthropology and Native Heritage in Alaska.” Current An-
thropology 45 (1), 2004.

Coombe, Rosemary J. The Cultural Life of Intellectual Properties: Authorship, Appropriation and the
Law. Durham: Duke University Press, 1998.

———. “Works in Progress: Traditional Knowledge, Biological Diversity, and Intellectual Property
in a Neoliberal Era.” In Globalization Under Construction: Governmentality, Law, and Identity, edited
by Richard Warren Perry and Bill Maurer, 273–314. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2003a.

———. “Fear, Hope and Longing for the Future of Authorship and a Revitalized Public Domain in
Global Regimes of Intellectual Property.” De Paul Law Review 52: 1171–91, 2003b.

Cowlishaw, Gillian. “Erasing Culture and Race: Practising ‘Self-determination.’” Oceania 68 (3): 145–
69, 1998.

———. Rednecks, Eggheads and Blackfellas: A Study of Racial Power and Intimacy in Australia. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan, 2000.

Cruikshank, Julie. The Social Life of Stories: Narrative and Knowledge in the Yukon Territory. Lincoln:
University of Nebraska, 1998.

Davison, Patricia. The Manga-Manda Settlement, Phillip Creek: An Historical Reconstruction from Writ-
ten, Oral and Material Evidence. Report submitted to the National Trust of Australia (Northern Ter-
ritory), December 1979. Reprinted by James Cook University of North Queensland for the Occasional
Papers in Material Anthropology Material Culture Unit, 1985.

Department of Communications, Information Technology and the Arts (DCITA). “Guide to the Copy-
right Amendment (Digital Agenda) Act 2000”—Fact Sheet, and “Moral Rights—Protecting the Rights
of Creators—Fact Sheet.” http://www.dcita.gov.a (accessed March 2004).

Dussart, Francoise. The Politics of Ritual in an Aboriginal Settlement: Kinship, Gender and the Cur-
rency of Knowledge. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 2000.

Edmunds, Mary. Frontiers: Discourses of Development in Tennant Creek. Canberra: Australian Insti-
tute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, 1995.

Erikson, Patricia Pierce. “A Whaling We Will Go: Encounters of Knowledge and Memory at the Makah
Cultural and Research Center.” Cultural Anthropology 14 (4): 556–83, 1999.

Fienup-Riordan, Ann. Hunting Tradition in a Changing World: Yup’ik Lives in Alaska Today, New
Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2000.

Geismar, Haidy, and Christopher Tilley. “Negotiating Materiality: International and Local Museum
Practices at the Vanuatu Cultural Centre and National Museum.” Oceania (73): 170–88, 2003.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

342

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

Gelder, Ken, and Jane Jacobs. Uncanny Australia: Sacredness and Identity in a Postcolonial Nation.
Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1998.

Ginsburg, Faye. “Indigenous Media: Faustian Contract or Global Village?” Cultural Anthropology 6(1):
92–112, 1991.

———. “Resources of Hope: Learning from the Local in a Transnational Era.” Indigenous Cultures in
an Interconnected World, edited by Claire Smith and Graeme Ward, 27–47. Vancouver: University of
British Columbia Press, 2001.

———. “Screen Memories: Resignifying the Traditional in Indigenous Media.” In Media Worlds: An-
thropology on New Terrain, edited by Faye Ginsburg, Lila Abu-Lughod, and Brian Larkin, 37–57.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002.

Glowczewski, Barbara. “Indigenous cognitive networks and multimedia in Australia.” Paper pre-
sented at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Chicago, November 20,
2003.

Hage, Ghassan. White Nation: Fantasies of White Supremacy in a Multicultural Society. New York:
Routledge, 2000.

Hamilton, Annette. “Fear and Desire: Aborigines, Asians, and the National Imaginary.” Australian
Cultural History 9: 14–35, 1990.

Hardin, Garrett. “The Tragedy of the Commons.” Science 162: 1243–8, 1968.

Hardman, William. Explorations in Australia: The Journals of John McDouall Stuart During the Years
1858, 1859, 1860, 1861, 1862. London: Saunders, Otley and Company, 1865.

Hinkson, Melinda. “New Media Projects at Yuendumu: Inter-cultural Engagement and Self-
determination in an Era of Accelerated Globalization.” Continuum: Journal of Media and Cultural
Studies (2): 201–20, 2002.

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Barbara. Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1998.

Langton, Marcia. “‘A New Deal?’ Indigenous Development and the Politics of Recovery.” The Dr.
Charles Perkins Memorial Oration, University of Sydney, October 4, 2002.

Lea, John P. Government and the Community in Tennant Creek. Darwin: Australian National Univer-
sity North Australia Research Unit Monograph, 1989.

Lessig, Lawrence. The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World. New York:
Random House, 2001.

———. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control
Creativity. New York: The Penguin Press, 2004a.

———. Remix culture. Paper presented at the SSRC Digital Cultural Institutions Project confer-
ence, Santa Clara University, 24 October 2004b.

Litman, Jessica. Digital Copyright. New York: Prometheus Books, 2001.
———. “Sharing and Stealing.” Unpublished manuscript accessed 2/6/2004.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

343

Maddock, Kenneth. “‘Owners,’ ‘Managers’ and the Choice of Statutory Traditional Owners by An-
thropologists and Lawyers.” In Aborigines, Land and Land Rights, edited by Nicolas Peterson and
Marcia Langton, 211–225. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, 1983.

Madigan, Cecil Thomas. Central Australia. London: Oxford University Press, 1936.

Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.

McDonald, Ian. “Indigenous Communal Moral Rights.” Australian Copyright Council, news release
prepared for the Australian Intellectual Property Law Bulletin, July 16, 2003.

McGrath, Ann, ed. Contested Ground: Australian Aborigines Under the British Crown. Sydney: Allen
and Unwin, 1995.

McGregor, Russell. Imagined Destinies: Aboriginal Australians and the Doomed Race Theory, 1880–
1939. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1997.

McLeod, Kembrew. Freedom of Expression: Overzealous Copyright Bozos and Other Enemies of Cre-
ativity. New York: Doubleday, 2004.

Merlan, Francesca. “The Limits of Cultural Constructionism: The Case of Coronation Hill.” Oceania
61 (4): 341–52, 1991.

———. “Entitlement and Need: Concepts Underlying and in Land Rights and Native Title Acts.” In
Claims to Knowledge, Claims to Country: Native Title, Native Title Claims and the Role of the Anthro-
pologist, edited by Mary Edmunds, 12–26. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Studies Press, 1994.

———. Caging the Rainbow: Places, Politics and Aborigines in a North Australian Town. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press, 1998.

———. “Aboriginal Cultural Production into Art.” In Beyond Aesthetics, edited by Chris Pinney and
Nicholas Thomas. Oxford: Berg, 2001.

Michaels, Eric. Bad Aboriginal Art: Tradition, Media and Technological Horizons. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 1994.

Morphy, Howard. “Empiricism to Metaphysics: In Defense of the Concept of the Dreamtime.” In
From Prehistory to Politics: John Mulvaney, the Humanities, and the Public Intellectual, edited by Tim
Bonyhady and Tom Griffiths, 163–89. Carlton: Melbourne University Press, 1996.

———. Aboriginal Art. London: Phaidon Press, 1998.

Murgatroyd, Sarah. The Dig Tree: The Story of Burke and Wills. Melbourne: Text Publishing, 2002.

Myers, Fred. Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self: Sentiment, Place and Politics Among Western Desert Ab-
origines. Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1986.

———. Painting Culture: The Making of an Aboriginal High Art. Durham: Duke University Press,
2002.

Nakamura, Lisa. Cybertypes: Race, Ethnicity and Identity on the Internet. New York: Routledge, 2002.

Nash, David. “An Etymological Note on Warlpiri Kurdungurlu.” In Languages of Kinship in Aborig-
inal Australia, edited by Jeffrey Heath, Francesca Merlan, and Alan Rumsey. Oceania Linguistic Mono-
graphs. 24: 141–59, 1982.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

344

KIMBERLY CHRISTEN

———. “The Warumungu’s Reserves 1892–1962: A Case Study in Dispossession.” Australian Aborig-
inal Studies 1: 2–16, 1984.

Peterson, Nicholas. “Demand Sharing: Reciprocity and the Pressure for Generosity Among Forag-
ers.” American Anthropologist 95 (4): 860–74, 1993.

Peterson, Nicolas and Marcia Langton, (eds.). “Introduction: In Aborigines, Land and Land Rights,
3–12. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, 1983.

Peterson, Nicolas, and Will Sanders, eds.. Citizenship and Indigenous Australians: Changing Concep-
tions and Possibilities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Povinelli, Elizabeth. Labor’s Lot: The Power, History and Culture of Aboriginal Action. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1993.

———. “Settler Modernity and the Quest for an Indigenous Tradition.” Public Culture 11 (1): 19–48,
1999.

———. The Cunning of Recognition: Indigenous Alterities and the Making of Australian Multicultur-
alism. Durham: Duke University Press, 2002.

Reynolds, Henry. Frontier: Aborigines, Settlers and Land. Victoria, Australia: Allen and Unwin, 1987.

———. Aboriginal Sovereignty: Reflections on Race, State and Nation. Sydney: Allen and Unwin, 1996.

Rose, Carol M. “Romans, Roads and Romantic Creators: Traditions of Public Property in the Infor-
mation Age.” Law and Contemporary Problems 66 (1&2): 89–110, 2003.

Rowse, Tim. “Rethinking Aboriginal ‘Resistance’: The Community Development Employment (CDEP)
Program.” Oceania 63: 268–86, 1993.

———. “Indigenous Citizenship and Self-determination: The Problem of Shared Responsibilities.”
In Citizenship and Indigenous Australians: Changing Conceptions and Possibilities, edited by Nicolas
Peterson and Will Sanders, 79–100. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Ruddock, Philip. The government’s copyright policy agenda. Paper presented at the Eleventh Bien-
nial Copyright Law and Practice Symposium. Sydney, November 20, 2003. http://www.ag.gov.au/
www/MinisterRuddockHome.nsf

Sanders, Will. “Citizenship and the Community Development Employment Projects Scheme: Equal
Rights, Difference and Appropriateness.” In Citizenship and Indigenous Australians: Changing Con-
ceptions and Possibilities, edited by Nicolas Peterson and Will Sanders, 141–53. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1998.

Smith, Claire, and Graeme Ward, eds. Indigenous Cultures in an Interconnected World. Vancouver:
University of British Columbia Press, 2000.

Stanner, W. E. H. After the Dreaming. Canberra: Australian National University Press, 1968. Re-
printed in White Man Got No Dreaming, 198–248, 1979.

———. Report on Fieldwork in North Central and North Australia 1934–35. Canberra: Australian
Institute for Aboriginal Studies, 1979.

Strelein, Lisa, and Kado Muir, eds. Native Title in Perspective: Selected Papers from the Native Title
Research Unit 1998–2000. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Stud-
ies Press, 2000.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186

ABORIGINAL REMIX AND THE CULTURAL COMMONS

345

Striphas, Ted. “Disowning Commodities: EBooks, Capitalism, and Intellectual Property Law.” Tele-
vision and New Media, in press.

Swain, Tony. “Dreaming, Whites and the Australian Landscape: Some Popular Misconceptions.” The
Journal of Religious History 15 (3): 345–50, 1989.

Tafler, David. “The Use of Electronic Media in Remote Communities.” Australian Aboriginal Studies
(1&2): 27–38, 2000.

Taylor, Diana. The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the Americas. Durham:
Duke University Press, 2003.

Tickner, Robert. Taking a Stand: Land Rights to Reconciliation. Sydney: Allen & Unwin, 2001.

Tonkinson, Robert. “Anthropology and Aboriginal Tradition: The Hindmarsh Island Bridge Affair
and the Politics of Interpretation.” Oceania 68 (1): 1–26, 1997.

Turner, Terence. “Defiant Images: The Kayapo Appropriation of Video.” Anthropology Today 8 (6):
5–16, 1992.

Wolfe, Patrick. “On Being Woken Up: The Dreamtime in Anthropology and in Australian Settler
Culture.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 33 (2): 197–224, 1991.

World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). “Indigenous Position Paper for the World
Summit on the Information Society.” UNESCO, 2003. http://www.ngocongo.org/ngonew/wsis.htm
(accessed March 2004).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050186


