International Journal of Cultural Property (2007) 14:33–55. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2007 International Cultural Property Society
DOI: 10.1017/S0940739107070038

What Does Not Move Any Hearts—
Why Should It Be Saved?
The Denkmalpflegediskussion
in Germany
Cornelius Holtorf*

Abstract: This paper is about the recent discussions (known as
Denkmalpflegediskussion) on the principles and practices of state heritage
management in Germany. In an expert report commissioned by the prominent
German politician Antje Vollmer from Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm, a number of
fundamental criticisms were made. They concern existing practices of state
heritage management, some of which are said to alienate and patronize people.
One of the main issues discussed is therefore whether the management of the
cultural heritage should be further decentralized (‘entstaatlicht’) and made the
responsibility of individual citizens and other stake-holders. The overriding
criterion for scheduling should be a site’s ability to move people aesthetically
and emotionally, rather than some complex academic reasoning about
historical significance. The significance of beauty and feelings to heritage is
illustrated by discussing a citizens’ initiative promoting comprehensive
reconstructions in the Dresden Neumarkt area, around the recently restored
Frauenkirche. This paper seeks to review some of the key issues of the German
debate and begin a discussion of how it might relate to states heritage
management in other countries for which Sweden serves as an example. The
question asked is to what extent heritage management elsewhere too can, and
should, be further democratized.

*Department of Archaeology and Ancient History, University of Lund, Sweden. E-mail: Cornelius.
Holtorf@ark.lu.se

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: I am grateful to Riksantikvarieämbetets FoU programme for supporting
the research on which this paper is based, Gottfried Kerscher for sending me his defunct webpages,
Matthias Donath for several valuable suggestions concerning the debate in Germany, Stefan Hertzig
for his readiness to answer questions about the Gesellschaft Historischer Neumarkt Dresden, and to
Bodil Petersson for comments on a shorter text about the same topic published in Sweden (Holtorf
2006). For help with the images I am obliged to Stefan Hertzig and Matthias Donath. I would also
like to thank two referees for their constructive suggestions and encouragement and Alexander Bauer
for a very quick turnaround.

33

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

34

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

From the supposition that culture is an end in itself it does not auto-
matically follow that the state has a particular responsibility for it. To
the contrary, one could claim that if, for the citizens, culture really
represented an end in itself it would be reasonable to assume that they
themselves would want to maintain a high and varied supply of its
goods.1

Svante Beckman

Dr Antje Vollmer, a former Vice-President of the German Parliament and spokes-
person for cultural policy of the Green Party, organized on 30 March 2000 a public
hearing that turned out to be a political bombshell. The subject of the hearing, held
in the German Parliament (Bundestag), was an expert report commissioned by Voll-
mer from Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm.2 Hoffmann-Axthelm is an architectural critic
and editor, best known as the author of several books on the history of architecture
and urban planning issues in Berlin and as an architectural critic, often speaking out
against post-war architecture. His long-standing association with the former alter-
native milieu of Kreuzberg in West-Berlin may have been an important credential
for being chosen by the Green Party as an expert on heritage management. Already
in 1980 he had published an essay entitled “Plea for abolishing the preservation of
heritage”.3 Concerning architecture, urban planning, and heritage management,
Hoffmann-Axthelm is an autodidact. Some have said that this shows in his work
which is usually polemic and accurate in historical detail, but lacking in background
knowledge, for instance of the history of the preservation of heritage.4

The topic of the Parliamentary hearing was an assessment of the future of cul-
tural heritage management in Germany. Its provocation was twofold. First, heri-
tage management in Germany is nearly in its entirety devolved to the Federal States
(Bundesländer) so that, essentially, the German Parliament has no business dis-
cussing it. As a matter of fact, this was the first time heritage management had
ever been discussed by the national parliament. Second, the report suggested noth-
ing less than an extensive withdrawal of the state from heritage management and
a much stronger “democratization” of the way cultural heritage is managed in Ger-
many. This was reflected in the provocative title of the report which asked “Can
heritage management be decentralized [entstaatlicht] 5?”

Whereas the first provocation was essentially a legal matter that does not need
to concern us here very much, the second provocation constituted a fundamental
attack against many of the principles and practices of heritage management taken
for granted. It raised important issues which deserve discussion even outside the
borders of Germany. The following account seeks to review some of the key issues
of the German debate and begin a discussion of how it might relate to heritage
management in other countries.

WHAT’S WRONG WITH HERITAGE MANAGEMENT IN GERMANY

In his report, Hoffmann-Axthelm discusses two fundamental problems regarding
the status quo of heritage management in Germany. It is important to remind us

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

35

here that he deals exclusively with architectural and urban heritage—the archae-
ological heritage faces very different challenges and is neither the subject of his
report nor of my present discussion.6

The first problem concerns the way heritage management at present relies on
an authoritarian state model. According to Hoffmann-Axthelm, during the 19th
century the state advanced the preservation of heritage with the aim to prevent
particularly significant old buildings in its own possession from decay and de-
struction. The current management of cultural heritage still rests on some of the
same principles, even though the context has changed completely. Now, the pres-
ervation of heritage predominantly concerns buildings in private possession and
the kind of sites and buildings protected is growing constantly. The heritage au-
thorities, Hoffmann-Axthelm argues, use the existing planning and building laws
and regulations to impose strict conditions on ever more private clients. In that
process they come across as authoritarian, self-righteous, and unable to take into
account the view of the owners and users of heritage. Indeed, Hoffmann-Axthelm
claims that the strict German planning and building laws and regulations contain
many remnants from the absolutist age. In other words, the ideals for the preser-
vation of collectively owned national treasures have been transferred unchanged
to the preservation of privately owned buildings. The first issue Hoffmann-Axthelm
raises is thus to what extent it is justified for the state to assume a collective re-
sponsibility and use authoritarian means when regulating building work on pri-
vately owned sites.

The question which decisions can best be left to the citizens themselves, possi-
bly with some guidance and support, and for what aspects the state and its au-
thorities need to take main responsibility on account of the larger, collective interest
is relevant to any state ruled by law. It is particular relevant and intricate in de-
mocracies because they explicitly seek to implement the rule of the people. Why
should the people not be allowed to decide themselves how much of their own
heritage they wish to preserve and in what way? At what level of decision-making
are judgments concerning the preservation of cultural heritage best taken ‘by the
people themselves’: at national or state level by elected representatives and their
(civil) servants, or much closer to the man or woman ‘on the street’ at regional,
local or street level? In other words, is the preservation of the cultural heritage a
common good of such high priority that it can and must be imposed on all citi-
zens by democratically controlled experts (like health and safety regulations or
environmental laws, for instance)? Or should it best be left to the individual peo-
ple who actually inhabit or own ancient buildings how much of the old character
and structure they wish to preserve? Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm argues that citi-
zens should be able to make these decisions for themselves.

The second problem Hoffmann-Axthelm raises concerns the criteria that are to
be applied to decisions about cultural heritage made by the state authorities. Ac-
cording to the provocateur, as it stands, heritage management is not based on the
existing principles and values meant to govern its practice but is de facto politi-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

36

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

cally negotiable. When their own financial interests are affected, the state and
local councils as well as individuals with connections either to politicians or to
the media find heritage authorities much more lenient than others. The same
goes for businesses who can plausibly argue that jobs may be at stake. Hoffmann-
Axthelm thus claims that the burden of the costs for the preservation of heritage
is largely—and unfairly—carried by all those ordinary citizens without much po-
litical leverage.

In addition, sometimes civil servants employed in the state heritage sector ap-
pear to confuse their own political convictions and preferences for certain aca-
demic schools with their role as disinterested assessors and judges of heritage on
behalf of society at large. More and more buildings are listed as part of the cul-
tural heritage, and they are of more and more recent age. This could be explained
by individual civil servants using the preservation of heritage as a pretext for in-
fluencing contemporary architecture and urban planning on the basis of their own
aesthetic preferences. Or they might be using academic criteria of a particular kind
in determining which buildings are ‘historically representative’ and therefore in
need of conservation, even though the preserved structures may not be of interest
to any but a few specialists. There may even be politically motivated strategies
prevailing within some state heritage authorities, e.g. in cases when remains of the
German Democratic Republic are being protected simply because they date to the
time of the German Democratic Republic (1949–1990). Such policies serve Ostal-
gia and specifically the PDS Party, i.e. the successor of the Communist party in
Eastern Germany.

Whether or not there is merit in any of these charges and suspicions, Hoffmann-
Axthelm claims that weighing up specific values in individual cases always in-
volves a high degree of subjectivity. The reasons for a specific decision can be
difficult to convey to the clients who ultimately have to pay for its consequences.
Specific decisions and conditions imposed on clients’ projects are not always eas-
ily comprehensible. They can appear to be arbitrary and solely dependent on per-
sonal attitudes and preferences of individual civil servants. All that, if true, is hardly
appropriate in a democratic state in which the people are said to rule and civil
servants are required to be directly accountable to the people through their elected
representatives.

Some elements of Hoffmann-Axthelm’s polemic found their way into Antje Voll-
mer’s “12 Theses on the preservation of heritage, the need for reforms and the
possibilities of change” from May 2000. This fairly short document chiefly em-
phasises the need to have a comprehensive, open and taboo-free debate about the
preservation of heritage in Germany. Vollmer also calls for a new “culture of dia-
logue” between heritage officials and citizens, where the former would be more
willing to account fully for their reasoning and be more open to reach compro-
mises with the latter.7 Elsewhere, Vollmer adopted far more of the suggestions by
Hoffmann-Axthelm. Taking his argument one step further, she even proposed that
the list of scheduled buildings should be reviewed every ten years. In that way, it

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

37

would continuously be re-assessed precisely what is worth preserving and what is
not, thus making decisions accountable to every new generation of citizens.8

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT?

Taking the two problems outlined earlier as the starting points of his analysis,
Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm develops a number of theses and suggestions for a new
kind of heritage management in Germany. These can be summarized as follows:

a. The term heritage has been overstretched—too much is being preserved. This
has led to reduced public credibility of the state heritage authorities, as al-
most anything might be taken to be a significant part of the cultural heri-
tage. The more items preserved, the less understanding of the purpose. This
trend ought to be broken.

b. A lack of state protection for a given building does not mean that it can be
demolished without further ado. What it means is merely that the building
is not protected by the state. There may be others than the state, such as the
owners of a building, local companies, citizens’ initiatives, independent foun-
dations like Deutsche Stiftung Denkmalschutz, or bodies like the National Trust
in the U.K., who accept their own responsibility for the cultural heritage and
take it upon themselves to try and preserve a building. The long-standing
link between the cultural heritage and its state administration needs re-
thinking.9 Other forms of management may not only be more democratic
but also be more sustainable. Even if we are losing some valuable buildings
until a sufficient number of stake-holders are becoming fully aware of their
responsibility, the benefits gained would still be worth these unfortunate losses.
c. In a state, what should be treasured is not whatever is representative of past ages
but what its citizens appreciate as worth preserving. Towns should not be treated
as archives or museums. The value of a protected building must be apparent
to any resident or visitor and must not depend on written academic appraisals
that fill many pages or entire books. The most important criterion for pres-
ervation should thus be the aesthetic appeal of the building for onlookers, in
other words its “beauty”. In short, buildings that people do not love because
they do not appeal to them, do not deserve to be protected and preserved ei-
ther. Only such structures should be preserved “without which we would be
poorer and the world would be cooler.” We should be saving buildings “whose
demise would break one’s heart”. For “what does not move any hearts—why
should it be saved?”10 Such aesthetic judgments need to be made by the peo-
ple concerned rather than by the state, i.e. they need to be democratized. (Ac-
cording to Hoffmann-Axthelm, there are important exceptions to this principle,
in particular regarding sites of special historical significance that are not of value
as buildings, such as concentration camps. Such places must under any cir-
cumstances be protected in the collective interest.)

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

38

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

d. The criterion of beauty will invariably favour older buildings, such as me-
dieval churches or castles, over more recent ones, such as factories and other
functional buildings constructed from the mid-19th century onwards. In many
cases, the construction of the latter was the reason for destroying the old
towns which often had been more beautiful than our present centres. More-
over, most modern buildings were anyway not designed to last longer than a
few decades. Accordingly, it is wrong to preserve a large number of these
buildings now.

In sum, Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm argues that in principle it is not the task of the
state to implement the aesthetic, academic, or political demands of heritage spe-
cialists, when these demands lack support among the local population. Instead,
the citizens themselves ought to determine to a larger extent what should and should
not be preserved as cultural heritage, and thus give their towns and cities the char-
acter they prefer. That this is not entirely unrealistic shows a new representative
study. It concludes that 88% of all German adults prefer conserving and restoring
old city centres to demolishing old structures and building anew. Likewise, more
than half of them are willing to pay more for being able to live in a renovated
listed historic building.11

FOR EXAMPLE: DRESDEN

The Neumarkt district of Dresden, currently being restored, provides a useful il-
lustration of some of Hoffmann-Axthelm’s ideas. Even though state heritage man-
agement is not directly at stake in this case, recent developments in Dresden can
serve as an example for the popular preferences concerning cultural heritage.
The Neumarkt area in Dresden does not tell a sad story about the failures of
heritage management but rather an uplifting tale about the hopes—and first
achievements—of a citizen-led initiative promoting a particular version of cul-
tural heritage.

Dresden, the capital of the German state of Saxony, is famous for its baroque
architecture from the first half of the 18th century. Much of it did not, however,
stand for very long. During the Seven Years’ War (1756–63) Prussian artillery de-
stroyed extensive parts of the city centre. Yet in the area of the Dresden Neumarkt
vernacular baroque architecture had survived uniquely. The centre of this area con-
sisted of an irregular space made up of three squares: Jüdenhof, Neumarkt and An
der Frauenkirche. The Neumarkt was crowned by the distinctive dome of the
Frauenkirche built by George Bähr (Figs. 1, 3).

In February 1945, comprehensive air raids erased the entire town, including all
the residential buildings in the Neumarkt area. After the war some historic build-
ings, like the Zwinger and the Semper Opera, were reconstructed by the authori-
ties of the socialist GDR but at the same time planning authorities demolished all

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

39

but a few of the ruins that remained in the Neumarkt district, intending to build
here part of the new, socialist Dresden (Fig. 2). Yet the Neumarkt remained un-
developed until the 1980s when a concrete extension of the police headquarters
(pulled down in 2005) and the Hilton Hotel were erected in the area. Following
German unification in 1990, the Frauenkirche, often described as the soul of Dres-
den and a symbol of the destruction of the city during the war, was rebuilt from
the remaining pile of rubble of the original church’s ruins thanks to private and
corporate donations amounting to more than 100 million Euros. It reopened in
2005 (Figs. 4, 6).12

Hoffmann-Axthelm states that individual buildings which people do not love
do not deserve to be protected and preserved either. As cited earlier, we should be
saving only those structures “whose demise would break one’s heart”. The de-
stroyed Neumarkt district in Dresden evidently did break sufficient people’s hearts
in order to let a strong citizens’ initiative arise.13 What do these citizens want? On
a poster sold in 2005, the initiative states programmatically:

“We want that Dresden regains its identity and that the heart of the Old
Town beats again:

1. We stand for the restoration of the conditions immediately before

the war (no pseudo-historic urban development)

2. We support the historical true-to-the-original reconstruction of all
art- and culture-historically significant town houses (15 key build-
ings are not sufficient)

3. Between the reconstructed houses we want exclusively to put up build-
ings in traditional architecture with simple plaster exteriors and
garrets (no inappropriate glass-steel oriels)”14

The overall sentiment is well expressed by the references to Dresden’s “identity”,
the “heart” of the Old Town, “true-to-the-original reconstruction”, “traditional ar-
chitecture”, and the rejection of “pseudo-historical urban development” (Fig. 5).
The express preference of “simple plaster exteriors and garrets” over “inappropri-
ate glass-steel oriels” reveals the professional expertise of some of the citizens
involved.15

Although the initiative has some 700 members in total (of which around half
live in Dresden), some leading members of the initiative were intellectuals from
the West who had moved to Dresden after German unification in 1990. That could
be seen as an indication that a minority of outsiders is trying to impose its will on
the majority of Dresden inhabitants. However there is another way of interpreting
this. Arguably, intellectuals who have been growing up in the Federal Republic
since the 1960s do not only have far-sighted visions for sustainable development
but are also very good at running competent and effective political campaigns.

Both the efficiency of the people behind the initiative and the wide support it
enjoyed in Dresden after all was born out by a petition in favour of reconstructing
the historic Neumarkt area. When in 2003 the petition was handed over to the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

40

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

FIGURE 1. Dresden Neumarkt with Frauenkirche in 1933. Photograph: SLUB/Deutsche
Fotothek, Dresden.

FIGURE 2. Dresden Neumarkt area without Frauenkirche in 1951 (showing the extensive
war damage). Photograph: SLUB/Deutsche Fotothek, Dresden.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

41

FIGURE 3. Dresden Neumarkt with Frauenkirche, plan from 2006. After Donath 2006.

FIGURE 4. Dresden Neumarkt with reconstructed Frauenkirche in 2006. Photograph: Jens-
Uwe von Berg.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

42

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

Mayor of Dresden it had been signed, within a few months, by nearly 68,000 peo-
ple including more than 63,000 citizens on the electoral register of Dresden,
amounting to 15% of the entire electorate.16 Even though the petition has had
little legal significance, these are very impressive figures, suggesting broad support
for the aims of the initiative. Indirectly, they have considerable impact both on the
politicians and the investors who are increasingly changing their plans in line with
the popular demands formulated by the citizens’ initiative.

Gesellschaft Historischer Neumarkt Dresden e.V.
The Foundation Gesellschaft Historischer Neumarkt Dresden e.V. was
founded in 1999 by a group of architects, historians, heritage managers, art
historians, lawyers and other engaged citizens. We are convinced that the re-
constructed Frauenkirche and the reconstructed Neumarkt belong together.
We believe that the rebuilt Frauenkirche requires the surroundings of the old
Neumarkt to be rebuilt as accurately as possible too.

With the historic Neumarkt thoroughly reconstructed, Dresden could re-
gain a historic heart in its town centre. The Foundation will give a voice to
the many citizens of Dresden and other friends of the town. They are refus-
ing to tolerate modern architectural ideas at the feet of the Frauenkirche. To
our horror it is now planned to rebuild the 300 houses of the Neumarkt area
in a modern way, except for fifteen reconstructed buildings where less steel
and glass will be used so that a somewhat more old-fashioned impression
will be given.

We, on the other hand, are in favour of a different but equally realistic
concept. We want the old Neumarkt to be rebuilt as one of the most beau-
tiful old towns in Europe. We prefer an archaeological reconstruction of 70
to 80 well documented and art historically valuable old town houses, based
on existing plans, sketches, original remains and photographs. There will how-
ever also be room for some modern designs in a symbiosis of reconstructed
and modern elements.

We should not lose our unique chance to regain at the Neumarkt a piece
of historical identity for our town, for the sake of our children and grand-
children. Let us give the new old Frauenkirche its old setting!

These days, modern architecture can and should be built in most parts of
Dresden. However, on this half square kilometre, architects should consider
themselves as humble servants in a historic context. We are convinced that
most of the population in Dresden want it this way.
Based on Hans Joachim Neidhardt, What we want. http://www.avoe.org/

dresdenwhat.html (accessed 15 March 2007)

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

43

FIGURE 5. The planned reconstruction of the buildings at the southern side of Jüdenhof
at Dresden Neumarkt. Graphics by Andreas Hummel. Copyright: Gesellschaft Historischer
Neumarkt Dresden e.V., 2006.

This is not the place to discuss the merits of reconstructing from scratch old build-
ings in modern cities. But a citizens’ initiative enjoying wide support promoting
the reconstruction of baroque architecture gives cause to consider their possible
motivations and values. Although politicians and developers may be contemplat-
ing the benefits of a historical city centre for the development of tourism and
retail, this is not the most important concern of ordinary citizens.17 It is therefore
pertinent to ask what, in this case, is popular heritage.

To be clear, the heritage being desired is emotionally loaded. Earlier I have cited
references to the “heart of the Old Town” and the “identity” of Dresden. Arguably,
the restored Neumarkt district around the Frauenkirche will first and foremost be
beautiful (Fig. 6). This has been made crystal clear by the Prince of Wales. Sup-
porting the campaign in Dresden for traditional architecture, he announced that

“I know that many people—visitors as well as citizens of Dresden—
yearn to see the historic form of the Neumarkt restored. They yearn to
see beauty and elegance restored once again as an antidote to so much
of the ugliness and brutality of the 20th century.”18

The heritage that is wanted here may not be representative of the entire history
of Dresden but it is considered worth preserving (or rather worth reconstructing)
by the citizens of Dresden. Although the Gesellschaft Historischer Neumarkt Dres-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

44

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

FIGURE 6. View of Dresden Neumarkt with Frauenkirche. Graphics: Quartier an der
Frauenkirche GmbH & Co. KG, 2006. For a similar view today see the webcam at http://
panorama.dresden.de/.

den is careful to avoid playing out traditional against modern architecture, the
desired buildings in the heart of Dresden will evoke the 18th century, while mod-
ern architecture is to be banned to the outer parts of the city. Significantly, during
the communal election campaign in 2004, the local liberal party (FDP) courted
the citizens of Dresden with the slogan “Baroque instead of concrete!” (Barock
statt Beton!). All of that is highly reminiscent of Hoffmann-Axthelm’s controver-
sial proposals.

The discussion about the future development in the Dresden Neumarkt district
is not about scheduled monuments and thus heritage management in the strict
sense, for the old buildings have long been destroyed. But the planned or already
carried out popular reconstructions can nevertheless make three important points
in the context of the Denkmalpflegediskussion. Firstly, Hoffmann-Axthelm formu-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

45

lated democratic principles and aesthetic criteria for heritage management that
are not only his own but shared by many people. Secondly, all these people are
anything but ignorant of history and hostile to heritage: they love history and
heritage! Thirdly, the already completed restoration projects in Dresden, such as
the Frauenkirche, illustrate that there is indeed much to be gained from restoring
cultural heritage in this way. Arguably, the restored Neumarkt is not merely going
to be a signifier of some misplaced nostalgia, as some critics might have it, but
indeed (becoming) a beautiful cultural treasure of the new Dresden (Fig. 7).

HOFFMANN-AXTHELM IN THE LINE OF FIRE

In the hearing of the German Parliament on 30 March 2000 practically everybody
spoke against the analysis and the specific proposals made in the expert report by
Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm. The same is true for the following debate that took
place in some of the largest national German newspapers (including Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung, Die Zeit, Süddeutsche Zeitung) as well as in some regional
papers (e.g. Der Tagesspiegel, Berliner Zeitung). Within a few months, more than

FIGURE 7. The “new life” of “tradition and innovation” at Dresden Neumarkt (showing
the Quartier an der Frauenkirche while under construction). Photograph: Cornelius
Holtorf 2005.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

46

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

30 contributions were published. Radio and TV reported too. Subsequently, a com-
prehensive webpage featuring a public forum, the publication of a reader contain-
ing all key texts, and the organisation of workshops and panel discussions carried
the debate further, albeit not on the same scale.19

Most writers were fairly critical about Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm’s report. The
criticisms ranged from disputes of his historical knowledge (as regards the history
of heritage management and the real significance of early preservation driven by
the state) to claims that his arguments were misinformed (concerning the status
quo), misconceived (neglecting how decisions are made in a representative de-
mocracy), or misplaced (trivializing the destructive consequences of his proposals
for many historic buildings currently protected by the state).20 All of these are
legitimate concerns but they do not belie the substance of his argument against
authoritarian traditions and in favour of democratic principles in heritage man-
agement: what does not move any hearts—why should it be saved?

Two other objections are, however, far more problematic. First, there is a risk
for heritage management to become driven by “populist” demands and an “arbi-
trary” popular aesthetics dependent on short-lived fashions. Heritage manage-
ment would lose whatever academic credibility it still has—although this could
also be seen as a good thing given the undemocratic nature of academic criteria.
As a consequence, policies might change relatively quickly and thus prevent urban
planning and sustainable development in the long term. Moreover, the destruc-
tion of a historic building is irreversible.21 Regarding conservation, the next gen-
eration cannot make up for the mistakes of the former because the destruction of
original substance is forever. This argument might be countered by pointing to an
obvious need of developing local procedures that maintain bottom-up demo-
cratic principles while at the same time allowing long term planning and sustain-
able development. Whether such procedures can be found would need to be tested
in practice before the ambition to do so can be deemed flawed.

A second serious risk is that much of the cultural heritage is going to be
preserved—and aesthetically valued—by well organized and vocal minorities rather
than by a majority of citizens as intended by Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm. Experi-
ence with local government shows how minorities can dominate decision making
processes. Even in Dresden it is still unclear whether really a majority of citizens is
behind the proposals of extensive reconstruction in the Neumarkt district. But
who should be counted anyway? What about those people who may chose not to
get involved in such matters at all? What about those who inhabit their accom-
modation only for a few months or years or lack competence to make up their
minds for other reasons? These problems are the same as those that emerge in any
political election, and yet we would never want to question anybody’s right to vote
in a particular constituency. It nevertheless raises the question why, in a democ-
racy, a minority of (self-selected) citizens should be trusted more than a minority
of (elected) politicians and (appointed) civil servants. If individual owners could
decide by themselves how to deal with a historic building in their possession, the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

47

problem becomes even more pressing. However, even concerning these dilemmas
procedures might be found that allow the voices of all stake-holders to be heard
and to influence any major decision regarding the cultural heritage on the local
level. Arguably we must at least try.

A KERNEL OF TRUTH

Although only a few commentators and politicians spoke out in favour of the par-
liamentary report22, many were agreed that the preservation of heritage in Ger-
many was in need of a critical analysis and that, in a general way, Hoffmann-
Axthelm had a point.23 As a contribution to the 2000 debate, Eckart Rüsch, then
a state heritage manager in Hannover (Lower Saxony), summarised the most ur-
gent problems in German heritage management arguing that

— there are too many scheduled monuments. Due to a lack of resources these
monuments cannot all be properly managed. The existing scheduled mon-
uments therefore need to be reviewed, with the purpose of de-scheduling
some of them;

— there is a lack of theorizing concerning the preservation of heritage and its
aims. There is no consensus about common values and best practices. Many
terms and categories regularly used are confusing and inconsistently applied.
— there is confusion about the existing responsibilities between the lower level
of heritage authorities (towns, communities, districts), the higher level of
heritage authorities (Landesdenkmalämter in each federal state) and the high-
est levels of authority in the relevant state ministries. Often, the precise role
of various independent advisory bodies is also unclear. To complicate mat-
ters further, there are large differences between the various states within Ger-
many. All this leads to inefficiency and occasionally to contradictory decisions
taken on different levels.

— there are deficiencies in public outreach. Many events, such as Open Days
satisfy only people’s basic curiosity to see a building from the inside but are
otherwise lacking in educational ambitions. Partly as a result of the lack of
adequate theorising, fundamental questions concerning both the aims and
purposes of the preservation of the cultural heritage and the kind of ‘public
interest’ that would justify state involvement in heritage management re-
main unanswered and unaddressed.24

Rüsch agreed with Hoffmann-Axthelm that state heritage management in Ger-
many runs the risk of continuing to function in the authoritarian way of former
centuries:

“Die bevormundende Anwendung des Ordnungsrechts auf die Freiheit
des Denkens und Erinnerns ist das ungelöste Grundproblem der gesamten

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

48

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

staatlichen Denkmalverwaltung, in dessen Widersprüchlichkeiten sie sich
seit jeher verausgabt.”25

The fact that this enormous discussion took place at all demonstrated, too, that a
sore point had been touched. Without much doubt, the heritage state authorities
and the preservation of heritage as such have an image problem in Germany (and
possibly, as we will see, elsewhere too). The authorities failed to gain sufficient
public trust in their abilities and their judgement. They have not been able to con-
vey precisely what they are doing and why. In everyday life in Germany, heritage
smacks of non-sellers, sleeve protectors, and 19th century.26 The relevant state au-
thorities are seen as the nasty heritage police bothering house owners unnecessar-
ily and preventing industrial development and economic growth by increasing
construction costs. This negative image is beautifully expressed by the following
graffiti:

“Gott schütze uns vor Staub und Schmutz, vor Feuer, Krieg, und
Denkmalschutz”.27

Arguably the most significant outcome of the Denkmalpflegediskussion in Ger-
many was that it brought home the fact that the preservation of heritage is not
(no longer?) something to be taken for granted in the public domain. Instead, it is
contested. Back in 2000, the state heritage authorities in Germany were largely
unprepared to deal with the frontal challenge offered by Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm
and Antje Vollmer. But decisions concerning the preservation of heritage must be
subject to the same rules of accountability that apply elsewhere in a democracy
governed by the rule of law.

RELEVANT BEYOND GERMANY?

To what extent is this debate relevant to states other than Germany? Obviously
this depends on the degree to which the preservation of heritage by the state suf-
fers from the same shortcomings. It is beyond the scope of this paper to make
detailed assessments regarding whether or nor this might be the case in any indi-
vidual states.

There is a sense though in which the German debate has been addressing issues
that are of a general nature and apply to many if not all representative democra-
cies, even beyond the specific example of the preservation of cultural heritage.
What is the adequate role of state authorities in representative democracies ruled
by law, and how should civil servants act? To what extent should they follow gov-
ernmental directions, to what extent should they be malleable by citizens’ prefer-
ences, and to what extent should they be experts accountable only to higher
principles of academic wisdom? When should state authorities be re-active, re-
sponding to what already goes on in society, and when should they be pro-active,
persuading people to act in particular ways? Should the state encourage citizens to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

49

behave according to specific political values of an existing majority, or should peo-
ple be encouraged to do anything they like, limited only by the requirements of
the law? Clearly, these are complex matters relevant to very many states and of
considerable interest to political scientists and others.28

It is evident that the German Denkmalpflegediskussion revolved in large parts
around Hoffmann-Axthelm’s suggestion to minimise the active role of the state
(and government) in heritage matters, while maximising the liberty of the citizens
in relation to what is ultimately perceived as an aesthetic matter. The accountabil-
ity of state heritage management and the best distribution of power and respon-
sibility between expert civil-servants on the one hand and the citizens who are
most affected by their decisions on the other hand are not however entirely new
questions or even specifically German problems. Yet curiously, the entire debate in
Germany has not found much echo in other countries nor has it until now been
accessible in languages other than German.29

There is much to be gained for other state’s heritage management though from
taking this discussion seriously. In closing I wish to make a few comments as to its
relevance to the situation in Sweden where I have lived for the past five years, two
of which as an employee of the central National Heritage Board (Riksantikvarieäm-
betet) in Stockholm. Just as in Germany, we could ask about the relations between
heritage, citizens and the state in Sweden. What is the appropriate role and pur-
pose of the Swedish National Heritage Board, the relevant County Museums (Läns-
museer) and County Council Departments (Länsstyrelser), in particular regarding
buildings not owned by the state? Which aspect of heritage management in Swe-
den requires state authorities, and precisely what is it they seek to preserve, for
what reasons? It has already been asked whether Riksantikvarieämbetet and the
state heritage authorities in Sweden, like their German counterparts according to
Hoffmann-Axthelm, are nothing but relics of a past age that was characterised by
a body of shared national values.30 As these values no longer exist to the same
extent now, how does heritage management in Sweden need to be changed and
adapted to the realities of our own age? Similarly, just as in Germany, even people
in Sweden prefer, when asked, to preserve “beautiful” sites and monuments, and
are reluctant to endorse the preservation of industrial buildings and residential
areas of modern towns.31 Also Swedish voices have begun to wonder about the
use and abuse of cultural heritage for life and in particular about the authoritar-
ian behaviour of the state concerning heritage preservation.32

It is evident that at present there is little sensibility within the Swedish heritage
sector for questions concerning authoritarian tendencies in heritage management
and the legitimacy of state heritage management as such. It is taken as self-evident
that experts employed by the relevant state authorities inform the citizens about
the significance of the cultural heritage, and not vice versa. Riksantikvarieämbe-
tet’s work is characterised by a strong top-down attitude. For example, in its vi-
sion and strategy document for 2004–2006, citizens are said to need opportunities
for making the cultural heritage their own. Riksantikvarieämbetet sees its role as

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

50

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

offering and increasing such opportunities. Moreover, it considers it as one of its
tasks to reveal to citizens how cultural heritage can be relevant to society. People’s
own relations to the cultural heritage, the responsibilities they assume, and the
desired ‘dialogue’ with them are assumed to be dependent on the suggestions of-
fered by the state.33 Significantly, even when Riksantikvarieämbetet emphasises how
its activities foster democracy, it describes how citizens can take part in imple-
menting state policies concerning the preservation of cultural heritage rather than
how they can actively be involved themselves in relevant decision-making pro-
cesses themselves.34 In short, Riksantikvarieämbetet graciously offers its expertise
so that citizens can contribute to what the state tries to achieve.

A similar way of thinking can be found in the Operation Heritage (Agenda Kul-
turarv) project.35 This project involved much of the Swedish heritage sector over
several years (2001–2004). Its aim was to question the fundamental aims and ap-
proaches of the preservation of cultural heritage in Sweden with the explicit ob-
jective of ‘putting people first’. Indeed, the final policy statement states what might
as well have been formulated by Dieter Hoffmann-Axthelm:

“in dialogue with the society at large, we must continually re-examine
our selection criteria and the ways in which we evaluate the historic en-
vironment. [. . .] every time we make some kind of selection, we should
ask ourselves questions such as: What do we want to accomplish? Who
will be affected? Whose viewpoints and values are we reflecting?”36

Yet in the end this concern did not extend very far. The project never really moved
from ‘asking ourselves’ these questions to openly discussing them with the people
directly affected. It remained unclear how the state preservation of heritage actu-
ally affects citizens in Sweden and what they themselves would want to accom-
plish with their heritage. This was no simple oversight but the result of a systematic
design flaw in the project. In limiting the project’s participants to representatives
of the heritage sector, even excluding the relevant university departments, the dom-
inant role of state authorities in managing the culture heritage in Sweden was never
to be put in question. The same policy statement expresses a view that is precisely
of the patronizing kind Hoffmann-Axthelm attacked so vehemently in Germany:

“Society has assigned us the task of enabling and encouraging people to
draw on the power of their history and heritage to shape their lives and
surroundings.”37

In other words, the Swedes are said to need the state heritage sector in order to
appreciate and use their own cultural heritage and history! Arguably, the outcome
of the entire Agenda Kulturarv project is little else but a reform of the specific
strategy employed by the state in informing citizens about the heritage managed
by the state on their behalf. A fundamental change of direction, involving citizens
in the management itself, is not on offer. According to an analysis by the anthro-
pologist Birgitta Svensson, the project “provides a good example for how the state
struggles to maintain its power over the citizens”.38

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

51

Only very recently have some voices in Sweden begun to scrutinize the attitude
underlying all such strategies chosen by the state and its authorities vis-à-vis the
citizens. For example, Sören Holmström has been calling for involving to a far
greater extent than at present the communities affected in each case in the local
decision making processes concerning heritage preservation.39 Similarly, archae-
ologists Anders Gustafsson and Håkan Karlsson have been asking a series of per-
tinent questions. What kind of dialogue is there between citizens and cultural
heritage institutions? Can one speak of a dialogue at all or has the communication
and collaboration between heritage institutions and citizens the form of a one-
sided monologue? A monologue in which antiquarian and other specialist exper-
tise outvotes people’s legitimate desire to take part in issues concerning the shared
cultural heritage and collective memory? Do the structures and strategies of state
heritage management really allow for listening to and prioritize the existing public
interest, as part of an open and vivid dialogue?40

The Denkmalpflegediskussion in Germany addressed some of the very same is-
sues as those now raised in Sweden. Even if none of the specific solutions sug-
gested for Germany may be applicable elsewhere, it seems that the underlying
question deserves to be taken seriously in other countries too: to what extent does
heritage management need to be further democratized?

ENDNOTES

1. My translation of Beckman, “Vad vill staten,” 45.
2. Hoffmann-Axthelm, Kann die Denkmalpflege; see also Hoffmann-Axthelm, “Alles bewahren”.
3. Hoffmann-Axthelm, “Plädoyer”.
4. E.g. Dolff-Bonekämper, “Restauration oder Restaurierung”.
5. The German term “entstaatlicht” is at the heart of the argument but difficult to translate into
English. It is used by Hoffmann-Axthelm to denote a removal of political responsibility for the pres-
ervation of cultural heritage (Denkmalpflege) from the level of the state (i.e. in this context the Ger-
man Länder) and give it to the citizens themselves. An alternative translation as “privatize” is not
suitable for its strong private sector and economic connotations in English which is far from how
“entstaatlicht” is used in German. Another alternative, “de-nationalize” gives significance to the na-
tion which the German term does not.

6. See Lettmann, “Denkmalpflege”; Holtorf, From Stonehenge.
7. Vollmer, 12 Thesen.
8. Vollmer, “In Augenhöhe reden”; see also Rüsch, “Unter Verdacht” and “Ist das »öffentliche
Interesse«”. A similar suggestion has been discussed again recently, see Donath, “Was bedeutet
Kategorisierung?”.

9. cf. Beckman, “Vad vill staten”.
10. My translations from Hoffmann-Axthelm, Kann die Denkmalpflege, 22, 33.
11. Vivacon AG, Schaubilder.
12. See Dresdner Geschichtsverein, Die Dresdner Frauenkirche.
13. Hertzig, “Die historische Rekonstruktion”; Seiss, “Im Rückwärtsgang”; Donath, “Der Dresd-

ner Neumarkt”; http://www.neumarkt-dresden.de.

14. My translation of: “Wir wollen, daß Dresden seine Identität wiederfindet und das Herz der
Altstadt wieder schlägt: 1. Wir treten für die Wiederherstellung des unmittelbaren Vorkriegszustandes
ein (kein pseudohistorischer Städtebau). 2. Wir setzen uns für die originalgetreue historische

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

52

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

Rekonstruktion aller kunst- und kulturgeschichtlich bedeutenden Bürgerhäuser ein (15 Leitbauten
reichen nicht). 3. Wir wollen nur Neubauten in traditioneller Bauweise mit einfachen Putzfassaden
und Mansardendächern zwischen die rekonstruierten Häuser setzen (keine unpassenden Glas-Stahl-
Erker).”

“Die historische Rekonstruktion” and “Frauenkirche und Neumarkt”.

15. See also the account of the art historian and leading member of the initiative Stefan Hertzig,
16. http://www.neumarkt-dresden.de/buergerbegehren1.html (accessed March 15, 2007).
17. Seiss, “Im Rückwärtsgang”.
18. Undated statement of HRH The Prince of Wales, available at http://www.intbau.org/

statemente.htm (accessed 15 March 2007).

19. www.denkmalpflegediskussion.de (now defunct); Donath, Dokumentation (out of print); Petra
Kelly Stiftung, “Denkmalschutz”; Maaß, “Denkmalschutz”; Donath, Paschke and Bongiorno, “Wie
ewig”.

20. e.g. Dolff-Bonekämper, “Restauration oder Restaurierung”; Rauterberg, “Ballast abwerfen”;

cf. Hoffmann-Axthelm, “Alles bewahren”.

21. Rauterberg, “Ballast abwerfen”; cf. Vollmer, “In Augenhöhe reden”.
22. e.g. Brülls, “Das Unbehagen”; Donath in Donath, Paschke and Bongiorno, “Wie ewig”.
23. e.g. Habich, “Wohin steuert”; Rüsch, “Unter Verdacht,” “Ist das »öffentliche Interesse«”; Echter,

“Preservation in Germany”; Greipl, “Denkmalschutz in Bayern”; Maaß, “Denkmalschutz”.

24. Rüsch, “Unter Verdacht”. Brülls, “Das Unbehagen” raises many similar issues.
25. Rüsch, “Ist das »öffentliche Interesse,” 103.
26. Greipl, “Denkmalschutz in Bayern,” 18. My translation of “Denkmalpflege . . . klingt nach Lad-

enhüter, Ärmelschoner und neunzehntem Jahrhundert.”

27. Greipl, “Denkmalschutz in Bayern,” 20. Rough translation: “May God protect us from dust
and dirt, from fire, war and the preservation of cultural heritage.” For a similarly negative reputation
of Swedish heritage managers as ‘no-sayers’ to the people’s wishes, see Agenda Kulturarv, Agenda
Kulturarv, 113.

28. Blomgren, Staten och filmen, 8–17, 25–35; Rüsch, “Ist das »öffentliche Interesse«”; Aronsson,

“Demokratiskt kulturarv”.

29. The only other texts in English to date are Echter, “Preservation in Germany,” and Holtorf,

“Should heritage management”.

30. Beckman, “Vad vill staten”; Grundberg, Historiebruk; Aronsson, Historiebruk, 150.
31. Sandström, På den tiden, 152–5.
32. e.g. Holmström, “Kulturarvens nytta”, Aronsson, “Demokratiskt kulturarv”.
33. Riksantikvarieämbetet, Kulturarv i tiden; see also Gustafsson and Karlsson, Plats på scen, 9–13;

Kulturarv som samhällsdialog?, 25–29.

different meanings of ‘democratisation’ in Historiebruk, 42–3.

34. Riksantikvarieämbetet, Kulturarv ger livskraft, 13–15; cf. Aronsson’s distinction between four
35. http://ux-ra-kmsap2.raa.se/agenda/ (accessed 15 March 2007); Agenda Kulturarv, Agenda

Kulturarv.

36. Agenda Kulturarv, Putting People First, 13.
37. Agenda Kulturarv, Putting People First, 7.
38. My translation of Svensson, “Identifiering och kategorisering,” 186.
39. Holmström, “Kulturarvens nytta,” 81.
40. Gustafsson and Karlsson, Plats på scen, 10.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Agenda Kulturarv. Agenda Kulturarv—inspiration & discussion (del 1–3). Stockholm, 2002–3. http://
ux-ra-kmsap2.raa.se/opencms/export/agendakulturarv/sidor/arkivskap/inspirationsskrift.html (ac-
cessed 15 March 2007).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

53

Agenda Kulturarv. Putting People First. Operation Heritage Policy Statement. Stockholm, 2004. http://
ux-ra-kmsap2.raa.se/opencms/export/agendakulturarv//dokument/Putting_people_First.pdf (ac-
cessed 15 March 2007).

Aronsson, Peter. Historiebruk—att använda det förflutna. Lund: Studentlitteratur, 2004.

Aronsson, Peter. “Demokratiskt kulturarv—nationella institutioner, universella värden, lokala prak-
tiken.” In Ett demokratiskt kulturarv, edited by A. Alzén. and P. Aronsson, 1–17. Norrköping: Tema
Q, 2006.

Beckman, Svante. “Vad vill staten med kulturarvet?” In Kulturarvets natur, edited by A. Alzén and J.
Hedrén, 13–49. Stockholm/Stehag: Symposion, 1998.

Blomgren, Roger. Staten och filmen. Svensk filmpolitik 1909–1993. Hedemora: Gidlunds, 1998.

Brülls, Holger. “Das Unbehagen in der Baukultur—Gibt es Reformbedarf und Reformbereitschaft in
der deutschen Denkmalpflege?” Die Denkmalpflege 60 (2002): 127–131.
Dolff-Bonekämper, Gabi. “Restauration oder Restaurierung.” Freitag, 28 July 2000. http://www.
freitag.de/2000/31/00311301.htm (accessed 15 March 2007).

Donath, Matthias. Der Dresdner Neumarkt. Ein Platz kehrt zurück. Dresden: Sächsische Zeitung, 2006.

Donath, Matthias, ed. Dokumentation: Entstaatlichung der Denkmalpflege? Von der Provokation zur
Diskussion. Eine Debatte über die Zukunft der Denkmalpflege. Berlin: Vereinigung der Landesdenk-
malpfleger in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland, 2000.

Donath, Matthias, Ralph Paschke and Biagia Bongiorno. “Wie ewig sind die Denkmalschutzbe-
hörden? Ein Streitgespräch.” Kunsttexte.de 1/2004. http://www.kunsttexte.de/download/denk/sym3-
streitgespraech.pdf (accessed 15 March 2007).

Donath, Matthias. “Was bedeutet Kategorisierung? Zusammenfassung der Diskussion.” Kunsttexte.de
2/2005. http://www.kunsttexte.de/download/denk/sym4-donath-z.pdf (accessed 15 March 2007).

Dresdner Geschichtsverein, ed. Die Dresdner Frauenkirche. Geschichte ihres Wiederaufbaufs. Revised
edition. Dresdner Hefte 71 (revised edition, February 2005).

Echter, Claus-Peter. “Preservation in Germany and the Study on Cultural Assets in Europe.” In Cri-
teria for the Spatial Differentiation of the EU Territory: Cultural Assets. Forschungen 100.2., 1–11.
Bonn: Federal Office for Building and Regional Planning (BBR), 2001. http://www.difu.de/english/
occasional/preservation-cultural-assets.shtml (accessed 15 March 2007).

Greipl, Egon J. “Denkmalschutz in Bayern. Erfahrungen, Organisation, Reformansätze.” In Denk-
malschutz: Privatinitiative statt staatlicher Gängelung? Dokumentation einer Tagung am 23./24.Januar
2002 in Tutzing. Petra Kelly Stiftung. Kommunalpolitische Schriftenreihe Nr. 6 (February 2002): 17–21.

Grundberg, Jonas. Historiebruk, globalisering och kulturarvsförvaltning: utveckling eller konflikt? O¨ s-
tersund: ETOUR, 2004.

Gustafsson, Anders and Håkan Karlsson. Plats på scen. Kring beskrivning och förmedling av Bohusläns
fasta fornlämningar genom tiderna. Uddevalla: Bohusläns Museum, 2004.

Gustafsson, Anders and Håkan Karlsson. Kulturarv som samhällsdialog? En betraktelse av kulturarvs-
förmedling. Stockholm: Riksantikvarieämbetet, 2004.

Habich, Johannes. “Wohin steuert die Denkmalpflege—17 Jahre nach der Kieler Jahrestagung.” Die
Denkmalpflege 58 (2000): 116–121.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

54

CORNELIUS HOLTORF

Hertzig, Stefan. “Die historische Rekonstruktion des Dresdner Neumarktes—Disneyland oder ein-
zigartige Chance?” Die Denkmalpflege 58 (2000): 5–10.

Hertzig, Stefan. “Frauenkirche und Neumarkt—Chancen eines städtebaulichen Konzepts.” Dresdner
Hefte 71 (revised edition, February 2005): 72–80.

Hoffmann-Axthelm, Dieter. “Plädoyer für die Abschaffung der Denkmalpflege [1980].” In Wie kommt
die Geschichte ins Entwerfen? Aufsätze zu Architektur und Stadt, by D. Hoffmann-Axthelm, 181–197.
Braunschweig/Wiesbaden: Vieweg & Sohn, 1987.

Hoffmann-Axthelm, Dieter. Kann die Denkmalpflege entstaatlicht werden? Gutachten für die Bund-
estagsfraktion von Bündnis 90/Die Grünen. March 2000. http://www.antje-vollmer.de/cms/default/
dok/4/4358.kann_die_denkmalpflege_entstaatlicht_wer.htm (accessed 15 March 2007)

Hoffmann-Axthelm, Dieter. “Alles bewahren heißt nichts erhalten.” Die Zeit, Nr. 22, (25 May 2000).
http://www.zeit.de/archiv/2000/22/200022.replik_neu_.xml (accessed 15 March 2007).

Holmström, Sören. “Kulturarvens nytta och skada.” In Hur djup är kulturens brunn?, edited by G.
Blücher and G. Graninger, 77–100. Vadstena: Vadstena Forum, 2002.

Holtorf, Cornelius. From Stonehenge to Las Vegas. Archaeology as Popular Culture. Lanham: Altamira,
2005.

Holtorf, Cornelius. “Should heritage management be democratized? The Denkmalpflegediskussion in
Germany.” In Ett demokratiskt kulturarv, edited by A. Alzén. and P. Aronsson, 103–115. Norrköping:
Tema Q, 2006.

Lettmann, Rolf. “Denkmalpflege als Teil der Landesverwaltung.” Archäologisches Nachrichtenblatt 9
(2004): 119–122.
Maaß, Jörg. “Denkmalschutz jenseits hoheitlichen Verwaltungshandelns.” kunsttexte.de 2002/2. http://
www.kunsttexte.de/download/denk/maass.PDF (accessed 15 March 2007).

Petra Kelly Stiftung. Denkmalschutz: Privatinitiative statt staatlicher Gängelung? Dokumentation einer
Tagung am 23./24.Januar 2002 in Tutzing. Kommunalpolitische Schriftenreihe Nr. 6 (February 2002).

Rauterberg, Hanno. “Ballast abwerfen. Warum Antje Vollmer, die kulturpolitische Sprecherin der
Grünen, den Denkmalschutz auflösen möchte.” Die Zeit, Nr. 17 (19 April 2000). http://www.zeit.de/
archiv/2000/17/200017.denkmalschutz_.xml (accessed 15 March 2007).

Riksantikvarieämbetet. Kulturarv i tiden—angeläget, tillgängligt, användbart! Vision och strategi 2004–
2006. Stockholm: Riksantikvarieämbetet, 2004. http://www.raa.se/cms/showdocument/documents/
extern_webbplats/2004/februari/kulturarv_i_tiden_vision_och_strategi_2004_2006.pdf (accessed 15
March 2007).

Riksantikvarieämbetet. Kulturarv ger livskraft. Hållbar utveckling ur humanistiskt och historiskt pers-
pektiv. Stockholm: Riksantikvarieämbetet, 2005. http://www.raa.se/publicerat/rapp2005_2.pdf (ac-
cessed 15 March 2007).

Rüsch, Eckart. “Unter Verdacht. Wieviel Denkmalschutz darf es sein?” Frankfurter Allgemeine Zei-
tung, Nr. 182 (8 August 2000): 48.

Rüsch, Eckart. “Ist das »öffentliche Interesse« Denkmalpflege auch von allgemeinem Interesse? Über-
legungen zu einem demokratischen Denkmalbegriff.” In Das öffentliche Denkmal. Denkmalpflege zwis-
chen Fachdisziplin und gesellschaftlichen Erwartungen, edited by T. Will, 102–106. Dresden: AK Theorie
und Lehre der Denkmalpflege e.V., 2004.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038

THE HERITAGE PEOPLE WANT

55

Sandström, Erika. På den tiden, i dessa dagar. Föreställningar om och bruk av historia under Medeltids-
veckan på Gotland och Jamtli Historieland. O¨ stersund: Jamtli Förlag, 2005.
Seiss, Reinhard. “Im Rückwärtsgang in die Zukunft.” Süddeutsche Zeitung (11 January 2006). http://
www.neumarkt-dresden.de/Presse/sueddeutsche-11-01-06.html (accessed 15 March 2007).

Svensson, Birgitta. “Identifiering och kategorisering. Om det kulturella erkännandets möjligheter och
begränsningar.” In Ett demokratiskt kulturarv, edited by A. Alzén. and P. Aronsson, 175–89. Nor-
rköping: Tema Q, 2006.

Vivacon AG. Schaubilder zur bundesweit repräsentativen VIVACON-Studie in Zusammenarbeit mit
dem Institut für Demoskopie Allensbach. 2006. http://www.presseportal.de/showbin.htx?id⫽62126&
type⫽document (accessed 15 March 2007)
Vollmer, Antje. 12 Thesen zum Thema Denkmalschutz. May 2000. http://www.antje-vollmer.de/cms/
default/dok/4/4357.12_thesen_zum_thema_denkmalschutz_mai_20.htm (accessed 15 March 2007)

Vollmer, Antje. “In Augenhöhe reden. Wir brauchen einen neuen Denkmalschutz.” Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung (14 June 2000).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:48:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739107070038


