The United  States  Reconsiders
the  1954 Hague  Convention
Keith W. Eirinberg*

1  Introduction

In  1914 the Great War had begun in Europe. One of the most shock-
ing  acts  in  the  early  days  of  that  conflict  was  the  German  army's
destruction of the library of the University of Louvain.  Prime Minis-
ter  Asquith  of  Great  Britain,  aghast  at this  wanton  destruction  pro-
tested  that the act was:

...the greatest crime committed against civilization  and culture
since the Thirty Years' War -  a shameless holocaust of irrepar-
able treasures  lit up by blind barbarian  vengeance.

It was also a possible violation  of two international  conventions re-
cently concluded  on the laws and customs  of war on land.'  Germ-
any's Kaiser William II, anxious to justify  the act, sought the advice
of  United  States  President  Woodrow  Wilson,  whose  country  main-
tained  neutrality.  The burning  of  the  library  was justified,  claimed
the  Kaiser,  because  Belgian  civilians  were  using  the  building  to
shoot at German troops.

Although  the  United  States  was  a  party  to  the  two  international
pacts at issue, Wilson deflected  the inquiry. He said he was honored
that the Germans (and later the Belgians) turned  to him:

...for  an  impartial judgment  as  the  representative  of  a people
truly disinterested as respects the present war and truly desirous
of knowing  and accepting the truth.2

Some  80  years  later,  the  destruction  of  cultural  property,  this  time
on  the  territory  of  the  former  Yugoslavia,  again  shocks  the  world.
But  on  questions  of the  protection  of  cultural  property  in wartime,
the United States has less standing today to mediate such issues than
in Wilson's  day, owing  to a decision  35 years  ago not  to ratify  the
most detailed  international  convention  on the  subject.

*  Fellow,  Asian  Studies  Program,  Center  for  Strategic  &  International  Studies,

Washington,  D.C.

27

Keith  W.  Eirinberg

This important accord, signed by 38 nations, including the United
States,  on  May  14,  1954  at  The  Hague,  is  the  Convention  for  the
Protection  of  Cultural Property  in the Event of Armed Conflict  (the
"1954 Hague Convention" or "the Convention").3 Now, virtually 40
years  since  its  inception,  the  Convention  is  in  trouble,  with  little
adherence and lukewarm support when the threat to cultural property
in  many  areas  of the world  is greater than  at any time  since  World
War II.

It  is  a  cold  war  convention,  born  during  the  chill  of  East-West
confrontation,  that has suddenly been confronted  by the disorder and
conflict  of  the  post-cold  war  world.  It  was  designed  as  a  response
to  the  wartime  devastation  that  flattened  much  of  Europe,  yet  the
lack  of  support  for  the  1954  Hague  Convention  has  turned  a  good
convention  into  a paper  tiger  rent  by  the  fierce  ethnic,  nationalist,
and religious  fervor that now characterizes a less-than-peaceful  new
world  order,  following  the  end  of  communism  in  Eastern  Europe
and the  break-up  of the former  Soviet Union.

This  critical  time,  in  which  the  international  community  gropes
for a response to aggression, is the environment in which the United
States  is  reconsidering  its  earlier  decision  not  to  ratify  the  1954
Hague Convention. In September  1991, in addressing collateral war
damage  in  the  Gulf  War  as  part  of  its  Report  accompanying  the
Defense  Appropriation  Bill  for  1992,  the  Senate  Appropriations
Committee requested that a joint  study be conducted by the Depart-
ments of Defense  and State to, among other things, review  existing
practices and international conventions on the issue of the protection
of natural  and  cultural  resources  during  times  of war. The  response
to the Senate and House Appropriations  Committees on January  19,
1993 from the joint panel stated that ratification  of the  1954 Hague
Convention  is  being  reconsidered.4  This  paper  will  depict  and  ex-
plore  the  present  attitude  of  the U.S. Government  toward  the  1954
Hague  Convention,  based  on  statements  in  government  documents
since the end of the Gulf War.

The potential  shift  in U.S. policy  appears to be the result of vari-
ous factors. First, the development of sophisticated weapons that can
achieve  pinpoint  targeting  —  thereby  minimizing  collateral  damage
—  combined  with the recently diminished threat of nuclear war, has
allayed  the  concerns  that  presumably  caused  the  United  States  to
reject  ratification  -  the  inability  to protect  cultural  property  in nu-
clear  war.  Second,  although  not  a  party  to  the  accord,  the  United
States has followed  the rules of the Convention in field manuals and
on the  battlefield.  Third, becoming  a party  to the  accord  would  af-
ford  the  United  States  standing  to  criticize  the  behavior  of  other
parties  to  the  Convention,  and  allow  Washington  to  have  a  say  in
any amendments that might be considered by Convention countries.
In this  regard,  the U.S. Department  of  Defense  (or "the  Pentagon")
has  noted  the  degree  to  which  the  Convention  had  been  accepted
and  implemented  since  1958, which  may be  indicative  of  its desire

28

US  Reconsiders  1954  Hague  Convention

to  participate  within  a  convention  that  has  achieved  growing  ac-
ceptance.5

The United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organiz-
ation  (UNESCO),  which  administers  the  1954  Hague  Convention,
would certainly  benefit  from  the entry of the United  States (and the
United Kingdom, if it followed  suit). The focus given by the United
States to cultural  property  protection  in the  Gulf War indicates that
it could  bring  to the  Convention  the  practical  experience  and  spirit
needed to revive it from  its moribund state. As a Permanent Member
of the United Nations  Security Council, the United  States could en-
sure  that  the  Convention  receives  the  respect  and  attention  it  de-
serves.  UNESCO would  also benefit  from  United  States entry  into
the  Convention  if  it  could  resolve  its  long-standing  dispute  with
Washington, that led the United  States (and the United Kingdom) to
withdraw  from  that organization  in  1985.6 A  shortfall  in UNESCO
funding  which resulted  from  the pull-out  has hampered  UNESCO's
efforts  to administer  the  Convention.

2  The Changing  Geopolitical  Context

The  1954  Hague  Convention  was  formulated  as  a  response  to  the
devastation of World War II, where saturation bombing and targeting
of non-military sites exacted a high toll on cultural property. Despite
the obligation  under  international  law to take measures to minimize
damage  to  cultural  property  in  wartime,  such  sites  were  attacked
with  impunity  by  the  combatants.7  The  Convention  was  meant  to
bolster  cultural  property  protection  under  the  Law  of  War  and  to
develop  a definitive  mechanism  for  the protection  of cultural prop-
erty during times of belligerence.

Nevertheless,  the  birth  of  the  Convention  was  anachronistic.  It
was  signed  in  1954, when  warfare  had  already  begun  to change  in
a dramatic way. The prospect of nuclear confrontation  had suddenly
increased  as  the  race  to  develop  atomic  weapons  coincided  with
deteriorating  relations between  the United  States and  its communist
foes, the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China. By  1954
an  uneasy  stalemate  on  the  Korean  Peninsula,  resulting  from  the
brutal  international  conflict  there,  had  added  a distinct  chill  to  the
already uneasy  global political  climate.

The United  States  and  the United  Kingdom  worked  closely  with
the other  drafters  of the  1954 Hague Convention  at an  international
conference  to produce  the  final  document.  But  four  years  later,  the
executive branch of the U.S. Government decided not to forward  the
Convention to the United  States Senate for its advice and consent to
ratification.  The  U.K.  Government,  following  the  American  lead,
also did not ratify  the  Convention.

The likely reason the United  States did not ratify  the  1954 Hague
Convention  was the impossibility  of honoring  its provisions  in case

29

Keith  W.  Eirinberg

it had to fight  a nuclear war.8 Atomic weapons, as the ruins of Hiro-
shima and Nagasaki attested, do not discriminate between  protected
and unprotected  sites. This inability  to prevent collateral  damage to
cultural  property  in a nuclear  conflict  seems  to  have  remained  the
key to reticence in Washington and London to ratify the  1954 Hague
Convention,  until  recently, when  the  developments  surrounding  the
1991 Gulf War and the fall  of the  Soviet Union  spurred  a re-evalu-
ation.9 While cold war tensions existed,  there appeared  no desire in
the  United  States  to ratify  a convention  that  might  either  constrain
American  defense  policy or leave the country  liable for  violation of
the  1954 Hague Convention  if a nuclear conflict  erupted.

A reduced  threat of nuclear war was the  immediate byproduct  of
the largely peaceful  downfall  of communism  in Eastern Europe and
the  disintegration  of the  Soviet  Union  in  the  1989—1991  period.
The breakthroughs  proposed  in arms  control,  combined  with  prom-
ised  western  financial  assistance  to  the  former  Soviet  Union  and
Eastern  Europe, have helped alter the geopolitical  landscape, so that
confrontation  —especially nuclear confrontation  —  between East and
West  is  unlikely.  These  changed  circumstances,  like  the  Gulf  War,
have  reduced  the  earlier  qualms  of  the  U.S.  Government  against
discussing  the ratification  of the  1954 Hague  Convention.10

Coinciding with the important political developments at the end of
the  1980s was the development and use of technically  sophisticated
military  equipment  and weapons that has given the U.S. armed  for-
ces  the  ability  to  minimize  collateral  damage  to  natural  resources
and  cultural  property. An attacker, notes the Pentagon,  achieves the
measures  to  accomplish  this  goal  —  and  responsibility  —  through
the  better  design  and  development  of  weapons,  weapons  systems,
and  weapons  delivery  systems. Also  crucial  is the  quality  of  target
intelligence  and  target  acquisition.11  The  Pentagon  has  expressed
pride  in meeting these ends:

...  U.S. efforts  to develop, acquire, and utilize weapon systems
such  as  the  F-117  aircraft,  the  laser-guided  bomb,  and  the
Tomahawk  missile  are  illustrative  of  the  degree  to  which  the
armed  services  have  sought  precision  in  their  military  oper-
ations  in  order to minimize  collateral  damage. Even  when  the
most  precise  means are  not utilized,  weapons  systems  such  as
F-15E Strike Eagle and F/A-18 Hornet aircraft  employing gene-
ral  purpose  gravity  bombs  possess  weapons  delivery  systems
that  provide  a measure  of  accuracy  vastly  exceeding  previous
capabilities, or current capabilities  of most nations.12

3  Honoring  the Spirit of the  Convention

The  fact  that  it chose to reject  ratification  of the  1954 Hague  Con-
vention  does  not  mean  that  the  United  States  failed  to  honor  the
spirit of the Convention. The United  States had a strong voice  in its

30

US  Reconsiders  1954 Hague  Convention

drafting  and  it  had  no  reason  to  object  to  its  tenets.  In  fact,  U.S.
military  field  manuals  adopted  the  Convention's  principles.  U.S.
support  in  this  area  is  longstanding:  the  United  States  is  bound  to
the  1907 Convention  Respecting  the Laws and  Customs  of War on
Land  and  its  Annex  signed  at  The  Hague  on  October  18,  1907
("Hague  IV") that  calls  for  the protection  of buildings  dedicated  to
religion,  art,  science,  or  charitable  purposes,  and  historic  monu-
ments, during  sieges  and bombardments,  if not used at the time  for
military  purposes.13  It  is  also  bound  to  a  similar  provision  in  the
Convention  Concerning  Bombardment  by Naval  Forces  in  Time of
War signed at The Hague on October  18, 1907 ("Hague  IX").14 The
U.S.  Department  of Defense  has taken  an even broader  perspective
than  that  stated  in Article  23(g)  of  Hague  IV, which  refers  only  to
the  prohibition  against  the  intentional  destruction  of  cultural  prop-
erty.  The  Pentagon  also  reads  the  section  as  precluding  destruction
that  may be  caused  by  collateral  damage  of  civilian  objects  that  is
clearly disproportionate to the military objective gained by the attack
of  military  objectives.  The United  States  regards  this  precept  to be
part of customary  international  law.15

4  Supporting  the Convention  in the  Gulf War

The  Pentagon  asserts  that  it  also  followed  the  rules  of  the  1954
Hague Convention  in the Gulf War.16 Besides utilizing technical re-
sources  that  would  help  to  minimize  damage  to  cultural  property,
the  Pentagon  affirms  that  it  took  further  steps  to  lessen  collateral
damage  by  identifying  Iraqi  cultural  property  sites  that  should  be
avoided  in targeting.  Recognizing  Iraq's rich cultural  and  religious
heritage  in "the  cradle of civilization",  the  Department  of  Defense,
in  close  coordination  with  national  intelligence  agencies  and  the
State  Department, jointly  developed  a "no-fire  target  list" of places
where  known  cultural  property  existed,  and  used  additional  intelli-
gence  sources  and  available  information  to  identify  other  sites  of
cultural  property.  Targeting  folders,  maps  and  large  photographs
were  used  to  delineate  areas  that  would  be  off-limits  to  Coalition
attack. A six-mile area around  each  target in Baghdad,  was investi-
gated  for  the possible  existence  of schools, hospitals, and mosques.
In  these  situations  extreme  care  was  warranted,  and  in  some  cases
the decision not to attack legitimate targets was made owing to their
proximity  to  a  protected  cultural  property  site  in  order  to  prevent
any damage to them.17

The  Pentagon  maintains  that  it  minimized  damage  to  cultural
property  through  the careful  selection  of aircraft  and munitions  that
would be detailed  to sites with  some proximity  to cultural  property,
to offer  a greater  likelihood  of  accuracy  and  the  least  possible  risk
to  cultural  property;  this  effort  was  effected  where  possible  when
consistent  with safety  requirements  for  air crew and aircraft.  Where

31

Keith  W.  Eirinberg

the  safety  of  the  air  crew  was  in  doubt  owing  to  Iraqi  defenses,
support  mission  aircraft  accompanied  attacking  aircraft  to  ensure
that the proper  targets were struck.  The air crews received  instruc-
tions,  if  attacking  a target  within  proximity  of  a  cultural  property
site, not to attack unless the target could be positively  identified.18
There  was  another  motivation  for  the United  States  to avoid col-
lateral damage to Iraqi cultural property that went beyond adherence
to  the  Convention.  This  less  obvious  concern  related  to  the  nature
of  the  allied  countries  fighting  Iraq.  Partners  in  the  United  States-
led coalition included  Arab and Muslim countries. The cohesiveness
of the  coalition  could  have been  adversely  affected  by any destruc-
tion  by  U.S.  munitions  of  mosques  and  other  sites  of  cultural  rel-
evance  to  citizens  of these  states.  For the  coalition  to  appear  more
than  Europe  and  the  United  States  versus  the  Muslim  world,  it
needed to keep the support of those Muslim  and Arab partners.

There  is no  doubt that there were damaged  mosques  and cultural
sites  in  Iraq  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Gulf  War.  The  Pentagon  has
admitted  that collateral  damage to cultural property  did occur:

...some  indirect  damage  may  have  occurred  to  some  cultural
property  due  to  the  concussive  effect  of  munitions  directed
against  Iraqi  targets  some  distance  away  from  the  cultural
sites.19

Iraqi statistics list 56 mosques damaged throughout Iraq and another
critic  of  the  United  States  war  effort  points  to  damage  done  to
churches  and  archeological  sites  in  the  country.20  The  question  re-
mains,  though,  whether  all  of  the  damage  to  cultural  property  was
caused  by U.S. or coalition partner attacks.

The  Pentagon  states  that  Iraq  ran  a campaign  of  misinformation
on  cultural  property  damage. Although  Baghdad  blamed the  coalit-
ion for damage to cultural monuments, in reality, responded the Pen-
tagon,  the  buildings  were  already  damaged  either  in  the  protracted
and devastating  Iran-Iraq war of the  1980s, or through  Iraqi  surface
to  air  missiles  and  antiaircraft  munitions  falling  to  earth,  pre-war
earthquake  damage, or deliberate  dismantling  by Iraqi  authorities.21
The  damage  could  have been  much  worse.  The  Pentagon  avows
that it chose not to attack elements of Saddam Hussein's  armed  for-
ces placed  strategically near cultural property. Based on the concept
of  "imperative  military  necessity",  which  the United  States and  the
United  Kingdom  had  succeeded  in  entering  into  the  1954  Hague
Convention, coalition forces could have legitimately attacked enemy
positions  placed  in  protected  cultural  sites.22  The  Pentagon  cites
Article 4(2) of the  1954 Hague Convention  that allows for  a waiver
of  the  protection  cultural  property  normally  incurs  -  when  an  en-
emy uses cultural property and its immediate environs for the protec-
tion of legitimate military targets.  Under international  law, the state

32

US Reconsiders  1954 Hague  Convention

that places its cultural property  at risk by using it to shelter military
equipment  is responsible  for  any damage to it that results.

The most famous  case of Iraq using its cultural property to shield
its  military  assets,  or  conversely  to  bring  about  an  attack  and  col-
lateral  damage  that  could  draw  adverse  reactions  to  the  coalition
cause, involved the positioning of two fighter  aircraft  adjacent  to the
famous ziggurat at Ur. The Pentagon recounts this episode and cites
two reasons for  not attacking the planes: respect  for  the  importance
of the cultural monument and the limited military value of attacking
planes  that  were  close  to  the  ziggurat  but  far  from  a  runway  and
service facilities  —  in effect  putting them  out of action.23  Although
the example  cited  in the Pentagon's  Gulf War report  is colourful,  it
is not a strong example of the United States following  either impera-
tive  military  necessity  or  the  doctrine  of  proportionality,  where  in
this case the threat  from  the Iraqi aircraft  was admittedly  very  low.
Another  battle  situation  involving  a  greater  military  threat  might
have better  illustrated  the Pentagon's  point.

5  The Desire  for  Standing

Ironically,  cultural  property  damage  resulting  from  the  wars  in the
Gulf and in the Balkans  involved belligerents that ratified  the  1954
Hague  Convention.  Iraq,  Kuwait,  and  Saudi  Arabia  are  full  parties
to  the  Convention.  Yugoslavia  had  also  ratified  the  accord.  While
countries such  as the United  States, the United  Kingdom,  and  Can-
ada  sought  solutions  to  the  conflicts  in  these  areas,  they  had  only
signed but not ratified  the Convention. By ratifying  the Convention,
they would have been better placed to confront the offending  parties.
In  reviewing  the  Gulf  War,  the  Pentagon  cited  numerous  war
crimes  committed  by  Iraq,  including  violations  of  the  1954  Hague
Convention.  Specifically,  it mentioned  the  looting  of cultural  prop-
erty  in  Kuwait.  The  administration  of  President  George  Bush  suc-
cessfully  incorporated  language  in United Nations  Security  Council
Resolution 674 regarding Iraq's accountability for war crimes. Wash-
ington held the government of Saddam Hussein responsible for these
breaches of international law. However, not being a party to the 1954
Hague  Convention  prevented  the  United  States  from  more  effec-
tively addressing  Iraq's  actions under the  Convention.24

Recently,  the United  States  assisted  the United  Nations  in its  in-
vestigations  of  possible  war  crimes  committed  by  Serbia.  In  re-
sponse  to  United  Nations  Security  Council  Resolution  771,  viol-
ations  of  the  Fourth  Geneva  Convention  were  investigated.  The
State  Department  referred  to  the  "wanton  devastation  and  destruc-
tion of property," particularly cultural property.25 U.S. interest in the
protection  of cultural property  during  times of belligerency  such  as
in  the  Balkans  is  apparent;  perhaps  through  its  ratification  of  the
Convention  it would have  a weightier  voice  in the matter.

33

Keith  W.  Eirinberg

The review  of the Convention  offered  by the Netherlands  in con-
junction  with  UNESCO  may  act  as  a catalyst,  causing  Washington
to act quickly  on ratification.  The United  States played a major  role
in  the  drafting  of  the  Convention  and  may  want  to  be  eligible  to
comment  on  any  changes,  draft  amendments,  or  reject  those  re-
visions  offered.  Certainly,  the  United  States  would  gain  a  stronger
hand in the development of international law in this field by ratifying
the Convention than by merely identifying  those principles and pro-
visions  of  the  Convention  which  it  believes  to  have  fallen  into the
realm  of customary  international law.

6  Conclusion

The United States is reconsidering the ratification of the 1954 Hague
Convention  at  a  time when  its backing  could  provide  rejuvenation
for  the beleaguered  agreement. U.S. support  for  the rules and  spirit
of the Convention were apparent  in the Gulf War.  Now that geopol-
itical  changes  and  technological  improvement  have  made  the  en-
vironment for ratification easier, Washington may soon join the Con-
vention.

Notes

1  The  two  conventions  were  the  Convention  with  Respect  to  the  Laws  and
Customs  of  War  on  Land  ("Hague  II")  and  its  Annex  signed  at  The  Hague
on  July  29,  1899  and the Convention  Respecting  the  Laws  and  Customs  of
War  on  Land  ("Hague  IV") and its  Annex  signed at The Hague  on  October
18,  1907.

2  This story  is related  in C D Davis,  The United States  and The Second  Hague

Peace  Conference,  Durham  1976, pp 342—343.

3  The Convention  and its accompanying  Protocol  remained  open  for  signature
until  December  31,  1954. It was signed by  59 countries by that deadline. As
of  June  1,  1993, a total  of 75  nations  have  either  ratified  or  acceded  to  the
Convention.

4  See  Senate  Report  (102-154)  accompanying  the  Department  of  Defense
Appropriation  Bill  for  fiscal  year  1992  (H.R.  2521),  102d  Congress,  1st
Session,  p 46  and  Report to  Senate  and  House  Appropriations  Committees
from  the  Department  of  Defense  in  conjunction  with  the  Department  of
State,  enclosed  in  letters  to  Representative  William  H.  Natcher,  Chairman,
Committee  on  Appropriations,  United  States  House  of  Representatives,  and
to Senator Robert C. Byrd, Chairman,  Committee on Appropriations, United
States Senate, from John H. McNeill, Deputy General Counsel  (International
Affairs  and Intelligence), Department of Defense, Office  of General Counsel,
dated  January  19, 1993.

5  Report  to  Senate  and  House Appropriations  Committees,  ibid, p 11.
6  The  United  States  withdrew  from  UNESCO  because  Washington  claimed
the  agency  failed  to  rid  itself  of  mismanagement,  extraneous  politicization,
and "endemic hostility" toward the institutions of a free  society: a free press,

34

US  Reconsiders  1954 Hague  Convention

free  markets,  and  individual  human  rights.  At  the  time,  the  United  States
contributed  about  25  percent  of  UNESCO's  $187 million  budget.  See  B. D.
Ayres  Jr,  "U.S.  to  Withdraw  from  UNESCO  at  End  of  Month,"  The New
York Times, December  19,  1984.

7  Parties to World War  II did  occasionally  refrain  from  attacking  non-military
sites, even when it would have been to their military advantage. For instance,
the  United  States did  not bomb  Kyoto, Japan,  during  the war because  of its
important cultural heritage, even though  industrial  facilities  were in the area.
8  A related  situation  can be  seen  in U.S. diplomatic  maneuvering  in  1977. On
the day (December  12,  1977)  in Geneva the United  States  signed  Protocol I
Additional  to  the  Geneva  Convention  of  12  August  1949,  and  relating  to
the  Protection  of  Victims  of  International  Armed  Conflicts,  it  stated  two
understandings.  The  first  understanding  had  direct  application  to  Article
53(c)  of  that  Protocol  concerning  reprisals  "against  historic  monuments,
works  of  art  or  places  of  worship  that  constitute  the  cultural  or  spiritual
heritage  of peoples." The  United  States declared:  "It  is the understanding  of
the United  States of America  that  the rules established  by the  Protocol  were
not intended to have  any effect  on and do not regulate or prohibit the use of
nuclear  weapons." The  United  States  has not  ratified  Additional  Protocol  I.
See  G.  H.  Aldrich,  Prospects  for  United  States  Ratification  of  Additional
Protocol  I  to  the  1949  Geneva  Conventions,  American  Journal  of  Inter-
national Law  85 (1991), p  1.

9  Report  to  Senate  and  House  Appropriations  Committees, op cit, p 11.
10  Report  to  Senate  and  House Appropriations  Committees, op cit, p 11.
11  Report  to  Senate  and  House Appropriations  Committees, op cit, p 4.
12  Report  to  Senate  and  House  Appropriations  Committees,  ibid,  p 4.
13  Article  XXVII  (Annex),  in  Convention  Respecting  the  Laws  and  Customs
Of War On Land (Hague  IV), The Hague, October  18, 1907, in L. Friedman,
ed.,  The Law of  War,  A Documentary  History, Vol I, New York  1972, p 319.
14  Article  V of  the  Convention  Concerning  Bombardment  By Naval  Forces  In
Time Of  War (Hague  IX), The  Hague, October  18, 1907, in  Friedman,  ibid,
p346.

15  See Conduct of the Persian  Gulf  War,  Final  Report to Congress, Pursuant  to
Title V of the Persian Gulf Conflict  Supplemental  Authorization  and  Person-
nel  Benefits  Act  of  1991 (Public  Law  102-25),  April  1992, pp  611-612.

16  Conduct of  the Persian  Gulf  War,  ibid, pp  605-606.
17  These measures are detailed by the Pentagon  in Conduct of the Persian  Gulf
War,  ibid, pp  98—100, 610  and  Report  to  Senate and  House  Appropriations
Committees,  op cit, pp  9—10.

18  These  examples  were  stated  in  Report  to  Senate  and  House  Appropriations

Committees,  op cit,  p  10.

19  Conduct of  the Persian  Gulf  War,  op cit, pp  610-611.
20  R. Clark,  The Fire  This Time, New  York  1992, p 66.
21  Conduct of  the Persian  Gulf  War,  op cit, pp  613-614.
22  Conduct  of  the  Persian  Gulf  War, op  cit,  pp  610-611.  The  United  States
also had stated this view during  the negotiations  over  Protocol  I to the  1949
Geneva  Conventions:  "that  if  the  cultural  objects  and  places  of  worship
protected  by Article  53 are used  in support of a military effort,  they  lose the
special  protection  of that  article." See discussion  in Aldrich,  op cit,  p  18.

23  Conduct of the Persian  Gulf  War,  op cit, p 615.
24  Conduct of the Persian  Gulf  War, op cit, pp 621 —624.
25  See  the  report,  "War  Crimes  in  the  Former  Yugoslavia,"  released  with  a
statement by State  Department  spokesman,  Richard Boucher,  Department  of
State, Office  of the Assistant  Secretary/Spokesman,  September  22,  1992.

35


