Property Rights and Protection of
the Cultural Heritage in Sweden

thomas adlercreutz*

This article presents a summary of the Swedish law pertaining to the treatment of the cul-
tural heritage. After a review of the property rights implicated through such a protective
scheme, the article examines the national legislation as well as its implementation at both the
national and local levels through administrative procedures that de(cid:222)ne and regulate the pro-
tection of ancient sites and monuments, historic buildings, archaeological (cid:222)nds, church-owned
property, and movable objects of cultural value.

there are many ways to legislate for the protection of the cultural her-
itage, and the scope of such legislation also may vary. In the United States
federal legislation is primarily concerned with procedures to guarantee that
proper consideration is given to the cultural values of the buildings and
sites that are under federal management or receive federal subsidies. Federal
legislation does not affect private property per se.1 However, in most coun-
tries legislation also takes into account the fact that culturally valuable land
and buildings are in private hands and that the authorities may need in-
struments to ensure that these values are not squandered. Legislation there-
fore exists to resolve con(cid:223)icts between property rights and public needs.
This is certainly the case in Sweden.

In order to clarify the extent to which protective legislation in Sweden may
infringe on private property rights, one needs to look at how property
rights are de(cid:222)ned or conceived in this country. Legislation contains little, if
anything, on the de(cid:222)nition of property or ownership, so one needs to go to
the legal scholars for guidance.

For many years the leading work was a treatise written originally in the
1920s by (cid:133)sten Und(cid:142)n, then a professor of civil law but later for many
years foreign minister. His de(cid:222)nition of ownership could be summarized

*Jur. kand., Uppsala University. The author has served as a judge at several district courts in
Sweden, at the Svea Court of Appeals, and at the Stockholm Court of Administrative
Appeals. He has been a legal advisor at several Swedish ministries, in 1984— 88 as a secretary
for the Swedish Parliament’s Committee on Housing and Physical Planning and, since 1988,
as legal counsel for the Central Board of National Antiquities, the Swedish government
agency responsible for the protection of the cultural heritage.

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 7, No. 2, 1998, pp. 410— 433
' 1998 International Cultural Property Society

1 property
rights in
sweden

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

410

thus: Ownership is the strongest protection that the legal system provides
for a person against the aspiration of others with regard to an object of
which he considers himself to be the owner. Legal science does not recog-
nize concepts such as the (cid:210)sanctity(cid:211) of ownership or a de(cid:222)nition of own-
ership derived from the Law of Nature or a Higher Hand. Ownership is
not de(cid:222)ned by legal science; it is delimited in the political process. Own-
ership is thus a relative concept, a package of legal functions.2

This de(cid:222)nition bears a marked similarity to that given by one of the
now leading civil law authorities, Torgny H(cid:140)stad, who de(cid:222)nes ownership
as the most complete package of rights to an object. Ownership, to his
mind, can be de(cid:222)ned simply in negative terms: The owner is free to use
property as he or she wishes, unless restricted by law or by contracts into
which the owner entered voluntarily. By contract, for instance, an owner can
let somebody else use all or part of the property, and the right of use can
also cease. Thus, ownership is an elastic concept. H(cid:140)stad(cid:213)s de(cid:222)nition is not
normative; he does not enter into recommendations as to how far owner-
ship and derived rights to property should be restricted. He suggests that is
a matter of political consideration. He rejects that there is any Law of Na-
ture that should guide the de(cid:222)nition of what is property.3 Legal restrictions
are most frequent for immovable property; in Sweden there are few limita-
tions of rights in movable property. Insofar as they exist, these limitations
aim at protecting general health and safety.

Neither from legislation nor from legal doctrine is it possible to (cid:222)nd
out who is at any given moment the owner of a certain piece of property.
There are, of course, registers specifying who holds land or owns cars, but
such registers merely state facts already established by other mechanisms. It
would not really be conceivable for the Swedish Parliament to appoint own-
ers or to declare that a piece of property belongs to someone. In a con(cid:223)ict
over ownership a court must, of course, rule on the issue, but the court still
cannot do more than establish which of the contestants has the better
claim. There is always the theoretical possibility that a third party may
come up with a superior claim.

1.1 restrictions on property rights

Legislation with regard to property rights is mainly concerned with the
transfer of ownership and the mechanisms by which owners can pass on
more or less limited rights to the use of land. By applying these rules, buy-
ers and sellers, lessors and lessees will know what their respective rights are
in relation to one another. These rules also serve the important purpose of
clarifying how rights of third parties(cid:209)for instance, the creditor of some-
one who has sold property with a lien on it(cid:209)can be exerted. Certainly,
property rights law also concerns itself with the question of how owner-

cultural heritage in sweden

411

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

ship may arise in certain cases where there is no previous or known owner.
Provisions of that nature do not have the same widespread practical ap-
plicability as rules on transfer, but they are nevertheless of particular in-
terest with regard to, for example, (cid:222)nds of archaeological objects.

Legislation may also uphold more general interests than the ones rep-
resented by the parties involved, by imposing various restrictions or mea-
sures to prevent transactions that might jeopardize vital public interests.
The sale of an apartment house to a notoriously unscrupulous landlord
can be prevented by legislation that compels buyers of such buildings to
have their purchases approved by a governmental authority. Rules on re-
strictions may also be imposed on owners without any formal restraints on
their inherent rights to transfer ownership or enjoy the usufruct of the prop-
erty. If these restrictions are not suf(cid:222)cient, there are as a last resort rules on
expropriation of property or rights to property (analogous to a (cid:210)taking(cid:211) in
United States constitutional terminology).

1.2 constitutional and human rights guarantees

Property rights are protected both by the Swedish Constitution(cid:209)the In-
strument of Government4(cid:209)and by the European Convention on Human
Rights.5

The Constitution has three provisions with a direct bearing on property
rights. Chapter 2, Article 18, as amended in 1994, states that no citizen must
be forced to give up property to the public administration or to any indi-
vidual through expropriation or similar dispossession nor must endure that
the public administration restricts use of land or buildings, except when it
is needed to meet vital public interests. Furthermore, anyone who is de-
prived of property by expropriation or similar dispossession shall be enti-
tled to compensation. Compensation shall also be afforded to anyone for
whom the public administration restricts use of land or buildings in such a
way as to impede substantially the continuing use of the land or the prop-
erty concerned or cause damage that is considerable in relation to the con-
cerned property. Compensation shall be determined according to provisions
laid down by statute.6 Such statutory provisions in planning and cultural
heritage legislation will be dealt with in this article. Chapter 2, Article 19
warrants that authors, artists, and photographers have a right to their works
according to ordinary legislative provisions.7 Chapter 2, Article 20 contains
provisions for the freedom of trade, that may be restricted only in order to
safeguard vital public interests and must be nondiscriminatory.

In addition to these constitutional provisions, the European Human
Rights Convention has been made directly applicable in Sweden, as of 1995.
Article 1 of the (cid:222)rst protocol to the convention states that every natural or
legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his or her possessions.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

thomas adlercreutz

412

No one shall be deprived of such possessions except in the public interest
and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general prin-
ciples of international law. The state, however, retains a right to enforce
such laws as it deems necessary to control the use of property in accor-
dance with the general interest. To some extent it is a moot question how
the Swedish Constitution relates to the European Convention; there might,
for example, be a difference between vital public interests required by the Con-
stitution and public interests in the wording of the Convention, but that ques-
tion shall not be considered here.

The general effect of the property rights guarantee in Swedish law can
be summarized as follows. If the public administration deems it necessary
to dislodge proprietary rights by expropriation, then it needs to show a
vital public interest. Compensation will be assessed in a court under statu-
tory provisions for expropriation.8 The loss of market value and other eco-
nomic damage resulting from the expropriation should be covered. If the
public administration wishes not to acquire proprietary rights but to im-
pose restrictions on the use of property, the restrictions must also serve
vital public interests, but compensation for economic damage caused by
the restrictions will be forthcoming only if the damage exceeds a certain
threshold.  Minor  economic  damage  must  be  endured  by  the  property
holder.9

Under existing legislation only expropriation of real property or rights
to real property is possible. Movables may be requisitioned only in wartime,
but there are, of course, several instances in which the use of movable prop-
erty can be restricted. There are no constitutional guarantees for compensa-
tion in such cases. The property rights guarantee of the European Conven-
tion, however, does not exclude movables, so disproportionate restrictions on
the use of movables should not go uncompensated in Sweden.10

Both  the  Constitution  and  the  European  Human  Rights  Convention
speci(cid:222)cally permit property rights to be restricted in the interest of fur-
thering  the  public  interest.  How  land  could  and  should  be  used  is,  of
course, a fundamental issue, where the bene(cid:222)t of exploiting the natural 
resources has to be balanced with due consideration to how the existing
cultural resources can be saved or used in sustainable fashion. Although
Sweden is a fairly large and sparsely populated country, the continuing de-
velopment of infrastructure that consumes considerable area takes its toll,
and the environmental effects are far from uncontroversial.

2.1 the management of natural resources

Land use legislation in Sweden is set in a system of more or less connected
special statutes for speci(cid:222)ed land use purposes. At the top of this legal hi-

2 land use
legislation

cultural heritage in sweden

413

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

erarchy is the Act on Management of National Resources (Swedish abbre-
viation (cid:210)NRL(cid:211)).11 The NRL, in effect since 1987, protects certain land and
water areas from use for purposes other than interests of national impor-
tance. This act is not primarily directed to private citizens or corporations
but rather addresses itself to the authorities, both local and national, and
tells them(cid:209)to a certain extent(cid:209)what priorities they ought to set or at
least consider when deciding matters of importance for the present or fu-
ture use of land. For example, this rule must be respected by local govern-
ments responsible for planning and development.

Certain kinds of land use are de(cid:222)ned as national interests under the
NRL, and areas in which such values have been recognized must be pro-
tected from actions that may clearly damage the national interest.12 Among
the recognized national interests are natural or cultural values. The NRL
gives precedence to those uses of land and water areas in Sweden that fur-
ther long-term goals of ecological, social, and economic allocation of nat-
ural  resources.  Certain  fundamental  rules  for  de(cid:222)ning  these  long-term
goals are laid down. Unexploited large areas should, as far as possible, be
saved from future exploitation. The same applies to areas that are ecologi-
cally sensitive.

The management of the cultural heritage is speci(cid:222)ed among those in-
terests worthy of protection. The NRL proclaims that areas where the cul-
tural heritage is of national importance must not be used in any way that
may damage cultural values. Now, what is an area of national importance to
the management of the cultural heritage? The NRL does not give a precise
answer to that question. The issue is determined in a complicated interplay
between the county administrations, which are agencies of the national
government, and the local governments. The county administrations may
fall back on guidelines issued by or knowledge disseminated from the cen-
tral government agency, the Central Board of National Antiquities, but
may also rely on inventories of cultural resources made at the local level.
Large areas have been designated as of national importance, but no direct
obligations are inherent in this designation. Obligations to protect areas are
imposed through other legislative acts.

However, the NRL also recognizes other values than natural and cul-
tural  values  as  national  interests.  For  example,  agriculture  and  forestry 
are proclaimed to be industries of national importance.13  Industrial pro-
duction, the production and distribution of energy, communication, water
supply, and waste disposal are activities that understandably make an un-
questionable claim on certain areas.14  With regard to situations where dif-
ferent national interests clash, the NRL proclaims certain principles, or
(cid:210)chains of thought,(cid:211) to be followed in decisions concerning land allocation.
National defense receives top priority, but the other national interests are

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

thomas adlercreutz

414

not ranked against one another. The general rule is that priority should be
given to an interest that furthers the best long-term use of the land or water
resources.15

In  addition  to  the  enumeration  of certain  national  interests,  the
NRL points out certain geographical areas for use primarily in accor-
dance with the national interest. Thus, many of the coastal areas of Swe-
den have been marked out as of national interest for their natural and cul-
tural values and their importance for tourism and recreation. It has not,
however, been considered possible to prevent completely other interests
from establishing themselves or expanding in these areas. Existing com-
munities must be permitted to grow and local industries must have lee-
way for development. Large industrial enterprises, however, have been
ruled out from the most unexploited coastal areas. As a general rule, these
must be located in the vicinity of already established enterprises of a sim-
ilar kind.16

The NRL does not contain any rules regulating the decision-making
process per se (apart from licensing by the government of certain large in-
dustrial enterprises).17 Decisions are made under other statutes, legally linked
to the NRL. One of the most important of these acts is the Planning and
Building Act18 (Swedish abbreviation (cid:210)PBL(cid:211)), through which the legislature
has entrusted to the local governments the regulation of planning and
building in their respective districts. In principle, local governments are au-
tonomous in such matters. The national authorities may intervene only in
issues where the priorities set by the NRL are not being respected. They
may also intervene against schemes which are detrimental to a neighboring
local government district or where public health and safety interests are
being ignored.

2.2 the planning and building act

The PBL, which was part of the same legislative package as the NRL and
came into effect the same year, 1987, provides protection for buildings and
constructions that are culturally valuable. 

First, the local governments must consider what areas in their re-
spective districts contain national interests according to the NRL. They
may not make planning ordinances that run contrary to a national inter-
est. As mentioned above, they are bound by the NRL to prevent, within
their  authority,  any  exploitation  that  would  clearly  damage  a  cultural
value of national interest. If they do not, the national government would
have grounds for annulling the ordinance or even making an ordinance of
its own.

Second, the local governments are bound also by provisions in the PBL
stipulating that buildings and areas of buildings that are particularly valu-

cultural heritage in sweden

415

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

able from a historic, cultural, environmental, or artistic point of view may
not be distorted and must be kept in suf(cid:222)ciently good repair to preserve
their characteristics.19 This not only applies to the local governments(cid:213) plans
for their own buildings but is also applicable in the general building per-
mission procedure. Thus it is not legal for a local government to issue a
building permission for careless rehabilitation of a valuable building nor
may permission be granted for the demolition of a valuable building.

There is no explicit rule in the PBL that forces the local governments to
identify which buildings fall into the category of being (cid:210)particularly valu-
able.(cid:211) It is, however, inherent in the whole planning system that the local
governments should try to make this determination so that various planning
devices become effective and the owners are alerted to the fact. The local
governments have to adopt so-called comprehensive plans for their entire
districts.20 One of the objectives of this planning device, which is not legally
binding but considered a strong recommendation, is to de(cid:222)ne what kinds of
interests make a claim on the land and need special observation. Many local
governments have also voluntarily taken upon themselves to make special
cultural heritage plans, as a step in the comprehensive planning procedure.
Binding planning ordinances may contain provisions directly aimed at
the maintenance of particularly valuable buildings. Thus a planning ordi-
nance could prohibit demolition of any such building. It also may contain
special protective provisions ordering the owner to preserve and take care of
valuable details of a building.21 Such a provision may be aimed at preserv-
ing, for example, a stucco ceiling, Dutch-tile stove, ornate wood carvings or
other such particulars that bestow cultural value to a building.

Certain planning provisions may prevent the owner of a building from
making the most economically valuable use of a building. In such cases the
local governments must compensate owners who suffer damage. The rele-
vant provisions of the PBL have in fact served as a model for the constitu-
tional provisions related above.22 It should be remembered that the duty to
compensate only occurs when the economic impact of the restrictions has
exceeded certain thresholds. If the damage reaches an even higher level, the
proprietor has a right to require the local government to redeem the prop-
erty and pay remuneration equal to the market value of the property.23 The
same provisions apply to local government decisions to deny permission
for demolition of buildings.

Apart from planning ordinances, there are other means of protection
available to the local governments under the PBL. The general obligation to
apply for building permission for certain changes to be made on a build-
ing does not cover minor alterations on the interior. However, with respect
to culturally valuable buildings, a local government may require permission
even for minor alterations. Such an order must be issued in the same man-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

thomas adlercreutz

416

3 the act on
cultural
monuments

ner as a planning ordinance but does not need the same extent of consid-
eration that is normally inherent in physical planning. Thus the local au-
thorities may keep a rather strict control over these buildings in order to
safeguard their maintenance, even in cases where no other planning ordi-
nances have been adopted.

2.3 the nature conservation act

The Nature Conservation Act 24 (Swedish abbreviation (cid:210)NVL(cid:211)) of 1964
is important to the preservation of another aspect of the cultural heritage,
primarily  cultural  landscapes. This  act  is  applicable  to  the  (cid:210)culturally
in(cid:223)uenced natural environment.(cid:211) Nature reserves may be established for the
protection of remains of older forms of agrarian use, such as meadows and
pastures, stone barricades for the fencing of cattle, and other vestiges con-
nected more closely to the natural rather than the built heritage.

This act came into effect in 198825 and embodies a series of several older
acts. Here, the translation into English of the title is as literal as possible,
re(cid:223)ecting the fact that this statute is primarily concerned with the protec-
tion of single objects rather than large areas containing cultural remains.
It is, however, possible to protect areas under the KML (Swedish acronym
for the Act on Cultural Monuments). The KML is not legally linked to
the NRL, meaning(cid:209)at least in theory(cid:209)that one act is to be applied ir-
respective of the other. While the KML regulates the role of the national
authorities in the management of the cultural heritage, rules applicable to
the local governments are(cid:209)as has already been described(cid:209)to be found
in the PBL.

3.1 introductory provisions and 

general structure

In a rather emblematic introductory provision,26 the KML states that it is
a national obligation to protect and care for our cultural heritage and that
everyone shares this responsibility. Private citizens as well as the authorities
have to consider and take care of the cultural heritage. Anyone who plans
or undertakes an enterprise shall avoid or limit as far as possible any dam-
age to the cultural heritage.

The State County Administrations supervise cultural resources in the
country.27 The act provides for administrative action by these agencies in
many respects, which will be discussed further below. The Central Board of
National Antiquities, which is also an agency of the national government,
supervises cultural resource management throughout the nation. It makes
few decisions with implications for individuals but may appeal decisions
taken by the county administrations, other agencies, or courts of law.

cultural heritage in sweden

417

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

The KML is divided into (cid:222)ve chapters for the following categories of
property: Chapter 2(cid:209)ancient monuments, sites and (cid:222)nds (that is, the ar-
chaeological heritage, which is distinct from the heritage provided for in
chapters 3 and 4); Chapter 3(cid:209)buildings and other constructions of cul-
tural excellence (historic buildings); Chapter 4(cid:209)churches, churchyards,
cemeteries and movables belonging to a protected church (heritage of the
church);  Chapter  5(cid:209)export  from  Sweden  of old  cultural  objects;  and
Chapter 6(cid:209)provisions implemented under the European Community di-
rective for the return of cultural objects illegally removed from their coun-
try of origin.28 These latter provisions, however interesting they are from a
property rights perspective, will not be dealt with in this article, as they are
fundamentally the same throughout the European Economic Area, with
only minor national deviations as to procedure.

3.2 archaeological heritage

Chapter 2 of the KML includes, as belonging to the archaeological her-
itage, on the one hand, ancient monuments and sites and, on the other, an-
cient (cid:222)nds. The former are mostly (cid:222)xed and the latter movable, but the dif-
ference  in  physical  mobility  does  not  necessarily  relate  to  or  have  any
relevance under civil law de(cid:222)nitions of the two kinds of property.

3.2.1 Ancient monuments

Ancient monuments are traces of human activity in past ages that resulted
from use in previous times and have been permanently abandoned. Fur-
thermore, they must (cid:222)t into one of the following subcategories:

(1) Graves, funeral buildings, and burial grounds, together with
churchyards and other cemeteries
(2) Raised stones and stones and rock bases with inscriptions,
symbols, marks, pictures, as well as other carvings or paintings
(3) Crosses or memorials
(4) Places of assembly for the administration of justice, cult
activities, trade, or other common purposes
(5) Remains of homes, settlements, and work places, and cultural lay-
ers resulting from the use of such homes or places(cid:209)for example,
traces of working life and economic activity
(6) Ruins of fortresses, castles, monasteries, church buildings, 
and defense works, and also of other remarkable buildings and 
structures
(7) Routes and bridges, harbor facilities, beacons, road markings,
navigation marks, and similar transport markings, as well as
boundary markings and labyrinths
(8) Wrecked ships, if at least one hundred years have presumably
elapsed since the shipwreck. Furthermore, ancient monuments

thomas adlercreutz

418

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

include natural formations associated with ancient customs, legends
or noteworthy historic events, as well as traces of ancient popular
cult.29

Ancient monuments are protected directly by the KML ipso lege. No
further administrative or judicial order based on the KML is needed. Pro-
tection can, however, be rendered more speci(cid:222)c and effective by comple-
mentary administrative action. The county administration may issue ordi-
nances regarding an ancient monument to specify, for example, what kind
of grazing may be permitted, to what depth the soil may be cultivated, or
which restrictions on access would apply.30

The Central Board of National Antiquities keeps a register of ancient
monuments, and the visible parts of many ancient monuments and sites are
marked on the of(cid:222)cial maps of Sweden. However, a site is seldom de(cid:222)ned
on the map with exact boundaries. An ancient monument includes a large
enough area of ground or on the seabed to preserve the remains and to af-
ford them adequate scope with regard to their nature and signi(cid:222)cance. The
area(cid:209)unlike in many other jurisdictions(cid:209)does not end at a speci(cid:222)ed dis-
tance from the ancient monument,31 but a boundary may be determined by
administrative decision.32

The fact that there is very seldom a predetermined boundary to an an-
cient monument may give cause for concern to landowners. In one instance,
a person who had received building permission for three houses was later
denied permission to go through with the project by the county adminis-
tration acting under the KML. The houses were to be built approximately
one hundred meters from the closest of four prehistoric settlements. The
protective zone necessitated by the existence of these sites would be close
to one square kilometer, with very few visible signs above ground. The ap-
plicant appealed, but the government upheld the county administration(cid:213)s
decision.33 The applicant was subsequently compensated out of court for
the loss of building rights.

The core protective provision of the KML states that it is prohibited
(cid:209)unless permission has been granted by the county administration(cid:209)to
displace, remove, excavate, cover or by building development, planting, 
or in any other way, to alter or damage an ancient monument.34 Anyone
intending to erect a building or structure or to carry out any other en-
terprise should ascertain in advance whether an ancient monument may
be affected and consult with the county administration. If, in the course
of digging or other work, an ancient monument is discovered, the work
must  be  suspended  immediately  and  the  county  administration  no-
ti(cid:222)ed.35 In some instances the county administration may not be able to
ascertain whether an intended enterprise will affect an ancient monu-
ment. It could then order a special survey to be made. If the enterprise

cultural heritage in sweden

419

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

in question covers a major area of land, the cost of the survey is borne by
the entrepreneur.36

The  county  administrations  may  receive  applications  to  remove  or
alter ancient monuments, but permission is granted only in cases where the
monument constitutes an obstacle or inconvenience that is not in reason-
able proportion to its importance. An owner of a shipwreck may be granted
such permission, if there are no contravening special circumstances.37 Per-
mission may be granted subject to the ful(cid:222)llment of certain conditions.
Thus it may be ruled that the monument or site must be investigated and
recorded or that special measures be taken to preserve it. Before (cid:222)nalizing
its decision, the county administration may order a preparatory investiga-
tion be made in order to obtain suf(cid:222)cient knowledge for its decision or to
enable it to appraise the need for a full investigation.38

As a general rule the entrepreneur will be responsible for covering the
costs of the archaeological measures stipulated by the county administra-
tion. The entrepreneur is exempted from responsibility for costs pertaining
to an ancient monument that was not known previously or if it turns out
that no ancient monument or site at all was involved in an investigation.
The entrepreneur also does not bear costs that are considerably higher than
estimated by the county administration or that pertain to a preparatory in-
vestigation, in case the county administration does not in the end grant
permission for the enterprise.39 There are also government subsidies avail-
able to cover the archaeological costs of certain minor enterprises or inves-
tigations rendered necessary by administrative order, such as an obligation
to replace a sewage system for sanitary reasons.40

When permission is granted to remove ancient monuments totally or
partially, the entrepreneurs usually cover the total costs of the ensuing in-
vestigations. These may come to considerable amounts. Of the estimated
total cost of a recently (cid:222)nished motor way, some 10 percent pertained to
the archaeologists(cid:213) investigations and record-taking. Archaeological investi-
gations are usually performed by a special branch of the Central Board of
National Antiquities or by staff at regional museums. In recent years, pri-
vate (cid:222)rms have also conducted a few investigations. It has been under dis-
cussion whether rules on government procurement are to be applied by the
county administration in choosing which agency should be appointed to
perform and which will have the right to bill the entrepreneur afterwards.
A recent amendment to the KML has ended this discussion by stipulating
that procurement procedures are not applicable.41

It is often said that the provisions protecting ancient monuments serve
as a servitude on property. Although this classi(cid:222)cation lacks in legal preci-
sion, it serves to point out that there are rather severe use restrictions on
land occupied by an ancient monument. No provisions ensure a landowner

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

thomas adlercreutz

420

continued use of the property, a right that is guaranteed under the Instru-
ment of Government in the sense that infringements on it should not go
uncompensated, but there are no provisions for compensation either. Does
this imply unconstitutionality? The question has been raised by Bertil Bengts-
son  but  so  far  not  been  put  to  any  test.42 In  one  situation,  however,  a
landowner is ensured of compensation for the inability to make use of the
property. If permission is refused for work that might affect an ancient
monument and that monument previously was completely unknown and
without visible sign above ground, then the applicant is entitled to reason-
able compensation, if the monument causes the owner substantial hin-
drance or inconvenience.43

The government agencies (the Central Board of National Antiquities
and the county administrations) may(cid:209)after proper noti(cid:222)cation of the
owner of an ancient monument but independent of the owner(cid:213)s consent(cid:209)
take necessary steps to protect and care for the monument by relocation,
enclosure, or clearance. These agencies are also allowed to conduct investi-
gations of their own or may grant permission for research investigation on
private land. In these situations, which are different from the ones treated
above, the owner is entitled to compensation for damage or inconvenience
caused by such measures.44

3.2.2 Ancient (cid:222)nds

Ancient (cid:222)nds are objects that have no owner when found, are either dis-
covered in or near an ancient site, and are connected with it or found in
other circumstances, and are presumably at least one hundred years old.45
The former accrue to the state when found; the latter accrue to the (cid:222)nder.
However, the (cid:222)nder is obligated to invite the state to acquire any (cid:222)nd which
either consists wholly or partially of gold, silver, copper, bronze or other
copper alloy or is part of two or more objects presumed to have been de-
posited  together. The  compensatory  sum  is  determined  by  the  Central
Board of National Antiquities. Compensation must, however, be reason-
able  and  cover  at  least  the  value  of the  metal  plus  one-eighth  of that
value(cid:209) 112.5 percent. The board(cid:213)s decision may be appealed in an admin-
istrative court of law.46

These provisions, however, apply only to ownerless ancient objects. In
Sweden, ownership is not considered to expire or be subject to time limi-
tation. Con(cid:223)icts between persons claiming title and the Central Board of
National Antiquities, however, have been rare. In a Supreme Court case
such a con(cid:223)ict was resolved with the state prevailing. An unusually rich sil-
ver treasure was found hidden in a Stockholm Old Town basement and was
subsequently claimed by several estates of inheritors of the known owners
of the  building  at  the  presumed  time  of hiding.  None  of the  estates

cultural heritage in sweden

421

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

demonstrated suf(cid:222)cient proof of ownership.47 The treasure is now in the
Stockholm  City  Museum.  Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that  landowners
under Swedish law have no title to (cid:222)nds discovered on their land. The
landowner will prevail only insofar as a  (cid:210)(cid:222)nd(cid:211) is, in fact, a (cid:222)xture or a
(cid:222)tting to real property and not a movable.

3.2.3 Metal detectors

The KML contains three sections on metal detectors, aimed at contraven-
ing illicit search for ancient metallic (cid:222)nds.48  There is a general ban on the use
of metal detectors, which is applicable everywhere, not just on ancient
monuments and sites. There are, however, some exemptions. The Central
Board of National Antiquities needs no permission. Military and public
authorities may use detectors in the course of their activities when search-
ing for things other than ancient (cid:222)nds. The county administrations may
also license individual use, such as for the search for lost objects or for cer-
tain hobby use.

3.2.4 Penalties

Offenses against the KML may incur penalties ranging from (cid:222)nes to a max-
imum of four years(cid:213) imprisonment. Prison sentences are very rare. Delib-
erate use of metal detectors in the search for ancient (cid:222)nds has resulted in
terms of two months(cid:213) imprisonment for three individuals in recent years. In
addition to penalties, offenders may have to pay damages for repair, recon-
struction, or archaeological investigations necessitated by the offense.49

3.3 historic buildings

Structures belonging to this category of the cultural heritage receive pro-
tection by an (appealable) administrative order issued by the local county
administration; thus there is no direct protection by law. Buildings of out-
standing interest on account of their historic value or that form part of a
settlement of outstanding historical interest may receive protection as well
as parks, gardens, and other amenities of historic interest.50 Examples of
such amenities include mines, jetties, walls, ramparts, moats, lime or iron
ore kilns, mills, wells, and bridges. In recent years a railroad and a canal
have been added to the list of historic (cid:210)buildings.(cid:211)

The difference between a historic building or structure and an ancient
monument lies in whether it has been permanently abandoned or not. As
an example, an unusual vaulted stone bridge may or may not be part of a
road system in current use. If it is not, and has not been so for a long time,
its  protection  as  an  ancient  monument  is  ensured  directly  by  law. The
owner who intends to remove or do any work to the(cid:209)possibly unsafe(cid:209)
bridge is under an obligation to (cid:222)nd this fact out for him or herself and

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

thomas adlercreutz

422

seek the necessary permission. If the bridge is still used for transportation,
a decision by the county administration will be necessary to protect it from
measures which might jeopardize its historic value. This decision will be
taken after consultation with the owner and should re(cid:223)ect due considera-
tion of the owner(cid:213)s interests.51

When listing a building, the county administration must issue an in-
struction on how the building should be cared for and kept, and to what
extent it must not be physically changed (protective order). There are in-
stances of a protective order covering just a couple of rooms of a building.
Normally, however, the whole building is included, and the protective order
is in effect an injunction on demolition. If necessary, the protective order
may cover an area adjoining the building to ensure that the area be kept in
such a condition that the appearance and the character of the building will
not be jeopardized. The protective order may not burden the possessor ex-
cessively with obligations that are not intrinsically necessary to safeguard
the cultural value of the building. Regard shall be paid to the use of the
building and the reasonable wishes of the possessor.52

The county administration may try an issue as to whether a building
ought to be listed as a historic building either on application or ex of(cid:222)cio.
The right to apply for a listing is open to everyone.53 Pending further judg-
ment, the county administration may prohibit temporarily any measures
that might lessen the cultural value of the building; most notably it may
stop an imminent demolition.54

There is quite a lot of administrative work to be carried out in the
course of listing a building and deciding on a protective order. The build-
ing ought to be measured and described in all details that comprise its cul-
tural value. Thus the county administrations normally have a number of
buildings on a waiting list for the formal listing procedure.

No restrictions on the owner are enforceable before the formal proce-
dure(cid:209)with a noti(cid:222)cation to the general land register of the foreseeable 
restrictions(cid:209)has been started. However, the county administration may
order the owner of a culturally valuable building to notify the administra-
tion of any plans for demolishing the building or changing it in a way that
might seriously jeopardize its cultural value. After having been noti(cid:222)ed by
the owner of such plans, the county administration has a month to decide
whether to act on the issue of a listing. During this time, the owner may
not make any changes.55

Once a building has been listed, the protective order is intended to
govern the continuing upkeep and care of the building. However, it is pos-
sible for the owner to apply for permission from the county administration
to make changes to the building contrary to the protective order, if there
are  special  reasons.  Permission  may  be  granted  on  condition  that  the

cultural heritage in sweden

423

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

change is made in accordance with speci(cid:222)c directions and that the owner
records  the  state  of the  building  before  and  during  the  work  that  will
change it. If listing causes an obstacle, inconvenience, or costs out of pro-
portion to the importance of the building, the county administration may
change the protective order or revoke protection altogether.56

The KML is not applicable to buildings owned by the state. However,
such buildings and other structures may be protected on order of the gov-
ernment. The Central Board of National Antiquities is responsible for the
monitoring of special regulations issued by the government.57

Great architectural value of a building does not by itself make the
building eligible for protection according to the KML, although architec-
tural value may in(cid:223)uence the applicability of the KML, if it (cid:222)ts into a con-
text of cultural history. Some time ought to elapse before this context be-
comes apparent. Thus, it is virtually out of the question to list under the
KML a very recent building, regardless of its outstanding architectural
qualities when judged contemporaneously.58  On the other hand, the impor-
tance of age should not be overemphasized. Bauhaus architecture as well as
the more prominent building features of the 1940s and 50s are now begin-
ning to be considered eligible for listing. The local governments also have
a greater range of action through the planning legislation, and they may
thus protect recent buildings with great architectural value.

The listing of a historic building has no expropriative effects. The
ownership, right of use, or possession remains in the same hands as before;
but, naturally, the full rights of property are to some extent impaired. The
most obvious restriction is that the house may not be demolished, even
though its economic life span may have elapsed, and the upkeep may be
more expensive than the income the property is able to yield.

The consent of the owner is not necessary for listing. However, as the
owner(cid:213)s cooperation is vital to the continuing good care of the building, it
very rarely happens that a building is listed contrary to the owner(cid:213)s opinion.
The KML also instructs the county administration to try to come to an
agreement with the owner.59 The KML grants the nonconsenting owner the
right of economic compensation. These rules are complex60 and generally
follow Chapter 2, Article 18 of the Constitution and the corresponding
provisions of the Planning and Building Act.

If the protective order contains a prohibition on demolition of the
building, the state has to compensate the owner(cid:209)if the economic damage
is considerable in relation to the part of the property affected by this re-
striction. Considerable damage is thought to arise when the damage exceeds
15— 20 percent of the value of that affected part. If there is other economic
damage(cid:209)for example, if the protective order compels the owner to main-
tain the building by more expensive methods than are normally required(cid:209)

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

thomas adlercreutz

424

then the owner is eligible for compensation if continued use of the affected
part is substantially impaired. That threshold is thought to be at 5— 10 per-
cent of the value. In the latter case, compensation is given for the entire loss
in value. In the former case, damages are reduced by the amount below the
threshold. It should perhaps be emphasized that the extent of damage is as-
sessed at the time of the listing, not(cid:209)as is the case in some other juris-
dictions(cid:209)when the owner is refused permission to alter a building and
then (cid:222)nds that the economic interests have suffered. Very serious restric-
tions on the use of property caused by listing gives the owner the right to
demand expropriation of the property. The owner then receives compen-
sation for its market value and also the costs of litigation in a real prop-
erty court.61

The  rules  on  compensation  for  listing  of historic  buildings  have
never been applied fully in a court of law (a few cases have been settled
voluntarily in court). There have, however, been several cases where com-
pensation has been negotiated. Very rarely have these agreements con-
cerned private property. The state through its county administration may
take a rather more activist stand on preservation than a local government
has. Battles between the county administration and the local authorities
have concerned large structures, such as theater buildings, hospitals, pris-
ons, and warehouses. The local governments, using their planning pre-
rogatives, have found these space-consuming structures to stand in the
way of modernization. A few of these situations have been resolved when
the state has offered (cid:222)nancial compensation to the local government in-
volved.

A breach of the protective rules for historic buildings may lead to con-
sequences of different kinds. The county administration may issue injunc-
tions for restoring damaged buildings, enforced by contingent (cid:222)nes. The
administration may also impose penalties, which, however, may not exceed
a (cid:222)ne.62

3.4 heritage of the church

Nominally, the Church of Sweden (Lutheran) is the established national
church,  although  there  are  few  constitutional  reminders  to  that  effect.
Under law, the church enjoys a great degree of self-determination. How-
ever, with regard to the church(cid:213)s property rights, the legal entanglements be-
tween the secular national interests and the interests of the church have
been of great complexity.

The relationship between church and state is in the process of change.
At the turn of the millennium, this relationship will have been reduced so
as to encompass only a very broad framework of legislation, regulating cer-
tain minimum requirements as to organization but bestowing autonomy on

cultural heritage in sweden

425

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

church bodies. The church also will have become autonomous with regard
to property. It will then be free to manage its property on an equal foot-
ing with other independent associations. When it comes to restrictions on
the management of church property, imposed to secure its considerable
cultural heritage values, however, it is thought that the present provisions of
the KML relevant to church property will continue to be applicable. The
details are not yet clear, but a short description of these provisions would
be justi(cid:222)ed also from a property rights perspective.63

The principal attitude of the KML is that the state should have a de-
gree of oversight with regard to the buildings of the church and their en-
vironment but only with respect to their importance as part of the general
cultural heritage. An earlier system of general state control of all con-
struction works on church buildings has thus been replaced by a system in
which only alterations on existing churches have to be reviewed by the
county administrations.

For practical reasons, the concept of cultural history has been given a
precise de(cid:222)nition in time. Anything created later than 1939 is, in principle,
not part of cultural history, unless the Central Board of National Antiq-
uities has decided on listing a speci(cid:222)c church or other heritage item. To be
more precise, the objects of the church heritage that are still under state su-
pervision are the following:

(1) Church buildings and churchyards, belonging to the Church of
Sweden and built or laid out before 1940, or later if listed by the
Central Board of National Antiquities
(2) Movables, regardless of age, of a church included under
Category 1 or a cemetery
(3) Cemeteries laid out before 1940, or later if listed. The concept 
of a cemetery includes secular cemeteries and cemeteries of other 
denominations than the Church of Sweden. It also includes 
buildings on a cemetery and other immovables or movables.
Protection is ipso lege and no further administrative action need 
be taken.

No church building or churchyard erected before 1940 or listed by the
Central Board may be changed in any considerable way without the county
administration(cid:213)s permission. Normal or urgent repairs may, however, be
carried out without approval. The KML states that material and methods
should be chosen with regard to the cultural values in question.

Movables of a church or a churchyard must be kept safe and in good
repair. Every parish must maintain an inventory of all movables with cul-
tural value. If an object belongs to or is kept by somebody else, this should
be noted in the inventory. The vicar and an appointed member of the

thomas adlercreutz

426

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

parish council are responsible for the inventory and the care of the objects.
An inspection by the dean takes place every six years, or when there is a
change of vicar. An object listed in the inventory (and not in private own-
ership) may not be alienated, stricken from the inventory, repaired, or al-
tered or moved from its traditional whereabouts, without the county ad-
ministration(cid:213)s permission. The county administration is also authorized to
inspect movables of the church and add them to the inventory and to take
care of movables in order to protect and care for them. The provisions for
cemeteries are similar to those applicable to church buildings and church-
yards.

3.5 old cultural objects

Chapter 5 of the KML regulates export of certain old cultural objects,
both Swedish and foreign. The term (cid:210)export(cid:211) should, however, be avoided
in relation to the KML, as it nowadays refers to the dispatch out of a
Member State of the European Union into a third country under the Eu-
ropean  Council  Regulation  (EEC)  No.  3911/92  on  export  of cultural
goods. Intracommunity trade is called (cid:210)dispatch(cid:211) in the relevant European
Community legal texts.

Sweden, like most other union members, has used the exception under
Article 36 of the European Community Treaty from the freedom of move-
ment stipulations to retain national legislation in order to protect its (cid:210)trea-
sures possessing of artistic, historic or archaeological value(cid:211) by regulating
dispatch out of this country of certain objects, regardless of whether they
are to leave for another member state or a third country. No object to
which the KML is applicable may be sent or taken out of Sweden without
a permit. The word (cid:210)permit(cid:211) is here being used as distinct from the term
(cid:210)license,(cid:211) used in the just-mentioned European Community regulation gov-
erning export to third countries. The regulation will not be dealt with here.

Swedish cultural objects under the KML are the following:

(1) Objects that were produced before 1600, irrespective of their
value(cid:209)printed works, maps and pictures, as well as manuscripts on
parchment or paper
(2) Objects more than one hundred years old, irrespective of
value(cid:209)certain wooden objects, with painted or carved decoration,
folk costumes and certain traditional textiles, furniture, mirrors and
caskets, clocks, signed faience, musical instruments, (cid:222)rearms and
weapons
(3) Objects more than one hundred years old, with a value in excess
of SEK 50,000(cid:209)paintings, drawings and sculptures, pottery, glass
and porphyry, objects of precious metals (except coins and medals),
chandeliers and woven tapestries

cultural heritage in sweden

427

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

(4) Objects more than (cid:222)fty years old, with a value in excess of
SEK 2,000(cid:209)Lapp (Sami) objects, unprinted minutes, letters,
diaries, manuscripts, sheet music and accounts, hand-drawn maps,
plans and designs, technical models, prototypes, and scienti(cid:222)c 
instruments.64

Dispatch of foreign cultural objects requires a permit if the object can
be assumed to have come to Sweden before 1840 AD and its value is in ex-
cess of SEK 50,000. Objects in this category are furniture, mirrors and cas-
kets, clocks, musical instruments, (cid:222)rearms and weapons, paintings, draw-
ings and sculptures, pottery, glass, ivory, precious metals (except coins and
medals), chandeliers, and woven tapestries.65

Dispatch in certain situations is exempt from the permit requirement.
No permit is needed if the owner moves from Sweden to settle in another
country or if the owner is a resident of another country and has acquired
the object through inheritance, a will or the legal distribution of an estate.
Nor is a permit needed for temporary loans by certain public institutions
or for public cultural activities abroad.66

The KML provides that a permit should be granted unless the ob-
ject is of great importance to the nation(cid:213)s cultural heritage. 67 The Cen-
tral Board of National Antiquities has been mandated to issue comple-
mentary regulations,68 which stress inter alia that artistic, scienti(cid:222)c, and
historic aspects are to be a part of the appraisal of cultural value. The
objective is to protect a many-faceted picture of the state(cid:213)s older cultural
heritage. Objects from all strata of society should be protected. Protec-
tion of sparsely represented categories should be given primary consid-
eration.

Permits are issued by (cid:222)ve different authorities: The National Library
(printed and unprinted books, etc.), The Nordic Museum (furniture, tex-
tiles, musical instruments, arms, etc.), The National Archives (unprinted
matter), The National Art Museum (furniture, paintings, art handicraft),
and The Central Board of National Antiquities (artifacts from churches).
All applications are (cid:222)led with the Central Board, which distributes them to
the proper authorities.69 A denial of permit can be appealed to an admin-
istrative court of law.70 There are no rules on compensation or preemption
by the state in cases where a permit is refused.

The number of permit applications is dwindling The (cid:222)rst year after
the introduction of the present rules (1985), 6,235 applications were (cid:222)led, of
which 190 were refused. As of January 1, 1990, an application fee of SEK
200 was introduced, and the number of applications fell to 1,379, with 40
refusals. The number stayed at approximately that level until 1995.71 Since
then it has fallen to a record low of 618 in 1997. The number of appeals in

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

thomas adlercreutz

428

all those years is very insigni(cid:222)cant, probably no more than (cid:222)ve cases have
been tried by the administrative courts.

The majority of applications concern furniture and similar objects.
This is explained by the broad categorization(cid:209)all furniture, etc., older
than one hundred years and regardless of value. The total number of objects
belonging to this category is, of course, not possible to count, but it is very
large.  It  has  been  estimated  that  96— 97  percent  of all  applications  are
granted, leaving only a small number of objects that must stay because they
are of great importance to Sweden(cid:213)s cultural heritage.72

How does the permit system relate to the Swedish property rights
guarantees? It should be remembered that where an owner of a cultural ob-
ject has a clear interest in being able to take the object abroad no permit is
required at all(cid:209)for example, when someone moves to take up residence, or
when someone already living abroad inherits property that is in Sweden.
These exemptions seem unusually broad in an international perspective.

At the same time, it is also obvious that owners who want their cul-
tural objects to leave the country for other reasons could be prevented
from dispatching them without any obligation resting on the state to pro-
vide compensation(cid:209)for example, for the loss of a more favorable selling
price on other markets than those in Sweden. A denied permit could, in
other words, amount to economic damage to the owner. The constitu-
tional re(cid:223)ections on this fact could be very brief. As has been pointed out
in section 1.2 above, the Swedish constitutional property guarantee does
not cover movable property. No such exemption is, however, to be found
in the European Human Rights Convention. So far, no attempt to con-
test the Swedish legislation on this score has been recorded. It should be
borne  in  mind  also  that  very  few  appeals  have  been  (cid:222)led  in  Swedish
courts.

There could be several reasons for this. One is that Swedish furni-
ture(cid:209)which provides the lion(cid:213)s share of applications(cid:209)seldom fetches
better prices abroad. With regard to arts, the one-hundred-year limit has
not yet brought the best-selling Swedish painters into the range of dispatch
control. There  are  comparatively  few  cases  where  permit  refusals  have
caused serious regret. Another reason, which seems to be increasingly likely
in light of the decreasing number of applications, is that the permit re-
quirements are not taken seriously. Chances seem slim that a person trav-
eling out of Sweden with illegally dispatched objects would be caught.

Not just owners, however, might (cid:222)nd reasons to test the constitution-
ality of the Swedish rules.73 Chapter 2, Article 20 of the Instrument of
Government states that restrictions on the general freedom of trade must
be motivated by vital public interests and must be nondiscriminatory. In
the preparatory works, it was said that the main purpose of the legislation

cultural heritage in sweden

429

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

notes

was to counteract a commercially organized export of Swedish cultural
goods.74 Auctioneers and antiques dealers might be tempted to bring that
up to prove that their trade is being discriminated against in relation to
other trade with free movement, although so far this has not happened.

1. National Historic Preservation Act of 1966. See The American Mosaic. Preserving a Nation(cid:213)s
Heritage (Robert E. Stipe and Antoinette J. Lee eds., US/ICOMOS, Washington DC
1987). The author of this article has written a study, Legal Protection of the Cultural Heritage
in the USA (Stockholm 1991) (unpublished).
2. (cid:133)sten Und(cid:142)n, Svensk sakr(cid:138)tt I. L(cid:154)s egendom 83 (Gleerups, Lund 1927)
3. Torgny H(cid:140)stad, Sakr(cid:138)tt avseende l(cid:154)s egendom 23 (5th ed., Norstedts, Stockholm 1994). For
a survey of theories, see G(cid:154)ran Skogh, Jan-Erik Lane, Ägander(cid:138)tten i Sverige (SNS f(cid:154)rlag,
Stockholm 1991).
4. Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1974:152 with later amendments.
5. Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Funda-
mental Freedoms, rati(cid:222)ed by Sweden February 4, 1952 and transposed into Swedish
law as of January 1, 1995.
6. The Swedish Parliament, acting on recommendation of its Constitutional Com-
mittee (KU 1997/98:30), has recently (June 3, 1998) decided that Chap. 2, Art. 18 of the
Instrument of Government should be restudied in order to clarify points of criticism
made, for example, by Bertil Bengtsson in Svensk Juristtidning 1994, at 920, and Grundlagen
och fastighetsr(cid:138)tten, (Nerenius and Santerus f(cid:154)rlag, Stockholm 1996), with contradicting
opinions by Gabriel Michanek, Milj(cid:154)r(cid:138)ttslig tidskrift 1995, at 155, and Staffan V(cid:138)ngby, Till
fr(cid:140)gan om 2 kap. 18 ⁄ andra stycket regeringsformen, Svensk Juristtidning 1996, at 892. 
7. These rights are also applicable to foreign citizens; copyright could be restricted
with regard to foreign citizens, but this has not happened.
8. Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1972:719.
9. Legislation also regulates other aspects of land ownership and use. For example,
there are special requirements for the registration and division of land, Chap. 1, Art. 1
of the Land Code of 1971 (Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1971:1209 with later amend-
ments). All land in Sweden must be registered under a system operated by the state
surveying authorities (Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1970:988 with later amendments),
and any agreements for the division of land are not effective unless they meet the leg-
islative requirements and are registered. The Land Code also regulates (cid:222)xtures that
have been installed for permanent use in buildings, Land Code, Chap. 2; transfers of
real property, id. Chaps. 4— 6; leases, id. Chaps. 7— 13, and servitudes, whereby one par-
cel may acquire rights of use in another parcel, id. Chap. 14.
10. It could be of some interest to compare this with, for example, the German Federal
Constitution, which, in Art. 14, has positive property guarantees, inter alia for the right
of inheritance. It does provide for expropriation, but regardless of the transfer of own-
ership inherent in expropriation and the right of compensation that goes with expro-
priation, it also provides for a general restriction on the use of property: (cid:210)Property
obliges. It should be used to further also the good of the public.(cid:211) This Sozialbindung
clause serves as a departure point for legal regulation of what use restrictions landown-
ers in Germany have to tolerate with, or sometimes without, economic compensation.

thomas adlercreutz

430

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

11. Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1987:12. This act is expected to be incorporated as of
1999 in a comprehensive Environmental Code, regulating almost all physical land use
issues, but it has not yet been adopted by the Swedish Parliament.
12. Id. Chap. 2, Art. 6.
13. Chap. 1, Art. 1 and Chap. 2, Arts. 1— 4 of the NRL.
14. Id. Chap. 2, Art. 8.
15. Id. Chap. 2, Art. 10.
16. Id. Chap. 3.
17. Id. Chap. 4
18. Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1987:10 with later amendments.
19. Chap. 3, Arts. 12 and 13 of the PBL.
20. Id. Chap. 4.
21. Id. Chap. 5, Arts. 7 and 16.
22. Id. Chap. 14, Art. 8.
23. Id. Chap. 14, Art. 9.
24. Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1964:822 with later amendments. This act, too, is ex-
pected to be incorporated in the Environmental Code, see supra note 11.
25. Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1988:950. This act is not going to be part of the Envi-
ronmental Code, see supra notes 11 and 24.
26. Chap. 1, ⁄ 1 of the KML.
27. Id. Chap. 1, ⁄ 2.
28. Council Directive 93/7/EEC on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed
from the territory of a Member State.
29. Chap. 2, ⁄ 1 of the KML.
30. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄ 9.
31. See, for example, Chap. 1, ⁄ 5 of the Finnish Act on Ancient Monuments, which stip-
ulates that a zone of two meters from the visible edge of the monument is under pro-
tection.
32. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄ 2.
33. Government decision December 1, 1994, Ku93/2867/K.
34. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄ 6.
35. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄ 10.
36. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄ 11.
37. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄ 12.
38. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄ 13.
39. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄ 14.
40. Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1993:379. Government regulation on grants for cultural
heritage management.

cultural heritage in sweden

431

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

41. Chap. 2, ⁄ 13 of the KML.
42. Bertil Bengtsson, supra note 6 at 110.
43. Chap. 2, ⁄ 15 of the KML.
44. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄⁄ 7— 8.
45. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄ 3.
46. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄⁄ 4, 16, and 24. The explanation for the odd percentage is purely tra-
ditional. The national code of 1734 stipulated that payment should amount to the
metal(cid:213)s value plus one-eighth, and that provision has been left standing. In practice, an
emulation of a cautiously appraised market value is sought.
47. The case of the Lohe treasure can be found in Nytt Juridiskt Arkiv I 1940:110.
48. Chap. 2, ⁄⁄ 18— 20 of the KML.
49. Id. Chap. 2, ⁄⁄ 21— 23. See Thomas Adlercreutz, Civil Liability for Costs for Ar-
chaeological Investigation Necessitated by Criminal Negligence(cid:209)A Swedish Supreme
Court Case, 6 International Journal of Cultural Property 327 (1997).
50. Chap. 3, ⁄ 1 of the KML.
51. Id. Chap. 3, ⁄ 3.
52. Id. Chap. 3, ⁄ 2.
53. Id. Chap. 3, ⁄ 4.
54. Id. Chap. 3, ⁄ 5.
55. Id. Chap. 3, ⁄ 6.
56. Id. Chap. 3, ⁄⁄ 14— 15.
57. Id. Chap. 1, ⁄ 1; Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1988:1229. Government regulation on
state-owned historic buildings.
58. Proposition (Government Bill) 1987/88:104 at 48.
59. See supra note 48.
60. Chap. 3, ⁄⁄ 10— 13 of the KML. The rules have been treated in Byggnadsminnes-
f(cid:154)rklaring,  at  91,  Recommendations  by  the  Central  Board  of National  Antiquities
(Stockholm 1991), and by Marianne Larsson Carlbring and Eije Sj(cid:154)din, Ers(cid:138)ttning vid be-
varande av kulturhistoriskt intressant bebyggelse (LMV-rapport 1994:7)
61. Under provisions of the Expropriation Act, Svensk f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1972:719.
62. Chap. 3, ⁄⁄ 16— 19 of the KML.
63. The text following this note is a digest of the contents of Chap. 4 of the KML.
64. Chap. 5, ⁄ 4 of the KML.
65. Id. Chap. 5, ⁄ 5.
66. Id. Chap. 5, ⁄ 7.
67. Id. Chap. 5, ⁄ 8.
68. Kulturr(cid:140)dets f(cid:154)rfattningssamling 1990:15.
69. Chap. 5, ⁄⁄ 10— 11 of the KML.

thomas adlercreutz

432

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770419

70. Id. Chap. 5, ⁄ 15.
71. Cultural Heritage Enquiry, Kulturegendomar och kulturf(cid:154)rem(cid:140)l (SOU 1995:128), at 246.
72. Id. at 244.
73. One point where the Swedish rules seem incompatible with higher norms is the
charging of application fees. For reasons spelled out by the Cultural Heritage Enquiry,
this practice contravenes the European Community Treaty. Id. at 235.
74. Proposition (Government Bill) 1984/85:179, at 14.

cultural heritage in sweden

433


