Cultural Heritage Legislation and
Management  in Nigeria
Folarin  Shyllon*

1  Summary

Cultural heritage legislation and management commenced in Nigeria
seventy years ago. Nonetheless, the Nigerian  commission  for muse-
ums and monuments remains a marginal institution without adequate
resources to manage and protect the country's cultural  heritage. The
consolidating  legislation  of  1979  was  hurriedly  enacted  and  has
many  defects.  The  sanctions  and  protective  measures  enshrined  in
the  Act  are  now  hopelessly  inadequate.  In  short,  the  legislation  is
in  need  of  urgent  revision  and  re-enactment.  The  cultural  heritage
managers  need  to  evince  a greater  commitment  and  a  higher  sense
of  probity  than  hitherto  in  order  to  have  a  comprehensive  cultural
heritage  management  programme  for  the  country.  Cultural  heritage
management  in Nigeria today  is neither well organized nor co-ordi-
nated. The authorities must appreciate that cultural heritage manage-
ment has an ideological  basis, which is sustaining the cultural  iden-
tity of a people.

2  Introduction

National  legal  controls  of  movement  of  antiquities  and  historical
artefacts  are quite old, going back to the fifteenth  century and begin-
ning with Papal  legislation. In Africa  most  states inherited forms  of
protective  legislation  drafted  by  colonial  governments.  The  Portu-
guese colonial  governments left  none. Angola, Cape Verde, Guinea-
Bissau,  Mozambique  and  Sao  Tome  Principe  all  reached  indepen-
dence  without  any  such  legislative  cover.  The  Spanish  apparently
left  no  such  legislative  legacy  behind  them  either.  A  good  deal  of
cultural  heritage  legislation  in French-speaking  Africa  is based on a

*  Professor  of Law, Faculty of Law, University of Ibadan/Nigeria.  —  The author
thanks Dr. Lyndel V. Prott of Unesco for her insightful  comments and  support.
The  author  also  thanks  Dr.  Babatunde  Agbaje-Williams  of  the  Institute  of
African  Studies,  University  of  Ibadan,  who  helped  to  sharpen  his  views  on a
number  of issues.

235

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

1956  French  law  which  applied  to  French  overseas  territories.
Though  there  was  no  general  statute  applicable  throughout  British
colonies  in Africa,  most  of  these  states  reached  independence  with
cultural  heritage  protection  laws  in  operation  (Prott  and  O'Keefe
1984: 34-39, 66-67;  1989: 77; Cleere  1989: 1).

3  Early  Legislation

In  Nigeria,  the  first  cultural  heritage  legislation  was  a  1924  ordi-
nance  which was passed in view  of the export  from  the  country  of
bronzes. The ordinance prohibited the export of ancient works of art
without the government's permission. According to Kenneth Murray
(1942: 246), but for the intensification  of the Second World War, the
colonial  government  would  have  introduced  in  the  early  forties  a
more comprehensive  act on the line of those made by other colonies
to  protect  works  of art  of  historical  interest.  A  comprehensive  act
was  enacted  in  1953  in  response  to  the  immense  export  trade  in
antiquities  and  the  demolition  of  many  historical  buildings  to  be
replaced by modern structures. The Antiquities Act  1953 established
the Antiquities Commission with full responsibility for the preserva-
tion and management of antiquities and monuments. The Act defined
antiquity to mean:
(a)  any  object  of  archaeological  interest  or land  in which  any  such

object  is believed  to exist or was discovered; or

(b)  any relic of early European  settlement  or colonisation; or
(c)  any  work  of  art  or  craftwork,  including  any  statue,  modelled
clay figure,  figure cast or wrought in metal, carving, house-post,
door,  ancestral  figure,  religious  mask,  staff,  drum  bowl,  orna-
ment, utensil, weapon, armour, regalia, manuscript or document,
if such work of art or craft-work  is of indigenous  origin  and
(i)  was made or fashioned  before  the year  1918; or
(ii)  is or has  been used  at any time  in the performance,  and  for

the purposes  of,  any traditional  African  ceremony.

"Object  of archaeological  interest" meant:
(a)  any  fossil  remains  of  man  or  of  animals  found  in  association

with man; or

(b)  any  site,  trace  or  ruin  of  an  ancient  habitation,  working  place,

midden or sacred place; or

(c)  any cave or other natural shelter, or engraving, drawing, inscrip-

tion, painting or inscription  on rock or elsewhere, or

(d)  any  stone  object  or  implement  believed  to  have  been  used  or

produced by early man; or

(e)  any  ancient  structure,  erection,  memorial,  causeway,  bridge,
cairn,  tumulus, grave  shrine,  excavation,  well, earthwork,  wall,
gateway  or  fortification;

236

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in  Nigeria

(f)  any  antique tool or object  of metal, wood,  clay, leather, textile,
basketware or other material, which is (or are) of archaeological
interest.

Local Government authorities were designated as agencies of preser-
vation  at the grassroots level with powers to make rules or by-laws,
and  special powers were conferred  on the Surveyor of Antiquities.
With  regard  to  monuments,  the  Commission  had  the  power  to
declare  any antiquity  as a monument  if it considered  that  it needed
protection or preservation and ought in the public interest to be pro-
tected  or preserved.  The  declaration  of  any  antiquity  as  monument
must be gazetted.

In  order to check  and control  illicit  trade  and  export  in Nigeria's
cultural  heritage  property, restrictions  were placed  on  export of an-
tiquities and excavations of cultural  sites. No antiquity  could be ex-
ported  from  Nigeria  without  a  permit  issued  by  the  Commission.
Similarly, no person could by means of excavation or similar opera-
tions  search  for  any  antiquity  unless  authorised  by  a permit  issued
by the Commission with the consent of the local government author-
ity of the place where the search was to be carried out. The Commis-
sion  was  enjoined  before  issuing  a  permit  to  satisfy  itself,  among
other  things,  that  the  applicant  was  competent  by  training  and  ex-
perience  to  carry  out  the  operations  for  which  the  permit  was  re-
quired.  A permit  could be revoked  by the  Commission  at any time
without any reason being given. Whenever any object of archaeolog-
ical  interest  was  discovered,  the  local  government  authority  of  the
place  where  the  object  was discovered  had  the  power  to  constitute
itself  the  guardian  of  the  object  for  the  purpose  of  preserving  or
protecting  the  object.

The Antiquities  Act  1953 created penalties  against  those  who in-
fringed  the  provisions  connected  with  the  preservation  and  protec-
tion  of  Nigeria's  antiquities  and  monuments  and  for  purposes  con-
nected  therewith.  Section  27, which  is  the  last  section  of the  1953
Act, created a general  criminal  liability against any person who wil-
fully  obstructed,  hindered  or  delayed  any  person  in the  exercise  or
performance  of  any  powers  or  duties  conferred  or  imposed  by  the
Antiquities Act. Any one found guilty was liable to a fine not exceed-
ing twenty-five  pounds or to imprisonment  for a term not exceeding
one  month.  Apart  from  this  general  offence,  some  specific  crimes
were created  by the Act.

In  spite  of  the  penalties,  the  illicit  trade  in  cultural  property
increased  by  leaps  and  bounds.  This  was  undoubtedly  due  to  the
low fines and terms of imprisonment coupled with ignorance and/or
corruption  in  the  police  and  customs  departments  leading  to  weak
enforcement  of  the  law.  All  these  made  the  despoliation  of  the
nation's  antiquities  a  lucrative  enterprise.  Indeed,  Eluyemi  (1982:
40)  describes  the  1953 Act as  a  smugglers'  charter.  In  essence  the
law did not prohibit the export and smuggling of Nigerian antiquities

237

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

but  only  asked  the  smugglers  to  obtain  a permit.  The crucial  ques-
tions  he  posits  are:  who  was  responsible  for  the  illegal  exports?
Who  had  the  power  to  issue  permits?  The  same  colonial  authority.
"Therefore,  it  will  be  clear  beyond  any  reasonable  doubt  that  the
Antiquities Ordinance  No.17  of  1953 in actual fact  gave more pow-
ers,  indirectly,  to  the  exporters  of  Nigerian  antiquities.  If  prior  to
1953  the  export  had  been  by  the  backdoor,  after  1953  under  the
cover  of  a permit,  trade  in Nigerian  antiquities  reached  a wider di-
mension."

The provisions  of  regulation  made under the  Act, the  Antiquities
(Export Permits) Regulations  1957, support Eluyemi's sweeping crit-
icism. Although section 3(2) of the regulations provided that applica-
tions  for  export  permits  shall  be made  at  least  three  months  before
the  proposed  date  of  export,  this  could  be  waived  if  "reasonable
grounds  for  urgency  are  stated."  Under  section  3(2)  of  the  regula-
tions the exporter  did not have to physically  deliver the antiquity to
the Director of Antiquities. He was only required to state its location.
By Section 4(1) the applicant  was only required to "permit and facil-
itate  such  access  to  and  inspection  of  the  antiquity  as  may  be  re-
quired  by  the  Director  or  a member  of the  Commission." All these
provisions  show  the  insincerity  of  the  colonial  government  to  stem
the illicit trade  in Nigerian  antiquities. The provision of section 2(2)
in effect  waived the right of  full  inspection to determine whether an
object  is really  an antiquity. Twenty-four  hour notice could be given
and  a  permit  granted  once  "reasonable  grounds  for  urgency  are
stated." In the circumstances,  what grounds could ever be reasonable
to eliminate  full  inspection?

Perhaps  the  major  defect  of  the  1953  legislation  is  its  failure  to
proscribe the sale of antiquities.  As a senior customs officer  (Brigue
1972:  41)  pointed  out  in  a  paper  he  delivered  at  a  symposium  on
Nigerian Antiquities, "there is no legislation against the sale of antiq-
uities.  People  are  free  to  sell, people  are  free  to  buy  antiquities  at
any place, at any time. Customs  Officers  [and indeed police  officers]
cannot,  therefore,  challenge  sales  in  the  shops,  markets  and  enter-
tainment  centres."

With  the  rise  of  African  nation  states  following  independence
from  colonial rule in the  1960s, Africans  in search of identity rooted
in antiquity came to see their  cultural resources as a means of histori-
cal  pride.  This  led  to  the  feeling  that  cultural  heritage  objects  must
be protected.  This finally  resulted  somewhat belatedly  in Nigeria in
the passing of the Antiquities (Prohibited Transfers)  Act in February
1974.

The  Antiquities  (Prohibited  Transfers)  Act  1974  prohibited  any
person  from  buying  any  antiquity  or  selling  any  antiquity  to  any
person, other than the Director of the Federal Department of Antiqui-
ties or a person  or body authorized  by him. Any person who contra-
vened  the  law  was  liable  to  a  fine  of  two  thousand  Naira  or  five
times the value of the antiquity, whichever is greater, or to imprison-

238

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

ment  for  a term  of three  years, and the  antiquity  involved  was  for-
feited  to  the  state.  Persons  in  possession  or  control  of  antiquities
were to register such antiquities when approached for the registration
by  accredited  agents  (i. e., the  Director  or a member  of the  staff  of
the  Federal  Department  of  Antiquities  authorized  in writing  by  the
Director  to  act  for  him  or  any  person  or  body  in any  State  of  the
Federation  authorized  in  writing  by  the  Director  to  act  for  him  in
that  state), and  failure  to  register  when  so  approached  could  entail
the seizure and forfeiture  of the antiquities.

The  1974  Act  was  meant  to  outlaw  the  buying  and  selling  of
Nigerian  antiquities  which  the  1953 Act  failed  to proscribe.  It  was
seen  as  a measure  to  prevent  illegal  export  of  Nigerian  antiquities
which the Antiquities  Act  1953 had failed  to curb. Yet the  1974 Act
itself  contained  enough  internal  contradictions  for  it  to  be  ineffec-
tive.  For example,  although  the  Director  of  Antiquities  could  for  a
fair price compulsorily buy any antiquity for which an export permit
has been refused,  poor funding  made this impossible.

4  The Consolidating  Legislation  of  1979

The  stiffer  penalties  adopted  by  the  Antiquities  (Prohibited  Trans-
fers) Act 1974 indicate that the government felt tough measures must
be taken to stop the plundering and dispersal of the nation's cultural
heritage, and  that  those  involved  in these  damaging  activities  must
be subject to serious financial  liability and/or loss of personal liberty.
In order to contain further  the illegal trade, five years later the gov-
ernment proposed new legislation, the National Commission for Mu-
seums  and  Monuments  Act  1979.  While  repealing  various  earlier
cultural  heritage  enactments,  this  legislation  consolidated  most  of
the provisions thereof and made fresh  provisions  in connection  with
the declaration of national monuments. The penalties for the destruc-
tion  or  unauthorized  alteration  or  removal  of  monuments  were
increased. The Act retained  however the same definitions  of "antiq-
uity," "monument," and "object  of archaeological  interest" as given
in the Antiquities Act  1953.

Repealing  as  it  does  the  Antiquities  Act  1953,  the  Antiquities
(Amendment)  Act  1969, and  the  Antiquities  (Prohibited  Transfers)
Act  1974,  the  National  Commission  for  Museums  and  Monuments
Act  1979 abolished the Antiquities Commission and the Federal De-
partment  of  Antiquities  as  the  agencies  of  the  Federal  Government
of Nigeria responsible for the preservation and conservation of Nige-
ria's  cultural  heritage  property.  A  new  commission,  the  National
Commission  for Museums and Monuments, was established with re-
sponsibility  for the conservation, preservation and restoration  of the
nation's  historical,  cultural,  artistic  and  scientific  relics.  The  Com-
mission is now the agency responsible for cultural heritage manage-
ment.  It  is specifically  provided  that five members of the Commis-

239

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

sion  must  be  individuals  with  experience,  ability  or  specialized
knowledge  in  education,  culture,  natural  history,  science  and  tech-
nology  who are capable  of making useful  contributions  to the work
of the  Commission.

Section  13  of  the  Act  sets  out  the  administrative  procedure  for
scheduling  national  monuments.  When  an  antiquity  has  been  de-
clared to be a national monument, the owner thereof shall be entitled
to  compensation  for  the  value  at  the  date  of  such  declaration  and
thereafter  any estate, right, title and interest  in and to such antiquity
shall  be  extinguished.  The  "value" here  means  the  price  for  which
an antiquity  would be  sold if it were offered  for  sale on the interna-
tional  art market.  In  case  of dispute  as to the amount  of compensa-
tion  payable,  such  dispute shall  be referred  to a court  of  competent
jurisdiction in the area concerned. In light of the fact that monuments
are  considered  to  be  part  of  the national  heritage,  the  Commission
may maintain  such  monument,  either with the consent of the owner
of the  monument  or if  it  appears to the Commission  that the monu-
ment  is in  danger  of decay,  destruction  or removal  or damage  from
neglect or injudicious  treatment. The Commission is entitled to have
access  at  all  reasonable  times  to the  monument  for  the purposes  of
inspecting  it and doing  such  acts as may be required  for  its mainte-
nance and, where practicable, the Commission may remove the mon-
ument  or  any  part  of  it  for  the purpose  of  repair  or  protection  for
such  period  as  may  be  agreed  between  the  owner  and  the  Com-
mission.

The  provisions  of  the  repealed  Antiquities  (Prohibited  Transfers)
Act  1974  are  re-enacted  in  Part  HI  of  the  new  Act  at  sections 21,
22, 23, 24 and 26. Section 25 which deals with restriction on exports
re-enacts  section  22 of the repealed Antiquities Act  1953. Under the
section, no antiquity may  be exported  from  Nigeria without a permit
issued  by the National  Commission.  A permit  is not required, how-
ever, for the export of an  antiquity which has been lawfully  imported
into Nigeria. The Antiquities (Export Permits) Regulations  1957 with
all  the  imperfections  highlighted  continue  to  apply  under  the  1979
Act  with  the  new  title  of  National  Commission  for  Museums  and
Monuments  (Export  Permit) Regulations.

The  1979 Act was signed  into law by the then Head of the Federal
Military Government  on  28th September,  1979, two days before  the
Military briefly  left  governance. As a result of this hurry to beat the
deadline  between  the military  and the civilian  regimes, an  opportu-
nity  was  missed  to  correct  the  defects  of  the  earlier  Acts.  Instead
they  were  reinforced  in  the  new  Act.  For  example,  the  description
of  antiquity  in  section  32(c)(i)  as  "any  work  of  art  or  craft  work
made  or  fashioned  before  the  year  1918"  ignored  the  criticism  of
this  exact  provision  in  section  2(a)(i)  of  the  Antiquities  Act  1953.
Eluyemi (1982: 42) has persuasively argued that all objects made by
man  have  functions  attached  to  them.  Therefore,  functional  utility
should be the  criterion  by  which we can measure whether an  object

240

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

is an antiquity or not. No matter the age of an object, whether made
during the early stone age or fashioned  during the Nigerian civil war
[1967-1970] as long as it has entered into the ritual and cultural  life
of the people,  it  should  be  classified  as an  antiquity.  The  yardstick
by which  we can measure  "antiquity"  is ritual or cultural  participa-
tion  in the life  of the people who made the  object.

The merits of the National  Commission  for  Museums and Monu-
ments  Act  1979  lay  in  the  fresh  provisions  for  the  declaration  of
national  monuments,  the  removal  of the  institution  from  a  govern-
ment ministry, and its constitution into a corporate body with power
to  generate  funds  and  enter  into  contracts.  In  short,  the  legislation
recognizes that the institution has come of age and must be allowed
to  operate  with  some  measure  of  independence.  (Nzewunwa  1982:
32).

Archaeologists  have,  however,  lamented  some  glaring  omissions
in the Act. It makes no provisions compelling archaeological  survey
and rescue excavations on land  for  development  projects  unless  the
area has been adjudged  to contain items of importance to the cultural
heritage  of  the  country.  Section  19(1)  of  the  Act  which  deals  with
restrictions  on excavations merely provides that:

No person  shall  by  means  of  excavation  or  similar  operations
search for any antiquities unless authorised by permit issued by
the Commission  and with the consent  of the  state  Government
in whose territory  the search  is to be carried out.

Section  20(1)  also  blandly  requires  that  any  person  who  discovers
an  object  of  archaeological  interest  in  the  course  of  an  operation
permitted under section  19 shall not later than  seven days  thereafter
give  notice  thereof  to  the  Commission.  Nothing  is  said  about  the
disposal of the object or objects. The combined effect  of sections  19
and  20 is that there  is no restriction  on any  individual,  company  or
group from  developing  their  land  and  doing  away  with  its  contents
in the manner  they  think  fit.  As a result, Nigerian  cultural  heritage
undiscovered  by archaeological  survey  is now under constant threat
of  permanent  destruction  by  roads,  housing,  water  irrigation  and
mineral  prospection  projects.  There  is no better  evidence  than  Sec-
tions  19 and 20 to prove that the  1978 Act was "hurriedly and  fever-
ishly"  (Eluyemi  1982: 41; Nzewunwa  1982: 36)  promulgated.  An-
other  archaeologist  (Boachie-Ansah  1982:  55)  bitterly  complained
that perhaps the greatest tragedy to Nigerian archaeology  is the way
in  which  monuments  and  sites  are being  destroyed  by  construction
works. Examples  of  sites destroyed,  he writes,  include  Nok  culture
sites.  Yet there  are many  questions  about  the Nok  culture  to  which
no answers  have  been  found.  Obviously  sections  19 and  20 of  the
1979 Act require drastic  amendment,  for  in their present  form  they
adversely  affect  the  progress  and  development  of  archaeological
practice  in the country.

241

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

5  The Development  of Cultural  Heritage  Management

While  the  careful  preservation  of  antiquities  and  works  of  art  of
ritual significance  is by no means a new idea in Nigeria, the develop-
ment  of public  museums and  ancillary  services  devoted  to the con-
servation  of  the  relics  of  early  cultures  and  civilizations  and  to the
traditional  material culture of its people came to Nigeria much later
than to many other countries  in Africa  (Fagg  1963: 130).

Writing  in  1942, Kenneth  Murray observed  that  it was just  thirty
years earlier that African  sculpture began to be acknowledged, under
the name of Negro Art, as an important style of distinctive  and out-
standing quality. The French, Germans, Belgians and Americans had
contributed  to its study and had brought recognition  to certain  parts
of West Africa  as  important  centres of the art. Much  less, however,
had  been  done  by  the  British,  and with  few  exceptions,  the  artistic
work  of  those  parts  of  Africa  which  were  under  British  rule  was
little known.  Nigeria was in fact not included  in the few  exceptions
cited by  Murray. The country  had no museum, "a  distinction  which
...  is  almost  unique among  all  the countries  of the British  Empire"
(Murray  1942: 241).

Thus,  for  a long time  the  colonial  government  did  little to  foster
the protection of Nigeria's cultural heritage in which it took an unin-
terested  position  (Kan  1980: xi). When this general  policy  changed
as  a  result  of  interest  shown  in Nigerian  arts  and  crafts  by  some
colonial  officials,  the efforts  were unfortunately  uncoordinated, hap-
hazard and "depended on the enthusiasm of individuals who did not
remain  long  enough  in  any  area  to  make  their  work  permanent"
(Murray  1943:  156). Nonetheless, the cumulative  effect  of these ef- .
forts forced the colonial government to the realisation that a museum
was  needed  to  house  Nigerian  antiquities, and just  before  the  out-
break of the  Second World  War, steps were being taken to establish
one.  By  this  time, the  colonial  government  had become  aware, not
only of the existence and cultural value of the antiquities to be found
all  over  the  country,  but  also  of the  high  prices  being  offered  for
them  by  dealers,  collectors  and  museums  in  Europe  and  America
(Herington  1972:  143). Although in pre-colonial  Nigeria  there were
no  formal  museums  in  the  modern  sense,  the  palaces  of  Obas
(Kings) and the shrines of priest-kings and priests functioned  as mu-
seums  in Yorubaland.  Indeed  the Yoruba geographer  Professor  Afo-
labi  Ojo  (1966:  13) has  pointed out that "the  [Yoruba] palace  is  for
all  practical  purposes  the  embodiment  of  the  arts  and  crafts  of the
people.  It  was  the repository  of the treasures  of both  the  town  and
its outlying  district.  It  was  a  museum  of  the  kingdom...  It was  the
fountain  of the culture  of the kingdom."

Benin  art  has rightly been  referred  to as "court  art," because the
Oba  (king) had  a monopoly  of the works. He maintained  specialist
guilds of bronze-smiths, wood and ivory carvers, and bead workers.
The bronze-smiths in particular were forbidden,  on pain of death, to

242

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in  Nigeria

work  for  anyone  outside  the  court,  where  everything  was  concen-
trated  (Eyo  1977:  132). The  Benin  empire  produced  bronze  sculp-
tures  and  ivory  carvings  for  several  centuries,  and  as  Ekpo  Eyo
states,  the  Benin  sculptures  constitute  perhaps  the  best  known  and
certainly  the  most  numerous  sculptures  in  bronze  in  the  whole  of
Black  Africa.

In  1897 a punitive British expedition was mounted  against  Benin
led  by  Admiral  Rawson.  The  160  brass  heads  taken  away  by  the
expedition  amongst  other  items are the Benin equivalent  to chrono-
logical  records.  Since  each head represented  an Oba, they  recorded
dynasties  back  to the  twelfth  century.  When  an  Oba  died,  a  formal
head  was  cast  in  bronze  as  a  furnishing  for  an  altar  erected  to  his
memory. The Benin bronzes were and are so important in the artistic
cultural  heritage  of Nigeria  because  they  presented  a record  of  im-
portant  events. The royal palace in Benin, which covered about half
of  Benin  City,  had  wooden  columns  supporting  the  roof.  About  a
thousand  rectangular  bronze  plaques  gave  a  detailed  picture  of  the
Benin  court  at the  height  of  its glory  and power.  These  were  fixed
to the pillars of the court and are a particularly  captivating  art  form
(Greenfield  1996: 121).

The bronzes in their thousands obtained by the  1897 punitive ex-
pedition  against  Benin were dispersed  among museums all over the
world. In  1938, eighteen fine bronze heads were discovered near the
palace  of  the  king,  with  regalia  linking  them  with  the  Portuguese
centuries  earlier.  All  these  pieces  are  in Nigeria.  Also  the  National
Museum  in Lagos  prior to its opening  in  1957 bought  back  several
Benin  bronzes  (Eyo  1979: 21). Greenfield  (1996:  122) tells  us that
Nigeria  holds  only  the  third  largest  collection  in  the  world  after
Berlin and the British Museum. That is to say it has only a minority
holding  of  its  own  art.  According  to  Biobaku  (1972:  14), Nigeria
holds  the  fourth  largest  collection.  Biobaku,  who was  Chairman  of
the Antiquities Commission, lamented that the Government of Nige-
ria had to compete  with other countries  at auction rooms  in Europe
to  buy  back  for  £50,000  all  but  one  of  the  Benin  bronzes  now  on
display  in  the  Benin  gallery  in  the  National  Museum,  Lagos.
"Whereas  the  Dahlem  in  West  Berlin  can  boast  of  4,000  Benin
pieces,  and  the  British  Museum,  2,500  and  Pitt  Rivers  [Museum,
Oxford  University]  393 objects, the Nigerian  museums possess only
about  100 pieces." In fact,  it may now well be that the Metropolitan
Museum  of Art  in New York has displaced  Nigeria  as the holder of
the  fourth  largest  collection  of  Benin  art  following  the  gift  of  the
Perls collection  to the Metropolitan  Museum. In his foreword  to the
exhibition catalogue of Royal Art of Benin from  the Perls Collection,
the  Director  of  the  Museum,  Philippe  de  Montebello  (1992:  vii)
gives  us  an  idea  of  the  Museum's  total  collection,  when  he  states
that  before  the  acquisition  of the  Perls  collection,  the  Metropolitan
Museum held about two dozen Benin  sculptures  from  the collection
of Nelson  A.  Rockefeller,  including  the  ivory  pendant  mask  that  is

243

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

Kenneth  Murray
arranging  museum
exhibits at the  National
Museum,  Lagos

one  of  the  Museum's  prized  possessions:  "With  the  recent  gift  of
163 objects from  the collection of Mr. and Mrs. Klaus G. Perls, these
fine  but  small holdings  have been transformed  into one of the  lead-
ing collections  of Benin  art  worldwide."

6  Kenneth  Crosthwaite Murray

The editorial comment in the Nigerian Field (1972: 98), marking the
death  of Kenneth  Crosthwaite  Murray, noted that by his death Nige-
ria had been deprived  of one of her greatest  friends:  one who, more
than  anyone  else  in Nigerian  history,  loved  and worked  for  the arts
and crafts  of the country and by collecting, cataloguing and preserv-
ing  them,  and  founding  the  Nigerian  Museum,  ensured  that  future
generations  should be  able  to study and enjoy  them. Murray's Nige-
rian  successor  as  Director  of  Antiquities,  Dr.  Ekpo  Eyo  (1977: 4),
writing  a few  years later, acknowledged  that it was Kenneth Murray
who  first  led  the  people  of  Nigeria  to  collect  and  preserve  their
antiquities.

Kenneth  Murray  was  a  grandson  of  the  great  lexicographer,  Sir
James Murray, principal  compiler  of the Oxford  English  Dictionary.
He was born in  1902. After  time at Balliol College, Oxford, he went
to  study  architecture  and  sculpture  at  the  Birmingham  Central
School  of  Art.  He  came  to  Nigeria  in  1927  to join  the  Education
Department  as  an  art  teacher.  He taught  arts  and  crafts  in  Govern-

244

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in  Nigeria

ment  schools  including  King's  College,  Lagos;  Queen's  College,
Lagos;  Government  College,  Ibadan,  and  Government  College,
Umuahia from  1927 to  1940. In  1950, he published in Oversea Edu-
cation his  ideas  on "Art  Courses  for  Africans."  The syllabus  which
has  many  quaint  suggestions  was  obviously  based  on  his  several
years of experience as an art teacher in government  schools in Nige-
ria. In fact, the introduction of the teaching of art in Nigerian schools
and  colleges  came  largely  as  a  result  of  the  vision,  initiative  and
untiring  effort  of  Chief  Aina  Onabolu  who  had  studied  drawing,
painting  and  design  in England  and  France  from  1920 to  1922. He
was  known  to  be  the  first  African  art  student  in  England,  and  it
appears  that  his  main  concern  from  the  outset  was  to  prove  that,
given the opportunity, the African  was capable of matching the Euro-
pean in the realm of fine arts. In the light of contemporary art educa-
tion in Nigeria, Chief Onabolu's achievement as an artist and teacher
is noteworthy. It was he who brought to Nigeria a number of expatri-
ate art teachers, notably Kenneth Murray (Wangboje  1976: 19).

In  1937, Murray made a breakthrough in persuading colonial  offi-
cialdom of the importance of preserving the artistic heritage of Nige-
ria  by  holding  a successful  exhibition  from  6th  July  to  7th  August
at  the  Zwemmer  Gallery  in  London  of  African  art.  The  exhibition
was opened by the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Mr. Ormsby-
Gore  (later  Lord  Harlech), who remarked  that  it was  desirable  that
a  greater  effort  should  be made to  preserve  works  of  art  in Nigeria
(Murray  1938:  100).  In  1949  (21st  June  to  16th  July),  Murray
mounted  another exhibition  at the Zwemmer  Gallery.

It  was  largely  as  a  result  of  Murray's  advocacy  that  the  Federal
Government  enacted  the  Antiquities  Ordinance  (Act  after  Indepen-
dence)  in  1953.  Funds  were  also  voted  in  the  same  year  for  the
building  of  the  museum  that  Kenneth  Murray  and  his  friends  had
wanted  for  so  long.  The  major  physical  creation  which  he  master-
minded and worked passionately for, the Museum of Nigerian Antiq-
uities,  Traditional  Art  and  Ethnography  in  Onikan,  Lagos,  was  not
formally  opened until March  1957, although the plans had been sub-
mitted  in  1948 and work  started  in December  1953. The passing of
the Antiquities  Ordinance  in  1953 was followed  by confirmation  of
Kenneth Murray  in the enhanced position of Director of Antiquities,
a post he held until August  1957 when he retired and was succeeded
by Bernard Fagg. Seven  years later, when  Bernard  Fagg was due to
retire, Murray agreed with some reluctance to return to his old post,
to fill the gap until such time as a Nigerian would be available to take
his place. He finally  retired in March  1967, when Ekpo Eyo was ap-
pointed to succeed him (Obayemi  1991: 6; Herington  1972: 144).

Murray's  tenure  had  seen  the establishment  of museums  at Esie,
Jos, Ile-Ife, Benin, Oron and Kano. He worked in active cooperation
with  the  Argungu  Native  Authority  to  ensure  the  setting  up  of  the
Kanta Museum  in Argungu. He played the leading role in the identi-
fication  and  survey  of  palaces,  city  walls,  mosques  and  other  reli-

245

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

gious buildings as national monuments, and, at the time of his retire-
ment,  more  than  fifty  historic  or  symbolic  buildings,  monuments,
shrines  and  sites  had  been  declared  national  monuments  (Murray
1967). Even after  his retirement, Kenneth Murray continued to make
his  expertise  and  time  available  to  the  Antiquities  Department,  ac-
cepting specific  assignments from  time to time. Although possessing
a beautiful  home at the foot  of the Sussex Downs, Murray could not
leave the Nigeria that he loved. On his retirement he built himself a
house at Tarkwa Bay on the west side of Lagos harbour. From here,
he would  go  over  in his  motor boat when  he had  work to do at the
museum.  The  circumstances  of  his  death  pointed  back  to  his  life
work: he was killed in a car accident on 22 April  1972, while on his
way to Benin  to advise  about the proposed  museum  for  the  famous
bronzes  (The Nigerian  Field  1972: 98,  144; Obayemi  1991: 6-7).

The time before  the final  retirement  of Murray  in  1967 has been
termed  by  Obayemi as a "golden  age" in historical  development  of
museums  and the  conservation  of monuments  in Nigeria  and  in the
promotion  of  related  field  research  on  the  platform  of  the  Depart-
ment. The first of the national  monuments was so declared  in  1956.
By 1964, the number of national monuments had risen to 52 (Murray
1967). In terms of publications, Annual  Reports appeared  regularly.
Commissioned  works  on the Kano Walls, Kalahari  sculpture,  Cross
River Monoliths  and some arts and historical relics of Northern Ni-
geria ("Nigerian  Panoply") were published.  He was indeed the "Fa-
ther of Nigerian  Antiquities" (25 years of Jos Museum  1978: 58).

7  Nigeria's  Cultural  Heritage  Policy

7.1  Introduction
As far back as  1966, Ekpo Eyo, then Deputy Director of the Depart-
ment  of  Antiquities,  had  said  in  his  paper  titled  "Preservation  of
Works  of  Art  and  Handicraft,"  delivered  at  the first World  Festival
of  Negro  Arts  Colloquium  in  Dakar,  that  Nigeria,  perhaps  of  all
African  countries, was then the only country that had come close to
implementing  a  comprehensive  cultural  heritage  management  pro-
gramme.  However, the  evidence  today  is not too  encouraging;  per-
haps it is a case of retrogression. As we shall see in our discussion of
several  incidents,  developments  and policy  decisions  have  set back
Nigeria's progress in effective  cultural  heritage  management.

In  spite  of  the  valiant  efforts  of  Kenneth  Murray,  Bernard  Fagg
and others, it would seem that the need for effective  cultural heritage
management  has  not really  caught  on, and  not  many  people  in the
ruling elite appreciate the need for it. Although Kenneth Murray and
other pioneers had established for Nigeria a vigorous and  purposeful
tradition  of  cultural  heritage  management,  it  is  debatable  whether
Nigerians  have  succeeded  in maintaining  the tradition,  not  to men-
tion  improving  on it.

246

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

The situation  is particularly  deplorable  in the area  of monuments
preservation.  Eluyemi  (1982)  states  with justification  that  from  his
experience  and  knowledge  the  commission  has  not  lived  up  to ex-
pectation.  He cites three  instances. A five-acre  historical  site called
Olokun  Grove  in the  northern  part  of  Ile-Ife  has  fallen  a victim  to
unscrupulous  house-builders  and  land  speculators.  The  Olokun
Grove is the only known  industrial  centre within  Yorubaland where
ancient glass beads were made from  indigenous materials. All  efforts
by the Department of History (Archaeology Division) of the Univer-
sity  of  Ife  to  alert  the  old  and  new  commissions  were  rendered
abortive. Letters written to the commission by the University  of  Ife
on this  issue  received  no reply. Thus the  greater  part  of this region
of  ancient  bead  industry  has  been  totally  lost  to  the  science  of  ar-
chaeology  and  to  history.  The  remnants  of  the  city  wall  of  Ile-Ife
are  being  destroyed,  and  there  is  no  officer  of  the  commission  to
enforce  the  law. In  the  ancient  town  of  Kabba  in  Kwara  State, the
city walls which were still extant in the early seventies have by now
disappeared  from  the city  landscape  as a result  of lack  of vigilance
(Eluyemi  1982:  43).  Dr.  Agbaje-Williams,  an  archaeologist  at  the
Institute  of  African  Studies,  University  of  Ibadan,  told  the  writer
that the people of Igboho, where he has done field  work, asked the
Commission in 1991 to take over the royal cemetery with four tombs
of  Alaafins  (Obas  of  Oyo)  as  a national  monument.  The  letter  has
received  no  reply.  Eluyemi  in  exasperation  concludes  that  it  looks
as if in a few big towns of Nigeria (Lagos, Jos, etc.), the commission
has many hands chasing a few jobs, while in other  archaeologically
important  towns junior  officers  stand-in  for  senior  officers  with the
result that effectiveness  in policy implementation  suffers.

Perhaps the truth  of the matter lies in the uncomfortable  fact  that
in the early fifties  those who were armed with  some  learning in the
English language and were destined to constitute the Nigerian power
and  ruling  elite  never  really  had  faith  or  saw  anything  good  and
positive  in  their  ancient  culture.  It  must  be  remembered  that  after
1930  (Obayemi  1991:  11-12),  Nigeria  had  to  reckon  with  the  in-
creasing  number  of  militant  Muslims  and  Christians  who  were  re-
nouncing  the hold  of the  indigenous  cosmologies  and  cosmogonies
and for whom the indigenous folk-ways and folk-lore had no binding
ritual or moral force. Thus, even in the "times of Murray in Nigeria,"
the museum and monument movement was not a nationalistic intel-
lectual  movement.  Could there have been a more cynical  comment
on  the  intellectual  commitment  of  the  proto-independence  govern-
ment, asks Ade Obayemi  (1991:  15), than the fact  that the Antiqui-
ties  Department  was  initially  part  of  the  Ministry  of  Works?  The
pioneers of the museum and monument movement were able to push
through  their  agenda  because  of  their  vibrant  commitment  to  their
cause, and  it was convenient  for  the proto-independence  politicians
to accept the idea and make it into an ordinance. That the politicians
were not  strongly committed  seems to be borne out by the fact  that

247

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

Nigerian  Heads  of  State have  traditionally  treated  the museum  and
monument  services  as a  marginal  institution.  This  attitude  is  well-
illustrated  by an incident in  1973, when General Gowon, then Head
of  State of Nigeria, on an official  visit to England, presented  Queen
Elizabeth  II  with  a  17th  century  bronze  plaque  from  Benin  (Prott
and O'Keefe  1989: 75). As we have seen, very few of these bronzes
remain  in the country; many  of the finest  examples of Benin art are
already in the British Museum which holds the second largest collec-
tion after  Berlin. Nigeria has long sought the return of many of these
objects. When the National Museum in Benin was opened in the late
1970s,  an  appeal  was  made  through  the  International  Council  of
Museums  to give  long-term  loans  or to return  one or two pieces to
Benin  City  so  that  its ancestral  art  could  be  exhibited  in  this  mu-
seum. The resolution was adopted  and the appeal made without any
response.  The  museum  was  therefore  left  to  display  lesser  objects
and mere casts and photographs of the pieces that once belonged to
Benin  (Eyo  1968: 584; 1979: 21; Greenfield  1996: 123).

7.2  Tackling the Problems
The  many  fundamental  problems  connected  with  cultural  heritage
management can be attributed to its low priority and the half-hearted
implementation  of cultural heritage  legislation.  The major  problems
and solutions  proffered  for  solving them will now be considered.

7.2.1  Underfunding
In  a paper titled,  "The Protection  of Artistic and Cultural  Property,"
delivered  by Dr. Yaro Gella, Director-General  of the National  Com-
mission,  at  a  workshop  on the  Model  Treaty  for  the  Prevention  of
Crimes that Infringe on the Cultural Heritage of Peoples in the Form
of  Movable  Property  held  from  June  25-27,  1992,  at  Courmayeur
Mont  Blanc  in  Italy, Gella  canvassed  the  need  for  the  international
community to help developing countries in the training of necessary
personnel  for  managing  museums  in  these  countries.  He  then  pro-
ceeded  to  outline  how  the  museum  organization  in  Nigeria  is  ex-
panding  its activities by establishing  Federal  Government  Museums
all  over  the  Federation  and  at  the  same  time  encouraging  the  State
governments  to  do  the  same.  This  rosy  picture  was,  however,  un-
dercut  when  he  disclosed  that  the expansion  of activities  "is  being
done at a time when resources available to the National  Commission
for Museums and Monuments have become very meagre" (emphasis
supplied). But why expand at a time of dwindling  resources?

In  a period  of unprecedented  collapse  in Nigeria's  economy,  it is
not  surprising  that  funding  of  the  Commission  has been  drastically
reduced.  The Commission has never occupied a priority  slot in  fed-
eral allocation of resources. For example, Bernard Fagg (1963: 132),
then  Director  of  the  Department  of  Antiquities,  revealed  that  "no

248

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in  Nigeria

Benin  bronze  head  of an  Oba,  14th  Century.  One
of five works of art bought in London  in  1980 for
a  total  sum  of  £800,000

Benin  plaque  of  a  warrior  chief  with  retainers,  circa
1600. Also bought  in London  1980

capital provision (for the Department) had been included in the eco-
nomic programme for  1959-1962". There was some improvement in
the  succeeding  economic programme  for  1962-1968 to enable Fagg
to report  that  the  sum  of  £232,000  was  approved  for  expansion  of
the  National  Museum,  Lagos.  The  expansion  commenced  in  1972
remains today  uncompleted.  Another  provision  enabled  the  Depart-
ment to buy back  some antiquities  so that at the Dakar  Colloquium
in  1966, Ekpo Eyo (1968: 584) could report that "the Department  is
engaged  in a campaign  of  acquiring  antiquities  by purchases." The
time for such a campaign has passed. The gross devaluation of Naira
in the  last  few  years, which  means that  about  one hundred  Naira is
now exchanged  for  one US dollar, rules  it out totally. In fact  by the
end of the  1960s, as Eyo (1979: 21) himself  reported,  the prices  of
Benin works of art had  soared  so high that the Federal  Government
of Nigeria  was in no mood to contemplate  buying them. There was
a  welcome  departure  from  this  position  in  June  1980  when  at  an
auction  at  Sotheby  Parke-Bernet  &  Co., London,  the  Federal  Gov-
ernment  of Nigeria  bought  five  Nigerian  works  of  art  "as  a  matter
of national  honour and interest" (Arinze  1984:  12) at a total cost of
£800,000.  The  items bought  include  an  early  Benin  bronze head  of
an Oba,  14th century, a Benin bronze head of an Oba,  19th century,
and a Benin  plaque of a Warrior Chief with  Retainers, circa  1600.

249

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

The idea  of Federal Government museums located throughout the
Federation  was  part  of  the  dream  of  the  founding  fathers  of  the
museum  movement  in Nigeria  (Murray  1942: 247-248; Fagg  1963:
132;  Kan  1980:  xi).  The  plan  was  to  exhibit  in  each  museum  art
from  all  over  Nigeria  so that the people would  accept that  although
Nigeria  is  an amalgam  of indigenous empires, states and kingdoms,
our  cultural  heritage  is  a  collective  and  indivisible  one.  The  lean
resources of the National Commission for Museums and Monuments
cannot  adequately  maintain  and  secure  these  museums.  Because
the  Commission  cannot  provide  adequate  security,  the  museum
collections  now fall  easy prey to antiquities predators. In November
1994, the  priceless  collection  at  Ife  —  "probably  Nigeria's  greatest
art  treasures"  -  was  cleaned  out,  and  within  three  weeks  of  the
depredation  some objects turned up in Switzerland  where they were
recognized  by  collectors  and  museum  people, attached  and  quickly
returned  to Nigeria. Also in November  1994, the Abeokuta  museum
was  pillaged.  The  story  of  how  the  Ife  plunder  was  carried  out
clearly  confirms  the lack of adequate  security in terms of electronic
equipment  and  professional  guards.  In  January  1995,  it  was  the
turn  of  the  Jos  museum.  It  is  evident  that  the  Commission  over
the  years  has  been  allowed  to  bite  off  more  than  it  can  chew.
There  must  be  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  Federal  museums  in
order  to  ensure  proper  and  adequate  maintenance  and  protection
of  those  that  remain.  Unless  this  is  done,  the  national  system  of
museums  in  Nigeria  may  cease  to  be  "one  of  the  best  organised
and  coordinated  museum  systems  in  Africa"  (Kaplan,  Ukwu  and
Arinze  1987),  if it has not  already  ceased  to be  so. In  1972, Robert
G.  Armstrong  (1972:  96), then  Director  of  the  Institute  of  African
Studies, University  of Ibadan, had warned at a symposium on Nige-
rian Antiquities hosted by the Institute that "there are dangers in too
many  museums  that cannot be properly  managed." The dangers are
now  evident.

Although  in  1988 the National  Council  for  Information  and Cul-
ture recommended  that States should establish museums and declare
monuments, the suggestion  should be abandoned. The States are too
weak  financially,  and  the  lapses  here,  it  is  feared,  would  be  worse
than in the case of Federal museums. As an alternative to State muse-
ums,  local  museums  should  be  encouraged.  The  people  who  own
the objects  are their best guardians.

The practical experience of the West African  Museum Programme
(Ardouin  and  Arinze  1994)  asserts  that  in  the  preservation  of  the
cultural  heritage  of  the  community,  the  main  responsibility  falls
more on the local museums than on the centrally-controlled  national
museum.  The  running of the  local  museums must of course harmo-
nise  with  the  national  museum.  In  addition,  corporate  bodies  and
wealthy  Nigerians  can  establish  properly  run  and  funded  museums
as is the practice  in the United  States.

250

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

7.2.2  Grassroot  Participation
Unlike  the  repealed  1953 Antiquities  Act  which  gave  a  prominent
role to local government authorities in cultural heritage management
and  conferred  on them  power  to  make  rules  or by-laws  relating  to
antiquities in their area of jurisdiction, the consolidating Act of 1979
does  not  involve  the  local  governments.  This  is  hardly  in  accord
with the latest thinking on the matter that for the proper management
and  preservation  of  both  historical  artefacts  and  natural  resources,
local  direct  participation  is  crucial.  Local  communities  that  own
these  treasures  and  resources  are  their  best  guardians.  As  Mveng
(1968:  13) asserted  in his key-note  address at the  1st World Festival
of Negro Arts Colloquium in Dakar in 1966, it is "the villages, towns
and  'fetish  convents'  where  the  official guardians (emphasis  sup-
plied) of the cultural  heritage  of Africa  still  survive."

The  failure  to  involve  the  local  communities  with  a sense  of re-
sponsibility  is a fundamental  flaw  of the  1979 legislation  and  a re-
turn  to the  provisions  of  the  1953 Act  is  strongly  urged.  This time
the  state  and  local  government  authority  committees  must  be  ap-
pointed  and given the ability to  function.

The Obas and Emirs (Kings) who no longer rule but reign in their
kingdoms  are the authentic  leaders  of the  local populations  in their
respective  domains.  They  are  the  heirs  of  Africa's  cultural  genius
and  can confidently  be  expected  to keep  watch  over the  antiquities
and  monuments  as  a  sacred  trust.  Two  stories  recently  reported  in
Nigerian publications  are affirmations  of the foregoing  assertion.

In March  1991, the national  dailies published  in Ibadan,  The  Tri-
bune  and  The Daily Sketch, gave  much  publicity  to the  arrest  of a
man  who  had  unauthorized  possession  of  artefacts  and  antiquities.
The Timi of Ede (one of the Obas) in the State where the arrest was
made  lost no time in  sending two of his chiefs  to the National  Mu-
seum  in Ibadan  to check  if  some  antiquities  which  had been  stolen
in his  domain  were  among  the  items  recovered.  The  second  event,
reported  in  the  weekly  magazine  West  Africa  of  11-17  November
1991,  captioned  "Treasure  Hunt," was that the Oba  of  Benin,  Omo
N'Oba Erediauwa, had launched a strong campaign  for the recovery
of thousands of art treasures taken to Britain from  the ancient King-
dom in  1897. The Oba was collecting as many as one million  signa-
tures from  important personalities worldwide. The drive was coordi-
nated  by the  Pan African  Movement  of Nigeria,  a branch  of  an in-
ternational  organization  committed  to  a  revival  of  African  culture.
The account concluded by noting that previous efforts  by Unesco to
recover  the  treasures  had  failed.  Posters  were  printed  and  widely
distributed  both  within  and  outside  Nigeria  depicting  some  of  the
plundered  bronzes  with  the  inscription  "We  Want  Our  Treasures
Back".

The leadership  shown  in cultural  heritage  antiquities  recovery by
the  Oba  of  Benin  and  the  Timi  of  Ede  is  in  sharp  contrast  to  the

251

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

Members  of  the  1897
punitive  expedition
against  Benin  with
looted  ivories  and
bronzes
(Contemporary
photograph  by  Rear
Admiral  H. S.
Mearsham)

spectacle of Gowon, Head of State of Nigeria. Gowon was responsi-
ble for  giving  away  one of  the finest  examples  of Nigeria's  cultural
heritage  to the Head  of  State of a country that had, in  1897, carried
away the  entire  treasury  of  treasures.

8  Illicit  Trafficking

The current international market in illicitly acquired art and archaeo-
logical  treasures  is  a  huge  business  now  running  to  millions  if not
billions  of dollars.  Dr. Gella, in his paper on the draft  Model Treaty
for  the  Prevention  of  Crimes  that  Infringe  on  the Cultural  Heritage
of  Peoples  in  the  Form  of  Movable  Property,  argued  rightly,  it  is
submitted,  that  if  during  the  colonial  encounter  military  force  was
used  to  take  over  the  land  and  resources  of the people  in the colo-
nies,  and  if the  missionaries  destroyed  and pillaged  shrines because
their  existence  hindered  the  liberation  of the African  mind  from  de-
mons,  today  the  offer  of  hard  currency  by  western  collectors  to
thieves of art works  encourages the plundering of the cultural prop-
erty of developing  countries. Gella attributed the increased  plunder-
ing to  "poverty,  want  and  ignorance"  —  incidentally  parallel  to the
plundering  of art treasures  in the collapsed  economies of the repub-
lics of the former  Soviet Union  including  Russia  itself  -  but to this
list of motives, as far  as Nigeria is concerned, must be added  greed.
The evidence shows that  security guards, cultural heritage manag-
ers  and  the  elite  are  actively  involved  in  the  theft  of  Nigeria's  art

252

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

treasures.  For instance, one  of the  security guards at Ife  museum  is
implicated  in the  Ife  museum  raid. Another security  guard  is impli-
cated  in  the  January  1995  break-in  at  the  Jos  museum.  Currently
two  officers  of  the  Jos  museum  are  standing  trial  in  the  Jos  High
Court on charges of conspiracy and criminal breach of trust over the
disappearance  of an antiquity  handed  to one of the accused persons
for safe custody. The Guardian of 28th May  1994 in a piece to mark
International Museum Day (18 May  1994) reported that Nigeria was
"losing  millions  of  dollars  yearly  to  the  activities  of  a  nefarious
but powerful  syndicate reportedly  not  far  from  the precincts  of  the
[National] museum [in Lagos]  ... who have made the nation's prized
artefacts  their targets of organised  theft".

The clandestine  activities  of these  local  agents  in a long  interna-
tional  chain whose anchor  is in Europe and North  America must be
tackled forcefully.  Although it is true, as Gella states, that legislation
for the prevention of theft  and illegal trafficking  of cultural property
has been  revised  for  the third time now  in Nigeria  in tune  with  the
changing  nature  of  the  criminal  activities  of  traffickers  of  cultural
materials,  the  punishments  prescribed  are  not  tough  enough.  The
fines  and terms of imprisonment  must be appreciably  increased.

Unfortunately  the  stigma  that  attaches  to  dealers  in  hard  drugs
does not attach to traffickers  in stolen antiquities for which there are
ready  buyers.  I venture  to  suggest  that  this  is why  more  and  more
Nigerians  are now turning to trafficking  in Nigeria's  antiquities and
artefacts  in  these  days  of  economic  gloom  and  depression  in  the
country.  Gella  understood  this  when  he  said  in  his  paper  that  the
collapse of the economies of the Third World (he should have added
post-Soviet  economies  also) has further  aggravated  the  perpetration
of  these  crimes  and  imposes  a  greater  security  burden  on  govern-
ments  and  museum  managers.  Just  as Nigeria  has  a National  Drug
Law  Enforcement  Agency,  it  should  also  have,  it  is  submitted,  a
National  Antiquities  Law  Enforcement  Agency.  Dr.  Gella  made  an
important  point  in his  paper  where  he  observed  that  whatever  stiff
penalties are provided by municipal  legislation can only have mean-
ing  and relevance  if the  international  community  is committed  and
resolved  to check  these  crimes. He therefore  appealed  to the  moral
conscience of nations to stand up to the task. As Magnus Magnusson
(1989: 7) has commented, too many  auction houses and  institutions
are prepared to turn  a blind eye to the dubious provenance  of some
illegally  excavated  items put up for  sale.

The United  States  is setting  the rest  of the world  a fine example
with its strenuous efforts to return treasures when they can be proved
to have been  illegally  removed.  The Cultural  Property  Implementa-
tion Act  1983, adopted pursuant to the  1970 Unesco Convention  on
the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Preventing  the  Illicit  Import,  Export
and Transfer  of Ownership  of Cultural  Property, enables the United
States, at the request of a State Party, to impose, under certain condi-
tions, import restrictions on archaeological  and ethnological  materi-

253

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

als when the cultural patrimony of the State concerned is in jeopardy
from  pillage. In response to an emergency request from  the Govern-
ment  of  El  Salvador,  restrictions  were  imposed  on  11th  September
1987  on  the  import  into  the  United  States  of  prehistoric  artefacts
from  the  south-western  region  of  El  Salvador.  A  release  by  the
United  States  Information  Agency  in  Washington  D.C.  on  the  day
the restriction  took effect  stated that "since the United  States is con-
sidered  a major  market  for  the artefacts,  the  imposition  of U.S. im-
port  restrictions  should  reduce  the  incentive  for  pillage  and  illicit
dispersal  of  the  material."  The  release  advised  that  other  countries
that  have  ratified  the Unesco  Convention  are  eligible  to  submit re-
quests  for  U.S. import restrictions to protect archaeological  and eth-
nological  objects  that comprise their cultural  patrimony.

Unfortunately  as  of  January  1995, Nigeria  has  not  availed  itself
of  this  facility  due  to  the  failure  of  the  National  Commission  for
Museums  and Monuments to fulfil  the conditions precedent required
by  the  United  States  Government.  Nonetheless, Nigeria  has  been  a
beneficiary  of U.S. policy. The United  States assisted Nigeria in the
recovery  of four  out of nine treasures  stolen  from  the National  Mu-
seum  in Jos on the night  of  14 January  1987 which  surfaced  in the
United  States  of  America.  In  1994, the  Kimbell  Art  Foundation,  a
New  York-based  museum, assisted  in the return to Nigeria  of a cul-
tural  artefact,  the  Benin  memorial  head  of  an  Oba  stolen  from  the
National  Museum  and  put  on  the  art  market  in  the  United  States.
When  the  "owner" was told that  it had been  stolen, he  relinquished
his rights  in the object.  Similarly, it was professionals  in Switzerland
and  in  the United States who recognized a stolen Benin bronze head
which  appeared in an auction catalogue in Switzerland. The Govern-
ment  of  Switzerland  promptly  responded  and  the  item  was  reco-
vered.  The Canadian  Government  has also  been  very helpful  to Ni-
geria.  According to senior officials  of the Commission for Museums
and  Monuments,  three  valuable  stolen  antiquities  were  recovered
during  the  regime  (1967-1986)  of  Dr.  Ekpo  Eyo.  The  Netherlands
has  also  shown  interest  in the return  of  stolen  African  treasures. In
1994,  the  National  Museum  in Leiden  organised  an exhibition,  and
a one  day  seminar on "Theft  of Cultural  Property  from  Africa"  was
held.  The  result  was  the  establishment  of  a  committee  against  the
purchase  of stolen cultural  property.

The  outcome  of efforts  to recover  through  foreign  courts  various
art  treasures  of  Nigeria  that  had  been  illicitly  exported  has  been
somewhat  mixed  due  to  the  complex  issue  of  conflicts  of  laws.  In
1982, the government of Canada prosecuted  a New York dealer who
had  imported  into  Canada  a  Nok  terracotta  sculpture  (Prott  and
O'Keefe  1989: 778-780; Greenfield  1996:  183-184) which had been
illegally exported from Nigeria, R v.  Heller (1983) 27 Alta. L.R. (2d)
346;  appeal  decision  (1984)  51  A.R.  73. Nok  culture flourished in
Nigeria between 900 BC and AD 200, and tests had shown the figure
to  be  between  1,800  and  2,900  years  old.  The figure  first  appeared

254

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in  Nigeria

in the art world  at an auction  in Paris held in the  summer of  1977.
It formed  part of a large collection  of African  antiquities  owned by
Alfred  Muller, a collector, and was priced at 25,000 francs (equiva-
lent  to  about  two  thousand  and  one  hundred  pounds).  The  figure
was imported  into Canada  in  1981 by Isaaka Zango, one of the co-
defendants,  who  reported  to  customs  officials  to  have  it  authenti-
cated.  He  advised  them  of  its  estimated  worth,  that  being  several
hundred thousand dollars. After  endeavouring to take it to the Glen-
bour Museum of Calgary, Zango and Heller, both American citizens,
and  Kassam, a Canadian, were  charged  with having  unlawfully  im-
ported  cultural  property  into Canada, contrary to the Cultural  Prop-
erty  Export  and  Import  Act  1975  in  contravention  of  section  37 of
the Act, and thereby committing an offence  against  section  39(1 )(b)
of the Act. Both Nigeria and Canada were parties to the Convention
at the date of the import  into Canada, and Canada was acting at the
request of the Nigerian Government as provided for in the Canadian
Act.  Evidence  was brought  that the  sculpture  was a Nigerian  antiq-
uity  within  the  meaning  of  current  Nigerian  legislation  and  that  it
had  been  illegal  to  export  cultural  antiquities from Nigeria  without
written  permission  since  1924.  The  figure  had  therefore  been  ille-
gally  exported  from  Nigeria.  However,  Canada  did  not  become  a
party  to the  Unesco  Convention  until  1978. The judge  in  this  case
accepted  that  Heller  and  Zango  (the  co-defendants)  knew  in  1980,
before  the  import  into  Canada,  that  the  object  had  been  illegally
exported from Nigeria. Was the Canadian statute intended to ban the
import  of  cultural  property  illegally  exported  from  Nigeria  at  any
time, or only that illegally  exported  after  the entry  into force  of the
legislation?

Article  7(a)  of  the  convention  to  which  Canada  and  Nigeria  are
parties provides that the convention only applies to cultural property
"which has been illegally exported  after  entry into force of this con-
vention  in  the  states  concerned."  Relying  on this Article, the  Court
held  that  the  words  "illegally  exported"  must  be  restricted  to  the
time following  Canada's entry as a party to the international conven-
tion. All three defendants  were accordingly  discharged.

In 1972, the German case of Allgemeine  Versicherungsgesellschaft
v. E.K.  BGHZ  59,  83, reported  in  Prott  and  O'Keefe  (1989:  659-
660)  and  in  73  International  Law  Reports  226,  was  decided.  The
German  Federal  Supreme  Court  held  that  a prohibition  in the  Ger-
man  Civil Code of contracts contrary  to public policy  included  "in-
ternational  public policy." In that case, a Nigerian  company  had en-
tered  into  an  insurance  contract  with  a German  company  covering
the  transport  by  sea  of  three  cases  of  African  masks  and  statues
from  Port Harcourt, Nigeria, to Hamburg. The plaintiff  was seeking
damages  for  the  loss  of  six  bronze  statues.  However,  the  contract,
which  was  in  violation  of  a  Nigerian  prohibition  on  the  export  of
cultural  objects, was held to be contrary  to public policy. The court
considered  the  1970 Unesco  Convention  and  found  that  this repre-

255

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

sented the emerging  international  public policy on the issue. There-
fore, even  though the Federal  Republic of Germany was not a party
to the Convention, the German court held that the contract was unen-
forceable  in Germany since "the export of cultural property contrary
to a prohibition of the country of origin for that reason merits, in the
interest of maintaining proper standards for the international trade in
cultural  objects, no protection  from  the civil  law." Furthermore, the
court  held  that  the disregard,  which  was both  customary  and  toler-
ated  in  earlier  times,  of  the  desire  of  other  nations  to  keep  their
cultural  treasures  could  not  be  regarded  as  the  contemporary  stan-
dard  for public policy as to the enforcement  of contracts.

8.1  The Exhibition  Loophole
The  failure  to return  objects  sent  out of Nigeria  on loan  for  exhibi-
tion abroad has become, by all accounts, a significant  way of denud-
ing  the  country  of its modern  arts and antiquities.  Two accounts  in
The  Guardian newspaper  reveal  the  extent  of  the  problem.  In  the
issue of 23 October  1993, it was reported that reliable sources close
to the National Gallery of Arts alleged that several works of Nigerian
artists which were exhibited at the second biennial  conference/exhi-
bition  on  World  Arts  held  in  London  in  1984  were  still  abroad.  It
also mentioned the mysterious disappearance of a consignment  from
London  which  had  been  exhibited  at  the  Commonwealth  Institute,
London.

In an expose captioned, "Artefact  Vault Emptying Gradually," The
Guardian, 28th May  1994, uncovered the method of a powerful  syn-
dicate  involved in emptying Nigeria's  art treasures vault. According
to  The  Guardian source,  the  syndicate  collects  artefacts  from  dif-
ferent  museums  under  the pretext  that  they  are being  taken  abroad
for  exhibitions.  "The artefacts  never  find  their  way  back  and when
they do, never intact." The Guardian  source cited the specific  exam-
ple of a Nok Culture antique that was ordered to be taken out of the
Jos  Museum  for  an  exhibition  at  Taejon,  Korea,  that  has  not  been
returned  to the Jos Museum or to any other museum  in the country.
The Guardian's attempts to put this and other issues to the Director-
General  of the National  Commission  for  Museums  and  Monuments
according  to the paper were unsuccessful  as he was busy preparing
for  the Museum Day (18 May  1994) celebration.

There  are  also  unsubstantiated  allegations  that  when  objects  are
released  on  loan,  replicas  and  not  the  originals  are  returned.  My
discussions  with  National  Museum  officials,  however,  indicate  that
it  has  its  own  security  measures  to  prevent  this,  and  the  museum
only lends antiquities to museums of the highest repute in other parts
of the world, who have their own reputation to protect. Be that as it
may, it is clear beyond peradventure that effective  measures must be
adopted to ensure that when art treasures are taken abroad for exhibi-
tions  they  are  duly  returned  to the  country.  This  must  not  continue
to be a loophole  in the law of cultural  heritage management.  It may

256

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

well  be  that  the  onus  for  the  return  of  objects  should  be  on  the
approving  officer  and  a definite  time  limit  for  the return  of  objects
must be stipulated with close monitoring. As it is now, the evidence
smacks of the game  keepers turning  poachers. Currently  two  senior
officers  of the Jos museum  are standing trial  in the Jos High  Court
on  charges  of  criminal  conspiracy  and  criminal  breach  of  trust  in
respect  of  an  antiquity  left  in  the  custody  of  one  of  the  officers.
Indeed,  Professor  Ade  Obayemi,  Director-General  of  the  Commis-
sion  from  March  1987 to August  1991, in his Handing  Over Notes
to his successor made the following remarks in respect of the matter:

The Chief Executive of the Commission will be shocked to find
that the  records  show  that  officials  of the Commission  at very
senior  levels, were,  or  had  been  indicted  as  security  risks  and
or  agents  of  traffickers  in  antiquities.  If  my  report  ever  gets
completed  it  might  help—but  I  will  only  quote  the  standing
warning of Prof. Ekpo Eyo in his own Handing Over Notes that
'...  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  the  greater  risk  could  come
from  inside and this is what  needs to be carefully  watched'.

8.2  The Courts
The courts  have  a critical  role  to play  in checking the  illicit  export
trade  in historical  artefacts  for  if the police and the customs  service
do  their  work  and  the  courts  do  not  effectively  perform  their  own
role  when  accused  persons  appear  before  them,  the  efforts  of  the
police  and  customs  service  will  have  been  in  vain.  Magistrates'
courts have original jurisdiction  for the summary trial of any matter
under sections 21,22  and 26 of the National  Commission for Muse-
ums  and  Monuments  Act  1979.  This  is  a  good  thing.  It  ought  to
ensure  speedy  trials  since  the  police  can  prosecute  in  the  Ma-
gistrates'  courts,  whereas  if  jurisdiction  is  confined  to  the  High
Courts alone, the appropriate Ministry of Justice would have to han-
dle the matter after police investigation  since the police cannot pros-
ecute accused persons  in the High  Court. For effective  enforcement
of the Act, Magistrates all over the country should be given adequate
instructions  that  the  sculptures  and  the  monuments  of  the  country
represent  the  collective  and  indivisible  cultural  heritage  of  Nigeria
and  alleged  offenders  should  be  seen  in  the  light  of  this  and  not
given  lenient  sentences  when  found  guilty.  There  should  be  formal
training for  magistrates on how to apply the law properly.

It was not until  1990 that the National  Commission  for  Museums
and Monuments  had its own counsel  and  legal  adviser. Prior to this
time,  cases  were  handled  through  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Justice
or  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Information  and  Culture,  the  National
Commission's  supervising  ministry. There are no reported cases un-
der either the  1953 or  1979 enactments. However, a number of cases
have  recently  been  determined,  and  others  are  pending  in  courts
across  the country,  and  it  is now possible  to assess  how  effectively

257

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

the courts  are playing their part  in halting thefts  and  illicit  exporta-
tion of art treasures. Before discussion of the cases, reference  should
be made to  a general  assessment  of the role of the courts drawn by
Ulli Beier in 1972 based on his personal involvement in the prosecu-
tion of antiquities thieves in South Western Nigeria. The Magistrates'
courts, he said, were "relatively strict with thieves (up to six months
in jail)  but  much  less  strict  with  dealers  who  received  the  stolen
goods. (They were usually given  fines, which they found  quite easy
to  pay)"  (Beier  1972:  33). That  was  the  position  in  1972. What  is
the  situation  today?

In  Commissioner of Police v. Ogungbemi, Charge No.MCO/36C/
88, three persons  were tried  in Omu-Aran  Magistrate's  Court  under
Section  286  of the Penal  Code  of Northern  Nigeria  for  the theft  of
two  antiquities, namely  the Orangun  and the Yeye Epa  Mask which
were  in the  custody  of  one Chief  Aina of Obo-Aiyegunle  in  Kwara
State. One of the antiquities, the Epa Mask, was recovered  from  the
accused  persons  and  served  as an  exhibit.  At the  conclusion  of the
evidence,  one  of  the  accused  was  discharged  and  acquitted.  The
other two defendants were found guilty of the theft  of the antiquities,
and  each  of them  was sentenced  to one year  imprisonment  without
the option of a fine on 20th February  1991 by the Magistrate Mr. A.
Garba.

The  accused  in  Commissioner  of  Police  v.  Kayanka,  Charge
No.Ml/602C/91, was an alien indicted  at Ibadan  Chief  Magistrate's
Court  for  the  offence  of  unlawful  buying  and  selling  of  antiquities
without  being  an  accredited  agent  of  the  National  Commission  for
Museums and Monuments contrary to section 21(1 )(a) and (b) of the
1979 Act and punishable under  section  21 (2) of the Act.  The arrest
of  the  defendant  was  widely  reported  in  the  two  national  dailies
published  in Ibadan in April  1991. The Daily Sketch of 3 April  1991
and  The Nigerian  Tribune of  the  same  date  captioned  their  stories
"Malian  Held  With  Stolen  Artefacts"  and  "Alien  Nabbed  with  N
[Naira]  10m  Artefacts"  respectively.  The  account  in  the  Tribune is
more  detailed  which  is  the  one  used  here.  The  paper  reported  that
acting  on  a tip, the police  stormed  the residence  of the accused and
hundreds  of  artefacts  were  collected.  These  included  masks,  mas-
querade regalia, traditional bells, twin carvings (Ere-Ibeji), and Yor-
uba  priests'  paraphernalia.  According  to  the  Tribune reporter,  his
close  examination  of  the  items  revealed  that  "the  antiquities  were
old,  some  very  old,  considering  their  texture  while  some  ooze  out
offending  odour". He proceeded to bring into his report the Jos mu-
seum theft  of  1987. He wrote:

It will be recalled that the 500-year old Benin bronze head valued
at  $1  million  in  the  European  art  market  stolen  along  with  eight
other  art  objects  from  the  Jos  Museum  in  1987  was  stopped  from
being  auctioned  by a private gallery  in Zurich  Switzerland  recently.
The  artefact  which  was  stopped  from  being  sold by a court  injunc-
tion  was brought  back  to Nigeria  last  December.  Information  about

258

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

its proposed  auction got to Nigeria through a friend  of the Nigerian
Museum while an early diplomatic move by the nation's embassy in
Switzerland  headed  by  Mr.  Sa'ad  Abubakar  stopped  it  through  an
injunction  given by a Zurich  court.

Returning to the case at Ibadan, I am sure that the reader  will be
astounded  that  the  magistrate  discharged  and  acquitted  the  accused
on  the  ground  that  the  prosecution  failed  to  prove  that  the  items
seized  from  the  accused  were  antiquities.  The  Magistrate  Mrs.  E.
Esan  proceeded  to order  the  Commission  to  return  all  the  artefacts
to  Kayanka.  This  is  of  course  a  perverse  verdict;  the  Commission
appealed to the High Court and obtained a stay of execution  so that
the artefacts  are still  firmly  in the custody of the  Commission.

The  next  case  to  mention  is  Customs, Immigration and Prisons
Services Board  v. Bashiru Mohammed, charge  No.FHC/AB/2C/92.
This  case  has  been  with  the  Federal  High  Court,  Abeokuta,  since
March  1992,  and  it  will  still  be  some  time  (perhaps  years)  before
judgement  is  given.  The  prosecution  had  closed  its  case  by  July
1994, when  the judge  hearing  the  case  was  drafted  to  Abuja  to try
the  felony  treason  case  against  Basorun  Moshood  Abiola,  the  pre-
sumed winner of the June  12,  1993, Presidential  election. This will
be the  second time that the judge  trying the case was transferred  to
another division in the middle of the proceedings. The charge in this
case, under  section  21(a)(l)  of  the  1979 Act,  was  that  on  the  14th
July  1991 at  Idi-Iroko  Main  (Nigeria/Benin)  border  gate  the  defen-
dant,  who was not  an accredited  agent, was  found  in possession  of
the  following  antiquities:  two  masquerade  regalia,  two  brass  leop-
ards, five brass antiquities and twenty-seven wooden antiquities. The
accused  was  also  charged  with  unlawful  exportation  of  antiquities
valued  at Naira (N) 900,000.

The State v. Takuh,  Charge  No.PLD/316C/91, pending  at the  Jos
High  Court  involves  two  officers  of  the  National  Commission  for
Museums and Monuments who are charged for the offence  of crimi-
nal  conspiracy  and  criminal  breach  of  trust  under  sections  96  and
313 of the Penal  Code of Northern Nigeria. In this case an antiquity
was  discovered  by  one  Samaila  Fumen,  who  passed  it  on  to  the
Commission through the first accused person. The antiquity, a Janus
head, was eventually handed over to the first accused person to keep
in the stores. Later when he was asked by the head of station of the
Jos museum to fetch  it, he could not produce  it. The second accused
person  was  charged  along  with  the  first  accused  because  he  was
helping  the  latter  to  conceal  facts.  The  prosecution  is  still  making
its case, and  it will be some months before  the case is concluded.

The last case  is an ironical  one  —  a civil  suit  in which  the Com-
mission  is the defendant!  The plaintiff  in Omotayo v.  National Com-
mission for  Museums  and  Monuments,  Suit  No.  LD/2515/88,  had
brought  some antiquities to the Commission  for  sale. The Commis-
sion  agreed  to  purchase  the  antiquities  at  certain  prices.  However,
before  paying, the Commission  received a letter from  a body called

259

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

Egbe Omo Igbobini challenging the plaintiff's  ownership  of the an-
tiquities and making an allegation of theft.  Fearing that the Commis-
sion  would neither release the disputed  antiquities nor pay for  them
and  that  it might  even prosecute  him  for  theft,  he commenced  civil
proceedings for the recovery of the antiquities. This case too is pend-
ing at the Lagos High Court.

The  decision  in the Kayanka case  suggests  perhaps  that  it  is not
a  good  thing,  or  at  any  rate  it  is  irrelevant,  that  magistrates  have
original jurisdiction under the 1979 Act. By all accounts the artefacts
in  the  matter  are  antiquities,  yet  the  Magistrate  held  that  they  are
not. The hope that trials at Magistrates'  courts would be quicker has
not  been  borne  out  by  events.  The  Kayanka  case  has  lasted  more
than three and a half years, while Commissioner of Police v.  Ogung-
bemi took three years. Both State v.  Takuh and Customs, Immigration
and Prisons  Service Board  v. Basihru Mohammed have  gone  on in
the  High  Court  for  more  than  three  years.  These  delays  give  the
impression  that judges and magistrates  do not really  feel  concerned
by the plunder  of Nigeria's  cultural  heritage.

8.3  "Insure  and  Secure"
Judging by the ease with which museum after  museum in the coun-
try  is  broken  into,  it  would  seem  that  even  museums  like  the  Ife
Museum,  which  housed  priceless  artefacts,  lack  basic  security  de-
vices such as burglary alarm systems. If an electronic burglary alarm
system had been wired to the entrances and the show cases and then
linked  to  the  police post  near  the  palace  of  Ife,  it  is  inconceivable
that  the  theft  would  have  taken  place.  Once  such  a  system  is  trig-
gered, it sends a warning signal to the police and the palace security
guards, even if,  as happened in this case, the museum's own security
personnel  are not capable of responding. Proof that the security per-
sonnel  were  not  well  trained  is provided  by  the  fact  that  while  on
duty they partook  of a native potion given to them by total strangers
(the  art  thieves)  which knocked  them  out  for  two days. The  almost
total  lack  of  security  at  the  Ife  museum  in terms  of both  personnel
and  equipment  is  monumental  considering  the  fact  that  it  housed
part of Nigeria's great cultural heritage. Located as it is inside a busy
royal palace with its own security outfit  and close to a police station,
the coup de grace  is complete.

The  museum  of  the  Institute  of  African  Studies,  University  of
Ibadan  has  been  raided  several  times  since  it  was  opened  in  1984.
In  so  far  as  it  is  located  in  and  owned  by  the  University,  it can  be
categorised  as  a  private  museum  (even  though  the  University  is
wholly funded  by the Federal government). It has no adequate means
of  security  in  terms  of  personnel  or  equipment.  In  1995,  it  was
closed and what remained of the works of art were stored away. The
museum of the Centre for Black African  Arts and Civilization  at the
National Theatre, Iganmu, Lagos, is perhaps the only museum in the
country  that  has  assembled  a  serious  security  system.  The  national

260

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

museums  across  the  country  do not have  the protection  of the first
line of security defence, the insurance of their holdings against  theft.
It is true that the premiums payable for  insurance  for  the  antiquities
may  be  prohibitive;  nonetheless,  it  should  be  possible  to  work  out
some arrangement  with the Federal  government-owned  National In-
surance Corporation  of Nigeria.

At the moment, national museums across the country lack critical
security infrastructure  namely, well  trained  security personnel, elec-
tronic burglary alarm systems and close circuit television monitoring
systems.  The  adoption  of  the  policy  of  insuring  the  museums  will
compel  institution  of  all  three  security  measures  for  no  insurance
company  would  accept  the  risk  of  insuring  the  museums  without
them.  The Guardian was probably aware that the national  museums
are  defenseless  when  it  advised  in  its  editorial  on  the  recovery  of
the Benin  bronze  that "the Nigerian  Museum  should  insure  and se-
cure the returned  artefact."

The senior management of the Commission must be more security
conscious and do all that is humanly possible to safeguard  our patri-
mony. Heaven, they say, helps those who help themselves. The Com-
mission  must  attend  to  details  that  could  ensure  the  safety  of  the
treasures  of which  it  is the custodian.  We can return  to the  Ife  mu-
seum to underscore the point being made. When Obayemi left  office
as  Director-General  of  the  Commission  in  August  1991,  he  ad-
dressed  in his Handing Over Notes the  following  specific  problems
of the museum:

Upkeep  of  the  Museum,  especially  the  security  of  the  collec-
tions  in  the  store  and  on  display.  Security—physical  and
human—had  been  improved,  but  given  the  sophistication  of
criminals  in Nigeria and the increasing value of antiquities, Ife
Museum should receive immediate (Obayemi's emphasis) atten-
tion. The head of station has the details of such plans which we
were to work upon this  September.

Most regrettably the warning was apparently ignored, and in Novem-
ber  1994  the  museum  was  swept  clean  of  its  most  treasured  and
valuable  antiquities.

8.4  Sensitizing  Enforcement  Agencies
Investigation shows that from time to time ethnographers, anthropol-
ogists, archaeologists  and curators of the Commission  give  lectures
to police and customs officers  on how to identify  historical  artefacts.
This practice dates back to the Department of Antiquities era. Ekpo
Eyo (1968: 584) gives the following  account  of the approach  then:

One problem  which we have been  facing  is to ensure that cus-
toms  officials  are  able  to  identify  what  are  and  what  are  not
antiquities when attempts are made to export them. In an  effort

261

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

to overcome this difficulty  lectures are given from  time to time
by  members  of  the  Department  of  Antiquities.  All  customs
posts  are  issued  with  folders  containing  instruction  pamphlets
and photographs,  and these are accompanied  by samples of all
certificates, permits and seals and strapping and a pair of tinsips
for  removing  the  permits  and  seal  from  the  specimens  being
exported  for  subsequent  return  to  the  Department  of  Antiqui-
ties 
In addition,  an intelligence  system has been built up to
deal  with  attempts  organised  overseas  to  export  antiquities
through  local  agents because  of the frequent  reports of whole-
sale thefts  from  shrines and sacred groves.

The Nigeria  Police on their part established antiquities teams whose
main  duty is the  investigation  of cases involving theft  and  unlawful
exportation  of antiquities. According to the Chief  Superintendent  of
Police  who  disclosed  this  at  the  1972  Institute  of  African  Studies,
University  of Ibadan symposium  on Nigerian Antiquities, "this is in
an  effort  to  give  further  protection  to  the  objects."  The  antiquities
teams, he added, had been established in all the States of the Federa-
tion  (Odu  1972: 39).

In view of the present economic recession  in the country, more is
required  than  the  current occasional  lectures by  the  Commission  to
the  law enforcement  agents. What  is needed  is a specially  designed
training  programme  for  special  units  of  the  police  and  customs
forces. Such a training programme is bound in the long run to reduce
the widespread  ignorance and apathy among law enforcement  agen-
cies  which  at  the  moment  cause  violations  of  cultural  heritage  le-
gislation  to be  considered  less  important than  certain  other  familiar
criminal  actions, for example, trafficking  in cocaine and heroine. In
fact,  since Nigeria in setting up the National  Drug Law  Enforcement
Agency  (NDLEA)  copied  from  the  American  example,  we  should
not hesitate to adopt the French method to protect the wilful  plunder
of Nigeria's  cultural heritage.  France's  method  of combating  the il-
licit  traffic  of  stolen  works  of  art  has  attracted  much  attention  in
professional  circles. With  strong support from  its parent Ministry of
the Interior, and benefiting  from  coordinated police work within and
beyond  national  frontiers,  the  Central  Office  for  the  Repression  of
Theft  of Works and Objects of Art has enlisted the active cooperation
of  the  art  museum  community.  Mireille  Ballestrazzi  (1993:  53-56),
Chief  of Office  of the Central  Office,  has explained  in Museum In-
ternational how  the system  works.

Nigeria  should  emulate  the  French  example  and  establish  a Na-
tional  Agency  for  the Repression  of  Theft  of Works and  Objects  of
Art  based  on  this  very  successful  model.  In  the  meantime  when
thefts  occur,  Nigeria  should  avail  itself  of  the  services  of  not  only
the French  Central Office  for  the Repression  of Theft  of Works and
Objects of Art but also other international bodies such as the Interna-
tional  Foundation  for  Art  Research  (IFAR), the  Canadian  Heritage

262

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

Information  Network (CHIN), and the Stolen Art Register,  London.
These bodies all hold  databases  of  stolen  cultural  objects  and  assist
developing  countries.  Thefts  must,  of  course,  be  reported  also  to
Interpol,  Unesco  and  ICOM.  While  there  is  evidence  that  Nigeria
does avail itself of the services of Unesco, Interpol and ICOM (there
was a Unesco release on the Jos museum theft), the promptness with
which  the  notifications  are  filed  is  crucial.  For  example,  there  was
undue delay by the appropriate authority of the Commission for Mu-
seums and Monuments in notifying  these international  agencies over
the Ife museum  robbery  of November  1994.

8.5  Database
Another  major  problem  in cultural  heritage  management  in Nigeria
is  the  fact  that  the  police  and  customs  officials  lack  an  adequate
database  for  effective  implementation  of  the  law.  For  example,  in
the highly organised French system, action to combat the transfer  of
stolen art works is only possible because the Documentation  Service
(of  the  Central  Office  for  the  Repression  of  Theft  of  Works  and
Objects  of Art) centralizes  and processes  all  information  relating  to
thefts  of  art  works  committed  in  France  and  constantly  updates  its
computerized  file  of  stolen  works.  In  addition,  a  database  storing
information  on a specialised network  of art thieves and on receivers
of stolen goods operating at national and international levels is main-
tained by the police officers  working for the Documentation  Service
(Ballestrazzi  1993: 54). A national  inventory  of historical  artefacts,
museums,  sites  and  conservation-worthy  areas  does  not  exist,  al-
though  the  Commission  has  started  work  on  compiling  one  (Gella
1992). It is also necessary  to computerise the  inventory.

Fortunately, one of the most  significant  aspects of the AFRICOM
Programme  developed  by  the  International  Council  of  Museums
(ICOM)  is the project  to  establish  computerised  inventories  of  mu-
seum  collections  in  Africa.  Considered  as a top priority  by  African
museum  professionals, 
to
strengthen links between the entire continent and to combat the illicit
traffic  in Africa's  cultural  heritage (Chieze  1994: 30).

is  an  ambitious  effort 

the  project 

Among  the  projects  chosen  to  form  part  of  the  AFRICOM  Pro-
gramme, the project  to establish computerised  inventories of collec-
tions was considered a priority. The project  is being implemented in
close  collaboration  with  CIDOC, ICOM'S  International  Committee
for  Documentation.  It  is  financed  by  the  Agency  for  Cultural  and
Technical  Co-operation  (ACCT)  and  the  French  Ministry  for  Co-
operation  and  Development.  The  inventories  may  include  not  only
the  collections  existing  within  each  African  country  but  also  a
country's  objects  held  abroad.  Two groups  of  museums  will  be  se-
lected to participate  in the pilot phase of the project.  The first  group
comprises museums which have already computerised their invento-
ries and  have  participated  in  the  setting  of  standards.  They  are  the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

263

Folarin  Shyllon

National Museum of Kenya in Nairobi, the National Museum of Mali
in  Bamako, the  Institute  of the National  Museum  of  Zaire  in Kins-
hasa, the Museum of Art and Archaeology of the University of Mad-
agascar  in  Anatananarivo,  and  the National  Museum  of Namibia  in
Windhoek.  The second  group will  comprise museums that have not
yet  begun  to  computerise  their  inventories  and  will  be  chosen  by
ICOM.  Again  Nigeria  is not  in the  second  group. The  Commission
must  now  take  a  hard  look  at  this  strategic  and  very  vital  but  ne-
glected  side  of  its  operations  and join  the  mainstream  of  cultural
heritage management  in this respect. After  all, even before  the com-
puter  age,  Kenneth  Murray  had  devised  as  good  a database  for  the
National  Museum  as one could  expect,  as revealed  by  Fagg  (1971)
in the  following  passage:

[W]hen first  I went to Nigeria in  1949, before there was a Nige-
rian Museum, I had the immense benefit  of collaborating, when
I  first  worked on the Yoruba, with the  Surveyor of Antiquities,
Kenneth Murray, and learning, both from  at first hand and being
given  full  access to the archives  in which  he had set down, on
typewritten cards with photographs, the results of twenty years'
work  in  southern  Nigeria  ...  (Can there be another  case  where
the main research archives of the national museum, as they still
are  [in  1971] and  indeed  some  of the  collections  also, were in
existence many years before  the museum  was founded?)  In the
field,  armed  with  this  data  on  named  artists,  I  immediately
found  it easy to identify  more pieces by the same artists.

9  Awareness

The  evidence  we  have tendered  with  regard  to underfunding,  illicit
trafficking,  the  exhibition  loophole, the  courts, the  security  system,
the enforcement  agencies, and database development  shows that we
do actually need to be reminded that the antiquities and monuments
that  we  possess  today  represent  the  sum  total  and  the  explanation
of  the  reality  of  our  past.  During  the  1972  Antiquities  Symposium
organised  by  the  Institute  of  African  Studies, University  of  Ibadan,
the  greatest  emphasis both  in the discussions  and  in the  recommen-
dations was on a mass education programme at all levels of Nigerian
society  to  stimulate  and  develop  respect  for  the  Nigerian  cultural
heritage.  The  people  should  be  educated  and  made  to  realise  fully
the need to preserve and cherish their cultural heritage. In particular,
local  identification  with  these  objectives  was  stressed  as  thefts  are
often  successfully  carried  out with  local collaboration, and local au-
thorities are to be regarded as watchdogs for the preservation of their
own  antiquities  (Alagoa & Awe  1972:  10, 98-99).

In  his  opening  address  at  the  symposium,  Professor  Biobaku
(1972:  15), who was then the Chairman  of the Antiquities Commis-

264

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in Nigeria

sion and would later become the Director of the Institute, argued for
heightened  consciousness among Nigerians:

The Antiquities  of any nation  are the most valuable  indexes of
that nation's cultural heritage. We must not allow that heritage,
which we know  is abundant  in Nigeria, to be denuded and  frit-
tered away either through ignorance of its value or the cupidity
of collectors,  local  and  foreign,  but  we must  ensure  its proper
preservation  and  stimulating presentation  within Nigeria.

Obayemi  (1991:  18-20),  in  the  concluding  passage  of  his  Kenneth
Murray  memorial  lecture,  also  addresses  the  issue  of  awareness  or
consciousness in Nigeria's cultural heritage management. The sculp-
tures  in  clay,  metal,  wood,  stone,  ivory  and  fibres  are  among  the
items that show the high water-mark of human endeavour and attain-
ment. The best of them stand proudly side by side with the best  from
any section of the human heritage  —  in the words of K. C. Murray
(1940: 271), they  "rank  among the masterpieces  of the  world."

Sir Kenneth Clark, then Director of the National Gallery, London,
in  a  note  in  the  Nigeria Magazine (1940:  342)  referring  to  the  Ife
bronzes  discovered  a year  earlier,  said  that  they  "are  not  solely  of
cultural  or  ethnographical  interest.  They  are  works  of  a  very  high
order, and should be preserved  as part of the world's artistic inherit-
ance."  For  Obayemi,  therefore,  "[a]s  the  Nigerian  people  are  de-
scended  from  specific  contexts and real ancestors, the  responsibilit-
ies  should  be  clear  —  that  culture,  especially  the  irreplaceable,  yet
timeless  heritage  has the  status  of the  sacred  and the  hallowed. We
have  no  other  authentic  badge  of  identity."  He therefore  called  for
self-mobilisation  by the rich  and the poor,  families,  lineages, wards
and quarters in preserving Nigeria's ancient cultural  heritage for the
living. At the apex of this consciousness movement would of course
be the government of all the Nigerian peoples  —  especially the gov-
ernment that derives legitimacy  from  the Nigerian  people.

10  Conclusion

Seventy years after  the first  steps were taken to prevent the  unlawful
export of Nigerian art treasures, and over forty  years after  the open-
ing of the first  formal  museum  in Jos, one must feel  concerned that
the plunder of many of the country's antiquities has continued. Even
priceless works,  like the Ife  bronzes  housed  in a National  Museum,
still  fall  easy prey to art robbers. The illegal  trafficking  in historical
artefacts  has  also  continued  unabated.  The  museum  and  monument
services remain a marginal  institution  without adequate resources to
manage  and  protect  the  nation's  cultural  heritage.  Thus  it  had  no
computerised inventory by the time the pilot phase of the AFRICOM
programme  of computerised  inventorying  of museum  collections in
Africa  started  in  July  1993, and  so Nigeria  was not  included  in the

265

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

first  museum  group that had already computerised their inventories.
There seems to be a lack of awareness on the part of the government
that  everything  must  be  done  to preserve  the  nation's  material  cul-
tural  heritage. Yet it is the awareness  in Europe  and North  America
of  the  beauty  of  African  art  that  has  drained  the  African  continent
of most of what  is left  at the end of colonialism.

Cultural heritage management has an ideological  basis in sustain-
ing the  cultural  identity of a people. The linkage was recognised by
the founding  fathers  of the cultural heritage preservation  movement.
Kenneth  Murray  (1942: 247) wrote thus:

The  need,  indeed,  for  a  collection  of  Nigerian  art  in  Europe
cannot  be  as  vital  as the  need  for  one in Nigeria.  In Europe it
would  chiefly  have  an  academic  purpose,  but  in  Nigeria  it  is
wanted  for  the cultural  life  of the country  itself.

The  incumbent  Director-General  of  the  National  Commission,  Dr.
Yaro Gella  (1992), has  spoken  in the same vein:

To Africans,  certainly to Nigeria,  cultural  property  has  signifi-
cance  beyond artistic value, because  it symbolises  the very es-
sence  of  the  life  of  the  people.  When  a thief  steals, plunders,
destroys or purchases these cultural property, he is, by so doing,
taking  away  the  soul,  the  spirit  and  indeed  the  lives  of  the
people.

Nigeria  shares a major  problem  of cultural  heritage  management  in
common  with  other countries  in Africa,  that  is, finding  resources to
enforce  their legislation on cultural heritage in the face  of the strong
demand  for  African  art and the enormous prices being offered  for it
(Prott  and  O'Keefe  1984: 68). Perhaps  the  holistic  approach  of the
French  Central  Office  for  the  Repression  of  Theft  of  Works  and
Objects  of  Art  is what  is needed  for Nigeria  and  the  rest  of  Africa.
Until  all  the  enforcement  agencies  are properly  guided  and  trained,
the  deficiencies  already highlighted  will  continue  to plague  cultural
heritage  management  and  the  enforcement  of  cultural  heritage  le-
gislation  in the country.

Postscript

On  23  July  1996, the Minister of  Information  and  Culture  inaugurated  an  Inter-
Ministerial  Committee  on  the  Looting  of Nigeria's  Cultural  Property.  The com-
mittee was charged,  among other things, to deliberate exhaustively  on the nature
and  extent  of  the  loss  of  our  cultural  property  to  smugglers;  review  security
measures  in place  in the museums and recommend additional  security measures;
to evaluate  existing  laws and recommend  how the law enforcement  agencies can
effectively  cope  with  reported  cases  of  loss  of  antiquities;  and  to  look  into  the
funding  of the  National  Commission  for  Museums  and  Monuments  and  recom-
mend  as  appropriate.

266

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Cultural  Heritage  Management  in  Nigeria

Bibliography

Alagoa,  E.J.  & Awe,  B. (eds.)-  1972. Nigerian  Antiquities:  Report  of  a  Sympo-
sium held at the Institute of African  Studies, University of Ibadan from Thurs-
day  20th  April  to  Sunday  23rd  April,  1972  Special  number  African  Notes
Bulletin  of the  Institute  of African  Studies,  University  of  Ibadan.

Ardouin,  CD.  &  Arinze,  E.  1994.  Museums  &  the  Community  in  West Africa

(James  Currey  Publishers,  London).

Arinze,  E.N.  1984.  "The  Punitive  Expedition  1897"  in  The Lost  Treasures of
Ancient  Benin.  Exhibition  Catalogue  (Museum  of African  Studies,  University
of  Ibadan,  Ibadan).

Armstrong,  R.G.  1972. "A  Statement  on  the  Purchase  and  Sale  of  Antiquities"
in Alagoa  E.J. & Awe, B. (eds.) Nigerian Antiquities, Special Number African
Notes 95.

Ballestrazzi,  M.  1993.  "Combating  the  Traffic  in  the  Stolen  Works  of  Art  in

France",  XLV No. 3 Museum  International  53.

Beier,  U.  1972.  "The  Preservation  and  Protection  of  Nigerian  Antiquities"  in
Alagoa,  E.J.  &  Awe, B. (eds.)  Nigerian  Antiquities,  Special  Number  African
Notes 32.

Biobaku,  S.O.  1972. "Opening Address" in Alagoa,  E.J.  & Awe, B. (eds.) Nige-

rian  Antiquities,  Special  Number  African  Notes  14.

Boachie-Ansah.  1982. "Archaeology  and  Cultural  Education  in Nigeria:  An Ap-
praisal"  in  Effah-Gyamfi,  K.  (ed.)  Archaeology  and  Cultural  Education  in
Nigeria 49.

Brigue,  J.F.  1972.  "Cultural  Objects:  Problems  of  Security"  in  Alagoa,  E.J.  &

Awe,  B. (eds.) Nigerian  Antiquities,  Special  Number African  Notes 40.

Chieze, V. 1994. "Computerized  Inventorying of Museum Collections in  Africa",

XVI  No. 1 Museum International  30.

Clark,  K.  1940. "Note" in 20 Nigeria Magazine  342.
Cleere,  H.F.  (ed.).  1989. Archaeological  Heritage  Management  in  the  Modern

World (Unwin  Hymans,  London).

Effah-Gyamfi,  K. (ed.).  1982. Archaeological and Cultural Education in Nigeria.
Proceedings  of the 4th Annual Conference  of the Archaeological  Association
of Nigeria  24th  -  27th  June  1982, Ahmadu  Bello  University,  Zaria.

Eluyemi,  O.  1982.  "The  Federal  Act  and  Nigerian  Archaeology"  in  Effah-Gy-

amfi,  K. (ed.) Archaeology  and  Cultural Education  in Nigeria, 40

Eyo, E.  1968. "Preservation  of Works of Art and Handicraft"  in Colloquium: 1st

World Festival of Negro Arts,  Dakar  (Presence  Africaine,  Paris).

Eyo,  E.  1977.  Two Thousand  Years of  Nigerian Art (Federal  Department  of An-

tiquities,  Lagos).

Eyo, E.  1979. "Nigeria"  in  "Return  and  Restitution  of  Cultural  Property:  View-

points" XXXI  (No.  1) Museum  18.

Fagg,  B.  1963. "The  Museums  of Nigeria" XVI  Museum  124.
Fagg, W.  1971. The Living Arts of Nigeria (Studio  Vista,  London).
Gella,  Y.  1992. "The  Protection  of Artistic  and  Cultural  Property,"  Paper  given
at  workshop  on  United  Nations  Model  Treaty  for  the  Prevention  of  Crimes
That  Infringe  on  the  Cultural  Heritage  of  Peoples  in  the  form  of  Moveable
Property  held  at Courmayeur  Mount  Blanc,  Aosta  Valley,  Italy, June 25—27,
1992.

Greenfield,  J.  1996.  The Return  of  Cultural  Treasures (2d  ed.,  Cambridge  Uni-

versity  Press, Cambridge).

Herington, G.N.  1972. "Kenneth Crosthwaite Murray  1.8.02-22.4.72,"  XXXVII

The Nigerian Field  140.

267

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045

Folarin  Shyllon

Kan,  M.  Preface  to  Eyo,  E.  &  Willet,  F.  1980.  Treasures of  Ancient  Nigeria

(Alfred  A. Knopf,  New York) XI.

Kaplan,  F.S.  &  Ukwu,  N.S.  &  Arinze,  E.N.  1987.  "Nigeria"  in  Jackson  V.,
Palmer, M.A. & Zafran,  G.M. (eds.) Art Museums of the  World Vol. 1 (Green-
wood,  New  York).

Magnuson,  M.  1996.  "Introduction"  to  Greenfield,  J.  The Return  of  Cultural

Treasures, (2d  ed., Cambridge  University  Press, Cambridge)  1.

de  Montebello,  P.  1992.  "Foreword"  to  Ezra  K.  Royal  Art  of  Benin:  The Perls
Collection.  Exhibition  Catalogue  (The  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New
York).

Murray,  K.C.  1938. "Museums:  An  Urgent  Need  in  Nigeria,"  14 Nigeria Maga-

zine  98.

Murray,  K.C.  1940. "A Museum  for  Nigeria,"  20 Nigeria Magazine 271.
Murray,  K.C.  1942.  "Art  in  Nigeria:  Need  for  a  Museum,"  XLI  Journal  of  the

Royal  African  Society 241.

Murray,  K.C.  1943.  "Arts  and  Crafts  of  Nigeria:  Their  Past  and  Future,"  XIV

Africa  155.

Murray,  K.C.  1967.  "A  List  of  Sites,  Buildings  and  other  Antiquities  Declared
to be Monuments Under the Antiquities Act from  February  1956 to  December
1964," 4 Journal  of the  Historical  Society  of Nigeria 161.

Mveng,  E.  1968.  "The  Functions  and  Significance  of  Negro  Art  in  the  Life  of
the  Peoples  Of  Black  Africa,"  in  Colloquium:  1st  World Festival  of  Negro
Arts,  Dakar  (Presence  Africaine,  Paris).

Nigeria,  1947. Annual  Report  of  the Antiquities  Section for  1946  (Government

Printer,  Lagos).

Nzewunwa,  N.  1982.  "Cultural  Resources  Management  in  Nigeria"  in  Effah-

Gyamfi,  K.  (ed.) Archaeology and  Cultural Education  in Nigeria 31.

Obayemi,  M.A.  1991. Ancient  Cultures for  the Living:  Nigeria  Monuments  and
Antiquities  Today (Institute of  African  Studies,  University  of  Ibadan,  Ibadan)
[First  Kenneth  C.  Murray  Memorial  Lecture  28th  April  1987].

Odu, J.O.  1972. "Cultural  Objects-The  Question  of Security" in Alagoa, E.J. &

Awe,  B. (eds.)  Nigerian  Antiquities,  Special  Number African  Notes 36.
Ojo,  G.J.A.  1966.  Yoruba  Palaces  (University  of  London  Press,  London).
Prott,  L.V.  &  O'Keefe,  P.J.  1984.  Law  and  the  Cultural  Heritage:  Volume  1.

Discovery  & Excavation  (Professional  Books  Limited,  London).

Prott,  L.V.  &  O'Keefe,  P.J.  1989.  Law  and  the  Cultural  Heritage:  Volume  3.

Movement  (Butterworths,  London).

Wangboje, S.I.  1976. "Arts and Crafts"  in Biobaku, S.O. (ed.)  The Living Culture

of Nigeria  17 (Thomas Nelson  Ltd., Lagos).

Sources

Antiquities  Act  1953: Laws  of the  Federation  of Nigeria  1958 ch.  12
Antiquities  (Prohibited  Transfer)  Act  1974:  Laws  of  the  Federal  Republic  of

Nigeria  1974 No. 9

National  Commission for Museums and Monuments  Act  1979: Laws of the Fed-

eration  of Nigeria  1990 ch.  242

Penal  Code:  Laws  of Northern  Nigeria  1965 ch.  89

268

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000045


