 

Armed Non-State Actors and Cultural 
Heritage in Armed Conflict
Marina Lostal*

Kristin Hausler†

Pascal Bongard††

 

Abstract: This article presents the preliminary findings of a scoping study that 
Geneva Call is conducting to understand the existing dynamics between armed 
non-state actors (ANSAs) and cultural heritage. Geneva Call is a Swiss-based non-
governmental organization dedicated to promoting the respect of international 
humanitarian law by ANSAs. The study centres on three case studies—Syria, Iraq, 
and Mali—on which information has been obtained through desk and field research, 
interviews with ANSAs operating in those countries, and with leading organizations 
committed to the protection of cultural heritage, globally or regionally. The article 
first maps the various attitudes of ANSAs toward cultural heritage, highlighting both 
positive and negative examples from current practices. Then it analyzes the response 
of specialized organizations to the impact of ANSAs on cultural heritage and 
their level of engagement with these actors on cultural heritage issues. Finally, 
the conclusion offers some tentative recommendations to enhance the respect of 
cultural heritage by ANSAs in non-international armed conflicts.

Keywords: cultural heritage, armed non-state actors, non-international armed 
conflicts, Geneva Call

INTRODUCTION

Over the past few years, the damage and destruction of cultural heritage in armed 
conflicts have made front-page news on many occasions. For example, in Syria, 

*Lecturer in International Law at the Hague University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands; 
Email: marina.lostal@cantab.net
†Dorset Senior Research Fellow, British Institute of International and Comparative Law, London, 
United Kingdom; Email: k.hausler@biicl.org
††Head of the Policy and Legal Unit at Geneva Call, Switzerland; Email: pbongard@genevacall.org

407

 (2017) 24:407–427. Printed in the USA.Copyright © 2017 MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

the old city of Aleppo (a United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Orga-
nization [UNESCO] world heritage site) has been on the frontline of the battle 
between the government forces and armed non-state actors (ANSAs), with its 
cultural heritage having been damaged or destroyed as a result of the fighting. 
Its medieval market (the Souq al-Madina) was burned to the ground; the outer 
wall of its citadel extensively affected; the main gate of the Umayyad Mosque 
(often known as the Great Mosque), also destroyed; and its library consumed by 
flames.1 The world heritage site of Palmyra was attacked twice by the Islamic State 
group, leading to the destruction of the Bel and Baalshamin temples and to the 
extensive damage of its Roman amphitheater.

In Iraq, the shrine of the Prophet Yunus and the Mosul Museum, among others, 
were the object of deliberate attacks by the Islamic State group, which filmed their 
devastation.2 Prior to losing the city of Mosul, the Islamic State group dynamited 
the Al Nuri mosque—the place from where al-Baghdadi declared the Islamic State 
caliphate and himself to be its caliph in June 2014.3 The Islamic State group has 
also put in place a systematic looting plan through its “Antiquities Division,” 
which raises funds through the issuing of licenses and the collection of taxes for the 
digging and trafficking of Iraqi and Syrian artifacts.4 Khaled al-Assad, the head of 
antiquities in Palmyra, was even assassinated in 2015 after refusing to cooperate 
with the Islamic State group and to disclose the whereabouts of some of the site’s 
antiquities.5

In Mali in 2012, Islamist ANSAs attacked the world heritage town of Timbuktu, 
destroying more than 4,000 manuscripts, 14 mausoleums, and the door of the Sidi 
Yahia mosque. The use of these sites of worship was deemed “idolatrous” and 
heretical within their interpretation of Sharia law. In September 2016, the Inter-
national Criminal Court (ICC) sentenced Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi, a member 
of the Islamist group Ansar Dine and head of its morality brigade, to nine years of 

1Syrian Directorate General of Museums and Antiquities, “State Party Report: State of Conservation 
of the Syrian Cultural Heritage Sites,” 2014, 1–28; see also Silvia Perini and Emma Cunliffe, “Towards 
a Protection of the Syrian Cultural Heritage: A Summary of the International Responses (March 
2011–March 2014),” April 2014. One recent examination of 210 locations in the world heritage site of 
Aleppo found that “22 had been destroyed, 48 were severely damaged, 33 were moderately damaged, 
and a further 32 had sustained possible damage.” See Cunliffe, Muhesen and Lostal 2016, 6.
2Ironically, a group of archaeologists found an undiscovered palace dating back to 600 bc under the 
debris of the Prophet of Yunus’ shrine. See Sarah Pruitt, “In Mosul, Archaeologists Find Hidden 
Palace under Shrine Destroyed by ISIS,” 7 March 2017.
3Martin Chulov and Kareem Shaheen, “Destroying Great Mosque of al-Nuri: Is ISIS Declaring 
Defeat,” The Guardian, 22 June 2017.
4United States Government Accountability Office (US GAO), “Report to Congressional Requesters: 
Cultural Property—Protection of Iraqi and Syrian Antiquities,” August 2016, 9, http://www.gao.gov/
products/GAO-16-673.
5Kareem Shaheen and Ian Black, “Beheaded Syrian Scholar Refused to Lead ISIS to Hidden Palmyra 
Antiquities,” The Guardian, 19 August 2015.

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

409

imprisonment for having intentionally directed attacks against the mosque and 
nine of the mausoleums, a charge to which he pled guilty.6

Historical monuments, religious buildings, and other cultural sites have also been 
damaged as a result of military use. The changed dynamics of warfare brought about 
by intra-state conflict between ANSAs and state-armed forces have increasingly 
turned urban areas into battlegrounds. For example, in Syria Crac des Chevaliers—
a medieval crusader castle and a declared world heritage site, which is located near 
the city of Homs—was allegedly being used by ANSAs before it was air raided by 
government forces in July 2013.7 As mentioned above, the city of Aleppo has with-
stood substantial damage (for example, its Souq and the Great Mosque) as a result 
of armed clashes and military occupation.

While the scale of looting and the destruction of cultural heritage during recent 
armed conflicts has been described as unprecedented, one of the key differences 
between past and present-day armed conflicts is that, today, most armed conflicts 
taking place in the world are non-international in character.8 A non-international 
armed conflict is defined as “protracted armed violence between governmental 
authorities and organized armed groups or between such groups within a State.”9 
The level of violence must reach a certain level of intensity to exclude mere inter-
nal disturbances, and “non-governmental groups involved in the conflict must be 
considered as ‘parties to the conflict’, meaning that they possess organized armed 
forces.”10 Thus, most armed conflicts taking place in the world now involve ANSAs, 
which, in turn, may be present in territories that are rich in cultural heritage. There 
is therefore a need to better understand how these groups view cultural heritage 
and, when appropriate and feasible, engage such groups toward compliance with 
international standards applicable in armed conflicts for its protection.

This is the approach adopted by Geneva Call, a neutral and impartial non-
governmental organization (NGO) dedicated to promoting the respect of inter-
national humanitarian law (IHL) by ANSAs. IHL is a branch of international law 
that regulates the conduct of warfare by seeking to limit its effects and protect the 

6ICC,  Prosecutor  v.  Ahmad  Al  Faqi  Al  Mahdi,  Case  no.  ICC-01/12-01/15,  27  September  2016 
(Prosecutor v. Al Mahdi). See also Kristin Hausler, “Some Justice for Timbuktu,” Lawyer Issue,  
5 October 2016, http://www.lawyerissue.com/some-justice-for-timbuktu/ (accessed 19 November  
2017); “A Landmark Case for the ICC,” Global Legal Post, 4 October 2016, http://www.globallegalpost.
com/blogs/global-view/a-landmark-case-for-the-icc-84068027/ (accessed 19 November 2017).
7For a lengthier description, see Lostal 2017, 95–96.
8In reference to Syria, see the Common Statement by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, UN 
Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Director-General Irina Bokova and 
UN and League of Arab States Joint Special Representative for Syria Lakhdar Brahimi: The Destruction 
of Syria’s Cultural Heritage Must Stop, 2014, 1.
9ICTY, Prosecutor v. Dusko Tadic a/k/a “Dule,” Decision on the Defence Motion for Interlocutory 
Appeal on Jurisdiction, 2 October 1995, para. 70.
10International Committee of the Red Cross, “How Is the Term ‘Armed Conflict’ Defined in Interna-
tional Humanitarian Law?,” opinion paper, March 2008, 3.

410 

MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

persons who are not, or no longer, taking part in hostilities and the civilian objects 
that may be affected by armed conflicts. IHL offers cultural heritage a regime 
of protection in armed conflict that goes beyond that afforded to civilian objects. 
The two most important treaties in this regard are the 1954 Hague Convention 
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (Hague 
Convention) and its 1999 Second Protocol.11

ANSAs refer to armed entities that are not under state control. They include 
a variety of actors, including opposition and insurgent movements, de facto author-
ities, paramilitary groups, and self-defense militia. The general rules of IHL apply 
to all parties involved in an armed conflict, whether they are state armed forces or 
ANSAs. Since the majority of IHL treaties that touch upon cultural heritage were 
drafted taking inter-state wars as a model, very little attention has been paid to their 
application in non-international armed conflicts or to the obligations and role of 
ANSAs.12 This runs counter to the current state of affairs where non-international 
armed conflicts are the norm and to the trend in general academic literature (outside 
the scope of cultural heritage) that in the past few years has seen the appearance 
of a number of publications that center on ANSAs and non-international armed 
conflicts, given their increasing relevance.13 However, none of these works tackle 
cultural heritage specifically.

In  this  context,  Geneva  Call  embarked  in  late  2015  in  a  pioneer  study  to:  
(1) examine the international legal framework relating to cultural heritage appli-
cable to ANSAs; (2) identify and analyze the attitudes of ANSAs toward cultural 
heritage, highlighting both positive and negative examples from current practices; 
(3) assess the status, risks, and opportunities of engaging ANSAs toward the pro-
tection of cultural heritage in armed conflict; and (4) recommend various forms 
of action that could be undertaken to enhance those efforts. The study revolves 
around three case studies: Iraq, Mali, and Syria. The armed conflicts in such coun-
tries share some common aspects: there has been a sectarian turn to some extent; 
they have all involved a number of ANSAs, including Islamist groups; and the level 
of destruction, damage, and looting of cultural heritage has been significant. The 
study has gathered information through field visits and qualitative research based 

11Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, 14 May 
1954, 249 UNTS 240 (Hague Convention); Second Protocol to the Convention for the Protection 
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, 26 March 1999, 2253 UNTS 172 (Second 
Convention).
12Hausler 2015; Henckaerts 2010; Howe 2012.
13E.g.,  Geneva  Academy  of  International  Humanitarian  Law  and  Human  Rights,  “Rules  of  
Engagement: Protecting Civilians through Dialogue with Armed Non-State Actors,” October 2011; 
“Understanding  Armed  Groups  and  the  Applicable  Law,”  no.  882, International  Review  of  the 
Red  Cross,  30  June  2011;  “Engaging  Armed  Groups,”  no.  883, International  Review  of  the  Red 
Cross, September 2011; Sivakumaran 2012; Geneva Academy of International Humanitarian Law 
and Human Rights, “Reactions to Norms: Armed Groups and the Protection of Civilians,” Policy 
Briefing no. 1, 2014.

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

411

on interviews carried out either in person or through written questionnaires with 
representatives of ANSAs and international organizations and institutions that 
deal with the protection of cultural heritage globally or in the selected countries.14
This article summarizes the preliminary findings of the forthcoming two-year 
study. It first acknowledges that the attitudes of ANSAs toward cultural heritage  
are diverse and can be broadly divided into two major trends: a destructive attitude, 
according to which ANSAs conduct deliberate attacks and/or plunder, and what can 
be described as “the other trend,” where ANSAs do not seek to intentionally damage 
or destroy cultural heritage but, rather, recognize the importance of safeguarding 
and respecting cultural heritage, even if their military tactics may expose it to inci-
dental, collateral damage. The article also provides a general insight into the way 
specialized organizations that deal with cultural heritage either globally or regionally 
have addressed the impact (both positive and negative) of ANSAs on cultural heritage. 
Then, it identifies first-hand accounts concerning the behavior of ANSAs operating 
in Iraq, Mali, and Syria. The conclusion offers some tentative recommendations to 
enhance the protection of cultural heritage in non-international armed conflicts.

ANSAS’ ATTITUDES TOWARD CULTURAL HERITAGE

The attitudes of ANSAs toward cultural heritage during armed conflict can be divided 
into two main categories. On the one hand, there are ANSAs that, as a matter of 
policy, deliberately target cultural heritage in the conduct of warfare because of 
what it represents. On the other hand, there are ANSAs that do not adopt such a 
policy and tend to respect cultural heritage during their military operations, with 
some of them even having taken concrete measures to safeguard cultural heritage 
from the possible adverse effects of an armed conflict.

The Deliberate Targeting Trend

Over the past few years, cultural heritage has increasingly become the direct target 
of systematic and deliberate attacks by ANSAs. A notorious example is the Islamic 
State group, which since 2014 has intentionally damaged or destroyed cultural her-
itage in Iraq and Syria under the pretext that it regards it as heretical to Islam, 
even calling the targeted statues and shrines “false idols.”15 Its targets have included 
artifacts, religious sites, and ancient monuments, with some even being listed as 
world heritage sites. The Islamic State group has destroyed Byzantine mosaics and 

14As the interviews and questionnaire shared the same structure and questions, all ANSAs were 
assessed against the same standard. When the interviews were conducted in person, in addition 
to the common structure, a more open-ended approach was adopted and follow-up questions 
were included.
15Graciela Gestoso Singer, “ISIS’s War on Cultural Heritage and Memory,” UK Blue Shield, 2015, 2, 
http://ukblueshield.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Singer-Isis_Against_World_Heritage.pdf 
(accessed 19 November 2017), 2.

412 

MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

Assyrian statues as well as Sufi and Shia shrines in the region of Raqqa in Syria.16  
It has also destroyed several mosques, churches, and Sufi and Shia shrines and tombs 
in Mosul in northern Iraq, the site of the ancient Assyrian capital of Nineveh.17 
The video of the destruction of the Mosul Museum that went viral in February 
2015 shows a representative of the group recalling how the Prophet Muhammad 
destroyed the idols in Mecca and adding: “These statues and idols, these artefacts, 
if God has ordered [their] removal, they [are] worthless to us even if they are worth 
billions of dollars.”18 In addition, the Islamic State group has been involved in the 
looting of several archaeological sites and even established an “Antiquities Depart-
ment” to authorize their plunder and collect their proceeds methodically.19 However, 
its attacks on cultural heritage have not been limited to objects that have a religious 
meaning. Following its capture of the ancient city of Palmyra in May 2015, the 
Islamic State group dynamited several of its temples, including the Temple of Bel 
and the Temple of Baal Shamin, its Arch of Triumph, as well as its tetrapylon and 
part of its Roman theatre after recapturing the city in January 2017.20

In Mali, Islamist ANSAs aimed to enforce their interpretation of Sharia law in the 
territories that were under their control in the north in 2012–13, which eventually led to 
the infamous attacks against the world heritage town of Timbuktu.21 In June 2012, 
Ansar Dine decided to destroy mausoleums of Sufi Muslim saints, which were used 

16Patrick Cockburn, “The Destruction of the Idols: Syria’s Patrimony at Risk from Extremists,” 
The Independent, 11 February 2014, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/archaeology/news/ 
the-destruction-ofthe-idols-syrias-patrimony-at-risk-from-extremists-91222  75.html  (accessed 
19 November 2017).
17Graham Bowley, “Antiquities Lost, Casualties of War,” New York Times, 3 October 2014, http://
www.nytimes.com/2014/10/05/arts/design/in-syria-and-iraq-trying-to-protect-a-heritage-at-risk.
html (accessed 19 November 2017); see also Marina Lostal, “The Systematic Destruction of Cul-
tural Heritage at the Hands of the Islamic State,” Global Policy Forum, 9 March 2015, https://www.
globalpolicy.org/component/content/article/144-bibliographies/52745-the-systematic-destruc-
tion-of-cultural-heritage-at-the-hands-of-the-islamic-state.html (accessed 19 November 2017).
18“ISIS Fighters Destroy Ancient Artefacts at Mosul Museum,” The Guardian, 26 February 2015, https:// 
www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/26/isis-fighters-destroy-ancient-artefacts-mosul-museum-iraq 
(accessed 19 November 2017).
19See, e.g., Kohn David, “ISIS’S Looting Campaign,” The New Yorker, 14 October 2014, http://www.
newyorker.com/tech/elements/isis-looting-campaign-iraq-syria;  FSC  Majority  and  Minority 
Staff, “Task Force to Investigate Terrorism Financing Hearing Titled “Preventing Cultural Geno-
cide: Countering the Plunder and Sale of Priceless Cultural Antiquities by ISIS,” Memorandum,  
15 April 2016, 7–8, http://financialservices.house.gov/uploadedfiles/041916_tf_supplemental_hearing_
memo.pdf (accessed 19 November 2017).
20See, e.g., “ISIS Destruction of Palmyra’s Temple of Bel Revealed in Satellite Images,” The Guardian, 
1 September 2015, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/01/satellite-images-reveal-isis-
destruction-of-palmyras-temple-of-bel (accessed 19 November 2017); Kareem Shaheen, “Isis Destroys 
Tetrapylon Monument in Palmyra,” The Guardian, 20 January 2017.
21Human Rights Watch, “Collapse, Conflict and Atrocity in Mali: Human Rights Watch Reporting 
on the 2012-2013 Armed Conflict and Its Aftermath,” 2014, 51, https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/
files/related_material/mali0514_ForUpload.pdf (accessed 19 November 2017).

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

413

by the local population for prayers and as places of pilgrimage.22 This decision was 
taken in consultation with members of Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Magreb (AQIM). 
Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi, who was at that time the head of the “Hesbah,” the 
morality brigade established by Ansar Dine, had confirmed that, under Islamic 
law, there should not be any construction over a tomb.23 He agreed to conduct 
the attacks, which were carried out between 30 June 2012 and 11 July 2012 against 
10 of the most important religious and historic sites in Timbuktu.24 A spokesperson 
of Ansar Dine allegedly declared that “[t]here is no world heritage. It does not exist. 
Infidels must not get involved in our business.”25

The ANSAs abiding by this destructive policy have regularly targeted world heri-
tage sites, which are regulated by the World Heritage Convention and include mon-
uments, sites, and groups of buildings of outstanding universal value—that is, of 
cultural “significance which is so exceptional as to transcend national boundaries and 
to be of common importance for present and future generations of all humanity.”26 
Conscious of their importance, these ANSAs try to send a message of defiance to 
the rest of the world by attacking such recognizable sites. By the same token, the 
fact that a monument has been listed as a world heritage site seems to have also 
been taken into account by the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC in selecting and 
pursuing the case against Al Mahdi.27 The Office of the Prosecutor largely relied on 
the world heritage status of the city of Timbuktu when arguing that the event met 
the gravity threshold required by the ICC Statute.28 In its discussion on aggravating 
circumstances, the Trial Chamber took into account that all sites destroyed but one 
(the Sheikh Mohamed Mahmoud Al Arawani Mausoleum) “were UNESCO World 
Heritage Sites and, as such, their attack appears to be of particular gravity as their 
destruction does not only affect the direct victims of the crimes, namely the faithful 
and inhabitants of Timbuktu, but also people throughout Mali and the international  

22Prosecutor v. Al Mahdi, para. 34.
23Prosecutor v. Al Mahdi, para. 36. Also, according to Al Mahdi, the way that the faithful prayed was 
judged to be impious. See his interview in the UNESCO Courier, October–December 2017, https://
en.unesco.org/courier/2017-october-december/ahmad-al-faqi-al-mahdi-i-plead-guilty  (accessed  
19 November 2017).
24Prosecutor v. Al Mahdi, paras. 37–38.
25Cited in Irina Bokova, “Culture in the Cross Hairs,” New York Times, 2 December 2012, http://
www.nytimes.com/2012/12/03/opinion/global/cultural-sites-must-be-protected.html  (accessed 
19 November 2017).
26World Heritage Committee, “Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage 
Convention,” UNESCO Doc. WHC 16/01, 26 October 2016, para. 49. Convention Concerning the 
Protection of the World Heritage and Natural Heritage, 16 November 1972, 1037 UNTS 151.
27Prosecutor v. Al Mahdi is the only case in the history of international criminal law that has revolved 
solely around the destruction of cultural heritage. This could change the attention that states dedicate to 
the issue since, until now, cultural heritage crimes have been seldom prosecuted at the national level.
28See International Criminal Court, “Situation in Mali: Article 53(1) Report,” Office of the Prosecutor 
report, 16 January 2013, paras. 154–60. Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court, 17 July 
1998, 2187 UNTS 90.

414 

MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

community.”29 More than 10 years before, in the trial against Pavle Strugar and 
Miodrag Jokić at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, 
which involved the shelling of the Old Town of Dubrovnik—also a world heritage 
site—the Trial Chamber already stated that “the Old Town [of Dubrovnik] is also 
legally distinct from the rest of the wider city because the Old Town … enjoys a 
World Heritage listing and the protections and immunities that are consequent on 
that listing.”30

The common denominator to all of these ANSAs that have been directly involved in 
the intentional destruction of cultural heritage is that they have sought to deny 
existing beliefs and have imposed their own ideology and interpretation of religion. 
In the words of Karima Bennoune, the UN special rapporteur in the field of cul-
tural rights, “fundamentalists often seek to erase the culture of others and the syn-
cretic nature of culture and religion and stamp out cultural diversity. Such efforts 
represent the misuse of what is claimed to be culture against cultural rights.”31 
The intentional destruction of cultural heritage may be related to a strategy of 
“cultural cleansing,” a term that was used by UNESCO Director-General Irina 
Bokova in relation to the situation in Iraq in 2014 to signify the tactic of erasing 
the unwanted history of a territory and the identity of its people by destroying 
its cultural heritage and, thus, any physical evidence of it. Cultural cleansing 
aims to eradicate cultural diversity and replace it with a single, homogeneous 
cultural and religious perspective.

The Other Trend

In contrast to the adoption of a clearly destructive policy, many ANSAs recognize 
and appreciate the value of cultural heritage, thus having a more positive attitude 
toward it. A number of ANSAs worldwide have bound themselves to respect cul-
tural objects in their internal regulations and codes of conduct.32 For example, 
when  it  was  a  rebel  group,  the  Sudan  People’s  Liberation  Movement/Army 
(SPLM/A) stated, in its 1983 manifesto, that “cultural objects which include reli-
gious monuments, buildings such as mosques and churches and various icons are 
respected by the SPLM/A.”33 As another example, the Colombian Ejército de 

29Prosecutor v. Al Mahdi, para. 80.
30ICTY, Prosecutor v. Strugar, Case no. IT-01-42, Judgment, 31 January 2005, para. 279; see also 
ICTY, Prosecutor v. Miodrag Jokić, Case no. IT-01-42/1, Judgment, 18 March 2004, §51; Hausler 
2014, 380–81; for a discussion on the value of the Mostar Bridge, see ICTY, Prosecutor v. Jadranko 
Prlić, Case no. IT-04-74, Judgment, 29 May 2013, 3
31“Report of the Special Rapporteur in the Field of Cultural Rights,” UN Doc. A/HRC/34/56, 16 January 
2017, para. 5.
32For more examples, see Hausler 2014, 133–34; Geneva Call’s online directory of ANSA humanitarian 
commitments, “Their Words,” http://theirwords.org/pages/home (accessed 19 November 2017).
33Henckaerts and Doswald-Beck 2004, 778, citing “Report on SPLM/A Practice,” 1998, ch. 4.2.

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

415

Liberación Nacional (ELN) stated in its Code of War that religious sites or cultural 
objects shall not be attacked.34 Also in Colombia, a guerrilla commander of the 
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) 
dedicated himself to building a museum in the mountains of the department of 
Cauca. The museum, called “La Cristalina,” was allegedly created to protect cultural 
heritage from looters and, nowadays, houses more than 3,000 pieces.35

Geneva Call’s study has nevertheless found that, while the interviewed ANSAs 
are willing to respect and even protect cultural heritage, they lack any knowledge 
whatsoever of the international legal standards for the protection of cultural heritage 
and, in many cases, capacity building to ensure its protection to the maximum 
extent feasible. According to Article 1 of the Hague Convention, cultural prop-
erty refers to “movable or immovable property of great importance to the cultural 
heritage of every people.” This may include monuments of architecture, art, or 
history, whether religious or secular, archaeological sites, groups of buildings, and 
works of art or manuscripts. The Convention also extends protection to buildings 
whose main and effective purpose is to preserve or exhibit the movable cultural 
property, such as museums, libraries, and centers containing monuments. When 
Geneva Call enquired about the concept of cultural heritage, all of the ANSAs 
interviewed demonstrated an instinctively broad and sound understanding of the 
term. For example, the Partiya Karkerên Kurdistanê (PKK) responded that “culture 
comprises all of the products of thought and action throughout human history. 
Heritage is what is handed down to us and what we hand on to posterity.”36 The  
answer from the representative in Europe of the Mouvement National de Libération 
de l’Azawad (MNLA), a Malian Tuareg ANSA, went on to include intangible heritage. 
He defined cultural heritage as “what remains: material constructions but also 
morality, artisanship, and immaterial practices, such as proverbs, riddles, poesy, 
prose, songs, and language itself.”37

As evinced by the Hague Convention, the IHL framework protecting cultural 
heritage in armed conflict has, to date, mostly focused on tangible cultural heritage,  
including monuments, archaeological sites, works of arts, and so on.38 Nevertheless, 
access to (or enjoyment of) all forms of cultural heritage, including its intangible 
manifestations, is also protected through the human right to participate in cultural 

34Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN), “El Codigo de Guerra,” 15 July 1995, http://theirwords.org/ 
media/transfer/doc/ut_co_eln_1995_01_eng-07e5677b22c4cf06bdfc9f02eff206ef.pdf  (accessed 
19 November 2017); see also ELN, “Accuerdo de Puerta de Cielo,” 15 July 1998, para. 14, which lists 
cultural centers as protected objects under international humanitarian law.
35See TeleSur, “Comandante de FARC crea museo arqueológico en medio de la guerra,” 16 February 
2017, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b30sFC2k0XQ (accessed 30 March 2017).
36Response from PKK to Geneva Call, January 2016.
37Interview with Moussa Ag Assarid, MNLA representative in Europe, Paris, France, 11 December 2015.
38The protection of tangible heritage in armed conflict also protects its intangible manifestations. 
E.g., protecting Timbuktu’s mausoleums allows their worshipers to exercise their right to freedom 
of religion.

416 

MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

life which states party to the relevant treaties must realize (Article 15 of the Inter-
national Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and Article 27 of the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights).39 One must also take into 
consideration the 2003 UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intan-
gible Cultural Heritage, which encompasses heritage such as traditions, language, 
songs, instruments, and the like “that communities, groups and, in some cases, 
individuals recognize as part of their cultural heritage.”40 This Convention seeks 
the safeguarding and respect of such heritage as well as raising awareness of its 
importance.41  Although  the  international  obligations  enshrined  in  this  Con-
vention are directed at states, they can provide guidelines for those ANSAs that are 
willing to implement international standards, particularly with regard to some of 
the safeguarding measures contained therein, such as the need to adopt a general 
policy aimed at promoting the function of intangible cultural heritage in society; 
to designate or establish one or more competent bodies for the safeguarding of the 
intangible cultural heritage present in its territory; or to establish documentation 
institutions for the intangible cultural heritage and facilitating access to them.42 
As the focus of this article is on the protection of tangible heritage, these instruments 
will not be considered further. However, they are worth noting given that ANSAs 
often refer to intangible cultural heritage when asked to define “cultural heritage.”
In some specific instances, the interviewed ANSAs had doubts as to what qual-
ified as cultural heritage. For example, the MNLA representative admitted that it 
was unsure whether a fortress built by the French near Kidal qualified as cultural 
heritage because it perceived this building as a symbol of colonialism. The most 
concerning aspect that Geneva Call noted is that none of the interviewed ANSAs 
knew about, had seen, or had heard about the blue shield emblem, which is pro-
vided for in Article 16 of the Hague Convention and allows state parties to use it to 
signal the presence of cultural property falling under its protection. Some ANSAs 
recognized, and were even able to draw, the symbol used for world heritage sites, 
but these were very few in comparison with the wide range of objects that constitute 
cultural heritage and deserve protection under international law.

The Hague Convention further enunciates four basic obligations applicable 
to ANSAs: (1) the prohibition of the use of cultural property and its immediate 
surroundings or of the appliances in use for its protection for purposes that are 
likely to expose it to destruction or damage in the event of armed conflict (except  
in cases of imperative military necessity); (2) the prohibition of acts of hostility  
directed  against  cultural  property  (this  obligation  may  also  be  waived  where 

39International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 16 December 1966, 993 UNTS 3; 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 16 December 1966, 999 UNTS 171.
40Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage, 17 October 2003, 2368 UNTS 3, 
Art. 2 (Intangible Heritage Convention); 2003 Declaration Concerning the Intentional Destruction 
of Cultural Heritage.
41Intangible Heritage Convention, Art. 1.
42Intangible Heritage Convention, Art. 13.

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

417

required by imperative military necessity); (3) the obligation “to prohibit, prevent 
and, if necessary, put a stop to any form of theft, pillage or misappropriation of, and 
any acts of vandalism directed against cultural property”;43 and (4) the absolute 
prohibition of acts of reprisal directed against cultural property. At the time the 
interviews were conducted, none of the ANSAs had any specific knowledge of these 
rules or had received any training pertaining to them. As put by a commander of a 
Free Syrian Army (FSA) brigade: “We know the rules in general but not in detail. 
We are aware there is an international law but no idea about how it applies in 
details. However, these sites are part of the Syrian identity—everyone is eager to 
protect them.”44

Despite their general lack of technical knowledge, some ANSAs have adopted 
measures, on a policy and/or practical level, to safeguard and respect cultural her-
itage in conformity with the obligation to prohibit, prevent, and put a stop to any 
form of theft, pillage, misappropriation, or vandalism. For example, in the Kurdish-
populated areas of Syria, which are controlled by the People’s Protection Units (YPG)/
Women’s Protection Units (YPJ), the de facto autonomous administration of 
Rojava has established an Antiquities Authority and, in 2015, passed an act on the 
protection of cultural heritage that prohibits destruction and damage of antiquities 
and archaeological sites and provides for sanctions in case of non-compliance.45 
There have been many cultural sites under YPG/YPJ control where looting has 
increased dramatically since the outbreak of the war.46 The Asayish, the police 
force  of  the  Rojava  administration,  has  a  special  unit  that  deals  with  organized 
crime, including illicit trafficking and excavations, and it claims to have arrested 
122 persons and confiscated many cultural objects (such as ancient statues, tablets, 
or coins, some dating back to 3,000 bc) (Figure 1).47 It has also deployed mobile 
patrols to inspect the main archaeological sites. Similarly, the YPG/YPJ have report-
edly issued a command order to respect cultural property, though in some cases 
they have established military positions in the vicinity of cultural sites.48

FSA brigade commanders interviewed in the context of Geneva Call’s study claimed 
to have taken measures to protect archaeological sites from plunder and theft, 

43It is unclear whether the obligation to stop “any form of theft, pillage” and so on extends only to the 
members of one’s armed forces or if it encompasses the civilian population as well. See, e.g., Gerstenblith 
2009, 693; O’Keefe, 2006, 131.
44Interview with Free Syrian Army (FSA) brigade commanders, Geneva, Switzerland, 18 December 2015.
45Copy on file with Geneva Call.
46According to Saad Ismail, the local archaeologist working with the Asayish police, thousands of 
items have been looted. See “Saad Ismail Message in Marburg Conference,” https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=nZR-NN5dZ4Y&feature=youtu.be (accessed 3 September 2017).
47Interview  with  Luqman  Ahme,  director  of  the  Antiquities  Authority,  Rojava  administration, 
Qamishli, Syria, 7 November 2015; Interview with Mihemmad Omar, Asayish commander, Qamishli, 
Syria, 8 November 2015. Geneva Call was allowed to see the artifacts guarded by the Asayish in a 
special storage. Interview with Saad Ismail, Qamishli, Syria, 31 July 2017.
48Interview with Redur Xelil, People’s Protection Units commander and spokesperson, and Nasrin 
Abdallah, Women’s Protection Units commander and spokesperson, Amuda, Syria, 7 November 2015.

418 

MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

Figure 1.  Cultural artifacts guarded by the Asayish, the police force of the Rojava 
administration, in a special storage in Syria. Photograph courtesy of Geneva Call.

deploying guards to watch over sites in the areas under their control and to have 
arrested a gang involved in the theft of manuscripts in Aleppo.49 Geneva Call con-
ducted two pilot trainings on the protection of cultural heritage with FSA commanders 
in December 2015 and June 2017 in Geneva. Following the first one, one brigade 
reportedly increased the protection of the Umayyad Mosque of Aleppo, especially of its 
sundial, also protecting the Zachariah’s mausoleum with sandbags and bricks.50 After 
learning that they could not use archaeological sites as military bases during their first 
pilot training, some FSA commanders, upon their return, began to raise awareness 
among the civilian population of the need to preserve Syrian heritage and gave advice 
on this subject to its chief of staff and his advisers.51 In northern Iraq, the various 
militias active in Mount Sinjar have posted guards to protect Yazidi temples from 
attacks from the Islamic State group.52 Several fighters of the Sinjar Resistance Units 
were reportedly killed in 2015 while defending the shrine of Sheikh Hassan in Gabara.53

49Interview with FSA brigade commanders, 18 December 2015.
50See also Diana Darke, “Saving Syria’s Cultural Heritage: How to Help,” 14 July 2014, https://
dianadarke.com/tag/zachariahs-tomb/ (accessed 3 September 2017).
51Interview with FSA brigade commanders, Geneva, Switzerland, 29 June 2017.
52Geneva Call’s trip to Mount Sinjar, Iraq, 9–10 February 2017.
53Interview  with  Zeki  Shengal,  Khanasor,  Sinjar,  Iraq,  9  February  2017.  See  also  Sam  Hardy, 
“Islamic State Destroyed Yezidi Shrine, Gabara, Sinjar, Iraq, 12th July 2015,” Conflict Antiquities blog, 
https://conflictantiquities.wordpress.com/2015/07/14/iraq-sinjar-gabara-yezidi-shrine-islamic-
state-destruction/ (accessed 19 November 2017).

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

419

In Mali, the MNLA established a department in charge of culture, handcraft, and 
tourism, led by Ambéïry Ag Rhissa, which reportedly worked to raise awareness on 
the importance of protecting cultural heritage, including among MNLA fighters.54 
The group was also involved in the protection of the Tomb of Askia in Gao in 2012, 
when it was in control of the town.55 In February 2013, during clashes with Islamist 
groups near Tessalit, the MNLA captured three boxes containing more than 1,000 
ancient manuscripts. In a letter dated 22 March 2013, Ag Rhissa informed UNESCO 
about the seizure, providing a comprehensive list of the manuscripts and requesting 
support to return them to their owner (assumed to be the Ahmed Baba Institute of 
Higher Learning and Islamic Research in Timbuktu).56 According to Ag Rhissa, the 
manuscripts were ultimately recovered and destroyed by Islamist groups.57

This episode highlights one of the major deficiencies of the Hague Convention 
in non-international armed conflicts: the structural deficit that plays against the 
technical assistance of ANSAs. According to Article 19(3), UNESCO may offer its 
services to all parties in a non-international armed conflict, including ANSAs. 
Yet, while the state parties may directly call upon UNESCO “for technical assistance 
in organizing the protection of their cultural property, or in connexion with any 
other problem arising out of the application of the … Convention,” the Hague 
Convention does not envisage the same possibility for ANSAs.58 The available 
means of communication between UNESCO and ANSAs is thus unidirectional, 
which is a problem in situations where ANSAs are in need of specialized advice or 
have requested assistance with regard to the protection of cultural property, which 
may be situated in the territory they control, as was the case with the ancient man-
uscripts in Mali. Similarly, the Rojava Antiquities Authority has reportedly tried to 
obtain technical support and equipment for conserving cultural and archeological 
sites, but their requests have remained unsuccessful to date.

In addition, lists of protected heritage or maps indicating their location are 
usually in the hands of the state’s central administration. This is the case in Syria 
where, at least during the first years of the conflict, the inventories of movable and 
immovable cultural property were housed in archives controlled by the Ministry of 
Culture.59 While all parties to the conflict must respect cultural property, knowing 
its location is a prerequisite for this to happen. However, the Hague Convention 

54Interview with Moussa Ag Assarid, 11 December 2015; phone conversation with Ambéïry Ag 
Rhissa, 5 January 2017.
55Interview with Moussa Ag Assarid, 11 December 2015; phone conversation with Ambéïry Ag 
Rhissa, 5 January 2017.
56Letter on file with Geneva Call. UNESCO confirmed it had received the letter. Interview with 
UNESCO, Paris, France, 6 November 2017.
57Phone conversation with Ambéïry Ag Rhissa, 24 March 2017.
58Hague Convention, Art. 23.
59Syrian Directorate General of Museums and Antiquities, “Periodic Report on Implementation of 
the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict 
and Its Two (1954-1999) Protocols for the Period 2005–2010,” 2010, 5.

420 

MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

does not envisage the exchange of relevant information between warring parties. 
ANSAs are thus at a disadvantage when it comes to specialized capacity and access 
to readily available information and risk-preparedness protocols, which the state 
armed forces may have put in place. Although Article 19(2) encourages all parties 
to a conflict “to bring into force, by means of special agreements, all or part of 
the other provisions of the present Convention,” to date there is no record of an 
agreement of this sort ever being made.60

The Second Protocol was drafted to update and improve the Hague Convention, 
and, while it did so in many respects, it maintains the structural deficit described 
above.61 According to Article 8(a) of the Second Protocol, ANSAs have a positive duty 
to remove, as far as possible, cultural property from the vicinity of military objectives 
in order to avoid its incidental damage. If this is not possible, ANSAs are requested to 
take in situ measures of protection to the maximum of their capacity. Nevertheless, the 
maximum extent feasible to which an ANSA may implement these precautions against 
the effect of hostilities may be compromised because only the state parties may call 
upon UNESCO for technical assistance. By contrast, it has been demonstrated that pro-
viding capacity building can yield very positive results. For example, the Smithsonian  
and other organizations trained heritage professionals in the use of sandbags and other 
in situ measures to safeguard ancient mosaics of the Ma’arra Museum in the Idlib Prov-
ince, an area under the control of a Syrian ANSA. When the museum was bombarded 
by government forces in 2015 and 2016, most of the mosaics were left intact.62

The attitude of ANSAs toward cultural heritage is more ambivalent when it 
comes to its use for military purposes, which could be a consequence of their lack 
of knowledge of legal standards. For example, the MNLA representative in Europe 
interviewed by Geneva Call suggested that the MNLA had used the French colonial 
fortress mentioned above because its location on the top of a hill amounted to a 
privileged military position and because it was unsure that the fortress constituted 
cultural heritage for the purposes of international law. He also admitted that the 
MNLA would attack cultural sites if there was no military alternative or if it was 
ignorant of its protected status.63

During a Geneva Call meeting with FSA commanders, a commander, speaking 
for his own brigade in response to the question: “have your brigades used cultural 
sites in its military operations?” replied: “No, for example we have freed the Temple 
in the Harem District (within the Idlib Governorate), and now we protect and 
guard it. We have never occupied a historical site.”64 However, with respect to the 
targeting of cultural sites used by the enemy, the response was more ambiguous:

60This must be read together with Art. 24(2) of the Hague Convention, according to which “[n]o 
special agreement may be concluded which would diminish the protection afforded by the present 
Convention to cultural property and to the personnel engaged in its protection.”
61Second Protocol, Arts. 1(a), 33.
62US GAO, “Report to Congressional Requesters,” 27–28.
63Interview with Moussa Ag Assarid, 11 December 2015.
64Interview with FSA brigade commanders, 18 December 2015.

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

421

As far as Aleppo is concerned, it is a sensitive situation as the whole city 
is a historical site where we are face-to-face with the regime to protect it. 
Because of its importance, we have refrained from attacking it. … The 
Citadel of Aleppo [a world heritage site] has been used as a shelter for the 
soldiers of the regime. The FSA has attacked the site in order to establish 
authority on it. If we go inside this area, the regime might then bombard 
the whole area. As we recognise this risk, we avoid going into the Citadel 
so that the regime does not use this as an excuse to destroy and kill us all.65

At Geneva Call’s 2017 meeting, a FSA brigade commander recounted that, toward 
the end of 2012, the government armed forces had placed snipers in a castle in 
Harem (Idlib) that was situated on the top of a hill. The commander affirmed that 
they had no alternative than to attack it but that they did so giving advance warning 
and without using heavy artillery.66

Granted,  these  statements  must  be  placed  in  contrast  with  independent 
reports.67 As mentioned earlier, “[t]he continuing armed conflict in Syria between 
the national armed forces and the Free Syrian Army (FSA) and the al-Nusra Front has 
also led to significant damage to, or destruction of, cultural heritage.”68 For example, 
in 2013, insurgents were reported to have established their headquarters near 
Aleppo’s  Old  Souk,  turning  its  old  town  into  a  battleground.69  In  2014,  the 
Umayyad Mosque in Aleppo was reportedly used by rebel snipers, which led to 
its shelling and eventual collapse.70 However, caution must be applied in quali-
fying such use or attack as a violation of IHL because, in some circumstances, the 
use of cultural sites for military purposes may be justified by imperative military 
necessity, which could have been the case with Aleppo’s Old Souk or its Umayyad 
Mosque and Idlib Harem castle.

THE RESPONSE OF SPECIALIZED ORGANIZATIONS

It  appears  from  interviews  with  specialized  organizations  that  only  a  very  few 
deal with ANSAs in order to strengthen the protection of cultural heritage in 
armed conflict. One example is the Smithsonian Institution’s Cultural Rescue 
Initiative, which has negotiated directly with ANSAs for access to heritage sites 

65Interview with FSA brigade commanders, 18 December 2015.
66Interview with FSA brigade commanders, 29 June 2017.
67See, e.g., Michael D. Danti, “The Finance of Global Terrorism Through Cultural Property Crime in 
Syria and Northern Iraq,” written statement submitted for testimony before the House Committee 
on Foreign Affairs—Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation and Trade, 17 November 2015, 1.
68For more examples, see Hausler 2015, 133–34.
69Anne Barnard and Hwaida Saad Sept, “In Syria’s Largest City, Fire Ravages Ancient Market,” New 
York Times, 29 September 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/30/world/middleeast/fire-sweeps-
through-ancient-souk-of-aleppo-citys-soul.html?_r=1&pagewanted=all (accessed 19 November 2017).
70“Heritage Sites Ravaged by Syria’s War,” Al Jazeera, 24 December 2014, http://www.aljazeera.com/
news/middleeast/2014/12/syria-war-heritage-sites-201412232326597765.html (accessed 19 November 
2017).

422 

MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

in opposition-controlled areas through its Safeguarding the Heritage of Syria 
and Iraq Project.71 The Smithsonian, along with the US Committee of the Blue 
Shield, has also created a pocket training manual known as the Guide to Mosul 
Heritage,  which  has  been  distributed  to  the  Kurdish  Peshmerga,  among  other 
armed forces, before the recapture of the city.72 However, the survey conducted 
among specialized organizations identified a paradoxical situation. On the one 
hand, well-established institutions whose mandate encompasses the protection 
of cultural heritage appear not to engage with ANSAs on this issue at present 
because of the restrictions within their mandate or political limitations. On the 
other hand, a number of newly-established organizations, some of them created 
as an ad hoc response to protect cultural heritage in current armed conflicts 
(in particular in Iraq and Syria), lack funding or other resources to carry out 
this mission.

Representing  the  first  category,  UNESCO  has  been  caught  in  a  dilemma. 
According  to  Article  I(3)  of  its  Constitution,  UNESCO  “is  prohibited  from  
intervening in matters which are essentially within the Member States’ domestic 
jurisdiction.” Establishing contact with ANSAs may be regarded as a breach of 
this obligation insofar as it may be considered recognition of their authority and 
legitimacy. By contrast, Article 19(3) of the Hague Convention grants UNESCO 
the  possibility  to  “offer  its  services  to  the  parties  to  the  conflict”  (meaning 
both state and non-state parties) in non-international armed conflicts. More-
over, Article 19(4) of the Convention expressly states that establishing contact  
with the parties “shall not affect the[ir] legal status.” No reservation was made 
by  any  state  party  regarding  any  of  these  provisions.  Therefore,  it  may  be 
argued that

establishing contact, in the framework of the 1954 Hague Convention, 
with a non-State actor during an armed conflict not of an international 
character involving one or several High Contracting Party(ies) [to the 
Convention] or taking place within the territory of one or several High 
Contracting Party(ies) cannot be considered as a violation of the principle 
of non-intervention in internal affairs.73

Furthermore, Member States together with the Secretariat developed a Standard Plan 
of Action to Protect Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict that explicitly 
states that one of the Secretariat’s possible actions is to “[e]stablish contacts with the 
warring parties (including States and ANSAs as applicable) and send letters to them 
signed by the Director-General regarding the protection of cultural property in the 

71Response from the Smithsonian Cultural Rescue Initiative, 27 September 2016; interview with 
Abdullah Khorsheed Qader, director of the Iraqi Institute for the Conservation of Antiquities and 
Heritage, Erbil, Iraq, 12 February 2017.
72Response from the Smithsonian Cultural Rescue Initiative, 27 September 2016; interview with 
Abdullah Khorsheed Qader, 12 February 2017.
73Interview with UNESCO, Paris, France, 15 November 2016.

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

423

event of armed conflict.”74 While this document has not been formally adopted by 
the state parties to the Convention, they have taken note of it. In practice, however, 
the situation is more complex since UNESCO has recently admitted that the “nature 
of contemporary conflicts … presents a challenge, as they often involve non-State 
actors, with whom intergovernmental organizations cannot establish relations.”75
In the past, there have been two instances where UNESCO has decided to engage, 
out of its own initiative, with ANSAs for the benefit of cultural and natural heritage, 
respectively. In response to threats by the Taliban to destroy the Bâmiyan Buddhas 
in Afghanistan in 2001, the then director-general of UNESCO, Koïchiro Matsuura, 
made direct contact with Mullah Mohamed Omar, the leader of the Taliban, and 
subsequently appointed Ambassador Pierre Lafrance as special envoy to meet with 
Mullah Omar and dissuade him from destroying the site.76 Likewise, in the context 
of the escalation of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the 
ensuing threat to the country’s five world heritage properties, the director of the World 
Heritage Centre undertook a mission there from 24 November to 3 December 2001, 
on the occasion of which he met with a number of stakeholders and “senior decision-
makers, including leaders of the rebel administration in Goma, Beni and Bunia.”77 In 
addition, in 2004, the World Heritage Committee “[r]equest[ed] the Director General 
of UNESCO to use UN and other appropriate diplomatic channels to influence high 
level SPLA [Sudan People’s Liberation Army] officials, urging them to put a halt to 
the poaching by their fighters as well as an immediate retreat of SPLA troops from the 
vicinity of the Garamba National Park.”78 The following year, it “invite[d] the Direc-
tor-General of UNESCO to use his good offices to sensitize all the parties concerned 
about the real risk to the outstanding universal value of Garamba National Park and to 
engage such parties in a dialogue leading to avoid the loss of such value.”79 However, 
this sort of initiative does not represent standard procedure at UNESCO.

UNESCO is currently considering the possibility of establishing “safe havens” 
and “cultural protected zones” in conflict areas by means of Article 19(2) of the 

74UNESCO, “Standard Plan of Action to Protect Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,” 
Doc. CLT-11-CONF-209-INF12011, 12 December 2011, Annex. The plan was slightly revised in 
2013 to reflect the experience of the armed conflicts in Syria and Mali. See UNESCO, “Standard 
Plan of Action to Protect Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,” Doc. CLT-13/10HCP/
CONF.201/INF.3, 21 November 2013.
75Prosecutor v. Al Mahdi, UNESCO Amicus Curiae Observations, 2 December 2016, para. 7.
76Ambassador Lafrance unfortunately did not succeed, and the Taliban destroyed the Buddhas in 
March 2001. “UNESCO World Heritage Committee Item 4b of the Provisional Agenda: Acts Constituting 
‘crimes against the Common Heritage of Humanity,” Doc. WHC-01/CONF.208/23, 22 November 2001, 
http://whc.unesco.org/archive/2001/whc-01-conf208-23e.pdf (accessed 19 November 2017).
77UNESCO World Heritage Committee, “World Heritage Sites of the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (DRC),” Decision no. CONF 208 VIII.12-28, 3 December 2001.
78UNESCO World Heritage Committee, “World Heritage Properties of the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (DRC),” Decision 28 COM 15A.3, 29 October 2004.
79UNESCO World Heritage Committee, “World Heritage Properties of the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo (DRC),” Decision 29 COM 7A.4, 9 September 2005.

424 

MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

Hague Convention, which encourages the parties to the conflict to endeavor to 
bring into force, by means of special agreements, the other provisions of the Conven-
tion, including those concerning transport of cultural property (Articles 12 and 18). 
In addition, it acknowledges that, considering the current situation witnessed glob-
ally, with ANSAs being increasingly involved in major conflicts, solutions need to be 
identified, such as encouraging the ratification of the Hague Convention and the 
Second Protocol and developing “cooperation with entities such as Geneva Call, 
which  works  in  promoting  principles  inspired  from  international  humanitarian 
law along armed non-State actors.”80

At the other end of the spectrum, Heritage for Peace represents the experience of  
newly-established organizations. Heritage for Peace is a NGO established in 2013 as a 
response to the conflict in Syria. Its main mission is to “support the Syrian heritage 
sector to safeguard their patrimony in any way they can.”81 Its activities include  
providing training and capacity building to interested stakeholders in the effort  
to  protect  cultural  heritage.  This  includes  educating  belligerent  forces  on  their  
obligations to protect Syrian cultural heritage under international law. The NGO  
has conducted “train-the-trainer” courses in Turkey for members of the Syrian  
opposition—in particular, the so-called Interim Syrian Ministry of Culture (IMoC)—
in 2014 and 2015. Through Heritage for Peace, the IMoC and the Syrian Direc-
torate General of Antiquities and Museums attended a conference in Santander, 
Spain,  in  April  2014 that led to the Santander Declaration on the Protection of 
Syria’s Heritage.82 Although the overall result of these trainings has been positive, the 
organization has faced certain difficulties such as funding, staffing-related issues, 
inability to establish a comprehensive needs assessment, logistical challenges, and 
so on.83 Specialized organizations concerned with the protection of cultural heritage 
are thus not engaging with ANSAs on a systematic basis, while such cooperation 
could make a difference in practice to the level of protection afforded to cultural 
property in current armed conflicts.

KEY FINDINGS

  1.   Although ANSAs could be seen as being reluctant to accept the legitimacy of 
international rules protecting cultural heritage since they lack the legal capacity to 
negotiate international treaties or to become parties thereto, none of the ANSAs 
interviewed as part of the study expressed disagreement with these rules.

80Prosecutor v. Al Mahdi, UNESCO Amicus Curiae Observations, para. 7.
81See “Who We Are,” Heritage for Peace, http://www.heritageforpeace.org/about-us/who-we-are/ 
(accessed 9 August 2017).
82Santander  Declaration  on  the  Protection  of  Syria’s  Heritage,  25  April  2014,  http://www. 
heritageforpeace.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Santander-Statement-and-Outcomes.pdf 
(accessed 19 November 2017).
83Response from Heritage for Peace, 7 December 2015.

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

425

  2.   All of the interviewed ANSAs have an instinctively holistic understanding of 
the notion of “cultural heritage,” encompassing both a tangible and intan-
gible dimension, but they are unaware of its definition under international 
law as well as the existence of the blue shield emblem.

  3.   All of the interviewed ANSAs admitted to a lack knowledge of the specificities 
of  the  various  international  legal  rules  protecting  cultural  heritage  in  armed 
conflict, having at best a basic awareness of the general rules of IHL, such as the 
principle of distinction, which merely demands not targeting civilian property.
  4.   All of the interviewed ANSAs expressed interest in obtaining training on the 
international  legal  framework  protecting  cultural  heritage.  The  two  pilot 
trainings conducted by Geneva Call with FSA brigade commanders further 
supported the idea that training would be of benefit to such groups given the 
number of practical and relevant questions posed by brigade commanders 
and the subsequent measures undertaken following the first training.

  5.   Many of the interviewed ANSAs have taken measures to safeguard and respect 
cultural heritage, including world heritage sites. However, their attitude remains 
ambivalent in some respects. For example, one group suggested having used a 
historical fort, which is part of cultural heritage, in a situation that did not 
appear to fall within the military necessity requirement as provided for in 
international law. Of course, this may be due to a lack of awareness of the 
international rules for the protection of cultural heritage.

  6.   Although  they  have  some  level  of  internal  capacity,  many  ANSAs  have 
expressed an interest to cooperate with specialized organizations and receive 
technical assistance for protecting cultural and archaeological sites.

  7.   The situation with specialized organizations remains a paradox: newly estab-
lished organizations, such as Heritage for Peace, would be open to engage 
further with ANSAs but face structural capacity challenges, whereas well-
established institutions that would have the resources to engage with ANSAs, 
such as UNESCO, face their own limitations.

  8.   ANSAs do not necessarily know about the existence of newly established 
NGOs concerned with the protection of cultural heritage and, instead, may 
try to approach UNESCO when they need advice or technical assistance. 
Some ANSAs have mentioned having tried getting in touch with special-
ized institutions, but their requests have remained unanswered. As a result, 
ANSAs do not know who to contact (successfully) to support their attempts 
at safeguarding cultural heritage.

CONCLUSION AND WAYS FORWARD

Most armed conflicts nowadays are non-international in character. ANSAs involved in 
such conflicts are active in (and sometimes even in control of) areas rich in cultural 
heritage, including world heritage sites. Insofar as cultural heritage is of importance 
for the whole of humanity, ensuring its preservation necessitates acknowledging 

426 

MARINA LOSTAL ET AL

the significant role that ANSAs play in this regard. This article has identified exam-
ples of both negative and positive practices, where ANSAs have destroyed cultural 
objects or, on the contrary, have taken measures to protect them. As demonstrated 
through the interviews conducted so far, there are two main obstacles that prevent 
ANSAs from protecting cultural heritage to the maximum extent feasible. First, 
all of the ANSAs that Geneva Call interviewed on this issue were unfamiliar with 
the international rules protecting cultural heritage in armed conflict, including the 
blue shield emblem. There is no need to amend these rules, but, rather, it is imperative 
to make them known and accessible to ANSAs.

Second, while ANSAs need training and capacity building, they often operate 
in isolation from organizations specialized in the protection of cultural heritage. 
In light of this, Geneva Call recommends the following ways forward:
 
  1.   Conduct sensitization and awareness-raising campaigns for both ANSAs 
and  their  constituencies,  highlighting  the  significance  of  cultural  heri-
tage, its need for protection, and its key role of post-conflict recovery and 
reconciliation.

  2.   Clarify the obligations that are applicable to ANSAs through existing author-
ities, such as the supervisory bodies of the applicable conventions, the special 
rapporteur  in  the  field  of  cultural  rights,  UNESCO,  and  other  relevant 
organizations.

  3.   Provide training to ANSAs on the international legal framework for cultural 
heritage protection. Geneva Call has developed innovative dissemination tools 
(such as videos and booklets as well as an application quiz) as part of its public 
campaign “Fighter not Killer”84 and is currently developing a training module 
on IHL rules related to cultural heritage specifically directed towards ANSAs.

  4.   Provide training to ANSA relevant authorities and heritage professionals 
operating in areas under their control on standards related to the preserva-
tion  of  cultural  heritage,  such  as  how  to  build  an  inventory,  techniques  of 
identification and protection from immediate dangers, standards of behavior 
with regard to the safeguarding of cultural heritage, and so on. This should 
be  accompanied  by  technical  assistance  and  capacity  building  so  that  such 
individuals can effectively implement these measures to protect cultural and 
archaeological sites and combat the illicit trafficking of cultural objects.

  5.   Encourage ANSAs to commit to safeguard and respect cultural heritage through 
the negotiation of special agreements (for example, on the establishment 
of “cultural protected zones” around heritage sites located in conflict areas);85 

84See “Fighter Not Killer,” http://fighternotkiller.org/ (accessed 19 November 2017).
85There has been several attempts to create “cultural protected zones” with respect to the Syrian sites 
of Bosra and Idlib. See “The Director-General of UNESCO Calls for All Syrians to Commit to 
the Safeguarding of Cultural Heritage in Bosra and Idlib,” UNESCO News, http://en.unesco.org/
news/director-general-unesco-calls-all-syrians-commit-safeguarding-cultural-heritage-bosra-and-
idlib (accessed 19 November 2017).

ARMED NON-STATE ACTORS AND CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ARMED CONFLICT 

427

the adoption of other measures (such as unilateral declarations, codes of con-
duct, command orders, bilateral agreements, and so on); and monitoring their 
implementation.

 
Even though the above ways forward are unlikely to influence those groups that 
deliberately attack cultural heritage, it should not overshadow the considerable 
room for improvement that exists with regard to ANSAs that do not follow the 
same policy and that show interest for its protection. As this article tries to show, 
some level of emergency heritage response is possible, even in times of war.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Cunliffe, Emma, Nibal Muhesen, and Marina Lostal. 2016. “The Destruction of Cultural Property in 
the Syrian Conflict: Legal Implications and Obligations.”  
23, no. 1: 1–31.

Gerstenblith, Patty. 2009. “Protecting Cultural Heritage in Armed Conflict: Looking Back, Looking 
Forward.” Cardozo Public Law, Policy and Ethics Journal 7: 677–708.

Hausler, Kristin. 2014. “The Protection of Cultural Heritage in Armed Conflict.” In The War Report 
2013, edited by Stuart Casey-Maslen, 361–87. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hausler, Kristin. 2015. “Culture under Attack: The Destruction of Cultural Heritage by Non-State 
Armed Groups.” Santander Art and Cultural Law Review 2: 117–46.

Henckaerts, Jean-Marie. 2010. “The Protection of Cultural Property in Non-International Armed 
Conflicts.” In An Insight into the 1999 Second Protocol to the Hague Convention of 1954 for the 
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, edited by Nout Woudenberg and 
Liesbeth Lijnzaad, 81–93. Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

Henckaerts, Jean-Marie, and Louise Doswald-Becks, 2004. Customary International Humanitarian 
Law, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Howe, Zoe. 2012. “Can the 1954 Hague Convention Apply to Non-State Actors?: A Study of Iraq 
and Libya.” Texas International Law Journal 47, no. 2: 403–25.

Lostal, Marina. 2017. International Cultural Heritage Law in Armed Conflict: Case Studies of Syria, 
Libya, Mali, the Invasion of Iraq, and the Buddhas of Bamiyan. New York: Cambridge University Press.

O’Keefe, Roger. 2006. The Protection of Cultural Property in Armed Conflict. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.

Sivakumaran, Sandesh. 2012. The Law of Non-International Armed Conflict. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.


