 (2006) 13:25–57. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2006 Diplomats, Banana Cowboys, and
Archaeologists in Western Honduras:
A History of the Trade in
Pre-Columbian Materials
Christina Luke*

Abstract: This paper explores access to the Honduran past with a focus on
northwestern Honduras, particularly the Ulua Valley. The foundations of
national patrimony legislation and the practice of collecting antiquities are
used to explore whether the disassociation of the archaeological community
from the collecting sphere over the last several decades has better protected the
archaeological record. I argue that early field expeditions led by U.S.
archaeologists, the shipment of their finds to U.S. institutions, and subsequent
massive looting galvanized Honduran efforts aimed at national patrimony
legislation. The roles of the U.S. government and U.S.-based businesses as
negotiating bodies in the early days of Honduran expeditions from 1890 to
1940 are explored in detail, particularly in the sphere of opening up the region
to collectors and the role of the U.S. antiquities market. We can understand the
early days of collecting in Honduras precisely because of the close relationships
once forged between collectors, museums, and archaeologists, networks that
have now disappeared because of current conceptions of archaeological ethics.
The changing definition of a collector represents a key point throughout this
analysis; at one time archaeologists, museums, and businesses were the primary

*Department of Archaeology, Boston University. Email: cluke@bu.edu

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: A number of people made this research possible, and I wish to thank them
briefly here. Patricia Kervick, archivist at the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, and
Alex Pezzati, archivist at the University of Pennsylvania Museum Archives, have made this study
possible through their patience in working with me at the respective archives. Maxine Kennedy pro-
vided a key newspaper clipping from a Savannah paper, which I have been unable to relocate. I
would also like to thank Patty Gerstenblith, Rosemary A. Joyce, Morag Kersel, and Christopher H.
Roosevelt for their valuable comments on earlier versions of this research; comments from two anon-
ymous reviewers also greatly enhanced the clarity of this paper. Finally, I wish to thank my students
from the fall 2004 research writing seminars in the Boston University Writing Program for their
enthusiasm in discussing the antiquities trade in Central America. This research grew in many ways
from our conversations.

25

26

CHRISTINA LUKE

collectors. The shift from the label collector to archaeologist is explored through
the lens of the development of archaeology as a discipline, with a particular
emphasis on context, and the contemporary legislative efforts aimed at cultural
heritage projection. The essay concludes with a look at recent archaeological
work in the region and the increasingly strict cultural patrimony legislation,
specifically the 2004 U.S.–Honduran Memorandum of Understanding.

INTRODUCTION

On March 12, 2004, the government of the United States of America signed a
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Republic of Honduras for pro-
tection of pre-Columbian materials. It represents the fourth MOU in the region;
El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua currently have MOUs with the United States.
All memoranda fall under the Convention on Cultural Property Implementation
Act (CPIA), the U.S.-implemented legislation for the 1970 UNESCO Convention
on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export, and Transfer
of Cultural Property.1 These agreements provide a number of benefits, including
import restrictions of archaeological and ethnological materials from respective
countries into the United States without proper documentation from countries of
origin and other long-term programs aimed at cooperative cultural property man-
agement in foreign countries.2 The agreements are often opposed by the dealing
community but favored by the archaeological community. The main divide fo-
cuses on whether the object or its context should be the focal point and who owns
and thus controls cultural heritage. This pedagogical debate has also served to de-
fine by default the definition of a collector as someone who favors artistic achieve-
ment over context; that is, the focus of appreciation is the object, rather than its
specific find location in the archaeological record.

This academic rift is relatively recent; the increasingly wide divide between these
two communities—the collector and the archaeologist—has a long history. Col-
lectors and archaeologists were once close colleagues, each seeking to provide data
and information to better our understanding of the past. In many areas around
the world, local businessmen and diplomats were among the first participants in
this quest for knowledge. In the Ulua Valley of Honduras, this was certainly the
case: A diverse group of foreigners set the stage for collecting and excavating the
Honduran past. And Honduras responded with increasingly rigid regulations that
applied to the excavation of the landscape, the storage of finds, and the export of
finds. Today Honduras has one of the toughest national ownership laws in the
world: Not only is it illegal to transfer cultural heritage across the national border,
but it is also illegal to hold it privately in the country, regardless of whether the
material is registered to the state.3 This paper, thus, explores the history of Hon-
duran legislation, specifically how U.S. involvement in the early excavations at

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

27

Copan and then in the Ulua Valley galvanized Honduran efforts to enhance leg-
islation.4 At the core of this debate was the perceived value of the Honduran past
by the various participants involved in removing it for pleasure and/or study. The
academic agenda focused on collecting and excavating to understand the ancient
history in the region but also to claim part of the Honduran past for itself in the
United States. Those focused strictly on collecting (i.e., the archaeological context
was secondary) increasingly measured value based on price, most often driven by
rarity and perceived aesthetics.

A critical goal in this preliminary examination, then, is to explore the shifting
definition of a collector of the Honduran past. For the purpose of understanding
the foundations of early collecting history in Honduras in the context of U.S.-led
exploration in the region, a number of different groups are defined: the local Hon-
duran collectors and looters living in Honduras; U.S. archaeologists conducting
research in Honduras on behalf of a U.S. institution; U.S.-based businessmen work-
ing in Honduras; U.S. archaeologists permanently based in Honduras; and U.S.-
based institutions and dealers driving the demand for Honduran materials. The
focus of this first analysis is U.S. participants in this network based in Honduras;
an investigation of the local Honduran perspective, particularly the rise of looting
and the involvement of local collectors, is explored elsewhere.5 This historical per-
spective allows us to trace the evolution of the U.S. collector and the U.S. archae-
ologist in the context of Honduran legislation.

Over the last 20 years archaeologists have come to consider how their work should
be conducted ethically with regard to the host communities where their specific re-
search area is located and to the importance of context. In 1993 Ricardo Elia con-
cluded an essay with the landmark statement, “the collectors are the real looters”;
that is, it is predominately elite collectors who drive the demand for antiquities, and
thus this group is directly responsible for massive plunder of archaeological con-
texts.6 Others have debated the impact of a licit market for properly excavated ob-
jects, questioning how one could control against illicit markets and the continued
plunder of sites.7 What is more, archaeologists, particularly field archaeologists, have
turned away from the study of looted materials. Consider the publication policies
of the Archaeological Institute of America and the Society for American Archaeol-
ogy: They make it extremely difficult to publish pillaged material, arguing that the
publication of such material serves to increase its monetary value. Yet with all the
emphasis on ethics, the archaeological landscape continues to be plundered. The im-
pact of legislation helps, but it alone cannot thwart the pillage of sites. I question
whether diplomatic efforts really can help mitigate plunder; and through a histor-
ical analysis of archaeological research in the Ulua Valley over the last 150 years, I
question whether the current practice of field archaeologists disassociating them-
selves from the collecting sphere is the right approach, particularly when it comes
to understanding the very networks destroying the archaeological landscape.

The research concentrates on the period between 1890 and 1947, when archae-
ological work in the Ulua Valley began with a review of earlier nineteenth-century

28

CHRISTINA LUKE

explorations at Copan that ultimately influenced the decision to conduct work in
the Ulua region. This timeframe marks also the period when American archaeol-
ogy, as well as more universal interests in Central America, began to take serious
hold in the academic community, with U.S. institutions seeking to make their own
mark in the museum world in light of the massive accessions by British, French,
and German institutions. For this first analysis, I draw from the archives at the
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology at Harvard (PMAE) and the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology (UPENN), the
former being the museum given exclusive rights to archaeological remains in Hon-
duras for a brief time in the early 1890s. The archives provide a history of U.S.
interests in Honduras and encapsulate the ongoing debate regarding scientific ex-
ploration, site preservation, object acquisition, and object and archival curation.8
They also clearly document the role of diplomacy in doing archaeology and the
changing identity of the collector. Furthermore, the correspondences provide a
lens into what was being collected and why.9 At the forefront of this debate was
and remains site access, with access to those objects found within the site and
their study a natural corollary. The correspondence files show that the Depart-
ment of State (DOS) in the 1890s, followed by the New York and Honduras Ro-
sario Mining Company (Royal Mining) in the 1910s, and the United Fruit Company
(United Fruit) in the 1930s were responsible for diplomatic negotiations for the
access of U.S. archaeologists to the Honduran past. At each point Honduras tight-
ened its legislation and continues to do so. The final section is a brief summary of
work in the valley in more recent decades, focusing on the potential impact of the
MOU.10

ARCHAEOLOGY IN HONDURAS

1839 to 1900: The Period of Discovery

John Lloyd Stephens’ infamous trek to the environs of Copan set the stage for
defining more than just the future of Honduran archaeology: His work provided
a base-point for defining the Maya. Ruins along the so-called southeastern Maya
periphery were among the first systematically studied Maya remains, including
the first classification of art in Central America by Stephens. The end of the
twentieth century saw a definition of the Maya core in the central Lowlands of
Guatemala, and it is this core and its material correlates that have come, rightly
or wrongly, to epitomize what is meant by the term Maya;11 Maya items have
traditionally reaped the highest prices on the antiquities market for Central Amer-
ican material.12 Could Stephens have anticipated his impact on field archaeol-
ogy, art history, and the art market? In fact, he tells us that it was his duty to
collect the ruins of Copan before they became valuable and fell into the hands of
the Europeans:

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

29

[D]rawing my blanket around me, [I] suggested to Mr. Catherwood “an
operation.” (Hide your heads, ye speculators in up-town lots!) To buy
Copan! Remove the monuments of a by-gone people from the desolate
region in which they were buried, set them up in the “great commercial
emporium,” and found an institution to be the nucleus of a great na-
tional museum of American antiquities! But quere, Could the “idols” be
removed? They were on the banks of a river that emptied into the same
ocean by which the docks of New-York are washed, but there were rap-
ids below and, in answer to my inquiry, Don Miguel said these were
impassable. Nevertheless, I should have been unworthy of having passed
through the times “that tried men’s souls” if I had not had an alterna-
tive; and this was to exhibit by sample: to cut one up and remove it in
pieces, and make casts of the others. The casts of the Parthenon are re-
garded as precious memorials in the British Museum, and casts of Copan
would be the same in New-York. Other ruins might be discovered even
more interesting and more accessible. Very soon their existence would
become known and their value appreciated, and friends of science and
the arts in Europe would get possession of them. They belonged of right
to us, and, though we did not know how soon we might be kicked out
ourselves, I resolved that ours they should be; with visions of glory and
indistinct fancies of receiving the thanks of the corporation flitting be-
fore my eyes, I drew my blanket around me, and fell asleep.13

Stephens bought Copan for $50 in 1839. The Honduran Government later over-
turned the purchase, passing the first legislation aimed at protection of the site in
1845.14

By the 1850s E. G. Squier ventured to Honduras—first as Charge D’Affaires
and later as secretary of the Honduran Inter-Ocean Railway Company. In addi-
tion to being a businessman, he was an avid explorer, mapping and excavating
sites.15 His work set the stage for discovery outside of Copan, particularly in the
Comayagua region.16 It was a fascination with Copan, however, that spurred in-
terests in the United States. In 1891 U.S.-based archaeologist John Owens led a
successful expedition to Honduras on behalf of the PMAE. Funded by patrons
with a growing interest in Central American antiquities, the PMAE took center
stage in Honduras and secured permission for excavation at Copan.17 In fact, the
concession granted by the Honduran Government gave the PMAE exclusive rights
to all ruins in the country, dividing any finds equally between the two parties.
Yet over the next 10 years, a series of events strained diplomatic relations and
challenged this concession.18

From the beginning of the PMAE’s work, their focus was on preservation and
excavation of materials, and as early as 1891 there is evidence of the PMAE’s con-
cern over the plunder of the site: “We have frequently raised our voice against the
barbarous plunder and destruction of antique remains and now hail with plea-
sure the beginning of work, that will reveal new interesting facts, relating to the
early history of Central America, the classic antique ground of the Continent of
America.”19 Copan was the subject of much interest of various U.S., French, Ger-
man, and British museums,20 all seeking to collect fine examples of the newly dis-

30

CHRISTINA LUKE

covered Maya ruins and artifacts, keeping with the burgeoning Universal Museum21
mandate, which Stephens’ clearly followed, as did the PMAE during its initial col-
lecting policy.22 Future years led to a good amount of diplomatic negotiation for
access to the ruins, familiar to any archaeologist, as well as permissions to export
materials, as agreed under the PMAE concession.

From the start the PMAE program was focused on both recording artifacts in
their proper contexts and excavating grand finds meant to impress the patrons
of the expedition as well as collecting the artifacts for shipment back to the United
States for eventual display. The fine art of diplomacy played a key role in the
success of both goals. The following correspondence from then director Frederic
Ward Putnam of the PMAE to Owens reminds us all of the diplomatic face re-
quired for doing archaeology, even in the remote jungle of western Honduras in
1892:

I think that all that is needed is a little judicious management of the
Customs-House Officials at Livingston. I have written to Mr. Saville that
Mr. Bernhard, U.S. Vice-Consul at Tegucigalpa, has been appointed as
honorary agent of the Museum at the Capital of Honduras and I think
through his influence you will have no difficulty in obtaining any facil-
ities which may be desired; for the letters which we have from the Gov-
ernment of Guatemala show a cordiality which only needs to be brought
out a little in order to produce the desired results.

I fully understand your feelings in relation to having so much work to
do outside of the actual archaeological investigations but this is always
the case, and it must always be taken for granted . . . you must also re-
member the grand opportunity you are now enjoying to study these an-
cient ruins, an opportunity for which I would willingly do ten times the
drudgery you have to perform if I could thereby study the ruins for a
month . . .

For it must be understood that not a single object, no matter how
insignificant, can be removed from the ruins except by the expedition,
with the exception of those objects which are determined by proper au-
thority to belong to the Government of Honduras.23

Complications with the expedition were a constant threat to the work. Soon
thereafter Owens died tragically, and the inexperienced G. B. Gordon, who had
gone to assist in excavation, was left in charge of closing down that season’s ex-
pedition. It is in the correspondences between Gordon and the PMAE that we
learn a lot regarding the interactions between the Honduran Government and U.S.
archaeologists. In the following correspondence from Charles Bowditch, trustee of
PMAE, to Gordon in the aftermath of Owen’s death, we glean an understanding
of the keen involvement of the PMAE in local negotiations and the role of gov-
ernment officials in Honduras and Guatemala (at this time most materials—
excavation equipment and excavated finds—came and went via Puerto Barrios,
Guatemala). Gordon, burdened with the enormous task of shutting down the ex-
pedition, organized the transport of casts and original sculpture, as directed by
Bowditch:

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

31

FIGURE 1. George Byron Gordon, director of the University Museum from 1910–1927.
Conducted research at Copan and in the Lower Ulua Valley starting in the late 1880s prior
to his first museum appointment at the University Museum in 1903. Photograph courtesy
of the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, #143973.

You will ask the Government Representative to divide all the objects which
are subject to division, and if he agrees to this, you will carefully pack
the share belonging to the Expedition, together with all negatives, sur-
veying plans, and articles belonging to Mr. Owens, including all his notes,
papers and accounts, and send them to Yzabal, there to be shipped to
the Peabody Museum to New York or Boston. If they go to New York,
order them transshipped in bond to Boston. In packing all articles spe-
cial care must be taken to ensure them against injury on the way, and
any paper moulds must be carried to the coast on the backs or in the
hands of mozos, and not on mules . . .

If, however, the Government Representative refuses to accept such a
house, or to permit any part of the specimens to be taken away until a
large house is built, you are authorized to go to Tegucigalpa, if you de-
cide that it is wise to do so, and lay the matter before the Government.
In that case the enclosed letters to Mr. F. M. Imboden and the American
Consul, Peterson, may be of use to you. Although you are thus autho-
rized to go [to] the capital, we think that it will be better to say to the
Government Representative that you can do nothing further, and that
you will let the matter be a subject of discussion between the Honduras
Government and that of the United States, at the same time requesting
the Government to join with you in cataloguing the specimens and plac-
ing those which are liable to be carried away in place of safety . . .24

The focus of the concession arrangements was on the finds themselves, not the ex-
cavation documentation—all apparently property of the PMAE. Both parties make

32

CHRISTINA LUKE

interpretations of the concession, particularly with regard to a facility to store the
finds. The U.S. perspective is that they provided sufficient storage facilities; the Hon-
durans disagreed. This dispute highlights the concern of the source country, Hon-
duras, with the long-term storage of all finds; this was apparently not the case for
the excavating party, PMAE, concerned only with the storage of what were consid-
ered the best materials or “those which are liable to be carried away”.

Over the course of the next 10 years, the Honduran Government became in-
creasingly involved in the management of antiquities within its national bound-
aries, and the PMAE was shut out. The DOS acted as the main negotiating body,
advocating for U.S. involvement (i.e., PMAE) at Copan. In fact, the journey from
Boston to Honduras most often included a stop in Washington. This trip required
lengthy stays in multiple ports and afforded the researchers time to visit and make
negotiations with the respective officials.

A now-seasoned Gordon returned to Honduras in 1894 to begin excavations at
Copan, expecting to continue under the 1891 concession granted to the PMAE,
under which Owens had excavated. Yet, Gordon’s trip was primarily focused on
diplomacy, not archaeology, to ensure access to the site, a point under consider-
able debate by the Honduran Government. In one of Gordon’s very lengthy let-
ters, written December 1, 1894, to Putnam at the PMAE, he affirms the strategic
role of the DOS and states that he sought legal advice regarding the concession.
His letter also clearly conveys his determination to continue work at Copan until
he is literally thrown out of the country:

The present administration is firmly opposed to our Copan concession;
they will listen to no proposition that we make, but give me to under-
stand that it was their intention to prevent us doing any more work there.
It is of no use to use arguments or try to conciliate. They want to be
ugly and they will do their worst. The only thing that you can do is to
maintain your rights and not give way in the least. I am convinced that
they are legally bound to acknowledge your concession and keep to it,
and I shall go directly to Copan and begin operations. They can take
whatever steps they like to eject me and then it will remain for the gov-
ernment of the United States to see that your rights are properly re-
spected. They claimed to have discovered various loop-holes by which
to get away from their obligations and leave them at liberty to cancel the
contract.25

The Honduran Congress was opposed to work by the PMAE at Copan, but as
Gordon tells us elsewhere in the same letter, the Honduran President was not;
thus, access to sites and finds was a hot-button issue in the Honduran political
sphere. In this same letter to Putnam, Gordon offered advice for future work and
his current plan:

I am sorry that your contract was not better gotten up. In your dealings
in these countries, no matter who may be in power at the time, you should
be very careful to leave no possible opportunity for an advantage and be
sure that no detail is omitted in a legal process, because the government

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

33

changes hands very often and although those in power at the time may
be disposed to act fair, the next crowd may not, and they may have a
very different policy . . .

My plan is this: I shall write a clear statement of the circumstances
and have the Consul forward it to the minister at Guatemala with his
own comments; then I shall go to the ruins and begin operations. If they
send me an order to stop, I will telegraph to the minister for advice. If
they merely continue to molest us in the usual way, we are not obliged
to submit to it. The terms of your contract are definite enough . . .26

The use of legal language became a tool to gain control of the past, rather than the
earlier sentiments of diplomatic negotiation. Gordon was sufficiently frustrated
with, as he saw it, the lack of reasonable diplomacy on the part of the Hondurans
and decided to forge ahead with work at Copan. The frustration regarding the
excavation and access to the site fueled hostility over the other major agenda of
the PMAE: collecting the best finds and shipping them home. Further on in the
same December 1, 1894, letter, Gordon demonstrates his frustration and inclina-
tion to go forward with exporting archaeological materials:

When it comes to a division of the objects found, if they refuse to divide
with us as they did last year, we do not need to wait for them, we can
take our share and let them look after theirs if they want to. In order to
be in a position to deal with the government of Honduras or its agents,
I shall require general power of attorney, specifying, however, any regular
duties as to administration, including judicial power to represent, pros-
ecute, defend, compromise, or arbitrate all matters concerning the busi-
ness of the Peabody Museum with the government of Honduras, or its
respective departments, with power of substitution and revocation. It
should be perfectly general; drawn up in proper legal form by a notary,
and it must be authenticated by the Honduranian consul general in New
York. (I don’t think they have a consul in Boston.) [T]hen it can be sent
to the American consul here, who will have it authenticated by the min-
ister of Foreign Relations and forward it to me. I shall need this very
soon and ask that it be sent to me as soon as possible . . .27

The voice of Gordon portrays an institution (the PMAE) seeking to establish it-
self, which at the time included excavation, documenting the context, the storage
of finds, and access to goods for export and eventual ownership by the institution.
Gordon asked for permission to negotiate on behalf of the PMAE, authority pre-
viously given to him in 1891 by the museum, just after Owens’s death. The close
networks between the U.S. archaeological, museum, and diplomatic communities
are clear from Gordon’s letter, including (in the closing of the letter) assurance of
transport of the letter via diplomatic pouch to ensure sealed delivery.

The reasons for Honduran apprehension are not clearly stated in the letters.
Gordon attributes the apprehension to political mayhem—certainly the case in
Honduras and elsewhere in Central America during the 1890s.28 Yet the sub-
sequent legislation suggests that Honduras attempted to regulate access to the site
in hopes of preserving it from massive plunder, even scientific removal and ship-
ment of monuments from Honduras to the PMAE. The unstable political situa-

34

CHRISTINA LUKE

tion in Honduras and the foreign interest in the archaeology of the country and
the export of it put the past on the negotiating table. In this way, collection of the
past became the point of negotiation. The PMAE realized via Gordon that con-
tinued work at Copan in the immediate future would not be viable; thus, they
focused on moving out of Honduras what they had collected and prepared—their
excavation notes as well as the casts of the sculpture, lamenting the real sculptures
had to remain behind at Copan.

The Honduran government’s opposition to U.S. work at Copan reflects the larger
issue of U.S. presence in Honduras during the end of the nineteenth century, par-
ticularly the increasingly powerful fruit, mining, and railroad companies. Up until
this period Copan had been the focal point of archaeology in the country—ever
since Stephens and Catherwood first visited the site. Thus, it constituted the main
point of interest for foreign institutions. The Hondurans allocated permits for work
at Copan to U.S. researchers as well as others. Yet, foreign access to the past was
clouded by the current political sentiments. In the body of Gordon’s December 1,
1894, letter we get a glimpse of how the political situation in Honduras influenced
archaeological work:

I think that the President himself is disposed to be fair. His manner was
friendly and my conversation with him was agreeable. He impresses me
as a man who would like to do what is right but does not dare. He would
like to favor foreigners and stand well in their opinion, but knows that
he must not run counter to the prejudices of his party. He made use of
the worst element in the country to put him in power. They themselves
the “liberal party” and their cry was “Honduras for Hondurainas”; they
hate foreigners and persecute them as far as they dare. Bonilla’s minis-
ters are a crowd of vagabond doctors and lawyers. The particular one in
whose department our business came is a certain Doctor Arias who lived
not far from Copan. When Vasquez was declared President in 1892 Arias
came here and became secretary of state. In the war between Vasquez
and Bonilla in 1894 he opened a secret correspondence with Bonilla and
offered to put the government into his hands on certain terms. Vasquez
found him out but instead of shooting him took him out to the field
and sent him over to Bonilla’s camp. My trouble has come chiefly from
this fellow; my business had to be presented through him, he refused to
negotiate on the grounds I have explained. I told him at last that my
mission was to arrange certain details of the contract and not to argue
its validity. I was sorry for the position he took, but since he refused to
listen to our propositions, I could only report the failure of my mission
to the Museum and go away. I find that this same fellow was in private
correspondence with Carlos Madrid when Owens was sick and after-
wards and also recently [sic]. It may be that he had something to do
with the authorship of that letter to Professor Putnam, and that Madrid
is a sort of tool. All the new officers in that part of the country have
been appointed by him and we will probably be molested considera-
bly. . . . When Bogran was in power he would have given you almost any-
thing you asked for, and if congress opposed him he would put all the
members in jail. His policy was to stimulate foreign enterprise, and he
felt friendly towards foreigners; his supporters were people of the same

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

35

class with himself. The crowd that are in now are the reverse of this,
they have made a new constitution which bears heavily on foreigners
owning property in the country. All the Americans here fought against
Bonilla, and his crowd in the last revolution, and those who were not
killed got out of the country.29

The change in government had a profound impact on how archaeological work
was conducted. Furthermore, the growing sentiment of “Honduras for Hondu-
rainas” implicated the archaeological record, precisely because the Hondurans saw
the past, in this case, Copan, as their cultural heritage. In contrast the PMAE viewed
Copan as evidence of the ancient Maya, not necessarily related to the contempo-
rary inhabitants or the nation state of Honduras.30 Their focus on the largest mon-
uments and storage for the luxury materials reflects their strong interest in the
ancient elite Maya sphere. The emphasis by the Hondurans on a proper facility for
the storage of all finds and management of the site demanded a more holistic
view of archaeology, certainly beyond the scope of removing materials solely for
collections in the United States. And the issue was made substantially more com-
plicated by the growing anger at U.S. businesses in Honduras, creating a greater
anti-American sentiment that reverberated into the archaeological community.

Because of problems with the Copan concession, Gordon turned to the Ulua
Valley, following leads from various businessmen (Joyce and Henderson 2002),
many who purchased materials. Gordon focused on the Ulua region precisely be-
cause “good finds” had been made by others, particularly Germans, in the area,
and such “operations [were] less likely to attract the attention” than at Copan: “It
will therefore not be well to make our movements conspicuous by attempting any
extensive work at the latter place.”31

Although working in the Ulua Valley proved to be interesting for Gordon and
the PMAE, they hoped to reaffirm their concession and return to Copan. They
found themselves up against political favoritism, however, and relied increasingly
on the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa to help with negotiations. Affronted by the
concession granted to the French for work at Copan, Richard Olney, U.S. secre-
tary of state, stepped in on behalf of the PMAE in February 1897, writing to
Putnam:

I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 1st instant, stating
that the Government of Honduras has granted to Mr. A. Pinart, of France,
a concession to explore the antiquities of Honduras in disregard of the
rights of the Peabody Museum, as specified in that Government’s con-
cession to it of 1891.

I have forwarded a copy of your letter and of its enclosure to our
Minister accredited to Guatemala and Honduras, in connection with
previous correspondence on the subject of the repeal of the Museum’s
concession, and have instructed him to again bring the matter to the
attention of the Honduranean Government, and to take such proper
steps as he may deem necessary to insure the Museum in its rights.32

The issue remained unresolved by May of the same year, and the DOS wrote again:

36

CHRISTINA LUKE

Referring to previous correspondence on the subject of the concession
granted to the Peabody Museum by the Government of Honduras to
explore and excavate the ruins in that country, I have to inform by di-
rection of the Secretary of State, that a note has been addressed to the
Minister of the Greater Republic of Central America, in this city, setting
forth the facts in the case and requesting that the matter receive the early
attention of the Honduranean Government with a view to the proper
protection of the interest of that Museum.33

These two correspondences and others similar to them clearly document the im-
portant role of the DOS in negotiating access to ruins, particularly the enforce-
ment of the concession granted in 1891. The broad concession was ultimately
revoked: The PMAE was forced to stop excavation and export of the ruins of Copan.
The Honduran government implemented new legislation in 1900, clearly
prompted by foreign excavations in the country. Under the new national cultural
patrimony law, all remains within the borders were property of the Republic.
The PMAE remained hopeful of getting the last choice pieces out of the country,
but settled for the fine and interesting molds:

Of course we are disappointed at not getting the regular concession, and
we hope that something may yet turn up that will enable us to secure it.
As I understand it, you are now doing the work under special permit
from the President. Of course it will be a great feather in your hat if you
succeed in getting out a lot of sculptures on this trip, but I hardly dare
hope for it, although I suppose you will get some of the smaller objects.
At all events you will have a fine lot of moulds which will be of great
interest.34

In this correspondence the PMAE laments the failure to secure a permit and to
continue work—both excavation and exportation. Although many correspon-
dences highlight the implicit instructions for scientific excavation, this letter also
conveys the sense of disappointment in unsuccessful attempts to secure and ex-
port the loot, particularly the monumental sculptures of Copan, despite the con-
solation of the molds.

1900 to 1946: Banana Cowboys and Archaeologists

Work resumed at Copan under the auspices of the Carnegie Institution in the
1920s;35 and here this essay turns to the Ulua Valley, the area G. B. Gordon thought
was a good substitute for Copan and where the PMAE continued its focus in the
1930s. During the earlier decades of this period, the role of diplomacy and the
collecting ethos began to evolve in the field of archaeology, particularly in the Ulua
Valley. Gordon became the director of the University of Pennsylvania Museum of
Archaeology and Anthropology (then the University Museum), and he actively
pursued acquisition of material from the Ulua Valley prior to the outbreak of World
War I. His main contact was Lincoln G. Valentine of the New York and Honduras
Rosario Mining Company (Royal Mining). Valentine’s links through Royal Min-

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

37

ing created a network for prospecting and shipping materials. The PMAE also par-
ticipated in this network, as the following correspondence from Gordon to Valentine
illustrates: “I expect to come down to New York in a few days and if it is agreeable
to you, I would like to have an opportunity of calling on you to see three speci-
mens from the Uloa [sic] River which Mr. C. C. Willoughby of the Peabody Mu-
seum has told me of.”36 Two weeks later Gordon wrote, “I now write to say that
we have decided to purchase the entire collection of Honduras antiquities which I
saw at your house on Saturday at the price indicated to you, namely, three hun-
dred dollars.”37 Gordon’s interest at this point focused on the finds, not the sites,
in contrast to his work at Copan, which included collecting as well as excavation
and preservation. Thus in the case of the Ulua Valley, Gordon focused exclusively
on collecting materials for UPENN.

By 1914 material from the Ulua Valley had attracted a significant amount of
attention in the growing local market, fueled by a U.S. market. This attention
spurred plunder, as indicated in a letter from Valentine to Gordon:

I regret to say that the rumor was spread in the Ulua region that the
antiquities found in the river possess a tremendous marketable value. Con-
sequently, my agent encountered difficulties in eliminating numerous in-
terested parties from acquiring the latest findings. The publication in
local newspapers of a translation of your report on Copan has contrib-
uted to create unwarranted competition. However, I have taken steps to
replace the matter on a normal basis and am quite confident that I shall
soon be in possession of everything there is to be had around San Pedro.
In order to make this possible I have deemed it wise to recall the gang of
men I engaged. But this is temporary and I hope that in a very short
time I shall be able to offer you further findings.38

Valentine operated as a sort of middleman, trafficking objects from Honduras to
the collecting institution in the United States. He competed with others, most likely
businessmen affiliated with the mining and/or fruit companies. Both groups worked
with local gangs to prospect for antiquities. Thus, the rise of the U.S. market helped
to jump-start the plunder of sites in the Ulua Valley.

In his next letter Valentine reiterates his points regarding local plunder and the
growing demand for objects from the region. The most salient point for this re-
search pertains to the emphasis on monetary value of objects in addition to cul-
tural value.

Some time ago I wrote you about the difficulties I encountered in se-
curing further pieces of interest from the Ulua valley owing to rumors
current in that region that the antiquities found there represent a tre-
mendous, marketable value.

About half a dozen beautiful calcium [marble] vases are now in the
possession of various parties in San Pedro, besides numerous jade beads,
clay articles, etc. One particularly pretty and well preserved calcium vase
about twice the size of the largest you obtained from me is now on the
way to the Smithsonian Institute for exhibition purposes. The owner has

38

CHRISTINA LUKE

such an exaggerated idea of the value of this vase that he expects to “make
his fortune” with it by selling it for—$10,000.00.

If any more antiquities are to be obtained from the Ulua valley it is
necessary to discourage people there with regard to the value of these
articles. If the Smithsonian Institute could write to the owner of the above-
mentioned vase a discouraging letter offering a nominal amount for the
vase, I would see to it that this letter became generally known in the Ulua
region.

I am informing you of the above, because I would like to obtain for
you whatever pieces are found in and around the Ulua and I am think-
ing that possibly you have some means of informing the Smithsonian
Institute of the advisability of discouraging the people down there as
above suggested . . .39

Gordon’s response to Valentine indicates a concern of access, not necessarily mit-
igation, and again highlights the emphasis on market value and the influence of
U.S. institutions in this market:

I regret to know that rumors current in the Uloa Valley have caused such
fantastic notions about the marketable value of antiquities. I am sorry also
that you did not get possession of the specimens now in private posses-
sion. I shall look out for the one [marble vase] which you say is on its
way to the Smithsonian Institution, and perhaps we can help to dispose
of the aforesaid rumors. Such notions, however, are very persistent and
are more likely to take encouragement than to give way to reason or
experience. I hope that you will do your best to discourage the notions
which prevail around San Pedro and that you will be successful in se-
curing whatever is found in that region in the future.40

UPENN competed with the private market, but also with other prominent insti-
tutions (e.g., the Smithsonian and Harvard) for materials from the Ulua Valley.
The correspondences focus on access to these finds and attempts to underbid the
market and disseminate information of the low market value of objects to the
local middlemen and looters in Honduras. That is, U.S. institutions, working closely
with their own middlemen—the businessmen—actively tried to squash a devel-
oping public interest to insure that they cornered market.

The prized marble vases were among the most desired objects. Initially brought
to light by Gordon’s earlier excavations in the valley,41 they have remained among
the hottest items from the Ulua Valley on the market.42 The relationship between
Gordon and Valentine continued for several years with Gordon writing periodi-
cally to check in with Valentine regarding upcoming trips that might afford buy-
ing opportunities. The complex web of business mixed with the pleasure of
collecting antiquities documents not only the art of diplomacy in controlling
market value, in addition to intellectual/academic value, but also the ultimate
goal of the private acquisition of finds for growing U.S. collections.

In the period between 1914 and 1915, Royal Mining had the favor of the Hon-
duran Government; the previous administration had been overthrown in a 1910
coup. The goal of the coup was to ensure that the railroad lines could be built and

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

39

operated according to U.S. interests. The coup was backed by several key U.S. busi-
nessmen, particularly Samuel Zemurray, then president of Cuyamel Fruit (1911–
1929), and the future president of United Fruit (1933–1950), who was the most
influential figure in the banana industry. Zemurray had a vested interest in the
railroad lines to move materials and goods across the country. What is more, his
daughter, Doris Stone, became one of the most prominent archaeologists in the
region. Therefore, Royal Mining had significant sway with local authorities, as clearly
stated in the correspondences from Valentine. In fact, Valentine assures Gordon of
good ties, regardless of whether he (Valentine) was in the country: “I have a good
many friends and connections in Central America, particularly in Honduras. If I
can serve you in any way, please do not hesitate to inform me. I shall be most
delighted to assist you whenever an occasion may arise.”43 The upper hand, thus,
had shifted from the DOS to the larger businesses in Honduras, which had con-
siderable power in the country, particularly in the wake of the U.S.-business-
backed coup (against DOS wishes). The U.S.-based archaeological community
seized on these new ties to secure export of materials from the Ulua Valley.

Proper excavations resume in the Ulua Valley some 15 years later under Doro-
thy Popenoe, who had accompanied her botanist husband, Wilson Popenoe, to
the region. Dedicated to her work in the valley, Popenoe returned to areas high-
lighted by Gordon, with a goal of defining the break between monochrome and
polychrome ceramic styles in the Ulua Valley (an inherently archaeological ques-
tion); she was also the first to consider seriously the importance of stratigraphy,
using what she called the “onion-peel” method.44 Popenoe’s good work, cut short
by her untimely and unfortunate death, set the stage for work by Doris Stone,
Samuel Zemurray’s daughter, and a PMAE expedition under the direction of Wil-
liam Duncan Strong.

United Fruit played a key part in redefining this period of archaeology in the
Ulua Valley. United Fruit offered a number of strategic opportunities for archae-
ologists, including the introduction of both Popenoe and Stone to the region. Al-
though these two researchers were not close (they may have never met), they were
both pioneers in the field, conducting excavations in the valley as well as the more
remote regions of Comayagua and Olancho, respectively. Both women were intri-
cately tied to United Fruit, but it was the U.S.-based field archaeologists who re-
lied exclusively on United Fruit for access to the region. United Fruit also helped
in a number of logistical ways: Excavations were often conducted near United Fruit
farms that provided living quarters for the excavation team; and materials for ex-
cavations and finds from excavations were shipped via the Great White Fleet, a
United Fruit–backed shipping company. United Fruit also had considerable clout
with the Honduran Government, avoiding the tense permit and export negotia-
tions of the 1890s.

What is more, members of the United Fruit workforce, the Banana Cowboys,
became key members of the early antiquities trade in the Ulua region, as captured
vividly in the following correspondence of Popenoe:

40

CHRISTINA LUKE

FIGURE 2. Excavation directed by D. Popenoe at Playa de los Muertos, late 1920s along
the Ulua River. Photograph credit: 2006 Harvard University, Peabody Museum 2004.29.7940.

The problems of the field archaeologist are tending to become less sim-
ple year by year as the Ulua Valley is being opened up for farming of
bananas and the mozos and peons who live on the farms and along the
river are already aware of the intrinsic value of the prehistoric relics they
encounter. Women as well as men make it a pastime to wander up and
down the banks, probing with their sharp pointed machetes wherever
fragments protrude from the bank. Objects found are sold to passersby,
to souvenir collectors, or to “Banana Cowboys” on the lookout for me-
mentos to send to the folks at home.45

In addition to local Honduran men and women, the cowboys did actively collect
and bring home materials. Working for United Fruit as dragline (for dredging ca-
nals) operators, they often found archaeological materials. Items of known value
were taken back to the United States to be sold. The deliberate nature of this ac-
tivity is clearly stated in a 1932 article from a Savannah paper:

J. I. Kennedy, formerly a resident of Savannah, but more recently with
the United Fruit Company at Tela, Honduras, was in Hotel Savannah
yesterday with pieces of pottery and stone work which he believes are
rare specimens.

Mr. Kennedy was operating a drag line in Honduras and forty feet
from the river at Tela, and nine or ten feet below the earth’s surface,
found the piece of stone work which shows considerable age. He was
interested in finding out what sort of tools could have been used to [work]
the stone and to inscribe the figures on the outside of the “cup-like”
vessel . . .

The piece of pottery was found with red coloring predominating, but
the boy of general work about the camp, thinking to please Mr. Kennedy
by clearing the pottery, first tried lye on it, then sandpaper, and the re-

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

41

FIGURE 3. Excavation along banana plantation canal, ca. 1930. Photograph credit: 2006
Harvard University, Peabody Museum 2004.29.7939.

sult was that while he scoured it successfully, he also scoured quite a bit
of the coloring off of it. This disappointed both Mr. Kennedy and the
boy when the latter found out what his enthusiasm had led him to do.
Mr. Kennedy, a guest of Hotel Savannah while here, left last night for the
North with his prized possessions and hopes to [learn] up there just what
his discoveries amount to.46

This newspaper clipping documents the interest in antiquities of businessmen dur-
ing the 1930s, echoing the interest for specific items between 1914 and 1915, as
documented in the correspondences with Valentine. The U.S. pre-Columbian mar-
ket of the second decade of the twentieth century had continued to grow, now
apparently with hubs in the northeast, not coincidently the home of the major
collecting institutions. Local workmen took charge of cleaning antiquities and U.S.
citizens carted materials back to the United States in hopes of finding buyers.

Certainly by the mid-1940s, there was a serious interest in antiquities from Cen-
tral America in the United States, when pre-Columbian materials began to be col-
lected seriously as “art”, particularly by the U.S. private collector Robert Woods
Bliss and U.S. dealers Alfred Stendahl and John Wise.47 Banana Cowboys (both
the dragline operators and the higher-up businessmen) participated in the initial
stages of defining pre-Columbian art as marketable. United Fruit connections to
the collecting sphere also guided interest in where professional archaeological ex-
cavations were focused.

J. B. Edwards, a U.S. citizen, became one of the first U.S. dealers in Honduras,
with a “curio shop in Puerto Cortes” (Popenoe 1935a), working closely with those
looting the northern shores of Lake Yojoa, just south of the Ulua Valley. Even after

42

CHRISTINA LUKE

FIGURE 4. View of Puerto Cortes from the banana company rail line. Courtesy of the
University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, #148732.

his wife’s death, Wilson Popenoe continued to monitor what was happening ar-
chaeologically in Honduras and became one of the foremost collectors of Uluan
material. He followed Edwards’ activities, occasionally buying pieces from him and
then selling or gifting them to the PMAE. According to a letter from Popenoe,
Edwards did not go unnoticed by the Honduran Government:

[Edwards] says he had quite a time getting his contract with the Hon-
duras govt., but that General Carias has assured him he will not have
any further trouble as long as he, the General, is President. He has to
give half of his finds to the National Museum. . . He is allowed to export
his own share.

The big row he recently had with the govt. came, he says (and Mr.
Turnbull verifies this), because someone in Teguci read an article pub-
lished by Doris Z. Stone that he was turning up gold at Yojoa. Since he
had not turned in any gold to the govt., they thought they were being
double-crossed and they had him arrested at Potrerillos, took him up to
Teguci and held him there for ten days, until they were satisfied.

. . . Since much of the Edwards material will henceforth figure in mu-
seums in the U S, it would be well to have some technical information
regarding the source. I believe we could strike a bargain of some sort
with him, to enable us to do the necessary work at Yojoa. I think he
would be open to almost any proposition which involves cash down. He
is working for a living, not because he is devoted to archaeology as a
science.

It certainly seems as though the Yojoa site should be tied with the

Ulua valley, anyway,—at least that is the way it looks to me.48

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

43

Plunder for the purpose of sale was clearly part of Edwards’ agenda, and he was
among the few people actively organizing such activities, building on the days of
prospecting by local businessmen or making chance finds from development (such
as the dragline discoveries of United Fruit).

By the mid-1930s the PMAE took a more forceful stance against purchasing
looted antiquities, appealing to the growing trend of archaeology as a science, clearly
expressed in the sentiment of this letter written by Tozzer to Popenoe about
Edwards:

As you know, we are not out for loot. There is no question but that there
is plenty of stuff down in his area, but personally I am much more in-
terested in continuing the problem on which Dorothy was working, the
contact between the monochrome and polychrome cultures. This, it seems
to me, could best be tackled in the valley itself.49

Tozzer impressed upon Popenoe the need to pursue the monochrome-polychrome
ceramic chronology: The research question initially proposed by his wife (Joyce
1994). Popenoe’s response shows that he understood the importance of context, a
concern that is highlighted throughout his correspondences; yet, he continued to
follow local plunder, even questioning why archaeologists should not at least mon-
itor local prospecting endeavors:

I feel as you do that what we are after is information, not loot, and we
must tie up the relationship between the monochrome and polychrome
wares. But the Yojoa site is turning out such a grand lot of stuff that I
very much doubt Strong’s and Kidder’s ability to resist taking a look at
it. Especially after they have seen some of the pots Edwards has ex-
humed. But I do not want or intend to complicate our own job in any
manner, nor shall I.50

Regardless of his conflicting ethical stance on looted materials, the PMAE contin-
ued to rely on Popenoe for a permit; the permit issues are often presented in the
same correspondences as those about loot, with references to the diplomatic at-
tempts to secure permission in Washington (Tozzer 1935).

I yesterday talked with Mr. Turnbull’s office regarding affairs at Teguci.
Mr. Hamer, who is acting in charge during Turnbull’s absence in the
States, was in Teguci day before yesterday and started the ball rolling. He
assures me there will be no difficulty at all. I haven’t any qualms on this
score; I believe we can consider the arrangements as complete.51

Popenoe’s association with United Fruit was clearly a key factor in the ease of se-
curing permission: “I haven’t any doubt that we shall get the sort of cooperation
we want from Tegucigalpa. The Company’s relations with the present administra-
tion are excellent” (W. Popenoe 1935c).

In 1936 the Honduran Government took another look at legislation, in part
because of Edwards’ activities at Lake Yojoa. In fact, the government took interest
in not only illicit trafficking, but also the importance of context.

44

CHRISTINA LUKE

I have just seen a batch of 15 Yojoa bowls. . . . They knock out not only
one, but both your eyes synchronously and simultaneously. I under-
stand Edwards has some 75 still on hand; but his digging has been stopped
by the government on the grounds that he is merely exploring the site,
and not getting sufficient information. A very progressive and enlight-
ened attitude, say I.52

The new legislation changed how archaeology in Honduras was conducted, even
that conducted by friends of the Honduran Government. Permission to excavate
became more challenging, and getting materials out of the country for the respec-
tive sponsoring institutions (i.e., the PMAE) was also increasingly difficult.

Now, about Yojoa pots: Duncan, Jean, and “Dreckly” are digging there
right now. We went up to Tegucigalpa and wrangled a permit to do so.
We stopped and saw the site, which is rapidly being looted . . . and Dun-
can felt it highly important that he get conformation from that area this
year. Our understanding worth it—Minister regarding exportation of ar-
tifacts is highly informal but I think it will work: if so, it—Peabody is
going to end up with some Yojoa pots. . . . Honduras is about to vote a
new Constitution which not only prohibits exportation of every sort of
archaeological material, but also gives the govt. the right to seize any-
thing privately held in the country, for the National museum I have read
the text and its log. . . . It may go into effect in a month or two.53

As intimated in this correspondence, implementation of the 1936 legislation made
it increasingly difficult to export antiquities:

I have made necessary arrangements to get it out, all open and above
board. It is the last large batch of Yojoa pottery which may come out of
Honduras for some time. So far as I know, there is no other private col-
lection of any considerable size in the country, and for the past year or
more, no digging has been done in Yojoa, for which I am glad, there is
sufficient of this material in North American museums now, to answer
all purposes of study; and it would be better to protect the Yojoa region
against further depredations, until such time as competent archaeolo-
gists can give it further attention.54

Popenoe continued to participate as a collector and patron. The following reply
to Tozzer, four years after the exchange regarding the end of collecting loot, por-
trays the sentiments of a collector, not an archaeologist, realizing that the days of
easy export have come to a close and that times have indeed changed:

I am not going to Honduras, and in any event would not wish to at-
tempt any further shipments of pottery, unless you were especially in-
terested. The people over there have been good to me in the past and I
do not want to impose on their good nature. If you should know of
someone who is fairly dying to have 35 good Yojoa pots, and care to
write to Edwards, he could probably get these for you; but unless you
really need them I think it would be better not to press matters further.
I figure you now have the best collection of Yojoa pottery in the U.S.,
anyway.55

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

45

Popenoe’s friendship and ties to United Fruit placed the PMAE in the middle of a
diplomatic quagmire. They wished to maintain ties to and benefit from Popenoe
and yet also needed to enforce upon Popenoe the mandate for context and a break
with antiquarian practices. In the following correspondence, it is clear that Pope-
noe continued to grapple with how to understand this evolving debate over how
to reconcile plunder and scientific research:

I am delighted that the Honduras artifacts are making a good showing.
I do not believe there can be any doubt that you now have the best, if
not the most extensive, lot of Yojoa polychrome in the U.S. and I quite
agree with you that you don’t need any more, unless perchance I should
see something very choice in Honduras, some time in future, and feel
that it ought to be added to your batch. . . .

It has been pretty difficult arranging shipment of the last two lots I
got for you, and unless something particularly choice shows up, some-
thing you really must have, I’d just as soon drop the subject of Honduras
archaeology. I told Doris this, in New Orleans. I’m terribly glad she is
looking to you now, for guidance; as long as she does this I would like to
assist her as much as possible, in every way.56

Popenoe’s sentiment reflects his changing perspectives on the importance of con-
text. Yet, subsequent letters tell of Popenoe’s continued interest in collecting an-
tiquities, regardless of their context, particularly from his new post in Colombia.57
The PMAE remained interested in ensuring diverse collections, particularly hav-
ing one of everything. This sentiment is most clearly viewed in a series of corre-
spondences between the Smithsonian and PMAE over the final division of material
from the Ulua expedition. Ties were severed not over the excavated finds, suppos-
edly the focus for both institutions, but over one vase—a large clay effigy of the
famed marble vases—that Wilson gifted to the expedition, the so-called Wilson
Vase.

The correspondences between Gordon and Valentine and the Popenoes and
Tozzer demonstrate that looting was recognized as a lucrative activity in the valley
by the second decade of the twentieth century and certainly well-known by the
1930s; a strong local market had developed, driven by the growing U.S. market;
stratigraphy was recognized, even promoted by Dorothy Popenoe58; national leg-
islation was an increasingly important part of Honduran control over antiquities
and sites; and United Fruit replaced the State Department as the primary negoti-
ating body between the U.S. archaeological community in the Ulua Valley and the
Honduran Government for access to sites and permission for export.

The face of the collector changed considerably during this period. U.S. institu-
tions and archaeologists working for them turned toward emphasizing context in
the Ulua Valley, particularly in light of the work by Dorothy Popenoe and the
Strong expedition. Yet, even with the growing acknowledgment of the importance
of context, archaeologists and their respective institutions still hoped to keep at
least part of what they found. The large collections now housed at many U.S. in-
stitutions were taken from the Ulua Valley during the last stage of when the Hon-

46

CHRISTINA LUKE

durans allowed the export of materials. After the Hondurans closed their borders
to antiquities in 1936, most formal U.S.-sponsored archaeological work stopped
in the Ulua Valley and did not resume seriously until the late 1970s.

1950–1984: Diplomats and Archaeologists

Although artifacts from Mexico and Guatemala lured collectors during the 1940s
and earlier, during the 1950s and 1960s the artifacts from the Ulua Valley at-
tracted interest from collectors beyond the Banana Cowboys and the handful of
archaeologists working for museums. Robert Woods Bliss purchased two “Ulua
marble vases” from Stendahl galleries in Los Angeles in the 1950s. By the 1960s
Alfred Stendahl was the primary dealer of material from the Ulua Valley, partic-
ularly the Ulua marble vases. Spencer Throckmorton served as his East Coast
counterpart in New York. By the 1970s museums that did not own material from
the Ulua Valley, specifically a marble vase, began buying from Stendahl and
Throckmorton.59

As the early correspondences document, the Honduran government was always
responsive to archaeological work in the country. In fact, the implementation of
national legislation appears to have been driven by foreign interest in the past or,
perhaps more realistically, foreign interest in acquiring antiquities, as reflected in
the implementation of the 1900 and 1936 laws, both corresponding to peaks in
archaeological investigations and the export of finds as well as increased looting.
A number of new laws went into place between 1946 and 1975. Notably, in 1952
under Decree 245 the National Institute of Anthropology and History was formed.60
By 1966 Honduras had issued an emergency decree hoping to deter further de-
struction of cultural sites. The 1950s and 1960s saw a rise in looting, particularly
around the sites of Travesia and Tenampua where “it was a popular ‘sport’ for
affluent people and the diplomatic core in Tegucigalpa to go on ‘digging expedi-
tions.’”61 In 1968 the institute was made the centralized body overseeing cultural
patrimony in Honduras.62

By the late 1970s Honduras knew it had a substantial pillage problem. Pillage
had taken a serious toll on the landscape. Archaeological sites were disappearing
at an alarming rate, most of them completely undocumented. In 1979 Proyecto
Arqueológico Sula (PAS) began: the first major U.S.-Honduran cooperative project
in the Ulua Valley. PAS aimed to document sites in the Ulua Valley and conduct
salvage operations at damaged sites and/or sites slated for future construction.63
During the 1980s PAS documented hundreds of sites in the valley, many of them
looted and even completely destroyed.64 Members of PAS found evidence of mas-
sive looting as well as specialized looting for specific items such as jade artifacts,
polychrome ceramic vases, and marble vases.65 By 1984 Honduras had developed
and put into place an even stronger national patrimony law—Decree 81–84, des-
ignating the Instituto Hondureño de Antropología e Historia (IHAH) as the na-
tional branch charged with overseeing the archaeology in the country. The PAS

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

47

project has matured into a long-term, region-wide study: Proyecto Arqueológico
Valle Inferior del Río Ulúa (PA-VIRU), directed by John S. Henderson and Rose-
mary A. Joyce. Researchers communicate directly with IHAH to secure permits
and permission to export materials for scientific analyses or museum exhibition.
There is no longer integral involvement by a negotiating party such as the State
Department or another entity such as Royal Mining or United Fruit.

1984–2005: Legislative Efforts for Honduran Archaeology

Honduras ratified the 1970 UNESCO Convention in 1979, followed by its tough-
ening of the national patrimony legislation under Decree 81–84. During the same
period, the United States also worked toward implementing the 1970 UNESCO
Convention, implementing it in 1983 under the Cultural Property Implementa-
tion Act (CPIA). Today agreements are implemented country by country, the ini-
tial request for an MOU coming through diplomatic channels to the United States
from the other state party (usually transferred via the respective ambassador). Under
an MOU certain categories of artifacts are prohibited from entering the United
States without proper documentation from the respective ministry of culture or
an equivalent entity. These MOUs serve as one tool in protecting archaeological
sites from future pillage and provide a formal channel for further cooperation at
the international, national, and regional levels, as stipulated in the respective agree-
ment.66 Those countries that make up the region of Central America are among
the most active in seeking MOUs with the United States. The MOUs pledge that
both the United States and the respective country will use their best efforts to
restrict the illicit trafficking in antiquities.67

In 2001 Honduras submitted a formal request to the United States, and an MOU
was implemented three years later in March 2004, the fourth in the region follow-
ing El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. The Honduran case was clear. Looting
was endemic and it had become increasingly embedded in the social fabric of local
communities. The primary market was the United States. In the Ulua area the
sites of Travesía, Calabazas, and Gualjoquito as well as hundreds of other sites had
all been badly looted, if not completely demolished. In the neighboring regions of
El Cajon, Comayagua, and Naco, plunder was a major problem. Over the years
international buyers had made frequent trips to San Pedro Sula, even out to spe-
cific sites known for particular artifacts. Furthermore, the history of the diplo-
matic core in trafficking antiquities was also clear.68

In the late 1990s the Margarita tomb complex at Copan was pillaged; evidence
suggests a highly organized plan. In 1997 National Geographic published a num-
ber of glossy images of the complex. In February 1998 the tomb was brutally
looted.69 Officials pointed fingers at a local guard who denied involvement. The
humiliation suffered by the guard led to his suicide: a tragic reminder of the social
implications of the antiquities trade.70 Just prior to this horrific event, Honduras
passed new legislation: Decree 200–97. With this decree Honduras entered into a

48

CHRISTINA LUKE

new phase in protecting the past within its borders. It became the first country in
Central America to restrict possession of cultural heritage from private citizens
and to forbid the sale of antiquities within national boundaries.71 People with col-
lections were granted a life-limited grace period: On the death of the patron, all
materials must be transferred to a sanctioned government location. Collections
may not be transferred or inherited. It is retroactive.

DISCUSSION

Through more than 150 years of archaeological work in Honduras, we can track the
continued interests of U.S. archaeologists and museums. We can track the fluctu-
ating interest of the U.S. Government, particularly DOS and the U.S. Embassy in Teg-
ucigalpa. The archival materials from PMAE document the U.S. State Department’s
role in the early days of archaeological work in the country. These same archives show
the increasingly powerful role of U.S.-based businesses, particularly the Royal Min-
ing Company and United Fruit, in negotiating permits for fieldwork and exports.
Although the State Department and the mining and fruit companies acted as ne-
gotiating authorities for PMAE and UPENN, recent work has been carried out with
the diplomatic skills of the U.S. archaeologists. Overall, this practice is good. Direct
ties allow for a transparent permit process and development of long-term relation-
ships. The recent MOU with Honduras presents a potential shift in DOS involve-
ment and opens a new opportunity for dialog.

A result of the increased interest by U.S. institutions in materials from Hondu-
ras, specifically in the Ulua Valley, the local Honduran and U.S. antiquities markets
thrived. Valentine’s correspondences reveal a long history of U.S. institutions and ar-
chaeologists creating a market for Honduran antiquities. And there was a diverse
group interested in procuring collections: U.S. institutions patronizing archaeolog-
ical work, U.S. archaeologists conducting excavations, and U.S. businessmen based
in Honduras (the elite as well as the dragline operators or miners as well as the local
middlemen and collectors such as J. B. Edwards). That is, these various participants
all identified with collecting as an integral part of what constituted archaeological
practice in a foreign country. It was the development of archaeology as a science (and
thus the importance of context) that began to identify archaeologists distinctly from
others interested in the past. And in the case of Honduras, it was the 1936 law that
forbid the continued shipment of antiquities from its national boundaries and re-
quired a more stringent permit process that turned archaeologists working in the
Ulua Valley away from their earlier agendas of collecting; now they were faced with
the reality of having to leave excavated materials behind.

In closing it is clear from the early correspondences that keeping abreast of loot-
ing and collecting activities provided information about how materials moved and
who was moving them and why. The discipline of archaeology has moved away
from close connections with the collecting community, arguing that such connec-

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

49

tions serve to validate collecting. Yet, collectors have not stopped collecting, and
looting has increased across the world.72 By cutting the ties to collectors, we have
lost information about their networks. To understand the problem of looting, we
need to understand how collecting works. For the MOUs to be effective in the
future, we need serious research into the history of collecting and the contempo-
rary collector; the next step is to trace the collecting of specific objects back to
their presumed areas of origin to determine if, in fact, the area has been plundered
over the period of interest as highlighted in the marketplace. In addition to study
of the western marketplace, this research needs to be done in the regions where
plunder continues to occur. The traditional middleman is increasingly cut out of
the equation: Looters are in direct contact with private collectors. Although it is
often taboo within the archaeological community to talk with collectors or loot-
ers, we need to understand how field research, academic and mainstream (e.g.,
National Geographic) publications, and museum exhibitions influence the collect-
ing sphere and how this interest manifests itself on the ground. In fact, the rise
in worldwide looting over the last decade indicates that pillage is a problem that
demands a hands-on approach on the ground, in the field, and at the borders.
Apart from the import restrictions, the MOUs offer a diplomatic channel for im-
proving ties among those—archaeologists and collectors alike—with a vested in-
terest in the past and an opportunity to create new programs. Honduras has a
long history of enforcing legislation and working with archaeologists. A continu-
ing dialog among diplomats, archaeologists, and collectors may hold the answer.
If collectors refuse to participate in this dialog, we need to start asking why and
demanding answers.

ENDNOTES

1. For information about the various memoranda and other state department activities related
to the trade in antiquities, please consult the main web site page available at http://exchanges.state.
gov/culprop/

2. See Gardiner, “Long-Term Archaeological Loans” and “International Conventions”; Luke and

Kersel, “The Antiquities Market.”

3. Honduran Decreto 220–97 Ley para la protección del patrimonio cultural de la nación.
4. The Honduran laws for this article are the following: Decreto No. 127, April 9, 1900, Protec-
ción de las Ruinas de Copán y otras ruinas del país; 1936 The New Constitution Politica of Honduras,
Titulo VIII, de la Hacienda Nacional, Capitulo I, de los Bienes Nacionales; Decreto No. 81–84 1984,
Ley para la protección del patrimonio cultural de la Nación; Decreto 220–97 1997, Ley para la protec-
ción del patrimonio cultural de la Nación.

5. Luke and Henderson, “The Plunder of the Ulua Valley.”
6. Elia, “A Seductive and Troubling Work”; Renfrew, “Collectors Are the Real Looters.”
7. Coggins, “Illicit International Traffic.”
8. See Susan Pearce’s publications Museum Studies in Material Culture and Archaeological Curator-
ship for an overall perspective on the importance of understanding the responsibilities of archaeo-
logical museums, particularly the archival aspect.

9. See Boone, Collecting the Pre-Columbian Past for a detailed look at the history of collecting
pre-Columbian antiquities, but there is not an emphasis on the Ulua Valley, per se. For discussions

50

CHRISTINA LUKE

on what drives people to collect archaeological artifacts, particularly today, please consult Susan Pearce,
Collecting; and Brodie and Luke, “The Social and Cultural Contexts of Collecting.”

10. The inherent approach in this paper is from the U.S. perspective. The archives do hint at the
Honduran perspective, specifically a growing concern with how U.S. citizens in their country (ar-
chaeologists and businessmen) treated cultural heritage. Future research will concentrate on under-
standing how this concern developed and from where—government officials, wealthy businessmen,
communities living near the areas pillaged, and/or communities outside of this general sphere. A
final note on what will not be discussed is the looters or the looting culture. Researchers working in
Mesoamerica who have addressed this issue include Chase, Chase, and Topsey, “Archaeology and the
Ethics of Collecting”; Paredes, “Surviving in the Rainforest”; Pendergast, “And the Looting Goes On”;
Pendergast and Graham, “Fighting a Looting Battle”; and “The Battle for the Maya Past.” For the
Andes, see Alva, “Destruction of the Archaeological Heritage of Peru,” where he does address the
changing face of the looter and his operation. Matsuda’s “The Ethics of Archaeology” defines the
subsistence digger, and part-time specialists in the Ulua Valley are described by Luke and Henderson
in “The Plunder of the Ulua Valley.” Compare these to the much more organized and standardized
systems of the Andes portrayed in the studies of Atwood, Stealing History; and Smith, “Looting and
the Politics of Archaeological Knowledge.” These various studies make it clear that there is a massive
looting problem. This study steps back from the looters to ask why people are looting and explores
the history behind this phenomenon. I have written elsewhere in Luke and Kersel, “The Antiquities
Market,” that we need to understand the collecting culture; and this study is the first of my attempts
in answering this question for Honduras.

11. See Euraque, “Antropólogos, arqueólogos, imperialismo”; Joyce, “The Construction of the Me-
soamerican Frontier,”“Archaeology and Nation Building”; “Solid Histories for Fragile Nations”; “Crit-
ical Histories of Archaeological Practice”; Joyce and Henderson, “Who Do We Work for Now?”

12. Gilgan, “Looting and the Market”; Luke and Henderson, “The Plunder of the Ulua Valley.”
13. Stephens, Incidents of Travel in Central America, 115–16.
14. Fash, Scribes, Warriors and Kings, 49, footnote 51; Agurcia, “La Depredación del patrimonio,”

90.

15. See Squier, Notes on Central America; and Hartman Strom, “E. G. Squier y el ferrocarril oceánico

Hondureño.”

16. Squier, “Ruins of Tenampua” and Honduras Expedition report of “News from the Peabody

Museum.”

17. Hinsley, “Wanted: One Good Man” and “From Shell-Heaps to Stelae”; Joyce, “Peabody Mu-

seum, Harvard University”

18. Fash, Scribes, Warriors and Kings, 50–51.
19. Honduras expedition report of “News from the Peabody Museum.”
20. See Aguirre, “Agencies of the Letter”; Chinchilla, “Archaeology and Nationalism in Guate-
mala”; Euraque, “Antropólogos, arqueólogos, imperialismo”; Graham, “Three Early Collectors in Me-
soamerica”; Joyce, “Critical Histories of Archaeological Practice.”

21. Universal Museum constitutes an institution seeking to display a range of artifacts from many
different locations of the world to exhibit the diversity of mankind, often emphasizing particularly
monumental and/or exquisite examples of the past. Among the first universal museums were the
British Museum in London, the Louvre in Paris, and what is now the Pergamon Museum in Berlin.
The 2001 Declaration on the Importance and Value of Universal Museums, drafted by the Cleveland
Museum of Art and the British Museum, validates these early collecting policies:

[O]bjects acquired in earlier times must be viewed in the light of different
sensitivities and values, reflective of that earlier era. The objects and monumen-
tal works that were installed decades and even centuries ago in museums
throughout Europe and America were acquired under conditions that are not
comparable with current ones. . . . Museums serve not just the citizens of one
nation but the people of every nation. Museums are agents in the development
of culture, whose mission is to foster knowledge by a continuous process of

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

51

reinterpretation. Each object contributes to that process. To narrow the focus
of museums whose collections are diverse and multifaceted would therefore be
a disservice to all visitors.

22. Watson, “Opening the Museum.”
23. Putnam to J. G. Owens, March 12.
24. Bowditch to G. B. Gordon, February 25, emphasis added.
25. Gordon to C. Bowditch, December 1.
26. Gordon to C. Bowditch, December 1.
27. Gordon to C. Bowditch, December 1, emphasis original.
28. For an overview of the political situation in Honduras with regard to archaeology, consult

Harris and Sadler, The Archaeologist Was a Spy.

29. Gordon to C. Bowditch, December 1.
30. This issue of control over an archaeological site still persists today at Copan, where the Chorti-
Maya have become increasingly active with site management in addition to increased site control by
the central government. See Joyce, “Archaeology and Nation Building,” and Mortensen, “Structural
Complexity,” for further discussion of Copan.

31. Bowditch to Gordon, 1896.
32. Olney to F. Putman, February 4.
33. Rockliny to F. Putman, February 4.
34. Putnam to G. B. Gordon, June 9.
35. Fash, Scribes, Warriors and Kings, 53–57.
36. Gordon to L. Valentine, April 2.
37. Gordon to L. Valentine, April 14.
38. Valentine, Letter to G. B. Gordon, July 6, emphasis added.
39.
40. Gordon to L. Valentine, August 4.
41. Gordon, “Researches in the Uloa Valley, Honduras.”
42. Luke and Henderson, “The Plunder of the Ulua Valley.”
43. Valentine to G. B. Gordon, April 10.
44. For details of Dorothy Popenoe, please consult the work of Rosemary A. Joyce: “Dorothy Hughes
Popenoe”; “Popenoe, Dorothy Hughes (1899–1932)”; and “Solid Histories for Fragile Nations.” The
work of Levin concentrates on the role of women in archaeology, including Dorothy Popenoe: “Cre-
ating Their Own Niches.”

to G. B. Gordon, July 28, emphasis added.

45. D. Popenoe to A. Tozzer, March 17.
46. News clipping from unknown “Savannah Paper” provided by Maxine Kennedy.
47. See Benson, “The Robert Woods Bliss Collection of Pre-Columbian Art,” and Coe, “From

Huaquero to Connosisser.”

48. W. Popenoe to A. Tozzer, November 23, 1935.
49. Tozzer to W. Popenoe, 1935.
50. W. Popenoe to A. Tozzer, December 13, 1935.
51. W. Popenoe to A. Tozzer, December 13, 1935.
52. W. Popenoe to A. Tozzer, February 18, 1936.
53. W. Popenoe to A. Tozzer, March 15, 1936.
54. W. Popenoe to A. Tozzer, November 23, 1938.
55. W. Popenoe to A. Tozzer, February 26, 1939.
56. W. Popenoe to A. Tozzer, March 30, 1939.
57. Wilson Popenoe, in addition to being a botanist, was also an undercover agent for the U.S.
government. See Harris and Sadler, The Archaeologist Was a Spy. Therefore, his ease of movement
around Central and South America and his close ties with prominent political members were not
entirely because of his good graces as a botanist but as a highly trained agent. He clearly used his ties
to embellish his love of antiquity, particularly the building of the PMAE’s collections.

58. Joyce, “Dorothy Hughes Popenoe.”

52

CHRISTINA LUKE

59. Luke and Henderson, “The Plunder of the Ulua Valley.”
60. Agurcia, “La depredación del patrimonio cultural en Honduras.”
61. See Agurcia, “La depredación del patrimonio cultural en Honduras,” 89; Agurcia, “Late Clas-

sic Settlement in the Comayagua Valley,” 264.

62. Agurcia, “La depredación del patrimonio cultural en Honduras.”
63. See Agurcia, “La depredación del patrimonio cultural en Honduras,” 91; Henderson, Agurcia,

and Murray, “El proyecto arqeuologico sula”; Joyce, Cerro Palenque, 30.

64. Luke and Henderson, “The Plunder of the Ulua Valley.”
65. Agurcia, “La depredación del patrimonio cultural en Honduras,” 87.
66. Each agreement and respective information regarding implementation can be accessed from
the Cultural Property Advisory Committee web site: Available at http://exchanges.state.gov/culprop/
sindex.html.

67. Luke and Kersel, “The Antiquities Market.”
68. A number of archaeologists who have worked in these areas confirm the endemic nature of
plunder, including John S. Henderson, Kennith Hirth, Rosemary A. Joyce, Jeanne Lopiparo, Allan
Maca, Edward Schortman, Robert Sharer, and Patricia Urban.

69. Stuart wrote the piece for National Geographic: “The Royal Crypts of Copán,” but Agurcia is

among the only to have published (albeit briefly) the horrific looting: “Copan Honduras.”

70. Also in 1998, the Chorti Maya took over the site of Copan, demanding a stake in the planning
and management of Honduran cultural patrimony. See Joyce, “Archaeology and Nation Building,”
and Mortensen, “Structural Complexity and Social Conflict.”

71. It is legal to buy and sell antiquities in Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala, and
Mexico as long as the antiquities and the transactions are registered with the respective government;
it is illegal in these countries to export antiquities without government permission, which is rarely,
if ever, granted for the permanent export of privately held materials.

72. Neil Brodie and Colin Renfrew provide the most up-to-date summary of the situation: “Loot-

ing and the World’s Archaeological Heritage.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aguirre, Robert D. “Agencies of the Letter: The Foreign Office and the Ruins of Central America,”
Victorian Studies, Winter (2004): 285–96.

Agurcia, Ricardo. “La depredación del patrimonio cultural en Honduras,” Yaxkin 8(2) (1984): 83–96.

———. “Late Classic Settlement in the Comayagua Valley.” In The Southeast Maya Periphery, edited
by Patricia A. Urban and Edward M. Schortman, 262–74. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1986.

———. “Copan Honduras: Looting in the Margarita Structure,” Mexicon 10(4) (1998): 68.

Alva, W. “Destruction of the Archaeological Heritage of Peru.” In Trade in Illicit Antiquities: The
Destruction of the World’s Archaeological Heritage, edited by N. Brodie, J. Doole, and A. C. Renfrew,
89–96. Cambridge, MA: McDonald Institute Monographs, 2001.

Atwood, Roger Stealing History: Tomb Raiders, Smugglers, and the Looting of the Ancient World. New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 2004.

Benson, Elizabeth P. “The Robert Woods Bliss Collection of Pre-Columbian Art: A Memoir.” In Col-
lecting the Pre-Columbian Past edited by Elizabeth H. Boone, 15–34. Washington, DC: Dumbarton
Oaks, 1993.

Boone, Elizabeth H., ed. Collecting the Pre-Columbian Past. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks, 1993.

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

53

Bowditch, Charles. To G. B. Gordon. Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Bowditch
Papers, 11–3, Harvard University, February 25, 1893.

———. To Gordon. Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Bowditch Papers, 11–7, Har-
vard University, 1896.

Brodie, Neil, and C. Luke. “The Social and Cultural Contexts of Collecting.” In Archaeology, Cultural
Heritage and the Antiquities Trade, edited by N. Brodie, M. Kersel, C. Luke, and K. Walker Tubb.
Gainesville: University of Florida Press, in press.

Brodie, Neil, and Colin Renfrew. “Looting and the World’s Archaeological Heritage: The Inadequate
Response,” Annual Review of Anthropology 34 (2005): 343–61.

Chase, Arlen, Diane Z. Chase, and Harriot W. Topsey. “Archaeology and the Ethics of Collecting.” In
Archaeological Ethics, edited by Karen D. Vitelli, 30–8. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 1996.

Chinchilla, Oswaldo. “Archaeology and Nationalism in Guatemala at the Time of Independence,”
Antiquity 72 (1998): 376–87.

Coe, Michael. “From Huaquero to Connosisser: The Early Market in Pre-Columbian Art.” In Col-
lecting the Pre-Columbian Past, edited by Elizabeth H. Boone, 271–90. Washington, DC: Dumbarton
Oaks, 1993.

Coggins, Clemency C. “Illicit International Traffic in Ancient Art: Let There Be Light!” International
Journal of Cultural Property 4(1) (1995): 61–79.

Elia, Ricardo J. “A Seductive and Troubling Work,” review of The Cycladic Spirit: Masterpieces from
the Nicholas P. Goulandris Collection by Colin Renfrew. Archaeology 46(1) (1993): 64, 66–9.

Euraque, Darío. “Antropólogos, arqueólogos, imperialismo y la mayanización de Honduras: 1890–
1940,” Yaxkin 17 (1998): 85–101.

Fash, William. Scribes, Warriors and Kings. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1991.

Gardiner, Bonnie Magness. “Long-Term Archaeological Loans from Italy: Summary of Roundtable
Discussions,” American Journal of Archaeology 107 (2003): 477–481.

———. “International Conventions and Cultural Heritage Protection.” In Marketing Heritage: Global
Goods and the Endangered Past, edited by Yorke Rowan and Uzi Baram, 27–40. Walnut Creek, CA:
AltaMira Press, 2004.

Gilgan, Elizabeth. “Looting and the Market for Maya Objects: a Belizean Perspective.” In Trade in
Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological Heritage, edited by Neil Brodie, Jenny
Doole, and Colin Renfrew, 73–88. Cambridge, MA: McDonald Institute Monographs for Archaeo-
logical Research, 2001.

Graham, Ian. “Three Early Collectors in Mesoamerica.” In Collecting the Pre-Columbian Past, edited
by Elizabeth H. Boone, 49–80. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks, 1993.

Gordon, George. To C. Bowditch. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Eth-
nology, Bowditch Papers, 11–4, December 1, 1894.

———. “Researches in the Uloa Valley, Honduras,” Peabody Museum Memoirs 1(4). Cambridge, Mass:
1898.

———. To L. Valentine. Director’s Office Records, George B. Gordon, University of Pennsylvania
Museum Archives, April 2, 1914.

54

CHRISTINA LUKE

———. To L. Valentine. Director’s Office Records, George B. Gordon, University of Pennsylvania
Museum Archives, April 14, 1914.

———. To L. Valentine. Director’s Office Records, George B. Gordon, University of Pennsylvania
Museum Archives, August 4, 1914.

Harris, Charles H., and Louis R. Sadler. The Archaeologist Was a Spy: Sylvannyus G. Morely and the
Office of Naval Intelligence. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2003.

Hartman Strom, Sharon. “E. G. Squier y el ferrocarril oceánco Hondureño: Centro América en la
imaginacíon Norteamericana,” Yaxkin XIV (1996): 127–37.

Henderson, John S., Ricardo Agurcia F., and Thomas A. Murray. “El proyecto arqueológico sula:
Metas, strategies y resultados preliminaries,” Yaxkin 1 (1982): 82–95.

Hinsley, Curtis. “Wanted: One Good Man to Discover Central American History,” Harvard Magazine
87(2) (1984): 64A–H.

———. “From Shell-Heaps to Stelae: Early Anthropology at the Peabody Museum.” In Objects and
Others: Essays on Museums and Material Culture, edited by George W. Stocking, Jr., 49–74. History of
Anthropology, Vol. 3. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1985.

Honduras Decreto No. 127, 9 April 1900 Protección de las Ruinas de Copán y otras ruinas del país.

———. The New Constitution Politica of Honduras, Titulo VIII, de la Hacienda National, Capitulo I,
de los Bienes Nacionales, 1936.

———. Decreto No. 81–84 Ley para la protección del patrimonio cultural de la nación, 1984.

———. Decreto 220–97 Ley para la protección del patrimonio cultural de la nación, 1997.

Honduras Expedition. “News from the Peabody Museum Explorers at the Great Ruins’ 1891,” Hon-
duran Mining Journal 245–247. PMAE Bowditch 11–1, 1991.

Joyce, Rosemary A. “Travesia. (CR-35): Archaeological Investigations” (report submitted to the Proyecto
Arqueológico Sula of the Instituto Hondureño de Antropología e Historia. Tegucigalpa, Honduras,
1983).

———. Cerro palenque. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1991.

———. “The Construction of the Mesoamerican Frontier and the Mayoid Image of Honduran Poly-
chromes.” In Reinterpreting Prehistory of Central America, edited by M. M. Graham, 51–101. Niwot:
University Press of Colorado, 1993.

———. “Dorothy Hughes Popenoe: Eve in an Archaeological Garden.” In Women in Archaeology,
edited by Cheryl Claassen, 51–66. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1994.

———. “Popenoe, Dorothy Hughes (1899–1932).” In Encyclopedia of Archaeology: History and Dis-
coveries, Vol. III, edited by Tim Murray, 1060–62. Denver: ABC-Clio, 2001.

———. “Stone, Doris Zemurray (1909–).” In Encyclopedia of Archaeology: History and Discoveries,
Vol. III edited by Tim Murray, 1212–14. Encyclopedia of Archaeology: History and Discoveries, vol. III.
Denver: ABC-Clio, 2001.

———. “Peabody Museum, Harvard University.” In Encyclopedia of Archaeology: History and Dis-
coveries, Vol. III, edited by Tim Murray, 1006–10. Denver: ABC-Clio, 2001.

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

55

———. “Instituto Hondureño de antropología e historia.” In Encyclopedia of Archaeology: History
and Discoveries, Vol. III, edited by Tim Murray, 669–71. Denver: ABC-Clio, 2001.

———. “Archaeology and Nation Building: A View from Central America.” In The Politics of Ar-
chaeology and Identity in a Global Context, edited by Susan Kane, 79–100. Boston, MA: Archaeolog-
ical Institute of America, 2003.

———. “Critical Histories of Archaeological Practice: Latin American and North American Inter-
pretations in a Honduran Context.” Paper presented at the 2004 Society for American Archaeology,
Montreal, 2004.

———. “Solid Histories for Fragile Nations: Archaeology as Cultural Patrimony.” In Embedding Eth-
ics, edited by Lynn M. Meskell and Peter Pels. London: Berg, 2005.

———. “The Monumental and the Trace: Archaeological Conservation and the Materiality of the
Past.” In Of the Past, For the Future: Integrating Archaeology and Conservation, edited by Neville Agnew.
Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2006.

Joyce, Rosemary A., and John S. Henderson. “Who Do We Work for Now? Imperialism, Nationalism,
Globalism: Archaeology in Honduras, 1839–2002,” revised version of a paper presented at the an-
nual meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Denver, 2002.

Levin, M. A. “Creating Their Own Niches: Alternative Career Styles Among Women in Americanist
Archaeology Between the Wars.” In Women in Archaeology, edited by Cheryl Classen, 9–40. Phila-
delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1994.

Luke, C., and J. S. Henderson. “The Plunder of the Ulua Valley, Honduras and a Market Analysis for
its Antiquities.” In Archaeology, Cultural Heritage and the Antiquities Trade, edited by N. Brodie, M.
Kersel, C. Luke, and K. Walker Tubb. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, in press.

Luke, C., and M. Kersel. “The Antiquities Market: A Retrospective and a Look Forward.” Journal of
Field Archaeology 30(2) (2005): 191–200.

Matsuda, David. “The Ethics of Archaeology, Subsistence Digging, and Artifact Looting in Latin Amer-
ica: Point, Muted Counterpoint,”  7(1) (1998): 87–97.

Mortensen, Lena. “Structural Complexity and Social Conflict in Managing the Past at Copán, Hon-
duras.” In Archaeology, Cultural Heritage and the Antiquities Trade, edited by N. Brodie, M. Kersel, C.
Luke, and K. Walker Tubb. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, in press.

Olney, Richard. To F. Putman. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Accession File 39–8, February 4, 1897.

Paredes, Sofia Maury. “Surviving in the Rainforest: The Realities of Looting in the Rural Villages of
el Peten, Guatemala.” Report to the Foundation for the Advancement of Mesoamerican Studies, 1998.
Available from http://www.famsi.org/reports/paredesmaury/paredesmaury.html (accessed ).

Pearce, Susan, ed. Museum Studies in Material Culture. London: Leicester University Press, 1989.

———. Archaeological Curatorship. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1991.

———. On Collecting: An Investigation into Collecting in the European Tradition. New York and Lon-
don: Routledge, 1995.

Pendergast, D. M. “And the Looting Goes On: Winning Some Battles, But Not the War,” Journal of
Field Archaeology 18 (1991): 89–95.

56

CHRISTINA LUKE

Pendergast, David M., and Elizabeth Graham. “Fighting a Looting Battle: Xunantunich, Belize,” Ar-
chaeology 34 (4) (1983): 12–19.

———. “The Battle for the Maya Past: The Effects of International Looting and Collecting in Be-
lize.” In The Ethics of Collecting: Whose Culture? Cultural Property: Whose Property? edited by Phyllis
Mauch Messenger, 51–60. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1989.

Popenoe, Dorothy. To A. Tozzer. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnol-
ogy, Accession File 30–46, March 17, 1930.

Popenoe, Wilson. To A. Tozzer. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnol-
ogy, Accession File 38–45, November 23, 1935a.

———. To A. Tozzer. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Acces-
sion File 38–45, December 13, 1935b.

———. To A. Tozzer. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Acces-
sion File 38–45, December 9, 1935c.

———. To A. Tozzer. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Acces-
sion File 38–45, February 18, 1936a.

———. To A. Tozzer. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Acces-
sion File 38–45, March 15, 1936b.

———. To A. Tozzer. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Acces-
sion File 39–8, November 23, 1938.

———. To A. Tozzer. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Acces-
sion File 39–8, February 26, 1939a.

———. To A. Tozzer. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Acces-
sion File 39–8, March 30, 1939b.

Putman, Frederic Ward. To J. G. Owens. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology, Bowditch Papers, 11–3, March 12, 1892.

———. To G. B. Gordon. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Bowditch Papers, 12–3, June 9, 1900.

Renfrew, Colin. “Collectors Are the Real Looters,” Archaeology 46(3) (1993): 16–17.

Rockliny, M. M. To F. Putman. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnol-
ogy, Accession File 39–8, February 4, 1897.

Savannah Times. J. I. Kennedy, “Former Savannahian Finds Them,” n.d.

Smith, Kimbra. “Looting and the Politics of Archaeological Knowledge in Northern Peru,” Ethnos 70
(2005).

Squier, Ephriam G. Notes on Central America; Particularly the States of Honduras and San Salvador:
Their Geography, Topography, Climate, Population, Resources, Productions, etc., etc, and the Proposed
Honduras Inter-Oceanic Railway. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1969 [1855].

———. “Ruins of Tenampua,” Historical Society of New York Proceedings, 1–8, 1853.

———. Honduras: Descriptive, Historical and Statistical. London: Trubner and Co., 1870.

DIPLOMATS, BANANA COWBOYS, AND ARCHAEOLOGISTS

57

Stephens, John L. Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas and Yucatan. Volume I. New York:
Dover Publications, 1969 [1841].

Stone, Doris. “Archaeology of the North Coast of Honduras.” In Memoirs of the Peabody Museum of
Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University. Vol. IX, no. 1. Cambridge, MA: 1941.

Stuart, George. “The Royal Crypts of Copán,” National Geographic 192(6) (1997): 68–93.

Tozzer, Alfred. To W. Popenoe. Harvard University, Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnol-
ogy, Accession File 38–45, 1935.

Valentine, L. To G. B. Gordon. Director’s Office Records, George B. Gordon, University of Pennsyl-
vania Museum Archives, July 6, 1914.

———. To G. B. Gordon. Director’s Office Records, George B. Gordon, University of Pennsylvania
Museum Archives, July 28, 1914.

———. To G. B. Gordon. Director’s Office Records, George B. Gordon, University of Pennsylvania
Museum Archives, April 10, 1915.

Vitelli, K. D. “An Archaeologist’s Response to the Draft Principles to Govern a Licit International
Traffic in Cultural Property.” In Legal Aspects of International Trade in Art, edited by M. Briat and
J. A. Feedberg, 109–12. The Hague: Kluwer Law International, 1996.

Watson, Rubie “Opening the Museum: The Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,” Sym-
bols Fall (2001): 2–7.


