International Journal of Cultural Property (2012) 19:453–476. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2012 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739112000276

Recycling Texts or Stealing Time?:
Plagiarism, Authorship, and Credit
in Science
Mario Biagioli*

Abstract: Scientific plagiarism is as sui generis as the author function in
science. A study of the specificity of scientific plagiarism and the ways in which
it diverges from appropriation in other disciplines allows us to question
traditional definitions that focus on the copying of published copyrighted
materials. The form of plagiarism that is most damaging to scientists does not
involve publications, is largely outside the scope of copyright law, and is
unlikely to be detected by textual-similarity algorithms. The same features that
make this kind of plagiarism difficult to identify and control also provide a
powerful window on the unique construction of authorial credit in science, the
problems of peer review, and the limitations of plagiarism surveillance
technologies.

It was owing to the Modesty and Diffidence of Sir Isaac Newton, that
he communicated some of his Discoveries to his Friends, before he
published them. Unfortunately they came in the Hands of a For-
eigner, who contested the Invention. In what Court of Justice could
have Sir Isaac instituted a Suit for a Reparation of this Injury? I will
endure to affirm that he could have had no Redress in any Court ei-
ther ancient or modern, where it was to have been determined on the
Principle of other Property.

—Anonymous, 17621

Written during the early English debates on copyright law, these lines about Leib-
niz’ alleged plagiarism of Newton’s invention of calculus demonstrate that the dif-
ficulty of legally codifying plagiarism and the punishment it ought to receive were

*STS Program and School of Law, UC Davis, mbiagioli@ucdavis.edu

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: I would like to thank the STS Food for Thought group at UC Davis, Ber-
ris Charnley, Simon Stern, and the journal’s referees for all their useful comments, criticism, and
suggestions.

453

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

454

MARIO BIAGIOLI

already clear in 1762.2 Little progress has been made in the subsequent 250 years,
which is an interesting piece of evidence in and of itself. Intellectual property law
has undergone extraordinary articulation since then, but plagiarism is still lacking
a consistent conceptualization despite surfacing more frequently, and getting a great
deal of attention, in more locations and professions than ever before.3

The remarkable gap between the discursive articulation of intellectual property
and that of plagiarism puzzles and interests me. Does that mean that the concep-
tual building blocks of intellectual property and plagiarism enable very different
degrees of discursive articulation? Or does the persistence and ubiquity of accu-
sations of plagiarism point to an altogether different regime for attaching value to
creative work—a regime that remains active today, if only with its visibility eclipsed
by the remarkable development and diffusion of intellectual property? In other
words, is the discourse of plagiarism the remnant of an older way of conceptual-
izing the relationship between author and work—a discourse that is now left to
inhabit the margins of intellectual property law? If so, plagiarism would not be
alone there as those borderlands are densely populated by a range of different au-
thorship constructs established not by legal statute but through professional and
sociocultural conventions. Beyond the vast morphological differences in the way
scientists, comedians, academics, chefs, and magicians construe authorship, we see
that they all try to escape (and sometime oppose) the logic of intellectual prop-
erty law.4 While the discourse of plagiarism does not offer an affirmative and al-
ternative definition of authorship, it shares in the externality to intellectual property
that characterizes these other authorship regimes.

Comparative analyses of authorship have shown that the author, far from being
a stable construct, changes across time and fields, and that it is tied to the work by
a relation of co-construction rather than unidirectional cause and effect.5 Author-
ship in literature or other works protected by copyright law is quite different from
scientific or academic authorship, which in turn is different from inventorship as
construed by patent law. Licenses based on the free software model support yet
other forms of authorship, as do the sociabilities reflected in fanzines’ produc-
tion.6 The “plagiarist function” varies across disciplines as well, depending on a
field’s subject matter and the changing protocols and technologies of detection.
As we will see, plagiarism in science (the subject of the second half of this essay)
is qualitatively different from the way it is defined by the Modern Language As-
sociation or by the American Historical Society.7

I take the elusive shapes of plagiarism (both its variability across fields and the
absence of a definition able to comprehend all such varieties) to be a predicament
to think with. Plagiarism matches the complexity of its twin concept—authorship—
and may thus be used as a window on the puzzlingly different ways in which the
author is constructed in and around the law, its relation to both property and
personhood, law and social norms, as well as on the tensions underpinning fun-
damental distinctions between ideas and expression and, ultimately, between tan-
gible and intangible property.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

455

IT IS ALL VERY PERSONAL, IN ALL SORTS OF WAYS

Plagiarism is one of those notions that are stabilized by the emotions they express
and elicit rather than by their conceptual clarity. Lacking a reliably applicable def-
inition of plagiarism, the various uses of the term are unified (to the extent that
they can be unified) by being about actions deemed to range from the unethical
to the immoral. Moral condemnation is inherent in the very term itself (plagia-
rism deriving from plagiarius, Latin for “kidnapper”) as well as in the invocations
of “pillage” and “rape” encountered in plagiarism allegations.8

Unlike piracy (the unauthorized copying and selling of, say, a Pirates of the Ca-
ribbean DVD), or passing-off (attaching the label “Prada” to a Prada-looking bag
you have made in your garage), plagiarism is described in a standard dictionary
definition as a very specific form of appropriation without attribution:

To steal and pass off (the ideas or words of another) as one’s own; use (a
created production) without crediting the source; to commit literary theft;
present as new and original an idea or product derived from an existing
source.9

Piracy may hurt the author financially, but does not take away her authorship. A
pirated Lady Gaga CD is still attributed to Lady Gaga because maintaining that
association is crucial to the market value of the pirated copy. Passing-off, in fact,
attributes even more authorship to the producer of the appropriated item—you
attribute to Prada a bag they never made—though that would be a gift of author-
ship the Prada people would reject as damaging to their brand. Plagiarism, in-
stead, severs the link between the work and the name of the author and then
reestablishes it with a different name.10 The success of both pirates and those en-
gaging in passing-off depends on their ability to erase the traces of their agency.
To the contrary, plagiarists need to erase the agency and name of the original au-
thor, and put theirs in its place.11

Unlike piracy whose typical goal is to make money for the pirate, plagiarism
may be practiced to seek advantages that are not inherently or immediately finan-
cial, like for example, importing somebody’s moving speech or sermon into your
own speech or sermon without acknowledgment, or producing a term paper by
lifting paragraphs from other authors’ texts.12 And while the typical pirate makes
and sells as many copies as possible, it may be enough for the plagiarist to make
only one copy and use it him- or herself. A student might cut-and-paste a paper
from somebody else’s texts he or she finds on the web but does not need to mul-
tiply them. All is needed is a single copy to turn in at the end of the class to get a
grade. (These quantitative differences are worth noticing because they imply qual-
itative differences: The meaning of “to copy” is not the same in the case of pla-
giarism, passing-off, piracy, or other kinds of intellectual property infringements.)
Finally, one may engage in industrial espionage or manufacture knockoffs of valu-
able fashion items on behalf of somebody else, but the kind of acts that are usu-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

456

MARIO BIAGIOLI

ally referred to as plagiarism are appropriations to oneself and for oneself, and are
typically done by somebody acting alone.

We could say that plagiarism is a form of reverse impersonation. The plagiarist
does not want to become the person he or she plagiarizes, but rather tries to turn
something that was personal to that individual—an idea, a speech, an autobio-
graphical narrative, a piece of expressive work—into something that becomes per-
sonally associated with the plagiarist (because he or she publishes it under his or
her name). It may even become part of his or her persona if he or she delivers it
with his or her voice, accent, and intonation, or reworks it in his or her own lan-
guage and style. The personal nature of plagiarism is even more evident when it
concerns somebody’s autobiographical narrative, which then becomes part of the
plagiarist’s life story.13 The plagiarist does not become or want to become the per-
son he or she plagiarizes—to lose him- or herself in the original author, so to
speak. Rather, he or she tries to incorporate something of the plagiarized by per-
forming those facets of that person as him- or herself (rather than the other way
around, that is, acting the plagiarized as themselves).

Plagiarism feels personal not only because it is perceived to take something per-
sonal away from the author, but also because it involves a personal decision on the
part of the plagiarist. An inventor may involuntarily infringe on a patent he or she
did not know about, and a writer may infringe on the copyright of a text he or she
had no clear memory of. But it would be difficult to conceive of the verbatim
lifting of substantial amounts of an author’s text and its representation as one’s
own as an involuntary action.14

The plagiarist’s choice is personal also in the sense that the plagiarized work
cannot be separated from some features of the plagiarized author. Successful pla-
giarism is undetected plagiarism, and the chances of being detected increase with
the fame of the plagiarized source relative to the plagiarist’s audience. Adding in-
sult to injury, being plagiarized may be a sign of one’s relative lack of visibility at
that specific time and place—something Pierre Bayle spelled out as early as 1697:

I believe all Authors agree on this Maxim, that it is better to rob the
Ancients than the Moderns; and that amongst the latter, we ought rather
to spare our Countrymen than Strangers. Literary piracy is not in all
things like to that of Privateers. The latter think themselves less criminal
when they commit their Piracies in the New World, than [if] they did it
in Europe. Authors, on the contrary, go more boldly a[t] privateering in
the Old World, and have Reason to hope they will be commended for
the Prize they shall make in it. [. . .] All Plagiaries, when it is in their
Power, follow the Plan of the Distinction I have alleged; not out of a
scruple of conscience: but rather that they may not be found out.15

This looks like the inverse of Robert Merton’s “Matthew effect”—the more suc-
cessful a scientist becomes, the more credit he or she receives for achievements he
or she has not achieved.16 (Margaret Rossiter has discussed the gendered counter-
part of this dynamics as the “Matilda effect.”)17 With plagiarism, the less you are
known in a certain place the more likely you are of being plagiarized there, not so

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

457

much because you have less authority to go up against the plagiarist, but rather
because fewer people are likely to notice that you have been plagiarized. Fame,
however, does not necessarily provide protection either. If you are well known in
your area, the plagiarist may republish your work in a different country, in a dif-
ferent language, or both.

Plagiarism, therefore, is more than just a plain appropriation but often involves
a displacement and recirculation of the plagiarized work in new different
communities—a feature already implicit in the etymology linking plagiarism to
kidnapping. Several cases of plagiarism in nineteenth-century science, for exam-
ple, involved “recycling” texts across European countries, or between Europe and
the United States.18 Today we see the same between East and West, or between the
Anglophone world and other languages.19 The plagiarist tends to import relatively
unknown foreign authors (or re-import forgotten ones) into a given publication
network, or export a well-known author to places and audiences where he or she
is not well known. (Often the recycling takes place within the same publication
sphere—say, Anglophone science journals—by moving an article from a top-tier
journal to a third-tier one, where few, if any, readers would notice it.) Plagiarism
hinges on republication, but republication is also the key to the plagiarist’s demise.
Not all forms of appropriation entail publication. You may infringe on a patent
or gain unlawful access to trade secrets in order to use that knowledge privately in
your laboratory, factory, or garage. But because plagiarism functions like author-
ship, you can only gain from it by publishing or publicly delivering somebody
else’s work and, most importantly, attaching your name to it. (People who knock
off Prada bags do not put their name on them, nor do those who sell or distribute
pirated films.20) Paradoxically, as a plagiarist you have to turn yourself into a clearly
visible sitting duck while hoping that nobody is carrying a gun, cannot aim it
properly, or are too far away to get you. Conversely, plagiarism without publica-
tion does not qualify as plagiarism. If you make a verbatim manuscript copy of
Joyce’s Ulysses and tell your family that it is your brilliant new novel that you can-
not publish because the world is not ready for it, they will probably call you some-
thing, but not a plagiarist.

Plagiarism, in sum, is personal both from the point of view of the plagiarized
(who feels personally singled out and robbed—robbed publicly) and the plagiarist
(who may have no personal animosity toward the plagiarized, and yet needs to
choose his or her sources carefully to minimize the chance of detection). The pla-
giarist always targets not only a work but a work and an author at the same time.

CONCEPTUAL KIN: PLAGIARISM AND SCIENTIFIC AUTHORSHIP

The relation between author and work in science bears important similarities to
the way the author is construed by the discourse of plagiarism. Unlike copyright
and patent law, scientific authorship construes credit in terms of attribution, not

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

458

MARIO BIAGIOLI

property—credit that accrues on a scientist’s name, not in his or her pockets. By
publishing in journals or conference abstracts, a scientist places his or her claims
in the public domain and receives back professional recognition, first by adding
the publication to his or her bibliography, and second by collecting citations from
peers. This professional recognition can translate into financial resources (well-
published, visible scientists are more likely to get jobs and grants), but is not a
monetary or property construct per se. It is also a kind of credit that is distinctly
personal, to the point of being inalienable.

While it may be advantageous for writers to sell the film rights of their novels
to Hollywood studios, what sense would it make for scientists to sell their rights
of their discovery after having published it under their names? Assuming there
was a way in which Darwin could have sold the rights in his discovery of evolu-
tion to John Doe after publishing the Origins, what would John Doe have gained
from that? How could he claim credit for something everybody knew to have al-
ready been discovered by Darwin? Scientific authorship is very personal for many
of the same reasons that make plagiarism personal. It construes credit (or, in
plagiarism’s case, damage) as inalienable and qualitative, something that concerns
an individual as a name-carrying person, not a proprietor.21

The analogies continue. While a scientific article is protected by copyright, what
makes that text important to its author is not what copyright law protects in that
text—the personal expression of its author, that is, the literary form of that article
or the specific look of its diagrams and illustrations. Scientific credit is about con-
tent (the claim, the idea, the results, the techniques) not the form. Some scientists
can patent their work when it falls within the legal definition of patentable subject
matter, but that is a different credit regime based on the utility of the marketable
products stemming from that work, which is quite separate from—and poten-
tially in conflict with—that of scientific publications. The kind of credit generated
by scientific authorship is categorically distinct from the rights granted by either
copyright or patent law. The core element of scientific authorship is attribution—
the professional rewards (not the property rights) that grow from the relation be-
tween the text and the author’s name. This probably makes plagiarism the most
dangerous kind of appropriation in the sciences. The appropriation of a scientist’s
work damages the scientist not as copyright infringement would damage a literary
author but rather the way plagiarism would damage an author’s name and repu-
tation by denying the author attribution, not just royalties. Prosecuting a scientific
plagiarist for copyright infringement would be like going after Al Capone for tax
evasion.

There are, however, some relevant differences in the author function as con-
strued by scientific authorship and plagiarism. For one, scientific plagiarism com-
prehends a wider range of objects than “normal” plagiarism, which was quite
capacious to begin with. The current definition published in the Federal Register
in May 2005 defines it as: “the appropriation of another person’s ideas, processes,
results, or words without giving appropriate credit.”22 Processes, and results (or

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

459

data) are not found in dictionary definitions of plagiarism. Also notice that the
Federal Register lists ideas first and words last, confirming that a scientist’s work’s
value attaches primarily to ideas, techniques, and the design of the study or ex-
periment rather than to the words that describe them. This also suggests that the
detection of textual similarity in scientific publications may not capture the more
damaging forms of plagiarism.

Another important difference between scientific and literary texts is that while
a novel or a poem is a novel or a poem from beginning to end, a science article is
made up of very different sections that, while all necessary and often required,
have very different value and reflect different levels of authorial agency, labor, and
originality. This is not how investigators and agencies involved with defining and
prosecuting scientific misconduct typically see things. Like copyright lawyers who
see an article like a unitary “work,” they do not differentiate between the various
sections of a scientific text, thus treating plagiarism of any part of it as equally
unacceptable. Some scientists, instead, do not see the literature review section as
valuable—and certainly not as original—as the sections reporting and discussing
the results. A recent poll of Brazilian scientists, for example, found that: “although
our participants unanimously regarded the use of the ideas and data of other re-
searchers as wrong, they had mixed opinions about using passages of text.”23

This is where the politics of language and the divide between Global North
and South intersect with discussions of plagiarism. The most common form of
plagiarism in science involves nonnative English speakers recycling portions of
articles (like the literature review section) published in Anglophone journals.24
Commenting on recent cases of plagiarism in China, Peking University officials
have reported that:

Some Chinese scientists think that they can’t compete equally in West-
ern journals because of a problem with English. So they like to copy
what others have done and then fill in what is new. . . . To many people,
what was done is not considered an aberration but part of an attitude
that says it’s OK to copy as long as you’ve done the work yourself.25

As shown by Ihsan Yilmaz, a Turkish physicist accused of plagiarism, a typical
defense is that there is an implicit editorial bias in the Anglophone publishing
world against less than smoothly written manuscripts which hurts smart and hard-
working foreigners the most:

Borrowing sentences in the part of a paper that simply helps to better in-
troduce the problem should not be seen as plagiarism. Even if our intro-
ductions are not entirely original, our results are—and these are the most
important part of any scientific paper. In the current climate of “publish
or perish,” we are under pressure to publish our findings along with an in-
troduction that reads well enough for the paper to be published and read,
so that our research will be noticed and inspire further work.26

No matter what side one picks in these debates, in science the content of the claim
trumps the importance of its literary expression and that there is a distinctly non-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

460

MARIO BIAGIOLI

uniform distribution of value over the various tranches of a scientific text (the
literature review is not considered as authorial as the results and their discussion).
This constitutes a “bell curve of authorship” that neither copyright law nor blunt-
edged definitions of plagiarism and textual similarity algorithms can address or
easily adapt to.

STEALING TIME, NOT TEXT

That said, the main difference between authorship and plagiarism in science com-
pared to other fields has to do with priority. Scientific credit goes to the person
who makes new claims and publishes them first.27 However independently achieved,
a major discovery made public shortly after somebody else has published it carries
very little credit to the second scientist (unless the second scientist comes to be
recognized as the one who “worked out” the insight of the first).28 The history of
science is littered with bitter priority disputes, which are as distinctive to science
as patent infringement cases are to industry. Furthermore, as shown by the quote
at the beginning of this article, accusations of plagiarism are quite common among
scientists as they try to establish their priority, or contest that of their opponent.
Setting aside questions about the specific validity of such allegations, it makes a
lot of sense to see them emerge during priority disputes, and not only because
accusing a competitor of plagiarism is an effective move to impeach their priority
claim. Given the crucial relation between credit and priority in science, the pla-
giarism that hurts the most is one that deprives a scientist of his or her priority.
That is, not a plagiarism that appropriates a published claim, but one that takes it
before the author can publish it.

This is supported by empirical findings of scientific misconduct. Data by the
Office of Research Integrity (ORI), which is in charge of misconduct investiga-
tions at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, shows that the ma-
jority of cases of plagiarism in U.S. biomedicine between 1992 and 2006 involve
the peer review process of manuscripts and grant applications, not printed arti-
cles.29 Furthermore, these cases typically involve the plagiarism of ideas, research
questions, and protocols. A typical scenario of this kind of plagiarism is described
in a case investigated by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Office of Inspec-
tor General:

“Professor Reviews Proposal for NSF, Then Plagiarizes from It into His Own
Proposal.” Our inquiry into a significant allegation of plagiarism con-
firmed that a proposal by a professor at an Oregon university contained
extensive sections of text and multiple figures duplicated from an earlier
proposal that NSF had asked the professor to review.30

Similarly, ORI’s Alan Price, who has reviewed all plagiarism cases investigated by
his office through 2006, comments that

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

461

All but 1 of these 8 ORI cases of solely plagiarism [as distinct from cases
concerning plagiarism mixed with other misconduct] involved the copy-
ing of words and/or ideas in [National Institutes of Health] grant ap-
plications, detected by a reviewer, who was in most cases the original
applicant whose own grant application to NIH (or to the NSF), or the
original author whose own publication, had been plagiarized; they just
happened to become a reviewer for NIH or NSF of the questioned ap-
plication and then reported the plagiarism to agency officials.31

The predominance of plagiarism cases involving grant applications (or manu-
scripts submitted for publication32) is striking, and the fact that they were re-
ported to the ORI mostly by the plagiarized scientists themselves (who happened
to review the application or manuscript) suggests that there may be considerably
more cases that go undetected because they are reviewed by referees who do not
have the same in-depth knowledge of the plagiarized sources. There seems to be
widespread knowledge of and concern about this kind of appropriation within
the scientific community. Interviewed during a survey of scientists’ opinions about
professional misconduct, a participant reported that:

I’m always wary of submitting grants to study sections, because those
people who sit on the study sections, it’s not unknown for them to take
your ideas, kill your grant, and then take and do it. And I think all of us
have either had that happen to them or know somebody who had that
happen to them.33

Appropriating somebody’s claim after it has already been published in a high-
visibility journal is, instead, a game with little gain for the plagiarist and relatively
little damage to the plagiarized. It is a bit like pirating a Prada bag after it has gone
out of fashion, and to sell it to people who do not know better.34 It is also an
easier kind of plagiarism to pursue, thanks to textual similarity algorithms.

Not so the plagiarism of proposals or manuscripts. As indicated by the last quote,
if the reviewer-plagiarist is a competitor (which is likely to be the case, given that
direct competitors have the most expertise in the application’s specific field and
may thus be asked to function as referees), he might give it a bad rating to try to
have the grant denied and the project delayed or stalled. That gives the plagiarist
time to put together a competing application or, if he or she has already the nec-
essary resources, pursue the plagiarized research project right away. Furthermore,
by plagiarizing an idea or project when it is still in a developing stage, he or she
could cover his or her tracks by doing some additional work on the proposal and
further articulate it.35 Going back to the early image of plagiarism as child kid-
napping, we could say that in this case the young work would grow up as the
plagiarist’s own.

What a scientist loses to this kind of plagiarism is not a work or product but
the potential of making one and gaining priority credit for it. It may therefore
foreclose that scientist’s opportunity of having a certain career based on the rec-
ognition that work might have engendered. It takes away possible futures, not the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

462

MARIO BIAGIOLI

credit for past work. If plagiarism is about stealing, then this one is about stealing
time.

IMPORT, HIDE, OR BOTH

The plagiarism of scientific publications (as distinct from that of grant applica-
tions or manuscripts) does occur, and is in fact the main, if not exclusive, object
of software-based studies of plagiarism in science. It is telling, however, that few
scientists are reporting this kind of plagiarism to the ORI, even though recent
studies indicate that about 10% of the polled scientists report direct knowledge
of plagiarism.36 The different response and concern that scientists show toward
the plagiarism of unpublished material compared to that of published articles is
not surprising given the crucial relationship between credit and priority, rather
than simply between credit and publication as found in other fields. Unless the
plagiarized article manages to come out ahead of the original one (which, most
likely, could happen only if the plagiarist was the peer reviewer of the manu-
script), or is published in a higher impact journal than the one the original au-
thor could have published it in, the plagiarized text is not likely to cause significant
professional damage to the legitimate author.37 Among the documented re-
sponses to plagiarism of scientific publications we find surprise (93% of plagia-
rized scientists are unaware of it), some anger, some sense of humor, abundant
disdain for the plagiarists, and disappointment with the performance of peer
review, but not remarks that one’s career has been damaged or could have been
different had the plagiarism never happened.38

Still, the plagiarism of scientific publications is quite interesting precisely be-
cause it is an altogether different species of misconduct compared to the plagia-
rism of unpublished grant applications and article manuscripts. And while it clearly
displays the import-export traits of scholarly authorship already described by Bayle
in 1697, it also adds a new and interesting twist to the genre. In the model dis-
cussed by Bayle, the plagiarist tried to avoid detection by appropriating ancient
texts few knew or remembered, and then fearlessly maximizing the visibility of his
or her own derivative text. That is the plagiarist’s best-case scenario: You can show
off your plagiarized work and reap all the credit you possibly can because the
chances of being found out are minimal.

Some plagiarism of published articles does indeed involve the importation of a
significant work to a place where it is not yet known. One may plagiarize an ar-
ticle by a notable European scientist published in a notable European journal by
translating it in a language few scientists read and republishing it in a venue out-
side of the Anglophone empire of science—a journal whose readers are not likely
to read European science journals. This is a fairly safe option for a plagiarist. So-
called translation plagiarism is hard to detect, but would gain you credit only in
the relatively isolated niche where you are recirculating the translated plagiarized

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

463

paper.39 That could work if you are a young U.S.- or Euro-trained PhD trying to
establish yourself as a player at home, pursuing a big-fish-in-a-small-pond strat-
egy. If, however, you are trying to accelerate or consolidate your career closer to
the center of the global community, you need to tweak Bayle’s model.

While not many of your colleagues read distant languages and journals, they
may be able to detect your plagiarism if you publish it in peer-reviewed Anglo-
phone journals. The answer is “publish and hide.” Not only hide your sources (as
suggested by Bayle), but try to conceal your plagiarized publications too. If the
plagiarism of unpublished materials is about “stealing time,” the appropriation of
published articles is about creating credit out of “invisible publications.” The key
element of this strategy is to republish in formally credible but low-impact-factor,
peer-reviewed Anglophone journals—journals that are good enough to give you
some credit when you add that publication to your vitae, and yet bad enough that
they are unlikely to be read by your direct colleagues and competitors.40 An ad-
ditional safety measure is to publish on marginal topics in marginal journals.41 If
plagiarism can be said to be a secondary economy of authorship, this specific va-
riety represents the lower tier of a secondary economy. Still, it is quite interesting
for those interested in questions of authorship because of the way it implicitly
redefines what a work is.

Ultimately, the text the plagiarist wants to claim credit for is his or her vitae
rather than his or her plagiarized article. In this context, the latter becomes a de-
vice to improve the former. The vitae has typically few readers—the chair, the
dean, the promotion committee—thus making it a relatively safe text compared
to an article that could be potentially read (and even cited!) by an unsafely large
number of people. The plagiarist’s goal here is not to pursue the premium prior-
ity credit associated with original publications. Plagiarizing scientific publications
is therefore radically different not only from the plagiarism of grant proposals but
also from “normal” plagiarism like appropriating a sermon or speech and rede-
livering it as yours. The scientist who plagiarizes a published article does not want
to show off the article to the world as if it was his or her own. He or she wants to
show off a longer publication list to the dean.

This is a unique scenario, distinct from all kinds of plagiarism I know of,
because it involves three texts, not two: the source article, the plagiarized article,
and the resume. The latter is the raison d’être of the whole process of appropri-
ation and (effaced) republication—not only the motive for it, but also its condi-
tions of possibility. This strategy would not make sense if we take the resume
out of the picture. If the plagiarist were to gain credit exclusively from his or her
plagiarized articles (as distinct from the credit he or she would receive from a
vitae made longer by those publications), the plagiarist would have to publish
them in high-impact journals (to maximize credit from the publication). But
that would likely lead to detection and demise. Conversely, if the plagiarist chose
to avoid detection, he or she would then probably have to avoid publication, and
thus plagiarism.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

464

MARIO BIAGIOLI

The vitae allows the plagiarist to bypass this dilemma, enabling him or her to
gain credit in a relatively safe fashion by publishing while not really publishing,
that is, by publishing in a way that negates the traditional effects of publication:
dissemination, reading, dialogue, and so forth. Because all that matters to the pla-
giarist is credit itself—an additional entry in his or her vitae rather than the claim
whose trace that entry is—all the plagiarist needs is a publication effect or, even
better, a publication event that is as invisible as possible and yet tangible enough
to create the effect that there was a publication—a publication that would justify
a new entry in the resume. The actions of somebody pursuing this specific kind of
plagiarism amount as much to resume fabrication (a form of fraud) as to the pla-
giarism of an article, which is only a means to the former.

The logic of this whole strategy hinges on the relationship between a public text
(the published article) and a more private one (the resume), and what can be
moved (or, more importantly, what cannot be moved) from the former to the lat-
ter. In the eyes of the plagiarist, the beauty of the literary and institutional genre
of the resume is that it is not supposed to contain the whole article but only a
short and effectively content-free reference to it. Unless the plagiarist has not even
bothered to modify the original article’s title, his or her plagiarism would be un-
detectable on the basis of the resume alone. The culture of publish or perish pro-
vides plagiarists with more than motivation. The quantitative logic of professional
evaluations construes the publication list as a work in and of itself (rather than
simply a record of somebody’s work); provides scientists with an incentive to pla-
giarize in order to feed their vitae; and helps them go undetected by focusing the
evaluation process on a reading of their vitae rather than of the articles listed
therein.

RECONFIGURING THE VICTIM, ELECTRONICALLY

Commentaries and policy proposals based on large-scale textual similarity studies
are surprisingly silent about the crucial relation between scientific credit and pri-
ority and, consequently, about how different the damages of plagiarism of pub-
lished texts are compared to that of unpublished texts and ideas. There is in fact
little or no mention of unpublished texts plagiarized during the peer review pro-
cess. Quantitative textual similarity studies seem to go for the low-laying fruits
that can be picked up by their algorithms while skirting the more complex forms
of appropriation that are not currently detectable with those technologies and yet
of greater concern to scientists: the lifting of ideas, research techniques, funding
proposals, or the denial of authorship. In a very recent (January 2012) series of
eight interventions in the journal Nature on the subject of “How to Stop Plagia-
rism,” only one mentioned plagiarism of ideas, acknowledging that is hardly cap-
tured by textual similarity algorithm.42 As another commentator puts it, “little if
any data exist on the plagiarism of ideas.”43

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

465

If most recent studies of scientific plagiarism focus on forms of appropriation
that are not highly damaging to scientists, it is not just because of the limits of
their heuristics. Their goals are distinctly different from those of the traditional
victim-centered discourse of plagiarism focused on the harm done to an author
by a plagiarist.44 The new discourse of plagiarism does focus on detection, but
largely to exemplify the power of these techniques as a surveillance system—a pan-
opticon aimed at preventing future plagiarism. If concerns with general preven-
tion have come to trump those for the damages suffered by plagiarized scientists,
the characterization of the victim has changed too. In the past, it was assumed to
be a specific individual author, but as will be seen below that figure is now being
replaced with the “public”—generic nameless readers who are “deceived” when
reading an article listing the wrong person as the author.45 From the protection of
authors and producers, we seem to have moved to that of readers or consumers.
Concerns with the protection of users are not without precedent in intellectual
property law. While patents and copyrights are construed as tools to incentivize
innovation and protect authors and inventors from the kind of appropriations
that would deflate their inventive spirit, trademark law protects business and cor-
porate brands partly because, we are told, protecting trademarks is in the con-
sumers’ best interest. Unless I can trust that the Coca-Cola logo that appears on
the soft drink bottle I’ve just bought means that its content has been indeed pro-
duced by the Coca Cola Company or a legitimate licensee, my shopping experi-
ence could turn into a nightmare of incertitude. The justification of trademark
protection based on the customers’ best interests, however, is not easily applicable
to scientific plagiarism. While one can imagine the damages that the passing off of
brands and commercial products could cause to a customer (like paying a lot of
money for a fake Rolex watch worth a fraction of a real one), it is difficult to
pinpoint what kind of damages would result from the reader’s confusion about
the identity of a science article’s author.46

Trademark law assumes that not all manufacturers produce and sell high-
quality goods. Consequently, the trust a customer develops for a brand whose re-
liability and quality he or she comes to appreciate is something valuable to the
customer and manufacturer alike. But the name of the author does not play the
same quality assurance role in science. Contemporary science is quite adamant in
presenting peer review as its primary quality control system.47 Articles published
in journals with good impact factor should be valuable and epistemically trust-
worthy no matter whose name appears on the byline. Peer review does not guar-
antee the truth of a scientist’s claim, but it still tells the reader that the manuscript
was audited and found sufficiently relevant and credible to warrant publication.
Furthermore, while plagiarism misrepresents the origin of a work, it does not
amount to passing off—the kind of practice that trademark law is after. A peer-
reviewed article that has been plagiarized and republished verbatim is not like a
cheaply made fake Rolex, but rather the original product with a fake name on it.
The packaging differs, but the epistemic value should be the same because the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

466

MARIO BIAGIOLI

substantial part of the product is the same.48 Given that people read science arti-
cles for their content and not because they make the readers look cool by associ-
ating them with the author’s “brand,” it is not clear what damage a reader would
sustain from using a fully plagiarized peer-reviewed article. One could even say
that a fully plagiarized article, if reprinted in a peer-reviewed journal, would have
undergone two rounds of review, thus making it even more trustworthy.

Recent studies of plagiarized literature are on a sounder course when they point
to financial costs (the republication of the same claims and data), the misuse of
human resources (the time wasted by scientist to re-review, re-read, or re-check
manuscripts and publications), or the unfair promotion of scientists based on pub-
lications they in fact did not author.49 But they do not stop there, intimating that
the damages of plagiarism spread further, affecting the trust between science and
the society that supports it. Plagiarism makes scientists look like cheating stu-
dents. Unless they know somebody is watching over their shoulders, scientists can
no longer be expected to abide by the honor code:

We find it odd that automated text-matching systems are used regu-
larly by high schools and universities, thereby enabling us to hold our
children up to a higher standard than we do our scientists. In our view,
it would be fairly simple to fold these tools into electronic-manuscript
submission systems, making it a ubiquitous aspect of the publication
process.50

It may be useful to use software to compare manuscript submissions to different
journals to detect possible similarities; the devil is not in the principle but in the
details, that is, in how the detected similarities are interpreted and what kind of
decisions are made based on those evaluations.51 What is more interesting about
this quote, however, is the language. The comparison between “our scientists” and
“our children” casts both of them as in need of supervision from “us”—an un-
defined parental entity hovering above high schools, research universities, and fed-
eral labs. “We” trusted and funded the scientists, but they cheated us, like ungrateful
children. Fortunately, we now have textual similarity software to stop them even
before they publish. Although plagiarism is something that scientists do to other
scientists, we—not the plagiarized scientists—are the victims.

But how big of a threat are we under? Recent statistics (cited in the textual-
similarity algorithm literature) put the percentage of plagiarized articles between
0.04% and 0.2%—not reassuring, but not exactly panic-inducing either.52 The call
for the ubiquitous deployment of text-similarity algorithms is not, therefore, a
response to a clear and imminent danger but more likely an attempt to create a
larger market and demand for these techniques and the expertise that goes with
them. The construction of so-called self-plagiarism is emblematic of this trend.
When textual-similarity algorithms turned up relatively modest percentages of tex-
tually similar articles by different authors (that is, potentially plagiarized articles),
they also detected a much higher percentage of similar texts published by the same
authors (that is, articles in which authors reused parts—large or small—of other

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

467

articles of theirs).53 These publications, however, were not termed “duplicate pub-
lications” or “partially duplicate publications” (which indeed they are) but have
been almost exclusively referred to as “self-plagiarism.” This is a puzzling linguis-
tic choice because, if plagiarism is defined as misappropriation, how can an au-
thor be said to steal what is already his or her own?54 The only relation (and a
merely phenomenological one) between plagiarism and duplicate publications is
that they may be detected by the same technology in the same way a thermometer
recording an elevated temperature in a patient’s body may indicate both heat stroke
and bubonic plague, and a variety of other unrelated conditions in between.

But instead of doing some qualitative homework to understand why scientists
sometime republish their work and determine the conditions under which those
practices may or may not be admissible, an assumption was made that there is no
categorical difference between plagiarism and duplicate publication or between
partially and fully duplicate publications, and that they are all unethical across the
board.55 Without in any way suggesting that it is unproblematic for an author to
republish the same article under a different title, I believe that the newfangled
notion of self-plagiarism is not an innocent, if remarkable, category mistake. Given
that there are many more duplicate publications than potential plagiarized arti-
cles, mixing the apples of plagiarism with the oranges of self-plagiarism has cre-
ated a significantly bigger target for textual similarity tools—one that can be better
used to gain visibility and justify the urgency for further research.

MISCONDUCT STUDIES

Over the last few decades, scientific misconduct has moved from being ad-
dressed on an ad hoc basis, within local institutional contexts, and with limited
transparency or concern with due process, to becoming the object of a new pro-
fessional discourse jump-started by a first generation of self-trained experts
responding to institutional concerns about misconduct, often in the form of high-
profile cases of scientific fraud.56 Science graduate students are now typically re-
quired to receive training on how to recognize and avoid misconduct—classes
for which textbooks and case studies are now available. This growing field is
anchored in institutions like ORI, which are increasingly emulated in other coun-
tries. They develop best practices for handling and prosecuting misconduct alle-
gations; coordinate their efforts and jurisdictions with those of universities,
journals, and various other stakeholders; articulate definitions; promote training;
organize conferences; publish newsletters; post findings, and so forth. There is
no doubt that if we now know a lot more about misconduct, and see a great deal
more transparency in its control and prosecution, it is largely because of institu-
tions like ORI and consortia of journal editors like the International Committee
of Medical Journal Editors and World Association of Medical Editors, which share
many of the ORI’s concerns (or those of similar bodies within other federal fund-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

468

MARIO BIAGIOLI

ing agencies) when it comes to misconduct. In sum, a new discipline has emerged,
aimed at disciplining scientists to prevent misconduct.

The traditional discourse of plagiarism (especially literary plagiarism) with which
I started this essay reflects the point of view of the plagiarized or of those speak-
ing on his or her behalf. There was (and there still is) no institution in charge of
literary plagiarism—the “Literary Court of Judicature” hypothesized in the open-
ing quote. Intellectual property law, as we have seen, has not been able to take up
that role either. Literary plagiarism has consequently remained largely confined to
a regime of “private justice,” narrated and acted in the first-person singular, de-
ploying pointed fingers and shaming tactics. This is profoundly different from the
new discourse on scientific plagiarism—a discourse that is not of the plagiarized
or on behalf of the plagiarized but is articulated by new “plagiarism experts” who
are charged (or self-charged) with developing academic studies of scientific mis-
conduct on behalf of universities and the federal agencies who support them. In
this new landscape, the generic taxpayer replaces the specific plagiarized scientist
as the victim of plagiarism, which in turn becomes a ubiquitous threat rather than
a specific local event. As suggested by the slippage between plagiarism and self-
plagiarism found in so much of the recent literature, the very object of the new
discourse may have changed as well.

The study and regulation of scientific misconduct are displaying most of the
typical sociological traits of the professionalization process: institutionalization,
standardization of training, certification of expertise, articulation of best prac-
tices, and so forth. But the expansion of the definition of plagiarism through the
use of textual similarity software shows that this is more than an institutional af-
fair. The development of plagiarism studies is crucially connected to the introduc-
tion of a technique—textual similarity algorithms—whose role goes well beyond
their ability to produce more evidence of possible plagiarism, more quickly, by
scanning an increasingly wider body of publications. These technologies are at-
tributed the kind of objective protocols and methodologies that can give credibil-
ity to a new field by providing previously unavailable evidence while casting its
production as free from qualitative personal biases. At the same time that the de-
tection of plagiarism in science has largely ceased to be the victim’s personal busi-
ness,57 it has been further depersonalized by being taken over by software. Produced
by people more likely to have a background in bioinformatics than literary stud-
ies, textual similarity algorithms may provide plagiarism studies with their “DNA
fingerprinting”—the kind of black-boxed evidence deemed to have lifted the field
of forensics from a skilled art into a science.

Setting aside the very interesting shift in the disciplinary background of pla-
giarism experts from literature or philology to computer science, we see that the
computerization of the detective’s role and the marginalization of the individual
plagiarized author from the picture goes hand in hand with a depersonalized
and delocalized notion of evidence. The new technologies do not engage in fine-
grained contextual (and therefore author- and plagiarist-specific) analyses of spe-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

469

cific plagiarism allegations, but in large-scale statistical studies. The combined
effect of the development of misconduct studies and its reliance on textual sim-
ilarity software has evacuated the individual—as victim, accuser, stakeholder, or
detective—from the discourse of plagiarism. It is now objective in its methodol-
ogies but, no longer set in motion by specific people and grievances, it is also
impersonal in its motives. These traits will be only enhanced when this kind of
data mining becomes an automated and virtually autonomous system of detec-
tion and surveillance, designed by human actors but operating on its own, in a
continuous fashion, according to its protocols.

The public was never construed as a stakeholder in the traditional discourse of
plagiarism, and would not, I believe, have become part of the story without the
advent of textual-similarity software. If it is difficult to pinpoint what exactly is
the public on whose behalf this new discourse on scientific plagiarism is being
developed, it may be because it is an empty name or, more precisely, a role emp-
tied, and left empty, by the evacuation of the individual from this new discourse.
Is it society? The readers? The government?58 The journal editors? The science
publishing business? The software providers? Given the proliferation of heteroge-
neous possible signifieds, this public may in fact be the name of an absence, the
name of the default and yet undetermined stakeholder that the new surveillance
discourse of plagiarism constructs for itself.

Changes in the discourse of plagiarism may provide an unexpected window on
the complex transition from a disciplinary society to a society of control.59 My
concluding point, however, is a much simpler one, namely, that the new surveil-
lance apparatus for plagiarism is doing a poor job at fulfilling the goals it has set
for itself. The way they are currently developed and deployed, these technologies
and their accompanying discourse are not particularly useful to the victims of sci-
entific plagiarism or to any other easily identifiable stakeholder because they fail
to provide evidence about the most damaging forms of misappropriation of sci-
entific work—misappropriation of proposals and unpublished manuscripts, not
publications. It misses the big target, blurs together the targets it can resolve (pla-
giarism and self-plagiarism), and cannot identify what is the public it is working
for. A cross-eyed panopticon with identity issues.

ENDNOTES

1. Anonymous, An Enquiry, 36–37. Sometimes erroneously attributed to William Warburton,

this text is discussed in Deazley, On the Origin of the Right to Copy, 149–67.

2. On this dispute between Newton and Leibniz see Hall, Philosophers at War.
3. The field-specific nature of plagiarism becomes quickly evident to anyone taking the time to
compare definitions, thus suggesting that plagiarism is, at best, a discipline-based construct. How-
ever, a prominent scholar of plagiarism has argued that even if one looks at just one set of practices—
“student cheating”—one can discern various forms of appropriations that make it virtually impossible
to define plagiarism even in one specific field. As Moore Howard, Standing in the Shadow, 157, puts
it: “The epistemological desire that propels us to attempt plagiarism regulations that would accom-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

470

MARIO BIAGIOLI

plish neat definitions to be cleanly applied to all cases cannot be fulfilled. Textuality and authorship
can never be fully articulated—much less regulated. They can only be enacted.” Her website “Pla-
giarism: Some Sources on Attitudes, Definitions, and Detection Methods” 具http://wrt-howard.syr.edu/
Bibs/PlagDefs.html典 is an important resource for anyone interested in plagiarism.

4. Loshin, “Secrets Revealed”; Oliar and Sprigman, “Intellectual Property Norms”; Fauchart and

von Hippel, “Norms-Based Intellectual Property”; Biagioli, “Rights or Rewards?”

5. Foucault, “What is an Author?”
6. Kelty, “Inventing Copyleft”; Tushnet, “Payment in Credit.” See also note 4 above.
7. Modern Language Association, Statement of Professional Ethics; American Historical Associa-
tion, Statement on Standards of Professional Conduct. While both associations uphold broad defini-
tions of plagiarism that include the appropriation of ideas, not just texts, the historians go further
by including data and empirical findings on the list of the objects whose appropriation amounts to
plagiarism.

8. On plagiarism as “pillage,” see Randall, “Imperial Plagiarism,” 132–35. On plagiarism as “rape”
see Mallon, Stolen Words, 134, 164; and Moore Howard, “Sexuality, Textuality,” 473–91. I discuss the
figure of plagiarism as kidnapping in “A Crime of Kinship.”

9. Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 870 (emphasis mine).
10. Both piracy and plagiarism are different from the most common form of trademark
infringement—passing off—that involves attaching somebody else’s brand or mark to a product
made by somebody else like, say, using the Louis Vuitton logo for bags that may be similar but not
identical in design and materials to those of Vuitton. Plagiarism, however, is conceptually similar to
“reverse passing off,” that is, the selling of somebody’s product under a different brand, like buying
Rolex watches and reselling them under the “Biagioli Watch” brand. This would not be a particularly
smart business decision because in high-brand products the brand is more valuable than the prod-
uct, but in the case of plagiarism the work is appropriated because of its use value to the plagiarist,
not the value of the original “brand”—the author’s name.

11. Failing to give attribution is not plagiarism in and of itself, but becomes so when one erases

the first author’s agency with the purpose of passing off the work as one’s own.

12. See for instance the recent plagiarism by Senator Scott Brown of a speech by Elizabeth Dole.
The lifting was not motivated by financial gain but by desire to find the “right” narrative for how
Senator Brown came to develop certain positive personality traits as a youth—an image that was
found in Ms. Dole’s own story about such process, see “Scott Brown Accused of Plagiarism: Eliza-
beth Dole Remarks ‘Lifted Verbatim’ Update,” Huff Post Politics 具http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
2011/10/12/scott-brown-plagiarism-elizabeth-dole_n_1008139.html典. What was lifted was, literally,
an autobiographical fragment, not a financially valuable text.

13. See the Brown-Dole case in note 12 above.
14. The typical defense against accusations of plagiarism is to acknowledge the facts (which, in
the case of verbatim plagiarism, would be quite difficult to refute) and then blame an associate for
the appropriation: a research assistant, a collaborator, or, in Senator Brown’s case, a summer intern.
15. Bayle, The Dictionary Historical and Critical, 773–74 (sub vocem “Ephorus”). I have first en-

countered a partial citation of this passage in Randall, “Imperial Plagiarism,” 133–34.

16. Merton, “The Matthew Effect in Science.”
17. Rossiter, “The Matthew Matilda Effect.” She articulated this construct by focusing on the sec-
ond half of the passage that Merton quoted from the Gospel according to Matthew 13:12, “For who-
ever has, to him more shall be given, and he will have an abundance; but whoever does not have,
even what he has shall be taken away from him.” The “Matilda Effect” is explicitly gendered—
Rossiter identifies men as the beneficiaries of the Matthew Effect and women as the victims of the
Matilda Effect—which is different from the more gender-neutral plagiarism scenarios that concern
me here. Still, some of the patterns of invisibility behind the Matilda Effect are similar to those that
enable plagiarism of distant or less visible sources.

18. LaFollette, Stealing into Print, 5–7.
19. For example, Xiguang and Lei, “Chinese Researchers Debate,” 337: “Li Fubin, then a lecturer
in physics at China Mining University at Xuzhou in eastern China’s Jiangsu province. In his pursuit

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

471

of promotion to associate professor, Li copied the whole text of a paper co-authored by a Turkish
professor and an Italian scholar from a physics journal published in Italy. Li then submitted the
copied article, under a new title, to a Swiss physics journal, which published it in 1990.”

20. There are liminal cases, however, when the brand name is tweaked to maintain a close asso-
ciation and yet signal some marginal difference in an attempt to stay clear of the law, like Proda
bags, Sany electronics, or Bolivia (instead of Bulova) watches. Thanks to Berris Charnley for this.

21. The significant differences between scientific authorship and the way the author or inventor

is construed in intellectual property law are discussed in Biagioli, “Rights or Rewards?”

22. Federal Register, 28386.
23. Vasconcelos et al, “Discussing Plagiarism in Latin American Science,” 677.
24. Roig, “Plagiarism in the Sciences,” 48.
25. Xiguang and Lei, “Chinese Researchers Debate,” 337.
26. Yilmaz, “Plagiarism? No, We’re just Borrowing,” 658. On that case see Brumfiel, “Turkish Phys-

icists,” 8.

27. Merton, “Priorities in Scientific Discovery”; Schaffer, “Discoveries and the End of Natural Phi-

losophy”; Biagioli, “From Ciphers to Confidentiality.”

28. Wikipedia, “Hardy-Weinberg Principle.” An example is the “Hardy-Weinberg” principle: “both
allele and genotype frequencies in a population remain constant from generation to generation un-
less specific disturbing influences are introduced.” Wilhelm Weinberg presented the principle in a
lecture, in Germany, in 1908 shortly before it was “rediscovered” and published in English by God-
frey Harold Hardy. For several decades Hardy was given priority, but the principle was then credited
to both scientists (despite the fact that Weinberg had never published it), when the near-simultaneity
of the discovery was accepted. Although chronologically first to discover, Weinberg is now listed
second, perhaps because, unlike Hardy, he did not go print.

29. Price, “Cases of Plagiarism.” Price’s article contains brief summaries of all plagiarism cases
investigated by the ORI over this period, including the sanctions handed out. Thanks to Berris Charn-
ley for this point, and for the many other useful comments.
30. National Science Foundation (NSF), “NSF/OIG Semiannual Report to Congress, September
2007-Investigations” http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/oigSept2007/oigsemiannualsept2007_4.pdf, at
p. 29.

31. Price, “Cases of Plagiarism,” 49.
32. Plagiarism of article manuscripts during peer review is discussed in Rennie, “Plagiarism,” 110–

11, 117.

33. De Vries et al., “Normal Misbehavior,” 47.
34. The analogy is not arbitrary because in both cases the plagiarist/pirate seeks credit in mar-

ginal and poorly informed markets.

35. That option would be difficult to pursue in the case of published work, by which time the

plagiarist could do little more than paraphrase or translate it into a different language.

36. Garner, “Publication Integrity Quantified,” 6. That not more scientists are aware of being pla-
giarized matches the evidence that plagiarized articles circulate in not so visible venues, otherwise
the author or her collaborators and colleagues would be likely to notice them more frequently.

37. Errami and Garner, “A Tale of Two Citations,” 399: “Unlike repeated publication by the same
authors, simultaneous publication is rarely observed for duplicates that do not share authors [. . .]
undoubtedly due to the fact that it is usually difficult to reuse someone else’s work before it appears
in print—unless the duplicating author also happens to have been a referee of the original.”
38. Long et al., “Responding to Possible Plagiarism”: see “Supporting Online Material: Supple-
ment with Materials and Methods, Tables S1 to S5, References,” 3–5 具www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/
full/323/5919/1293/DC1典 accessed 24 July 2012.

39. Garner et al., “How to Stop Plagiarism,” 23. Plagiarism-detecting software like Turnitin and
iThenticate has recently added translation modules to detect plagiarism across linguistic bound-
aries, but the effectiveness of these new features remains unproven.

40. In general, duplicates [i.e., “self-plagiarized” articles] are often published in journals with lower
impact factors (undoubtedly at least in part to minimize the odds of detection).” (Errami and Gar-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

472

MARIO BIAGIOLI

ner, “Tale of Two Citations,” 399). A Chinese scientist involved in the current anti-plagiarism cam-
paign reported that: “Plagiarists often send their copied papers to second-rate journals, making their
misdeeds harder to detect.” (Xiguang and Lei, “Chinese Researchers Debate,” 337). An investigation
into plagiarism by a team of Turkish physicists reported: “the search has turned up 67 papers, about
half of which have appeared in low-profile peer-reviewed? journals.” (Brumfiel, “Turkish Physicists,”
8). Also: “[. . .] we recorded the impact factors for each journal in which the 212 articles and their
duplicates were published using the Thomson Scientific Journal Citation Reports feature. A large
portion of the duplicates were published in low-profile journals; thus, impact factors were available
for only 199 of the 285 different journals. The impact factors of journals publishing original articles
were significantly higher (P ⬍ 0.001), averaging 3.87 and spanning 0.147 to 52.589, than those of
the journals publishing duplicate articles, averaging 1.6 and spanning 0.272 to 6.25.” (Long, Errami,
George, Sun, Garner, “Responding to Possible Plagiarism,” 1293.

41. Brumfiel, “Turkish Physicists,” 8: “Many of the papers concern an obscure theory of gravity
known as the Møller version of general relativity. Few people would be likely to check such work,
allowing the students and professors to build their publication record without fear of being caught,
says Ginsparg. ‘They were following the optimal strategy.’”

42. Garner, “How to Stop Plagiarism,” 22: “The unattributed rehashing of original ideas in an
author’s own words is much harder to detect. Consequently, we rely on a high-level peer-review
process and careful editing to spot such plagiarism.”

43. Roig, “Some Reflections on Plagiarism,” 38.
44. Although it would be unfair to expect that one type of study could cover all aspects of pla-
giarism in science, it remains striking that, to the best of my knowledge, the issue of damage and
redress to the plagiarized scientist is never mentioned in this literature—not even as a desideratum.
This is even more curious given that, unlike most kinds of plagiarism where redress can be just
primarily symbolic, the most damaging form of plagiarism in science—that of grant applications
turned down because of fraudulently poor reports by the plagiarizing referee—could be substan-
tially corrected by collecting the illegally claimed research funds from the plagiarist and redirecting
them to the original applicant who deserved them.

45. It is not clear, however, whether such consumers are the scientists themselves, the journals,

the universities, the funding agencies, the state, the taxpayers, or all or the above.

46. The only specific argument I have found (distinct from general claims that plagiarism erodes
the trustworthiness of science in the eyes of the public) for the damages that may be produced by
duplicate publication (either plagiarized or “self-plagiarized) is by Errami and Garner: “Duplication,
particularly of the results of patient trials, can negatively affect the practice of medicine, as it can
instill a false sense of confidence regarding the efficacy and safety of new drugs and procedures”
(“Tale of Two Citations,” 399). They do not, however, produce evidence that this scenario has actu-
ally materialized. Garner makes the same point elsewhere, citing the response of one author whose
paper was found to be plagiarized: “‘[My] major concern is that false data will lead to changes in
surgical practice regarding procedures’ was the response from one author whose plagiarized paper
was found by the Déjà vu project. This author correctly pointed out that, as researchers and clini-
cians, we are guided by the literature, and if it is corrupt the results can be disastrous, affecting
clinical decisions or research and career directions.” (Garner, “Publication Integrity Quantified,” 1).
This is a possible scenario, but an imagined one. No evidence is provided to support this fear and no
attempt is made to spell out how plagiarized claims equal “false data.” The Déjà vu project is de-
scribed in Errami, Sun, Long, George, and Garner “Déjà vu.”

47. Biagioli, “From Book Censorship.”
48. This would not amount to passing off (I sell you a cheaper article by disguising it as a high-
quality one), but rather a case of reverse passing off, where I would sell you a top-brand item with
a different logo on it.

49. Garner, “Publication Integrity Quantified,” 1.
50. Errami and Garner, “A Tale of Two Citations,” 399.
51. This is already happening, through the CrossCheck software used by various journal publish-
ers like Elsevier, Taylor & Francis, Wiley-Blackwell, the British Medical Journal, and Nature Publishing.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

473

52. Errami and Garner, “A Tale of Two Citations,” 397: “The study suggested a low number of
suspected acts of plagiarism (0.2% of arXiv papers), but a much higher number of suspected du-
plicates with the same authors (10.5%). In 2002, an anonymous survey of 3247 U.S. biomedical
researchers asking them to admit to questionable behavior revealed that 4.7% admitted to repeated
publication of the same results and 1.4% to plagiarism” and “In recent work, we have used eTBLAST
[a textual similarity algorithm] to search a subset of more than 62,000 Medline abstracts from the
past 12 years to identify highly similar entries. The 421 potential duplicates found have been depos-
ited in a publicly available database, Déjà vu, and after manual inspection were confirmed as dupli-
cates with different authors (0.04%; based on inspection of full-text articles), or duplicates with the
same authors (1.35%; based on inspection of the abstracts). The rate of false positives in this study
was only 1%.” I have not cited, in the body of my text, Errami and Garner’s claim that 1.4% of the
scientists polled in a 2002 study admitted to plagiarism because I believe they misunderstood the
sources they cite. They refer to the results reported in Martinson et al., “Scientists Behaving Badly,”
737, Table 1, showing an average 1.4% of positive answers to the question of whether scientists have
used “another’s ideas without obtaining permission or giving due credit.” The study by Martinson
and his colleagues was explicitly aimed at mapping the incidence of other forms of misconduct
outside of the “normal” ones—fabrication, falsification, plagiarism. This means that the question
about “using another’s ideas without obtaining permission or giving due credit” is not about pla-
giarism of printed sources (which is, instead, the topic of Errami and Garner’s “A Tale of Two Ci-
tations”) but about the appropriation of ideas. What Martinson and colleagues are reporting is
precisely the kind of plagiarism that cannot be easily detected by textual similarity algorithms, and
is much closer to the plagiarism of unpublished sources that I discuss here. Martinson’s data, in fact,
shows that the frequency of idea plagiarism (1.4%) is substantially higher than the 0.2% textual
plagiarism found in the arXiv study, and the 0.04% Errami and Garner found when they actually
compared full-length articles rather than simply abstracts in “A Tale of Two Citations,” 397.

53. Errami and Garner, “A Tale of Two Citations,” 397.
54. Rennie, “Plagiarism,” 102. ORI’s Alan Price is among the few who point to the category-
hopping performed by the notion of “self-plagiarism”: “Plagiarism is appropriation of someone else’s
words, without giving proper credit. Self-plagiarism is really duplicate publication. [. . .] it is inap-
propriate, a real problem for editors, and an expensive one. But basically it does not fall under ‘sci-
entific misconduct.’ Self-plagiarism is not ‘plagiarism,’ it is something else.”

55. A contextual analysis of “self-plagiarism” is in Samuelson, “Self-Plagiarism or Fair Use?”
56. Kevles, The Baltimore Affair, 6–117. Daniel Kevles’ analysis of the so-called Baltimore affair
discusses the emergent, and typically ad hoc procedures and conflicting expertise mobilized in early
scientific misconduct cases, as well as the poorly developed sense of due process that characterized
that phase of the field. Particularly interesting is the case of Ned Feder and Walter Stewart—two
NIH scientists who turned themselves into fraud busters, developing new techniques along the way.
57. Long et al., “Responding to Possible Plagiarism,” 1293. A recent study indicates that 93% of

plagiarized scientists are not aware of having been plagiarized.

58. Also, which government? The international and indeed, global nature of the field, and the fact
that journals are not only located in many different countries (and run by typically international
editorial teams) and publish work from all over the world (work that is often coauthored by scien-
tists of different nationalities) further complicates the identification of such a government, render-
ing this discourse’s stakeholders even more generic.

59. Deleuze, “Postscript.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

American Historical Association. Statement on Standards of Professional Conduct. 具http://www.
historians.org/pubs/free/ProfessionalStandards.cfm#Plagiarism典.

Anonymous. An Enquiry into the Nature and Origin of Literary Property. London: Flexney, 1762.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

474

MARIO BIAGIOLI

Bayle, Pierre. The Dictionary Historical and Critical of Mr Peter Bayle. The Second Edition, Carefully
Collated with the Several Editions of the Original. Vol. 2. London: Knapton, 1734.

Biagioli, Mario. “From Book Censorship to Peer Review.” Emergences 12 (2002): 11–45.

———. “Rights or Rewards? Changing Frameworks of Scientific Authorship.” In Scientific Author-
ship: Credit and Intellectual Property in Science, edited by Mario Biagioli and Peter Galison, 253–80.
New York: Routledge, 2002.

———. “From Ciphers to Confidentiality: Secrecy, Openness, and Priority in Science.” British Jour-
nal for the History of Science 45 (2012): 213–33.

———. “A Crime of Kinship: Plagiarism and the Gendering of Authorship.” Theory, Culture & So-
ciety (forthcoming).

Brumfiel, Geoff. “Turkish Physicists Face Accusations of Plagiarism.” Nature 449 (2007): 8.

Deazley, Ronan. On the Origin of the Right to Copy: Charting the Movement of Copyright Law in
Eighteenth-Century Britain (1695–1775). Hart: Oxford, 2004.

Deleuze, Gilles. “Postscript on the Societies of Control.” October 59 (1992): 3–7.

De Vries, Raymond, Melissa Anderson, and Brian Martinson. “Normal Misbehavior: Scientists Talk
about the Ethics of Research.” Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics 1 (2006):
43–50.

Errami, Mounir, and Harold Garner. “A Tale of Two Citations.” Nature 451 (2008): 397–99.

Errami, Mounir, Zhaohui Sun, Tara Long, Angela George, and Harold Garner. “De’ja’ vu: A Database
of Highly Similar Citations in the Scientific Literature.” Nucleic Acids Research 37 (database issue)
2009: D921–D24.

Fauchart, Emmanuelle, and Eric von Hippel. “Norms-Based Intellectual Property Systems: The Case
of French Chefs.” MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 4576–06 (1 January 2006) 具http://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id⫽881781典 accessed 20 October 2011.

Foucault, Michel. “What Is an Author.” In Language, Counter-Memory, Practice, translated and edited
by Donald F. Bouchard and Sherry Simon, 113–38. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977.

Garner, Harold. “Publication Integrity Quantified.” Office of Research Integrity Newsletter 17, no. 4
(2009): 1–6.

Garner, Harold, Bernd Pulverer, Ana Marusic´, Mladen Petrovechi, John Loadsman, Yuehong Zhang,
Ian McIntosh, Sandra Titus, Miguel Roig, and Melissa Anderson. “How to Stop Plagiarism.” Nature
481 (2012): 21–22.

Hall, Rupert. Philosophers at War: The Quarrel between Newton and Leibniz. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1980.

Kelty, Christopher. “Inventing Copyleft.” In Making and Unmaking Intellectual Property: Creative Pro-
duction in Legal and Cultural Perspective, edited by Mario Biagioli, Peter Jaszi, and Martha Wood-
mansee, 133–48. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.

Kevles, Daniel. The Baltimore Affair: A Trial of Politics, Science, and Character. New York: Norton,
1998.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

RECYCLING TEXTS OR STEALING TIME?

475

LaFollette, Marcel C. Stealing into Print: Fraud, Plagiarism, and Misconduct in Scientific Publishing.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.

Long, Tara, Mounir Errami, Angela George, Zhaohui Sun, and Harold Garner “Responding to Pos-
sible Plagiarism.” Science 323 (2009): 1293–94.

Loshin, Jacob. “Secrets Revealed: How Magicians Protect Intellectual Property without Law.” In Law
and Magic: A Collection of Essays, edited by Christine Corcos, 123–42. Durham: Carolina Academic
Press, 2010.

Mallon, Thomas. Stolen Words: Forays into the Origins and Ravages of Plagiarism. New York: Penguin
Books, 1989.

Martinson, Brian, Melissa Anderson, and Raymond de Vries. “Scientists Behaving Badly.” Nature 435
(2005): 737–38.

Merriam-Webster. Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 9th ed. Springfield, MA: Merriam-
Webster, 1981.

Merton, Robert. “Priorities in Scientific Discovery: A Chapter in the Sociology of Science.” American
Sociological Review 22 (1957): 635–59.

———. “The Matthew Effect in Science.” Science 159 (1968): 56–63.
Modern Language Association, “Statement of Professional Ethics.” 具http://www.mla.org/
repview_profethics典 accessed 15 October 2012.

Moore Howard, Rebecca. Standing in the Shadow of Giants: Plagiarists, Authors, Collaborators. Stamford,
CT: Ablex, 1999.

———. “Sexuality, Textuality: The Cultural Work of Plagiarism.” College English 62 (2000): 473–91.

Oliar, Dotan, and Chris Sprigman. “Intellectual Property Norms in Stand-Up Comedy.” In Making
and Unmaking Intellectual Property: Creative Production in Legal and Cultural Perspective, edited by
Mario Biagioli, Peter Jaszi, and Martha Woodmansee, 385–98. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2011.

Price, Alan. “Cases of Plagiarism Handled by the United States Office of Research Integrity 1992–
2005.” Plagiary: Cross-Disciplinary Studies in Plagiarism, Fabrication, and Falsification 1 (2006): 1–11.

Randall, Marilyn. “Imperial Plagiarism.” In Perspectives on Plagiarism and Intellectual Property in a
Postmodern World, edited by Lise Buranen and Alice M. Roy, 131–40. Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1999.

Rennie, Drummond. “Plagiarism: The Perspective of an Editor of a Biomedical Journal.” Proceedings
of the ORI/AAAS Conference on Plagiarism and Theft of Ideas (21–22 June 1993, Bethesda, MD):
109–21.

Roig, Miguel. “Plagiarism in the Sciences: Conference Highlights.” Science Editor 29 (2006): 48–49.

———. “Some Reflections on Plagiarism: The Problem of Paraphrasing in the Sciences.” European
Science Editing 33 (2007): 38–41.

Rossiter, Margaret. “The Matthew Matilda Effect in Science.” Social Studies of Science 23 (1993): 325–41.

Samuelson, Pamela. “Self-Plagiarism or Fair Use?” Communications of the ACM 37 (1994): 21–25.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276

476

MARIO BIAGIOLI

Schaffer, Simon. “Discoveries and the End of Natural Philosophy.” Social Studies of Science 16 (1986):
387–420.

Tushnet, Rebecca. “Payment in Credit: Copyright Law and Subcultural Creativity.” Law and Contem-
porary Problems 70 (2007): 135–174.

Vasconcelos, Sonia, Jacqueline Leta, Lídia Costa, André Pinto, and Martha Sorenson. “Discussing
Plagiarism in Latin American science: Brazilian Researchers Begin to Address an Ethical Issue.” EMBO
Reports 10 (2009): 677–82.
Wikipedia. “Hardy-Weinberg Principle.” 具http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardy-Weinberg_principle典 ac-
cessed 8 August 2012.

Xiguang, Li, and Xiong Lei. “Chinese Researchers Debate Rash of Plagiarism Cases.” Science 274 (1996):
337–38.

Yilmaz, Ihsan. “Plagiarism? No, We’re just Borrowing Better English.” Nature 449 (2007): 658.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:19:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000276


