 

Heritage, Crisis, and Community Crime 
Prevention in Nepal
Donna Yates*

Simon Mackenzie†

 

Abstract: Following Nepal’s 2015 earthquake, there was speculation that 
sacred art would be looted from the ruins of severely damaged temples due to a 
breakdown in formal security. Although pillage did not immediately occur, the 
months following the earthquake have seen the theft of sacred heritage items. 
As Nepali sacred art remains under threat of theft, we explore the processes by 
which government intervention can be destructive of the community dynamic 
that maintains local crime prevention on an informal and unofficial level. Based 
on fieldwork conducted in Nepal shortly before and after the earthquake, we 
ask: can situational crime prevention measures, when imposed in a top-down 
fashion upon communities by state actors, be corrosive of collective efficacy 
and, therefore, ultimately self-defeating in crime prevention terms? The case of 
post-quake Nepal seems to suggest that the answer to this question is, in some 
circumstances, yes.

INTRODUCTION: COMMUNITY HERITAGE CRIME PREVENTION AND 

THE EARTHQUAKE IN NEPAL

On 25 April 2015, an earthquake ranging in magnitude from 7.8 to 8.1 hit central 
Nepal. Nearly 9,000 people were killed and 22,000 injured in the quake and its major 
aftershocks, and hundreds of thousands of people lost their homes to landslide and 
collapse. Significant portions of heritage sites in the Kathmandu Valley and beyond 

*Scottish Centre for Crime and Justice Research, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom; 
Email: donna.yates@glasgow.ac.uk
†School of Social and Cultural Studies, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand; Scottish 
Centre for Crime and Justice Research, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom; Email: simon.
mackenzie@vuw.ac.nz

203

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

International Journal of Cultural Property (2018) 25:203–221. Printed in the USA.Copyright © 2018 International Cultural Property Societydoi:10.1017/S0940739118000140204 

DONNA YATES AND SIMON MACKENZIE

were damaged or destroyed. In the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, there 
was intense speculation by cultural heritage organizations that sacred art would 
be looted. This speculation resulted in a flurry of panicked reports in the Nepali 
and international media. This assumption of vulnerability was not unfounded 
as the quake should have created the sort of security breakdown that allows for  
undetected theft. However, the speculation proved incorrect. No sacred art theft 
was recorded in the three months following the earthquake: not by the government, 
by preservation non-governmental organizations, or by communities. A year and a 
half after the quake, however, thefts of sacred art from Nepali sites have escalated. 
What explains this post-disaster period of heritage site integrity, followed by an 
escalating crime rate in relation to site thefts more than a year later?

The answer, we suggest, lies in the nexus of effects of government-mandated 
formal legal and crime prevention measures, on the one hand, and the local and 
informal cultural protective social control regimes exercised by populations living 
near the sacred sites that use them as part of their cultural practices, on the other 
hand. Government legal and situational crime prevention initiatives have in some 
cases replaced the collective efficacy of local communities in deterring art thefts 
from sacred sites; in other cases, they have complemented them; and, in other cases 
still, they have eroded them. This article seeks to examine more closely this range 
of interactions between formal and informal social control measures in the context 
of the recovery period after a natural disaster.

In terms of the three categories of interaction listed above between formal (state) 
and informal (community) crime controls—replacement, complementarity, and 
erosion—the first two are reasonably uncomplicated, and we will examine their 
evolution in the case study in question. The third form of interaction—erosion—is 
the more quixotic. We can begin to unravel some of the theoretical possibilities 
involved in that process now in order to set the context for a full understanding of 
the post-quake heritage protection scene in Nepal that will follow.

Collective efficacy, defined by Robert Sampson, Stephen Raudenbush, and 
Felton Earls as “social cohesion among neighbors combined with their willingness 
to intervene on behalf of the common good,”1 has emerged as a concept from studies 
of the relationship between social disorganization and crime, broadly drawing 
together two separate, but mutually compatible, ideas: informal social control 
and social cohesion.2 Research has produced persuasive evidence that collective 
efficacy acts as a mediator between concentrated disadvantage and crime rates at 
the neighborhood level.3 The proposition is that collective efficacy measures the 
extent to which people would intervene to exercise a degree of control aimed at 
preventing crime locally. Highly collectively efficacious neighborhoods therefore 
experience lower crime rates because they are more able to mobilize a variety of 

1Sampson, Raudenbush, and Earls 1997.
2Gau 2014.
3Sampson 2006.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

HERITAGE, CRISIS, AND COMMUNITY CRIME PREVENTION IN NEPAL 

205

social resources to identify, deter, or reduce crime.4 Thus, collective efficacy is the 
“efficacy” (the capacity to function) of a given “collective” (a group of people), 
which often occurs in the field of crime prevention.

By contrast, situational crime prevention (SCP) looks to “target hardening”: 
changes to the physical environment that can protect objects, sites, and areas 
against crime.5 The theory is quite functional in orientation; it is about reducing 
opportunities for crime through changes to the settings in which those crimes take 
place. It may be seen to have a relationship with informal social control where—for 
example, in crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED)—buildings 
or areas are specifically planned and built to minimize blind spots and increase 
natural surveillance by users of the space.6 It may also have a relationship to the 
higher-level concept of collective efficacy if, for example, communities mobilize 
to demand SCP measures or, perhaps alternatively, the use of SCP lowers neigh-
borhood fears and anxieties to the extent that collective efficacy becomes a more 
realistic prospect than might otherwise be the case, as pro-social community inter-
actions are more freely undertaken and previously closed and guarded social actors 
begin to open up to their social surroundings.

The interesting question that emerges in the present case study is whether 
situational crime prevention measures, when imposed in a top-down fashion upon 
communities by state actors, albeit with the best intentions, can be corrosive of col-
lective efficacy and, therefore, ultimately self-defeating in crime prevention terms. 
The case of post-quake Nepal seems to suggest that the answer to this question 
is, in some circumstances, yes. If collective efficacy holds that “mutual trust and 
commonly held values unlock a community’s latent capacity to self-regulate and 
to prevent crime and disorder,” then what are the processes by which government 
intervention in terms of well-meaning crime prevention initiatives can be destruc-
tive of that community dynamic that maintains the fabric of local crime prevention 
on an informal and unofficial level?7

Critiques of SCP and CPTED, generally railing against the rather thin social 
conception of the rational actor at its base, have been taken forward recently in 
an interesting article by Thomas Raymen, who proposes that “attempts to design 
out crime create environments which are not only doomed to fail in their pri-
mary objective, but actively create environments which perpetuate and exacerbate 
the decline in symbolic efficiency and the narcissistic, competitive-individualist 
and asocial subjectivities which … have the capacity to significantly contribute to 
forms of harm, crime and deviance.”8 In post-disaster Nepal, while it would clearly 
not be appropriate to forcibly import Western academic conceptions of neoliberal 

4Sampson 2004.
5Clarke 1992.
6Newman 1973.
7Gau 2014.
8Raymen 2016.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

206 

DONNA YATES AND SIMON MACKENZIE

consumerist forms of individualism, we do see a comparable process of the social 
effects of environmental–legal interventions that diminish, rather than enhance, 
local protective regimes with respect to heritage sites and objects that have his-
torically been exercised and maintained as part of the cultural and religious daily 
practices at the community level of living with, using, and worshiping Hindu and 
Buddhist deities in the form of statuary. Or, as Raymen puts it, “when we employ 
SCP and CPTED strategies in our city spaces, are we designing-in the decline of 
symbolic efficiency and the development of potentially harmful subjectivities by 
designing-out the social?.”9

CULTURAL HERITAGE CRIME, CORRUPTION, AND POLICING IN NEPAL

Nepal is a landlocked country that runs along the spine of the Himalaya, sharing 
borders with India to the south and west, Tibet to the north, and Bhutan to the east. 
Known most as a high mountain country, Nepal also extends into lowland jungle 
regions, making it a country of sharp contrasts. Hinduism and Buddhism are the 
two primary religions of the country, with Hinduism representing 81.34 percent 
and Buddhism representing a visible minority at 9.04 percent of the country’s 26.5 
million people, according to the 2011 census.10 Both religions have long histories 
in Nepal and, accordingly, are both represented in several thousand years of sacred 
art and architecture.11 Temples and shrines are Nepal’s most iconic heritage sites. 
They are equally valued as so-called world heritage, as can be seen in the listing of 
many of the Kathmandu Valley’s sacred and royal precincts on the United Nations 
Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization’s  (UNESCO)  World  Heritage 
List and as living sacred locations that are in constant use by devotees.12 The sheer 
number of religious heritage sites and the amount of sacred art in the country 
cannot be understated; Jürgen Schick, while documenting the vulnerability of 
sacred sites, likened the entire Kathmandu Valley to “a large open-air museum.”13 
Ancient sculptures can be found in small shrines along every roadside and in every 
neighborhood courtyard. Most villages have several temples and sacred sites, many 
of them ancient. Cities have thousands. Most are at least nominally protected by 
the country’s heritage law, and most are in use.

There is a long and documented history of antiquities theft in Nepal, specifically 
pieces of sacred art stolen to meet the demands of the Western, and now Eastern, 
art market. This demand increased in the 1960s and 1970s when pop versions of 
both Hinduism and Buddhism entered into the Western mainstream. Much of the 
early research on the theft of sacred cultural objects from Nepal was conducted by 

9Raymen 2016 (emphasis original).
10Nepal 2011.
11Bangdel 1998.
12UNESCO, “Kathmandu Valley,” https://web.archive.org/web/20160916082344/http://whc.unesco.
org/en/list/121/ (accessed 15 May 2018).
13Schick 1998.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

HERITAGE, CRISIS, AND COMMUNITY CRIME PREVENTION IN NEPAL 

207

the late and revered scholar Lain S. Bangdel.14 As an art historian with a specialty 
in Nepal’s sacred art, Bangdel was witness to what he recorded as a massive exodus 
of Nepali sacred art onto the international market in the 1970s and 1980s. Revis-
iting sites he had photographed in the past, Bangdel was able not only to show 
that certain objects were missing but also to identify them in foreign private and 
public collections. All of the pieces identified by Bangdel as missing were stolen 
and exported in violation of Nepal’s Ancient Monuments Protection Act of 1956; 
cultural property that left Nepal after 1956 without an official government export 
permit is, unambiguously, illegal.15

There is some indication of the involvement of high-level antiquities and rare 
commodities smuggling from Nepal during this time and through the 1990s, with 
plausible allegations made of extended royal family and elite corruption as a 
facilitating factor.16 Sources close to Bangdel at this time report that he faced death 
threats  for  his  work  on  the  topic  of  sacred  art  theft  and  that  seeking  the  return 
of stolen sacred art in foreign collections was rarely a government priority.17 At 
this time, post-1951, the police service was controlled directly by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, ensuring the non-investigation of crime related to the corrupt elites. 
To some observers, “the police service were reduced to being a mere onlooker to 
crimes ranging from rape … to the theft of idols.”18 This situation shifted in the 
2000s with changes in the country’s political structures and some limited success 
in anti-corruption measures, but since the earthquake, Nepal has fallen from an 
already poor place in various assessments of global corruption, with Transparency 
International, for example, rating it “more corrupt” compared to other countries on 
their Corruption Perceptions Index.19 Furthermore, as Deepak Prakash Bhatt notes 
in regard to corruption cases, Nepal’s “judiciary is not very effective in awarding 
severe punishment to those who are involved in these kinds of activities, because of 
its long-highlighted link with political and power elites.”20

14E.g., Bangdel 1998.
15Ancient Monument Preservation Act 2013 (ad 1956) (Fifth Amendment).
16Retired Department of Archaeology official, personal communication, June 2015; see also Bhatt 
2009, 121.
17Dina Bangdel, personal communication, May 2015.
18Bhatt 2009. In this article, we use the term idol but note that it is not unproblematic. A more accu-
rate term to refer specifically to Hindu sacred statuary is Murti, which indicates that the statue and the 
deity have become the same thing—in other words, that the statue is the deity. This is an important 
concept toward understanding the importance of these objects that are living Gods. “Idol,” with no 
negative connotation, is the most frequent English term used in Nepal and abroad in reference to 
Murti, both in the academic and popular press. The term “idol” can include Buddhist statuary as well, 
which is a common target of theft in Nepal.
19See Transparency International, “Corruptions Perceptions Index 2017,” https://www.transparency.
org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2017 (accessed 15 May 2018). Nepal’s most recent 
Transparency International corruption score of 31 represents a worsening of corruption factors since 
the earthquake and places Nepal in the middle of the “more corrupt” end of the scale.
20Bhatt 2009.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

208 

DONNA YATES AND SIMON MACKENZIE

In an effort to reform the image of the police and related civil structures, com-
munity policing has been a government initiative since 1982, with the introduc-
tion of neighborhood police who are meant to be seen as more approachable.21 
While  the  intention  of  these  reforms  was  positive,  the  intended  cooperation 
between local and traditional authority structures and civil administration did not 
materialize  in  many  locations,  particularly  during  and  after  the  Maoist  insur-
gency when government-level administration could not extend into many com-
munities.  The  police  are  still  perceived  as  being  corrupt  and  as  engaging  in 
“regular extortion.”22

Within this political context, many Nepali individuals and communities harbor 
a  deep  distrust  of  the  government  and  government  institutions,  particularly 
those located outside of their local context. For example, from a survey of nearly 
2,000  households  conducted  before  the  earthquake,  Steinar  Askvik,  Ishtaiq 
Jamil, and Tek Nath Dhakal found that public trust is high for local institutions 
such as schools, hospitals, and village development committees but low for the 
courts,  the  civil  service,  parliament,  and  government.23  Hopeful  predictions 
for a move toward stronger institutions and increased public trust in non-local 
government  has  likely  been  dashed  by  the  government’s  inability  to  respond 
adequately to the long-term effects of the earthquake,24 with confidence drop-
ping to such a low level that Prime Minister K.P. Sharma Oli resigned in July 
2016, ending his “struggling” nine-month-old government ahead of a no con-
fidence vote.25 It is within this climate of weak government, local distrust of 
distant  authorities,  and  ongoing  insecurity  through  perceived  police  corrup-
tion that post-earthquake heritage preservation decisions are being made, pres-
ervation policy is being enforced, and, potentially, new heritage legislation is 
being drafted.

CONTRASTING PRIORITIES IN THE SACRED HERITAGE SPACES OF NEPAL

The following analysis stems from field research conducted in Nepal four months 
before the earthquake in December 2014 and three months after the earthquake in 
June 2015.26 The dichotomy between formal security (government-level legislation 
and regulation) and alternative or informal networks of community-level security 

21Bhatt 2009.
22Bhatt 2009.
23Askvik, Jamil, and Dhakal 2011.
24E.g., Tsering Dolker, “Earning Back the People’s Trust,” Nepali Times, 8–14 May 2015, https://
web.archive.org/web/20151002092300/http://nepalitimes.com/regular-columns/Between-the-lines/
government-earning-back-people-trust-after-earthquake,483 (accessed 15 May 2018).
25Sharma 2016.
26The names and titles of most informants have been omitted from this article due to the sensitive 
nature of the information provided, in line with the approval of our research ethics committee at the 
University of Glasgow.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

HERITAGE, CRISIS, AND COMMUNITY CRIME PREVENTION IN NEPAL 

209

is reflected, perhaps, in the conflicting preservation needs of many heritage sites. 
This is certainly the case at heritage sites throughout the developing and developed 
world, and Nepal, the focus of this article, is a clear example. The challenges that 
Nepal faces in protecting its sacred heritage sites are a study in contrasting stake-
holder needs with little room for compromise.

At the heart of this discussion is the tension caused by competing interests at 
sites of sacred heritage, particularly those within the Kathmandu Valley’s UNESCO 
world heritage site. Nepal’s temples and shrines must fulfill at the same time all 
three of the following functions:
 
	 •	 	They	must	be	sites	of	preservation,	which	have	been	formally	judged	to	be	
significant  to  all  humanity,  to  be  “world  heritage”  beyond  the  state-level 
context of Nepal. They must be preserved to an international standard, largely 
defined by such intergovernmental organizations as UNESCO, which have been 
criticized as being overly “Western” in construction.27 This generally means 
an emphasis on the preservation of physical, built objects over any intangible 
heritage uses.

	 •	 	They	must	be	sites	of	tourism,	which	are	significant	tourist	attractions	and,	
alongside outdoor sports, which are intermingled with visits to sacred sites, are 
the primary reason that most foreigners visit Nepal. Tourism is one of Nepal’s 
most important industries, and there is immense pressure on government 
preservation authorities to present sacred heritage sites in a manner that tourists 
expect; this need has taken a significant hit since the 2015 earthquake.28

	 •	 	They	must	be	sites	of	worship,	which,	as	the	homes	of	living	gods	or	as	direct	
portals  to  the  divine,  are  parts  of  the  vibrant  religious  and  social  identities 
of Nepal’s communities and of individual Nepalis.29 Removal of significant 
ancient sculptures to museums, locking or blocking access to parts of temples, 
and preventing the application of food and other offerings to pieces of sacred 
art in the name of preservation and security challenge the central role that 
sacred art plays in the daily life of many Nepalis.

 
Simplified to its most basic form, the needs of government-level preservation 
authorities, which we can consider to be associated with written and formal secu-
rity policy, may contrast with the needs of religious communities, which we can 
associate with non-legal community-level security associated with day-to-day use 
at sacred heritage sites. The official security powers naturally prioritize the pres-
ervation of heritage objects and the prevention of theft. Religious communities 

27Kathmandu-based heritage professionals, personal communication, 2015.
28E.g., in June 2015, when Donna Yates visited several of the major Kathmandu Valley sites, there 
were nearly no foreign tourists present; a noticeable difference from her December 2014 visits to the 
same sites.
29E.g., Bangdel 1998; Schick 1998.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

210 

DONNA YATES AND SIMON MACKENZIE

prioritize cultural use and access. On the ground, this may become a controversy 
over, for example, locking temple doors or moving idols from shrines into museums  
for  safekeeping  and/or  tourism  purposes.30  Official  security  powers  require 
the  documentation  of  cultural  property  since  inventories  improve  security 
planning  and  assist  in  recovery  following  theft.  Religious  communities  may 
consider  such  handling  to  be  sacrilegious  and  often  have  a  complete  ban  on 
photographing  what  they  consider  to  be  living  gods.31  The  same  cultural 
objects  must  be  preserved  by  the  state  and  serve  their  cultural  and  spiritual 
functions for the public. Both preservation and use are carried out under con-
ditions of poverty and the specter of extreme international art market demand. 
Lawmakers, heritage professionals, and community members, then, are forced 
to make nearly impossible choices about which set of values should be given 
primacy. On paper, the governmental preservation approach is clearly empha-
sized.  In  practice,  the  community  protection-through-use  approach  has  had 
the greater social effect.

NEPAL’S FORMAL HERITAGE PROTECTION FRAMEWORK

The primary legislative tool that concerns the security of sacred art in Nepal 
is the 2013 Ancient Monument Preservation Act,32 which has been amended 
several times, most recently in 2052 (ad 1992). It defines ancient monuments 
as any of a number of structures, including temples, stupas, and so on that are 
over 100 years old, and archaeological objects, including all sacred art, that also 
is over 100 years old. The government may declare any place to be a preserved 
monument. To modify or use these monuments in any way requires permis-
sion from the government via the Department of Archaeology, except explicitly 
under section 3(5) “to conduct and perform traditional dancing and singing or 
organize a fair or festival”—in other words, certain, but not all, religious uses 
require no prior permission.

The Act classifies ancient monuments into three categories: those of local impor-
tance, those of national importance, and those of international importance, with 
those of international importance being granted the most state-level protection. 
With regard to ownership, the Act recognizes two types of ancient monuments: 
public ancient monuments and private ancient monuments. The Department of 
Archaeology owns public ancient monuments and is charged with conserving 

30Numerous informants interviewed in both 2014 and 2015 expressed that the potential for a god 
to be moved into a museum was a constant worry in Kathmandu Valley communities. While only a 
handful of specific cases could be cited about this, the fear is great enough that it warranted comment 
across the social spectrum.
31Such a photography ban can extend to publically displayed statues—e.g., at the seventeenth-
century Kathesimbhu Stupa in the middle of Kathmandu, signs advise tourists not to photograph 
certain statues.
32Ancient Monument Preservation Act. Nepal uses the Bikram Samvat calendar so 2013 is ad 1956.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

HERITAGE, CRISIS, AND COMMUNITY CRIME PREVENTION IN NEPAL 

211

them.  Private  ancient  monuments  must  be  conserved  by  their  owners,  which 
may be collectives, communities, or individuals, but the Department of Archae-
ology retains the right to conserve privately owned monuments of national and 
international importance itself and to mandate conservation activities by monu-
ment owners. Owners must seek the approval of the Department of Archaeology 
before  modifying  the  features  of  any  ancient  monument.  Owners  of  temples, 
which  in  many  cases  are  treated  as  private  ancient  monuments,  are  required 
to use up to 50 percent of offerings and donations to fund the conservation of the 
structure and grounds.

The government claims in section 4(1) of the Ancient Monument Preservation 
Act the right to purchase any ancient monument “if it deems necessary from the 
point of view of protection of the monument.” Through the chief archaeology 
officer, it can force the owner of a private ancient monument to enter into a deed 
of responsibility to preserve the site; refusal to enter into the deed results in a local 
official being made responsible for the site. This deed states what level of secu-
rity the owner must provide and may list supervision responsibilities, the hiring of 
guards, a prohibition against alterations or object removals, and a ban on the sale 
or transfer of the monument. Failure to abide by a deed of responsibility may result 
in the Department of Archaeology assuming ownership of the monument without 
payment to the owner. Local chiefs are charged with inventorying archaeological 
objects located within their jurisdiction and forwarding the details of those objects 
to the Department of Archaeology.

Citing preservation as the goal, the government retains the right to prevent 
“misuse or any kind of ill-treatment” of sacred sites that are either of archaeolog-
ical importance or are under the supervision of the government as described in 
the Ancient Monument Preservation Act. Furthermore, the Act stipulates that any 
person may enter a religious site if they wish to do so—and this includes privately 
owned sacred sites—provided they do not disturb “the religious feeling of the con-
cerned person or the traditional practice.” The imposition of “improper restric-
tions” on entry into sacred sites are to be punished by exacting fines. Specifically, 
the chief archaeological officer has the power “to inspect as to whether or not the 
statue of the God or Goddess that is being worshiped is being kept properly.” If 
they determine it is not, they “may cause it to be adequately preserved.” No suit can 
be filed against government employees for actions performed under the powers 
vested in the Act.

Theft or vandalism of an ancient monument results in a fine of 25,000 to 100,000 
rupees (€206–826) on top of the valuation of the monument and five to 15 years 
in prison. Theft or vandalism of an archaeological object results in a fine of 5,000–
100,000 rupees (€41–826) on top of the valuation of the object and up to five years 
in prison. Objects covered by the Ancient Monument Preservation Act may not be 
exported or even transferred from one place to another within Nepal without prior 
government consent. Anyone in possession of an object that is over 100 years old, 
even objects inherited via families, must register with the government, except in 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

212 

DONNA YATES AND SIMON MACKENZIE

cases where the objects are kul devata (family gods).33 Fines for not registering 
objects range from 500 to 5,000 rupees (from €4 to 40), and failure to pay the 
fine may result in government seizure of the object with no payment made to the 
owner. There can be no legal trade in objects over 100 years old. Individuals who 
offer information that leads to an arrest and guilty verdict for violations of the Act 
are entitled to 10 percent of the fine imposed.

Ultimately, the Ancient Monument Preservation Act proclaims the govern-
ment’s power to make all decisions related to heritage sites and objects. Although 
the government allows for the private ownership of monuments and related objects, 
owners are stripped of all rights regarding modifications, transfer, movement, and, 
in the case of religious artifacts, acceptable use. To put it simply, the Ancient 
Monument Preservation Act seeks to apply a state-controlled international stan-
dard of preservation to Nepal’s complicated and contested heritage space, the most 
contested aspects of which relate to sacred sites and objects.

SACRED SITES AND ADVERSARIAL POLICY

The continued focus on religious sites in the Ancient Monument Preservation Act 
not only reflects the sacred nature of much of Nepal’s heritage but also may sig-
nify that religious heritage is what the government tends to have the least control 
over. The government can force the non-state caretakers of religious sites to enter 
into a state-defined management plan and to allow state officials (and, in essence, 
anyone) access to all sacred sites even when this violates access restrictions as man-
dated by religious observances. It can also determine if idols are being improperly 
cared for and, in theory, can order preservation or removal if it decides that active 
worship is harming the piece. Violation of any of these directives results in fines 
or object seizure. The government’s right to impose international preservation 
models on religious heritage sites, then, supersedes the active cultural functions of 
those sites or the religious needs of the owners and community members.

This  forced  yielding  to  government  determination  sometimes  places  com-
munities in an adversarial role against the state, and this friction is made more 
salient by the ongoing political issues outlined above in the history of the country’s 
regimes. This can be characterized as a generalized cynicism toward the govern-
ment’s legitimacy and good intentions that spills over into public attitudes toward 
the heritage security issue. The Ancient Monument Preservation Act acknowl-
edges that communities may oppose state-level heritage preservation measures and 
clearly spells out that the state wins such disputes. Community rights to heritage 
are approached as being inferior to the state’s right to heritage within the law, and 
the state is cast as the enforcer of the law and the appropriate body to control and 

33In India, Mullick v. Mullick (1925 27 BOMLR 1064) established that family gods were legal entities in 
their own right, rather than moveable property, and thus could have their interests represented in court. 
Nepal appears to treat kul devata in a comparable way, at least within cultural heritage law.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

HERITAGE, CRISIS, AND COMMUNITY CRIME PREVENTION IN NEPAL 

213

reprimand illicit activity. Strangely, the inventorying of objects and sites covered 
by this Act is left to local authorities—community members who one may assume 
might be the least willing to violate social norms related to the access to sacred sites 
and the photography of sacred objects. This likely accounts for Nepal’s uneven 
official registering of sacred art and exposes the Act’s inherent weakness: it does not 
protect the intangible and social heritage of these sacred cultural sites but, rather, 
subverts it. Aspects of site or object security that are created and maintained by tra-
ditional and non-preservational use—informal social control, in other words—are 
not regarded as valid at the regulatory level and are likely not officially recorded or 
supported.

NEPAL’S INFORMAL HERITAGE PROTECTION REALITY

Informally, protection and security at sacred sites in Nepal are partially predicated 
on the structure of the Ancient Monuments Protection Act in that they sometimes 
fill gaps in the Act or directly challenge its authority and are partially a function 
of the long-standing social and cultural uses of these sites. In the first instance, 
the types of non-state-level security patterns that are observable at Nepali sacred 
sites include decisions made by community members or religious caretakers either 
without consulting the government heritage authorities or in violation of their 
orders. We consider this to be a “replacement” effect, where community-level con-
trols replace, supersede, circumvent, or resist official policy. These usually involve 
changes in the physical fabric of a sacred heritage site, such as the installation of 
protective screens, locks, walls, and other security features in a manner that is con-
sidered to violate best practices in Western-style heritage preservation. It may also 
include the refusal to add security features such as those listed above in violation 
of government orders, placing emphasis on continued access to sacred objects and 
spaces. Beyond the religious argument for such access, it may be argued that the 
physical presence of devotees within sacred spaces prevents theft (for further dis-
cussion, see our theoretical notes on guardianship below). In other cases, commu-
nities and religious leaders may bar government access to sacred sites, arguing that 
under the Act these inspections may lead to the removal of sacred art to museums. 
Such removal is perceived by communities as theft, and the prevention of govern-
ment removal is perceived as securing the deities.

Beyond  direct  and  knowing  violation  of  the  government  heritage  protection 
framework in favor of community-defined security, a significant amount of sacred 
site protection in Nepal comes from actions beyond the Ancient Monument Pres-
ervation Act. This is the situation we refer to as “complementarity” between the 
official and the community crime prevention regimes. The cultural uses of many 
sacred Nepali sites ensure that they are monitored and that changes including theft 
and damage are noticed. Interaction with active shrines and temples begins in the 
early hours of the morning, with priests or members of the community perform-
ing puja (prayer ritual) to either invoke the deity or, in the case of temples where 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

214 

DONNA YATES AND SIMON MACKENZIE

the deity resides, awake them in order to honor them. This first prayer, which 
also  includes  unlocking  the  temple  or  shrine  if  it  is  normally  closed  during 
the  night,  can  happen  as  early  as  3:00  am  and  marks  the  start  of  a  complete 
day  of  human  presence  at  the  site.  Community  members  offer  short  prayers 
as they pass, others visit at various times for longer interactions with the deity, 
and priests perform their functions until the site is closed for the night. The 
constant flow of people and the direct interaction that devotees have with the 
sites afford a kind of protection to which limited government security under 
the Act cannot aspire.

Of  course,  this  is  not  the  case  for  all  Nepali  heritage  sites.  Disused  temples 
and shrines naturally do not have the benefit of protection from the presence of 
visitors, and suspicious behavior or theft at these sites may not be detected for 
quite a long time. Some sites as well may have religious access restrictions, with 
only limited groups being allowed to view the deity or sacred item held within,  
potentially shielding theft or damage from detection. However, some might argue 
that these access restrictions are, in themselves, a form of protection; if potential 
sacred art thieves do not know what (if any) targets exist in a temple, they may 
be unlikely to rob the temple, especially if they are looking for certain types of 
antiquities. In both of these cases, and at sacred sites generally, communities and 
religious groups depend on the social stigma and the divine punishment believed 
to be associated with sacred art theft and destruction; in other words, potential 
thieves may fear the social or religious penalties of theft. This is evidenced by 
several cases, recorded by the authors, of thieves returning stolen sacred art to 
temples, believing that “bad luck” and other tragedies in their lives had their 
source in the theft. Such guilt or “bad luck” returns are also possibilities in two 
recent idol theft cases.34

It is clear that the state heritage protection structure does not reach these local, 
social, and cultural security activities. Not only are these activities not protected 
under the law, but they are also directly challenged in key passages of the gov-
ernment’s primarily legislative tool. Top-down and bottom-up structures can 
therefore exist in tension, even when the relationship between official and infor-
mal control models is what we have called “replacement” and “complementarity.” 
Where the issue is the “erosion” of informal social controls by perhaps ill-advised 
state interventions, there is more tension still.

34“500-Year-Old  Conch  Stolen,”  Kathmandu  Post,  15  November  2015,  https://web.archive.org/
web/20151117055005/http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/news/2015-11-15/500-year-old-conch-
stolen.html (accessed 15 May 2018); “Four-Faced Shiva Idol Found at Bhaktapur,” Kathmandu Post, 
7 August 2016, https://web.archive.org/web/20160808161030/http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/
news/2016-08-07/four-faced-shiva-idol-found-at-bhaktapur.html (accessed 15 May 2018); “Police 
Recover 400-Year Old Stolen Idols, Ornaments,” Kathmandu Post, 21 August 2016, https://web.
archive.org/web/20160822183154/http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/news/2016-08-21/police-
recover-400-yr-old-stolen-idols-ornaments.html (accessed 15 May 2018).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

HERITAGE, CRISIS, AND COMMUNITY CRIME PREVENTION IN NEPAL 

215

THE EARTHQUAKE AND AFTERMATH

The 2015 earthquake destroyed significant parts of the important heritage sites of 
the Kathmandu Valley. To cite one example out of hundreds, the Kasthamandap, 
a sixteenth-century pagoda-style temple said to be built from the wood of a single 
tree and from which the city of Kathmandu gets its name, completely collapsed 
and, essentially, no longer exists. Collapse is the typical form of earthquake-related 
destruction of Nepal’s wooden and stone heritage sites, burying carved deities and 
architectural elementals in rubble or launching them off the sides of falling temples. 
Even the gods, it has been said, lost their homes in the quake.

After the earthquake, noting the fragile security situation that accompanied the 
inevitable social upheaval and physical destruction, many people widely expressed 
fear for the exposure of cultural heritage sites to looting.35 As previously stated, 
there is a strong international demand for Nepali art and a market for potentially 
looted sacred statuary. Following the earthquake, it seemed reasonable to assume 
that official guards and caretakers would leave sacred sites unattended; police and 
military officials would be concerned with the pressing need to save people trapped 
in the rubble rather than with preventing looting and theft. It was also assumed 
that closed-circuit security televisions and alarms (although non-existent in nearly 
every Nepali heritage location) would not be functional due to electricity disrup-
tion and that community members would be distracted with other issues and not 
necessarily keeping an eye on their cultural sites. It followed that sacred art thieves 
would identify this situation as their big chance.

Fortunately, however, the potential for despoliation manifested in these fears 
did not in fact materialize. During the informal interviews with residents as well 
as local and government officials that we conducted about three months after the 
earthquake, all reported that the immediate public reaction to the earthquake was 
to save: to pull people out of the rubble and then to pull gods out of the rubble. The 
form and organization that this salvage took differed greatly from site to site. In 
Patan, for example, local individuals and heritage professionals (often one and the 
same) brought sculptures and carved architectural pieces from in and around the 
heavily damaged Durbar Square area to the courtyard area of the Patan Museum 
with the help and expertise of the Kathmandu Valley Preservation Trust. In Bhaktapur, 
objects from damaged sacred spaces were also brought into the local museum, and 

35E.g., “After Damage, Nepal Quake-Ravaged Temple Faces Threat from Looters,” Hindustan Times, 
4 May 2015, https://web.archive.org/web/20151227211322/http://www.hindustantimes.com/world/
after-damage-nepal-quake-ravaged-temple-faces-threat-from-looters/story-OSjW86zv8igYnLVLbf1ZjI.
html (accessed 15 May 2018); “Looters Prowl as Nepal’s Treasures Spill into View,” The Nation, 
7 May 2015, https://web.archive.org/web/20151002161543/http://www.nationmultimedia.com/
opinion/Looters-prowl-as-Nepals-treasures-SPILL-INTO-VIEW-30259479.html  (accessed  15  May 
2018); Sarthak Mani, “Protecting the Ruins,” Nepali Times, 14–30 July 2015, https://web.archive.
org/web/20150830101824/http://nepalitimes.com/article/Nepali-Times-Buzz/religious-objects-of-
Kathmandu-vulnerable-to-threat-after-the-earthquake,2437 (accessed 15 May 2018).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

216 

DONNA YATES AND SIMON MACKENZIE

architectural elements were also preserved in an unused covered palace structure 
and in a shed owned by the Rabindra Puri Foundation. At each location, security 
was quickly established, usually by community members, and sacred art was pro-
tected from theft and, when possible, from further earthquake-related damage. In 
some locations, the military and police participated in the art salvage operations, 
signifying a complementarity between the levels of protection, but this support 
was not available everywhere and certainly was not available immediately. In a 
moment of crisis, then, security came largely from unofficial sources and from the 
community. This was, therefore, primarily a situation of the replacement of state 
protection regimes with informal community social controls.

In the Nepali year before the earthquake,36 only four sacred art thefts were 
recorded by police,37 although it is likely that this figure is far below the number 
of actual heritage thefts that took place that year. In the year following the quake, 
as mentioned, there were no thefts. At the time of writing, just over a year since 
the quake, we are beginning to once again see the theft of sacred art from Nepali 
temples, including, for example:
 
	 •	 	a	trident	and	a	bell,	which	were	stolen	from	a	Shiva	Temple	in	Ujjwal	Tole,	

Pepsicola, Kathmandu in September 2015;38

	 •	 	a	500-year-old	sacred	conch	shell,	which	was	stolen	from	the	Bhagwati	Temple	

of Marbhung, Gulmi, in November 2015;39

	 •	 	a	 seventeenth-century	 idol	 of	 Digu	 Bhairav,	 which	 was	 stolen	 from	 the	
Balkumari Temple in Digu Tole, Madhyapur Thimi, Bhaktapur, in December 
2015;40

	 •	 	two	idols,	at	least	one	of	them	of	Brahmayani,	which	were	stolen	from	the	

Brahmayani Temple at Taulachhe, Bhaktapur, in May 2016;41

	 •	 	a	 four-faced	 Shiva	 idol,	 which	 was	 stolen	 from	 an	 unknown	 location	 and	
concealed on the premises of the Chwanga Ganesh Temple in Bhaktapur in 
August 2016; and42

	 •	 	two	idols,	which	were	stolen	from	a	temple	in	Naudobahal,	Lalitpur,	in	August	

2016 and subsequently recovered with three arrests made.43

 

36The Nepali new year falls in mid-April.
37Sewa Bhattarai, “The Gods Are Still Leaving,” Kathmandu Post, 9 January 2016, https://web.archive.
org/web/20160916080402/http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/news/2016-01-09/the-gods-are-
still-leaving.html (accessed 15 May 2018).
38“Four Theft Cases Reported in Capital,” The Himalayan, 16 September 2015, https://web.archive.
org/web/20160916082347/https://thehimalayantimes.com/kathmandu/4-theft-cases-reported-in-
capital/ (accessed 15 May 2018).
39“After Damage.”
40Ojha 2015.
41Samiti 2016.
42“Looters Prowl.”
43Mani, “Protecting the Ruins.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

HERITAGE, CRISIS, AND COMMUNITY CRIME PREVENTION IN NEPAL 

217

There is speculation emerging that the onset of these new post-quake thefts 
is related to some of the lasting effects of the earthquake. While discussing the 
theft of the Dighu Bhairav statue in December 2015, Bhesh Narayan Dahal, the 
director general of the Department of Archaeology, stated that sacred art theft had 
increased since the earthquake, saying that “[t]here have been incidents of antiques 
that were stolen and left lying around, and also of the police intercepting sales and 
negotiations in the past three months.”44 He believes that the thefts were due to 
reduced security, and he went further to say that 50 to 100 “items of archaeolog-
ical importance” are stolen each year but that law enforcement may not always be 
notified of the thefts. In discussing the idol thefts from the Brahmayani temple, the 
police stated that “it became easier for the thieves to lift the statues from the temple 
as local people living around the temple had migrated elsewhere following the 2015 
earthquake.”45

Although it is early to speculate about a specific pattern of post-earthquake 
sacred art theft in Nepal, the observations of both state-level archaeological officials 
and local police regarding security raise important questions about the true nature 
of heritage site security in Nepal. Is it the state that protects these sites from theft—
sites that the government legally claims the right to preserve—or is it the informal 
networks of individual and community use that protect them? It appears that the 
answer is that it is the underlying constant presence of informal community-level 
social controls that underwrites the site preservation reality.

Sometimes, as happened immediately following the earthquake at a few of the 
internationally significant world heritage sites, the state can saturate the area with 
agents of formal control and thereby replace or complement the usual community 
protections. At the majority of other sites that do not have the same world heritage 
status, the community crime control regime performed its function in an accel-
erated way in the immediate aftermath of the disaster. However, after a period 
of time, as the earthquake damage leads to incremental community displacement 
from some sites, those local controls have dissipated, and thefts are increasing.46 
The accentuated state response in the immediate aftermath has subsided to the 
point that now the usual cultural heritage protection regime has been largely rein-
stated. However, the regime is now missing the community-level complementarity 
necessary to achieve effect on the ground. What seems to be happening is a process 
of further erosion of already attenuated informal social control as the government’s 
“business-as-usual” approach to inventory, situational crime prevention, and the 
removal of sacred objects to museums clashes with what is left of the community’s 
various attempts to use, and therefore protect, idols and shrines.

44Quoted in Bhattarai, “Gods Are Still Leaving.”
45Rastriya Samachar Samiti, “Ancient Brahmayani Statues Stolen from Bhaktapur Temple,” Hima-
layan Times, 11 May 2016, https://web.archive.org/web/20160916081951/https://thehimalayantimes.
com/kathmandu/ancient-statues-stolen-from-brahmayani-temple/ (accessed 15 May 2018).
46The International Organization for Migration has estimated that approximately 2.8 million people 
were displaced due to the earthquake. See International Organization for Migration 2016.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

218 

DONNA YATES AND SIMON MACKENZIE

THE THEORETICAL LANDSCAPE FOR REPLACEMENT, 

COMPLEMENTARITY, AND EROSION OF FORMS OF CONTROL

Informal social control therefore appears to be at the core of the pattern of post-
quake site protection followed by diminished protection and the rise of incidents 
of  theft.  As  a  central  component  of  the  routine  activities  theory,  “the  capable 
guardian against crime serves by simple presence to prevent crime, and by absence 
to make crime more likely.”47 In this well-known schema, “guardians” supervise 
“suitable targets,” thereby discouraging crime against them through surveillance 
and through intervention where necessary. The crux of the theory is that, while 
guardians can of course intervene actively to prevent crime, in most situations it 
is simply their visible or known presence that operates to discourage would-be 
offenders. The ritual use of sacred heritage sites can provide this visible display of 
guardianship and therefore protect the sites against thefts.

There is more to it than that, though. Cultural practices at sacred sites bind 
community members into forms of worship that embed the religious value of the 
component parts of the site in the collective consciousness of the local community. 
Therefore, as well as discouraging crime by the kind of informal social control  
envisaged by day-to-day guardianship in the routine activities theory, the man-
ifestation and reinforcement of a socially constructed respect for the sites in use 
can alter the perceptions of local community site users. This is less about capable 
guardianship than it is about social perceptions of the suitability of the target, 
which is perhaps the third issue in the routine activities triad—the motivation of 
offenders. Objects that might otherwise be seen as unsecured, valuable, portable, 
attractive targets come instead to be seen as inviolable, practical, and vital com-
munity foci. Thus, there are various levels on which the daily religious routines 
we have observed in Nepal protect cultural objects against crime, all of which are 
aspects of both the active and the passive implications of the concept of informal 
social control, including collective efficacy and the ideological consensus around 
the social meaning of sacred objects.

With respect to the first issue—informal social control—the concept of the 
“place manager” has been developed by John Eck and David Weisbud48 and sub-
sequently integrated into the broader theory of routine activities.49 Marcus Felson 
divides  responsibility  for  place  management  into:  (1)  personal;  (2)  assigned;  
(3) diffuse; and (4) general types of responsibility, corresponding in order to (1) places 
you own or use; (2) places you are employed to protect; (3) places you and others 
work in and share a responsibility in maintaining; and, finally, (4) bystanders and 
other casual users of places. It is clear that personal responsibility for place manage-
ment and protection against crime is one of the most powerful of these operational 

47Felson 1995.
48Eck and Weisbud 1995.
49Felson 1995.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

HERITAGE, CRISIS, AND COMMUNITY CRIME PREVENTION IN NEPAL 

219

categories of social control. It is also apparent that the integration of shrines and 
other sacred places into everyday community life can imbue them with the requi-
site sense of “personal” meaning so as to support their protection by community 
members on this level: ‘[E]xtra emphasis is given to personal ties, which impels 
more responsibility than any of the other three categories … primacy decreases in 
this order: personal, assigned, diffuse and general responsibility,’50

With respect to the second issue—the ideological consensus around the social 
meaning of sacred objects—we can observe that, while this certainly underlies 
much routine cultural practice in Nepal, it appears to have taken on a particu-
larly heightened salience in the immediate aftermath of the earthquake. Here, local 
communities mobilized to “save” their gods in a proactive and symbolic effort that 
rested on, but goes well beyond, the normal emotions of daily worship. Parallels 
can be drawn here to observations made by Randall Collins on the topic of “rituals 
of solidarity and security” in the wake of the 9/11 attack in New York. He identifies 
four phases of group solidarity as a response to “conflict” or, one might equally say 
perhaps, disaster, including:
 
	 •	 	an	initial	few	days	of	shock	and	idiosyncratic	individual	reactions	to	attack;
	 •	 	one	to	two	weeks	of	establishing	standardized	displays	of	solidarity	symbols;
	 •	 	two	to	three	months	of	high	solidarity	plateau;	and
	 •	 	gradual	decline	toward	normalcy	in	six	to	nine	months.51
 

In a very broad outline, this model and timeline seems quite instructive in 
helping to understand our case study. In terms of the more nuanced specifics of 
the theory, there are items that we would need to discuss, amend, manipulate, and 
so on at greater length than would be valuable here. However, the general prop-
osition is valuable and relevant for our purposes—namely, that community-level 
emotional responses to crisis are dynamic processes with particular and somewhat 
generalizable “shapes in time … that sweep people up at one moment and bring 
them down at another.”52

CONCLUSION

The protection of culturally important heritage sites against theft in a particular 
moment of crisis after a natural disaster is hardly the first context that springs to mind 
for a useful case study of the relationship between formal and informal social controls. 
In this research, we have gathered data that has allowed us to make some relatively 
broad  observations  about  the  “shapes”  of  group  response  to  crisis,  which  Collins 
has written about in another context, and to consider the relationship of those shapes 

50Felson 1995.
51Collins 2004.
52Collins 2004.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

220 

DONNA YATES AND SIMON MACKENZIE

to both the official government control regime for site protection and preservation 
and some of the criminological theory that supports an explanation of the patterns of 
crime prevention that we have observed. In the heuristics of replacement, comple-
mentarity, and erosion, we have considered the complexity of relationships between 
formal and informal control in this particular context and essentially observed that 
the state’s regime is less important in practice for the majority of sites than the com-
munity’s routine activities, that this was especially true in the immediate aftermath of 
the Nepal earthquake, and that the longer-term effects of the disaster on the dilution of 
these community-level controls is only now beginning to become apparent.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Askvik, Steinar, Ishtaiq Jamil, and Tek Nath Dhakal. 2011. “Citizens’ Trust in Public and Political 
Institutions in Nepal.” International Political Science Review 20: 1–21.

Bangdel, Lain S. 1998. Stolen Images of Nepal. Kathmandu: Royal Nepal Academy.

Bhatt, Deepak Prakash. 2009. “Public Security Challenges and the Effective Mobilization of Law 
Enforcement Agencies.” In Changing Security Dynamics in Nepal, edited by R. Bhattarai and R. Cave, 
113–34. Kathmandu: Nepal Institute for Policy Studies.

Collins, Randall. 2004. “Rituals of Solidarity and Security in the Wake of Terrorist Attack.” Sociological 
Theory 22: 53–87.

Clarke, Ronald V. 1992. Situational Crime Prevention. New York: Harrow and Heston.

Eck, John E., and David L. Weisburd. 1995. “Crime Places in Crime Theory.” In Crime and Place, 
edited by J. E. Eck and D. L. Weisburd, 1–33. Monsey, NY: Criminal Justice Press.

Felson, Marcus. 1995. “Those Who Discourage Crime.” In Crime and Place, edited by J. E. Eck and 
D. L. Weisburd, 53–66. Monsey, NY: Criminal Justice Press.

Gau, Jacinta M. 2014. “Unpacking Collective Efficacy: The Relationship between Social Cohesion and 
Informal Social Control.” Criminal Justice Studies 27: 210–25.

International Organization for Migration. 2016. “Nepal: Thousands Remain Displaced from Earth-
quake, Exposed to Impact of Coming Monsoon Season. International Organization for Migration,” 
24 June. https://web.archive.org/web/20180515082628/https://www.iom.int/news/nepal-thousands-
remain-displaced-earthquake-exposed-impact-coming-monsoon-season (accessed 15 May 2018).

Nepal,  Government  of.  2011.  Census  Info  Nepal.  http://dataforall.org/dashboard/nepalcensus/ 
(accessed 15 May 2018).

Newman, Oscar. 1973. Defensible Space. London: Architectural Press.

Ojha, Anup. 2015. “Police Draw Blank in Idol Theft Case.” Kathmandu Post, 21 December. https://
web.archive.org/web/20160916081701/http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/news/2015-12-21/
police-draw-blank-in-idol-theft-case.html (accessed 15 May 2018).

Raymen, Thomas. 2016. “Designing-in Crime by Designing-out the Social? Situational Crime Pre-
vention and the Intensification of Harmful Subjectivities.” British Journal of Criminology 56: 497–514.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140

HERITAGE, CRISIS, AND COMMUNITY CRIME PREVENTION IN NEPAL 

221

Sampson,  Robert  J.  2004.  “Neighbourhood  and  Community:  Collective  Efficacy  and  Community 
Safety.” New Economy 11: 106–13.

Sampson,  Robert  J.  2006.  “Collective  Efficacy  Theory:  Lessons  Learned  and  Directions  for  Future 
Inquiry.” In Advances in Criminological Theory, vol. 15: Taking Stock: the Status of Criminological 
Theory, edited by F. T. Cullen, J. Wright, and K. Blevens, 101–25. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction 
Publishers.

Sampson, Robert J., Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls. 1997. “Neighbourhoods and Violent 
Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy.” Science 277: 918–24.

Schick, Jürgen. 1998. The Gods Are Leaving the Country: Art Theft from Nepal. Bangkok: Orchid Press.

Sharma, Bhadra. 2016. “Nepal’s Prime Minister, K.P. Sharma Oli, Resigns Ahead of a No-Confidence 
Vote.” New York Times, 24 July. http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/25/world/asia/nepal-prime-minister-
resigns.html (accessed 15 May 2018).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:40:02, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739118000140


