 (2008) 15:159–179. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2008 Relational Objects: Connecting People
and Things Through Pasifika Styles
Anita Herle*

Debates around cultural properties tend to focus on law and ethics, on appropri-
ation and ownership, with media representations often producing stereotypes that
reinforce and polarize the terms of the debate. The common, typically polemical,
notion is that rapacious museums are merely a final resting point for captive static
objects, with repatriation viewed as simply restorative compensation. A robust chal-
lenge to this view was developed in the Declaration on the Importance and Value
of Universal Museums signed in 2002 by the directors of 19 leading museums in
Europe and North America.1 The concept of the universal museum asserts that
objects are cared for and held in trust for the world, overriding shifting political
and ethnic boundaries and enabling the visitor to see “different parts of the world
as indissolubly linked.”2 Although many would be in sympathy with the rhetorical
position asserted, critics have argued that the declaration is a thinly veiled attempt
to bolster immunity to repatriation claims. On both sides of the debate, the heg-
emonic position of many museums remains unsettling.

Drawing on the experience of the exhibition Pasifika Styles at the University of
Cambridge Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology (MAA),3 and the pro-
cesses involved in its creation and reception, the article shifts the focus on utterly
fixed objects unambiguously owned by individuals, communities, and institu-
tions, to a more relational understanding of the dynamic links between people
and things. A central premise of relational models is that entities (both objects
and people) emerge from (and thus acquire substance, meaning, and value through)
the relations in which they are enmeshed.4 A relational approach to the museum
and the objects it contains highlights the productive potential of museum collec-
tions and exhibitions to link people and ideas over time and space.5 Recent projects,
both within the Pacific and between particular Pacific communities and museums
in Europe and America, have shifted the emphasis from ownership (in a narrow

*Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Cambridge. Email: ach13@cam.ac.uk

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: Photo credits: Figures 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 courtesy of
Kerry Brown. Figures 2, 7, 8 courtesy of the Cambridge University Museum of Archaeology and
Anthropology. Figure 16 courtesy of Carine Durand. Figure 17 courtesy of Joshua Bell.

159

160

ANITA HERLE

FIGURE 1.
Jason Hall, The do-it-yourself repatriation kit (2006). Open leather briefcase con-
taining a club hammer, with a baggage tag from London’s Heathrow airport. The interior
foam lining has a recessed compartment in the characteristic shape of a Maori hei tiki
ornament.

sense of the term) to considerations of access, use, and interpretation.6 In many
instances, this shift has reconnected communities with treasured historic objects,
reinvigorating their potency and reinforcing the presence of the ancestral past in
the present. Furthermore, contemporary art practice, often involving members of
diasporic communities, provides an insightful and powerful commentary on ideas
about appropriation and reciprocity.7

Pasifika Styles was initiated by museum curator Amiria Salmond with guest cu-
rator Rosanna Raymond, a Samoan New Zealander living in London, who has
continued to be an influential figure in Maori/Polynesian fashion, performance,
and installation art.8 Rosanna Raymond’s leading role as both cocurator and par-
ticipating artist was crucial to the development of the project, as was the active
involvement of numerous Maori- and New Zealand–based Pacific Island artists,
many of whom came to Cambridge to participate in its creation, opening, and
associated outreach activities. Pasifika Styles was generated from a less proprieto-
rial form of curatorship, which facilitated members of local and diasporic com-
munities to reconnect with their tãonga (ancestral treasures) and revitalize the
museums collections, both physically and spiritually.

Working with museums and collections can help bridge the gaps that have
opened in the process of housing, collecting and writing about indigenous

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

161

people over the past 200 years. They could be arenas for cultural exchange,
going outside the boundary of the space into everyday life.9

The poster image for Pasifika Styles features Raymond’s tattooed hand reaching
toward a Maori tãonga, a hei tiki neck pendant (MAA Z 6498) collected in 1907
by Baron Anatole von Hügel, the museum’s founding curator. Her arm is deco-
rated with boar’s tusk ornaments from Samoa (also in the museum’s collection)
and her gesture highlights the living and dynamic aspects of Pacific art (Figure 2).
Commenting on the image Raymond stated, “I see him coming into the world of
light, re-connecting to the living aspect . . . and binding Maori with the Pacific.”10
The exhibition opens with George Nuku’s Outer Space Marae (2006), carved
from acrylic Perspex and inlaid with paua (Haliotis shell). Its positioning at the
entrance of the exhibition highlights the transformation of parts of the gallery
into Maori space and the connection between ancestors and their contemporary
kin (Figure 3). Adept at moving between cultural worlds, Nuku describes his “mul-
titudinal self,” his ability to take his family and tribe with him: “When you enact
your culture you don’t need to translate your culture anymore.”11

Visible through the marae’s facade, on the opposite side of the gallery, is Ro-
sanna Raymond’s large glass-case installation, Eye land Part II: Welkome 2 da K’lub
(2006). Raymond’s work plays with puns and analogies that tease as well as elicit

FIGURE 2. The poster image for Pasifika Styles featuring Raymond’s tattooed hand reach-
ing toward a Maori tãonga, a hei tiki neck pendant (MAA Z 6498) collected in 1907 by
Baron Anatole von Hügel, the museum’s founding curator.

162

ANITA HERLE

FIGURE 3. George Nuku, Outer Space Marae (2006), carved from acrylic Perspex and in-
laid with paua (Haliotis shell).

insightful connections between things. Da K’lub is framed with a selection of Pol-
ynesian clubs from the museum’s collections, arranged along the top of the long
case in a manner inspired by the symmetrical arrangements of weapons on the
walls of colonial residences and the layout of many ‘traditional’ museum displays
(Figure 4). Her Eye land is a strong visual evocation of contemporary Polynesian
life in New Zealand and beyond. The walls are covered with hundreds of overlap-
ping photographs, posters, magazine covers, and ephemera, which document a
vibrant and intense period of intercultural creativity involving Auckland-based
Maori and Pacific Islander artists in dialogue with international youth and fash-
ion culture (Figure 5). As a performing artist and founding member of the art
collective Pacific Sisters, Raymond’s own art practice has been central to these de-
velopments.12 The case also includes many personal items such as photographs,
jewelry, ornaments, and T-shirts. A Samoan raffia and pandanus skirt from the
museum’s collection (MAA 1925.151) is displayed alongside a new skirt created
by Raymond from plaited yellow plastic raffia strips decorated with cowrie shells.
Raymond carefully selected specific museum objects to include in her artwork,
which allude to varied and complex historic relations between Cambridge and the
Pacific. A nineteenth-century Samoan mat (MAA 1951.775) is displayed on the
case floor with an old hand-written label, which reads as follows:

King Matafa of Samoa and his Queen sat on this mat to receive Dr Alex
Hill [late Master of Downing College in Cambridge] and his wife and

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

163

FIGURE 4. Rosanna Raymond’s large glass-case installation Eye land Part II: Welkome 2 da
K’lub (2006). Suspended in front of the case is Annie O’Neil’s etuit/little stars (2006) com-
posed as part of an outreach project for children at the museum.

son and daughter, at a kava drinking in 1895 when they visited the is-
lands. After the ceremony, King Matafa rose and presented the mat to
Dr Hill . . . donated by Miss E. Hill 1951.775.

Positioned on the mat, a roughly carved wooden female figure from Fiji, donated
by the museum’s founding Curator Baron von Hügel, hints at more ambiguous
relations. As a young man, von Hügel worked in Fiji between 1875 and 1876 re-
cording details of customary life and collecting objects. The catalog card for the
figure (MAA Z 2869) notes that it was “given to the collector by Ninona, a pretty
half caste Kai Loma girl at (Bau) Mbau as her portrait.” Although ‘portrait’ is a
misnomer, the figure appears to have been a memento of a relationship between
von Hügel and the girl. Prior to display Raymond was concerned that the figure
appeared neglected, so carefully dressed her with a whale-tooth necklace from the
collection, a miniature plaited hula skirt she crafted herself and a feather and shell
anklet, thus restoring a sense of decorum to the figure and clothing it as it might
have been clothed in the past.13 Researching the museum’s collections, Raymond
explained that she feels “a strong bond to my ancestors when I meet ‘artefacts.’ It
is like a direct line opens up with my cultural heritage, the past becomes present.”14
The living dynamic between the past and present is demonstrated in a powerful
and evocative installation by Maori artist Lisa Reihana, a leading figure in the de-
velopment of multimedia art in Aotearoa New Zealand. Her he tautoko (2006) fea-

164

ANITA HERLE

FIGURE 5. Detail from Rosanna Raymond’s large glass-case installation Eye land Part II:
Welkome 2 da K’lub (2006), with central image of Raymond from the Pacific Sisters.

tures a carved wooden tekoteko (MAA 1939.70), an ancestral figure originally
attached to a house gable. The carving was collected in the 1830s by Baron von Hü-
gel’s father near the Bay of Islands, tribal homeland of the artist’s father (Figure 6).
This region was also the first center of colonial government and therefore the lo-
cation from where some of the first Maori objects left Aotearoa. The tekoteko, nearly
a meter in height, is positioned in the top half of the case so that its iridescent shell
eyes look down on the visitor. The figure is wearing large white headphones, plugged
into a visitor’s listening post, and placed with its back to a video screen displaying
digitally manipulated images of nineteenth-century Maori collections in the mu-
seum and of the artist’s journey between New Zealand and Cambridge. The move-
ments on the screen, the stories, and the songs (including a rendition of the artist
singing “My Bonnie Lies Over the Ocean”), animate the figure, highlighting its con-
tinued ancestral presence and ongoing connection to both past and contemporary
events. Rather than being didactic, the artist’s intention is to activate people into
thinking for themselves about the possible meanings created by the repositioning
of objects from the museum’s collections. Commenting on the creation of this in-
stallation within the museum, Reihana notes the following:

It’s interesting territory for an artist to work in a museum; they have
collections—rich and loaded material. It’s not the blank canvas that a
gallery usually presents . . . We call treasured artefacts ‘tãonga.’ Pasifika

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

165

FIGURE 6. Lisa Reihana, he tautoko (2006). The installation features a carved wooden
tekoteko (MAA 1939.70), an ancestral figure originally attached to a house gable. The fig-
ure is wearing headphones, plugged into a visitor’s listening post, and positioned in front
of a video screen.

Styles allows me the opportunity to show people these aren’t just ob-
jects, they embody the life blood of our living culture.15

An adjacent photographic installation by Reihana, Hongi Hika BA (Cantab.):
‘an emblem of wisdom . . . ?’ (2006) refers to a critical historic encounter between
the University of Cambridge and Hongi Hika (1772?–1828), a Maori chief and
war leader of the Ngapuhi iwi (tribe). Hongi Hika travelled to England in 1820 on
board the whaling ship the New Zealander, accompanied by the missionary Thomas
Kendall. He spent five months in London and Cambridge, where he worked closely
with the linguist Professor Samuel Lee at Queens College. Lee went on to write
the first orthography of the Maori language, but Hongi Hika’s contribution to this

166

ANITA HERLE

important scholarly work was never formally acknowledged. This is redressed in a
series of three photographs, where another Pasifika Styles artist, Reuben Paterson,
standing in for Hongi Hika, is shown in front of a college wall receiving his long-
overdue Cambridge degree. In the photograph Reihana has painted lines over
Paterson’s face, alluding to Hongi Hika’s moko (tattooed visage). He wears a Maori
cloak composed by Reihana of Cambridge college scarves, stitched together and
embellished with tassels of goat hair, and holds a rolled degree certificate (Fig-
ure 7). The photographs, positioned above the cloak itself, are captioned “word
power” and “fire power,” the latter alluding to the guns Hongi Hika brought back
with him from England and used to overrun much of the North Island.

Drawing on extensive research on historic Pacific photographs held in muse-
ums and archives, artist Shigeyuki Kihara explores how people and places are col-

FIGURE 7. University of Cambridge Newsletter with image from Lisa Reihana’s installa-
tion Hongi Hika BA (Cantab.): ‘an emblem of wisdom . . . ?’ (2006). The photograph shows
artist Rueben Paterson, wearing a Maori cloak composed of Cambridge college scarves,
standing in for Maori chief Hongi Hika (1772?–1828), who is belatedly receiving an hon-
orary degree from Cambridge.

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

167

lected and classified. Her large and compelling photographic triptych, Fa’a fafine
in a manner of a woman (2005), challenges stereotypic representations of Poly-
nesian women as sensuous “dusky maidens” and raises questions regarding the
attribution of gender and racial identity (Figure 8). Transgendered and of mixed
Japanese and Samoan descent, Kihara positions herself centrally within the series
of black and white images which both mimic and critique the techniques of
nineteenth- and early twentieth-century studio photography. The artist is posed
in a semireclined position on a Victorian settee flanked by potted plants with a
backdrop covered by a plaited mat. In the first image she is wearing a scant hula
skirt, with a floral ear ornament and a strand of beads hanging loosely from her
left shoulder. Although her posture and expression are identical in all three im-
ages, the subsequent photographs are surprisingly revealing. Responding to the
voyeuristic and titillating expectations of the genre, in the second image her hula
skirt is removed and in the final image a penis protrudes from between her tightly
closed legs. Although positioning herself as the fictive subject of a typically male,
colonial gaze, Kihara looks directly at the viewer, as if to challenge their presump-
tions. Her reenactment both highlights and subverts the power of colonial pho-
tography to classify and subjugate. The ‘reality’ of the image is also undermined
by the torn edge of the mat background, which reveals a further backdrop and
draws attention to the artificiality of the studio setting.

FIGURE 8.
(2005). MAA 2007.465

Shigeyuki Kihara’s photographic triptych, Fa’a fafine in a manner of a woman

168

ANITA HERLE

What people see with me is the surface of what’s being presented to them,
but not necessarily what you would call a reality. I am Polynesian, I am
Asian, I appear publicly and live as a woman within my male anatomical
body—this is known as fa’a fafine in Samoa—third gender is the closest
western interpretation. The Fa’a fafine work questions the western clas-
sification of races, gender and sexuality. I can never fit into them, but at
the same time I ask myself—are they worth fitting into?16

A series of installations by Maori artist Maureen Lander feature her exquisite
and at times fanciful weavings, some of which extend beyond the confines of the
display cases. Her artwork has been inspired by more than 15 years of research on
feather and fibre objects in museum collections in New Zealand and overseas. She
describes the intriguing qualities of objects that have been “kept in the dark” in
museum storerooms. “Discovering them is like meeting old friends for the first
time—a sense of recognition and sadness, and an urge to bring them back into
the light and give them new life through referencing them in my art-making pro-
cess.”17 Lander is also interested in how objects are interpreted and displayed in
museums and how different kinds of meanings are brought up in particular con-
texts. One of her installations in the gallery, This is not a kete (1994/2006), focuses
on a large kete (woven bag), which she made specifically for display. Here the kete
becomes a kind of meta-object that invites reflection rather than use. Lander has
created site-specific installations at a number of museums and galleries, including
Mrs Cook’s Kete, originally developed at the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford and
adapted for Pasifika Styles.18

Developing customary weaving skills for new contexts and creatively incorpo-
rating new material and techniques, Lander’s artworks directly challenge the dis-
tinction between traditional and contemporary. “One of the main things that I
have learnt from Museums is that weavers were always innovating in response to
new materials, developing new technologies. So I have come to believe that that is
what is traditional—to be innovative—and in that way there is a continuum.”19
Another continuum between past and present evident in the exhibition is the
strong link between land and indigenous identity and the creative use of artwork
to assert political entitlements to customary resources. Lander’s main installation,
Crown Grab Bag (2006), features a magnificent fibrous crown perched on a royal,
purple silk pillow embellished with golden tassels (Figure 9). The work references
the New Zealand Foreshore and Seabed Act of 2004, which empowered the New
Zealand government, “the Crown,” to override tribal rights to pursue customary
claims to the foreshore and seabed through the courts. Lander’s crown is deli-
cately woven from a variety of fibres, including plant materials that grow along
the foreshore—the creation of the crown itself is thus a subtle but defiant act of
reappropriation. Shells and fishing hooks from the museum’s collection are placed
on the base of the case. Strands of pingao fiber, stitched into the fabric lining at
the back of the case, form inverted U-shapes representing the raised eyebrows of
Tane (god of the forest). According to Maori legend, following a dispute between

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

169

FIGURE 9. Maureen Lander’s Crown Grab Bag (2006) features a magnificent fibrous crown
perched on a royal purple silk pillow embellished with golden tassels.

Tane and Tangaroa (god of the sea), Tane’s eyebrows were flung on to the sand
dunes, which mark the liminal space between the forest and the sea. Here Lander
connects contemporary political conflicts to legendary battles. This part of the
installation is reflected on the other side of the gallery in a large-scale version ar-
ranged over the archway leading through to the museum’s stores. In this work,
Tane Raises his Eyebrows (2006), Tane expresses his surprise and disapproval at the
crown’s decision to expropriate resources that are collectively owned and used by
Maori people and connect them back to their ancestors. This theme is also picked
up in Kewana Duncan’s costume piece Fulltime Revolutionary, which includes a
video presentation of the massive hikoi or protest march against the confiscation
of the seabed and foreshore of Aotearoa.

Fuelled by the entangled colonial history embodied within museum collections
and contemporary artworks, the exhibition space is a powerful forum for contem-
porary political debates. Although Pasifika Styles provides the opportunity for art-
ists to reconnect with and breath new life into their tãonga, which have been carefully
preserved by the museum over many decades, the exhibition also offers a forum to
express frustrations and raise questions about museum practices of collection, clas-
sification, and containment. Wayne Youle’s installation is composed of numerous
modular storage boxes, stacked together in a locked display case. Some were crafted
by Youle himself, based on those formerly used to store preserved Maori heads in
the museum prior to their repatriation, others are actual museum boxes containing

170

ANITA HERLE

Maori artifacts (Figure 10). The labels on the boxes both follow and extend the
museum’s classification system, from functional categories and object types such as
“weapons” and “adze heads” to “someone else’s stuff ” or “visitor (special).” One of
Youle’s boxes displays a nineteenth-century image of British military officer Hora-
tio Robley in front of his substantial collection of toi moko or tattooed Maori heads.20
It alludes to the fascination of Western collectors for these highly exoticized human
objects, which prompted a grisly trade in the nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
tury and epitomized the macabre extremes of collecting. Belatedly, many museums
have cooperated with Maori requests for their repatriation and these ancestors are
quietly and steadily making their way back home. The notion that artifacts or tãonga
are still alive is suggested by the breathing holes drilled into some of the storage boxes
and via the headphones attached to others. The sounds of breathing or scratching,
as if something or someone inside was attempting to escape, are a powerful evoca-
tion of the pain of alienation and separation.

Museums are that kind of hush-hush, clean, untouchable, tapu kind of
space. You wanna touch everything but you can’t. It’s a thing I’d like to
explore, like what’s behind all those boxes.21

FIGURE 10. Detail of Wayne Youle’s installation hahea (2006) composed of numerous mod-
ular storage boxes, stacked together in a locked display case. The box on the left has breath-
ing holes, whereas that on the right displays a nineteenth-century image of British military
officer Horatio Robley in front of his collection of toi moko or tattooed Maori heads.

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

171

The right of museums to hold material from other cultures is most forcefully
challenged by Jason Hall’s The do-it-yourself repatriation kit (2006). An open leather
briefcase, with baggage tag from London’s Heathrow airport attached to the han-
dle, contains a club hammer (see Figure 1). The interior foam lining, with a re-
cessed compartment in the characteristic shape of a Maori hei tiki ornament, makes
the intended purpose of the hammer obvious. Ironically, the installation, which
seems to advocate the forceful liberation of tãonga, is itself contained within a
museum display case. Although the suggestion of smash and grab may be inter-
preted as overtly threatening, its positioning within the museum is both playful
and provocative. The do-it-yourself repatriation kit is perhaps best understood as a
demand for recognition and engagement.

Although several of the artists’ installations incorporate historic pieces from the
museum’s collections, contemporary artworks have also been used as interjections
in the main anthropology gallery, bringing a renewed vitality to the predomi-
nantly historical displays. Next to the Maori case is a video installation, Tales of the
Maori Border (2006) by Natalie Robertson and Hemi Macgregor, which refers to
Maui, a shapeshifter and popular character in Polynesian legends (Figure 11).
Opaque window inserts with avian designs composed by Sheyne Tuffery accentu-
ate the spiritual importance of birds in the Pacific, where feathers are also an im-
portant symbol of wealth and status. Chris Charteris’ alluring greenstone pendants
and necklaces made of Perspex whale’s teeth stand out against the symmetrical
arrangement of Fijian ivory and shell ornaments based on nineteenth-century dis-

FIGURE 11. Natalie Robertson and Hemi Macgregor, Tales of the Maori Border (2006).

172

ANITA HERLE

play aesthetics (Figure 12). Charteris pays great attention to materials and form,
activating the energy inherent within his creations:

Before I start making, I think about what sort of energy I wish to por-
tray. In making these works I have contemplated what would be appro-
priate for a chief or a person with big mana to wear. What would have
enough power, status and impact.22

George Nuku’s placement of a specially carved perspex patu (hand club) in the
Maori display case in the permanent gallery is an eloquent evocation of the pro-
ductive potential and ambiguities involved in the movement of objects and ideas
between the Pacific and the United Kingdom (Figure 13). Nuku’s Patoo Patoo Pas-
ifika (2006), gifted to the museum and inscribed with a version of the Pasifika
Styles logo, refers to much earlier exchanges through which Cambridge acquired
eighteenth-century Maori tãonga collected during the voyages of Captain Cook.
The label for Nuku’s patu reads as follows:

After returning with Captain Cook from the Pacific in 1771, the natu-
ralist Joseph Banks commissioned a set of bronze patu (hand clubs) bear-
ing his coat-of-arms, cast from a Maori patu onewa. His purpose was to
take them on Cook’s second voyage to use to impress the locals. This

FIGURE 12. Chris Charteris greenstone pendant displayed in front of a symmetrical ar-
rangement of Fijian ivory and shell ornaments collected in the nineteenth-century.

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

173

FIGURE 13. George Nuku’s Patoo Patoo Pasifika (2006) carved from Perspex with the Pas-
ifika Styles logo.

work is an echo of those earlier works. By bringing this Patu to England,
I am returning the favour.23

The distinctive spaces and environments created within the Pasifika Styles gal-
lery also reveal the different regimes of the senses at play.24 In Europe there is a long
history of privileging visual perception, reinforced by colonial practices that at-
tempted to impose Western hierarchies of the senses as well as Euro-American mu-
seums and galleries, which cultivated particular ways of seeing now seen as
paradigmatic. A critical aspect of the ‘politics of liberation in museums’ involves chal-
lenging the sensory relations between people and objects. The artists’ engagement
with ancestral tãonga is not limited to visual appreciation and the presentation of
the artworks similarly invites a range of sensory engagements. Sounds from the art
videos, shown in a cinematic viewing area, subtly permeate the gallery. Two of the
artists’ installations include headphones on listening posts, as described earlier; and
interviews with individual artists, recorded by Sarah Robins, are accessible on audio

174

ANITA HERLE

handsets at a purpose-built audio station looking out over the gallery. Filipe Tohi’s
tactile and interactive Tupu’anga (ancestor, origin or source) (2005) is composed of
a series of three dimensional black and white rectilinear shapes, which the visitor is
encouraged to fit together to make a variety of forms (Figure 14). His work is based
on the ancient Pacific Island art form of lalava (lashing) that was used for joining
and binding materials together. He describes lalava patterns as a “mnemonic device
for representing a life philosophy. Lalava patterns advocated balance in daily living
and were metaphorical and physical ties to cultural knowledge.”25

The Living Room section of the gallery creates a sensuous and cozy ambience,
with dappled light filtered through Tracey Tawhiao’s curvilinear designs painted
over the window (Figure 15). Her textured wallpaper, made from pieces of news-
paper, is over-painted with lustrous colors to obscure many of the stories and to
highlight particular phrases such as “lend us your ear,” “we’re looking for people
to take us to our future” and “a foothold in paradise”—in what Tawhiao describes
as an attempt to “find the news beyond the newspapers,”26 which so often contain
ill-informed and negative portrayals of Maori and Pacific peoples. Photographs
by Greg Semu, exploring the affect of Christianity on his Samoan people, hang
next to the mantelpiece. Visitors to the exhibition are encouraged to sit on the
customized sofa, covered by Ani O’Neil with a patchwork of brightly coloured
floral-patterned fabric, and to feel the tactility of the crocheted throw. They can
watch ‘television’ via a video monitor playing a documentary commissioned for

FIGURE 14. Filipe Tohi Tupu’anga (ancestor, origin or source) (2005) composed of three-
dimensional rectangular shapes.

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

175

FIGURE 15. Living Room installation with wall paper and window screen design by Tracey
Tawhiao and sofa customized by Annie O’Neil. The video monitor shows George Nuku,
part of a series of artist’s interviews.

the project from New Zealand-Samoan academic and broadcaster Lisa Taouma,
featuring interviews with many of the artists. Here they are able to speak all but
directly to the viewers about their work, framed within the political and social
context of their lives and ambitions. Two Edwardian display cases in the living
room, arranged to resemble household cabinets, contain a variety of personal
tãonga: greenstone hei tiki, pieces of barkcloth, tattooing implements, and hand
clubs, all from the museum’s collections. These museum objects are not labeled as
artifacts but rather displayed as personal and family heirlooms within this simu-
lated domestic settling. Their meanings are embodied in the personal and social
relations of their production and use. This popular area of the exhibition is dif-
ferent from the static room-sets found in other museums; visitors often hang out
in this comfortable and familial interactive space.

During their visits to Cambridge, the Pasifika Styles artists engaged with the
museum and its collections on many levels. Che Wilson composed a waiata (tra-
ditional song) for Pasifika Styles, which was sung on and off throughout the in-
stallation and performed at the opening by members of Ngati Ranana, the London
Maori Club, together with many of the artists. With care and respect, tãonga were
handled, caressed, smelled and used in ceremonies and performances. Although
acknowledging the role of museums in preserving these artifacts, Nuku expressed
his frustration at their separation from daily life.

176

ANITA HERLE

I feel sorry that the tãonga aren’t breathing like they would out in the gar-
den or wherever, getting damaged and getting sweaty Maori hands fon-
dling them and snot and tears all over them and being kissed and stuff.27

The museum agreed to the request that specific items from the collections be used
in the opening ceremonies, confident that the cultural descendants of their makers
would ensure their wellbeing. Che Wilson, a distinguished Maori orator, together
with his relative Gerrard Albert, developed the tikanga or protocol surrounding the
opening of the exhibition. Che officiated on the day carrying a taiaha staff (MAA Z
6381) and wearing a korowai (cloak) made by Raymond, which they nicknamed a
sugawai, referring to its innovative style that blended aspects of hula skirt and a
cloak.28 He led the formal blessing that took place before the exhibition opening, in-
volving the artists and museum staff, which was intended to lift the spirit of the
tãonga and unite together the participants in the exhibition’s creation (Figure 16).
Prior to the spectacular opening event, guests were required to wait outside the mu-
seum while Wilson explained what was to follow. Suddenly, artist George Nuku
emerged for the wero or ceremonial challenge, intended to test the intentions of in-

FIGURE 16. Che Wilson leading the blessing before the opening carrying a taiaha staff
(MAA Z 6381). Pasifika Styles artists and museum staff circle the gallery lifting the spirit
of the taonga.

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

177

FIGURE 17. Artist George Nuku’s wero, a Maori ceremonial challenge.

coming visitors. Displaying his full body moko (tattoo), he charged toward the
visitors, wielding his Perspex taiaha (club), and chanting loudly with hisses and a
protruding tongue. His vigorous and agile movements were a forceful demonstra-
tion of the power and strength of the Maori people (Figure 17). Guests were then
invited to come inside, where they were welcomed by members of Ngati Ranana and
Beats of Polynesia, a Cook Islands group, with singing, drums, and chants. Through-
out the evening, bullroarers were swung in the gallery, Jerome Kavanagh played
traditional musical instruments, and Raymond performed with a greenstone mere
(hand club) from the museum’s collection.

The power of the opening and the strength of the exhibition overall was made
possible by the collective efforts of artists and curators, facilitated by museum staff
relinquishing strict authority over the collections and methods of presentation. In
this way Pasifika Styles demonstrates the importance and potential of acknowl-
edging different kinds of expertise and interests in the objects they hold in trust.
Here, the museum itself shifts from being a hegemonic institution, aligned to the
pedagogical and self-serving interests of state,29 to a restorative agent, which pro-
vides a forum for debate and creative dialogue. Pasifika Styles demonstrates the
potency of developing the collaborative capacity of kaitiaki or guardians, both of
the objects and of crucial relationships between people and their tãonga.

Thanks especially to Cambridge we are able to touch our tãonga, and
by touching our tãonga without white gloves we give life back to the
tãonga . . . They have had a very long sleep . . . When we touch them it
gives them life and they give us life—it is a reciprocal thing.30

178

ENDNOTES

ANITA HERLE

1. ICOM News, no. 1, 2004.
2. ICOM News, 7.
3. Pasifika Styles was at the University of Cambridge Museum of Archaeology and Anthropol-

ogy from May 26 to February 2008.

4. Strathern, Property, Substance and Effect.
5. Herle, “Objects, Agency and Museums.”
6. Peers and Brown, Museums and Source Communities; Stanley, The Future of Indigenous Museums.
7. Phillips, Trading Identities; Raymond and Salmond, Pasifika Styles; Thomas, Possessions.
8. Raymond, “Getting Specific.”
9. Rosanna Raymond, label text, Pasifika Styles exhibition.
10. Pasifika Styles web log, available at http://pasifikastyles2006.dblogspot.com (accessed Febru-

ary 23, 2007).

11. Label text, Pasifika Styles exhibition.
12. Raymond, “Getting Specific.”
13. Early accounts record that Polynesian figures of this kind were often clothed, wrapped, or
otherwise adorned with feathers and fiber when in use, the coverings being integral to the objects
spiritual potency.

14. Pasifika Styles label text.
15. Pasifika Styles label text, from an interview with Sarah Robins.
16. Shigeyuki Kihara, Pasifika Styles label text.
17. Pasifika Styles label text.
18. The woven artifacts produced by Lander for this installation are now in MAA’s permanent
19. Lander in a 2006 interview, Pacifika Styles web site. http://www.pasifikastyles.org.uk/mp3/

collection.

lander.mp3

20. Robley, Moko or Maori Tattooing.
21. Youle, Pasifika Styles label text.
22. Pasifika Styles label text.
23. Pasifika Styles label text.
24. Edwards, Gosden, and Phillips, Sensible Objects, 1–31.
25. Pasifika Styles label text.
26. Tawhiao, quoted from the Pasifika Styles website http://www.pasifikastyles.org.uk/artists/

tracey-tawhiao.php

27. Pasifika Styles label text.
28. The creation of the sugawai is a salient example of how interpersonal relationships and ar-

tistic innovation come together in the creation of valued cultural objects.

29. Bennett, The Birth of the Museum; Hooper-Greenhill, “The Museum in the Disciplinary Society.”
30. Che Wilson in a 2006 interview, Pasifika Styles web site http://www.pasifikastyles.org.uk/mp3/

wilson.mp3

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bennett, Tony. The Birth of the Museum: History, Theory, Politics. London: Routledge, 1995.

Edwards, Elizabeth, Chris Gosden, and Ruth Phillips, eds. Sensible Objects: Colonialism, Museums
and Material Culture. Oxford: Berg, 2006.

Herle, Anita. “Objects, Agency and Museums: Continuing Dialogues Between the Torres Strait and
Cambridge.” In Museums and Source Communities: A Routledge Reader, edited by Laura Peers and
Alison Brown, 194–207. London: Routledge, 2003.

RELATIONAL OBJECTS

179

Hooper-Greenhill, Eilean. “The Museum in the Disciplinary Society.” In Museum Studies in Material
Culture, edited by Susan Pearce, 61–72. London: Leicester University Press, 1989.

MacGregor, Neil. “The British Museum.” ICOM News, no. 1: 2004.

Peers, Laura, and Alison Brown, eds. Museums and Source Communities: A Routledge Reader. Lon-
don: Routledge, 2003.

Phillips, Ruth. Trading Identities: The Souvenir in Native North American Art from the Northeast 1700–
1900. Seattle: University of Washington Press/Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1998.

Raymond, Rosanna. “Getting Specific: Pacific Fashion Activism in Auckland during the 1990s.” In
Clothing the Pacific, edited by Chloe Colchester. Oxford: Berg, 2003.

Raymond, Rosanna, and Ami Salmond, eds. Pasifika Styles: Artists Inside the Museum. Dunedin, New
Zealand: Otago University Press, 2008.

Robley, Horatio. Moko or Maori Tattooing. London: Chapman and Hall, 1896.

Thomas, Nicholas. Possessions: Indigenous Art, Colonial Culture. London: Thames and Hudson, 1999.

Strathern, Marilyn. Property, Substance and Effect. Anthropological Essays on Persons and Things. Lon-
don: Athlone Press, 1999.

Stanley, Nick, ed. The Future of Indigenous Museums: Perspectives from the Southwest Pacific. Oxford
and New York: Berghahn Books, 2007.
University of Cambridge Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Pasifika Styles, 2006. http://
www.pasifikastyles.org.uk (accessed February 23, 2007).


