Hong Kong,  1997, and the Inter-
national Movement  of Antiquities
J. David  Murphy*

1  Introduction

Many collectors, dealers and museum professionals  would maintain
that China is the final  frontier  for the art and cultural property1 trade.
Its  potential,  not  just  as  a  source  but  also  as  a  future  market,  is
huge.2  The  very  existence  of  a  thriving  contemporary  art  market
only  serves  to  underscore  the  enormous  importance  of  the  vastly
more lucrative  antiquities trade.

The People's  Republic  of China  ('PRC')  is undoubtedly  now the
classic  'source'  state  in  an  art  world  divided  into  rich,  developed,
but art-poor  'market'  states; and poor, developing, but art-rich  'sour-
ce' states. It is a developing country awakening  —  both at the private
and governmental  levels  —  to the economic potential  of the antiqui-
ties trade. The economic significance  of its relics is increasing while
their  cultural  significance  has  declined.  There  is  a  huge  supply  in
government  storage  and  as  yet  unexcavated  or  undiscovered  in
tombs. Grave-robbing  and museum thefts  occur on a massive scale.
The  PRC  is  increasingly  the  target  of  international  smuggling  net-
works (with  peasants  at the bottom  of the pyramid  and  dealers and
collectors  at the  top). There  are  inadequate  state  resources  for  con-
servation,  archaeology  or  protection.  There  is  little  hope  of  effec-
tively  enforcing  blanket  export  restrictions. Empirically,  the  lack of
a  free  licit  market  has  made  large  scale  black  marketeering  inevi-
table,  with  attendant  social  problems  of  corruption  and  the  devas-
tation  of  sites.3  Many  of  the  current  problems  and  themes  in  the
cultural  property  area generally  are magnified  in the PRC.

Hong Kong has always played an important role in the movement
of antiquities out of China and is intimately connected with the Chi-
nese antiquities  trade.4 This  brief  note  provides  an overview  of the
PRC  legal  regime  and  considers  what  impact  the  reversion  to  the
PRC in  1997 of sovereignty over Hong Kong will have on the inter-
national  movement  of cultural  property.

*  Lecturer,  Department  of Law, University of Hong Kong. An earlier version  of
this article was published  in (1994) 24 Hong  Kong Law Journal  195, to which
Journal  grateful  acknowledgement  is given.

241

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

J. David  Murphy

2  The Movement  of Chinese  Antiquities  Into and

Through  Hong  Kong

Hong  Kong  has  long  been  recognised  as the  leading  'transit'  state5
for  PRC  antiquities, and,  indeed,  a  'market'  state. It is a centre  for
all  facets  of  the  art  trade  -  expertise,  appraisal,  finance,  sales  and
auction  facilities,  and  transportation.  A  significant  volume  of  the
illicit traffic  from  China  -  antiquities stolen or illegally exported  -
flows  out through  Hong Kong.

Not  least  important  is  the  fact  that  Hong  Kong  has  virtually  no
import  or  export  controls  aimed  at  art  and  cultural  property.  The
importing  of antiquities into Hong Kong, or their export, are not per
se  illegal  under  Hong  Kong  law,  though  movement  of  bulk  ship-
ments of items for trade into or out of Hong Kong without a manifest
(smuggling)  could  constitute  an  offence.6  As  a  matter  of  practice,
Hong Kong  authorities usually return to the PRC smuggled antiqui-
ties they have  seized, presumably as a matter of comity.7 Otherwise,
the relics are regarded  as  'home  free'  when they find their way into
the hands  of dealers or other  intermediaries in Hong Kong. "

As to the  only  legislation  dealing  specifically  with  cultural  prop-
erty, it  seems clear  from  s-s 20 (2) (b) of the Antiquities and Monu-
ments Ordinance that antiquities that have been  'imported into Hong
Kong'  are  not  intended  to  be  subject  to  the  control  or  protection
provisions  of the  Ordinance.

Antiquities  are  thought  to  be  the  largest  single  class  of  item
smuggled  out of the PRC, at least in terms of monetary value.8 His-
torically, smuggling relics out of the PRC has proven to be relatively
easy.  A  commonly-used  route  is  via  the  province  of  Guangdong9
with  a  view  to  transshipment  through  neighbouring  Hong  Kong or
Macau.  Relics  are  frequently  smuggled  out  of  the  PRC  by  coastal
vessels  including  the  myriad  small  cargo  and  fishing  boats  sailing
in  the  South  China  Sea.  They  are  also  brought  into  Hong  Kong in
truck  cargo,  or,  in  the  case of extremely  valuable  individual  pieces,
couriered  out  of the  country by plane.

In  September  1993  Hong  Kong  officers  at  Lok  Ma  Chau  seized
107  artifacts  worth  more  than  HK$  10  million.10  In  April  1994 a
shipment  worth  considerably  more, consisting of 250 pieces  includ-
ing  bronze  buddhas,  swords  and  terracotta  animals,  was  seized  at
the  border.11  Hong  Kong  dealers  recall  the  heydays  of  the  mid-
1980s  when  boxes  of  antiques  were  unloaded  in  Hong  Kong  from
mainland  cargo ships each night.12  Smuggling into Hong Kong may
not be  as brazen  in  recent times, but there  is no doubt that a steady
flow  continues. It is widely alleged that many of the smuggling rings
are  based  in  Hong  Kong  or  in  Macau,  using  a  network  of  antique
dealers  to  obtain  the  highest  prices.13  Sales  of  the  most  valuable
pieces,  which  are  often  couriered  into Hong  Kong  individually,  are
said to be arranged  between local dealers and overseas buyers with-
out  the  item  ever  appearing  in  a  local  shop.  Hong  Kong  customs

242

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

Hong  Kong,  1997, Movement  of  Antiquities

officials  complain  that  they  receive  little  cooperation  from  Hong
Kong  art traders,  and  that  the  likelihood  of  low-level  smugglers  or
couriers  informing  on ring-leaders is very slim.

Hong  Kong  Customs  and  Excise  Department  statistics  indicate
that  between  1983  and  1993  there  were  fifty  court  cases  in  Hong
Kong involving relics smuggling. Thirty-seven of them involved sea
vessels  and  the  rest  involved  trucks  and  containers.  Almost  seven
thousand pieces were smuggled.14 The generally low sentences (usu-
ally  fines  around  HK$  10,000)  meted  out  by  Hong  Kong  courts
suggest that such smuggling is regarded as a minor economic crime.

3  An Overview  of the PRC Legal  Regime  Relating

to Cultural  Relics

As one of the main  issues of concern  is whether  PRC laws relating
to cultural relics will apply to the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region  after  June  30,  1997, the  following  paragraphs  briefly  sum-
marize the main features  of the current  PRC legal regime relating to
cultural  property.15

The  National  People's  Congress,  the  supreme  legislative  organ,
has  not  dealt  directly  with  cultural  property  matters  except  in  the
Criminal  Law of the People's Republic of China16, Articles  173 and
174 of which  deal  with defacing,  stealing  and  exporting  relics, and
generally  criminalise  violations  of  other  cultural  relics  laws.  Most
of  the  main  legislation  in  the  cultural  property  area,  including  the
central  statute,  the  Law  of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  on  the
Protection  of  Cultural  Relics17,  emanates  from  the  Standing  Com-
mittee of the National People's Congress. Many norms (for example,
the  Circular  on  Cracking  Down  on  Activities  Involving  Smuggling
and Illegal  Excavation  for Cultural  Relics18) emanate from  the main
executive  body, the State Council. Regulations  can also be made by
the Ministry of Culture and by the State Bureau of Cultural Relics.19
Although the PRC is a unitary state, there is still a body of cultural
property-related  legislation  that  has  been  developed  by  provincial,
autonomous  region  and  local  governments20,  and  by  the  decree  of
local  cultural  relics  authorities.  While  such  laws  tend  to  mirror
national  legislation  for  the  most  part,  there  is  often  a  problem  of
effective  central  administrative  control  and  coordination  (particu-
larly  where  independently-minded  coastal  regions  or  Special  Econ-
omic Zones are involved)  —  a current  theme  in PRC  administration
generally.

The cultural property  legal regime suffers  from  the same inherent
defects  that  characterize  the Chinese  legal  system  generally  as  'un-
developed':  a  lack  of  legal  efficacy  (the  gap  between  the  statute
book  and  the  actual  behaviour  of  citizens  and  officials)  resulting
from  an  absence, historically,  of  a  concept  and  doctrine  of  legality
or  a  legal  culture;  the  ideology  of  Marxism-Leninism  and  particu-
larly  Mao Zedong Thought; the inadequate  educations of most law-

243

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

J. David  Murphy

related  personnel;  the  tensions  between  policy  and  law;  and  rudi-
mentary  legal drafting  and legal engineering.21  A significant  portion
of the legislation in the cultural property area is overlapping and too
often  vague and merely hortatory.

The  1982  Cultural  Relics  Law  was  meant  to  be  the  first  truly
comprehensive modern legislative treatment, dealing with protection
of  sites  and  immovables,  archaeological  excavations,  state  insti-
tutions, privately-owned  relics, export and enforcement.  All of these
areas of legislative concern have been subjected  to various interpret-
ations  and  glosses  in  numerous  subsequent  pronouncements  and
regulations22.  However  the  1982 Cultural  Relics  Law  still  provides
the basis of the  legal regime.

The definition  of'cultural  relics'  is broad, covering movables and
immovables  of historical,  artistic or  scientific  value  including  sites,
buildings,  tombs,  works  of  art,  records,  manuscripts,  objects  re-
flecting  the various ethnic groups in different  historical periods, and
fossils.23  The  general  provisions  of the  legislation  make no real  at-
tempt  to  adapt  the  statutory  scheme  or  the  definition  to  different
types of protection or contexts. The definition  itself is arguably sub-
jective  and  vague, incorporating  as it does wording like  'important'
and  'valuable'.  A vast  amount of administrative  discretion  is left  to
the  State Bureau  of Cultural  Relics.

All cultural  relics found  underground  or in inland waters or terri-
torial  seas  within  the  boundaries  of  the  PRC are  deemed  to  be  the
property  of  the  state,  as  are  all  designated  sites  of  ancient  culture,
tombs,  cave  temples  and  buildings,  and collections  in  public  insti-
tutions.24  The  state  has  designated  over  500  sites  and  relics,  and
further designations have been made by governments at lower levels.
The 1982 Law attempts to address in a very general way the tensions
between  the  importance  of  site  protection  and  the  need  for  capital
construction.

While  private  property  rights  in  cultural  property  do  exist,  they
are  severely  emasculated.  Other  provisions  of  the  1982  Law  make
it clear that the state has a duty to  'protect'  the relics, that the items
may only be sold to the state and only through the state sales appar-
atus,  and  that  mandatory  submission  to  state  'verification'  pro-
cedures  can result  in expropriation.25

The provisions of the  1982 Law dealing with archaeological  exca-
vations26 reflect  themes that pervade PRC cultural  property law: the
tensions  between  cadres  charged  with  the  responsibility  for  relics
and  those  involved  with  construction  projects,  paranoia  over  the
possible  loss  of relics,  state  concern  over power  exercised  by  local
cultural  relics administrations, and the general need for political un-
its to oversee  the work  of departments  of cultural  administration.

The PRC prohibits exports of most cultural  relics, but does allow
for  the granting of export certificates  in some situations. No private
individual  may export  any cultural  relic; exports may only be made
by the state sales apparatus.27 All relics must be  'verified'  or exam-
ined  by  a cultural  relics  bureau.  Items  deemed  by the  state  to  lack

244

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

Hong  Kong,  1997, Movement  of  Antiquities

historical,  artistic  or  cultural  significance  could  be  released  for  ex-
port, as could 'ordinary' cultural relics (relics not graded nor deemed
'precious'  by  the  State  Bureau  of  Cultural  Relics,  on  the  basis  of
unpublished  guidelines).  It  would  appear  that  pursuant  to  current
administrative  policy,  no  relics  dated  before  1795  will  be  allowed
to  leave  China  at  all  unless  approved  for  exhibition  loan  purposes.
Smuggled  relics are confiscated  by the state.

The  1982  Law  as  amended28  sets  out  lists  of  'administrative'
(quasi-criminal) and  'criminal' offences.  The former  include damag-
ing relics in minor incidents, failing  to report discoveries, undertak-
ing  construction  in  designated  zones,  and  making  illegal  domestic
sales.  Penalties  tend  to  be  modest  fines.  The  criminal  offences  in-
clude  serious  cases  of theft,  tomb-robbing,  smuggling, damage  and
deriliction of duty by officials.  Such offences  are normally dealt with
harshly  under the provisions  of the  1980 Criminal  Law of the Peo-
ple's Republic of China29.

There  is  a  somewhat  confusing  web  of  legislative  enactments,
regulations  and  edicts  relating  to  serious  cultural  relics  crimes  and
sentencing. It would appear that in serious cases the sentence ranges
from ten years to life  imprisonment or death.30 One important  factor
in sentencing is the 'grade' of the relic, even though the prosecution
(much less the accused) may not appreciate  its value or  significance
until  after  the  verification  process  by  the  cultural  relics  adminis-
tration. Criminals who steal or smuggle  'Grade One' relics are  often
executed.

Apart from  the  1982 Law and the numerous other enactments that
relate to it, there is a very wide spectrum  of legislation that touches
on cultural  property  in various contexts31, ranging  from  underwater
relics  and archaeology32  to film-making.33

Generally  the  PRC domestic  regime  can  be characterized  as one
of  the  most  stringent  in  the  world,  emphasizing  as  it  does  a  strict
embargo  approach  to  exports,  numerous  means  of  state  control  in
the  guise  of  'protection',  and  the  emasculation  of  private  property
rights.34  As a matter  of  practice,  the  PRC relics  administration  has
adopted  a  hoarding  mentality,  and  the  overriding  policy  consider-
ation  is  not  cultural  but  economic  —  the  accumulation  of  foreign
exchange through tourism  in the case of immovables, and controlled
sales in the case of movables.

Historically, the PRC has, for  the most part, remained  aloof  from
the various  cultural  property  developments  in  international  forums.
It  has,  however,  recently  acceded  to  the  1970  UNESCO  Conven-
tion35, the only international cultural property treaty in the civil area.
Its  main  operative  provisions  are  those  in  Article  7(a)  (requiring
market  states  to  take  steps  to  prevent  their  museums  and  similar
institutions  from  acquiring  illegally-exported  cultural  property  from
another  state  party)  and  Article  7(b)  (prohibiting  the  importing  of
cultural  property  stolen  from  a museum,  public  monument  or insti-
tution, and obliging market  states to take  steps to return  it).36

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

245

J. David  Murphy

In  addition,  representatives  of  the  PRC  have  recently  been  in-
volved  in  some  of  the  deliberations  of  UNIDROIT  (International
Institute  for  the  Unification  of  Private  Law)  in its efforts  to draft  a
new convention  addressing the private law issues raised by the 1970
UNESCO  Convention,  and  in  particular  the  problem  of  the  bona
fide purchaser  rule  in civil  law jurisdictions, which  is regarded  as a
major  factor  contributing  to  the  illicit  art  trade.37  The primary  aim
of the draft  convention  is to place the responsibility  on the buyer to
verify  that  an  object  is  being  legally  traded.  Failure  to  do  so  will
lead  to  the  object  being  returned.  Stolen  objects  are to be  returned
to the original  owner,  subject  to limitations provisions and compen-
sation being paid to the  buyer where necessary diligence was shown.
As  to  illegally  exported  cultural  property,  such  objects  are  to  be
returned,  but  only  where  their  export  has  injured  certain  important
defined  cultural  interests  of  the  state  requesting  their  return.  The
draft  convention  in effect  contributes to the creation of a new  inter-
national  class  of  property.  If the  convention  is finalised  and  comes
into  force  in  1994 or  1995  as  expected,  the PRC may well  become
a party. Clearly both the  1970 UNESCO Convention and the current
UNIDROIT  draft  convention  favour  source  states  like the PRC, but
both  are based  on  reciprocity.

4  Hong  Kong  and  1997

After  June 30,  1997, Hong Kong, a Dependent Territory of a leading
market  state,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  itself  an  important  market
and  transit  state  where  Chinese  art  and  antiquities  are  concerned,
will become a Special Administrative Region ('SAR')  of the PRC.38
This  raises  the  important  question  of  whether  after  that  date  PRC
law and administration  relating to cultural  relics will be extended to
art and  cultural  property  located  in Hong Kong.

There is relatively  little in the way of indigenous cultural property
in  Hong  Kong.  There  are  however  very  substantial  collections  of
Chinese  antiquities  held  privately  (to  the  extent  that  they  have  not
already  been  shipped  out  of  Hong  Kong  to  other jurisdictions  for
safekeeping)  and in public museums. Invariably these consist largely
of treasures that originated  in China. There is obviously concern, not
only  as  to  whether  the  PRC  will  try  to  extend  its  administration  to
Hong Kong with a view to achieving more effective  control of smug-
gling  out  of  the  PRC,  but  also  as  to  whether  antiquities  owned  by
Hong  Kongers  or by  the  Hong  Kong government  will be  'frozen'.

There  have  been  some preliminary  statements  by the PRC  to the
effect  that this will not be the case, and that cultural property matters
would be left  to the SAR governments of Hong Kong and  Macau.39
There  was  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  include  in  the  Basic  Law  of
the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region  of  the  People's  Re-
public  of  China,40  a  provision  expressly  relating  to  the  freedom  to

246

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

Hong  Kong,  1997, Movement  of  Antiquities

export  cultural  objects.41  Significantly,  and  by  contrast,  cultural
property  was  expressly  addressed  in  Article  125 of  the  Basic  Law
of  the  Macau  Special  Administrative  Region  (enacted  with  a  view
to  Macau's  changeover  in  1999).  Article  125  provides  that  'the
Government  of the Macau  Special Administrative  Region  shall pro-
tect  scenic  spots  as  well  as  other  historic  relics  and  the  legitimate
rights and interests of owners of cultural  relics'.

This  arguably  would  allow  for  the  export  of  cultural  relics  from

Macau after  1999.

It is of course difficult  to predict what the political  reality will be
in 1997. This is not the place to add to the massive amount of specu-
lation  in which  commentators  have  engaged  to date. The  following
paragraphs provide a canvass of some provisions of the Hong Kong
Basic Law that may bear on the  question.42

Generally  the  Basic  Law  authorizes  the  SAR to exercise  a  'high
degree of autonomy'.43  The  'previous  capitalist  system  and  way  of
life  shall  remain  unchanged  for  50  years'.44  Private  ownership  of
property is to be protected in accordance with law.45 Article 8 of the
Basic Law provides that:

The  laws previously  in  force  in Hong  Kong, that  is, the  com-
mon  law,  rules  of  equity,  ordinances,  subordinate  legislation
and  customary  law  shall  be  maintained,  except  for  any  that
contravene  [the Basic Law], and  subject  to any amendment  by
the  Legislature  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative
Region.

The  laws  in  force  in  the  SAR  are  to  be  the  Basic  Law,  the  laws
previously  in  force  in  Hong  Kong  according  to  Article  8,  and  the
laws enacted by the legislature of the SAR.46 PRC national laws are
not  to  be  applied  except  for  those  listed  in Annex  III  to the  Basic
Law. None  listed  at  the  moment  would  affect  the transfer  of  art or
cultural  property. However the  Standing Committee  of the National
People's  Congress  may  add  to  the  list  after  consulting  the  SAR.47
The  Standing  Committee  may  also declare  any  Hong Kong  laws to
be in contravention  of the  Basic Law.48

Article  22 provides that  no department  of or political  unit  within
the PRC may interfere  in  SAR affairs.  The government  of the PRC
shall, however, have responsibility  for  foreign  affairs  relating to the
SAR.49

Article  115 provides  that the  SAR shall pursue the policy of  free
trade  and  'safeguard  the free  movement  of goods,  intangible  assets
and capital'.  Article  116 stipulates  that the SAR shall  be a  separate
customs territory. Article  140 provides that the SAR shall  formulate
its own policies on culture.

As can be  seen, there  is no  express mention  of cultural  property
in the Basic Law. However, on the face  of the Basic Law at least, it
would appear that PRC laws relating to cultural property will not be

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

247

J. David  Murphy

extended  to  the  SAR  unless  the  legislature  of  the  SAR  does  so,
additions  are made to Annex HI, or the matter is somehow regarded
as being  encompassed  within  foreign  affairs.  If this view  is correct,
the  status  quo will pertain after  1997. That is, the  stringent (at least
dejure)  domestic and export regime will continue in the territory of
the  PRC,  and  the  relatively  lax  regime  will  continue  in  the  SAR
territory.  Chinese  antiquities  located  in  Hong  Kong  will  be  secure
from  the application  of PRC laws and administration, and there will
still be an incentive to smuggle relics through Hong Kong into world
markets. Legal repatriation efforts  by the PRC will be limited to the
common  law remedies, such as replevin  (subject  of course to a  suf-
ficient  evidentiary  base),  afforded  by  existing  Hong  Kong  law,
though  China  has  not  shown  an  inclination  to  resort  to  this  in  the
past.

The PRC  has acceded to the  1970 UNESCO Convention and has
demonstrated  an  interest  in  the  draft  UNDROIT  convention  which
would  be  a  supplement  to  the  former.  The  United  Kingdom  is not
likely  to  accede  to either  before  1997. However,  it should  be noted
that  Article  153  of  the  Basic  Law  provides  that  the  application  to
the  SAR  of  international  agreements  to  which  the  PRC  is  a  party
shall  be decided by the government  of the PRC  'in  accordance with
the  circumstances  and  needs  of  the  Region,  and  after  seeking  the
views of the government  of the Region'. A possible  scenario is that
after  1997 the PRC will cause international cultural property conven-
tions  to  which  it  is  a party,  to be  applied  to the  SAR  as  well. The
PRC  could  then  attempt  to avail  itself  of the  repatriation  and  other
provisions  in  such  conventions,  on  the  basis  that  the  PRC  and  the
Hong Kong  SAR are separate customs territories50, in order to  force
the  return  of  antiquities.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  under
these  conventions  the  safeguards  for  possessors  of the  targeted cul-
tural property, while not as extensive as some would like, are signifi-
cantly  greater than under PRC domestic  law.

Quite  apart from  the Article  153 scenario, there is another avenue
potentially available to the PRC that could well prove worrisome for
market  interests in Hong Kong. It arises from  the seemingly innocu-
ous Article  12 of the  1970 UNESCO Convention, ironically a vestige
of  colonial  times:

The  States  Parties to this  Convention  shall  respect  the  cultural
heritage  within  the  territories  for  the  international  relations  of
which they are responsible, and shall take all appropriate mea-
sures to prohibit and prevent the illicit import, export and trans-
fer  of ownership of cultural property in such territories (empha-
sis added).

Of course the existence of the unique Chinese 'special  administrative
regions'  was  hardly in the contemplation  of the drafters  of the  1970
UNESCO  Convention.  However  it  is  not  inconceivable  that  the

248

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

Hong  Kong,  1997, Movement  of  Antiquities

PRC, which  clearly  will  have  power  over the foreign  affairs  of the
SAR,  could  seize  upon  the  positive  treaty  obligation  set  forth  in
Article  12 and  use  it  as  an  authority  for  its  interference  in  cultural
property  matters  in  Hong  Kong.  This  is  particularly  significant  as
Article  12 is expressed much more broadly than other operative pro-
visions such as Article 7.

The international  movement of art and antiquities is not normally
the first  topic that comes to mind when the concerns over  1997 are
raised. However, it cannot be doubted that the movement of cultural
property  has  economic,  political  and  cultural  implications  for  this
region just  as it does elsewhere  in the world.  It is to be hoped  that
whatever  the  relationship  between  the  PRC  and  Hong  Kong  after
1997, the policies  adopted  in the  cultural  property  area  will  be  en-
lightened  and  will  properly  balance  the  often-competing  domestic
and international  concerns and  objectives.

Notes

1  'Cultural  property'  may  be  loosely  defined  as  a  category  of  property  that
includes works  of art and archaeological,  historical  and  ethnological  objects
which  are  generally  considered  as  being  the  material  evidence  of  a  certain
stage of civilisation:  Pierre  Lalive,  'A  General  View of the  Law  Relating  to
Cultural  Property'  (1988)  13 International  Legal  Practitioner  18. There  is an
infinite  variety of definitions  found  in domestic legislation around the world.
The  extended  definition  of  'cultural  property'  contained  in  Article  1 of  the
UNESCO Convention  on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the  Illicit
Import,  Export  and  Transfer  of  Ownership  of  Cultural  Property  1970,  823
UNTS  (hereinafter,  the  '1970  UNESCO  Convention'),  a  definition  often
regarded  as  subjective  and  overbroad  for  practical  purposes,  enumerates
various  categories  of  'property  which,  on  religious  or  secular  grounds,  is
specifically  designated by each State as being of importance for  archaeology,
prehistory, history,  literature, art  or  science...'.
The terminology  used in the People's Republic of China is normally  'cultural
relics'  rather  than  'cultural  property'.  Article  2  of  the  Law  of  the  People's
Republic  of China  on  the  Protection  of Cultural  Relics, adopted  at  the  25th
Meeting of the Standing  Committee  of the Fifth  National  People's  Congress
and promulgated  19 November  1982 by Order No.  11 of the  Standing  Com-
mittee  of  the  National  People's  Congress  (hereinafter,  'the  1982  Cultural
Relics  Law'  or  '1982  Law')  is as  follows:
Article  2 The state  shall  place  under  its protection,  within  the boundaries  of
the  People's  Republic  of  China,  the  following  cultural  relics  of  historical,
artistic  or scientific  value:
(1)  sites  of  ancient  culture,  ancient  tombs,  ancient  architectural  structures,
cave  temples  and  stone  carvings  that  are  of  historical,  artistic  or  scientific
value;
(2) buildings, memorial sites and memorial objects related to major  historical
events,  revolutionary  movements  or  famous  people  that  are  highly  memor-
able  or  are  of  great  significance  for  education  or  for  the  preservation  of
historical  data;

249

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

J. David  Murphy

(3)  valuable  works of art and handicraft  articles dating  from  various  histori-
cal  periods;
(4)  important  revolutionary  documents  as  well  as  manuscripts  and  ancient
or  old  books  and  materials,  etc., that  are  of  historical,  artistic  or  scientific
value;  and
(5) typical  material  objects  reflecting  the social  system, social  production  or
the  life  of  various nationalities  in different  historical  periods.
By contrast,  the  Hong  Kong Antiquities and  Monuments  Ordinance  cap. 53,
legislation  that deals largely with site designation  rather than with the move-
ment  of  antiquities,  and  which  does  not  refer  directly  to  any  criteria  of
cultural  significance,  defines  'antiquity'  (in  s. 2) as  '(a)  a  relic; and
(b)  a  place,  building,  site  or  structure  erected,  formed  or  built  by  human
agency  before  the  year  1800  and  the  ruins  or  remains  of  any  such  place,
building,  site or structure, whether or not the same has been modified,  added
to  or  restored  after  the year  1799'.
A  'relic'  is defined  as
(a)  a  movable  object  made,  shaped,  painted,  carved,  inscribed  or  otherwise
created,  manufactured,  produced  or  modified  by  human  agency  before  the
year  1800, whether  or  not  it  has  been  modified,  added  to  or  restored  after
the  year  1799; and
(b)  fossil  remains  or  impressions.

2  It  is  interesting  to  compare  and  contrast  the  situation  in  Russia  after  'glas-
nost'.  There,  economic  relaxations  led  immediately  to  the  intervention  of
Western  art  dealers  and  auction  houses,  Western  art  exhibitions,  concern
about  overvaluation,  and  confusion  as  to  world  trading  practices  and  com-
mercialisation  of  art  generally.  The  situation  eventually  prompted  the  re-
entry  of  government  with  a  view  to  taking  over  art  as  an  export  barter
commodity:  see  Julie  S. Berkowitz,  'A  Look  Into  Glasnost's  Impact  on  the
Soviet  Art  World',  (1991)  11 Loyola  Entertainment  Law Journal 453.

3  See  J.  David  Murphy,  'The  People's  Republic  of China  and  the  Illicit  Trade
in  Cultural  Property:  Is the  Embargo Approach  the Answer?', (1993)  2 Asia
Pacific  Law  Review  53, reprinted  in  (1994)  3  International  Journal  of  Cul-
tural  Property  227; J. David  Murphy,  'The  Imperilment  of Cultural  Property
in  the  People's  Republic  of  China',  paper  presented  at  'Material  Culture  in
Flux  — Repatriation  of  Cultural  Property:  A  Conference  on  International
and  Domestic  Law and  Policy',  University  of British  Columbia,  Vancouver,
Canada,  May  1994;  and  J. David  Murphy,  Plunder  and  Preservation:  Cul-
tural  Property  Law  and  Practice  in  the  People s  Republic  of  China  forth-
coming  1995. (Oxford  University  Press).

4  Interestingly,  a  Chinese  commentator  distinguishing  between  'precious'  re-
lics (normally  those within  the First, Second  or Third grades, as administrat-
ively  determined by the PRC State Bureau of Cultural  Relics) and  'ordinary'
relics  (normally  those  dated  after  1795, without  historical,  artistic  or  scien-
tific  value), equated  the  latter  with  objects  for  which  'there  is  no  great  de-
mand...in  the  markets  of  Hong  Kong...':  Chen  Shun-lie,  'The  Legal  Basis
to  Punish  Cultural  Relics Crimes Severely',  (1988) 4 Studies  in Law  40-45
(in  Chinese).

5  On  the  concept  of  the  transit  state,  see  Lyndel  V. Prott  and  Patrick
J. O'Keefe,  Law  and  the  Cultural  Heritage  Vol  III  (London:  Butterworths,
1989),  ch.  10;  Karen  T. Burke,  'International  Transfers  of  Stolen  Cultural
Property:  Should  Thieves  Continue  To Benefit  from  Domestic  Laws  Favor-
ing  the  Bona  Fide  Purchaser?',  (1990)  13  Loyola  of  Los  Angeles  Inter-
national  and  Comparative  Law  Journal  427; and  Patrick  J. O'Keefe,  'Com-
monwealth  Cooperation  for  the  Preservation  of  Cultural  Heritage',  Com-

250

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

Hong  Kong,  1997, Movement  of  Antiquities

monwealth  Law  Conference  Proceedings  1993 at  643. Interestingly,  Article
16  of  the  1978  UNESCO  Recommendation  for  the  Protection  of  Movable
Cultural  Property  would  have  imposed  specific  duties  on  transit  states.

6  Import  and  Export  Ordinance  cap. 60, s. 18. Items  of  ivory  are  banned  from
import  or  export  under  the  Animals  and  Plants  (Protection  of  Endangered
Species)  Ordinance  cap.  187 which  gives  effect  in  Hong  Kong  to  the  Con-
vention  on  International  Trade  in  Endangered  Species  of  Wild  Fauna  and
Flora. The United  Kingdom  is not a party to the  1970 UNESCO  Convention
on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Preventing  the  Illicit  Import,  Export  and
Transfer  of  Ownership  of  Cultural  Property;  this  is  a  sore  point  with  the
international  cultural property community  generally given the status of Lon-
don  in  the  international  art  trade,  but  it  also  has  implications  for  Hong
Kong's  position  as a transit  state.

7  Hong  Kong  Customs  assume  that  the  Government  of the  PRC  is the  owner
of  the  relics,  and  repatriation  is  arranged  through  the  Hong  Kong  office  of
the  New  China  News  Agency,  the  de  facto  PRC  embassy.  It  has  been  re-
ported  that  the  PRC  has  'rewarded'  the work  of  Hong  Kong's  law  enforce-
ment agencies in returning smuggled artifacts, by donating to the Hong Kong
Museum  of  Art  numerous  pieces  of  antique  porcelain  from  the  National
Museum  of  Chinese  History:  South  China Morning  Post  9 April  1991  (but
see the official  PRC rationale  for  the donation  in  'China's  Museum  Donates
Ceramics  to  Hong  Kong'  Xinhua  (New  China  News  Agency)  7  February
1991).  Hong  Kong  customs  authorities  used  to  call  upon  curators  at  the
Hong  Kong  Museum  of  Art  to  verify  the  nature  and  value  of  the  items
seized; however, the curators now resist in view of the large number of items
that  are  brought  to  them  on  a  regular  basis.  Lower  grade  relics  are  often
seized  in  batches  of hundreds.

8  Michael  Duckworth,  'The  Painting  Market  in  Asia:  Progress  and  Promise'
in  International  Fine  Art  Expositions,  Art  Asia:  Hong  Kong  (Hong  Kong:
Everbest  Printing  Co.  Ltd.,  1992)  at  11. Relic  smuggling  out  of  China  has
even  come  to  be  romanticized  in  recent  popular  fiction:  see  Justin  Scott,
Nine Dragons  (New York: Bantam,  1991).

9  A  local  saying  is  'East,  south,  west,  north,  or  central,  by  sea,  land  or  air,
smuggle  cultural  relics to Guangdong':  Fazhi Ribao  (Legal  System  Daily)  1
February  1992  p. 3.  From  1981  to  1989,  Guangdong  Customs  investigated
3,081  cases  of  relics  smuggling  and  retrieved  70,226  items.  In  a  typical
recent  case,  Guangzhou  Customs,  inspecting  a  container  truck  carrying
goods for export, found  among the goods seven large boxes of cultural relics
of  the  Han,  Tang,. Yuan,  Ming  and  Qing  dynasties,  all  of  which  were  pro-
hibited  exports,  and  329  pieces  of  Grade  Three  relics  from  the  collections
of  museums.  An  official  of  the  Guangdong  Provincial  Cultural  Relics  Ad-
ministration  Committee  acknowledged  that  in  1991  in  Guangdong,  Public
Security  and  Customs  recovered  2000  prohibited  relics  and  5600  ordinary
relics:  Xu  Heng-bin  quoted  in  Da  Gong Bao  (in  Chinese)  24  October  1992
p. 6.

10  South  China Morning  Post,  25  September  1993.
11  South  China Morning  Post  17 April  1994.
12  South  China Morning  Post  9 October  1992.
13  Chinese  commentaries  often  allege  that  the  largest  smuggling  cases are  'in-
cited  and  controlled  by  the merchants  and  smugglers  from  Hong  Kong  and
Macau':  Chen shun-lie, (note 4 above). PRC Public  Security  Bureau  officers
often  pose  as  'Hong  Kong bosses'.

14  Customs  and  Excise  statistics  in the author's  files.

251

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

J. David  Murphy

15  For an examination  of the array of laws, regulations, notices, rules and orders
that  touch  upon  cultural  property matters  in the PRC generally,  see J. David
Murphy,  Plunder  and Preservation:  Cultural Property  Law  and Practice  in
the  People's  Republic  of  China,  especially  ch.  4  thereof  (note  3  above);
J. David  Murphy,  'Annotated  Chronological  Index  of  People's  Republic  of
China  Statutory  and  Other  Materials  Relating  to  Cultural  Property',  (1994)
3  International  Journal  of Cultural  Property  159; and J. David  Murphy,  'The
1982  Law  of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  on  the  Protection  of  Cultural
Relics',  paper  delivered  at  a  meeting  of  Committee  20  (Cultural  Property),
Section  on  General  Practice, International  Bar Association  Biennial  Confer-
ence,  Melbourne,  Australia,  October  1994.

16  Adopted  by  the  Second  Session  of  the  Fifth  National  People's  Congress  on

July  1 1979  and  effective  as of  1 January  1980.

17  See  note  1 above.
18  Issued  26  May  1987 by  the  State Council.
19  See,  for  example,  Administrative  Measures  of  the  People's  Republic  of
China  on  Foreign  Archaeological  Work,  approved  and  promulgated  by  the
State  Bureau  of  Cultural  Relics on  22  February  1991.

20  See, for  example,  Beijing  Municipal  Administrative  Regulations  on the Pro-
tection  Areas  for  the Cultural  Relics Protection Units and Construction  Con-
trol  Zones,  promulgated  1  December  1987  by  the  Beijing  People's
Government.

21  See  Albert  Hung-yee  Chen, An Introduction  to the Legal  System  of the Peo-
ple's  Republic  of  China  (Singapore:  Butterworths  Asia,  1992), especially  at
pp. 92  ff.

22  See,  for  example,  Detailed  Rules  for  the  Implementation  of  the  Law  of  the
People's  Republic of China on the Protection of Cultural  Relics promulgated
7  May  1992  by  the  State  Bureau  of  Cultural  Relics  and  approved  by  the
State  Council.

23  See  note  1 above, Article 2.
24  See  note  1 above, Article  4.
25  See  note  1 above, Articles  1, 2,  3, 5, 24, 25, 27, 30 and 31.
26  See  note  1 above, Articles  16 to 21.
27  See  note  1 above,  Articles  27  and  28.  And  see  Measures  on  the  Adminis-
tration  of  Export  Verification  for  Cultural  Relics  announced  27  February
1989 by the Cultural  Department, which purport,  inter alia, to apply to relics
held  by  'compatriots  in  Hong  Kong, Macau, Taiwan  ...'  (Art. 11).

28  Decision  on  Amendments  to Articles  30 and  31  of the  Cultural  Relics  Law
of the  People's  Republic  of China adopted 29 June  1991 at the 20th  Meeting
of  the  Standing  Committee  of the  Seventh  National  People's  Congress.

29  See  note  16 above.
30  Decision  Concerning  the  Severe  Punishment  of  Criminals  Who  Seriously
Undermine  the  Economy  adopted  8  March  1982  by  the  22nd  Session  of
the  Standing  Committee  of  the  Fifth  National  People's  Congress.  See  also
Explanation  of  Several  Questions  Concerning  the  Applicable  Law  in  Hand-
ling Cases of  Stealing, Illegally Recovering, Dealing in, and Smuggling Cul-
tural  Relics,  issued  27 November  1987 by the  Supreme  People's  Court  and
Supreme  People's  Procuratorate;  Supplementary  Provisions  Concerning  the
Punishment  of  Smuggling  adopted  21  January  1988  at  the  24th  Session  of
the  Standing  Committee  of the  Sixth  National  People's  Congress; and  Sup-
plementary  Provisions  on  Punishment  for  the  Crime  of  Illegally  Excavating
Ancient  Cultural  Relics or Tombs adopted  29 June  1991 at the 20th  Meeting
of the  Standing  Committee  of the  Seventh National  People's  Congress.

252

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

Hong  Kong,  1997, Movement  of  Antiquities

31  See J. David  Murphy,  'Annotated  Chronological  Index  of People's  Republic
of China  Statutory  and  Other  Materials  Relating  to  Cultural  Property'  (note
15 above).

32  See  Regulations of the People's  Republic  of China  on the Administration  of
Protection  of Underwater Cultural Relics promulgated  20 October  1989; and
Administrative  Measures  on  Foreign  Businesses  Taking  Part  in  the  Salvage
of Sunken  Ships or Artifacts  in China's Coastal  Waters promulgated  12 July
1992 by the  State  Council.

33  See  Interim  Provisions on  the  Use of Cultural  Relics and  Monuments  in the
Filming  of  Motion  Pictures  and  Television  promulgated  19  April  1985  by
the  Ministry  of  Culture  (apparently  superceding  an  earlier  version  promul-
gated  11 December  1984).

34  This  gives  rise  to  the  response  of  the  'cultural  internationalists'  that  a  less
retentive  national  policy,  paradoxically,  will  be  more  effective  in  slowing
the tide of thefts  and illegal exports of antiquities. It is argued that the export
policies  of  the  source  states  must  be  guided  by  a  cost-benefit  approach,
taking  into  account  a  scheme  of  values  that  ranks  art  objects  according  to
their  cultural  significance.  What  is required,  commentators  argue,  is  a pro-
cess  of judicious  selection  that  may  result  in  the  export  of  all  but  the  most
culturally  significant  items. The income from  the export of excess relics can
be made available to finance preservation  of the most important pieces, train-
ing of curators, and scientific  exploration  efforts.  Once international  demand
is satisfied  by the creation  of a  sizeable  licit  market,  the profit  is cut  out  of
illicit  trafficking  and  the  concomitant  anti-social  bahaviour  is  reduced  and
enforcement  regimes kept to a manageable size. This sort of approach, which
has  at  its  core  the  substantial  relaxation  of  export  controls,  would,  it  is
argued,  achieve the stated  objectives  of embargo  legislation  better than  em-
bargo  legislation  itself.  See  James  A. R.  Nafziger,  'An  Anthro-Apology  for
Managing  the  International  Flow  of  Cultural  Property',  (1982)  4  Houston
Journal of International  Law  189; Paul Bator,  'An  Essay on the  International
Trade in Art', (1982) 34 Stanford  Law Review 275; John H. Merryman,  'The
Retention  of  Cultural  Property',  (1988)  21  University  of  California  Davis
Law  Review  477; John  H. Merryman  and  Albert  E. Elsen,  'Hot  Art:  A Re-
examination  of  the  Illegal  International  Trade  in  Cultural  Objects',  (1982)
12  Journal  of  Arts  Management  and  Law  5;  and  J. David  Murphy,  'The
People's  Republic  of China  and  the  Illicit Trade  in Cultural  Property:  Is the
Embargo  Approach  the  Answer?'(note  3 above).

35  See note  1 above. The PRC does not appear to have enacted  domestic  legis-
lation  implementing  the  1970  UNESCO  Convention;  however,  scholars  are
of the view that this is not necessary  in the  PRC: see Albert  Hung-yee  Chen
(note  21  above)  at  103 and  authorities  cited  therein.  See  useful  discussions
of  the  1970  UNESCO  Convention  in  John  H. Merryman,  'Two  Ways  of
Thinking  About  Cultural  Property',  (1986)  80  American  Journal  of  Inter-
national  Law  831; Prott and O'Keefe  (note  5 above) and  Maritza  F. Bolano,
'International  Art  Theft  Disputes:  Harmonising  Common  Law  Principles
with  Article  7(b)  of  the  UNESCO  Convention',  (1991-92)  15  Fordham
International  Law Journal  129.

36  Various criticisms have been  made of the  1970 UNESCO  Convention,  larg-
ely  on  the  basis  of  its  vague  and  subjective  wording:  see  for  example  Ann
P. Prunty,  'Toward  Establishing  an  International  Tribunal  for  the  Settlement
of  Cultural  Property  Disputes:  How  to  Keep  Greece  From  Losing  Its  Mar-
bles', (1984)  72 Georgetown  Law Journal  1155; Bonnie Burnham,  'Review'
in (1983)  15 New York  University Journal  of  International  Law and  Politics

253

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300

J. David  Murphy

1021,  1023; and  Pierre  Lalive  (note  1 above). Undoubtedly  the main  reason
for  the  perceived  minimal  impact  of  the  1970  UNESCO  Convention  is  the
fact that it has not been ratified  by a significant  number of the leading market
(or transit)  states, such  as the  United  Kingdom.

37  See  generally  Malcolm  Evans,  'The  International  Protection  of  Cultural
Property  —  The Unidroit Response'  in  10th Commonwealth  Law  Conference
Proceedings,  1993; Richard Crewdson, 'Putting  Life into a Cultural  Property
Convention  -  UNIDROIT:  Still  Some Way to Go', (1992)  17  International
Legal  Practitioner 45; Lyndel  V. Prott,  'The Preliminary  Draft  Unidroit  Con-
vention  on  Stolen  or  Illegally  Exported  Cultural  Objects',  (1992)  41  ICLQ
160; and  Claudia  Fox,  'The  Unidroit  Convention  on  Stolen  or  Illegally  Ex-
ported  Cultural  Objects:  An  Answer  To The  World  Problem  of  Illicit  Trade
in Cultural  Property',  (1993) 9 American  University Journal  of  International
Law  and  Policy 225.

38  See  Sino-British  Joint  Declaration  on  the Question  of  Hong  Kong  1984.
39  The  Director  of  the  State  Council's  Hong  Kong  and  Macau  Affairs  Office

quoted  in Xinhua  24 September  1991.

40  Adopted  on  4  April  1990  by  the  Seventh  National  People's  Congress  of
the  People's  Republic  of  China  at  its Third  Session  (hereinafter,  the  'Basic
Law').

41  South  China  Morning Post  26  October  1993, quoting  the  Chairman  of  So-

thebys  Asia.

42  See generally  Roda Mushkat,  'Hong  Kong as an International  Legal  Person',
(1992)  6  Emory  International  Law  Review  105; and  Yash  Ghai  and  Peter
Wesley-Smith,  'Constitutional  and  Legal  System'  in  Philip  Smart  and  And-
rew  Halkyard  (eds),  Trade and  Investment  Law  in Hong  Kong  (Singapore:
Butterworths  Asia,  1993) and  references  cited  therein. As to  1997 generally,
see Raymond  Wacks (ed), The Future of the Law in Hong Kong  (Hong Kong:
Oxford  University  Press,  1989); Peter Wesley-Smith  and  Albert  Chen (eds),
The Basic  Law  and Hong  Kong's  Future (Singapore:  Butterworths,  1988);
and  Peter  Wesley-Smith  (ed),  Hong  Kong's  Transition: Problems  &  Pros-
pects  (Hong  Kong: Faculty  of  Law,  University  of  Hong  Kong,  1993).

43  Basic  Law,  Article 2.
44  Ibid,  Article  5.
45  Ibid,  Article  6.
46  Ibid,  Article  18.
47  Ibid.
48  Ibid,  Article  160.
49  Ibid,  Article  11.
50  See Roda Mushkat (note 42 above); and Roda Mushkat, 'Jurisdictional  Issues
In  A "Highly  Autonomous  Region"  -  The Case of  Hong  Kong',  (1993)  42
ICLQ  11 for  arguments  to this  effect  in other contexts.

254

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:07:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739195000300


