Salvor in Possession: Friend or Foe 

to Marine Archaeology?

 -*

 . ’**
 ***

While the threat to the underwater cultural heritage from the treasure salvage industry is widely
recognised, the approach to “protection” ranges from absolute prohibition to the sale of state li-
cences to the highest bidder. Even the former raises difﬁcult problems of enforceability and the
choice of mechanisms to determine whether in situ preservation is the preferred option for any
particular wreck site. The common law jurisdictions have tended to prefer a regulated salvage
regime, in which the courts themselves have a role in considering whether appropriate archaeo-
logical methodology is applied to the recovery of historic artefacts. This article examines the legal
and economic basis of such an approach and evaluates whether the underwater cultural heritage
has derived any discernible beneﬁt from this judicial creativity. Inter alia, it concludes that the
legal framework is itself ﬂawed by uncertainty and that the deliberations of the court are ham-
pered by procedural deﬁciencies.

1 

The struggle to provide effective legal protection for the underwater cultural her-
itage has continued unabated for nearly four decades1 on both the national and in-
ternational fronts. Notwithstanding the failure to achieve a European Convention
in 1986, many of the countries participating in those negotiations have developed
domestic legal regimes2 that have curtailed unregulated salvage operations.3 Indeed,
the widespread acceptance among European nations of the need for intervention
has been a major factor in developing the necessary impetus for the 1999 Draft
UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage4
(“the Convention”), which is likely to be submitted to the UNESCO General

*Senior Lecturer in Law, University of Wolverhampton.
**Consultant on art and cultural property law; Member, Editorial Board, International Journal of Cultural
Property 
***Senior Lecturer in Law, University of Wolverhampton.
263

264  -  .

Conference in 2001. However, until such a treaty is in force, the protection of the
underwater cultural heritage will remain dependent on national legal regimes. It
is largely the common law jurisdictions, with their general commitment to a legal
regime for historic wreck based on the law of salvage, that give the greatest cause for
concern.5 It is essential for the effective defence of the underwater cultural heritage
to gain an understanding of the origin and traditions of salvage, together with an
appreciation of recent attempts to modify established principles to take account of
the particular problems arising from the recovery of antiquities from the seabed. 
It is in this context that the unique developments of salvage law in the U.S.
federal admiralty courts acquire their signiﬁcance, as it is primarily the American
salvage industry that has the new technology in search and recovery operations tar-
geting deep ocean historic wreck sites.6 However, the majority of sites are in shal-
low (territorial) waters and new technology such as mixed gas equipment and
re-breathers7 is available to sports divers as well as smaller commercial salvage
companies throughout the developed world. Thus, there can never be a complete,
practical separation between private salvage interests and international negotia-
tions. Indeed, any evaluation of both the problems to be faced by negotiators and
the nature of legal protection for the underwater cultural heritage must necessar-
ily take into account the operation of the salvage law regimes in many different ju-
risdictions and the commercial interests that they support. This connection be-
tween national jurisdiction and international agreement could not have been more
graphically illustrated than in the latest round of litigation involving the wreck of
the Titanic.8 The court expressed considerable annoyance that the U.S. government
was not represented to explain why it was contemplating an international agree-
ment with Canada, France, and the United Kingdom that would restrict interfer-
ence with the wreck and, by the same token, interfere with the rights granted by the
court to RMS Titanic Inc. to conduct salvage operations at the site. Until this
matter is resolved, the government of the world’s principal maritime power is ap-
parently constrained in its conduct of international negotiations by an internal
issue of the individual property rights of a salvor in possession under the U.S. ad-
miralty law of salvage.9

Accordingly, this article has three objectives. Firstly, it analyses the legal and
economic context of the United States’ and other common law jurisdictions’at-
tempts to regulate the salvage of historic wreck; secondly, it examines the attempts
of federal courts to take account of archaeological considerations, both in grant-
ing protection to salvors and in calculating salvage awards, and, ﬁnally, it consid-
ers whether the underwater cultural heritage has derived any discernible beneﬁts
from this judicial creativity.

     
    

  265

It is incorrect to regard salvage law simply as a sterile collection of legal rules. It
has its roots in antiquity, its own sense of pride in its contribution to legal and
economic development, and an awareness that national variations in detail do not
detract from the truly international character of its substantive core. Even when
the law of salvage developed in England during the nineteenth century,10 it did so
with reverence for the past,11 and those same central principles still underpin sal-
vage law in common law jurisdictions and internationally.12 The emergence of a
body of law which was and remains largely sui generis underlines this historical con-
tinuity and offers a greater insight into the ferocious independence of federal ad-
miralty courts that has emerged as a key strand in the line of recent cases dealing
with treasure salvage in the United States.

The central principle of salvage law is that encouragement of salvage is para-
mount. The continuity of this policy merits further explanation, since it lies at the
core of the conﬂict between salvors and archaeologists. In words which would not
be  out  of place  in  a  modern  political  manifesto  or  economics  text,  Sir  John
Nicholl stated in 1835 in the Industry,13 “there is still another principle—to en-
courage enterprise, reward exertion and to be liberal in all that is due to the general
interests of commerce. . . .”14 The 1910 Brussels Convention for the Uniﬁcation of
Certain Rules Relating to Assistance and Salvage15 at Sea (hereafter “the 1910 Con-
vention”) similarly asserts in Article 2 “[t]hat every act of assistance or salvage
which has a useful result gives a right to equitable remuneration.” Finally, the pri-
mary reason for the process leading to the 1989 London Salvage Convention (“the
1989 Convention”) was the concern of maritime nations and the salvage industry
itself to bolster declining revenues and reverse the parallel reduction in capacity.16
Unsurprisingly, the 1910 Convention made no attempt to address the issues either
of sunken wreck in general or of historic wreck in particular. The 1989 Conven-
tion, while permitting reservations in respect of historic wreck under Article 30,
also failed to elaborate a clear policy.17 Thus, the commitment of admiralty courts
in the United States and elsewhere to commercial reward merely reﬂects at least
two centuries of an unbroken international legal tradition, underpinned by the pri-
macy of federal jurisdiction in admiralty matters that itself enjoys protection
under Article III of the U.S. Constitution.18 It is against such a background that
the emergence of judicial protection for the underwater cultural heritage must be
judged.

266  -  .

Notwithstanding a degree of evolutionary change, the overall consequence of
this historical continuity is rigidity, a straitjacket of existing admiralty law under-
pinned by public policy justiﬁcations and a doctrine of precedent constraining ju-
dicial creativity. It is unnecessary for the present purposes to review generally all
these legal principles but it is clear that four concepts are central. Firstly, the entire
salvage regime itself does not apply unless the wreck, artefacts, or wreck site can be
shown to be “in marine peril,” or, as it is more simply stated in most of the mod-
ern cases, “in danger.” Secondly, the initial reason for salvors seeking legal protec-
tion is to defend the status of “salvor in possession” and its attendant possessory
rights. Thirdly, entitlement to a salvage award is dependent on “success,” the as-
sessment of which is made by reference to an established list of criteria. Fourthly,
entitlement to an award can be affected by the law relating to “abandonment,” the
juridical deﬁnition of which has caused particular difﬁculties in the United States. 

.1 “  ”
Traditionally, the danger to the property to be salved is assessed under two broad
headings, the risk of physical damage or destruction and the risk of ﬁnancial or
proprietary harm (including deprivation of enjoyment) to the owner. The applica-
tion  of the  same  principles  was  extended  to  sunken  wreck  as  the  technology
emerged to make recovery possible,19 although the majority of the case law naturally
reﬂects a preoccupation with the most common maritime casualty, vessels aﬂoat but
in need of assistance. Even in the latter context, the practical difﬁculties have been
considerable, particularly on the questions of the degree and immediacy of dan-
ger.20 Throughout the common law jurisdictions, these matters are still assessed on
the facts of individual cases by the exercise of judicial discretion rather than the me-
chanical application of precedent,21 and while this conﬁrms judicial ﬂexibility, it
does so in an operational maritime context having little relevance to historic wreck.
A judicial willingness to innovate is also demonstrated by the later extension
of salvage principles to reward success in protecting owners from the consequen-
tial ﬁnancial loss of the casualty (for example, the costs of wreck removal from a
harbour entrance). This represented a slightly broader approach, although such ef-
forts are merely taken into account and do not justify a salvage award per se.22 By
contrast, English admiralty courts were unable to respond satisfactorily to the
problem of environmental danger, notably oil pollution, beyond accepting that re-
muneration might be enhanced if third-party claims were avoided by the efforts of
a salvor.23 It is also noteworthy that the American cases disclose an even more cau-
tious approach24 to extension of liability for salvage claims. The 1910 Convention
did not extend the concept of danger to third-party claims,25 and even the 1989
Convention proceeds by way of carefully worded provisions in Articles 13 and 14 to
reward salvors who avert environmental “threats.”26

  267

Thus, it is apparent that the concept of danger is not only hidebound by
precedent but also inherently pragmatic in nature. The central public policy ob-
jective is to encourage intervention by salvors to avert maritime perils with a view
to returning maritime property to the stream of commerce. This is a recurring
theme in salvage cases, including those where the subject matter is historic wreck.
This essentially commercial ideology was at the heart of the debate over so-called
liability salvage in the years leading up to the 1989 Convention. The issue was not
whether it was desirable to reward salvors for averting environmental disaster but
on whose insurers the liability should fall, shipowners’ or cargo owners’. The even-
tual compromise has left the basic concepts of salvage law untouched, and the as-
sessment of danger to historic wreck is conducted against this background of im-
penetrable commercialism, judicial tradition, and precedent.

.    
In Morris,27 the ﬁrst of only two relevant English cases involving historic wreck, the
matter was not dealt with expressly and the court merely assumed that recovery of
artefacts amounted to salvage.28 However, the location of the wreck site near a reef
to the west of the Isles of Scilly, an area exposed to Atlantic storms and ﬁerce
tides, renders the physical danger self-evident in conventional maritime terms. The
peril is not so much that the items themselves might be destroyed or sustain fur-
ther damage, since 260 years at the bottom of the sea had long since done their
worst,29 but that a fresh storm or high spring tide might sweep them away or cover
them again.30 Since admiralty law seeks to return goods to the stream of com-
merce, this was seen as sufﬁcient danger to justify the application of salvage prin-
ciples. Similarly, in the case of the Hanover,31 which involved an application for an
injunction on behalf of a salvor, restraining the U.K. government from designat-
ing the wreck as an historic vessel, it was implicitly recognised by the court that the
wreck was “in danger” and therefore legitimately the subject of salvage, even though
it was buried at that time in many feet of sand. 

A similar approach can be detected in the American cases. In Columbus-America
Discovery Group v. Atlantic Mutual Insurance Company,32 where there was no serious dis-
cussion of the issue of danger (other than an insistence that loss on the ocean ﬂoor
was sufﬁcient33) in relation to this sidewheel steamer which sank in a hurricane 160
miles off the coast of South Carolina in 1 1/2 miles of water. The hull is stated to
have come to rest in an upright position, largely free of sediment, although the
wooden structure had collapsed. The assumption of danger by the court would
seem rather less justiﬁed than in Morris, as instability of the site was clearly not a
concern. The potential value of the cargo, however, was spectacular.34 But a marked
feature of the above cases is that the courts did not expressly consider the question
of the presence of danger, but merely treated it as axiomatic while the property re-

268  -  .

mained on the seabed. In marked contrast are the remarks of Judge Ramsey in Sub-
aqueous Exploration and Archaeology Ltd. et al. v. The Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Ves-
sel etc.,35 which merit repeating in full:

However, the defendant vessels in these proceedings have been resting on the
ocean ﬂoor “under an undetermined amount of sand” for hundreds of years.
This forum declines to follow the recently developed rule in the Fifth Circuit
that an ancient, abandoned shipwreck constitutes a marine peril for purposes
of stating a valid salvage claim. See, e.g. Cobb Coin II, 549 F. Supp. at 557
and cases cited therein. Rather, the Court ﬁnds that the defendant vessels are
not reasonably in peril of being lost through the elements since they are “im-
pervious to weather conditions above the sea,” with the “sand prevent[ing]
deterioration under water.” Platoro Limited v. Unidentiﬁed Remains of a
Vessel, 508 F.2d 1113, 1114– 1115 n.1 (5th Cir. 1975).

The Court, therefore, ﬁnds under the circumstances that the traditional

public policy concerns underpinning the federal law of salvage are
insufﬁciently implicated, if at all, when the objects to be rescued are marine
antiquities which have been undisturbed for centuries.

However, it is also interesting to note that, even at ﬁrst instance in Platoro36 itself,
Judge Garza was dismissive of this very argument by the State of Texas, stating em-
phatically that it made no difference whether a vessel was ﬂoating, lying on the sea-
bed, embedded in the ocean ﬂoor, or buried under sand. In Cobb Coin II,37 one of
the richest treasure hauls of them all, from the wreck of the so-called 1715 Plate
Fleet,38 Judge King decided the matter by relying on the so-called “established” rule
cited above by Judge Ramsey.

The lack of discussion on this issue in English law has already been noted,39
but the Canadian approach in H.M. The Queen in Right of Ontario v. Mar-Dive Corpora-
tion et al.40 is noteworthy for rejecting a salvage claim on the grounds that the wreck
of the Atlantic, which had sunk in Lake Erie in 1852, was in no danger other than
from recovery operations themselves, in that they had already disturbed the equi-
librium of the site. This vessel had sunk bow ﬁrst and became “mired” in the bed
of the lake, that is to say, stuck fast but not submerged in sediment. Notwith-
standing these few cases where the lack of danger has avoided the application of
salvage law, the predominant approach is that expressed above by the Fifth Circuit,41
namely, that property is in peril simply because it remains on the seabed. Again, the
example of The Central America is instructive, where the lack of analysis of the dan-
ger requirement amounts to a simple reassertion of the basic premise of admiralty
law that property lost at sea has been involuntarily removed from the possession of
the owner and should be restored, subject only to payment of the salvor. The three
possibilities of destruction, damage, or loss are not differentiated for this purpose,
again underlining that returning property to the stream of commerce is sufﬁcient.

  269

The approach is taken up again in Cobb Coin Company Inc. v. The Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked
and Abandoned Sailing Vessel etc.,42 where almost identical phraseology is used, where
the danger of losing the artefacts in subsequent tropical storms and hurricanes is
emphasised, and where the whole matter is encapsulated by the words, “Every day
lost in the salving effort means fewer artifacts recovered for the beneﬁt of soci-
ety.”43 In terms of traditional salvage law principles, this approach must be correct.
The extended meaning of danger, encompassing as it does loss of beneﬁcial use
and the continued absence of sunken property from society’s stream of com-
merce,44 means that the courts cannot determine the issue solely by reference to the
presence or absence of physical danger in the marine environment. This incorpo-
ration by salvage law of economic and proprietary considerations is in fundamen-
tal opposition to the stance of the archaeological community, which regards phys-
ically  stable  sites  as  the  most  appropriate  means  of preserving  the  heritage.
Preservation in situ can preserve even organic remains for centuries, is immeasurably
more cost effective than the elaborate and expensive conservation measures re-
quired upon recovery, and resolves the pressing problem faced by all heritage bod-
ies of securing adequate accommodation for recovered material in publicly acces-
sible collections.45 Consequently, the extended interpretation given to danger by
the admiralty courts constitutes a virtually irreconcilable disparity with accepted
principles of conserving the underwater cultural heritage.

This requirement of danger is only relevant if salvage law applies. In the
United States, where title to property has been abandoned, the law of ﬁnds applies
to grant title (and thus the full value) to the ﬁnder.46 If abandonment of title is es-
tablished,47 the ﬁnder has only to prove that the artefacts have been reduced into
possession to establish a claim to title. The existence of danger is immaterial. In
this way, the law of ﬁnds encourages covert, early recovery, since locating the prop-
erty is insufﬁcient without the exercise of possession. In The Central America this
“harsh, primitive and inﬂexible” law is criticised in favour of the law of salvage,
precisely because the latter encourages overt, less competitive recovery operations.48
Indeed, the assertion is made that admiralty law prefers and favours salvage law.49
This view is dismissed as “erroneous” in the powerfully argued dissenting judge-
ment of Judge Widener,50 who cites ten precedents in addition to other learned
sources51 to demonstrate (with respect, beyond all reasonable doubt) that other cir-
cuits have consistently applied the law of ﬁnds to historic wreck and not the law
of salvage. Of course, this suggests that the issue of danger is largely of historical
interest in the United States, and that may well have proved to be the case before
the 1987 Abandoned Shipwreck Act.52 As title to such wrecks is now effectively
vested in the State, it suddenly became vital for salvors to demonstrate that wrecks
had not in fact been abandoned by their owners and so fall outside the provisions
of the Abandoned Shipwreck Act. Salvage law then applies53 and danger again be-
comes an issue.54

270  -  .

. “  ”
The role of federal admiralty courts in the early stages of a salvage operation is
primarily to offer protection to one salvor from either competing salvors55 or, in
the United States, from a state.56 In American historic wreck cases, it is the prac-
tice of salvors to apply for both a declaration that they have acquired the status of
salvor in possession and for an injunction restraining others even from entering the
wreck site, let alone excavating and removing artefacts.57 It is important to em-
phasise that these possessory rights are proprietary in nature and also enjoy the
draconian protection of a maritime lien.58 This arises automatically on the com-
pletion of successful salvage and endures until the salvage award has either been
discharged or adequate security has been provided.59

The concept of “salvor in possession” is related to the parallel concept of
“derelict” and both have their origins in the case law of previous centuries. The lat-
ter is a vessel abandoned at sea by the master and crew, without hope of recovery.60
It is abandoned, not in the sense that legal title (ownership) to it is lost, but in the
sense that it is no longer in the physical possession nor under the control of the
owner or crew.61 The concept originated as long ago as the thirteenth century, when
wooden vessels were sometimes abandoned but remained aﬂoat in a waterlogged
condition. Any person discovering one could board it as a salvor and, if it was suc-
cessfully brought to port, a salvage reward was payable.62 The concept of salvor in
possession was related to that of derelict, as the ﬁrst persons boarding and taking
possession as salvors acquire the status of salvor in possession and, as such, “have
a legal interest, which cannot be divested . . . and it is not for . . . any other person
. . . to dispossess them without cause.”63 In short, a salvor in possession has a legal
right to entire and exclusive possession and control of a derelict which is good
against the world.  

It is instructive to consider further how the status of a salvor in possession is
both acquired and retained. The requirements are simply stated. To establish pos-
session of a derelict, a salvor must demonstrate both an intention to do so64 and
sufﬁcient physical acts of use and occupation to be in control of the whole of the
wreck or the wreck site.65 Clearly, in respect of a sunken vessel in tidal waters, such
use and occupation by divers must, by the constraints of weather, tide, and depth,
be discontinuous and limited. In assessing whether possession has been taken, U.K.
courts will take account of the weather and tidal conditions, the depth, the fre-
quency of diving operations achieved, the maintenance of a buoy upon the site, the
degree and nature of any preparatory work and recoveries made, and the existence
of future plans.66 The Morris case is particularly instructive in two respects. Firstly,
because it involved an archaeological excavation67 rather than a traditional com-
mercial salvage operation, it established that maritime archaeologists could become
salvors in possession and thereby protect their sites from intrusion.68 Secondly, the
court accepted for the ﬁrst time in the United Kingdom that possession could be

  271

taken of a site where the remains of a wreck were scattered69 rather than of the
substantial remains of a vessel70 itself. Thus an archaeologist or a salvor (in the tra-
ditional sense), by manifesting control over a site, may acquire a possessory right
which is enforceable against the world and which may be said to be analogous to
a proprietary right in the site.71 Similar criteria have been formulated in the United
States, where possession must also be established and maintained. The court must
be convinced that due diligence has been exercised in actual recovery operations by
an applicant with the capacity to achieve success.72 In Hener v. United States of Amer-
ica et al.,73 a dispute between three groups of salvors was resolved by the application
of these principles, following a detailed evaluation of the efforts made by each,
with particular emphasis on the degree of investment of capital, equipment, and
time. A more recent judicial application of these requirements occurred in Marex
International Inc. v. The Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel etc., where the court ex-
amined the activities of the plaintiff in minute detail before granting an injunction
protecting its status against intrusions by competing salvors and arresting the re-
covered artefacts.74

2.3.1 Acquisition and Retention of Status
The more modern problem of possession of deep ocean wrecks has been imagina-
tively resolved by the concepts of “telepresence” and “telepossession,” acknowledg-
ing that, inter alia, underwater robotic vehicles, remote video ﬁlming, and laser imag-
ing are the only realistic means available in depths beyond the reach of conventional
diving equipment.75 Yet the conclusion from the salvor’s viewpoint is disturbingly
simple: continue successful salvage operations or risk vacation of injunctive protec-
tion and displacement by a competing salvor. Indeed, the case law emphasises this
conclusion, in that legal challenges to the status of a salvor in possession frequently
include allegations of lack of due diligence in pursuing recovery operations,76 again
underlining the commercial rationale of the entire salvage regime.

2.3.2 Due Diligence and the Titanic
It should come as no surprise, therefore, that the two critical components of the
legal concept of salvor in possession, the right to exclude others so that salvage can
continue unimpeded and the correlative duty to pursue recovery with due diligence,
have been given even greater prominence by the latest developments in the saga of
the Titanic referred to brieﬂy in the introduction.77 The salvors intended to mount
a major recovery operation during the summer of 2000 and the company sought ap-
proval and guidance from the court on the possible impact of the pending multi-
lateral agreement between the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, and
France to regulate access to the wreck. The company and the court accept that a sal-
vage operation approximately every two years is necessary to show the due diligence
required to maintain the status of salvor in possession. The declared intention is to

272  -  .

collect further artefacts, although the company has reiterated its commitment to
maintain the collection and not to dispose of individual items. However, there are
further aspects of these proceedings that give cause for grave concern.

An RMS witness at the March proceedings78 revealed a plan to make a “surgi-
cal incision” to allow entry through the side of the hull for removal of wreck con-
tents. It is alleged that the wreck may “collapse upon itself,” rendering such entry
impossible, although this assessment is noteworthy for its lack of a time scale.
Apart  from  discounting  the  use  of explosives,  the  method  of entry  was  not
speciﬁed, other than to say that consideration was being given to the matter in dis-
cussions between the company and ROV (remotely operated vehicle) operators. 
The cross-examination then turned to the question of sale, revealing two ad-
ditional matters. Firstly, the company may consider sale of artefacts in the future,
but only of the collection as a whole to an “entity who would agree to make the ob-
jects available through exhibition to the public.”79 Secondly, it was revealed that the
terms of the charter agreements with IFREMER permitted the sale of coal, coins,
currency, gold, and diamonds.80 Although this may have been public knowledge
from the outset, these “exempt” items take on a greater signiﬁcance in the context
of a plan to enter the hull since, up to this time, most of the recovered objects have
come from the seabed, in the so-called debris ﬁeld. The suspicion must be that there
will now be a dedicated search for such items, which will then be sold to generate
a proﬁt for the salvage company, RMS Titanic Inc. Such suspicions have not been
alleviated by statements reputed to have been made by some shareholders to the
general effect that “if there are $1 billion worth of artefacts down there, we want
them up.”81 Indeed, counsel for the United States in the March proceedings ex-
pressly made the point that any policy over the long-term future of the collection
was “contingent upon the express approval of the shareholders.”82 The point was
not conceded by the company, but it is a matter of basic company law that share-
holders can change the management team and thus company policy on any issue.83
Apart from the request for guidance regarding the multilateral agreement,84 the
March proceedings were also instructive regarding the court’s attitude to the prior-
ity to be accorded to archaeological considerations. Counsel for the United States
suggested that any decision to blow a hole in the hull would breach the spirit, if not
the letter, of the court’s original order. Judge Calvert Clarke dismissed that notion
and reiterated that the salvor had exclusive rights that no one could fetter.85 If the
point required greater emphasis, this was forthcoming by the later statements that
the salvor had “carte blanche” to conduct operations86 and, then again, “blanket au-
thority from this court to exercise salvage on that ship.”87 The substantive nature of
the rights of a salvor in possession could enjoy no more emphatic illustration than
these extraordinary proceedings. Private property rights are being asserted by a na-
tional court in international waters over a wreck of a foreign vessel in derogation
of its own state’s authority to conduct foreign policy and, albeit potentially, in di-
rect contravention of a treaty recognised in international law. Moreover, the failure

  273

to establish the relative importance of archaeological considerations among the
other criteria used by admiralty courts is shown to be a major deﬁciency in the ju-
dicial protection afforded to the underwater cultural heritage.

. “”
The right to a salvage award is dependent on the preservation of maritime prop-
erty from marine peril, and failure to achieve success prevents such an award, how-
ever great the effort or however high the expenditure.88 This is the traditional prin-
ciple of “no cure, no pay,” which can be found in English law,89 American law,90
and international law.91 The requirement is in no way relaxed for historic wreck and
the due diligence obligations of a salvor in possession have already been noted. In-
deed, it is questionable whether an altruistic salvor could slow, or even halt tem-
porarily, the rate of recoveries on scientiﬁc or archaeological grounds alone with-
out endangering its legal protection. Certainly, a prolonged cessation, other than
on grounds of site difﬁculties, technical problems, or operating conditions, would
result in success for any third-party application to vacate an injunction.

The criterion of success is also relevant to the assessment of salvage awards
and how these relate to the other duties of salvors. Traditionally, admiralty texts
treat the two aspects separately,92 but logic dictates that a duty to exercise due care
in the salvage operation must surely relate directly to the amount of the salved
value, to the assessment of the skill used by the salvor, and to the overall measure-
ment of success. In the speciﬁc context of historic wreck, it will be seen that U.S.
admiralty courts have added a duty to preserve the “archaeological provenance”93
since the decision in The Central America.94 This decision purported to base itself on
MDM Salvage Inc. v. The Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Sailing Vessel etc.95 In fact,
MDM was only concerned with commenting on the lack of real effort in preserv-
ing the archaeological integrity of the site, as part of a series of ﬁndings of fact
that resulted in a refusal to grant exclusive salvage rights. In other words, it was not
concerned in that case with assessment of an award. This particular example of ju-
dicial creativity reﬂects the central theme of this article, namely whether the un-
derwater cultural heritage (UCH) has derived any signiﬁcant degree of protection
from this foray into “land management.”96

     

.1     11  1
At this juncture, it is useful to note Article 8 of the 1910 Convention, which lists
the considerations in making an award as follows:

(a) ﬁrstly, the measure of success obtained, the efforts and deserts of the
salvors, the danger run by the salved vessel, by her passengers, crew and
cargo, by the salvors and the salving vessel; the time expended, the expenses

274  -  .

incurred and losses suffered, and the risks of liability and other risks run by
the salvors, and also the value of the property exposed to such risks, due
regard being had to the special appropriation (if any) of the salvors’ vessel
for salvage purposes; (b) secondly, the value of the property salved.

Although differently structured and worded, Article 13.1 of the 1989 Convention
contains broadly the same criteria but adds “the skill and efforts of the salvors in
preventing or minimising damage to the environment,97 the promptness of the ser-
vices rendered,98 the availability and use of vessels or other equipment intended for
salvage operations99 and the readiness and efﬁciency of the salvor’s equipment and
the value thereof.”100 With the exception of environmental damage avoidance,101 it
can be argued that these additions simply make explicit factors already implicit in
Article 8. 

However, the important question for present purposes is whether this list of
criteria is deﬁnitive. In dealing with just that matter in the United States, District
Judge Lynch in Westar Marine Services v. Heerema Marine Contractors,102 after examining
Article 8, the Comité Maritime International (CMI) Draft Convention that led to
Article 13,103 relevant English authorities, and Article 31 of the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties,104 stated decisively:

It is not for this Court to arrogate itself to the position of an international
lawmaking body and read additional factors for consideration into the
Treaty. Thus, this Court declines to consider the prevention of liability to
third parties, public interest, or “beneﬁts to the ship owner” as distinct
factors in arriving at a salvage award under the Treaty.

Such an approach is at odds with the additional factor (archaeological provenance)
accepted in The Central America and subsequent case law. Brice,105 while conceding
that there is no similar English decision on Article 8, accepts the principle and
submits that Article 13 should also be construed as deﬁnitive in the interests of in-
ternational uniformity. Nonetheless, he supports the American approach to take
account of scientiﬁc endeavour in assessing an award in historic wreck recoveries.106
Although his position is encouraging, it also appears to be contradictory, unless
it is possible to argue that such a factor is part of Article 13.1(e), “the skill and ef-
forts of the salvors in salving the vessel, other property and life,” a point which
Brice himself does not seek to establish. This discussion also serves to emphasise
that the American judiciary has been genuinely creative in introducing archaeo-
logical criteria into salvage law and that the Westar Marine Services approach can no
longer be regarded as good law.

.  BLACKWALL 
At this point, it is useful to explain more fully the speciﬁc criteria used by U.S.
courts in assessing salvage awards. There are six traditional factors set out by the

  275

Supreme Court in The Blackwall 107 and they are listed in descending order of im-
portance in Benedict,108 namely:

1. the degree of danger from which the property was rescued;
2. the value of the property saved;
3. the risk incurred by the salvors in securing the property from the impend-
ing peril;
4. the promptitude, skill and energy displayed in rendering the service and
saving the property;
5. the value of the property employed by the salvors in rendering the service,
and the danger to which such property was exposed; and
6. the labour expended by the salvors in rendering the salvage service.109

The more recent, seventh factor of preserving the archaeological provenance was
certainly referred to as the “seventh,” although there is little in the case law to in-
dicate its actual priority in the assessment process, and Benedict does not yet assist
in this regard. Given the cogent fact that the original list of six has the sanction of
the Supreme Court, any pronouncement from a lower level of the judiciary would
have to be regarded as provisional. Of course, it is possible to argue that the sev-
enth criterion is only relevant to historic wreck and, in that context, should be pre-
eminent. Nonetheless, the recurring themes of this article, the fundamental tradi-
tions and functions of salvage, together with the constraint of precedent placed on
judicial creativity, must throw serious doubt on the chances of success for that ar-
gument. While national salvage regimes continue to dominate the management of
the underwater cultural heritage, then this issue, which seems to be merely techni-
cal, will remain one of fundamental importance for marine archaeology.

Benedict’s order of priority merits further comment, as it provides the prac-
tical link between the two central salvage issues of “danger” and “success.” It has
already been explained that the former is a pre-requisite for the salvage regime to
apply in the ﬁrst place but, for that purpose alone, the actual degree of danger has
no great signiﬁcance as long as it can be established that “there is a state of dif-
ﬁculty and reasonable apprehension”110 or that  “the vessel has encountered any
damage or misfortune which might possibly expose her to destruction if the ser-
vices were not rendered.”111 However, when assessing the award, the Benedict pri-
ority renders the immediacy and seriousness of the danger the paramount factor.
In conventional maritime disasters, this approach is sensible, is easy to assess, and
serves the public policy objective of encouraging salvors. In the case of historic
wreck, any objective assessment of the degree of physical danger is necessarily an
archaeological assessment, which would provide a mechanism, in appropriate cases, to
formulate disincentives to salvors, since a stable site would produce a very low as-
sessment of the level of physical danger. However, since danger includes ﬁnancial
danger which, in turn, includes removal of artefacts from the stream of commerce,

276  -  .

the opposite result is inevitable. It is simple to argue that the mere presence of
valuable goods on the seabed is the ultimate danger, making it almost superﬂuous
to mention the purely physical threats of storms, typhoons, and shifting sediment.
Thus the paramount factor achieves the highest rating in the assessment of salvage
awards.

Similarly, the second most important factor, the value of the salved property,
operates automatically in favour of the salvor. Once again, it is self-evidently sen-
sible in the context of a conventional maritime casualty to reﬂect high salved val-
ues in the award 112 but, in the case of historic wreck, the salvor will have selected its
“casualty” precisely because it is likely to yield high monetary values and will almost
certainly abandon the salvage operations if they do not materialise. Yet again an-
cient principles do not serve well where the commercial rationale is not accepted.
Turning from the criteria for the award to the duty of a salvor to take reason-
able care (or “due care,” as it is expressed in Article 8 of the 1989 Convention113), the
courts in all jurisdictions have been faced by the dilemma that the salvor is a vol-
unteer (that is to say, not under a prior legal duty to intervene) intervening to res-
cue maritime property from danger. The predictable and sensible consequence has
been a judicial policy of leniency towards salvors by the application of a standard
of care expressed by Judge Atkinson as “the skill and care which can reasonably be
expected from persons in their position.”114Thus, a chance intervention by a passing
vessel will require less skill than the intervention of a professional salvor.115 Al-
though the modern American approach has seen a divergence from its English ori-
gins,116 it remains the case that gross negligence or wilful misconduct on the part of
a salvor will reduce or negate an award,117 and that is a general approach that corre-
sponds to the 1989 Convention regime. There is no case applying this to recovery of
historic wreck,118 although ﬁrst principles suggest there should be no difﬁculty in
doing so on appropriate evidence. Perhaps the major evidential obstacle to such an
application would be the standard of archaeological and scientiﬁc methodology
required by admiralty courts in the ﬁrst instance, since the negligence must be
“gross.” 119 In other words, although there may be a duty incumbent on American
salvors to preserve the archaeological provenance, and although there may be the
means under traditional salvage law to penalise those who fail to do so, the practi-
cal consequences are likely to depend largely on the standards required by the courts
when they determine the outcome of the original application for injunctive pro-
tection. This theme will be elaborated later in this article.

 “  ”

It has already been pointed out that salvage law does not apply where title has been
abandoned. Although the issue of abandonment has already been discussed in
connection with the concept of “derelict,” this must be distinguished carefully

  277

from abandonment of title. Abandonment of a vessel by master and crew with-
out intention to return is simply a pre-requisite for derelict status to be applied to
the vessel; it has no impact on the title of the owner. For many jurisdictions, aban-
donment of title has proved to be a complex problem that has spanned many cen-
turies.120 The primary difﬁculty is that “abandonment” has no ﬁxed meaning but is
a generic term describing conduct or circumstances that affect title to property.121
It covers a range of behaviour and, even in the most obvious case of an express dec-
laration  of abandonment  by  a  proven  owner,  the  question  still  remains  as  to
whether the effect is to immediately divest the owner of title and render the property
available to the ﬁrst ﬁnder or whether the declarer’s title remains intact until as-
sumed by another. Roman law adopted the former solution, but the position remains
doubtful under the English common law.122 For example, police in Portsmouth,
England, in returning to ﬁnders certain gold coins that had been scattered at ran-
dom by their elderly owner in the front gardens of local residents, required indem-
nities in the event that the original owner re-asserted title.123 Similarly, the effect
of a formal abandonment by a shipowner in favour of underwriters who then
refuse to accept the notice has not been resolved.124 In real property matters, the
common law has shown even greater reluctance to accept anything other than for-
mal abandonment.125

Abandonment of title to shipwreck in English law, other than in the context
of notice of abandonment by owner to insurer in cases of total loss or construc-
tive total loss, has generated little case law126 or academic comment.127 The reason
for this is certainly not the clarity of existing principles but is probably the result
simply of insufﬁcient ﬁnancial incentives to litigate. There have been no salvage
operations of historic wreck in U.K. waters with high salvage values and disputed
ownership.128 This contrasts markedly with the United States, where a series of
spectacularly lucrative operations such as the Central America produced recoveries
measured in hundreds of millions of dollars.129 In consequence, thirty-nine differ-
ent insurers litigated to establish their shares by subrogation130 in the cargo.

.1   
The two basic requirements for abandonment of title are identical throughout the
common law jurisdictions: ﬁrstly, physical relinquishment of possession and con-
trol, and secondly, the intention to relinquish proprietary rights in the property.131
The ﬁrst requirement is unlikely to create difﬁculties in the context of historic
wreck,132 but the second is the source of recurring disputes. In contrast to the con-
fusing position under English law,133 express abandonment creates few difﬁculties
in the United States,134 as the law of ﬁnds is well established and provides that the
ﬁrst ﬁnder of abandoned property (including maritime property) to establish pos-
session and control also acquires title.135 Generally, however, the issue of express
abandonment seemed to have had only theoretical relevance, as there appeared to
be no recorded example in historic wreck cases until Sea Hunt Inc. v. The Unidentiﬁed,

278  -  .

Shipwrecked Vessel or Vessels etc.,136 involving the wrecks of the Juno and La Galga, two
Spanish warships sunk in 1802 and 1750 respectively. The plaintiff argued three
grounds for express abandonment by Spain, namely two treaties of 1763 and 1819
respectively and the declaration of war by Spain against the United States in 1898.
It was held that, on a true construction of the 1763 Treaty, Spain did indeed ex-
pressly abandon title to La Galga. Conversely, such argument was rejected in relation
to the effect of the 1819 Treaty on the title to Juno. It was further held that no aban-
donment occurred as a consequence of either the declaration of war, since auto-
matic forfeiture of warships does not occur under U.S. law, or the proclamation of
President McKinley conﬁscating Spanish vessels in territorial waters.

Following this decision, express abandonment of title may yet have a major im-
pact on historic wreck in the United States. The 1763 Treaty was concluded between
the three major colonial powers of the time, Great Britain, France, and Spain, at the
end of the Seven Years’ War. The agreement re-wrote the map of North America
and, under Article XX, Spain ceded Florida, “all that Spain possesses on the con-
tinent of North America, to the East or to the South East of the river Mississippi,”
and “everything that depends” on the land to Great Britain. Many ancient wrecks
are to be found in these areas. On appeal, Spain was successful in proving non-
abandonment of both vessels. This decision probably negates the practical effect of
the ASA in the case of all state, historic vessels, since most are either Spanish or
British and both countries now pursue an identical policy. The case also conﬁrms
that the U.S. courts respect the rule of customary international law on which the
decision is based. Further judicial scrutiny of other ancient treaties should be an-
ticipated in future years, although the balanced view must be re-emphasised, namely
that it remains to be seen whether express abandonment in the context of historic
wreck is likely to be of more than marginal importance.

.     
Inferred abandonment, on the other hand, is both highly relevant to historic wreck
and unavoidably problematic, since it requires an assessment of the weight of ev-
idence in each case, or “clear and convincing evidence,” as the American test is ex-
pressed.137 Although it is not merely the passage of time and inactivity by owners
that are relevant factors,138 they are certainly the most important. With wrecks of
great antiquity such as Roman or Viking vessels, tracing ownership is quite im-
possible and any system of law is compelled to consider whether res nullius is the
solution to such problems. Bracton accepted the possibility as long ago as the thir-
teenth century. However, even in such “obvious” instances, there are alternatives.
Wrecks of any age in the inter-tidal zone between high- and low-water marks in the
United Kingdom are usually vested in the lord of the manor,139 while in the Re-
public of Ireland they are vested in the state. In the case of vessels not covered by
national laws, there is no universal approach to the effects of lapse of time on
ownership rights and selected examples are necessary to illustrate the problem.

  279

In Simon v. Taylor,140 Mr. Justice Chua of the Singapore High Court held that
a German U-boat sunk by the allies during World War II remained vested in the
Federal Republic of Germany as successor in title, notwithstanding inaction for
twenty-eight years.141 However, a more persuasive authority may be Robinson v. West-
ern Australian Museum,142 which involved the wreck of the Dutch East Indiaman the
Vergulde Draeck, which sank in 1665 off the coast of western Australia. Following the
discovery of the wreck by the plaintiff, the question before the court concerned
the validity of state legislation dealing with title to and possession of historic
wrecks in Australian waters. Judge Stephen, in holding that the Dutch government
was the successor in title to the Dutch East India Company,143 stated:

There is of course, no evidence here of express abandonment nor of the cir-
cumstances of the wreck, other than it occurred in uncharted waters of an
undiscovered continent; there was no doubt, nothing voluntary in the
owner’s failure either to resume possession or even to discover the ship’s
whereabouts and in these present proceedings the mere passage of so many
years should not be treated as involving abandonment of title, even if in
other circumstances the mere passing of time without any attempt to assert
possession can perhaps be so regarded.”144

Thus, this view is that, although it is possible in some circumstances to infer aban-
donment of title from the passage of time, the fact that the owners could not have
made any attempt to assert ownership over that period made such an inference in-
appropriate. Finally, the willingness of an English court to infer abandonment of
title after sixty-seven years has already been noted in Pierce v. Bemis “The Lusitania.” 145

.   
The modern position with regard to abandonment of title in the United States
can be derived from a myriad of recent precedents from all levels of the court
structure, including the Supreme Court. However, a simple illustration of the basic
law can be found in a case not involving historic wreck. In Sea Services of the Keys Inc.,
a Florida Corporation, d/b/a Sea Tow Islamorada v. The Abandoned 29' Midnight Express
Vessel and Two 200HP Mercury Offshore Outboard Motors etc.,146 a modern, fast motor-
boat was abandoned by its owner following an unspeciﬁed debacle involving con-
traband, the vessel being left moored to a ﬁshing buoy in a rough sea. In these cir-
cumstances, neither party contested the fact of abandonment by the owner or the
application of the common law doctrine of ﬁnds. This illustrates the clarity of the
American approach to abandonment of title. Clear evidence renders the property
res nullius and the law of ﬁnds awards ownership to the ﬁrst person reducing it into
their possession.

However, Sea Services of the Keys is useful in explaining two further issues. Firstly,
the physical condition of the vessel, the sea state, and the degree of danger involved
in towing it to safety were ﬁercely disputed by the Florida Department of Envi-

280  -  .

ronmental Protection, whose attorney made much of the lack of “marine peril.”
However, since the law of ﬁnds and not the law of salvage applied, the issue of
danger is irrelevant. Secondly, the State argued that the vessel was not abandoned
at the time of the tow as it had already established “constructive possession” by
ﬁnding the Midnight Express with one of its own boats and deciding not to under-
take recovery in view of the suspicion that a criminal act had been perpetrated that
required further investigation. The court rejected this argument, stating that “the
ﬁnder of abandoned property must continuously possess or be in the process of
reducing to possession the property which he has found.”147 Location of aban-
doned property is insufﬁcient. The court expressly distinguished an earlier case in-
volving historic wreck, Klein v. Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel etc.,148 factually
on the ground that this earlier case involved a wreck embedded for hundreds of
years in soil now owned by the United States and legally on the ground that the
United States had demonstrated constructive possession, “the intention to exercise
dominion and control,” primarily by means of an archaeological assessment car-
ried out some ten years previously. However, the “inactivity” of the owner in that
case, that is to say, in situ preservation, had itself formed the basis of the dispute,
since it had given the salvor the opportunity to argue that there was insufﬁcient ev-
idence of constructive possession. The consequences of the law of ﬁnds for his-
toric wreck are grave. The existence of marine peril is irrelevant and the strict re-
quirements for possession necessitate immediate and continuous recovery operations.
Whatever any court may demand in preserving the archaeological provenance, it
cannot escape the incompatibility of these principles or ameliorate their deleteri-
ous effects on the underwater cultural heritage. 

However, in the majority of cases in which inferred abandonment of title is
argued, the facts are less clear and subject to dispute. Thus, the useful, modern il-
lustration provided by Sea Services of the Keys must not disguise the extent of the
difﬁculties. In The Central America, the court observed that the traditional applica-
tion of the law of ﬁnds was only to cases where maritime property “had never
been owned by anybody”149 but that a recent trend had developed to apply it to
“long lost and abandoned shipwrecks.”150 There are two circumstances in which the
law of ﬁnds is to be preferred over the law of salvage, namely in cases of express
abandonment and where no owner appears in court. Further, if an owner (includ-
ing, of course, successors in title of all descriptions, namely states, heirs, assignees,
and insurers) does appear and there is no evidence of express abandonment, then
the law of salvage must be applied. The effect of applying these guidelines would
be to remove the need to establish inferred abandonment except where no owner
was present in court. Indeed, the court expressly distinguished the much quoted
view expressed in Treasure Salvors v. The Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Sailing Ves-
sel etc.151 that the “disposition of a wrecked vessel whose very location has been lost
for centuries as though its owner were still in existence stretches a ﬁction to absurd

  281

lengths.” This suggested that the passage of time per se was sufﬁcient to apply the
law of ﬁnds, as Spain, the owner at the time of the sinking, had not appeared in
court to assert a claim to ownership in that case.152 Underwriters appearing to as-
sert title in The Central America were successful in resisting the claim by salvors that
abandonment should be inferred, notwithstanding the passage of 134 years, the
proven destruction of some documentation relating to the payment of claims, and
the apparent loss of other records. Further convincing authority for this approach
can be found in Zych v. The Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel Believed to be the Lady
Elgin153 where insurers were again successful in resisting argument for inferred aban-
donment in spite of making no attempt to locate or salvage the wreck since its
sinking in 1860. Thus, in the three cases where an owner has appeared to assert title,
the so-called express abandonment rule has been applied, that is to say, “clear and
convincing evidence” must be presented to establish inferred abandonment, and
the lapse of centuries alone is insufﬁcient to discharge this burden of proof.154

.   
It had been hoped that the U.S. Supreme Court would use the opportunity to clar-
ify and further elaborate the law on this (and other) issues in Deep Sea Research Inc.
v. Brother Jonathan.155 Regrettably, the court restricted itself to the narrow view that
the proper test of abandonment under the Abandoned Shipwreck Act (ASA) was
the same test as for other admiralty cases (that is to say, there is no separate test for
Abandoned Shipwreck Act purposes) and remanded the matter for further con-
sideration by the district court. In the event, the abandonment issue was settled be-
tween the parties and no further litigation ensued. Thus this critical issue which
will determine both the practical scope and effectiveness of the Abandoned Ship-
wreck Act 1987 must still await appellate resolution. Indeed, the Supreme Court
also avoided a determination of the even more fundamental question as to whether
the ASA is constitutional.156 For the moment, the express abandonment rule re-
mains intact and there is little reason to believe that a future Supreme Court de-
cision will reject it. On an entirely legal practical level, it is a sensible and work-
able rule. However, in the context of the Abandoned Shipwreck Act, it is also
deeply worrying. The act has certainly caused a marked change in tactics by salvors
who have everything to gain by establishing non-abandonment and thus non-
applicability of the legislation. It is not difﬁcult to discover an insurer of at least part
of the cargo or vessel to enter an appearance. If they are unwilling to do so, then
they will usually be willing to assign rights of subrogation for an appropriate sum,
in the absence of any practical hope of salvage themselves. Indeed, that is precisely
what occurred in The Brother Jonathan.157 If an owner, any owner, makes an appear-
ance to assert title, the operation of the  “clear and convincing evidence rule”
makes it unlikely in practice that abandonment will be inferred. Even in the case of
wrecks too ancient to involve insurers,158 many were state vessels of British, French,

282  -  .

Dutch,159 or Spanish origin. The ﬁrst three have always routinely claimed owner-
ship and, since the Sea Hunt case, it is to be presumed that Spain will now follow
the same policy, although it has been observed that there may be arguments in sup-
port of express abandonment consequent to the treaty of 1763. Notwithstanding
the optimistic and stout defence of the operational effectiveness of the Aban-
doned Shipwreck Act by its drafter,160 in the eyes of many, the abandonment issue
threatens to undermine the entire purpose of this progressive legislation. The risk
is further enhanced by the unresolved constitutional objections.

   

Just as it has been argued that it is inadequate to characterise the approach of the
legal salvage regime to historic wreck as a sterile body of rules designed from
the outset to serve a self-seeking salvage industry, it is also insufﬁcient to dismiss
the market in historic artefacts as simply the product of the same sectional inter-
est. There is a powerful body of economic and political opinion that links the
functioning of any market with two fundamental precepts, the primacy of mar-
ket economic principles and the general undesirability of state intervention in any
particular market.

Market economics emphasises the goal of optimising the efﬁciency of mar-
kets and, in any general debate over the desirability of intervention by government
or other public authority, two central issues are critical. Firstly, there is the posi-
tivist question of the relative success of intervention, vis-à-vis market forces, in
achieving social objectives. Secondly, there is the normative problem of the relative
desirability of conﬂicting social objectives. In the context of historic wreck, the
positivist question is whether state regulation achieves a better or worse result than
market forces. The normative problem is to resolve the conﬂicting, arguably mu-
tually exclusive objectives of in situ preservation of the underwater cultural heritage
as part of the common heritage of mankind and the return of maritime property
to the stream of commerce. For the conservationist, it is little short of absurd to
separate the two aspects, but that is precisely the argument of some economists.
The dominant economic theory in North America161 is Pareto162 or welfare eco-
nomics,163 the stated objective of which is to apply scientiﬁc methodology and to
maintain an “ethically neutral” standpoint. Thus, the original Pareto criterion states
that “in order for a maximum welfare position to be reached then the ‘ophelimity’164
of some should not increase to the detriment of others.”165 This is intended to pro-
vide an objective standard against which to judge the effects of economic changes.
In this way, a “Pareto improvement” makes at least one person better off without
making anyone else worse off, producing an improvement in so-called social efﬁ-
ciency. However, the lack of normative content in such an approach separates social

  283

efﬁciency from social desirability. The former is said to be the consequence of ra-
tional economic behaviour that involves an assessment of whether a particular ac-
tivity will beneﬁt a person’s private interests166 or, to express it in welfare econom-
ics  terms,  achieve  “private  efﬁciency.” Similarly,  social  efﬁciency  is  assessed  by
balancing social beneﬁt against social cost. Welfare economists argue that private
efﬁciency will also achieve social efﬁciency if two criteria are met. Firstly, there must
be  “perfect competition” throughout the entire economy,167 and secondly, there
must be no “externalities.”168These can conveniently be referred to as “side effects,”
and they are central to the arguments of welfare economists, since their removal or
minimisation is viewed as a process of improving market conditions. However, gov-
ernmental intervention to correct these imperfections is known as the “problem of
the second best,” the “ﬁrst best solution” being the (unattainable) ideal, the self-
correcting free market. The terminology might be regarded as arcane, yet is vital be-
cause it expresses a value system.169 These values conﬂict with interventionism in
general and thus also with the proponents of in situ preservation of historic wreck.
Since the free market is regarded as paramount, intervention must be justiﬁed as the
best available compromise, the “second best compromise.” Intervention is always
seen as a distortion of the market and thus the precise form of intervention will
inﬂuence the welfare economic assessment of its relative desirability. If one method
distorts the market less than another, then it should be selected.

For example, taxes and subsidies170 can be used to correct externalities but, as
the stated objective of taxation is to compel producers to take on the full social
costs of their actions (pollution, for example), it is difﬁcult to see how that could
assist in the case of historic wreck. In this case, the primary social cost is the loss
of archaeological provenance. This represents a cultural deﬁcit for which ﬁnancial
compensation is inappropriate.171 For the same reason, the imposition of taxes by
way of penalty (rather than to correct market imperfections) seems largely irrele-
vant to the problem also, since it would simply be reﬂected in the market price.

.1    
Conversely, it is argued that one common cause of market failure lies in the lim-
ited nature of property rights themselves, and thus welfare economists argue that
one solution to the problem of externalities is simply to extend property rights.
For example, the problem of neighbour nuisance would be dealt with by extend-
ing to householders the absolute right to prevent nuisances. An individual then has
the choice of reporting the matter with a view to abatement action by the appro-
priate public authority, or negotiating private compensation for non-abatement. In
other words, a market should be created in private property rights.172 Of course,
problems with this solution have been identiﬁed, not least inequality of expertise,
the costs of litigation, and the sheer number of separate negotiations between dif-
ferent protagonists.173 However, it is argued that this approach has particular merit

284  -  .

where few people are involved, and such an argument is easily applied to historic
wreck. The proposed solution is straightforward. If legislation granted a general
unrestricted right to salvage historic wreck,174 then the discoverer would have the
right to become a salvor unless compensated for waiving rights of salvage. In other
words, the right to salvage should be treated in the same way as the right of the
householder not to suffer the consequences of nuisance in the previous example.
It is simply a property right to be traded like any other commodity.175 Even present
regulation of salvor behaviour by admiralty courts would be viewed as an unnec-
essary and undesirable transaction cost, since it makes the property right “contin-
gent” on an assessment by the court of the so-called social welfare function, in this
case the diligence of the salvor in preserving the archaeological provenance.

It is interesting to compare this theoretical solution to three existing yet con-
trasting legal regimes: the Republic of Ireland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. In the ﬁrst, rights to historic wreck176 were vested in the state in 1987177 and
recovery (the salvage regime does not apply) is only permitted under the supervi-
sion of a professional marine archaeologist and only if good cause is shown why in
situ preservation is inappropriate. Thus, the Irish solution is simply to abolish the
market entirely. In the United Kingdom, by contrast, the market remains intact.
There are no restrictions on who may become a salvor,178 but any wreck can be des-
ignated historic under the 1973 Protection of Wrecks Act if it is deemed to be of
sufﬁcient signiﬁcance.179 Salvage is then only permitted under the authority of an
ofﬁcial licence and is subject to the direct supervision of a designated archaeolo-
gist.180 However, in practice, such licences are usually issued to the salvor in posses-
sion181 and generous salvage awards have become the norm.182Thus, the U.K. market
in historic wreck is regulated and, to the extent that this causes delay or increases
costs, it represents an additional transaction cost for the salvor.

In the United States, the Abandoned Shipwreck Act represents an attempt to
follow a similar route to the Irish183 in that rights to abandoned shipwrecks are
vested in the federal government but then transferred to individual states. How-
ever, it has already been noted that salvors have since redirected their energies to-
wards establishing that particular wrecks have not been abandoned, so that they
fall outside the scope of the Abandoned Shipwreck Act and remain within the tra-
ditional salvage regime. Thus, to salvors of historic wreck in the United States, the
costs of Abandoned Shipwreck Act litigation represent an externality, a cost im-
posed by the state inhibiting entry into the market.184 The U.S. Congress was very
concerned during the passage of the Abandoned Shipwreck Act that it not ad-
versely affect existing property rights,185 but the legislators failed to understand, or
at least under-estimated, the reaction of the existing market. Salvors already had
a right to enter the market in historic wreck and, since the Abandoned Shipwreck
Act did not deal with the critical deﬁnition of the meaning of “abandoned,” they
were given the opportunity to deploy a technical argument to defend the existence
of the market. Their success in this regard has been at the expense of the effec-

  285

tiveness of the Act itself. This has stimulated pressures for its wholesale repeal,186
meaning, in effect, that the struggle between the welfare economists and the preser-
vationists remains unresolved.

Therefore, it is an over-simpliﬁcation to view the debate over the future of his-
toric wreck as a narrow polemic between conservationists (led by archaeologists)
on the one hand and salvors on the other. It has a more profound signiﬁcance,
since economic and political opponents of interventionism per se do not draw ax-
iomatic distinctions between desirable and undesirable examples. Analyses of par-
ticular instances have a common departure point. Intervention must be justiﬁed on
the ground that it improves market functioning, and even then, the choice of method
should seek to minimise involvement. To the welfare economist, intervention that
destroys markets or enhances externalities is undesirable ex hypothesi. Thus, there is
a convergence between the predominant economic view in the United States and
the narrow sectional interests of the salvage industry. Conﬂict with the latter over
archaeological provenance and in situ preservation inevitably engenders a wider ide-
ological debate with the former over social efﬁciency and market mechanisms. This
is also a perspective from which the judicial views expressed in the latest Titanic de-
velopments should be judged.

      
:  

Before proceeding with an evaluation of admiralty courts’ alleged defence of the
archaeological provenance, it might be helpful to explain in greater detail the con-
tent and chronology of this intervention. Although the U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Fourth Circuit in the Central America decision is generally cited as the origin for
the addition of the seventh criterion (the salvor’s preservation of the historical and
archaeological value of the wreck and cargo) to the Blackwall test187 for assessing sal-
vage awards, this is somewhat misleading. It will be demonstrated that the judicial
process was one of cumulative accommodation of archaeological concerns, pro-
ceeding in a series of small, cautious steps to a position less well deﬁned than is
generally imagined. 

Federal courts had already wrestled with the problem of whether the salvage
regime had any application at all to historic wreck188 and, in doing so, had en-
countered both the difﬁculties of assessing values of ancient artefacts and the ex-
pensive, peculiar difﬁculties of conservation.189 In a later case also involving the
Platoro corporation,190 although the court expressly refused to apply the same stan-
dard of archaeological methodology as would have been required of marine ar-
chaeologists, it was taking cognisance of the problem at that stage.

The explicit breakthrough in The Central America began cautiously in Cobb Coin I.
After citing the standard six criteria of the Blackwall test, the court proceeded to

286  -  .

elaborate the equitable requirement for “clean hands” in the context of the re-
quirement on all salvors to act in good faith by not only meritoriously rescuing
property from marine peril, but also restoring it to the owners. District Judge King
then linked this general requirement of evaluating the merits of a salvor’s service
with the archaeological provenance by stating, “Thus, there can be no suggestion
that federal admiralty procedures sanction salvage methods that fail to safeguard
items and the invaluable archaeological information associated with the artefacts
salved.”191 The court went on to acknowledge the public concern and interest in
these matters but declared itself satisﬁed by the production of records and the ev-
idence of the plaintiff ’s own salvage consultants. Although a Florida state repre-
sentative had been on board a salvage vessel, it is merely noted at this stage that the
judgement made no mention of that person’s assessment. The learned judge did
venture to say, however, that artefacts should be removed “with scrupulous care”
and that historical information could enhance commercial values.192

The theme was repeated in Cobb Coin II the following year, arguably more em-
phatically, by the judge’s stating, “in order to state a claim for salvage award on an
ancient vessel of historical and archaeological signiﬁcance, it is an essential element
that the salvors document to the Admiralty Court’s satisfaction that it has pre-
served the archaeological provenance of a shipwreck. To leave this element merely
for consideration of a salvage award would not provide, perforce, sufﬁcient incen-
tive to salvors to ensure that the information is obtained.”193 This was an important
development, as it made correct archaeological practice the sine qua non of an
award and not merely a factor affecting the level of award, and at least such an ap-
proach would have given admiralty courts the ability to punish unacceptable prac-
tice by denying any award, whatsoever. It has to be observed that there seems no
direct authority for this view and that it was probably simply an attempt to “modern-
ise” the traditional clean hands requirement in the context of historic wreck. The
main deﬁciency of the judgement was the failure of the court to deﬁne the so-
called threshold requirement for archaeology. It demanded that such a standard be
met, but did not deﬁne the content. All that can be certain is that it was still not
a professional marine archaeologist’s standard.

.1  
Klein 194 was an interesting development, being one of only three cases where salvors
have been penalised for failure to comply with threshold standards.195 An award
was refused expressly on the ground that no procedures at all were adopted to
record the archaeological provenance and that therefore the recovery operation it-
self created a marine danger. The decision is clear enough, although there was an
additional ground (in the appeal court) that the United States, as owner in so-
called constructive possession of the artefacts, was entitled to prohibit salvage
in any event. More signiﬁcant may be the dissenting judgement of Judge Krav-
itch196 in which, having held the salvor in (criminal) breach of the 1906 Antiqui-

  287

ties Act, he went on to hold that the site was in marine peril (from the elements)
and that Klein had indeed rendered useful service and should have been granted a
salvage award, albeit a reduced one to take account of failure to use proper ar-
chaeological techniques. The signiﬁcance of this view is that it treated archaeology
as a de facto seventh criterion rather than as a sine qua non factor in applying the clean
hands principle. An even more cavalier approach to archaeology can be discerned
the following year (1986) in MDM.197 After expressly accepting that no efforts had
been made to preserve the archaeological provenance and that this was “a signi-
ﬁcant element” in granting salvage rights, the court inexplicably concluded that the
salvage operation had been conducted in good faith. Although injunctive relief was
denied, it was on the ground that insufﬁcient salvage work had been conducted to
justify it. Indeed, the court described the salvage effort thus far as “commendable”
and made it clear that exclusive salvage rights would be granted if sufﬁcient in-
vestment and effort were expended on an intensiﬁed salvage operation. No admo-
nition was given concerning the conservation aspects, notwithstanding the per-
ceived failures in that regard. 

Jupiter Wreck Inc. v. Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Sailing Vessel,198 although
dealing primarily with jurisdictional problems of the relationship between state
and federal legislation, acknowledged the importance of historic wreck. The court
declared itself satisﬁed in this regard, having inspected an “archaeological research
design” prepared with the former chief archaeologist for Florida and Texas. Typi-
cally for the majority of such case reports, there was no further detail. In particu-
lar, there was no indication of professional input into actual salvage operations or,
indeed, whether there was any monitoring of the implementation of the “design.”
Whatever may have been the true extent of the evidence before the court, this lack
of detail in the report continues to leave in doubt the true requirements of the
threshold to be met by salvors.

.      CENTRAL AMERICA
Chronologically, the ﬁrst instance hearing of The Central America in 1989 is the next
noteworthy development. The court observed with approval that salvage efforts had
extended to a substantial commitment of resources to analysing and disseminating
scientiﬁc, historical, “and, where appropriate, archaeological” information, and that there
was an express commitment to continue that policy. It would have been reasonable
to suppose that this apparent relegation of archaeological matters to an occasional
status was inadvertent, since it appeared quite illogical to have done so in the con-
text of this wreck. However, in its ﬁndings of law, the court stated emphatically that
there is a duty “to preserve the scientiﬁc, historical and, in the limited situations where ap-
plicable,199 archaeological provenance of the wreck and artifacts.” Presumably, the
court made a distinction between historical and archaeological provenance and had
concluded that only the former had much signiﬁcance in this case. Such oddities,
together with the complete lack of information in the report as to what exactly had

288  -  .

been done to deserve such commendation, merely serves to subvert conﬁdence in
the court’s willingness and/or ability to investigate these matters rigorously.200

The Central America appeal in 1995 came at this stage of the development of ju-
dicial protection of the archaeological provenance of historic wreck. It merits rep-
etition that the decision must therefore be seen as evolutionary and that it was made
at a point in time providing ample scope for doubting the practical content of this
protection. It has been observed that the clean hands doctrine had been used to im-
pose nominally appropriate standards on salvors of ancient shipwrecks, and that the
advantage of this approach was to provide the court with the means to punish non-
compliance with refusal of any award. This sanction had been used in three cases al-
ready and the court in Cobb Coin II had observed that merely adding such a factor to
the Blackwall test in calculating the award would provide an insufﬁcient incentive to
guarantee compliance. Indeed, this warning was illustrated most graphically in Judge
Kravitch’s dissenting judgement in Klein, where he expressly disapproved of denial
of a salvage award for this type of misconduct and advocated dealing with the mat-
ter simply as a factor mitigating the size of the award. The Central America appeal
also applied the clean hands requirement but only did so in connection with more
conventional matters, namely allegations of misrepresentation to the court during
earlier proceedings and the misuse of certain data. It was open to the court to fol-
low what had become an established pattern, to deal with archaeological method-
ology under this head also. Indeed, that would have caused no difﬁculty in this case,
as it was an express ﬁnding of fact (by the District Court) “that Columbus-America
had taken extraordinary care in preserving the Central America, beneﬁting a range
of sciences and disciplines.”201 Instead, the appeals court proceeded to consider
whether the District Court’s unusually high salvage award of 90 percent was exces-
sive. Conventionally, it systematically considered the six factors although, rather cu-
riously, it chose to do so in an apparently random order not corresponding either
to that set out in The Blackwall itself or to the established priority from Benedict.202
The seventh criterion, “the salvor’s preservation of the historical and archaeologi-
cal value of the wreck and cargo,” then followed, entirely without legal explanation
for what must be regarded as a surprising addition to such an established and cen-
tral test as the Blackwall criteria.203The other departure from established practice was
to provide greater detail in the judgement itself of the efforts made to preserve the
archaeological provenance,204 although the information provided falls far short of
a full report.205 It is mildly worrying that the expert witnesses relied upon were ap-
parently those of the plaintiffs, although this was supplemented by supporting
briefs of the National Maritime Historical Society, the National Association of
Academies of Science, and the Explorers Club.

However, the conclusions to be drawn from the Central America appeal in this
article do not correspond with those of other commentators. Salvors declared that
the preservation of the archaeological provenance had achieved the priority it de-
served by being added to the established Blackwall criteria, while the conservation-

  289

ists approved of the progress but complained that the standards were still inade-
quate. What seems to have been missed entirely is that shifting the issue from the
clean hands test to one of seven criteria has arguably deprived the court of the op-
portunity to impose the ultimate sanction for non-compliance with the threshold
standard: deprivation of any salvage award whatsoever. The difﬁculty is given a
sharper focus by the failure of the court to indicate a weighting for the new crite-
rion. Given the fact that the Benedict priority already has judicial approval, the nat-
ural conclusion is that this new addition must be accorded the lowest priority.206
Thus, the opinion of the court in Cobb Coin II (and, indeed, the dissenting view
of Judge Kravitch in Klein) can be seen as prophetic. Finally, ex hypothesi, none of
these criteria is overriding and it is extremely doubtful in law if a low rating under
any single criterion (other than the value of the salved property) could eliminate
an award entirely.207 In short, it seems that the legal reality of the Central America ap-
peal has been regressive from a conservationist standpoint, although this may have
been lost in the fanfare of judicial praise for the conservation efforts of the salvors
and the high proﬁle accorded to archaeology in the judgement.

.     
The RMS saga208 is not simply a case (or rather, a seemingly interminable sequence
of litigation) concerning the most widely known shipwreck in history, but the jewel
in the crown of U.S. admiralty courts in their attempt to demonstrate concern for,
and the ability to protect, the archaeological provenance of historic wrecks. In many
ways, the circumstances appeared to be tailor made. RMS is a public corporation
and, notwithstanding mounting debts from a technically demanding salvage oper-
ation, steadfastly maintained its commitment not to sell artefacts but to conserve
and retain them in a single collection for permanent public display.209 Indeed, no
salvor has done more to demonstrate its commitment to archaeological propriety.
This is not intended as a value statement. It is a fact that no other private (as op-
posed to public agency) salvor has done more. It is a separate question to evaluate
the quality of the effort. In 1994, an International Advisory Committee of approx-
imately twelve representatives from European and American maritime museums,
historical societies, and RMS itself was formed. An agreement with the French gov-
ernment and the policy statement issued jointly with the National Maritime Mu-
seum in Greenwich, England, both contained a ﬁrm commitment not to dispose of
any artefacts.210 This was one of the factors considered by the court when it granted
salvor in possession status to RMS in 1994.211 Additionally, RMS proved the ex-
pense and effectiveness of its conservation efforts, not only by its own evidence, but
also by that of independent conservators and marine archaeologists. By any past
standards, this was an impressive performance that boded well for the future.

However, there were warning signs. Tensions were developing within RMS.
One, the owner, Joslyn and another individual litigated questions of ownership
and control over a corporate shareholder in RMS. Joslyn later launched a series of

290  -  .

legal challenges, inter alia, to RMS’s status as salvor in possession on the ground of
lack of due diligence in pursuing salvage operations.212 Considering that this wreck
is situated in international waters two and a half miles under the North Atlantic,
rather more puzzling decisions in favour of RMS followed. The company was
granted exclusive photographic rights213 and an order excluding the rights of oth-
ers to even view the site, whether or not they are U.S. nationals.214 The latest Titanic
litigation precedes a major salvage operation, apparently with the intention of gen-
erating substantial income from the sale of thousands of artefacts. It appears that
the commitment to non-disposal has yielded to commercial imperatives, and it is
necessary to examine how this was possible in the light of the highest proﬁle given
by the court to preservation of the archaeological provenance.

There are three principal reasons for these latest developments, all of them
widely enough understood to lend an air of predictability to present events. Firstly,
the considerable conservation efforts of RMS were simply a factor in granting the
company salvor in possession status. They were not imposed by the court or made
an express condition of continuing injunctive relief. The comparatively detailed
listing in the report of efforts made should not disguise the limitations of the con-
clusion that “[i]n sum, not only do courts consider the time, effort and money
that parties have invested in the salvage operation as well as their chances of suc-
cess, but, where the vessel is of historic importance, they also weigh the salvor’s preser-
vation efforts.” 215 This weakly worded assessment is nonetheless an accurate state-
ment of the law 216 and is connected directly to the second factor, the lack of
deﬁned content to the so-called threshold standard noted earlier in this paper.
Thirdly, maintenance of the status of salvor in possession and the continuation of
the injunctive relief associated with it require the exercise of due diligence in pur-
suing recovery operations, which should be ongoing with some prospect of suc-
cess.217 Given the huge expense of mounting deep ocean recovery operations, an
admiralty court is hardly in a position, as a matter of law, to obstruct the very
means needed by the salvor to achieve “success” in salvage terms. In other words,
it is questionable whether the protection of the archaeological provenance can be
accorded paramount status when to do so would have the de facto consequence of
depriving the salvor of the status of salvor in possession and therewith any enti-
tlement to legal remedies.

.   
The fundamental problem explained in the context of The Titanic arose again in
Marex,218 where the court again recorded an impressive list of conservation efforts219
before proceeding to assert preservation of the archaeological provenance as part
of the duty of care imposed on all salvors of historic wreck. In this particular case,
the court held the vessel to have been abandoned and thus subject to the law of
ﬁnds, although it emphasised that the archaeological duty remains the same as if
salvage law applied. There is no doubt that the grant or continuation of injunc-

  291

tive relief is a discretionary matter which can be denied if a court is not satisﬁed
on this (or any other) issue, a point equally applicable under the law of salvage and
the law of ﬁnds. Neither is there doubt that a court can reduce a salvage award if
dissatisﬁed with conservation efforts (it has been noted that there is doubt whether
this alone would justify refusal of any award). However, again as a matter of law,
it must be doubtful whether a court has any power to impose archaeological con-
ditions after it has determined that the law of ﬁnds applies. After such an order,
the ﬁnder is the owner and, although the court may refuse further discretionary re-
lief, there seems no basis for it to control in any way the recovery of that property.
In granting Marex an injunction for the duration of the 1997 season, the court did
not make this issue apparent. Had the company later decided to abandon any at-
tempts at conservation, it would simply have proceeded to recover what was its
own property without recourse to the court.

Finally, in the 1999 case of International Aircraft,220 the court required the preser-
vation of the historical and archaeological provenance in the case of a deep ocean
wreck of an historic World War II aircraft. It relied on the statement from Cobb
Coin II that it would be insufﬁcient to rely on the issue, being simply a factor in as-
sessing the salvage award. There was no reference in the judgement to the modiﬁed
Blackwall test referred to in the Central America appeal. Factually, this is not surpris-
ing, since the case decided who should conduct salvage, not the quantiﬁcation of
the award. However, it leaves the law confused as to whether the archaeological du-
ties of salvors apply at an early stage to determine injunctive relief, are simply a fac-
tor in assessing a salvage award, or are relevant throughout the process from dis-
covery to payment. These uncertainties, together with those relating to the true
content of the threshold test, lead to an evaluation of the effectiveness of admi-
ralty courts in providing protection for historic wrecks.

      
: 

As established above, there has been a gradual recognition by the courts in the United
States that certain wrecks have a special value and somehow archaeology has a role to
play. However, it is not clear that these courts clearly understand the task they face in
giving substance to that role. Archaeology is not about returning objects to the stream
of commerce. It is more than conserving a few artefacts and making videos, more
than entertaining the public through exhibitions. It requires expertise in ancient cul-
tures; in preparing research designs; in knowing what to excavate and, more impor-
tantly, why; and it is based on the fundamental principle of serving the public inter-
est. The heart of archaeology lies in the preservation of knowledge that can be
extracted only from objects and the context in which they are found. Such knowledge
may be found in things of absolutely no commercial value but which are costly to ex-

292  -  .

cavate and conserve, such as ship’s timbers. In some cases, the pursuit of knowledge
may be advanced by not disturbing a wreck. It should be left until the questions that
it can answer may be better formulated. Moreover, the courts have failed to consider
the possibility that the concept of salvor in possession with its attendant duty to work
the site can run directly counter to that of archaeological resource management, i.e.,
the systematic identiﬁcation, evaluation, and protection of cultural sites.

Where the courts have attempted to apply archaeological principles in salvage
operations, there is evidence that their views of what these comprise differ from
those of archaeologists. One problem for the court is to establish what the relevant
principles are. For example, Judge King accepted that Cobb Coin I “adequately doc-
uments archaeological provenience.” This was partly based on evidence given by
“Cobb Coin’s salvage consultants, Fay Field and R. Duncan Mathewson.”221 The
latter wrote a master’s thesis in anthropology in which he states regarding work on
the site of the Neustra Señora de Atocha:

There were, of course, countless disappointments and many difﬁculties 
to overcome in the data-gathering process. Many times it was impossible 
to get essential information because of the shortage of time, equipment
breakdown or other operational difﬁculties. Often data were unreliable and
had to be discarded. Other times it was impossible to get the divers to
record data consistently enough to recognize incipient patterning.222

This is obviously a frank statement of the problems Mathewson encountered in
trying to develop appreciation of the importance of archaeological standards
among the treasure seekers and the imperatives of commercial operations. But,
if this was the standard applying in practice, how does the court establish a
benchmark?

.1     CENTRAL AMERICA
The District Court in Virginia, in the 1993 unreported decision in Columbus-America
Discovery Group v. Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Sailing Vessel, studied the attention
the company had paid to archaeological matters and the people it had gathered to
ensure that these issues were taken into account in operations. The court was
clearly impressed, as was the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in reviewing its de-
cision in 1995.

The [District] court found that “the efforts to preserve the site and the arti-
facts have not been equalled in any other case,” and no evidence to the
contrary is before us.223

But a 1997 comment in a leading reference work is less accepting:

No overall site photographs, a site map, or any other archaeological
information has been released. Some artifacts, including well preserved

  293

clothing and newspapers from an intact leather trunk, were conserved and
placed on display in Ohio.

Archaeological study and documentation of Central America would be

particularly signiﬁcant because no detailed record of a Panama Route
steamship of the period exists. More importantly, the apparent high
degree of preservation of passenger baggage, which is very similar to that
observed at the Titanic wreck site, would offer a detailed opportunity to
assess the material culture of the period, and its use and transportation on
a vessel travelling from the “frontier” of Gold Rush California, and could
be compared with collections of the same period from the wrecks of
Bertrand and Arabia.224

It is notable that a laudatory book dealing with the ﬁnding of the gold on the
Central America nowhere mentions any archaeological considerations apart from
the taking of photographs.225 The emphasis was on secrecy rather than scientiﬁc
openness.226

In The Brother Jonathan,227 a District Court in California, in assessing an appli-
cation for an injunction protecting salvage rights in the vessel, stated that the com-
pany had “attempted to preserve the archaeological value of the wreck by pho-
tographing the site.”228

Archaeological considerations were also mentioned by the Virginia District
Court in RMS 229 in considering whether RMS Titanic Inc. should continue as
salvor in possession in light of its past activities on the wreck site. In considering
whether due diligence had been exercised, the court had this to say:

Moreover, RMST has been dedicated to the preservation of the archaeolog-
ical integrity of the wreck site as well as the preservation of the retrieved
artifacts. RMST has worked with a number of organizations to establish an
International Advisory Committee whose purpose is to develop a strategy
for safeguarding the TITANIC and the artifacts recovered from it. RMST
has also hired a highly-qualiﬁed conservation company to preserve the
artifacts.230

Once again, the archaeological community sees the need for more than these types
of activity. Archaeologists stress the absence of any professional archaeologist on
site, the failure to assemble an archive of dive data, and the failure to prepare an ar-
chaeological report.231

.     
The courts referred to in this article have clearly been concerned with the neces-
sity for preservation of objects and, to a certain degree, the information to be
learned from historic wreck sites. However, archaeologists and museologists have
been critical of the conduct of salvors found acceptable by the courts. Some do

294  -  .

not seem to see a problem with this,232 but the question must be asked where the
courts get their authority to substitute their view of acceptable conduct for that of
the relevant professional community. If the preservation of knowledge is impor-
tant then everyone must be concerned that the maximum possible is obtained from
what is indeed a non-renewable resource.

To be fair to the courts, it appears that in most cases the only evidence given
was that of the salvors. There was nothing against which the court could measure
the appropriateness of their conduct, except presumably its own knowledge of
what archaeology is all about, although members of the public, and this includes
judges, are not always conversant with what archaeologists do and how they go
about it.233 Archaeology is a profession involving a high degree of expertise and
specialized knowledge and includes a signiﬁcant intellectual component. In trying
to assess the appropriateness of conduct without reference to the professionals, the
courts have undertaken a difﬁcult task with inadequate resources. Part of the prob-
lem may be alleviated by emerging internationally accepted standards to which
courts could have recourse. It must be emphasised that these only provide general
guidance and are no substitute for expert opinion.

One of the standards is the International Charter on the Protection and Management of
Underwater Cultural Heritage, ratiﬁed by the General Assembly of the International
Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) in 1996. Another is the Rules Con-
cerning Activities Directed at Underwater Cultural Heritage, which appears as an Annex to
the Draft Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage. Al-
though at present this is still under negotiation by states, it does give an indica-
tion of the conduct the international community expects in relation to wreck sites,
particularly those in international waters. The Annex was based on the ICOMOS
Charter but has been adapted for use in an international instrument.

A study of the cases above shows that the courts have been heavily inﬂuenced
by preservation of artefacts raised from the ocean ﬂoor and presentation of the
work being done to the public by such means as television, exhibitions, and school
project kits. The two documents referred to above show that much more is neces-
sary. In particular, there must be continuous supervision of the work by qualiﬁed
personnel. The Annex states:

Activities directed at underwater cultural heritage shall only be undertaken
under the direction of and in the presence [in control] of a qualiﬁed under-
water archaeologist with scientiﬁc competence appropriate to the project.

This envisages that the archaeologist or archaeologists will be active members of
the excavating team. In its unreported judgement referred to earlier, the court
noted that a “number of these experts were aboard the vessel from time to time”;
another “accompanied the ship during some of its collections.” It certainly was
not the case that the operation was under the direction of and in the continuous
presence of a qualiﬁed underwater archaeologist.

  295

The comments above on the Central America and RMS operations refer to the

lack of reports. The Annex states:

Documentation shall include, at a minimum, a comprehensive record of the
site including the provenance of underwater cultural heritage moved or
removed in the course of the activities directed at underwater cultural
heritage, ﬁeld notes, plans, drawings, sections, photographs and recording in
other media.

Furthermore, the courts will ﬁnd the greatest difﬁculties in applying the Char-
ter or Annex when there is an archaeological imperative that the site remains undis-
turbed. The Annex, for example, states:

The protection of underwater cultural heritage is best achieved through 
in situ preservation, which should be considered as the ﬁrst option.
Accordingly, activities directed at underwater cultural heritage shall be
authorized by the competent authority of the concerned State only when
they make a signiﬁcant contribution to knowledge, protection and [/or]
enhancement of underwater cultural heritage.

Leaving aside the question of authorisation, satisfaction of this requirement could
be quite difﬁcult for some operations. The Virginia District Court in RMS saw this
as satisﬁed by the salvor’s providing public access to artefacts:

Finally, RMS has done more than merely preserve the site and the artefacts; it
has made the artifacts available to the public through exhibitions, thereby
beneﬁting the public more than the requisite at-site archaeological
preservation could do.234

This seems to be an assumption on the part of the court without any considera-
tion of principle. It may well be right but there should have been a proper analy-
sis of the issues.

An excavation for commercial purposes would pose a further problem for the

courts as this is the basic purpose of salvage. The Annex states:

The commercial exploitation of underwater cultural heritage for trade or
speculation [, other than in the provision of services,] or its irretrievable 
dispersal is fundamentally incompatible with the protection and proper
management of the underwater cultural heritage. Underwater cultural
heritage shall [should] not be traded, sold, bought and bartered as items of
commercial value.

The scope and effect of this provision will depend on what is meant by “com-
mercial exploitation.” For example, no study has yet been made of whether the
non-physical exploitation of a site through such means as tourist visits, photog-
raphy, and ﬁlms would fall within its scope.

296  -  .

.     
 - 
The nature of the relationship between actual excavation and commercial exploitation
has already arisen in relation to the raising of material from the Titanic. On 10 Sep-
tember 1993 the International Congress of Maritime Museums (ICMM) “adopted
standards for the exploration of underwater cultural sites and the acquisition, preser-
vation and exhibition of artifacts recovered from shipwrecks and other sites.”235 The
standards enjoined member museums to “not knowingly acquire or exhibit artifacts
which have been . . . removed from commercially exploited archaeological or historic
sites.” Further, it was stated that “a commercially exploited heritage site is one in
which the primary motive for investigation is private ﬁnancial gain.” The ICMM stan-
dard was immediately tested by the Titanic exhibition at the National Maritime Mu-
seum, Greenwich, England—a member of ICMM—in 1994– 95. RMS Titanic Inc.
had insisted publicly and later gave the court its assurance that the artefacts raised
would not be sold. But the company president was reported as saying that its goal was
“to earn more than $100 million by exhibiting the ship’s artifacts” during a global
tour. The ethical aspects of the exhibition were raised with the National Maritime
Museum but at its 1996 meeting the ICMM chose to attempt to improve the nature
of the exhibition arrangements rather than to attempt to determine whether the Ti-
tanic had been commercially exploited. The Museum went ahead with the exhibition,
which was hugely successful and had to be extended by six months. Whether the site
of RMS Titanic is a “commercially exploited heritage site” has not been satisfactorily
clariﬁed and may be impossible to clarify on current deﬁnitions. Much more work is
needed in this issue. For example, at the “Presentation of Periodic Report of Salvors”
before the District Court of Virginia on 22 March 2000, RMS Titanic Inc. indicated
that it had to raise more objects to stage additional exhibitions. To do this they were
considering a “surgical incision” in the vessel for cargo removal. Do these additional
elements strengthen the view that this is a commercially exploited site or can the stag-
ing of exhibitions for proﬁt be accepted? 

One  attempt  to  establish  the  distinction  between  commercial  and  non-
commercial exploitation has been made by G. Stemm, president of ProSEA.236
This distinguishes a category of what it calls  “trade goods,” comprising those
goods which can be identiﬁed as cargo and which can be distinguished by any one
of three criteria: number of duplicates on site; ease of recording or replicating ar-
tifacts; and archaeological value versus value of return to the stream of commerce.
Stemm describes what is meant by these categories:

1. Number of duplicates on site: This is simply an evaluation of the number of arti-
facts of that particular type available from the site. Based on discussions with
museums and archaeologists, I recommend maintaining a minimum ﬁve to ten
percent sample of the multiple artifacts in the permanent cultural collection.
. . . the ﬁnal evaluation should be left to the project archaeologist. . . .

  297

2. Ease of recording or replicating artifacts : In the ProSEA Code of Ethics, it states
that those artifacts that cannot be “documented, photographed, moulded or
replicated in a manner that allows reasonable future study and analysis” must
be kept together. An obvious example of an artifact that is easily documented
is a coin, which can be easily photographed in high resolution, weighed and
the dimensions given, thus providing virtually all the data necessary for further
study of the coin. The one exception would be an analysis of the metal in the
coin, but that can be accomplished for the most part from the sample
collection of similar coins from the same site in the permanent collection. . . .

3. Archaeological value versus value of return to stream of commerce: . . . One concern of
archaeologists today is that the potential cultural value should be considered
in determination of economic value. But then to decide which value is
greater? And to what degree? The answer is not simple, and is a subjective
judgment. It can probably best be illustrated by the following example.

Consider the case of 1,000 similar gold coins recovered from a shipwreck
from the late 18th Century. In this instance, the market value of those coins
could easily reach millions of dollars. In terms of the archaeological value,
there are many of the same coins already widely circulated throughout the
coin collectors marketplace, so there is very little that can be learned
incrementally about 18th Century culture that can’t be learned from records
and data which are already in existence. This is especially true when coupled
with a representative sample, plus photos and documentation of the coins
that are dispersed. In this case, a reasonable conclusion could be drawn that
the tiny incremental value of the archaeological knowledge that could be
gained from keeping the collection together does not warrant preventing a re-
turn of millions of dollars to the stream of commerce.

On the other hand, a large collection of amphorae from a Mediterranean
bronze-age site would probably not have a very large intrinsic value. However,
so little is known of trade from this era, that minor variations in markings on
the amphorae, as well as data that can be gleaned from the remains of their
contents, may be data that can be gathered in no other method. In this case, a
reasonable conclusion could be drawn that the low commercial value would
not warrant breaking up this collection.237

This classiﬁcation draws on some of the language of commerce while incorporat-
ing some of the principles of archaeology. Whether and to what extent it would
be acceptable to the parties involved remains to be seen. Consider, for example,
museums. A museum with a major coin collection might ﬁnd a 5 to 10 percent rep-
resentative sample acceptable, but ones with smaller collections may ﬁnd the de-
mands such that this percentage would be insufﬁcient. Particularly would this be
the case where the needs of regional museums have to be satisﬁed. Museums are

298  -  .

increasing their role in determining what is unique about a region and a commu-
nity, and this makes them important both socially and, through tourism, econom-
ically. Exhibitions are no longer produced on the basis of one representative of
each type. They are theme based and particular themes may demand many dupli-
cates. For example, the Maritime Museum in Fremantle, Australia, has a section
through the hull of an East Indiaman, showing the many identical ballast bricks in
the lower parts and the many timber planks.238

 

In many jurisdictions, the response to the growing tension between the treasure
salvage and archaeological communities has been statutory prohibition of com-
mercial recovery of wreck beyond a certain age, typically one hundred years. While
there appears to have been no comprehensive research to assess the effectiveness
of this approach, the experience of some countries suggests that prohibitions are
more honoured in the breach than the observance in the absence of adequate re-
sources devoted to enforcement. The inescapable basis of the difﬁculty is that the
overwhelming majority of wrecks are in relatively shallow waters accessible to a
large and expanding sports diving community that is even more problematic to
regulate than the treasure salvage industry. Moreover, for some countries, eco-
nomic development has a higher priority than preservation of the underwater cul-
tural heritage and the temptation to exploit a cultural resource by permitting diver
access to beneﬁt tourism has proved irresistible. The alternative approach of a
heavily regulated salvage regime is a possible compromise, but only if it can be
demonstrated that this can provide adequate protection.

Admiralty courts in the common law countries are compelled to apply the law of
salvage when confronted with a ﬁnd or recovery that, as a matter of law, falls within
the regime. Some, particularly those in the United States of America, have attempted
to take account of the fact that certain subjects of salvage law incorporate more than
commercial value. This arises from the fact that historic wreck contains information
on past ways of life, information that can provide people with knowledge of their ori-
gins. The information is unlocked using the principles of archaeology and related dis-
ciplines. The courts, in giving salvors certain rights over the wrecks, attempt to hold
them to standards of behaviour based on these principles yet, in doing this, the courts
have applied their own notions of what these principles mean, notions which reﬂect
only partially the requirements of the archaeological profession. Some assistance may
be obtained from the international standards that have been adopted recently or are
in the process of being prepared. However, it is not unusual for the courts to be called
upon to evaluate the expert evidence provided by salvors and it would seem to be a
simple matter of common sense that this should be done with the beneﬁt of expert
advice. Indeed, admiralty courts in the United Kingdom are assisted by lay advisers in,

  299

for example, determining liability in maritime collision cases.239 The use of profes-
sional marine archaeologists to advise in historic wreck cases seems a natural pro-
gression that would materially enhance the ability of the court to assess the archaeo-
logical merit, or otherwise, of an application. It would then be easier for a court to
impose far more speciﬁc archaeological criteria that could be adequately monitored
and enforced by the deployment of professional marine archaeologists to direct re-
covery operations, in a manner similar to the administrative controls imposed by the
United Kingdom under the 1973 Protection of Wrecks Act. Yet, whatever attempts
might be made to accommodate archaeology within the traditional salvage regime, the
archaeological imperative for some sites will always be in situ preservation, and this cre-
ates an impasse with the freedom to initiate salvage. Moreover, the courts would have
to supervise the conduct of salvors effectively. It is insufﬁcient to assess this at the
time of making a salvage award as, by that time, the damage has been done. It is
doubtful if many courts would have the facilities for such supervision. If the full
range of archaeological principles is taken into account, there seems little scope for
salvage to operate. In addition, the court’s scope to administer salvage law is limited
by its jurisdiction. While it may make an order, that may well be ignored by those be-
yond its power. International rules on jurisdiction have to be studied as well as the fact
that states have varying rules on the relationship between salvage and historic wreck.
But that is the stuff of another article. 



1. Although the origin of the debate is of greater antiquity, this article regards the UNESCO
Regional Seminar on the Protection of Movable Property held in Brisbane, Australia, in 1966
as a practical starting point, since the following statement led belatedly to the decision in 1993
to conduct a feasibility study into the possibility of an international convention to protect the
underwater cultural heritage (UCH): “if positive steps are not taken immediately it is antici-
pated that the recent advances that have been made by treasure hunters internationally . . . will
result in a tragic loss of essential and important heritage.”
2. A selection of these regimes is described and analysed in a scholarly and timely text, Legal Pro-
tection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage: National and International Perspectives (S. Dromgoole ed.,
Kluwer Law International, London 1999).
3. No comment is made or implied on the effectiveness of these regimes, which is self-evidently
variable and entirely dependent on resources that, in turn, reﬂect political commitment and pri-
orities. However, if increases in reporting of ﬁnds to public authorities is regarded as one mea-
sure of success, then the U.K. regime under the 1973 Protection of Wrecks Act has shown yearly
improvements in this regard as a consequence of an active policy of co-operation and educa-
tion of the sports diving community. On the darker side, it is rumoured that a U.S. salvage
company has succeeded in negotiating a licence with the Government of Vietnam to locate and
salvage historic wreck along the entire length of its coastline.
4. The evolution of this latest draft from the original International Law Association draft has
generated much comment and analysis. On the original ILA draft, see particularly J. Blake, The

300  -  .

Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage, 45 International and Comparative Law Quarterly
819 (1996), and P. J. O’Keefe, Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage Developments
at UNESCO, 25 International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 169 (1996); on the UNESCO 1998 draft
Convention, see a range of problems in S. Dromgoole and N. Gaskell, Draft UNESCO Con-
vention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage 1998, 14:2 International Journal
of Marine and Coastal Law 179 (1999); P. Fletcher-Tomenius and C. Forrest, Historic Wreck in In-
ternational Waters: Conﬂict or Consensus?, 24 Marine Policy 1 (2000); and P. Fletcher-Tomenius
and M. Williams, The Draft UNESCO/Doalos Convention on the Protection of Underwater
Cultural Heritage and Conﬂict with the European Convention on Human Rights, 28 Interna-
tional Journal of Nautical Archaeology 145 (1999).
5. Even if a convention is agreed on, the current U.S. position regarding salvage law is unlikely
to change in the absence of acceptance of its proposal at the 1999 meeting either to make Ar-
ticle 12(2) (the provision requiring non-application of salvage law to historic wreck) optional
rather than mandatory as at present or, alternatively, to permit reservations in respect of that
obligation (CLT-99/CONF. 202/5 Rev.).
6. For an informative summary of the available technology and the companies that possess it,
see R. Mather, Technology and the Search for Shipwrecks, 30:2 Journal of Maritime Law and Com-
merce 175 (1999). It is noted that the French Institute of Research and Exploitation of the Sea
(IFREMER) also has a sophisticated deep ocean technological capability. 
7. This equipment allows amateur divers to reach depths of 120 metres and remain submerged
for much longer periods of time. Such depths make a large part of the continental shelf ac-
cessible to sports divers. For example, the maximum depth in the English Channel, an area
strewn with literally thousands of wrecks of all ages, is about 110 metres.
8. Transcript of the Presentation of Periodic Report of Salvors in R.M.S. Titanic Inc. v.
Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel etc., Civil Action No. 2: 93cv902 in the U.S. District Court for
the Eastern District of Virginia before Clarke and Smith JJ. 22 March 2000 (“the March pro-
ceedings”) and the Transcript of Proceedings in the same matter of 3 April 2000 (“the April
proceedings”).
9. The signiﬁcance of this development is further examined infra in the section “Salvor in
Possession.”
10. A process usefully summarised in G. Brice, Maritime Law of Salvage 3– 5 (3d ed., Sweet and
Maxwell, London 1999).
11. For example, in The Calypso (1828) 166 E.R. 221 at 224, Sir Christopher Robinson examined
the Roman law and equitable origins of salvage law.
12. For an elaborate review of the relevance of and the relationship between English and U.S. ad-
miralty law after independence, see Thompson v. The Catharina 23 Fed. Cas. 1028 (1795), more gen-
erally, Brice, supra note 10, at 9– 14, and W. R. Casto, The Origins of Federal Admiralty Juris-
diction in an Age of Privateers, Smugglers and Pirates, 37 American Journal of Legal History 1 (1993).
13. (1835) 3 Hag. Adm. 203, 204.
14. The continuing close relationship of English and American admiralty law after indepen-
dence is explained by Brice, supra note 10, at 12.
15. This Convention remains in force with the United States as one of the state parties.
16. See Current Law Statutes, Merchant Shipping Act 1995 (annotations by N. Gaskell, 21:239– 240,
Sweet and Maxwell, London 1995).

  301

17. Indeed, it proved impossible to achieve consensus even on the question of whether sunken wreck
was capable of salvage, reﬂecting wide divergence between national legal regimes (see note 2 supra).

18. 28 U.S.C. §1333 deﬁnes the jurisdiction of district courts and procedural matters are further
elaborated in the Supplemental Rules for Certain Admiralty and Maritime Claims.

19. The progression can be traced in English law from HMS Thetis (1835) 3 Hagg. 228 to Morris
v. Lyonesse Salvage Co. Ltd. (The Association) [1970] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 59. 

20. The matter is examined exhaustively in Brice, supra note 10, particularly at 46– 57. He also
includes a comparison of the U.S. law, which is broadly similar other than on its treatment of
future or contingent dangers.

21. For example, in the United Kingdom, see The North Goodwin no. 16 [1980] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 71;
in the United States, Nunley v. M.V. Dauntless (1988) A.M.C. 1445; and in South Africa, Petjalis
Engineering Works (Pty) Ltd. v. South African Transport Services (1988) (1) S.A. 103.

22. See The Whippingham (1934) 48 Ll. List L. Rep. 49 and the discussion thereon in Brice, supra
note 10, at 387– 89.

23. See The Merannio (1927) 28 Ll. List L. Rep. 352 and The Gregerso [1973] 1 Q.B. 274.

24. For example, B. V. Bureau Wijsmuller v. U.S., 702 F.2d 333 (1983) and Allseas Maritime S.A. v. M.V.
Mimosa, 812 F.2d 243 (1983).

25. A point exhaustively considered in American law in Westar Marine Services v. Heerema Marine
Contractors S.A., 621 F. Supp. (1985).

26. Article 14 uses the different phraseology advisedly, implicitly acknowledging the restricted
meaning of “danger”; see further Brice, supra note 10, at 414– 17.

27. Supra note 19.

28. This may be unfair in the sense that the case dealt only with an application to consider
whether an interlocutory injunction restraining a competing salvor from interfering with op-
erations should be continued. However, this involved a consideration of the rights of salvors
in possession (see infra), which necessarily involved an acknowledgement that the operations
themselves amounted to salvage.

29. Though the case report states laconically (at p. 60) that “the hull of the Association is partly
embedded in sediment,” suggesting that at least part of the wooden structure was intact.

30. It is important to stress that this is a real possibility in such areas. For example, the Post
Ofﬁce packet Hanover, discovered in 1996 in an exposed north Cornish cove bearing the same
name, was covered again by ﬁfteen feet of sand after an ordinary gale. The hull only was un-
covered, as it had lodged in a gully in a corner of the cove. Had the wreck site been located in
an open area of ocean ﬂoor, it may well have been lost.

31. The salvor commenced salvage operations in July 1997 but an emergency designation order
was made under the 1973 Protection of Wrecks Act. Further unlicensed salvage operations were
prohibited but the salvor obtained an injunction restraining implementation of the order on
the grounds, inter alia, of lack of consultation. The matter was eventually resolved by agree-
ment, salvage operations continuing under the supervision of two archaeologists paid for by
the government. The outcome was widely seen as a defeat for the government’s heritage con-
trols. See further Guardian, 19 July 1997, and Times, 24 July 1997.

32. (1989) A.M.C. 1955 and the appeal (1995) A.M.C. 1985 (“the Central America”).

302  -  .

33. Id. at 2007.
34. The vessel sank in 1857 with a recorded $1 million of California gold aboard plus unknown
quantities of personal wealth of passengers, many of whom were returning home after suc-
cesses in the Gold Rush of those days. These were fabulous sums for those times.
35. 577 F. Supp. 597, 611 (1983) (“Subaqueous” ).
36. Platoro v. Unidentiﬁed Remains of a Vessel, 371 F. Supp. 351 (1970) (“Platoro” ).
37. Cobb Coin Company Inc. v. Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Sailing Vessel etc., 549 F. Supp. 540
(1982) (“Cobb Coin II”).
38. A ﬂeet of twelve Spanish galleons departed Havana Harbour on 24 July 1715 with cargoes
of gold, emeralds, and pearls from Peru that had been loaded at the port of New Grenada. The
king of Spain annually sent two ﬂeets of ships to bring back the wealth of the New World, one
for treasure and the other for pottery, silver, and dyes from the Orient. The two ﬂeets then
combined in Havana for greater mutual protection from pirates before sailing for Europe.
Normally the ﬂeet would have sailed in advance of the hurricane season, but it was delayed for
trade reasons. The hurricane of 31 July caused the loss of 1,000 lives, eleven galleons, and four-
teen million pesos of treasure.
39. Although it is arguably less serious for the protection of historic wreck in U.K. waters, as
the 1973 Protection of Wrecks Act provides a statutory means of exercising control over salvage
operations and, in appropriate cases, of imposing in situ preservation. The system has been rea-
sonably successful, notwithstanding certain deﬁciencies in the legal regime.
40. (1997) A.M.C. 1000 (Ontario Court, General Division) (“Mar-Dive”). It is noted that a re-
lated point arose in the U.S. case of Klein v. Unidentiﬁed and Abandoned Sailing Vessel etc., 568 F. Supp.
1562 (1983), and, on appeal, 758 F.2d 1511 (1985), where the court held that the danger was cre-
ated by the salvor’s failure to use appropriate archaeological practices.
41. A view which is also expressed in decisions of the 4th Circuit (The Central America), 6th Circuit
(Fairport International Exploration Inc. v. Shipwrecked Vessel Known as the Captain Lawrence, 105 F.3d 1078
(1997)), and 7th Circuit (Zych v. Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel etc., 811 F. Supp. 1300 (1993)).
42. 525 F. Supp. 186, 215, 217 (1981) (“Cobb Coin I”). Similarly, in Treasure Salvors Inc. v. Unidentiﬁed,
Wrecked and Abandoned Sailing Vessel, 569 F.2d 330, 337 (1978) (“Treasure Salvors I” ), the court deﬁned
danger in terms of both tropical storms and pirates.
43. 525 F. Supp. at 217.
44. Arguably, such a consideration applies even where the recovered artefacts are not subse-
quently sold but are deposited with a publicly accessible collection, in that public access fur-
thers the institutional objectives and existence.
45. In the United Kingdom, it is the policy to favour in situ preservation unless conservation fa-
cilities and accommodation in a publicly accessible depository can be secured prior to recovery.
See further Department of Culture Media and Sport, Archaeological Diving Unit, Protected His-
toric Wrecks: Guidance Notes for Divers and Archaeologists (St. Andrews University 2000). Nonetheless,
in situ preservation is not always possible (a point well understood by terrestrial rescue archae-
ologists), and two U.K. examples are instructive in this regard. In Scottish waters, the wreck of
The Swan, one of a ﬂotilla of warships dispatched by Cromwell during the English civil war to
engage a royalist stronghold, lies in approximately twelve metres but was uncovered in recent
years in an excellent state of preservation, probably from a combination of a minor earth
tremor and prop-wash from passing ferries. It has been necessary to sandbag parts of the wreck

  303

to avoid further damage, while recovery proceeds at the slow pace necessary to meticulously
record the archaeological provenance. At the harbour entrance of St. Peter Port, the capital of
Guernsey in the Channel Isles, the remains of a Roman boat (which has become known as the
“Asterix Wreck”) were uncovered a few years ago by prop-wash from new, more powerful fer-
ries, and recovery was the only option available to archaeologists. Destabilisation from the same
source has continued, revealing a further, unidentiﬁed medieval wreck currently being excavated
by archaeologists from Southampton University.

46. The position is quite different under English law, as the law of ﬁnds is not applied to aban-
doned property, which falls to the Crown by prerogative right (S. 241 Merchant Shipping Act
1995). Technically, the same rule explains the title question in Mar-Dive.

47. See infra.

48. 974 F.2d 450, 460.

49. Id.

50. Id. at 470 et seq.

51. Id. at 476– 477.

52. 43 U.S.C. §§2101– 2106. This is a short legislative provision of only six sections declaring that
States are the owners of all abandoned shipwrecks that are (1) embedded in state submerged
lands, (2) embedded in coralline formations on state submerged lands, or (3) on state submerged
lands and either included, or eligible for inclusion, in the National Register of Historic Places.

53. The argument is more complex as the constitutionality of the ASA itself is still an issue.
See infra.

54. This change of tactics by the treasure salvage industry has attracted considerable comment
—for example, O. Varmer, The Case against the “Salvage” of the Cultural Heritage, 30: 2 Jour-
nal of Maritime Law and Commerce 279 (1999), and A. G. Giesecke, The Abandoned Shipwreck Act
through the Eyes of Its Drafter, id. at 167.

55. This applies both to maritime salvage in general and to historic wreck in particular. Although
there are circumstances where more than one salvor is recognised (for example, the Unique Mariner
[1979] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 37), the defence of possessory rights remains the central issue.

56. See infra for an explanation of this as a general phenomenon, but for a particular case study,
see P. N. Keller, Salvor-Sovereign Relations: How the State of Illinois Destroyed the Lady Elgin,
30: 2 Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce 245 (1999).

57. This also occurs in English law (for example, in the Tubantia [1924], p. 78) but it has already
been observed that there have been few cases involving historic wreck.

58. A maritime lien entitles a salvor to proceed in rem against the salved property, i.e. to arrest
(detain) it until payment. Such liens are commonplace and part of customary international law,
being recognised implicitly in Article 2 of the 1910 Convention and explicitly in Article 20 of
the 1989 Convention. Protection probably extends also to a possessory lien in English law (see
Brice, supra at 143– 44) and certainly does so in American law (see Benedict on Admiralty 10-7–
10-9 (7th ed., rev., M. Bender, New York 1974–) (hereinafter Benedict)).

59. The issue of security is not important in the context of historic wreck as its practical rele-
vance is restricted to the successful salvage of a ﬂoating casualty, the owner of which will de-
sire to continue operating for commercial gain pending the assessment of the salvage award,
usually payable by insurers following arbitration.

304  -  .

60. The Aquila 1 C. ROB. 37 (1798) per Sir W. Scott at 40.

61. H.M.S. Thetis, supra note 19, per Sir John Nicholl at 235, cited with approval in The Tubantia, supra
note 57, per Sir Henry Duke (president) at 87.

62. The Black Book of the Admiralty, compiled between the early thirteenth and late ﬁfteenth cen-
turies speaks of entitlement to salvage for “vessels fﬂoateing or waving found . . ., without any
man therein”; see further 1 The Black Book of the Admiralty xx–xxi (Sir Travers Twiss ed. and trans.,
London, Longman 1871).

63. The Blenden Hall 1 DODS. 414 (1814), per Sir W. Scott at 416. English courts gradually ex-
tended the concept of derelict from vessels abandoned and ﬂoating to those which had sunk to
the seabed. See H.M.S. Thetis, supra note 19 (sunken vessel’s cargo is derelict), and Pierce v. Bemis
(“The Lusitania”) [1986] Lloyd’s Rep. 132 (a derelict which sinks remains a derelict at law).

64. Referred to by the courts as animus possidendi.

65. See The Tubantia, supra note 57, at 89– 91, and Morris v. Lyonesse Salvage Company Ltd., supra note 19,
at 61– 62.

66. See further The Tubantia, supra note 57, at 88– 89, and Morris v. Lyonesse Salvage Company Ltd., supra
note 19, at 62. 

67. While many in the present archaeological community would dispute that the work was ar-
chaeological in nature, the court expressly accepted it as such. 

68. Given that designation under the 1973 Protection of Wrecks Act requires that the location
of a site be published, this possessory right has been used very successfully by at least one ar-
chaeological group (South West Archaeological Dive Group) to avoid disclosure and thus pro-
tect a site for three years prior to designation. 

69. The vessels were wooden men-of-war and, given the very exposed location, must have bro-
ken up within days, if not hours, of the wrecking. Certainly no substantial structures remained
and the artefacts were very scattered.

70. The Tubantia, although broken, remained in three substantial sections.

71. That this has profound implications for maritime archaeology cannot be denied. The pos-
sessory rights of a salvor in possession are regarded as falling within the protection of the Eu-
ropean Convention on Human Rights, with the result that the salvor cannot be dispossessed
by the state without payment of compensation, even where such dispossession is in the public
interest. See further P. Fletcher-Tomenius and M. Williams, The Protection of Wrecks Act 1973:
A Breach of Human Rights? 13: 4 International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 623 (1998). 

72. In Martha’s Vineyard Scuba Headquarters Inc. v. The Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Steam Vessel,
833 F.2d 1059, 1061, it was stated that a salvor must show that its efforts are (1) undertaken with
due diligence, (2) ongoing, and (3) clothed with some prospect of success.

73. 525 F. Supp. 350 (1981) (“Hener”). The case usefully explains the broad test of possession and
cites the leading precedents relevant to the problem of competing salvors, notably Eads v. Brazel-
ton, 22 Ark. 499 (1861).

74. 952 F. Supp. 825 (1997) (“Marex”).

75. The Central America and RMS Titanic v. The Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel, 924 F. Supp. 714 (1996)
(“RMS”), are the best-known examples. See further Note, Telepossession Is Nine Tenths of the
Law: The Emerging Industry of Deep Ocean Discovery, 3 Pace Yearbook of International Law 309

  305

(1991), and Comment, Property Owners’ Constructive Possession of Treasure Trove: Rethink-
ing the Finders Keepers Rule, 38 UCLA Law Review 1659 (1991).
76. Hener and RMS are two of the better known examples.
77. Supra note 8.
78. Id. at 36– 37.
79. Id. at 38. The question arises as to the enforceability of such an agreement in the longer
term, since there are formidable legal obstacles to imposing effective conditions on the own-
ership of chattels (movables). Additionally, archaeologists would be concerned over rights to
access for scientiﬁc reasons and the enforceability of long term conservation measures.
80. Id. at 38. 
81. The generality of this view is expressed here, as the authenticity and origin of the statement
cannot be veriﬁed.
82. Supra note 8, at 13.
83. It is technically possible to constrain such rights but there is no evidence that this has been
done in the case of RMS Titanic Inc. It is further noted that the company has recently settled
a change of management team, following a well-publicised and acrimonious dispute among
shareholders.
84. It is not relevant for the purposes of this article to examine the implications of this aspect
of the proceedings, but the court was asked for guidance on how to proceed in the light of the
negotiations for the impending multilateral agreement between the United States, Canada,
France, and the United Kingdom that would render the proposed operation unlawful. In fact,
the present negotiations, which appear to be nearing success, concern guidelines for the con-
duct of operations affecting the wreck, but any implementation legislation is likely to be some
years away. The court made it clear that it would order those four governments not to restrict
the salvors and questioned the jurisdictional basis of the RMS Titanic Memorial Act that
granted the U.S. government authority to enter into such agreement in the ﬁrst place (for ex-
ample, at p. 16 of the March proceedings and p. 34 of the April proceedings, supra note 8). Ad-
ditionally, it ordered representatives of the government to meet the salvors and provide details
of the proposed agreement (which “almost told him how to brush his teeth in the morning”—
at p. 12 of the April proceedings) within ten days, on pain of imprisonment for non-attendance
(at p. 50 of the March proceedings).
85. March proceedings, supra note 8, at 13– 14.
86. Id. at 44.
87. Id. at 48.
88. The only signiﬁcant exceptions to this are for environmental protection endeavours, the so-
called safety net and special compensation provisions contained in Articles 13 and 14 of the
1989 Convention, on which see generally Brice, supra note 10, at ch. 6.
89. See 43 Halsbury’s Laws of England 713 (Butterworths, London 1973).
90. See 3A Benedict, supra note 58, at 1 – 4.
91. See EnricoVincenzini, International Salvage Law 55– 60 (Lloyd’s of London Press, London 1992).
92. Brice, supra note 10, for example, deals with the criteria for awards in ch. 2 and breach of
duty in ch. 7.

306  -  .

93. Also referred to as the “archaeological provenience”; both terms are approved in the Con-
cise Oxford Dictionary and may be used interchangeably. It is noted that the use of this term is
regarded by many archaeologists as unsatisfactory, as it relates to location or place of origin
data. It would be more satisfactory if the courts concerned themselves with the more compre-
hensive issue of the archaeological context. However, the terminology of the courts is used
throughout this article.

94. Supra note 32, at para. 43.

95. 631 F. Supp. 308 (1986) (“MDM”).

96. As Giesecke, supra note 54, at 170– 71 somewhat scathingly refers to it.

97. Article 13.1 (b).

98. Article 13.1 (h).

99. Article 13.1 (i).

100. Article 13.1 (j).

101. It should be emphasised that there appears to be no scope for arguing that preservation of
the UCH per se falls under this head. It would only be relevant if “physical” pollution from oil
or chemicals threatened a UCH site and was averted or minimised by a salvor.

102. Supra note 25.

103. The decision occurred before the International Salvage Convention was agreed. However,
Article 13 is substantively similar to the CMI draft.

104. Which provides: “A Treaty shall be interpreted in good faith and in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the Treaty in their context and in the light of its
object and purpose.”

105. Supra note 10, at 166.

106. Id. at 277.

107. 77 U.S. 10 Wall. 1 at 13– 14 (1870).

108. Supra note 58, at para. 237. This order received judicial approval in B.V. Bureau Wijsmuller v.
U.S. (1980) A.M.C. 2993.

109. The order in The Blackwall itself, using the numbers in Benedict, was 6, 5, 4, 2, 3, and 1.

110. Per Dr. Lushington in The Phantom (1866) L.R. 1 A. & E. 58 at p. 60.

111. The Saragossa, 21 F. Cas. 425 (1867).

112. Although it should be noted that the English approach states only that the value must be
“considered” and that it should not justify a sum out of proportion to the actual service ren-
dered. See Brice, supra note 10, at 166– 67.

113. The 1910 Convention was silent on the matter.

114. Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co. Ltd. v. Admiralty (The Delphinula) (1946) 79 Ll. L. Rep. 611, 634.

115. It should be noted that intervention may be contractual and the standard of care may well
be deﬁned. For example, Lloyd’s Open Form salvage requires a salvor to use “best endeavours,”
and that is clearly a subjective standard to be based on the skill, experience, and equipment of
the particular salvor.

  307

116. See Brice, supra note 10, at 510 et seq., and Benedict, supra note 58, at paras. 120– 23. 
117. See The Mohawk (1953) A.M.C. 1541.
118. This point refers only to whether unacceptable archaeological practice breaches the gen-
eral duty to exercise due care. There are American cases that hint at penalties for poor perfor-
mance under the seventh criterion, and these will be analysed later in this article.
119. In other words, ordinary negligence often does not affect a salvage award; the behaviour of
the salvor must be akin to recklessness.
120. For a learned and modern exposition of the difﬁculties, see A. Hudson, Abandonment,
in Interests in Goods 595 et seq. (2d ed., N. Palmer and E. McKendrick eds., Lloyds Library Press,
London 1998).
121. Hudson, supra note 120, at 595, states the issue even more broadly by saying that it “may af-
fect the rights of owners and possessors of property,” although even he, in the particular con-
text of this publication, does not include the effects on real property (immovables).
122. See Hudson, supra note 120, at 598– 601 and 606– 14.
123. Daily Telegraph, 11 Oct. 1991. The issue was not that the owner was mentally disordered or
acting under undue inﬂuence; the police caution simply reﬂected doubts regarding the legal po-
sition under English law.
124. See Hudson, supra note 120, at 610– 12. Under the Marine Insurance Act 1906, S. 63(1), an
assured can elect to abandon title to underwriters in the event of a total loss or constructive
total loss by a formal notice to that effect. The underwriters can then elect to accept or reject
the notice (in practice, they will often reject it, as they do not wish to incur the risk of further
third-party  claims  arising  from  the  wreck). The  unresolved  issue  is  whether  the  notice  is
sufﬁcient to divest title even if it is rejected.
125. Implied release of rights is possible, however. For example, see Moore v. Rawson (1824) 3
B. & C. 332 and Tehidy Minerals Ltd. v. Norman [1971] 1 Q.B. 528. Formal abandonment presents no
practical difﬁculties in real property matters and is almost always accomplished by deed; for ex-
ample, surrender of a lease or extinguishment of a right of way are commonplace transactions
following agreement of terms between the respective parties. It should be noted that, while
English law accepts the termination of title to freehold land (for example, where a company
is liquidated and land vested in it is not sold as it has no market value, or where an individual
dies intestate without heirs), it vests by operation of law as bona vacantia in the Crown. In this
sense, there is no true abeyance of title, although this rule does not affect so-called squatters’
rights, as these depend on the acquisition of superior rights of possession and do not depend
on abandonment of title.
126. While The Crystal [1894] A.C. 508 H.L. deals with abandonment and res nullius, it does so
in a narrow statutory context. The Egypt, (1932) 44 Ll. List L. Rep. 21, held that underwriters
had not abandoned sunken gold inaccessible to them at the time of the loss and claim, as there
was only ten years between the two events. Only Pierce v. Bemis (“The Lusitania”), supra note 63,
is signiﬁcant in holding sixty-seven years on the seabed without any assertion of title sufﬁ-
cient to amount to abandonment of title. Even in this case, however, the decision is ﬁrst in-
stance, and a modern case at appellate level examining the general principles is awaited with
interest.
127. Brice, supra note 10, is oddly silent on the general issue other than a bald statement of prin-
ciple. He deals extensively with abandonment in the context of derelicts and notices of aban-

308  -  .

donment, but exclusively with Canadian and U.S. law in relation to abandonment of title. It ap-
pears that signiﬁcant analysis is restricted to S. Dromgoole and N. Gaskell, Interests in Wreck,
in Interests in Goods, supra note 120, at 141.

128. It should also be re-emphasised that salvage awards for historic wreck in the United King-
dom are traditionally very high, and this would tend to act as a disincentive to litigation since,
in the absence of very high total values, there would be insufﬁcient residual values.

129. At one time the value of the Central America was estimated at US $1 billion; although this
has since been revised downwards and a ﬁnal ﬁgure is still not known, it is believed that the
total will exceed $600 million.

130. This was based on the principle of insurance law under which, on payment of a claim, in-
surers automatically gain the right to claim the lost or damaged property.

131. Dromgoole and Gaskell, supra note 127, at 163.

132. It could only become an issue if the owner (successor) in title had re-established posses-
sion and control, presumably with a view to conducting salvage operations. Although there is
no case law on the point, ﬁrst principles suggest this in itself would be powerful evidence of
non-abandonment, since it is established law that inability to salve per se (inaccessibility, in
other words) does not adversely affect title (see, e.g., The Egypt, supra note 126).

133. This is graphically illustrated by the different judicial and academic interpretations of
L. J. Greer’s judgement in Oceanic Steam Navigation Co. v. Evans: The Celtic (1934) 50 Ll. List L. Rep.
1, a case concerning an express notice of abandonment by the owners that was followed by a
later attempt by that same owner to salvage the vessel. Dromgoole and Gaskell (supra note 127,
at 170) and G. Gauci, Constructive Total Loss in the Law of Marine Insurance, in The Modern Law
of Marine Insurance 201, 206 (D. R. Thomas ed., Lloyd’s Library Press, London 1996), both con-
clude that a notice of abandonment not accepted by the insurer does not divest title from the
ship owner. Hudson (supra note 120, at 436), however, concludes that the judgement supports
the view that express abandonment can indeed divest title.

134. The exception is where it is a device to avoid third-party liability, an irrelevant issue in this
context. However, it is noted in passing that the United States dealt with the major problem of
divesting title by abandonment to avoid wreck removal liabilities in the 1899 Rivers and Har-
bors Appropriation Act. A substantial and helpful summary of the general position in the
United States can be found in D. P. Larsen, Ownership of Historic Shipwreck in U.S. Law, 9:1
International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 31 (1994), although it should be noted that there has
been further, signiﬁcant case law since the publication of this article (see infra).

135. While the law of ﬁnds does exist in English law, it has no application to maritime property.
The uncertainty of whether express notice of abandonment divests title, rendering the prop-
erty res nullius, has already been noted. 

136. 47 F. Supp. 2d 678 (1999) AMC 1752; rev’d in part, 221 F.3d 634 (4th Cir. 2000), cert. petition ﬁled
(Oct. 19, 2000).

137. The Central America, 974 F.2d 450, 468.

138. For example, the destruction of insurance records was taken into account in The Central
America.

139. Manorial rights, including the franchise of wreck, still survive in the United Kingdom and are
usually both traceable and enforced in practice (see Fletcher-Tomenius and Williams, supra note 4).

  309

140. [1975] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 338.
141. Admittedly, a rather short period from which to infer abandonment without other, sub-
stantive evidence. The decision also included a ﬁnding that the vessel had not been abandoned
for the purpose of making it derelict, as the abandonment was not “voluntary.” This contro-
versial conclusion is not relevant to this article, however.
142. (1977) 51 A.L.J.R. 806.
143. The Dutch government has always vigorously asserted title to such wrecks in all jurisdic-
tions, for example, the wreck of the Amsterdam off the beach of Hastings, England.
144. At pp. 820– 21.
145. Supra note 122. The case generated signiﬁcant academic reaction, on which see S. D. Lilling-
ton, Wreck or Wreccum Maris? The Lusitania, Lloyd’s Maritime and Commercial Law Quarterly 267
(August 1977), and M. Nash, The Lusitania and Its Consequences, 1 International Journal of
Estuarine and Coastal Law 323 (1986).
146. 16 F. Supp. 2d. 1369 (1999) A.M.C. 1198.
147. Quoting from MDM, supra note 95, at 311.
148. 758 F.2d 1511 (1985).
149. Supra note 32, at 960.
150. Id.
151. 569 F.2d 330, 337 (1978).
152. The Spanish government, unlike the French and British, showed no interest in the discov-
ery of its ancient wrecks in foreign waters until the Sea Hunt case, supra note 136.
153. Supra note 41.
154. For a discussion and criticism of this development of the law, see J. P. Jones, The United
States Supreme Court and Treasure Salvage: Issues Remaining after Brother Jonathan, 30: 2 Jour-
nal of Maritime Law and Commerce 205 (1999). See particularly the extensive list of cases in which
abandonment of title was claimed in note 35.
155. 118 S. Ct. 1464 (1998) A.M.C. 1521 (“The Brother Jonathan”).
156. This problem is outside the scope of this article, but the substance of the argument against the
ASA is that it impinges on federal admiralty jurisdiction, which is itself protected under Article III
of the U.S. Constitution. The matter is moot, but the eventual outcome is genuinely uncertain.
See further Jones, supra note 144, at 223. The argument is usefully and succinctly summarised in Zych
v.Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel, Believed to Be the “Seabird,” 19 F.3d 1136, 1139– 42 (1994).
157. The court also declined to hold even the uninsured portion of the cargo and personal ef-
fects as abandoned, stating that it was premature to determine the issue, as heirs of persons
who drowned might lodge claims. Indeed, this same point remains an issue with personal pos-
sessions on the wreck of the Central America. The matter is considered in greater detail by Jones,
supra note 154, at 221– 22.
158. Although of much more ancient origin, the routine practice of marine insurance among
the Western European maritime powers began in the seventeenth century but was not by any
means universal until the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Additionally, it was not the
practice to routinely insure state vessels, particularly men-of-war, at any stage.

310  -  .

159. Including ships of the Dutch East India Company, to which the Dutch government is the
established successor in title.
160. Giesecke, supra note 54, at 167– 68 and 170– 73.
161. Although it has an inﬂuential power base in Europe, notably the so-called Austrian School.
162. Vilfredo Pareto (1848– 1923) was an Italian social scientist and one of the ﬁrst advocates of
positive economics (in the sense of being based upon factual statements, the validity of which
can be tested and contrasting with normative or value-based judgements) and is also seen by
many economists as the founder of welfare economics (this is not used in the social welfare
sense but in the social efﬁciency sense).
163. For a general explanation of which see J. Sloman, Economics 362– 415 (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge 1991).
164. Pareto uses this term as an alternative to “utility,” which is a term used by economists to
denote consumers’ perception of the social beneﬁt (to themselves) of purchasing one product
rather than another.
165. Later modiﬁcations to this original formulation have been made by later economists such
as Hicks-Kaldor (see Sloman, supra note 163, at 404), but the substance of the theory remains
intact for present purposes.
166. In economic terms, this is expressed as a balancing of marginal beneﬁts against marginal
costs, where “cost” means “opportunity cost,” i.e., the sacriﬁce of alternatives where one ac-
tivity is deemed to produce a greater (individual) beneﬁt than an alternative activity.
167. There never is perfect competition, as this represents a theoretical model in which the mar-
ket price for any good is the same for all producers and consumers. Paradoxically, this “perfec-
tion” is achievable in the market for historic artefacts by virtue of the restricted supply, as the re-
sponse to scarcity will simply be an increase in price and the ability of salvors to increase output
will always be limited by the nature of the product, almost regardless of investment levels.
168. “Externalities” are additional costs or beneﬁts not suffered by the individual consumer or
producer. Pollution is a prime example, as the cost falls on society, not the producer, in the ab-
sence of state intervention. Bad archaeology places greater costs on the general public for res-
cue and conservation, eventually causing the market to disappear altogether, as it is dependent
on a ﬁnite resource.
169. This is denied by welfare economists themselves, who insist that their viewpoint is “ethi-
cally neutral.”
170. Welfare economists place the two in the same category of intervention; there is no sugges-
tion here that subsidy for the salvage industry is a realistic policy option. However, the paradox
is that state subsidy for in situ preservation or controlled recovery and conservation outside the
salvage regime is regarded by many archaeologists as a desirable, if unrealistic, policy objective.
This serves to emphasise the ideological divide between them and welfare economists.
171. The view of welfare economists on this particular issue is unknown but ﬁrst principles sug-
gest they would disagree. This will become apparent in the discussion infra on property rights.
172. A scholarly and thought-provoking examination of this and other examples may be found in
D. Campbell, Of Coase and Corn: A (Sort of) Defence of Private Nuisance, 63: 2 Modern Law Review 197 (2000).
173. For example, is it realistic to expect individual householders in a street to negotiate terms
with hauliers for the creation of noise and fume pollution?

  311

174. Subject to the general requirements of admiralty law, this would already be the case in
common law jurisdictions but for the ASA in the United States, the Protection of Wrecks Act
in the United Kingdom, and similar legislation elsewhere. It is not the case in, for example,
Spain, where archaeological recoveries are classiﬁed as “extractions,” not salvage, or France,
where the award to the recoverer is ﬁxed by statute.

175. Presumably, such rights would be traded between salvors, and the (publicly funded) com-
pensation for non-enforcement would become a major component in setting the price.

176. Vessels over 100 years old.

177. National Monuments (Amendment) Act 1987.

178. Other than those arising from the requirements of admiralty law, e.g. that a salvor must
not be under a pre-existing contractual obligation.

179. When permitted, recoveries in the United Kingdom fall within the salvage regime.

180. There are other requirements speciﬁed in the licence, such as a duty to report annually.

181. Partly as a consequence of a policy of co-operation with the sports diving community and
partly as a consequence of the litigation which might follow dispossession of a salvor in pos-
session (see note 3 supra). 

182. Typically, 80 percent or greater, less the Receiver of Wreck’s expenses if the artefacts are
purchased by a publicly accessible institution, less also fees if they are not so purchased. A re-
cent award was made amounting to 82 percent of the market value, £99,000.

183. Except that rights were transferred from the federal government to states, and except that
the latter more routinely licence recoveries by other than professional marine archaeologists.

184. E. W. Horan, Organizing, Manning and Financing a Treasure Salvage Expedition, 30: 2
Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce 235, 237 (1999), suggests that all such projects should envis-
age legal challenge by other salvors, the true owner or the government, possibly also involving
appellate litigation. In other words, the professionals involved do indeed calculate the costs of
these externalities, illustrating yet again the attachment of common law jurisdictions to the
sanctity of private property rights.

185. An instructive source on the passage of the ASA can be found in A. Giesecke, Historic Ship-
wreck Resources and State Law: a Developmental Perspective (1991) (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Catholic University of America (Washington, D.C.) (on ﬁle with University Microﬁlms In-
ternational, Ann Arbor, Mich., Ref. no. 9217086).

186. P. N. Keller, supra note 56, at 251, takes this view, describing the problem in terms of “how
easy it is for sovereigns to oppress any salvor.”

187. Supra note 107.

188. For example, in Platoro, supra note 36. 

189. Id.

190. Platoro Ltd. v. Unidentiﬁed Remains of a Vessel, 518 F. Supp. 816 at 822 (W.D. Tex. 1981).

191. Id. at 208.

192. Id. at 218.

193. 549 F. Supp. at 559.

312  -  .

194. Supra note 40.
195. The others being MDM, supra note 95 (see also infra), and Chance v. Certain Artifacts Found and Sal-
vaged from the Nashville, 606 F. Supp. 801, aff’d, 775 F.2d 302 (1985), where salvors obtained no reward
as a consequence of their failure to use sufﬁcient care in making recoveries from an historic wreck.
196. 758 F.2d 1511, 1515– 16.
197. Supra note 95.
198. 691 F. Supp. 1377 (1988).
199. Authors’ emphasis.
200. In passing, in Moyer v. Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel known as the Andrea Doria, 836 F. Supp. 1099
(1993), it is noted that the court did not discuss any such criteria in relation to salvage of arte-
facts from this luxury cruise ship that sank following a collision in 1956, but merely observed
that the entire operation had been documented and videotaped.
201. 56 F.3d 556, 573.
202. Supra note 58.
203. In fact the court went on to list an eighth factor, “other considerations,” in which it in-
cluded the general policy to provide an incentive to salvors, the underwriters’ claim to certain
silver, and the striking out of the excess of the plaintiffs’ overlong brief. However, a generic cat-
egory such as this is normal and quite uncontroversial, not only in American law but also under
the 1989 Convention.
204. 56 F.3d at 573.
205. The court generalised about the generous praise of the plaintiff ’s own expert witnesses,
discussed the videotapes of conservation measures, and mentioned the production of sample
artefacts and books as well as the educational effort of the salvors. Little detail was added
about the precise content of these matters.
206. It is conceded that the Supreme Court could alter this priority.
207. Of course, if a salvor displays a sufﬁcient lack of skill to amount to negligence, then there
can be a relationship between misconduct (“unclean hands”) and one of the criteria in assess-
ing an award.
208. Supra note 75.
209. The detail of the ﬁnancial aspects of the operation is summarised, 924 F. Supp. 714, 716– 18.
210. Although lumps of coal from recovered bunkers of the Titanic were sold, these were not re-
garded as “artefacts” since they were “natural” objects, a view endorsed by the National Mar-
itime Museum.
211. The order was unreported, but was quoted in R.M.S. Titanic v. Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel,
924 F. Supp. 714, 716 n. 2 (1996).
212. The history of the litigation is summarised by J. A. R. Nafziger, The Titanic Revisited,
30: 2 Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce 311, 314– 17 (1999).
213. R.M.S. Titanic v. Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel etc. (1996) A.M.C. 2497, 2500. Although this
ﬁnding was reversed on appeal (R.M.S. Titanic Inc. v. Haver, 171 F.3d 943 (1999) ), the decision re-
mains signiﬁcant as an example of the extent to which the District Court has been prepared
to defend its initial injunctive relief.

  313

214. R.M.S. Titanic v. Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel etc., 9 F. Supp. 2d 624 (1998). This pattern of
extension of both the nature of the rights of salvors and the extent of admiralty court juris-
diction is particularly worrying in the light of the court’s view that exercising in rem jurisdiction
in this way was consistent with international law, notwithstanding the contrary view of the ap-
peal court (R.M.S. Titanic Inc. v. Haver, supra note 213). 
215. 924 F. Supp. at 721. Authors’ emphasis.
216. Notwithstanding the later, terse declaration at p. 722 that the conservation of wreck and
artefacts was “of extreme importance to this court,” the court had quoted earlier (at p. 721)
from T. J. Schoenbaum’s second edition in 1994 of Admiralty and Maritime Laws to the effect that
preservation of the provenance “should be” part of the requirements of the law of salvage. The
wording simply conﬁrms the view of the authors that a doubtful priority is accorded to such
issues as a matter of law.
217. The court referred to the fuller formulation of these requirements contained in Martha’s
Vineyard, supra note 72.
218. Supra note 74.
219. Findings of Fact numbered 1, 3, 10, 11, 13, and 14.
220. International Aircraft Recovery LLC v. Unidentiﬁed, Wrecked and Abandoned Aircraft etc., 54 F. Supp.
2d 1172 (1999).
221. Supra note 42.
222. R. D. Mathewson, Archaeological Treasure: The Search for “Neustra Señora de Atocha” 112 (Seafar-
ers Heritage Library, Woodstock, Vt. 1983).
223. 1995 A.M.C. 1985, 2008.
224. Encyclopaedia of Underwater and Maritime Archaeology 93– 94 (J. P. Delgado ed., British Museum,
London 1997).
225. G. Kinder, Ship of Gold in the Deep Blue Sea (Little, Brown, London 1998).
226. D. C. Frederick, Book review, 30 Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce 355 (1999).
227. Supra note 155.
228. 883 F. Supp. 1343, 1362.
229. Supra note 75.
230. 924 F. Supp. at  723.
231. K. J. Fewster and J. R. Valliant, Titanic: Delving Beneath the Surface, Museum News 29 (May–
June 1997). 
232. D. J. Bederman, The UNESCO Draft Convention on Underwater Cultural Heritage: A
Critique and Counter-Proposal, 30 Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce 331, 345 (1999).
233. For example, D. Pokotylo and N. Guppy, Public Opinion and Archaeological Heritage:
Views from Outside the Profession, 64 American Antiquity 400 (1999).
234. 924 F. Supp. at 723.
235. Reproduced in 3  308 (1994).
236. Professional Shipwreck Explorers Association, Inc. ProSEA is described as a non-proﬁt
organisation which represents members throughout the world active in legitimate and ethical

314  -  .

shipwreck exploration. It was formed to provide self-regulation to those companies and indi-
viduals who seek to preserve and protect the world’s shipwreck resources. Among its members
are some of the largest deep ocean exploration companies, including Oceaneering, Comex,
Odyssey Marine Exploration, and Nauticus.
237. G. Stemm, Differentiation of Shipwreck Artifacts as a Cultural Resource Management
Tool, paper delivered at the Ocean Intervention 2000 Conference, Houston, Texas (25– 27
Jan. 2000). 
238. Personal communication, Graeme Henderson, 3 April 2000.
239. Appointments are made by Trinity House, a government agency, and such advisers are re-
ferred to as “the Elder Brethren.”


