Treasure  Trove and  Title
to  Discovered  Antiquities
Norman  E.  Palmer*

1  Introduction

Few  doctrines  of  English  law  have  attracted  greater  disquiet  than
that  of  treasure  trove.  It  is an  archaic concept,  rife  with  anomalies
and  unanswerable  questions. It  was evolved  for  a different  purpose
from  that  which  it  now  serves,  and  it  serves  its  present  purpose
dismally.  And  yet it is the  primary  modern  vehicle by which terres-
trial antiquarian  finds  are compulsorily  acquired  by  the  nation.1

Modern  critics  have  been  astute  to  recount  its  shortcomings. In
1988,  Finlay  CJ  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Ireland  called  it  '...an
outmoded  remnant.'2  In  1982  Lord  Abinger  CBE,  moving  the
second  reading  of  his  Antiquities  Bill  in  the  House  of  Lords,  de-
scribed  it  as  an  instrument  of  'almost  pitiable  inadequacy  for  ar-
chaeological  preservation',  comparing  it unfavourably  to  legal pro-
vision elsewhere.3 In  the  same year,  Lord  Denning  MR  emphasised
the  desirability  of  reforming  the  law  along  the  lines  of  an  earlier
version  of  Lord  Abinger's  Bill,  presented  in  1979.4  In  1984  the
Law  Society,  and  in  1986  the  Surrey  Archaeological  Society,  felt
sufficiently  concerned  to  request  the  Law  Commission  to  examine
the  law with  a  view  to  reform.5  In  response,  the  Law  Commission
listed no fewer  than eight grounds on which the doctrine gave cause
for  concern.6  These  included  the  rule  that  to  qualify  as  treasure
trove  an  object  must  consist  substantially  of  gold  or  silver,  the
method by which objects are identified  as treasure trove, the machin-
ery  by  which  finders  of  treasure  trove  are  rewarded,  the  fact  that
rewards  are  paid  only  to  finders  and  the  exclusion  of  objects  lost
or  abandoned  from  the  realm  of treasure  trove.7

The reason  for  these deficiencies  is readily discoverable. Treasure
trove represents an awkward  adaptation  of old doctrine for  modern
objectives.  The  point  was  forcefully  made  by  the  editor  of  the
Juridical  Review in 1903:

'The  truth  is that  the  object  which  the  law  of  treasure  trove is
now invoked to aid is diametrically opposed to the object which

*  Barrister, Rowe and Maw Professor of Commercial Law, University College

London.

275

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

it was originally  devised  to subserve. Its original  intention  was
to  secure to  the Crown a not  inconsiderable  source of income;
it  is now  invoked,  on the contrary, to  ensure the  preservation
of objects  of antiquarian  value for  the public  benefit'.8

The  idiosyncrasies  of treasure  trove would  be less disquieting were
the  doctrine  not  entrusted  with  so  important  a  function.  But  the
growth  of  the  metal  detector  industry,  and  the  corresponding  rise
in  both  amateur  and  commercial  prospecting,  have  caused  a  vast
proliferation  of finds.9 They have precipitated tensions among land-
owners, finders, archaeologists, museums and government, and have
mercilessly exposed the defects of the present system. Modern finds
often  command  substantial  values:  the  Middleham  Jewel,10  the
Monkton  Deverill  tore,11 the  Snettisham  'F'  hoard. 12  And  yet  the
allocation  of  title  to such finds still depends on  an uneasy  alliance
between  a  limb  of  the Royal  Prerogative (possibly  dating  from  the
time  of  Edward  the  Confessor  (1043 — 1066) and  the  civil  law  of
finders  (a  body  of  law  of itself  described  as  unsatisfactory  by  the
Law  Reform  Committee in  1971,13  a  criticism  endorsed  by Auld  J
in R  v Hancock).™ Only in Ireland  can the common  law be said  to
be less satisfactory,  and  that  is through a constitutional  accident.15
The  subject  cries aloud  for  reform.

2  The  International  Dimension  of Treasure  Trove

Claims

The characterisation  of objects as treasure trove has more than local
significance.  It  can  have  a  crucial  impact  on  the  effectiveness  of
cross-border  transactions. Where, for  example, buried  artefacts  are
excavated  and  sold outside England,  their identity as treasure trove
can materially affect both the acquirer's title and the original owner's
ability  to  retrieve  them.  Of  course,  where  the  original  place  of
finding is unknown or the provenance of the find has been destroyed
during  excavation,  it may be difficult  in any event to establish  that
an  object  is  treasure  trove.  As  we  shall  see16  the  requirement  of
animus recuperandi (an  ingredient  in  the characterisation  of  goods
as  treasure  trove)  can  be vastly  harder  to establish  where  a  hoard
has  been  removed  unscientifically  from  its  resting  place  and  the
circumstances  of  its discovery  are  obliterated.  Even  so, the  advan-
tage  which  treasure  trove possesses  over  the  ordinary  title  to  dis-
covered  objects  asserted  by landowners (or  finders)  is that  the title
which it confers  is independent of any specific locus. Treasure trove
is  Crown  property  irrespective  of  the  place  in which  it  is  found.17
In  the  absence,  therefore,  of  some  overseas  disposition  which  is
capable  of  extinguishing  pre-existing  title  under  the  law  of  the
country  where  the  goods  are  situated  at  the  time,18  the  Crown's
retrieval  of  its  property  may  be  a  relatively  simple matter.  Where,

276

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure  Trove

on  the  other  hand,  discovered  antiquities  are  demonstrably  not
treasure  trove  (as  where  they  are  made  of  bronze  rather  than  of
gold  or  silver)  a  land-owner  who  seeks  to  recover  them  from  an
overseas  buyer  faces  the  immediate  difficulty  of  proving  that  they
came  from  his  land.  Upon  such  proof  his  assertion  of  a  prior
possessory  title depends.19 No modern case better demonstrates  the
formidable challenges confronting  a land-owner in this position than
that of the Roman bronzes allegedly abstracted from land in  Suffolk
owned and  farmed  by Mr John  Browning.20

3  Proprietary  Effect  of  Characterisation  as  Treasure

Trove

Treasure  trove  belongs  to  the  Crown.21  Objects  which  satisfy  the
legal  definition  of  treasure  trove  are  the property  of  the  Crown  or
its  franchisee.22  To  remove  treasure  trove  with  the  intention  of
permanently  depriving  the  Crown  or  its franchisee  of  it  constitutes
the  crime  of  theft  and  presumably  (although  there  is no  authority
on the point) the tort of conversion.23 It seems that conversion may
also be committed  by a bona fide third party who acquires  treasure
trove  from  the  finder  or  from  an  intermediate  party,  unless  the
circumstances  of  the  acquisition  are an  exception  to  the rule  nemo
dat  quod  non  habet.24  In  an  action  for  conversion  the  Crown  is
likely  to  be  awarded  an  order  for  the  specific  restitution  of  the
object  under  the  Torts  (Interference  with  Goods)  Act  1977 ss.3 or
4, rather  than  damages. A party  who is liable in conversion  in  this
manner can proceed  against his immediate vendor  for  the return of
the  price  under  s,12(l)  Sale  of  Goods  Act  1979,  or  for  damages
under  S.12(2).25

4  Ingredients  of  Treasure  Trove

Three cardinal elements are stressed by ancient and modern  author-
ity.  First,  the  object  must  be  of  gold  or  silver.  Second,  it  must
have  been  concealed  by  someone  who  intended  to  return  for  it
subsequently.  Third,  the  original  owner  (or  his  successors  in  title)
must  be unknown.26

Thus, Coke says that:

'when  any  gold  or  silver,  in  coin,  plate  or  bullion,  hath  been
of  ancient  time  hidden,  wheresoever  it  be  found,  whereof  no
person can  prove any property,  it doth  belong  to the King, or
to some lord or other by the King's grant, or prescription. The
reason whereof it belongeth to the King, is a rule of the common
law,  That  such  goods  whereof  no  man  can  claim  property,
belong  to the  King...'27

277

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

Similarly,  according  to  Chitty:

'Treasure  trove,  is  where  any  gold  or  silver  in  coin,  plate,  or
bullion  is found  concealed  in a  house, or in the earth, or  other
private place, the owner  thereof  being unknown, in which case
the  treasure  belongs  to  the  King  or  his  grantee,  having  the
franchise  of  treasure  trove;  but  if  he  that  laid  it  be  known  or
afterwards  discovered,  the  owner  and  not  the  King  is entitled
to  it;  this prerogative  right  only  applying  in the  absence  of an
owner  to  claim  the  property.  If  the  owner,  instead  of  hiding
the  treasure,  casually  lost  it,  or  purposely  parted  with  it,  in
such  a  manner  that  it  is  evident  he  intended  to  abandon  the
property  altogether,  and  did  not  purpose  to  resume  it  on
another  occasion,  as  if  he  threw  it  on  the  ground,  or  other
public  place,  or  in  the  sea,  the  first  finder  is  entitled  to  the
property,  as  against  every  one  but  the  owner,  and  the  King's
prerogative  does  not  in  this  respect  obtain.  So  that  it  is  the
hiding, and  not  the abandonment,  of the property  that entitles
the King  to  it.'28

The first and  second  requirements exclude from  national  ownership
a  wide  spectrum  of  antiquities.  They  confer  almost  unfettered
powers of disposal  on the land-owner  or finder,  as the case may be.

4.1  Gold  and  Silver
The  'gold  and  silver'  rule  was  affirmed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
AG of the Duchy of Lancaster  v G E  Overton (Farms)  Ltd.29 There,
a  hoard  of  almost  8,000  antoniniani  (Roman  coins  of  the  third
century  AD)  were  held  not  to  qualify  as  treasure  trove  because
they  did  not  have  a  'substantial'  silver  content.  The  find  therefore
belonged  not  to  the Crown  in  right  of  the Duchy  of  Lancaster  but
to  the  land-owners.  (The  finder,  a  trespasser,  was  convicted  of
theft).30  Lord  Denning  MR  observed31  that  to  satisfy  this  require-
ment  a  silver  content  of  50%  or  more  was  needed;  the  current
content  ranged  from  below  1%  to  a  maximum  of around  18%.

The  disadvantages  of  the  rule  are  obvious.  Treasure  trove  does
not include base metal objects,32 objects of marginal or  subordinate
precious  metal  content,  precious  stones,  statuary,  glass,  ceramics,
amber,  bone,  ivory,  wood,  shell  or  stone  artifacts,  textiles,  or
human33  or  animal34  remains.35  Such  objects  fall  to  be  allocated
according  to  the  ordinary  civil  law  of  finders,  set  out  later  in  this
paper.  English  law  compares  unfavourably  with  that  of  Scotland,
where  other  metallic  objects  (for  example,  a  bronze  axe  head)  are
treasure  trove.36

Not the least unsatisfactory  aspect of the rule is the way in which
it  can  lead  to  a  division  of  finds.  A  compound  hoard  containing
objects  of  differential  gold  or  silver  constituency  may  fall  to  be

278

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

distributed  among  several  claimants.  The  Crown  will  receive  those
which  are  substantially  gold  or  silver,  while objects  of marginal  or
no precious  metal content  will go to  the  land-owner  or finder. The
result is to diminish the historical value of the collection as a whole.37
A  vivid  example  of  this  divided  dominion  is  the  Snettisham  'F'
hoard,  found  by  Mr  Cecil  Hodder  while  prospecting  with  a  metal
detector  in a field at  the Ken  Hill  Estate  at  Snettisham  in  Norfolk.
The point  is well made by  Longworth:38

What  then  of  Snettisham?  Here  the  torques,  bracelets  and
ingots analysed by the British  Museum's Department  of Scien-
tific research ranged across a spectrum of values from  less than
1% to 97% gold, and from  2% to 98% silver. The jury on this
occasion  took  the  perfectly  defensible  view  that  any  object
which (collectively) contained  50% of gold and/or silver placed
the  object  as  potential  treasure  trove.  Items  with  less  were
deemed to be excluded. The effect  of this decision was to divide
the  scrap  metal  hoard  (Hoard  F)  for  example  roughly  2:1
treasure  trove  to  non-treasure  trove  items.  It  seems  highly
doubtful,  however,  that  the  Iron  Age metal  smith  would  have
seen such a distinction as meaningful.  To them, all these metals
would  have represented  malleable  wealth.

For  the archaeologist  the type of arbitrary  division  imposed
by  the  treasure  trove  system  is  not  simply  unhelpful  but  can
present  a  very  real  threat.  The  value  of  any. find is  greatly
enhanced  if  all the  evidence  can  be  assembled  and  preserved
together  for  study  and  future  re-analysis.  The  non-treasure
trove  items,  however,  will  almost  always  belong  to  the  land-
owner and  there is no compulsion  to  present  or even  sell such
items to  the  institution  which  has  acquired  the  treasure  trove.
We are fortunate,  that in the vast majority  of cases landowners
have  proved  public  spirited  and  have  allowed  the  finds  to  be
re-united  but the outcome at present depends entirely on good-
will.

A helpful  reform  would  be to seek a definition  of 'gold'  and
'silver'  which could  be simply  and  rigorously  applied. To have
maximum benefit this might seek to include all objects to which
gold  or  silver  had  been  deliberately  added  but  would  need  to
exclude small values which could  occur naturally. A content of
5%  or  more  of  either  gold  or  silver  might  serve  as  a  general
definition,  though  coinage  might  need  its  own  lower  limit  of
0.5%.39

4.2.  Concealment  with the  Intention  of  Retrieval
Metallic constituency  can  at  least  be  readily  established.  The  same
cannot be said of the second requirement, concealment  animo recu-
perandi.  And  yet  'property  is only  capable  of  being  treasure  trove

279

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

if  its  last  owner  left  it,  intending  to  recover  it'.40  The  evidential
difficulties  are especially pronounced  where the object  was covertly
removed  some  time before  the treasure  trove inquest,  impairing its
provenance.  In  R  v Hancock41 (a  prosecution  for  theft  of  treasure
trove)  the  Crown  failed  to  establish  on  the  criminal  standard  of
proof that  Celtic silver coins taken from  a site at Wanborough were
treasure  trove;  the removal  was clandestine, and  evidence as to  the
position  of  the  coins  at  the  time  of  their  discovery  was  deficient.
But  the  problem  exists  even  where  the  circumstances  of  the  find
are  contemporaneously  recorded.  In  AG  v  Trustees of  the British
Museum*1 Farwell J dismissed  as fanciful  a  theory  that  Celtic arti-
facts  discovered  by  ploughmen  in  a  field  adjoining  Lough  Foyle
were  originally  cast  into  the  sea  as  votive  offerings  to  an  Irish  sea
god  and  restored  to  dry  land  by  natural  forces  when  the  water
retreated.  In  his view, the fact  that  they were found  close  together
some  eighteen  inches  below  the  land  surface,  that  certain  chains
were concealed  inside a hollow collar,  and  that  some but  not all of
the  objects  were mutilated  showed  a deliberate  deposit  and  a clear
animus recuperandi. This conclusion was fortified  by evidence as to
the  civil  condition  of  Ireland  at  the  material  time.  Farwell  J  ex-
pressed  the matter in terms of a presumption: the Crown  'must first
establish  a  prima  facie  case,  but  when  they  have  done  so  the
defendants must defeat  that title by producing a better title'.43 Little
(if  any)  reliance  has  been  placed  on  such  a  presumption  in  later
authority,  and  in  Hancock**  Auld  J  held  that  'Whatever  presump-
tions  may  be  available  in  civil  disputes  as  to  treasure  trove...or
as  to  the  Crown's  entitlement  to  it...,  do  not  apply  to  criminal
proceedings'.  At  first  instance  in  Overton*5  Dillon  J  said  that  (had
he  been  wrong  on  the question  of metallic content)  he would  have
held  that  the  coins  were  concealed  animo  recuperandi.  Dillon  J
seems to have relied  on  the existence of a containing urn,  the  rural
location  of  the find and  the  fact  that  the  coins  were  buried  below
the level of an  ordinary  ploughshare:  'it is difficult  to suppose  that
anyone  would  have placed  such  a large number  of coins  in  an  urn
in  what  seems  to  be a  rural  locality  rather  than  a  town  if  he were
not  hiding  them'.46 No  reference  to  these  factors  was made  by  the
Court  of Appeal,47 which confined  itself to the metal content of the
hoard.  As  criteria  for  the  national  acquisition  of  antiquities  they
clearly leave much to be desired.48

The  requirement  of  animus  recuperandi  (like  that  of  gold  or
silver) removes a vast range of antiquarian finds from  the realm of
treasure trove. The rule excludes burial offerings  such as the Sutton
Hoo  treasure,  and  articles  deliberately  abandoned  or  inadvertently
lost by their owner.49 A powerful  example in the last category is the
Middleham Jewel, evidently mislaid by its fourteenth-century  owner
alongside a bridle path  near  Middleham  Castle, and  thus  incapable
of  constituting  treasure  trove.50  In  that  case, the Jewel  became  the
property of the finders. It was sold at auction for almost £1.4 million

280

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

and  was  only  at  the  last  moment  saved  from  export,  having  since
been revalued  at £2.5 million.

Finally, the animus recuperandi  rule probably also excludes  from
the category of treasure trove objects deposited or dispersed by way
of  sacrifice,  and  votive  objects  given  to  propitiate  deities.51  Time
capsules  (collections  of objects  buried  in  order  to  give a  picture  of
contemporary  life)  present  different  problems,  but  again  the  pros-
pect of their constituting  treasure  trove seems remote.52

5  Procedure  in  Cases  of  Suspected  Treasure  Trove

The tribunal  of first instance is the coroner  for  the district in which
the  object  was found.  His obligations  as  regards  the holding  of  an
inquest are set out in s.30, Coroners Act 1988. The coroner's  officer
(usually  a  police  officer)  is  empowered  to  take  evidence  on  oath.
Applications  to  review a verdict  of  treasure  trove are  rare, but  one
such  application  is currently  being  pursued  on  the  question  of  the
identity  of the finder.53

A finder who suspects that an object may be treasure trove should
deliver  it  to  the  appropriate  coroner,  either  directly  or  by  way  of
delivery  to  the  police  or  the  British  Museum,  as  soon  as  possible
after  its  discovery.  There  is  no  statute  positively  compelling  such
delivery, but failure  to report  a find may result in a prosecution  for
theft  or (presumably) an action  for  conversion  if the find turns out
to be treasure trove. Moreover, in Parker v British Airways Board54
Donaldson  LJ  remarked  obiter  that  every  finder  owes  a  common
law  duty  to  take  reasonable  steps  to  seek  out  the  owner  and  to
reunite him with his chattel.55

As soon as a find which may constitute treasure trove is reported
to  him,  the  coroner  must  summon  a jury  and  hold  an  inquest  to
determine  the  character  of  the  object  as  treasure  trove  and  the
identity  of  the  finder.  There  is  no  legal  obligation  to  consult  the
British  Museum  at  this  stage  and  some  coroners  do  not.  Such
consultation  is considered  helpful,  however,  because  it  enables  the
Museum  to  give an  expert  opinion  as  to  the character  and  signifi-
cance  of  the find. That  opinion  may  include  a  research  laboratory
analysis of the gold or silver content and a conclusion as to whether,
on  the  available  evidence,  the  object  was  lost,  abandoned  or  de-
posited  animo  recuperandi.  The  Museum  may also  be able to pro-
vide  first  aid  for  objects  in  a  parlous  condition.  A member  of  the
Museum staff  may attend  the inquest and speak to its evidence, but
only at the invitation  of the coroner. The British Museum generally
lacks the resources to mount an investigation  of the site but will try
to ensure that,  through  the coroner,  the local museum is persuaded
to do so.

If  the  object  is  found  to  be  treasure  trove,  it  will  be  delivered
either to the British  Museum or to the National  Museum  of Wales,

281

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman E. Palmer

depending  on  the  location  of  the  find.  The  Museum  will  make  a
valuation and submit that valuation to the Treasure Trove Reviewing
Committee.56 This is an  independent  body, appointed  by the Treas-
ury  in  1977  with  the  function  of  deciding  whether  the  Museum's
valuation is correct. If confirmed,  the Museum's valuation will form
the basis of any reward  paid to the finder.  The reward is paid either
by  the  British  Museum,  or  by  any  other  museum  which  wishes  to
acquire  the  object,  from  its  existing  funds.57  It  is understood  that
neither  in  this  respect,  nor  in  relation  to  its  consultative  services,
does  the  Museum  receive  specific  additional  funding  for  cases  of
treasure  trove.58

Special  care  is  enjoined  upon  coroners  when  the  inquest  has
declared  the  find  not  to  be  treasure  trove.  As  the  current  Home
Office  Circular59  points  out,  the  true  proprietor  may  be  someone
other  than  the  finder;  therefore,  'as  it  is  not  within  the  coroner's
power  to  determine  ownership,  it  may  be  necessary  to  retain [the
object]  until  the disputed  ownership is  resolved.'

A coroner's  inquest is not a necessary preliminary to a conviction
for  theft  of  treasure  trove.60  The  reason,  according  to  Auld  J in  R
v  Hancock,  is  that  theft  can  be  committed  whenever  goods  are  in
the  actual  or  constructive  possession  of  the  owner  at  the  time  of
the  appropriation.  Moreover,  any  other  rule  would  be  absurd  be-
cause the verdict of a coroner's jury on a question  of treasure trove
does  not  bind  any  other  court  in  which  the  question  might  arise.
The  point  is  not  settled,  but  it  seems  that  an  analogous  principle
should  apply  if  the  finder  were  sued  by  the  Crown  in  conversion.
Provided that the claimant can establish possession or the immediate
right  to  possess  at  the  time  of  the  alleged  conversion,  the  claim
should succeed. An immediate right of possession should be capable
of substantiation  by showing, on a balance of probabilities, that the
object  was  treasure  trove,  irrespective  of an  inquest verdict  to  that
effect.

6  Rewards

If  the  British  Museum  or  any  other  museum  wishes  to  retain  the
object,  that  institution  will pay  a  reward fixed in  accordance  with
the foregoing  procedure. The  reward  is paid  only to  the finder  and
not  to  the  land-owner  or  occupier.61  The  policy  of  this  rule  is  to
encourage  the prompt  and  proper disclosure of finds:62 if the finder
cannot expect  to receive a reward representing the full market value
of  the  find,  he  may  be  tempted  to  dispose  of  it  more  profitably
elsewhere.  The  finder  is clearly  the  preferable  recipient  under  this
policy  because  he alone has the ability  to conceal  the find.63

Rewards  are  ex  gratia;  the  finder  has  no  legal  entitlement  to  a
reward.  He  also has  no  legal  right  to the return  of a  treasure  trove

282

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

object which no museum wishes to retain, although in practice such
finds are returned  to  the finder.64

If  the coroner  decides  that  more  than  one person  was concerned
in the find, the reward  may be divided.65 But difficulty  can arise in
cases of collective or syndicated finding. In a recent case at Monkton
Deverill,  two men with  metal  detectors  started  an  excavation.  One
of  them  found  a  bronze  palstave  before  lunch.  The  other  man
returned  after  lunch  and  continued  the  excavation,  finding  a  gold
tore. The coroner's inquest found  that the object was treasure trove
and  that  both  men  were  finders.  The  normal  result  would  be  a
division  of  the  reward  between  them.  Proceedings  are  currently
afoot  to review the verdict  on  this  point.66

A reduced  reward  may be paid  (or no reward  at all) if the  finder
has acted improperly. Decisions on this point  are taken, not  by the
British  Museum  or  the  Treasure  Trove  Reviewing  Committee,  but
by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury. Examples are set out below.
Restricting  the  reward  to  the  finder  excludes  other  interested
parties  who  may  feel  entitled  to  share  in  the  proceeds  of  the  find.
Examples are the owner of the land on which the find occurred; the
landlord,  where  the  land  is  tenanted;  anyone  else  with  a  past  or
present  interest  in  the  land;  or  the  finder's  employer.  The  sense of
injustice may be particularly  marked  where the finder was trespass-
ing at  the  time  and  the land-owner  or  other  party  would  probably
have found  the object  for  himself  in due course. A few examples of
finds in East  Anglia  may put  this problem  in perspective.

In  1980  six  silver  Anglo-Saxon  brooches,  unearthed  in  Pentney
churchyard by the sexton, Mr William King, were held at a coroner's
inquest  to  be  treasure  trove.67  Mr  King was  declared  entitled  to  a
reward  based  on  the commercial  value  of  the brooches  and  finally
quantified  at  £135,000. At  the  time of  the discovery,  Mr  King was
working in  the course of his employment  (viz., digging a grave) on
land  belonging  to  the  church.  If  the  brooches  had  been  made  of
any substance other than  gold or silver it is highly unlikely that  Mr
King would have had any right to them. They would not have been
treasure  trove,  the  Crown  would  have  had  no  claim,  and  there
would have been no reward. The right of possession in the brooches
would  have  fallen  to  be  decided  according  to  the  general  civil law
of finders, by which the rights of an employer are generally superior
to  those  of  an  employee  who  finds  goods  in  the  course  of  his
employment,68 and the rights of the land-owner  (at least in the case
of goods buried  beneath  the surface) are generally superior  to those
of  a  finder,  whether  that  finder  is  a  trespasser  or  not.69  Mr  King
was obviously  not  a  trespasser;  he behaved  with  complete  honesty
throughout  and  came  to  an  amicable  settlement  on  the  division  of
the  reward  with  the  rector  of  Pentney,  Rev.  Wilson.  Nevertheless,
it seems strange that  his entitlement  to a reward  of a £135,000 (and
the  correlative  denial  of  any  rights  to  the  church)  should  have
depended  upon  the  relative  accident  of  whether  the  goods  were

283

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

treasure  trove.  To  some,  the  position  may  appear  unsatisfactory
because  the  landowner  or  employer  may  have  found  the  goods
himself  had  the  finder  not  deprived  him  of  the  opportunity.  When
vast  rewards  depend  upon  the obscurities  of  treasure  trove and  the
almost  negligible  evidence  on  which  inquest  verdicts  must  be
reached,  the  case for  reform  is compelling.

A  more  extreme  and  complicated  case  was  reported  to  have
occurred  in  1980 at  Stonham Aspal.70 A dilapidated  cottage, whose
owner  had  died,  was sold  to a farmer  at auction.  Before  the  farmer
acquired  possession  two passers-by,  Mr and  Mrs Trawford,  noticed
some silver coins in the garden and  took  them away. They returned
later  with  a  metal  detector  and  discovered  a  substantial  hoard  of
silver money, subsequently valued at over £4,000. This had obviously
been concealed  at some time in the thatched roof, which had  begun
to decay. The coins were held to be treasure trove and the Trawfords
became  entitled  to  the  reward.  Again,  this  might  appear  an  unjust
result  because the finders  were trespassers  and  the purchaser  of the
cottage  would  almost  certainly  have  found  the coins when  he took
possession.  He  was  last  reported  to  be  taking  legal  advice,  having
rejected  the  finders'  offer  of  a  portion  of  the  reward.  But  there  is
another  party  with  a  legitimate  grievance,  and  that  is the  executor
of  the former  owner.  It could  be said  that  his estate should  also be
entitled  to consideration,  on the ground  that there was no intention
to  transfer  property  in the coins  to  the  purchaser.

Perhaps ironically, it seems that if the coins had not been treasure
trove  and  had  had  to  be  allocated  according  to  the  general  law of
finders,  the  farmer  may  have  fared  no  better.  Moffat  v  Kazanalx
suggests that ownership of the coins would probably not have passed
from  the  deceased  former  owner's  estate  to  the  farmer  under  s.62
of the Law of Property Act, 1925. This is particularly so if,  as seems
probable, the former  owner himself did not have ownership of them.
The  lack  of  ownership  might  not  have  been  fatal  to  any  claim  to
the  goods  by  the  farmer  if  he could  show  that  he  had  possession.
If so, that  possession  could  prevail against a later dispossessor,  and
he would  be entitled  to recover or retain  the goods. But in this case
the  farmer  had  not  yet  occupied  the cottage  and  his claim  to be in
possession  of  the  .coins  would  be  a  highly  precarious  one.  The
position  would  be akin  to  that  in Hannah v Peel11, where a  soldier
billeted  in a  house which  had  been  requisitioned  by the War  Office
found  a  brooch  in  a  crack  in  a  wall  of  the  house.  He  was  held
entitled  to  keep  it  (the  true  owner  being  unknown)  because  the
house-owner  had  never  occupied  the  house  before  it  was  requisi-
tioned  and  had  therefore  never  acquired  possession  of  the  brooch.
There  is,  of  course,  a  difference  between  Hannah v  Peel and  the
facts  of  the  discovery  at  Stonham  Aspal,  in  that  the  Trawfords
(unlike  the  soldier)  were  trespassers. According  to  Parker111,  an  act
of trespass on  the part of a finder disentitles him to the find against
the owner of the land on which it was found, although it is uncertain

284

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

whether  this denial  applies as against  a land  owner who  was never
in  possession  of  the  land.  The  dilemma,  and  the  absence  of  clear
legal rules, illustrate the inadequacy of the law of finders  in general
as well as that  of  treasure  trove in  particular.73a

Injustice  can  also  occur  to  the  non-finder  when  no  reward  is
granted.  The  failure  to  grant  a  reward  will generally  be  motivated
by one of two reasons.74 First, the finder may have behaved dishon-
estly  or  improperly.  He  may  have  concealed  the  find,  or  delayed
reporting  it for  a substantial  period,  or even dissipated  it (cases are
rare:  some five reported  occasions  from  1931 to  1981). We have a
modern  example of the reduction of a reward  for  misconduct  in the
case  of  Thetford  hoard.  There  Mr  Arthur  Brooks,  using  a  metal
detector, discovered an important collection of Roman silver spoons
and  gold jewellery  which  had  been  hidden  at  about  the  time when
the  Romans  vacated  Britain.  The  find  occurred  on  land  belonging
to  Breckland  District  Council.  Neither  the  Council,  nor  the  police
or  the  British  Museum,  became aware  of  the find until  six  months
had  elapsed  and  Mr  Brooks declared  it.  During  that  time  building
work  had  taken  place  on  the  site,  destroying  the  opportunity  of
further  excavation.  The  find  was  held  to  be  treasure  trove  and
valued  at  c.  £262,000,  but  the  Treasury  granted  a  reduced  reward
of £87,180. In  a press release75 the Treasury  stated  that  the  normal
presumption in such a case is that no reward shall be paid, but  that
in this case Mr  Brooks was seriously ill and  subsequently  died  (the
reward  was paid  to  his personal  representatives).  The  reduction  in
this  case  was  no  doubt  justifiable  as  an  example  to  other  finders;
but  it  may  be  questioned  whether  the  Crown  should  have  got  the
hoard  for  a  third  of  its  value  when  there  was  another  party  (the
Council) with some moral claim to a share. In the Thetford  case, it
is believed  that  Mrs Brooks had  signed  a contract with  the Council
whereby  the  reward  was  to  be  divided  equally  between  them.  The
reduction  of  the  reward,  through  circumstances  which  were  in  no
degree the fault  of the Council, diminished its legitimate expectation
in the proceeds from  over £130,000 to less than £44,000. This might
appear  unfair  in  the  case  of  a  private  landowner,  and  is  arguably
no more desirable when  the proprietor  is a public  authority.

Other  examples  of  potential  injustice  are  not  hard  to  imagine.
Suppose,  for  example,  that  the  coins  in  the  Overton16  case  had
contained  sufficient  silver to qualify  as treasure  trove. The finder  in
that  case  was  later  convicted  of  theft.  It  is unlikely  that  he  would
have  received  a  reward  and  probably  undesirable  that  he  should
have done so. But it seems harsh  that the landowner  should  receive
nothing in these circumstances.77

No occasion  to grant a reward will arise where neither the British
Museum  nor  any  other  museum  to  which  it  is  offered  wishes  to
retain  the object.  In this event, assuming that  the objects  have been
declared  treasure  trove,  they  will  be  returned  to  the  finder.78  If  he
prefers,  the  British  Museum  will  sell  them  for  him  at  the  best

285

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman E. Palmer

obtainable  price. A case in which objects were returned  occurred in
Somerset in January  1981, where the finders of gold sovereigns were
told  by  the coroner,  immediately after  the verdict  of treasure trove,
that  the  British  Museum  did  not  require  them  and  that  they could
therefore  be  retained.79  Since  treasure  trove  is  the property  of  the
Crown,  it  presumably  follows  that  when  the  Crown  declares  its
willingness  to  renounce  its  rights  in  treasure  trove  to  a  finder,
ownership  in  the  object  is thereby  conferred  on  the finder. Indeed,
the  most  recent  Home  Office  circular  on  the  subject80  states  that
the  finder  then  has  'full  liberty  to  do  as  he  likes'  with  the  object.
Such  a  conclusion  would  of  course  conform  with  the  policy  of
rewarding  the finder; he is more likely to behave honestly  if he can
expect  to  receive  not  only  whatever  reward  is  paid  but  unencum-
bered  title  to  the  object  itself  when  no  reward  is  paid.  Again,
however,  the result is to exclude third  parties from  participation  in
the fruits  of the discovery, even where the finder was trespassing at
the time of the find and the third party would have had an unanswer-
able  civil claim  against  him had  the object  not  been treasure trove.
There have, in the past, been criticisms of the time which it takes
to  pay  rewards.  An  article  in  the  tabloid  press  in  1981  instanced
two cases where rewards had not been paid  to the finders two years
after  the  discovery,  one  of  them  being  the  case  of  Mr  King  the
sexton.81  At  that  time,  new  treasure  trove  finds  were appearing  at
the  rate  of  two  per  month;  the  current  rate  may  be  even  higher.
Special  consideration  was given  to  this problem  by  a  recent  inter-
departmental  committee, and  recommendations  were made.

It  is  open  to  the finder  to make a special contract  with  the land-
owner  (or  the  finder's  employer)  concerning  the  division  of  any
reward  or  other  proceeds  of  the  find.  This  could  extend  to  some
form  of  co-ownership  of  treasure  trove  objects  which  the  British
Museum  does  not  propose  to  retain.  A  clause  dealing  with  the
division  of  proceeds  appears  in  a  form  of  contract  compiled  and
distributed  by  Treasure Hunting magazine. It provides for an agreed
sharing  of the proceeds of any find and  is designed  to be concluded
prior to the commencement of any search on the proprietor's land.82
Such  contracts  seem  unexceptionable83  and  there  is  no  reason  in
principle  why  they  should  not  be  legally  effective.84  The  Treasury
will not, however, accede to invitations to assist in enforcing them.85
Greater  difficulty  surrounds those contracts which are concluded
after  the  find  has  occurred  and  after  the  finder's  entitlement  to  a
reward  (or  to  the  return  of  the  goods)  has  become  apparent.  An
informal  arrangement  to  this  effect  occurred  in  the  Pentney  case,
where  Mr  King  eventually  agreed  to  give  the  church  £24,000.  A
more  formal  example  occurred  in  the  case  of  the  Thetford  hoard,
where  Mrs  Brooks  signed  a  contract  awarding  half  of  her  reward
to  Breckland  Council.  Are  such  retrospective  agreements  binding
on  the  finder?  The principal  difficulty  concerns  the  requirement  of
consideration.  The landowner  has  no  right  to  the  reward,  so what

286

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

is he giving up in return  for  the finder's promise to give part  of the
reward  to  him?  Without  some  contribution  to  the  bargain  he  is
unable  to  enforce  it,  unless,  of  course,  the  contract  is under  seal.
There  is  a  remote  possibility  that  if  the  landowner  honestly  and
reasonably believes he has a right to part of the reward, his surrender
of  that  notional  right  will constitute  consideration  and  enable  him
to enforce  the contract.86 But nowadays a belief of that kind would
be  hard  to  substantiate.  A  stronger  argument  may  be  that  the
landowner  agrees to  surrender  his right (if any) to sue the finder in
trespass in return for  a share of the reward. This form  of considera-
tion might suffice  even though the likely damages in trespass would
be far  below the value  of  the reward  promised.  But  it cannot  exist
where  there  has  been  no  trespass,  as  in  a  case  like  that  of  the
Pentney find.

A  second  possibility  lies  in  the  landowner's  bringing  an  action
for  trespass  itself.  But  whether  this  will enable  him  to  recover  the
value of the reward (or even a substantial part of it) seems doubtful.
Trespass is a tort  and  damages in tort  are normally  compensatory;
they are limited to the loss suffered.87  A landowner who is deprived
of treasure trove by the trespass of a finder arguably  suffers  no loss
at all in relation to the find, because the goods belong to the Crown
and  he, as landowner, would  not  be entitled  to  a reward.  If  so, his
damages  for  trespass  would  be  limited  to  whatever  damage  had
occurred  to  his land.  The  landowner  would  have to  argue  that  his
substantial  loss consisted in the deprivation  of his own  opportunity
to  find  the  goods  and  recover  the  reward  as  finder.  The  law  of
contract  has  occasionally  awarded  damages  for  a  loss  of  opportu-
nity,88 but whether the law of tort would be equally responsive to this
form of'expectation  interest' is questionable.89 Further difficulties of
this  device  are  those  of  assessing  such  damages,  and  of  showing
that the landowner's own opportunity was a realistic or serious one.
The fact is that in many cases, without the intervention of the finder,
the goods may never have been discovered  at all. Again, this device
cannot  work  where  there  has  been  no  actionable  wrong  by  the
finder.

A third possibility would be to argue that, irrespective of whether
he  knew  of  their  existence  or  would  have  found  them  himself,  the
landowner  had  possession of  the  goods  prior  to  any  possession
gained by the finder and that, under the doctrine in The Winkfield90,
a  possessor  of  goods  who  is  wrongfully  dispossessed  of  them  by
another  can  recover  their  full  value  in  an  action  for  conversion.
This method  would  seem equally  applicable  whether  the goods  are
found  by a trespasser  or  by an  employee  (such  as a  tractor  driver)
working  on  the  employer's  land.  In  the  latter  case  it  might  be
reinforced  by  the  argument  that  the  employee's  possession  is  that
of his employer  himself  and  that  any  later  removal  of  the goods is
a  conversion  against  the  employer.  But  the  value  of  this  device  is
greatly reduced by three factors: first, the evident rule that recovery

287

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman E. Palmer

by  the  owner  (as  where  the  Crown  retains  treasure  trove)  debars
any  further  recovery  by the possessor;91  secondly, the enactment of
section  8 of the Torts (Interference  with Goods) Act 1977, whereby,
a  defendant  in  proceedings  for  'wrongful  interference'  with  goods
is  entitled  to  show  that  anyone  (viz,  the  Crown)  other  than  the
plaintiff  (viz,  the  landowner)  has  a  better  right  to  the  goods;92
thirdly,  s.7  of  the  same  Act,  which  is directed  towards  preventing
double  recovery in an action for wrongful  interference  with goods.93
It  must  now  be  regarded  as  highly  improbable  that  a  court  would
award  an  aggrieved  landowner  more than  the nominal  value of his
possessory  right.94  Since  the  goods  were  not  his  and  he  stood  no
chance  of  a  reward,  his damages would probably  be minimal.

Fourthly,  the  landowner  may  simply  argue  that  to  allow  the
trespassing  finder  to  keep  the  reward  would  be  to  allow  a man  to
profit  from  his  own  wrong.95  Such  an  assertion  suggests  a  novel
and  not,  perhaps, unattractive application  of the principle of  unjust
enrichment.  But  it  seems  unlikely  that  an  argument  based  on  this
ground  alone would  succeed.

7  Protection:  Criminal  Law 96

Enough  has been said to demonstrate the ineffectiveness  of treasure
trove  as  a  means  of  allocating  title  or  of  preserving  objects  of
national  importance.  Regrettably,  the  position  under  criminal  law
is  no  more  favourable  to  the  proper  safeguarding  of  valuable  ar-
chaeological  finds.

The common law recognised an offence of concealment of treasure
trove.  This  was  abolished  by  s.32(l)(a)  of  the  Theft  Act  1968.
Dishonest appropriations of treasure trove now fall to be prosecuted
under  the  law  of  theft.  In  theory,  there  is  no  reason  why  this
assimilation  into  general  law  should  not  work  satisfactorily.  The
Crown  has  property  in  treasure  trove and  can  thus  be regarded  as
the person  to whom it  'belongs' for  purposes  of the Theft  Act 1968
s.5(l).  It  follows  that  a  person  who  removes  and  retains  treasure
trove can be guilty of dishonestly appropriating  'property belonging
to another  with the intention  of permanently  depriving the other of
it'  within  the Theft  Act  1968  s.l(l).

But  in  practice  the  criminal  law  works  much  less  satisfactorily.
The  difficulty  is  the  liminal  one  of  identifying  treasure  trove when
much  of  the  available  evidence  has  been  dispersed.  Appropriating
treasure  trove is theft,  but  what goods are treasure  trove?

In R v Hancock91 a collection of Celtic silver coins had been taken
from  a site at Wanborough. The appellant told the police that, when
he unearthed  them, the coins were scattered about over a wide area.
He conceded,  however,  that  this could  have resulted  from  repeated
ploughing  and  that  they  might  originally  have  been  left  over  a
smaller  area.  Academic  opinion  was  tentatively  divided  between  a

288

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure  Trove

deposit  animo  recuperandi  and  some  form  of  votive  offering.  The
trial judge directed  the jury that it was unnecessary for  the prosecu-
tion  to prove that  the coins were treasure trove; it sufficed  to prove
that  they were capable  of being found  to be treasure  trove,  or  that
there was a real  possibility  that  they might  be found  to be  treasure
trove.  This  was  held  to  constitute  a  material  misdirection  and  the
appeal  was  allowed.  The jury  should  have  been  directed  that  they
could  convict  only  if  they  were  sure  that  the  coins  were  treasure
trove.  Proving  that  the  coins  were  deposited  with  the  intention  to
retrieve them was an essential part of the prosecution case and  must
therefore be established according to the criminal standard of proof.
The Court of Appeal left open the question whether the prosecution
might  alternatively  have  been  framed  in  the  form  of  a  theft  from
the landowner,  who had  (even without his knowledge of the  hoard)
a possessory  title to the coins.

This  decision  puts  a  premium  on  destruction.  It  shows  that  a
defendant  has  a  powerful  interest  in  obliterating  evidence  of  the
find. The greater  the muddying of the evidential waters, the  greater
are  the  defendant's  prospects  of an  acquittal.  A similar  conclusion
must  follow  where  the  successful  concealment  of  a  find  makes  it
unavailable  to  be  brought  in  evidence,  thereby  incapacitating  the
jury  from  deciding  its metallic constituency.  Problems  of  this  kind
may follow  inevitably  from  the criminal  nature  of  the  proceedings,
but  they are hardly  conducive  to the protection  of  the  past.

A number of criminal offences  are created by the Ancient  Monu-
ments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979, but these do not  directly
affect  the  question  of  title.  Section  42(1)  renders  it  an  offence  to
use a metal  detector  in a 'protected  place' (as to which, see  s.42(2))
without  the written  consent  of  the  Secretary  of  State.  By s.42(3)  it
is  also  an  offence  to  remove  an  article  discovered  by  means  of  a
metal detector from  a protected  place, again without the consent  of
the  Secretary  of  State.  By  s.42(5)  it  is  an  offence  to  contravene
the  terms  of  any  consent  given  in  accordance  with  the  foregoing
provisions.

It is believed  that  these provisions are less than  completely  effec-
tive, for two reasons. First, the scheduling of a site is not universally
regarded  as  the most  effective  medium  of archaeological  conserva-
tion;  in cases  of development,  this  objective  is sometimes  achieved
by the alternative route of conditions attached to planning consents.
Secondly, it is not always possible to define with certainty the ambit
of  a  scheduled  monument  or  site  or  the  location  of  an  artefact
within it prior  to its removal. A recent consultation  paper  from  the
Department  of  the Environment  and  the Welsh Office  (April  1991)
proposes to expand  s.42 of the  1979 Act by making it an  offence  to
remove without consent any find from  a scheduled  site, irrespective
of whether  the find arose  through  the use of  a metal  detector.  The
same  paper  discloses  that  these  bodies  are  also  considering  non-
legislative measures to advise on the handling of casual archaeologi-

289

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

cal  finds  on  unscheduled  sites.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  such
proposals  are  acceptable,  and  how  far  they  strengthen  existing
provision.

8  Reform  Initiatives

In  1981, Lord  Abinger  CBE  introduced  in  the  House  of  Lords  an
Antiquities  Bill which sought  to  reform  the law of treasure trove in
three  principal  respects:  by  abolishing  the  requirement  that  the
object should have been hidden with view to its recovery, by extend-
ing  the  doctrine  to  objects  made  of  any  alloy  containing  gold  and
silver,  and  by extending  it  further  to  objects  lying with  or  adjacent
to a treasure trove object.98 In addition, the Secretary of State would
have  been  given  the  power  to  extend  the  doctrine  to  any  object
'contained  in any class of object  specified  by order'. The Bill sought
also  to impose  an obligation  to  report  treasure trove objects  within
forty eight hours of their being found, on pain of a fine not exceeding
£500. The  Bill received  its second  reading in the  Lords in  February
1982, but  perished  through  lack  of  time  and has  not  been revived.
Lord Abinger's proposals were well received. A note of reservation
was,  however,  sounded  by  Lord  Avon,  who  believed  that  the  Bill
would  make  'a  fundamental  change  in  the  laws of property  and  in
citizens'  rights  of  ownership'.  Lord  Avon  saw  the  Bill  as  eroding
the rights  of landowners, because it diluted  the principle that  goods
concealed  on  land  belong,  in  the  absence  of  the  true  owner,  to the
occupier. In a passage reminiscent of the policy dictating the finder's
reward,  he  added:

'If  the  Bill  is  to  secure  its  objective  of  getting  more  finds
recorded  and  available  for  skilled  investigation  and  display,
then it needs to command the support of the people affected. We
should  not  disguise the  fact  that  the  Bill proposes  a  curtailing
of  centuries-old  rights  of  ownership.  I  am  sure  it  is  wise  to
acknowledge  this fully  and  openly'.99

In September  1987, the Law Commission published  a paper entitled
Treasure  Trove; Law  Reform  Issues. The Law  Commission  consid-
ered  that  the  subject  of  treasure  trove  was  so  closely  interrelated
with  other  questions  of  private  property  and  national  acquisition
that  its  reform  could  not  usefully  be  approached  in  isolation.  The
Commission  recommended  the  formation  an  interdepartmental
committee, with  non-Governmental  representation,  to  consider  the
following  issues  and  to  formulate  principles  upon  which  the  new
law might  be based:
(a)  the  definition  of  the  class  of  objects  to  which  protection  is  to

be  granted.

(b)  the rights  of  landowners  and  occupiers.

290

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

(c)  the  rights  of  the  finder  and  other  persons  interested  in  the

objects  to which  protection  is extended.

(d)  provision  for  purchase  or  reward  for  the  finding  and  handing

in of  objects.

(e)  a simple procedure  for  the determination  of the rights of inter-

ested  parties in any purchase or  reward.

(f)  the extent of any duty to be placed on those who find the objects

to  report  the find, and  a procedure for  doing so.

(g)  whether  concealment  of  objects  found  and  failure  to  report
them should be made criminal offences,  thus obviating the need
to  charge  the  more  serious  offence  of  theft  involving  more
complex  and  costly issues.

An  inter-departmental  Committee  was  in  fact  set  up  shortly  after-
wards,100  which  made  the  following  recommendations  concerning
rewards,101  but  does  not  appear  to  have  taken  action  on  wider
issues:
*  the  Home  Office  should  draw  the  attention  of  coroners  to  the
overall  target  time  for  handling  finds  and  to  the  fact  that  a
treasure  trove inquest  is only  the first stage in  the  handling  of a
find.

*  the  British  Museum,  or  other  museums  or  experts  consulted  by
coroners,  should  aim  to  submit  their  advice  within  2 months  of
that  advice being  requested.

*  the national museums should be invited to bring all finds declared
treasure  trove  before  the  Treasure  Trove  Reviewing  Committee
for  valuation  within  3 months  of the relevant  inquest.

*  the  Committee's  secretariat  should  liaise  regularly  with  the
national  museums  to  ensure  the  most  appropriate  timing  for
meetings of the Committee. The British Museum should nominate
a single focal  point for  that  liaison.

*  the  British  Museum  should  continue,  and  the National  Museum
of Wales  should  in  future  aim,  to  purchase  treasure  trove which
they  intend  to  acquire  within  4  weeks  of  its  valuation  by  the
Treasure Trove  Reviewing Committee.

*  where  a  local  authority  museum  intends  to  purchase  treasure
trove,  it  should  aim  to  do  so  within  4 months  of  notifying  that
intention  to  the  appropriate  national  museum.  This  target  must,
however,  of  course  be dependent  on  the  target  for  the  length  of
time between inquest and valuation by the Treasure Trove Review-
ing Committee  being met in that  particular case.

*  in  order  to  assist  the  museums  to  achieve  that  target,  the  Office
of  Arts  and  Libraries  should  consider  with  the  Museums  and
Galleries  Commission  whether  it  would  be  appropriate  to  give
priority  in  the  handling  of  applications  to  its  local  museums
acquisitions  fund  to  applications  for  grants  to  purchase  treasure
trove.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

291

Norman  E. Palmer

Responses  to  the  Department  of  the  Environment's  consultation
paper  on  portable  antiquities  (issued jointly  with  the Welsh  Office)
indicated  that  the  public  interest  in  the  knowledge  represented
by  casual  archaeological  finds  'was  not  so  great  as  to  warrant  a
compulsory  reporting  system  for finds in England  and Wales'.102

The most  recent initiative  is  a draft  Bill sponsored  by the  Surrey
Archaeological  Society.  At  the  time  of  writing,  this  draft  Bill  is
expected  to  receive  a  first  reading  in  the  House  of  Lords  in 1993.
The  document  is  still  at  the  consultative  stage  and  its  provisions
may change  before  it  is presented.

The  sponsors  attempt  to  allay  the  concerns  of  landowners  in
several ways. First, the draft  Bill requires every coroner who receives
notification  of  a  find  to  inform  the  occupier  of  the  land  where  the
object  is  found  within  fourteen  days  of  the  coroner's  receipt  of
notification.103  The  aim  of  this  provision  is  to  enable  occupiers  to
take  preventative  measures  against  a  possible  invasion  of  treasure
hunters, as occurred  at Wanborough.  Secondly, any finder  who has
reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  a  discovered  object  may  be
treasure  within  the  statutory  definition  (and  any  other  person  who
comes  to  know  of  the  existence  of  an  object  which  he  has  reason
to  believe  to  be  treasure)  is  required  to  notify  the  coroner  for  the
area  in  which  the  find  occurred.104  Notification  must  be  made  as
soon  as  reasonably  practicable, but  in any event within  four  weeks
of  the  date  of  the  find,  or  within  four  weeks of  the  date  on  which
a person  comes to know  of  the existence of a find, as the case may
be.105 If the place of  finding  is  unknown, notification  may be made
to  any coroner.106  Failure  to  comply  with  the duty  to  notify  a find
is to  be a criminal  offence.107  Thirdly,  the draft  Bill seeks to  create
the  further  criminal  offences  of  (i)  searching  for  treasure  on  any
land  as  a  trespasser108  and  (ii)  removing  treasure  trove  from  any
land  without  lawful  authority109  other  than  for  the  purpose  of
delivering  the  object  to  a  coroner.110  It  is suspected  that  the  latter
proviso  may  constitute  something  of  a  barrier  to  prosecutions  for
wrongful  removal.

The principal change contemplated  by the draft  Bill lies, however,
in  the  class  of  objects  which  may  constitute  treasure  trove.  The
draft  Bill  both  increases  and  diminishes  the  current  grasp  of  the
prerogative. Expansion occurs in two directions. First, treasure trove
will no longer be confined  to objects deposited and concealed  animo
recuperandi,  but  will  extend  to  treasure  which  has  been  lost  or
abandoned,  including  treasure  buried  in  a  grave.111  The  draft  Bill
declares  in  this  connection  that  the  place  of  a find does  not  affect
its characterisation as treasure trove,112 and that the rights of owners
of  objects  are  to  be  unaffected  by  the  foregoing  extension.113
Secondly,  the  rule  that  an  object  must consist  substantially  of gold
or  silver (or,  presumably,  must  consist  substantially  of  a  combina-
tion  of  the  two)  will  be  abrogated  by  a  set  of  provisions  dealing
with  four  specific  categories  of  object.

292

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

The first category  is coins and  tokens.114 Treasure trove will now
extend  to  any  coin  or  token  having  a  gold  or  silver  (or  combined
gold  and  silver)  content  of  0.5%  or  more,  provided  that  the  coin
or  token  forms  part  of  a  connected  series  of  objects.115  Thus,  the
great  preponderance  of  the  Coleby  hoard  of  antoniniani  in  the
Overton case  would  qualify  as  treasure  trove  under  this  provision
of  the  draft  Bill.116 Objects  are  deemed  to  form  a  connected  series
if they are either found  together or are found in circumstances which
may  reasonably  be taken  to indicate  that  the objects  were together
immediately before being hidden, lost or abandoned.117 It is immate-
rial  for  this  purpose  that  the  objects  have  been  found  by  different
people at different  times, or that  they are not  all found  in the same
place.118 It is also immaterial that the objects do not all comprise the
same class of object.119  These provisions clearly effect  a  substantial
increase in  the number  of  objects  which  will  be treasure  trove, but
there  is  also  a  reduction:  a  single  coin  will  no  longer  be  treasure
trove irrespective  of its level of precious metal  content.

The  second  category  is plate, jewellery  or  any  other  objects  not
including  coins  or  tokens.  Such  an  object  will  constitute  treasure
trove if (i) at least  5%  of its metallic content  is precious metal  and
(ii) the  object  is  or  may  reasonably  be  assumed  to  be  at  least  one
hundred  and fifty years old when  found.120  Again,  the abolition  of
the  requirement  of  a  substantial  precious  metal  content  would
greatly  expand  the  purview  of  treasure  trove,  but  there  is  a  slight
complementary reduction in the shape of the 'one hundred and fifty
years'  requirement.  Under  existing  law  the  antiquity  of  an  object
would  appear  immaterial  to its characterisation  as treasure trove.

The third category  is a miscellaneous one, consisting of any class
of  object  designated  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  State  as  one
considered  by  him  to  be  of  historical  or  archaeological  impor-
tance.121  The  power  to  extend  the  content  of  treasure  trove  by
ministerial order is limited in two respects: it applies only to  objects
which,  when  found,  are  or  may  reasonably  be  assumed  to  be  at
least  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  old122  and  it  applies  only  to
artefacts.123  Unworked  natural  objects  (such  as  fossils  or  human
remains)  therefore  fall  beyond  its  scope. Orders  made  pursuant  to
this provision  must  be made  by statutory  instrument,  and  no such
order shall be made unless a draft  of the order has been laid  before
and  approved  by resolution  of each House of  Parliament.124

The  fourth  category  comprises  all  those  objects  which  form  a
connected  series  (in  the  sense  defined  above)  if  at  least  one  object
in  the  series  is  treasure.125  Under  this  provision  an  object  may
constitute  treasure  trove  without  any  precious  metal  content,  so
long  as  it  is  found  as  part  of  a  series  of  objects,  at  least  one  of
which does thus qualify.  Examples would  be bronze coins included
in  a  hoard  to  protect  gold  or  silver  coins,  an  earthenware  pot  or
other container in which precious metal objects have been deposited,
precious  stones  forming  (along  with  objects  of  precious  metal)

293

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman E. Palmer

part  of  a  jeweller's  stock  in  trade,  or  a  bone-handled  knife  lost
contemporaneously  with  a gold  or  silver locket. The application  of
the  statutory  notion  of  a  'series'  to  'lost'  goods  (ie, objects  found
together unaccompanied  by any evidence that they were deliberately
placed  together by a depositor  or abandoner, or objects  the circum-
stances  of whose  find  indicate  that  they were together  immediately
before  being  lost) may generate lively controversy.

The  draft  Bill  is expressed  to  apply  only  to  objects  found  after
the  resultant  Act  comes  into  force.126  It  applies  to  franchises  of
treasure  trove  wherever  granted127  but  will  not  extend  to  Scotland
or  Northern  Ireland.128

Other  provisions of the draft  Bill empower  the Secretary of State
to  publish  both  a  Code  of  Practice  relating  to  treasure  trove  and
further  information  or  guidance  relating  to  the  retention  of  finds
by  museums  and  the  payment  of  rewards.129  Such  guidance  may
include  (a) matters concerning the rights and duties of searchers  for
and  finders  of  treasure  trove,  and  of  those on whose land  treasure
trove  is  found,  (b)  the  provision  of  forms  for  the  making  of  any
necessary  notifications,  and  (c)  procedures  for  the  recording  of
treasure  trove finds.130 Nothing in the draft  Bill is intended to  affect
the current Treasury practice of making ex gratia rewards. The  draft
Bill also  seeks  to  render  a  finding  by a coroner  or  a coroner's jury
on  a  matter  of  treasure trove conclusive for  all purposes, including
civil and criminal proceedings.131 This provision is, however, heavily
qualified.  It  does  not  apply  to  (i) proceedings  on an  application  to
review or quash a finding that an object is or is not treasure trove,132
and  (ii) any civil proceedings where the point at issue (or one of the
points at issue) is the question whether one party to the proceedings
(or  a  person  through  whom  the  party  is claiming)  was the  rightful
owner  of  the  object  at  the time it was found.133  In  this context  the
phrase  'rightful  owner'  means someone who was the rightful  owner
otherwise than  by virtue of his finding the object.134 Under the  draft
Bill a coroner's inquest into whether an object is treasure trove may
be  held  without  a jury.135  It  is  thought  that  the  disappearance  of
the  main  factual  question  governing  characterisation  as  treasure
trove (viz, whether the object was deliberately hidden or merely lost
or  abandoned)  will largely remove the need for  a jury.

9  Buying Up  the Land-Owner's  Rights

An  interesting  dilemma  is  suggested  by  a  recent  decision  of  the
Supreme  Court  of  Ireland.  To  what  extent  is  it  legitimate  and
effective  for  a  national  museum,  having  been  entrusted  with  dis-
covered  antiquities  prior  to  a determination  as to whether  they  are
treasure  trove,  to  seek to fortify  its position  by obtaining a  transfer
of the rights of  the land-owner? In  Webb v Ireland and the Attorney
General136 the  Supreme  Court  of  Ireland  held  that  the  museum's

294

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

estoppel  as  the  finders'  bailee  did  not  preclude  it  from  asserting  a
superior  personal  title,  acquired  in  this manner,  in  response  to  the
finders'  claim to  recover  the goods.

The claimants in this case were a father and son. In February 1980
they  discovered  an  exquisite  silver  chalice  and  other  ecclesiastical
treasures  (dating  from  around  the  ninth  century)  while  searching
with a metal detector on land near Derrynaflan  Church in Tipperary.
The  precise  location  of  the  find  was  a  tract  of  land  belonging  to
third  parties named O'Leary  and  O'Brien. The Webbs delivered  the
articles  into  the  possession  of  the  National  Museum  of  Ireland
accompanied  by  a  letter  from  their  solicitor,  which  stated  that  the
articles were being entrusted  to  the  Museum's care  'for  the  present
and pending determination of the legal ownership or status thereof.
While still in possession  of the articles, the  Museum  approached
O'Leary  and  O'Brien  and  agreed  to  acquire  their  entire interest  in
the hoard for the sum of £25,000 apiece. When the Webbs eventually
sued  for  the return  of  the  treasures,  the  Republic  of  Ireland  raised
two  defences:  first,  that  the  hoard  was  treasure  trove  and  thus
the  property  of  the  Republic,  and  secondly  that  the  subsequent
transaction  with  the  landowners  now gave the  Republic a  superior
title to  the hoard  in any event.

At first instance, Blayney J rejected  both defences. On the  former
point,  he  held  the  doctrine  of  treasure  trove  to  be  inapplicable  in
the Republic, because it represented an aspect of the Royal Preroga-
tive  which  had  not  been  expressly  transferred  to  the  Republic  on
the  enactment  of  its  Constitution.137  On  the  latter  point,  he  held
that  the  terms  of  the  letter  on  which  the  Museum  accepted  the
hoard  amounted  to  an  acknowledgement  by  the  Museum  that  it
was to hold the hoard as the Webbs' bailee. As a bailee, the Museum
was  estopped  from  denying  the  title  of  its  bailors  and  must  be
deemed  to  have  undertaken  to  treat  them  as  the  true  owners,
irrespective of any later  acquisition  of title on its part.

Both  aspects  of  the  decision  were  varied  on  appeal.  Finlay  CJ
(with  whom  Henchy  and  Griffin  JJ  concurred)  agreed  that  the
prerogative of treasure trove had become extinguished in its applica-
tion  to  Ireland,  but  held  that  a  form  of  state ownership  equivalent
to treasure trove could be justified  by reference to the Irish Constitu-
tion.138  Furthermore,  the  terms  on  which  the  Museum  accepted
delivery  of  the  hoard  did  not  preclude  it  from  asserting  a  superior
personal  title  by  virtue  of  the  later  conveyance  from  O'Leary  and
O'Brien.  The  literal  terms  upon  which  the  Webbs  entrusted  the
hoard to the Museum were not such as to amount to an undertaking
by  the  Museum  to  acknowledge  title  exclusively  in  them.  Rather,
the question of title was, by virtue of the phrase 'pending determina-
tion of the legal ownership', expressly left  open. It followed  that the
implied  term  normal  to  most  bailments,  that  the  bailor  enjoyed
exclusive  and  unquestionable  title,  was  displaced  by  the  terms  of
this  particular  bailment.  In  any  event,  the  bailee's  conventional

295

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman E. Palmer

estoppel did not apply to a case where the bailee defends the bailor's
claim  on  the  ground  that  title  now  vests  in  the  bailee  himself  (as
opposed  to residing in some third party); when a bailee gets the title
the bailment  ends, and  with it ends the estoppel.  Finally, the Chief
Justice  held  that  the  landowners'  title  was  indeed  superior  to  that
of  the  finders  and  had  been  translated  into  a  superior  title  on  the
part  of the Museum itself. The fact  that  the goods had  been buried
in  the ground  conferred  a prior possessory  right upon  O'Leary  and
O'Brien,  which  was  violated  when  the  Webbs  removed  the  hoard;
and  the  fact  that  the Webbs were  trespassers  meant  that,  indepen-
dently  of  the  issue of  prior  possession,  they  were  disentitled  from
acquiring  any  rights  superior  to  those  against  whom  their  trespass
was  committed.

Walsh  J  took  a  different  view  of  the  efficacy  of  the  landowners'
purported  conveyance to the Museum. He considered that the land-
owners' interest, being merely possessory, expired with their posses-
sion:  'They  could  not  assign  a  right  to  bare  possession  divorced
from  ownership  when  they had  already  lost possession.'139  Walsh J
agreed,  however,  that  the  bailee's  conventional  estoppel  could  in
principle  be  extinguished  by  a  later  acquisition  of  property  on  his
part;  in such a case: '...  he has ousted the title of the bailor and  the
matter ceases to be one of bailment.' Only McCarthy J was prepared
to uphold  Blayney J's decision that the Museum's estoppel extended
to  the  point  of  debarring  it  from  asserting  a  personal  title;  in  his
opinion  the  agreed  terms of  delivery,  while  recognising  that  actual
ownership might reside elsewhere, did not affect  the limited implica-
tion  that,  as  between bailors and bailee, the  bailors'  title  was  the
better.  But  McCarthy  J,  like  Walsh  J,  did  not  consider  that  an
effective  title had  been acquired  by the  State in any  event.

Three points should be made about  this decision. First (and most
obviously)  it  shows  that  the  ambit  of  a  museum's  estoppel  as  the
bailee  of  the  finder  can  sometimes  be  deduced  from  the  express
terms  of  the  delivery.  Secondly,  it  seems  to  follow  that  the  terms
accompanying  the delivery  can  sometimes  (contrary  to  the  conclu-
sion  in  Webb itself) indicate that  the bailee does covenant to  refrain
from  asserting any personal title superior to that of the bailor. Such
a  covenant  may  preclude  not  only  the  assertion  by  the  bailee  of
some  superior  interest  acquired  after  the bailment  was created,  but
also his assertion of some superior interest existing before  the goods
were  bailed:  for  example,  where  the  occupier  of  land  on  which  a
chattel  is  found  accepts  possession  from  the  finder  on  the  under-
standing  that  he  will return  it  to  the  finder  if  the  true  owner  does
not  appear  (such  an  argument  might,  perhaps,  have  been  pursued
in  Parker v British Airways Board.)140 The third point is that, in the
absence  of any express agreement, it remains uncertain whether the
bailee's  estoppel  prohibits  him  from  relying  upon  a  personal  title
acquired  from  a  third  party.  A  refusal  to  extend  the estoppel  thus
far  would  arguably  conform  with  Eastern Trust Co Ltd  v National
Trust  Co  Ltd141,  where  the  acquisition  of  title  by  a  third  party

296

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

wrongdoer  was  held  to  debar  any  action  by  the  claimant-bailee,
notwithstanding  the rule in  The Winkfield.142 But the analogy is not
a  complete  one,  because  in  cases  where  the  bailee's  possession  is
violated  by a third  party  the defendant  will normally  lack  any pre-
existing  consensual  relationship  with  the  claimant,  whereas  such  a
relationship  naturally  exists between  bailor and  bailee. On balance,
however,  it  seems  preferable  to  regard  the  bailee's  estoppel  as
generally confined  to the assertion of interests in third parties, while
acknowledging that exceptional cases may occur in which the terms
of  the  delivery,  or  other  attendant  circumstances,  support  a  wider
prohibition.143

Webb is  an  extreme  example  of  the  difficulties  which  may  be
encountered  by  a  national  authority  seeking  to  assert  a  common
law possessory  title to discovered  antiquities.144 At first  glance, it is
hard to decide which aspect of the case is the more remarkable: the
judicial  invention  which  produced  the  doctrine  of  inherent  state
property or the woeful condition of the law that necessitated it. Nor
is it easy to banish  a lurking suspicion  that  the Webbs were treated
austerely, both  by the museum  and  by the court.

Had  the  facts  arisen  in  England,  the  Derrynaflan  hoard  would
almost  certainly  have  been  declared  treasure  trove.  It  had  the  re-
quired  metallic  constituency  and  was  evidently  deposited  for  safe-
keeping.145 The Crown would not have needed to invoke some wider
doctrine of inherent  sovereign  ownership  —  a plea which would, in
any event, be doomed  to failure.  But  there remains scant  cause  for
complacency.  If  the  doctrine  of  treasure  trove  fails  to  apply  in  a
given case, and the original owner or his successor remains untraced,
title depends  on  the civil law of finders.  This body  of  law is exclu-
sively concerned  with  possessory  title is and  essentially  egalitarian;
it contains no material public interest ingredient capable of promot-
ing  the  national  conservation  of  antiquities.  Having  awarded  the
find  to  the  individual  who  was  first  in  possession,  it  allows  that
claimant  virtually  unfettered  rights  of  detention,  destruction,  con-
sumption,  disposal  and  use.  Just  as  Lady  Churchill  could  destroy
with impunity the Sutherland portrait of her husband, so the posses-
sory owner of a silver chalice can melt it down, sell it to his dentist
for  tooth fillings, or  use  it  to  demonstrate  the corrosive  properties
of nitric acid.146  Sometimes  the successful  claimant  will be a  public
body  (such as a  local  authority  occupying  land  on which  an  object
was  found  or  employing  the  finder)  and  the  object  will  come  into
pubic  ownership  independently  of  the  law  of  treasure  trove.  Even
here,  however,  problems  of  proof  and  enforcement  may  frustrate
the public  interest.147

10  The  Civil  Law  of  Finders148

If  the  Crown  cannot  assert  a  title  founded  on  treasure  trove,  the
right  to  retain  the  goods  will  fall  to  be allocated  according  to  the

297

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman E. Palmer

private  law  of  finders,  as  modified  by  any  contract  between  the
relevant  parties. What follows does not purport  to be an exhaustive
account  of the law in this field, but merely a summary  for  the sake
of  completeness.

Unless he has abandoned them,149 an owner of lost goods remains
their  owner.150  This proposition  does not  necessarily  mean that  the
proprietor  will  always  be  able  to  vindicate  his  title,  because  the
limitation period may have expired.151 Subject  to that, however, the
owner can  recover the goods from  a finder or  from  an  occupier on
whose land they were lost. If the owner does not claim his property,
the  party  who  first  reduced  the  goods  into  his  possession  will
normally  have  the superior  title.  Frequently,  this will be the  finder
himself.  In  Armory v Delamiriei52 a chimney  sweep's boy  who had
found  a  jewel  was  held  entitled  to  recover  it  (or  damages  for  its
value) from  a jeweller who accepted it for valuation but then  refused
to  return  it.  The  finder's  right  was  good  against  everyone  except
the  true  owner.

Often,  however,  someone other  than  the finder  will already  have
gained  a  prior  possession  when  the find is made. In  such a case, it
is  that  earlier  possessor  who  is entitled  to  retain  the  goods  against
everyone  except  the true  owner, and  the finder  (having  taken  them
from  his  possession)  must  surrender  the  goods  to  him.153  A  pre-
emptive  possession  of this type can arise in two main  situations.

The  first  is where  an  employee  finds  goods  in  the  course  of  his
employment.  If  his  employment  is  the  cause  (and  not  merely  the
occasion) of the finding,  the employee's possession  is deemed  to be
that  of his employer and he gets no independent possessory right.154
The  test  is somewhat  difficult  to  apply;  in  the  Queensland  case of
Byrne  v  Hoarei55,  a  policeman  on  points  duty  who  found  a  gold
ingot  on  land  adjoining  the  road  was  held  to  have  a  possessory
right  superior  to  that  of  his  employing  authority.  But  it  seems
reasonably certain that workers who discover articles while carrying
out  excavation,  pile-driving  or  demolition  work  on  the  instruction
of  their  employers  will  take  possession  only  on  behalf  of  their
employers  and  will get  no  independent  possessory  title.  In London
Corpn  v  Appleyard156  McNair  J  stated  obiter  that  employees  of
contractors,  who had found  a wall safe containing banknotes while
working  at  their employers' instruction  on  the site of a demolished
building,  were  accountable  to  the  contractors  in  respect  of  these
contents. The judge cited the decision of Palles CB in a case reported
as  The  Title of  the Finder.*57 There  a  porter  employed  by  a  bank
found  bank  notes while sweeping out its premises. Deciding the case
in favour  of  the bank,  Palles CB held that  it was 'by reason'  of the
relationship  of  master  and  servant,  and  'in  the performance  of  the
duties  of  that  service',  that  the  porter  acquired  possession  of  the
notes; therefore  'the  possession  of  the  servant  of  the  bank  was the
possession  of  the  bank  itself.'  This  conclusion  will  be all  the more

298

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

likely when an employee has actually been ordered to make a search
for  lost  articles.158

The  second  situation  is  where  the  goods  are  found  on  land
occupied  by  someone  other  than  the  finder  or  owner.  Occupation
of  the  land  may  have  conferred  on  the  occupier  a  possession  over
lost  goods  situated  on  that  land  which  is  prior  to,  and  therefore
stronger than, that of the finder  or his employer. Such prior  posses-
sion can exist even though the occupier was unaware that  the goods
were present  on his land.159

Certainly, the occupier will have gained the necessary prior posses-
sion  if  the  goods  are  buried  on  his land,  or  attached  in  a  manner
which  suggests  that  he is asserting exclusive control  over  the  place
where they  are situated. The courts will generally hold  that  posses-
sion of land entails possession of everything lying below the  surface,
down  the  centre  of  the  earth.160  In  Elwes v  Brigg  Gas  Co,161  the
application  of  this  principle  resulted  in  the  award  of  a  prehistoric
boat, which was submerged  beneath  the  land,  to  the tenant  for  life
in possession  as  against  a  lessee for  99 years. Nothing  in  the  lease
could  be regarded  as  granting  permission  to  the  lessees  to  remove
the  boat,  and  the  long  period  which  had  elapsed  since  its  deposit
indicated that property as well as possession had vested  in the tenant
for  life.  In  South  Staffordshire  Water Co  v  Sharman162  workmen
found  two rings embedded in mud at the bottom  of a pool  on  their
employers'  land.  The  find  occurred  while  they  were  obeying  an
instruction  to clean  the pool. They were held  not  entitled  to  retain
the rings as against  their  employers. Surprisingly,  the decision  pro-
ceeded  not  on  the  ground  that  the  find  occurred  in  the  course  of
their employment,163  but  on the ground  that  occupation  of  the  site
gave their employers a concurrent possession  of articles  attached  to
it.

If the goods were merely lying on the land,  the occupier  will  not
necessarily  gain  a  superior  possession  by  virtue  of  his  occupation
alone. In  order  to  do  so, he must  have 'manifested  an  intention  to
exercise  control  over  the  building  and  the  things which  may  be  in
or  on  it'.164  Such  an  intention  may  be especially  elusive  where  the
site  is  one  to  which  the  public  (or  many  different  entrants)  have
lawful  access. In  Parker v British Airways Board165  a traveller  who
found  a  gold  bracelet  on  the  floor  of  an  executive  lounge  at
Heathrow  Airport  was  held  entitled  to  retain  it  as  against  the
occupiers  of  the  lounge.  The  nature  of  the  premises, the  degree  of
public  access  and  the  quality  of  the  control  over  the  area  exerted
by  the  occupiers  were  such  that  the  court  felt  unable  to  conclude
that  the  occupiers  had  asserted  any  superior  possession  over  the
article prior  to that  of the finder  himself. A similar  conclusion  was
reached  in  the  Canadian  case  of  Kowal v Ellis166 where  the  finder
was  held  entitled  to  retain  a  pump  which  he  found  lying  close  to
the  highway  on  the  occupier's  land.  But  it  has  been  said  that  a
finder  who  was  trespassing  at  the  time  of  the  find  acquires  no

299

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

enforceable possessory rights against the occupier, because recognis-
ing such  rights would  enable  him  to  profit  from  his own  wrong.167
Moreover, an owner or  lessee who does not  occupy the site person-
ally before the discovery will not normally gain a superior possession
of the articles  themselves, whether  these were buried  in the  land  or
merely  lying on  it.168

Many of the more important finds occur in the course of construc-
tion operations. Unattached goods are unlikely to produce problems
for  building employers  and contractors; the very nature of building
work  suggests  that the  majority  of finds will  have  been  unearthed.
Whereas this removes one difficult  question, however, there continue
to  be other  reasons why the general  law  of  finders  is an  unsatisfac-
tory  vehicle  for  determing  title  to  antiquities  within  the  employer/
contractor  relationship.  Identifying  the possessor  of  the site can be
a  complex  process,  and  the  answer  may  vary  according  to  the
context  in  which  the  question  is  raised.  The  same  is  true  of  the
relationship of employer and employee. The principle which equates
a finding of goods in the course of employment  with an  assumption
of possession on behalf of the employer is likely to  appear  simplistic
when applied  to the complicated  but informal  labour  arrangements
(including  temporary  transfers  of  service  among  contractors  and
sub-contractors,  and  notional  self-employment)  which  obtain  on
building sites.

For such reasons, most standard building contracts deal expressly
with  discovered  antiquities.  An  example  is  cl.  32  of  the  ICE  (6th)
conditions, by which: 'All  fossils  coins articles of value or  antiquity
and  structures  or  other  remains  or  things  of  geological or  archaeo-
logical interest discovered on the Site shall as between  the Employer
and  the  Contractor  be  deemed  to  be  the  absolute  property  of
the  Employer...'.  The  clause  also  requires  the  contractor  to  'take
reasonable precautions to prevent his workmen or any other persons
from  removing  or damaging  any  such  article  or  thing', to  acquaint
the  engineer  of  the discovery  immediately  it  occurs,  and  to  'carry
out  at  the expense of  the  Employer  the  Engineer's  orders as  to  the
disposal  of  the same'.169

In  London Corpn v Appleyardm  freeholders  entered  into a  build-
ing lease whereby  'every relic or article  of  antiquity  or value which
may be found  in or under  any part  of the site' was  stated  to belong
to  them.  McNair  J held  that  this provision  entitled  the  freeholders
to retain (as against the leaseholders and a sister company for whom
the lease was held in trust)  a box containing  bank-notes  which  had
been  found  by  workmen  in  a  disused  wall-safe.  The  expression
'article  of...value'  extended  to  articles which  were  valuable  not  for
their  antiquity  or rarity  but  for  some other  reason.171

Now this provision, being contractual, operated  only between the
contracting  parties. The  superior  entitlement  which  it  purported  to
confer on the freeholders  was therefore viable only if the contracting
party against whom it  operated  had  an entitlement  superior to  that

300

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

of  other  potential  claimants.  McNair  J  held  that  this was the case.
Since  the  wall  safe  formed  part  of  the  premises  demised  to  the
leaseholders  and  to  their  sister  company,  possession  of  it  and  its
contents  resided  de  facto  in  one  or  other  of  them  (in  the  event,
McNair  J  preferred  to award  possession  to the  sister company,  on
the  ground  inter  alia  that  the  lease was  held  on  trust  for  them).172
That  possession  was  prior,  and  thus  superior,  to  the control  taken
by  the  individual  workmen  who  discovered  the  safe.  Since  the
leaseholders  and  their  sister  company  were the other  parties  to  the
contract  with  the  freeholders,  it  was  to  the  freeholders  that  the
ultimate entitlement  passed.

A further  aspect of this decision deserves mention, for it illustrates
the  complications  which  can  arise  from  labour  arrangements  in
construction  projects.  The  finders  were  employed  by  Wates,  who
were the contractors  engaged by the sister company to work  on the
site.  If  no  superior  possession  had  resided  in  the  leaseholders  or
their  sister  company  by  virtue  of  the  lease  alone,  the  court  would
have had to identify  the party to whom the finders were accountable
for  the articles which they found  in the course of their  employment:
was  it  their  immediate  employers  Wates,  or  was  it  the  party  who
engaged  Wates? McNair  J  (speaking  obiter)  opted  in favour  of  the
former,  on  the  ground  that  'there  is  no  general  principle  that  for
all  purposes  the  servant  of  an  independent  contractor  is  to  be
regarded  as  the  servant  of  the  person  by  whom  the  independent
contractor  was  engaged'.173

Appendix  I
Finds  Valued  by  the  Treasure  Trove  Reviewing
Committee  1979-1990

Year 

1979 

Place of find 

Otterbourn 
Kempstone 
Pennyrock  Falls 
Much  Wenlock 
Thetford 
Winsford 
Menai  Bridge 
Bryn Maelgwyn 
Penybryn 
Barton-upon-Humber 
Epping  Forest 

1980 

Eddington  Wood 
Roche Abbey 
Vindolanda 

Value of find

2,320
1,200
525
227
2,190
2,135
100
14,667
4,450
3,580
21
£31,415
393
90
493

301

Total 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman E. Palmer

Year 

Place of find 

Value  of find

Maltby 
Cadeby 
Aylesbury 
Wragby 
Miscellaneous  coins 
Ringwood 
Washbrook 
West  Wycombe 
Cadeby 
Wheatley 
Mildenhall 
Taunton 
Osbournby 
Pentney 
Reculver 
Bedford 
Hovington  Park 
Caer  Rumney 

Wenallt 
Thetford 
Bearpark 
Whippendell  Woods 
Loxbeare 
Streatley 
Mildenhall 
Barway 
Bromham 
Barton-upon-Humber 
Otterbourne 
Osbournby 
Freckenham 

Great  Orme 
Dover 
Farnham 
Weston-sub-edge 
Ridgewell 
Glewstone 
Stainton 
Welsh  Bicknor 
Stonea 
Monkton  Farleigh 
Otterbourne  II 
Middle  Harling 

1981 

1982 

302

4,059
1,335
450
1,150
1,110
3,625
4,875
1,020
62
650
7,250
3,335
1,069
135,000
2,250
700
568
742
£170,226
103,040
262,540
650
900
507
205
60
1,134
7,246
100
1,250
960
917
£379,509
225
1,092
3,240
5,926
410
435
1,955
2,730
840
60
60
51,500

Total 

Total 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Year 

Place of find 

Treasure Trove

Value of find

1983 

1984 

Thetford  (Addenda) 
Wheatley 
Maesmelan  Farm 
Llanarmon-yn-ial 

Howie 
Armthorpe  (Addenda) 
Stonea 
Cadeby 
Bainton 
Finkley Down 
Blencowe Hal 
Palmers  Green 
Wyke 
Harpsden  Woods 
Akenham 
Westgage 
Chatteris 
Thetford 
Newton  Mills 
Weston  • 
Wervin 
Stonea 
Phorslee 
Redditch 
Middle Harling 
Lawrence Weston 
Canterbury 
Brean  Down 

. 

Corfe  Common 
Cheriton 
Guildford 
Barway (Addenda) 
Burwell Farm 
Scole 
Osbournby 
Oliver's Orchard 
Pershore 

1985 

Maen  Cowyn 
Snelsmore Common 
Ashdon 
Dessingham 

Total 

Total 

Total 

615
110
8,000
2,650
£79,848
13,942
50
16,415
2,000
1,120
2,950
950
1,702
7,505
3,150
1,155
125
750
112
240
156
42
1,925
6,595
684
11,350
5,230
8,535
3,000
£89,683
2,650
7,125
1,349
230
773
470
350
2,203
622
£15,772
440
2,139
3,141
905

303

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman E. Palmer

Year 

Place  of  find 

Value of  find

Middleton
Great  Melton 
Chippenham  near  Ely 
Howe 
Aldworth 
Wanborough 
Moor  Monkton 
Ashdon 
Blencogo 
Grimsby 
Southend-on-Sea 
Norton  Subcourse 
Stonea 
Fincham 

Breckenborough 
Barway 
Donhead  St Mary 
Selsey 
Hindolveston 
Winterbourne 
Elmstone 
Colaton  Raleigh  Common 
Brough 
Chute 
Norton  subcourse  (Addenda) 
Cheriton 
Bassaleg 
Cefn  Coed 

Michaelston-Super-Ely 
Postwick 
Howe  (Addenda) 
Chudleigh 
Morton 
Huntington 
Barsham 
Lawrence  Weston 
Rockbourne 
Morton  (Addenda) 
Fishpool  (Addenda) 
Winterbourne  Monckton 
Ironshill 
Nettisham 
Pinchbeck 

445
6,235
1,600
1,426
2,200
4,580
2,099
135
220
7,920
967
390
25,000
£99,842
11,797
45
5,210
4,710
600
960
2,000
5,000
1,200
11,000
180
1,000
1,759
235
£43,796
150
65
161
1,620
1,620
2,596
9,160
16,995
27,600
148
180
985
1,710
11,470
11,680
£86,140

Total 

Total 

Total 

1986 

1987' 

304

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Year 

1988 

1989 

1990 

Place of find 

Brackley 
Wanborough 
Aldworth 
Ryhall 
Bletchley 
Stevenage 
Kingsclere 
Whitchurch 
Clapham 
Reeth 
Sutton 
Sandhills 
Pontypridd 
Stanwix 
Winterbourne  Monkton 
Ollerton 
Sutton 
Thirsk 

Rockbourne 
Snettisham 
Amble 
Bawsey 
Caunton 
Hastings 
Teynham 
Snettisham 
Bawsey 
South  Shields 
Norton  Subcourse 
Cheriton 
Honingham 

Wicklewood 
Waddington 
Winterbourne  Monkton 
Barrow  Gurney 
Barway 
Fring 
Penrith 
Melbourn 
Chalfont  St Peter 
Wroxeter 
Somerton 
Kirkby  in Ashford 

. 

Treasure Trove

Value of find

50
36,238
2,210
1,037
13,775
15,740
1,400
1,680
400
212
2,605
1,078
100
7,730
860
1,090
200
2,200
£88,905
1,600
1,100
975
1
15,332
1,670
2,170
140
150
850
140
4,475
60
£28,663
845
600
900
624
125
3,055
42,200
295
4,599
750
16,000
604

305

Total 

Total 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman E. Palmer

Year 

Place of find 

Much  Hadham 
Boscombe Down 
Wingham 
Bawsey 
Hartlebury 

Value of find

3,221
2,615
2,141
10
1,219
£107,803

Total 

Appendix  II
Annual  Rate  of Treasure  Trove  Inquests  1980 — 1991

1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
Source: Home Office  Statistical  Bulletin for Inquests, Table 6.

57
59
51
38
48
46
29
46
44
54
63
60

Notes

1  Cf,  as to  maritime  finds,  the  doctrine  of  wreck:  Dromgoole  and  Gaskell,
above,  p. 217.  In  Canada,  recently-proposed  legislation  sought  to  abolish
any  distinction  between  land-based  and  marine  hoards  and  to  treat  both
categories of find in the same manner for the purposes of national  ownership
and  conservation:  see the  proposed  Archaeological  Heritage  Preservation
Act  1990; Haunton  (1992) 2 IJCP 395. In the event, this proposed  legislation
failed  to became  law. For an account  of new  legislation  amending  the law
of  treasure  trove  in The Netherlands,  see Forder  (1992)  2 IJCP  396.  The
doctrine  of treasure trove in the United  States has a much  wider scope  than
in  England,  and  is  not  an  instrument  of  state  ownership;  indeed  it  is
contended  that  the law of treasure  trove  has become  merged  with  the  law
on  lost goods generally:  Brown, Personal Properly (3rd ed, 1975) 28; cf note
49 below).

2  Webb v Ireland and the Attorney  General [1988] I.R. 353, at 386.
3  HL  Deb, 8 Feb 1982, col 18, citing Palmer  (1981) 44 MLR 178, at  183.
4  A-G  of the Duchy of Lancaster v G E  Overton  (Farms)  Ltd [1982] Ch  277,

at  293; [1982] 1 All ER 524, at 531.

5  Law Commission  Treasure Trove, Law Reform  Issues, September  1987, pp. 1,

2.  The  Law  Commission  has  done  no  further  work  on  this  subject  and

306

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

produced  no  further  law  reform  proposals:  letter  to  the  author,  July  29th
1992. See  further  the  Report  of a Review of Ex  Gratia Awards  to Finders of
Treasure  Trove (henceforth  referred  to as the Treasury  Review) published  by
HM Treasury in February  1988. The Surrey Archaeological Society has since
produced  a  draft  Bill  to  reform  the  law  of  treasure  trove:  see  below  p. 292
and  Cookson  and  Ayres  (1992) 66 Antiquity  399, 403.

6  Ibid.  See  further  the  criticisms  advanced  by  Martin  (1904)  20  LQR  27,
Palmer  (1981)  44  MLR  178,  Longworth  (1992)  2  IJCP  333, Cookson  and
Ayres (1992) 66 Antiquity  399, 403 and  Viscountess Hanworth,  President  of
the  Surrey  Archaeological  Society,  in  a  letter  entitled  'Gaps  in  Law  of
Treasure  Trove', (1989)  The Times, October  28th.

7  One recent illustration  among many was reported  in (1990)  The Independent,
February  13th.  A  rare  medieval  solid  gold  ring,  found  by  treasure  hunters
at  Middleham,  Yorkshire,  was  held  not  to  be  treasure  trove  because  it  had
been  lost  rather  than  concealed.  The  more  famous  Middleham  Jewel  (see
note 146 below) is a further  example of the non-application  of treasure  trove
to  objects  inadvertently  discarded  or  mislaid.

8  (1903) 5 Juridical Review, p. 276, cited  by  Sir George  Hill  in  Treasure  Trove
in Law and Practice (1936) pp. 202 — 203, n.  5. See also the Treasury  Review
of  1988 (above, note  5) para  2.4, and  C.S. Emden  (1926) 42  LQR  368, who
describes  the  practical  difficulties  of  the  doctrine  as  arising  less  from  the
complexity  of  individual  cases as from  the  'haze' in which the origins of  the
law reside, and  the  'casual'  manner  in  which  the rules have  taken  shape.

9  Palmer  (1981)  44  MLR  178.  There  is  now  a  National  Council  for  Metal
Detecting, which has published  its own  Code of Conduct  (see (1993)  1 IJCP
159) and  a  position  paper  entitled  A  Shared Heritage (1992).

10  As to  this, see (1988)  The Times, October  13th, (1990)  The  Times, 9 August;

note  146 below.

11  As to  this, see  In Re  Chaddock,  The  Times 23 November,  1992; below  note

53.

12  As to  this, see Longworth  (1992) 2 IJCP  333. Since this  article  was  written,
a further  highly exceptional  hoard  has been  discovered  at  a  site near  Eye in
Suffolk:  see  The Times, 19 November  1992. It comprises  Roman  gold  orna-
ments, coins, spoons  and jewellery,  and  some contemporary  reports  suggest
a  value  of  several  million  pounds.

13  Law Reform  Committee,  Eighteenth  Report,  Conversion and Detinue, Cmnd

4774 (1971), Annex  I pp. 48-50.

14  [1990] 2 QB 242, at  252; [1990] 3 All  ER  183, at  189.
15  See  Webb v  Ireland and  the Attorney  General [1988]  I.R.  353 (High  Court)

373 (Supreme  Court).

16  Below, p. 279.
17  Subject  to  the possibility  of a  Crown  grant  of franchise  of  treasure  trove  in

the particular  area:  see below  note 22.

18  Winkworth v  Christie Manson and  Woods  Ltd  [1980] Ch. 496.
19  Below, p. 284. This  is broadly  true  across  the common  law  world.
20  See note  32, below.
21  R v Hancock [1990] 2 QB 242, at  244; [1990] 3 All ER  183, at  184, per  Auld
J.  The  Crown's  title  thus  exists  even  before  discovery  and  excavation.  Cf
Hill, op cit supra,  216 whose opinion  on the point  is tentative, but who cites
observations  in  The  King's  Prerogative in  Saltpetre  (1606)  12  Co.  Rep. 12
that  the  King  may  dig  for  treasure  trove  in  the  land  of  the  subject  because
he has  property.

307

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

22  As  to  whether  particular  grant  or  franchise  extends  to  treasure  trove,  see
A.G.  v  Trustees of  the British Museum  [1903] 2  Ch  598; Hill,  op  cit  supra,
208 -  215. Cf the  Webb case, above, and the Treasury Review of 1988 (above,
note  5) para  2.2.

23  This  assumes  that  the  Crown  has  an  immediate  right  of  possession  arising
(if  that  be necessary)  from  a proprietary  interest  in  the  object:  see generally
Palmer,  Bailment (2nd ed) 209 et seq. Where excavation  of an  identified  find
is  likely  to  cause  substantial  disruption  to  the  landowner  or  occupier  the
exercise,  and  thus  the  immediacy,  of  the  Crown's  right  of  possession  may
itself  be  contentious.

24  It  appears,  however,  that  the  doctrine  of  market  overt  does  not  apply  to
chattels  belonging  to  the  Crown:  Willion v  Berkley  (1561)  1 Plowd  223, at
242 — 246 and, for  further  authority,  Benjamin's  Sale of Goods (3rd ed) para
468;  Davenport  and  Ross (1993)  1 IJCP  25 at  30.

25  As to  market  overt  generally, see Davenport  and  Ross (1993)  1 IJCP 25. As
to  s.12  Sale of Goods  Act  1979, see Bridge in Interests  in Goods (ed. Palmer
and  McKendrick,  1993, Lloyds  of  London  Press) p. 133.

26  If  the  original  owner  or  his  descendants  are  known  and  can  be  traced,  the
object  will belong to  them,  subject  to  the possibility  of  abandonment  (as  to
which  see  Hudson,  Abandonment,  in  Interests  in  Goods  (ed.  Palmer  and
McKendrick,  1993, Lloyd's of  London  Press) p. 424). Thus  in an  1868 case,
where  eighty  guineas  were  found 
in  the  wall  of  an  old  house  near
Christchurch,  the  descendants  of  the  original  owner  successfully  claimed
them  and  were compensated  at  face  value  for  eight  of  the  pieces which  had
already  been  sold: Hill, op cit supra, 220. Cf Moffat  v Kazana [1969] 2 WLR
71.  When  the  foundation  deposit  under  the  old  Blackfriars  Bridge,  dating
from  1760,  was  unearthed  in  1870,  it  was  restored  to  the  Corporation  of
London  as  the  representatives  of  the  depositor:  Hill,  ibid,  who  notes  an
opinion  that  such  deposits  become  part  of  the  building  itself  and  as  such
might  belong  to  the  landlord.

27  3rd  Inst,  p 132. See generally as to  Bona Vacantia,  Bell in Interests in Goods

(ed.  Palmer  and  McKendrick,  1993, Lloyds of  London  Press) p. 401.

28  Prerogatives  (1802), p 152.
29  [1982] Ch  277. Contrast  a  case of  silver-washed  copper  coins  found  at  Hull
in  1868:  Hill,  op  cit  supra,  204  n.3. As  to  the  decision  of  Dillon  J  at  first
instance  in  Overton, [1981] Ch  333; [1980] 3 All  ER  503, see  Palmer  (1981)
44  MLR  178.

30  Palmer,  op cit  supra.
31  [1982] Ch  277, at 292.
32  For  example, the Icklingham Bronzes, a collection of Roman bronze artefacts
allegedly  removed  from  a field belonging  to  a  Mr  Browning  in  Suffolk  and
later  sold  in  New  York.  Proceedings  were  until  recently  afoot  to  determine
the entitlement  to the bronzes. See the letter by Viscountess Hanworth  'Gaps
in  Law  of  Treasure  Trove'  (1989)  The  Times, October  28th,  and  cf  (1992)
The Independent  on Sunday, July  19th, p. 22. Since the foregoing was written,
it  is  understood  that  an  agreement  has  been  reached  whereby  the  bronzes
will  remain  in  the  USA  during  the  lifetime  of  the  present  holder  and  his
wife,  and  thereafter  be desposited  at  the  British  Museum:  (1993)  The Times,
29th  January.

33  Cf  the  controversy  as  to  the  ownership  of  the  recently-discovered  Similaun
man:  (1991)  The  Times September  29th,  (1992)  The  Times  February  10th,
(1992)  The Independent, February  22nd. The question  whether  common  law
proprietary  or  possessory  rights  can  subsist  in  human  remains  is a  distinct

308

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

and  controversial  issue,  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper.  See  Magnusson
Proprietary  Rights  in Human  Tissue in  Interests  in Goods (eds.  Palmer  and
McKendrick,  1993, Lloyds of  London  Press) p. 237); Palmer,  Bailment (2nd
ed) 9 et seq; Matthews [1983] C.L.P. 193; Hubert (1992) 1  IJCP 105; Pinkerton
(1992) 2 IJCP 297.

34  Cf  the  controversy  as  to  the  ownership  of  Sue,  the  world's  best-preserved
example  of  Tyrannosaurus  Rex:  (1992)  The  Times,  May  20th  and  22nd,
(1992)  The Independent on Sunday, May  24th.

35  There are numerous  cases of finds which  fall  into  private ownership  for this
reason.  Two examples, cited  by the  Law  Commission  in  its September  1987
paper  Treasure Trove, Law  Reform  Issues,  p. 3,  are  the  1983  discovery  at
Oliver's Orchard  in Colchester  of a large hoard  of Roman coins of the third
century AD, and  the  1982 discovery  of an Anglo-Saxon  helmet at York. For
further  illustrations,  see Palmer  (1981) 44 MLR  178, at  180-181.

36  Hill,  op cit  supra,  202, 203; Lord Advocate v Aberdeen  University 1963 SLT
361.  For  a  recent  example,  see  (1991)  The  Times June  1st.  The  position  in
the  Isle  of  Man  conforms  in  all  material  respects  with  that  applying  under
English  law:  see  Government  Circular  No  66/72  (G.O.  Reference  No. G5/
189) issued  by  the Government  Office  at  the  Isle  of  Man,  23rd  June 1972.
37  This is merely one of several situations where modern  English law regulating
transactions  in cultural  property  arguably  gives insufficient  emphasis to the
desirability  of  preserving  the  integrity  of  collections.  A  further  example
concerns  the  operation  of  the  export  licensing  system  on  collections:  see
the  Report  of  the  Reviewing  committee  on  the  Export  of  Works  of  Art
(1989-1990), paras 36-38; Maurice and Turnor (1992) 2 IJCP  273. Contrast
the  approach  taken  by  the  Court  of  Session  towards  the  porpoise  bone in
Lord  Advocate v  Aberdeen  University 1963 SLT  361, at  364 (Lord  Patrick),
366  (Lord  Mackintosh):  'it  is  enough  to  say  that  as  all  the  objects  were
found  together  in  one  box  the find should  be  regarded  as a  whole  and  that
all of it should  be held  to  be treasure trove  if any  of it is to be so  regarded.'

38  (1992)  2 IJCP  333 at  335-336.
39  These  proportions  are  adopted  by  the  proposed  Treasure  Trove  Bill  1992;
see  below,  p. 292.  Of  course,  even  where  the  entirety  of  a  find  is  declared
treasure  trove,  the  British  Museum  may  select  only  part  of  the  find  for
retention  and  may  return  the  residue  to  the  finder.  See,  for  example,  the
discovery  of  136 gold and  6,567 silver coins by Roger  Mintey  in a field near
Reigate:  (1992)  The  Times, 5 December.  The  hoard,  dating  from  the  15th
century  AD,  was  declared  treasure  trove  after  a  90  minute  hearing.  The
British Museum  selected 300 pieces for retention and  Mr  Mintey was permit-
ted  to  keep  the  remainder;  in  due  course  he  consigned  them  for  sale  at
Glendinnings.  At  least  the  British  Museum  has  the  opportunity  to  consider
and  preserve  the value of the find as a collection  in  such  circumstances. See
further  a case reported  in  (1993)  The Independent, 8 April.

40  R  v Hancock [1990] 2 QB 242, at  247; [1990] 3 All  ER  183, at  186 per Auld
J.  It  is commonly  said  that  objects  must  have  been  'concealed'  or  'hidden'
to  constitute  treasure  trove  (contrast  Lord  Advocate  v  Aberdeen  University
1963  SLT  361, at  364  (Lord  Patrick)  and  366  (Lord  Mackintosh)  denying
the  existence  of  any  such  requirement  in  Scotland).  Taken  literally,  this
requirement  might  exclude  from  treasure  trove  those  gold  or  silver  articles
which,  while deliberately  deposited  by  an  owner  who  intended  to return  for
them,  were not  hidden  or  secreted  in  the ordinary  sense. Such  a case might
arise  where  sovereigns are  kept  in an  office  safe,  and  the premises  are later
demolished  or  built  over  in  circumstances  where  the  presence  of  the  sover-

309

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

eigns becomes  forgotten.  In a  note  on  A-G v Trustees of the British  Museum
[1903] 2 Ch  598 (see below) in  (1904) 20 LQR 27, at  p. 32, Martin  contends
that,  where  commentators  have  employed  the word  'hide'  in  definitions  of
treasure  trove,  they have done  so  merely  to express the antithesis  of  loss or
abandonment,  and not to impose an additional and independent  requirement
of  covert  concealment.  In  short,  an  object  can  be  hidden  for  the  purposes
of the doctrine notwithstanding  that there is public knowledge of the deposit.
Emden  (1926)  42  LQR  368,  at  p. 373,  agrees  that  a  deposit  need  not  be
secret  in  order  to  constitute  treasure  trove.  He  cites  the  Crediton  find  in
1896, where coins  found  in a  pigeon-hole  shelf within  the beam  of an  office
which  had  later  been  covered  by  plaster  were declared  treasure  trove, even
though  apparently deposited  in  the  ordinary course  of  business  rather  than
from  motives  of  secrecy.  See  further  on  this  point  Hill,  op  cit  supra,  207,
citing  a  similar  1886 case  of  coins  found  in  a  beam  brought  from  an  old
house  to  a  builder's  yard  at  St  Albans.  The coins  were  held  to  be  treasure
trove, evidently on the ground  that  the beam had once been fixed  in a house.
Hill  contrasts  this with  an  1875  case,  where  coins  found  in  a  cart  among
rubbish  from  the  ruins  of  an  old  house  at  Dean  in  Bedfordshire  escaped
classification  as  treasure  trove,  there  being no evidence  of  their  situation  in
the house.  Older  authority  appears  further  to limit  treasure  trove to  objects
concealed  in or  below  the ground:  see for  example, the review of  records  up
to  the  middle  or  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  by  Emden,  op  cit  supra,  at
p. 376, showing  that in  thirty  one of thirty six recorded  instances the expres-
sion  'under'  or  'in'  the  ground  was  used,  and  that  most  if  not  all  of  the
decisions  appearing  to  support  a wider  rule were  unreliable.  This  limitation
was  reproduced  by Blackstone,  op  cit  supra.  But  Coke, op cit  supra,  spoke
of  treasure  trove  as capable  of  applying  to  any  object  of  the  appropriate
constituency  'wheresoever  it  be  found',  and  Martin,  op  cit  supra,  strongly
supported  this,  arguing  that  it  should  make  no  difference  whether  the
object  was  deposited  in  the  ground  or  in  a  'tangled  thicket'.  In  any  event,
concealment  within something  attached  to the ground  may well suffice  (Hill
op cit supra, p 208 and cases cited  by him at 205 — 207) and modern  opinion
certainly  seems  to  favour  the  extension  of  the doctrine  to  things  hidden  in
the walls or roofs  of buildings: see the cases of coins found  in thatched  roofs
cited  by  Palmer  (1981)  78 MLR  178, at  183. Of course, it is much  easier  to
classify  objects  found  on  the  surface  of  soil  as  treasure  trove  where  their
current  location  occurred  through  erosion  by  natural  forces,  and  evidence
permits  the  inference  that  the  object  was  originally  concealed  below  the
ground.  An example is the  1927 case of the flint  money  box containing  sixty
five ancient British gold coins, found  on a field by a boy at Chute in Wiltshire
and  declared  to  be  treasure  trove:  Hill,  op  cit  supra,  222.  There  is  some
doubt  as  to  whether  objects  deposited  under  water,  rather  than  buried  on
land, can qualify  as treasure trove. Where goods are deposited  in a river  bed
or  a  pond,  the  locality  seems  no  bar  to  a  decision  that  they  are  treasure
trove.  Indeed,  one of  the  most  renowned  treasure  trove  hoards  of  all  time
(the Tutbury hoard) was found  on  the bed of the River Dove in  Staffordshire
in June  1881. The find, believed  to  have  been deposited  around  1324—1325
AD,  consisted  of  some 20,000 silver coins dating from  the reigns of  Edward
I  and  Edward  II,  and  was  once  believed  to  be  the  largest  hoard  of  coins
ever  found  in  the  United  Kingdom  (contrast  now  the  1979  case  of  Mr
Humphries  and  Mr  Booth,  reported  in  (1981)  Daily  Express  17 July,  who
found  56,000  Roman  coins  reportedly  worth  some  £300,000).  There  seems
no  reason  why  goods  deposited  beneath  coastal  waters,  or  on  land  which

310

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

has since been submerged  beneath the sea (as at  Dunwich in Suffolk)  should
not  also  be  capable  of  constituting  treasure  trove:  contrast  the  British
Museum  case, below.

41  [1990] 2 QB 242; [1990] 3 All  ER  183.
42  [1903] 2 Ch 598.
43  [1903] 2 Ch  598, at  609-610.
44  [1990] 2 QB 242 at  251; [1990] 3 All  ER  at  189.
45  [1981] Ch  333 at  340; [1980] 3 All  ER  503 at  508.
46  [1981] Ch  333, at  343. C.S. Emden  (1926) 42 LQR  368 at p. 375 relates  that
in  proceedings  arising  from  the  Corbridge  gold  find  in  1911,  'eminent
authority'  advanced  the following  factors  as tending to show that  gold coins
found  in  a  bronze  jug  at  the  site  of  a  Roman  military  station  had  been
concealed  and  were thus  treasure  trove:  the  upright  position  of  the jug,  the
protection  given  to  the  gold  coins  by  the  inclusion  among  them  of  bronze
coins; the fact  that  the coins were not  of  mixed  metals; the original  position
of  the  hoard  (a  few  inches  below  ground,  under  a  room  of  a  destroyed
house);  and  the  danger  of  hostile  raids  on  the  station  at  the  probable  time
of  the  deposit.

47  [1982] Ch  277; [1982] 1 All  ER  524.
48  A question  on which modern  authority  appears  to  afford  no guidance is the
legal  status  of  objects  deposited  animo  revertendi  by  someone  other  than
their  owner  without  that  owner's  knowledge  or  consent.  This  might  occur
where  a  thief  deposits, animo  revertendi,  treasure  stolen  from  its  owner,  or
where  a  finder  of lost  treasure,  having  failed  to  trace  the  owner,  deposits  it
animo revertendi. Suppose then that the thief and the finder  disappear, never
returning  to claim  the hoard,  arid  that  the owner  likewise remains  untraced.
Does  the  object  belong  to  the  Crown  as  treasure  trove?  Although  it  is
unlikely  that  clear  evidence  of  such a  chain  of events would  be  forthcoming
in  a  case  of  antiquarian  deposits,  such  evidence  is  not  improbable  in  the
case  of  plundered  goods.  It  must,  moreover,  be  recalled  that  there  is  no
compelling  reason  of  principle  why  treasure  trove  should  be  limited  to
antiquarian  finds.  Admittedly,  at  least  one  definition  (that  of  Coke:  see
above, p. 277) requires  the goods  to  have been  hidden  'of  ancient  time',  but
it  is  submitted  that  the  sole  relevance  of  this  lies  in  establishing  the  third
ingredient  of  treasure  trove  (viz,  the  untraceability  of  the  owner)  and  that
the courts will not embark on inquiries as to the relative antiquity of deposits.
Of course,  the  Crown  is less likely  to  wish  to  retain  modern  objects,  but  it
may be more attracted  by ancient  objects  recently  stolen  and  concealed.  On
balance, it is submitted  that where there is a loss by the owner but  deliberate
deposit  animo  revertendi  by  a  non-owner  the  object  should  be  capable  of
classification  as  treasure  trove,  perhaps  on  the  ground  that  it  is 'ownerless'
rather  than  'lost'  in  the  strict  sense.  Contrast  the  general  doctrine  of  bona
vacantia: Bell, Bona Vacantia, in Interests in Goods (eds. Palmer and  McKen-
drick,  1993, Lloyds  of  London  Press) p. 401.

49  The  rule  (like  that  relating  to  gold  and  silver)  does  not  apply  in  Scotland:
Lord  Advocate v  Aberdeen  University 1963  SLT  361, at  364  (Lord  Patrick)
and  366  (Lord  Mackintosh).  But  it  seems  that  under  Scottish  law  the
principle quod nullius estfit  domini regis now extends to treasure and  objects
of  antiquity,  making  it  no  longer  necessary  to  identify  treasure  trove  as  a
separate medium  of acquisition:  Carey  Miller,  Corporeal Moveables in Scots
Law (1991)  25-26.

50  See note  146, below, and  Longworth  (1992) 2 IJCP  333 at  337-340.

311

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

51  The  point  was  left  open  in  the  British Museum case at  611, but  in Hancock
at  pp. 247,  186  Auld  J  remarked  that  sacrifices  or  votive  offerings  were
'unlikely  to  be  treasure  trove'.  Cf,  however,  Martin  (1904)  20  LQR  27,  at
p. 32; Emden  (1926)  LQR  368 at 373.

52  Cf the case of the foundation  deposit at the old Blackfriars  Bridge, discussed

by  Hill,  op  cit  supra,  p. 220; above,  note 26.

53  See  now  In  Re  Chaddock,  The  Times, 23  November  1992;  Ward  (1994)  1
IJCP (forthcoming),  (section  13, Coroners Act 1988, relating to High  Court's
power  to  order  the  holding  of  an  inquest  or  a  fresh  inquest,  applies  to  an
inquest  to  enquire  into  treasure  trove).

54  [1982] QB  1004, at  1017;  Tamworth Industries Ltd  v Attorney-General [1991]

3 NZLR  616, at  621, 624, per  Eichelbaum  CJ.

55  Cf  the  position  in  Scotland,  where  there  is  a  statutory  duty  to  deliver
lost  chattels  (including  objects  of  antiquarian  value)  to  the  police:  Civic
Government  (Scotland)  Act  1982, s.67; Carey  Miller,  op cit  supra.

56  See the Treasury  Review  of  1988 (above, note  5) 5.1 — 5.8 for  a  statement  of

the  constitution  of  the  Committee  and  recommendations  for  improvement.
Chief  among  such  recommendations  was  the  proposal  that  the  Committee
henceforth  be  given  formal  terms of reference:  ibid, para.  5.6.

57  The  order  of  consideration  is  as  follows.  Where  the  British  Museum  does
not  wish  to  add  the  object  to  its  collection,  it  will  inquire  among  other
museums  to  see  whether  any  of  them  wishes  to  acquire  it.  Only  after  these
possibilities  have  been exhausted  will the object  be returned  to  the finder or
sold  for  his benefit.  Money  for  rewards has to be found  either by the  British
Museum  or  by whichever  other  museum  wishes to  acquire  the  object.

58  Treasury  Review  of  1988 (above  note  5) para  3.19 which  recommended  the

continuation  of  the  existing  self-financing  practice.

59  No  10/1989, para  11.
60  R  v Hancock  [1990]  2 QB 242; [1990] 3 All ER  183. And  see note  21 above.
61  Home  Office  Circular  No  10/1989, para  6.
62  Treasury  Review  of  1988 (above  note  5) para  3.5.
63  Cf  the  recent  proposed  Canadian  legislation,  where  the  legislature  decided
against  a  reward  system: proposed  Archaeological  Heritage Preservation Act
1990; Haunton  (1992)2  IJCP  395; above, note  1.

64  See  below.  It  is  believed  that  such  cases  are  rare: Treasury  Review  of  1988
(above,  note  5)  para  3.24,  and  cf  the  case  of  Mr  Mintey,  above  note  34;
(1992)  The  Times  5  December.  The  Review  recommends,  however  (at  para
3.25)  that  the  British  Museum  and  the  National  Museum  of  Wales  should
in  future  make  annual  returns  to  the  Treasury  of  the  numbers  of  finds
declared  treasure trove but returned to finders on the ground that no museum
wishes  to  acquire  them,  together  with  brief  particulars  of  such  finds.  See
further  paras  3.26— 3.27.

65  Home  Office  Circular  No  10/1989, para  6.
66  See  now  In  re  Chaddock,  (1992)  The  Times, 23 November;  above  note  53.
For  this  and  much  other  information,  the  author  is  indebted  to  Dr  Ian
Longworth,  FSA,  Keeper  of  Prehistoric  and  Romano-British  Antiquities  at
the British  Museum.  For a further  case of a threatened  review of a coroner's
jury's verdict  (which  does not, in  the event, appear  to have materialised)  see
(1986)  The  Times, September  19th.

67  (1980)  The  Times,  October  17th,  (1980)  Sunday  Express,  October  5th;  dis-

cussed  by  Palmer  (1981)  44 MLR  178, at  184-185,  note 47.

68  Palmer,  Bailment  (2nd  ed,  1991), pp  1439 et  seq.
69  Palmer,  op  cit,  pp  1442  et  seq.

312

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

70  (1980)  The Times, October  3rd; Palmer (1981) 44 MLR  178, at  183, note 37,

185, note 47.

71  [1969] 2 WLR  71. And  see Hoath  [1990] Conv. 348.
72  [1945] KB 509.
73  Parker v British Airways Board [1982] QB  1004, at  1009, per Donaldson  LJ;
and  see  Webb v Ireland and the Attorney  General [1988] IR  353 at  379-380,
per  Finlay  C.J.  (cf  at  396-397,  per  McCarthy  J);  Tamworth Industries  Ltd
v  Attorney  General [1991]  3 NZLR  616  at  621, 624 per  Eichelbaum  J.  For
criticism,  see Palmer,  Bailment (2nd  ed)  1457-1459.

73a Kohler  (1993)  1 IJCP 133.
74  Cf  the  rather  fuller  list  of considerations  set  out  by  the Treasury  Review  of
1988  (above  note  5) para  3.12  as justifying  the  abatement  of  rewards.  See
also  paras  3.13  et  seq.  The  Review  lists:  (a)  evidence  of  illegal  activity  in
relation  to  a  find,  in  relation  to  which  no  prosecution  has  been  instituted,
(b)  unreasonable  delay  between  making  and  reporting  a  find,  (c)  failure  to
report  all  other  circumstances  surrounding  a  find,  (d)  evidence  that  only
part  of a find  has  been  handed  in, (e) reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that
a  find  has been  made elsewhere  than  on  the alleged  site, or  (f)  other  factors
which Ministers think  it appropriate  to take into account in individual cases.
These  factors  are, of course, additional  to  any  relevant  criminal  conviction.
The  Review  contends  that  criminal  prosecution  should  continue  to  be  re-
garded  as the main  sanction  against  dishonest  finders.

75  July  16th 1981.
76  AG  of  the Duchy  of  Lancaster  v  G E  Overton  (Farms)  Ltd  [1982] Ch  277;

above,  p. 278.

77  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing  considerations,  the Treasury  Review  of  1988
(above,  note)  concluded  that  the  policy  served  by  the  reward  system  would
be  endangered  by  extending  rewards  to  land-owners,  employers  or  others,
and  recommended  that  rewards  should  continue  to  be paid  only  to  finders
themselves: ibid, paras  3.7 — 3.8.

78  See above, notes  39, 64.
79  It  is believed  that  the  coroner  then  bought  two  of  the  sovereigns  from  the

finders.

80  No  10/1989, para  6.
81  (1981) Daily Express, July  17; (1980) Sunday  Express, October  5th;  see also
(1989) The Independent Feb 25th, describing a 2 year-plus delay in  rewarding
the  finder  of  Pinchbeck  Hoard.

82  Cf  the  draft  licence  prepared  by  the  Country  Landowners  Association,  and

reproduced  by  kind  permission  of  that  Association:  (1993)  1 IJCP  160.

83  Except,  perhaps,  in  so  far  as  they  may  entitle  the  searcher  to  excavate
without  scientific  supervision,  thus  arguably  paying  insufficient  regard  to
archaeological  interests.  But  cf  clause  4.1  of  the  Country  Landowners'
Association  draft  licence  which  makes  provision  for  the  involvement  of
archaeological  authorities  where excavation  is not  limited  to the  disturbance
of plough-soil:  (1993)  1 IJCP  160.

84  Cf  the  case  of  the  Middleham  Jewel,  below,  note  146, and  the  Middleham
Ring,  above,  note  7,  in  both  of  which  reward-sharing  agreements  were  in
operation.

85  Treasury  Review of  1988 (above,  note  5) para  3.7.
86  Callisher v Bischoffsheim (1870)  LR  5 QB 449.
87  The Albazero [1977] AC 774, at  841, 846, per  Lord  Diplock.
88  Chaplin v Hicks  [1911] 2 KB  786; Howe v  Teefy (1927)  27 SR  (NSW) 301.

313

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E.  Palmer

89  Cf,  however,  Hardware Services Pty  Ltd  v Primac Association Ltd  [1988] 1
Qd  R  393; and  see  Weir,  Loss  of  a  Chance  -  Compensable  in  Tort?  in
Developpements  Recents du Droit de la Responsabilite Civile (Zurich, 1991),
pp.  111-129.

90  [1902] P.42; Palmer,  Bailment (2nd  ed)  Chapter  4.
91  OSullivan  v  Williams [1992] 3 All  ER  385, CA.
92  In  such  a  case,  the  court  can  require  the  other  party  to  appear  and  can
award  damages  according  to  their  respective  interests.  If  this  were  to
happen,  the  landowner  could  again  recover  nothing  because  his interest  in
the  goods  (i. e. his possession)  is financially worthless.  Section  8,  however,
is designed  to operate before any recovery  of the goods by the owner.  Thus
it  may  not  apply  when  the Crown  has  already  retrieved  treasure  trove.

93  Palmer,  op cit  supra.
94  If  that:  cf  O Sullivan v  Williams, above,  note 89.
95  Cf  the  Parker case (above)  per  Donaldson  LJ.
96  The  Treasury  Review  of  1988  (above  note  5)  has  recommended  that  the
criminal  law should continue to be seen as the main sanction  in cases where
there  is evidence of illegal activity  in  relation  to a find: ibid, para  3.10. See
also  (1992)  The  Times,  20  November,  and  the  letter  by  Martin  Beddoe,
(1992)  The  Times, 3 December.

97  [1990] 2 QB 242; [1990] 3 All  ER  184; Ward  (1992)  1 IJCP 195.
98  The absurdity of excluding adjacent  material (such as containers or contem-
porary  written  messages or  catalogues)  from  the  realm  of  treasure  trove is
scarcely  less than  the absurdity  of excluding  objects  with merely  secondary
precious  metal  content.  Again,  the  point  is  made  by  Longworth  (1992)  2
IJCP  333, at  336 — 337,  who  observes  that  objects  other  than  those  made
of precious  metal  'can  form  part  of a  single deposit'.  Longworth  continues:
'This  can  often  simply  be  a  container,  a  pot  for  example,  in  which  the
hoard  had been placed, or a minor component  of the hoard, as at  Thetford
where  a  unique  shale  box  formed  part  of  the  find.  Such  associations  are
often  of  great  significance  in  relating  the  precious  metalwork  to  the  more
mundane  articles  of  everyday  life.  But  the  separation  of  a  single  find
into  treasure  trove  and  non-treasure  trove  components  can  lead  to  total
absurdity.  In  the case of a  recent  treasure  trove again  from  Snettisham  but
from  a  different  site,  a  hoard  of  Roman  silver  jewellery  was  discovered
inside  a  pot.  The  hoard  clearly  belonged  to  a  jeweller  for  it  consisted  of
silver  rings, coins, bracelets, necklaces, scrap metal  and  a collection  of  110
loose  carved  carnelian  gems  destined  to  be  set  at  some  future  date  in  the
rings.  From  careful  study  of  the  metalwork  and  gems  it  became clear  that
they  represent  not  a  stock  derived  from  here and  there  but  the product  of
a  single  workshop  providing  a  unique  insight  into  the  ways  of  a  Roman
jeweller  at  work  in  the mid-second  century  AD. Under  present  procedures
the  pot  cannot  be  declared  treasure  trove,  nor  can  the  loose  gems.  If  we
are  to  continue  to  use  the  laws of  treasure  trove  as  a  way  of enabling  the
nation  to  preserve  major  discoveries  like  the  Snettisham  Jeweller's  Hoard
and  the  Snettisham  treasure  in  their  entirety,  then  some  extension  to  the
present  definition  of  treasure  trove  is  needed  to  embrace  items  found  so
closely associated  with objects  of precious metal that  they can be construed
to  form  an  integral  part  of a  single indivisible  deposit.'

99  HL  Deb  9 Feb  1982 col 31.
100  See  Home  Office  Circular  No  10/1989.
101  Contrast  the  earlier  recommendations  of  the  Treasury  Review  of  1988

(above,  note  5), paras  6.1 —6.14.

314

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

102  Consultation  Paper:  Ancient  Monuments  (April  1991) p. 2; reply  by  Lord

Hesketh,  House  of  Lords,  13th  December  1989.

103  Clause 2(1).
104  Clause 4(1).
105  Ibid.
106  Clause 4(2).
107  Clause 4(3).
108  Clause  5(1).
109  Clause 5(2).
110  Clause 4(3).
111  Clause  1(1).
112  Ibid.
113  Clause  1(6).
114  Clause  l(2)(b).  By  cl  1(5)  'token'  means  a  token  used  (or  which  may

reasonably  be assumed  to  have  been  used) in place  of  money.

115  Ibid.
116  The remainder  of the hoard  (ie that containing less than 0.5% silver) would

qualify  as treasure  trove  under  cl  l(2)(a)  of  the draft  Bill: see  below.

117  Clause  1(3).
118  Ibid.
119  Ibid.
120  Clause  l(2)(c).
121  Clauses  l(2)(d), 1(4).
122  Clause  l(2)(d).
123  Clauses  1(4), 1(5).
124  Clause  1(8).
125  Clause  l(2)(a).
126  Clause 6(1).
127  Clause 6(2).
128  Clause 6(4).
129  Clause 2(2).
130  Clause 2(4).
131  Clause 3(1).
132  Cf In re Chaddock, (1992)  The Times, 23 November;  above, note 53.
133  Clause 3(2).
134  Ibid.
135  Clause  3(3).
136  [1988] IR 353.
137  Applying  Byrne  v  Ireland  [1972]  IR  241,  where  Walsh  J  had  reached  a
similar  conclusion  regarding  the  Royal  prerogative  of  immunity  from  suit.
138  Finlay  CJ  (for  the  majority)  described  this  pre-emptive  national  right
of  dominion  and  acquisition,  equivalent  to  the  normal  prerogative-based
doctrine  of  treasure  trove,  as  an  inherent  attribute  of  the  sovereignty  of
Ireland  and  a  natural  incident  of  Ireland's  status as an  independent  sover-
eign  state,  rather  than  as  a  right  derived  from  the  Crown.  The  right  was
fortified,  in  his  view,  by  Art  10  of  the  Constitution,  notably  Arts  10.1
(entitling  the State  inter  alia  to  all  natural  resources, all  forms  of  potential
energy  and  all  royalties  and  franchises)  and  10.3 (empowering  legislation
for  the management  of State  property  and  for control  upon  its alienation).
In  Finlay  CJ's  opinion  [1988]  IR  353, at  383, the  phrase  'all  royalties'  in
Art  10.1  was  apt  to  include  the  right  to  preserve  the  national  heritage  by
means  of  a  pre-emptive  property  in  material  corresponding  with  treasure
trove. Such material constituted  a 'national  asset' and  its protective  owner-

315

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E.  Palmer

ship  by  the  State  was  a  necessary  implication  both  for  the common  good
and  to  realise  the  aspirations  of  the  Constitution  at  large.  Finlay  CJ's
judgment  contains  a  resounding  declaration  of  the  importance  to  every
civilised  nation  of  an  understanding  of  its  heritage,  and  of  the  conviction
common  to  Irish  people  that  the  'keys  to  their  ancient  history'  should  be
protected  by  State  ownership  rather  than  relinquished  to  the  hazards  to
private  dominion.  Walsh  J  (at  390 — 391)  accepted  the  legitimacy  of  a
general  right  of  national  ownership  of  'antiquities  of  importance',  while
excepting  those  cases  where  the  original  owners  of  an  antiquity  (or  their
successors  in  title) could  still  be identified  and  traced.  In  general,  Walsh  J
agreed  that  it  would  be inconsistent  with  the  Irish  Constitution,  and  with
the  objectives  of the society which  it  sought  to  create, to  permit  important
historical  objects  to 'become  the exclusive property  of  those who by design
or  by  chance  discover  them  and  take  possession  of  them'.  This  opinion
applied  'to  the  owners  of the  land  in or  on  which'  antiquities  are  found  as
much  as  to  'any  other  persons  who  find  them  in  or  upon  land'  (at  931).
Walsh  J  disagreed,  however,  with  Finlay  CJ's  interpretation  of  the  phrase
'all royalties'  in Art  10.1 as meaning 'all attributes of sovereignty'. In Walsh
J's  view,  such  an  interpretation  would  render  Art  5 redundant;  rather,  the
phrase  must  refer  back  to  the  term  'all  natural  resources'  earlier  in  Art
10.1.  A  further  point  of  divergence  between  Walsh  J's judgment  and  that
of Finlay  CJ  is that Walsh J was not prepared to restrict the inherent power
of public ownership to objects which would  have qualified  as treasure trove
within  the  Royal  Prerogative.  See  ibid,  at  391:  'I  see  no  reason  why  it
should  be  confined  to  such  items  as  fall  within  the  definition  of  treasure
trove  under  the former  law. In  this country this definition  would  be of little
benefit  as so  many  of our antiquities in chattel form  are not made of either
gold  or  silver'.

139  Sed  quaere;  the  fact  that  the  finder's  interest  is  purely  possessory  cannot
mean  that  he  is  without  a  remedy  where  the  defendant  has  wrongfully
taken  the  goods  out  of  his  possession:  cf  Palmer,  Bailment  (2nd  ed)
pp.  1426-1427,  notes 40, 41.

140  [1982] QB  1004; see Palmer,  Bailment (2nd  ed) Chapter  23. As to  whether
the  conventional  estoppel  might  preclude  a  bailee  from  pleading  that  the
bailor has abandoned  his property in the chattel, see Palmer [1987] 1 Lloyd's
MCLQ  43, at   71 —73,  discussing  Moorhouse v Angus  & Robertson  (No  1)
Pty  Ltd  [1981] 1  NSWLR  700; Hudson,  Abandonment, in Interests in Goods
(eds  Palmer  and  McKendrick,  1993, Lloyds  of  London  Press) p. 424.

141  [1914] AC  197.
142  [1902]  P 42.
143  It  is  to  be  noted  that  Lord  Diplock,  speaking  of  bailments  by  way  of
carriage,  has  said  that  at  common  law  the  carrier  was  'estopped  from
denying  his  bailor's  title  to  the  goods  at  the  time  when possession was
delivered  to  him':  The Albazero [1977] AC  747 at  841  (emphasis  added). A
similar  qualification,  applied  to  bailments  in  general  and  to  bailments  by
finders  to museums in particular, would relieve the bailee of any prohibition
upon  pleading  that  he had,  since delivery  to  him, become  the owner  of the
goods.

144  Ci Bumper  Development Corpn Ltdy  Commissioner of Police of the Metropo-

lis [1991] 4 All  ER  638, CA;  Ghandhi  and  James  (1992)  2 IJCP  369.

145  [1988] IR  353, at  358, per  Blayney J  at  first  instance.
146  Practically  the  only effective  restraint  is the  licensing control  placed  on  the
export  of  those  artistic and  antiquarian  objects  which  satisfy  the  Waverley

316

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Treasure Trove

criteria:  see  generally  Maurice  and  Turnor  (1992)  2  IJCP  273.  Even  this
means  of  control  is  substantially  blunted  by  the  lack  of  sufficient  public
funds  to  enable  objects  threatened  with  export  to  be acquired  by  national
museums  and  galleries.  No  case  illustrates  the  problem  more  vividly  than
that  of  the  Middleham  Jewel.  Found  by  amateur  treasure  hunters  near
Middleham  Castle in North  Yorkshire, this fifteenth  century gold jewel, set
with  a  sapphire,  was  described  as  the  most  important  addition  to  the
surviving  body  of  English  mediaeval jewellery  since  the  last  war.  It  failed
to qualify  as treasure  trove because  there was no evidence  that  it had  been
deliberately  deposited  or  concealed;  it  seems  simply  to  have  been  lost.  It
therefore  fell into private ownership and  the chance of compulsory  acquisi-
tion  for  the  nation  was  lost.  In  the  event,  however,  the jewel  did  at  least
remain  in  England.  Originally  sold  at  Sotheby's  in  1986  for  £1.43  million
against  an  estimate  of £200,000-£300,000,  it  was  resold  in  August  1991  for
£2.5  million,  being  saved  from  export  at  the  eleventh  hour  by  a  private
offer  sent  via  fax:  (1991)  The  Times August  9th;  (1991)  The Independent
August 9th. In a letter in (1991)  The Times August 22nd, Mr R W Hamilton
(a  former  keeper  at  the  Ashmolean  Museum)  condemned  the  folly  of
making the retention of such objects dependent  on  the whims of the market
and  the  ability  of  national  museums  or  private  UK  buyers  to  raise  such
sums  at  short  notice.  He  proposed  a  national  law,  enabling  the  state  to
declare  appropriate  objects  part  of  the  national  heritage,  and  to  prohibit
their  export  outright.  But  the  idea  of  a  list  of  heritage  items  whose  export
is absolutely prohibited  has since been rejected  by the Minister for  National
Heritage.

147  An  example  is  recounted  in  (1982)  Daily  Telegraph,  April  2nd.  The  finder
of  a  seven-inch  lead  cross,  inscribed  in  Latin  with  the  legend  'Here  lies
buried  the  famous  King  Arthur  in  the  Isle  of  Avalon'  and  alleged  by  the
finder  to  be  the Glastonbury  Cross, was sentenced  to  two years'  imprison-
ment for contempt  after  failing  to deliver it up to  Enfield  Borough  Council,
the  owners  of  the  land  on  which  he  had  discovered  it  while  using  a  metal
detector.  The  metallic  constituency  of  the  find  would,  of  course,  have
exempted  it  from  the doctrine  of treasure  trove.

148  See  generally  Webb  v  Ireland  and  the  Attorney  General  [1988]  IR  353,

377-379,  per  Finlay  CJ.

149  Cf Moorhouse v Angus & Robertson (No  2)  Pty  £frf[1981]  1 NSWLR  700;
Pierce v Bemis, The Lusitania [1986] QB 384, [1986] 1 All ER  1001; Hudson
above  note  140.

150  M off at v Kazana [1969] 2 WLR 71.
151  See Limitation  Act 1980, ss. 3,4; Bumper Development Corpn Ltdv  Commis-
sioner of Police for  the Metropolis [1991] 4 All  ER  638; Ghandi  and  James
(1992) 2 IJCP 369. As to the position  where an incoming occupier has since
built  over  the  site  of  the  goods,  see  Moffatt  v  Kazana  ibid  at  76,  per
Wrangham  J;  Palmer  (1980) 9 Anglo-American  Law  Review 279.

152  (1721)  1 Stra  505.
153  The Torts (Interference  with  Goods)  Act  1977, s 8, which enables a  plea of
jus  tertii  to  be  raised  in  certain  circumstances  in  defence  to  an  action  for
wrongful  interference  with goods, will be inoperative in this context  because
the  defendant  will  by  definition  be  unable  to  identify  the  real  owner
(tertius).'

154  Willey v  Synan  (1937)  57  CLR  200,  at  216-217,  per  Dixon  J;  White v
Alton-Lewis  Ltd  (1975) 49 DLR  (3d)  189; Hannah v Peel [1945]  1 KB 509,

317

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335

Norman  E. Palmer

at  519, per  Birkett  LJ;  and  see, for  further  authority,  Palmer,  Bailment (2nd
ed,  1991)  pp.  1439-1442.

155  [1965] Qd  R  135; cf  Crinion v  Minister for  Justice [1959] Ir  Jur  Rep 15.
156  [1963]  1 WLR  982  at  989;  [1963] 2 All  ER  834, at  839.
157  McDowell  v  Ulster  Bank  Ltd  (1899) 33 ILT Jo 225.
158  Cf  Willey v  Syrian  above.
159  Palmer,  Bailment  (2nd  ed,  1991) Chapter  6.
160  For  an  interesting  modern  example, see  Webb v Ireland and the A-G  [1988]

IR  353 (High  Ct),  373  (Sup Ct,  Ireland).

161  (1886)  33 Ch  D  562  at  568-569.
162  [1896]  2  QB  44;  and  see  Parker  v  British  Airways  Board [1982]  QB  1004

esp  at  1017-1018,  per  Donaldson  LJ.

163  Cf  Hannah  v Peel  [1945] 1 KB 509 at  519, per  Birkett  LJ.
164  Parker  v  British  Airways  Board  [1982]  QB  1004,  at  1018,  per  Donaldson
LJ;  and  see  Tamworth  Industries Ltd  v  Attorney-General  [1991]  3  NZLR
616, at  621-624,  per  Eichelbaum  CJ;  Kohler  (1993)  1 IJCP  133.

165  [1982] QB 1004. Cf  Bridges  v Hawkesworth (1851) 21 LJQB 75, 15 Jur 1079.
166  (1977)  76 DLR  (3d)  546, [1977] 2 WWR 761.
167  Parker  v British  Airways  Board[\9%2] QB 1004 at  1017, per Donaldson  LJ;
and  see  Webb v Ireland  and the A-G [1988] IR  353 at  372 (Sup Ct, Ireland);
cf  Tamworth  Industries  Ltd  v  Attorney-General  [1991]  3  NZLR  616  at
pp. 621 -624,  per  Eichelbaum  CJ; Kohler  (1993)  1 IJCP 133.

168  Hannah  v Peel  [1945]  1 KB 509, [1945] 2 All  ER 288.
169  See similarly,  1980 JCT  contract,  cl 34.1.
170  [1963]  1 WLR  982;  [1963] 2 All  ER  834.
171  Ibid  at  989,  839-840.
172  Ibid,  at  989, 837.
173  [1963]  1 WLR  982  at  988-989;  [1963] 2 All ER  834 at 839.

This  is a  revised  and  updated  version  of  a  paper  delivered  at  a  meeting of
Committee  20  of  the  International  Bar  Association  at  Montreal  in  June
1991,  and  published  in  Interests  in  Goods (eds  Palmer  and  McKendrick,
1993)  by  Lloyd's  of  London  Press,  to  whom  grateful  acknowledgement  is
given.

318

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000335


