Attribution  and the Claim
to  Objectivity
John Murdoch*

One of the  first  things that  happened  to me when  I began  working
in  a  London  national  museum  was  that  I  got  involved  in a  public
dispute  about  the  authenticity  of  some  pictures.  I  was  a  junior
Assistant Keeper in the Department of Paintings at the Victoria and
Albert  Museum,  and  part  of  the  job,  when  visitors  brought
paintings,  drawings,  watercolours  or  miniatures  to  the  Museum,
was to identify  the objects. If possible, one would attribute the work
to  a  particular  artist,  or  to  a  school; more  often,  all  one could  do
was  give  a  date,  and  some indication  of  the  sort  of  authorship  —
perhaps  it  would  be  a  work  by  someone  having  lessons,  or  by an
amateur,  perhaps  on  tour  in  Europe,  by  a  member  of  a  local  art
society, or perhaps it would be a copy after  something recognizable,
or an imitation or a pastiche, sometimes even with a false signature.
The  task  involved  looking  closely  and  analytically  at  the  object,
front  and  back,  including  any  old  mounting  or  framing  material.
Occasionally  one  would  get  out  a  selection  of  certainly  authentic
works  for  close comparison,  or  look  up  photographs  either  in  the
department  records  or in books.

In contrast to our colleagues in the department who gave opinions
on prints  —  for  they would consult  the standard  catalogues  raison-
nes of the artist concerned  —  we relied mainly on our internal visual
memory and  general  knowledge of the conditions  under  which, for
the last two or three hundred years, art had been produced. Mostly,
people were satisfied.  Those of us who were men had distinctly less
trouble when we had to say that someone's David Cox was a forgery
of c. 1905 than the women. Confronted  with such bad news delivered
by a  young  woman,  some visitors  would  ask  to  speak  to  an  older
man.  For  all  of  us, giving  opinions  was  very  much  easier  at  work
than  if we were taken  by surprise  at,  say, a dinner  party.  This was
not  only  for  the  obvious  reason  that  one  doesn't  have  books  and
photographs  at  dinner  parties;  it  was  because  essentially  what  we
were  offering  and  deploying  was  the  authority  of  the  institution,
not of ourselves. Obviously we had to embody that authority  as far

*  Assistant  Director  (Collections) Victoria  and  Albert  Museum  London.

319

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

John Murdoch

as possible, and not make too many judgements that other  authorit-
ies would  disagree with,  or  else  we would  imperil  the  authority  of
the institution  both for  ourselves and for the future.  And in general,
even without deep research and long trips to the library, it is possible
to  derive  from  the  primary  physical  characteristics  of  a  painting,
together  with  any  surviving  evidence  of  provenance  or  exhibition
history, most of what people want to know. That statement  is what
this paper  is about.

One  day  in  the  early  spring  of  1975,  I  was  summoned  to  the
crowded  opinions room and saw two young men in sharp suits with
a large parcel. When  their turn came they unpacked  several  framed
watercolours and asked me if I could tell them what they were. After
inspection, I said that it was difficult  to comment on  contemporary
amateur  work,  that if they  liked  it, well and good, and  they  should
have confidence in their own taste. One of the young men questioned
me  as  to  why  I  thought  the  images  were  recent,  and  I  said  that,
although  the drawings were on laid paper, their style was obviously
dependent  on  that of  Marc  Chagall;  I hazarded  that  they  were by
someone  in  the  late  1960s,  when  Flower  Power  and  Psychedelia
briefly  produced  a revival of interest in Chagall of the  1940s. I said
that  such  imagery did  not  exist  in  art  or  literature  before  the  mid
twentieth  century. 'That's interesting' the young men said,  'because
these drawings  have  been  offered  for  sale to  us  as  by a  previously
unknown  female  artist  of  the  1840s,  a  disciple  of  William  Blake,
who  had  managed, through  mystical  experiences  similar  to  Blake's
own,  to  anticipate  the  vision  of  the  twentieth  century.'  The  claim,
they  went  on,  was  that  the  drawings  were  a  major  discovery,  of
importance  to  the whole history  of art  since the  1840s. A group of
them  had  turned  up in  a  street  market  and  were now  on  sale in a
London  gallery. I said  that  if the objects  were 'in  process of trade',
I was afraid  I couldn't comment further,  because it was against our
rules. They  'thanked  me and  left'  and  I got on with  the rest  of the
roomful  of opinion seekers.

A  couple  of  weeks  later,  I  awoke  one  Sunday  morning  to  hear
myself being quoted on a radio programme called 'What the Papers
Say'.  There  was  evidently  a  row  between  The Sunday  People and
The Observer,  and  The Observer had just  hit  back.

What  had  happened  was that  reporters from  The Sunday  People,
acting  on  a tip-off,  had  visited  a gallery in the West End  owned by
a  famous  actor  to investigate  what  thay  had  been  told  were  some
very dubious drawings. The exhibition had opened with  fashionable
eclat  and  everyone,  except  obviously  me,  had  been  there:  a  great
art  and  show  business  affair,  celebrating  this  major  discovery.
Among  the  guests  had  been  the  newly  appointed  Director  of  the
V&A,  and  the  exhibition  had  received  an  extremely  favourable
mention  in  The Observer.  Maybe  The Sunday People was interested
in the story because of the show-business angle; maybe also because
the owner of the gallery was still associated in the public mind with

320

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

Attribution

a  memorable  scene  in  a  film  in  which  he  had  pulled  the  pink  and
yellow  tights  off  two  wonderful  looking  actresses.  Anyway,  The
Sunday  People had  quoted  me  and  my  opposite  number  at  the
British Museum, as saying that the drawings were recent work. They
had also cast doubt on the published information  on the provenance
of  the  drawings.  They  implicitly  held  The Observer  up  to  ridicule
and  the  owner  of  the  gallery  was  naturally  deeply  embarrassed.
Since  I  don't  normally  see  The Sunday  People, I  had  missed  this
article, as had everyone else I know at home and at work. But when
The Observer hit  back, everyone knew it.

I  can't  remember  all  the  details,  nor  when,  over  several  weeks,
all  the  different  statements  were  made.  The  Observer produced
statements  that  the  drawings  had  been  found  in  an  eighteenth
century coffer  in an old house in Surrey. They also quoted  a paper
conservator  at the Courtauld  Institute  as saying that  there were no
anachronistic  pigments  and  that  since  the  drawings  were  on  laid
paper  they  must  be  old.  They  also  quoted  the  Director  of  the
V&A as being enthusiastic  about  the drawings.

In  reply,  The Sunday People demolished  the  new  details  of  the
provenance, quoting a denial by the recent owners of the house that
there  had  been  drawings  or  paintings  anywhere  in  the  house  and
that the coffer  had been empty, and revealed other sceptical opinion
in support  of my position. The other  side countered  that  the draw-
ings  had  escaped  the  notice  of  the  previous  owners  of  the  house
because  the  coffer  in  question  had  had  a  false  bottom.  And  so  it
went on.

I dreaded  Sundays, but eventually the story lapsed and the draw-
ings disappeared.  No  museums  were buyers. It  was a  fairly  typical
art-world  spat,  the  result,  you  might  say,  of  the  chronically  loose
and  impressionistic  evidential  base  of  the  way  we write,  or  apply,
the  history  of  art.  I  have  told  it  at  some  length  because  I  think  it
shows  some  of  the  factors  that  act  together  to  constitute  day-to-
day  'knowledge'  in  our  field.  I  want  to  list  those  that  I  have  so
far  distinguished,  and  then  to  spend  rather  longer  exposing  the
historically  specific  nature of the position  that  I myself occupied in
the dispute.

From  what  I stress is my point  of view, I see the factors  as:

(a)  Firstly,  technical,  as  in  the  question  whether  the  drawings
qualified  as 'old', and therefore  'genuine', or 'recent' and there-
fore  in  this case  'fake'.  But  these  words, which  suggest  that  it
might  be  possible  to  settle  who  was  right  in  the  controversy,
cannot  do  so  in  any  simple  way.  For  instance,  simply  asking
the question  about  age, and  getting  the  answer  that  the  paper
is old,  does  not  lead  to  the  expected  conclusion,  for  its  being
old  is  to  my  mind  a  reason  for  suspicion.  Someone  produced
the drawings, I say, using old laid paper, which is not very easy
to  come  by,  and  is anyway  not  very  suitable  for  watercolour

321

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

John Murdoch

painting.  The  visibility  of  the  lines in laid  paper  (made by  the
lattice  of  wires  in  the  traditional  paper-maker's  mould),  and
the fact  that they show through the wash in a coloured drawing,
was a reason  for  the adoption  of wove paper (made with a fine
woven  screen  developed  by John  Baskerville  in  the  1750s)  for
the  large  exhibition  watercolours  of  the  late  eighteenth  and
nineteenth  centuries.  But  the  supposed  watercolourist  of  the
1840s had  many  more  papers  to choose  from  and  would  have
been  much  more  likely  to  use  one  of  the  specially  developed
watercolourists'  papers, such as 'Creswick',  which were widely
available and  virtually  standard  for  large wash drawings in the
second quarter  of the nineteenth century. Amateurs particularly
use  these  special  papers,  because  correcting  mistakes  on  them
is so much easier. So the use of a laid paper seemed anomalous,
and  suggestive  of  an  attempt  to  bamboozle  the judgement  of
those  of  us  who  pay  attention  to  such  technical  aspects  of
art.  And  similarly,  the  provision  of  an  elaborate  provenance,
especially  when  it  was  exposed  as  dependent  on  coffers  with
false  bottoms,  suggested  a deliberate attempt  to deceive.
(b)  Money:  presumably,  in  the  initial  stages,  the  motive  was
profit.
(c)  Credulity:  although  the  gallery  owner  would  legitimately
have been making  money out of the drawings, I doubt whether
there  was  any  attempt  to  deceive  there.  I  suppose  he  was
seduced by images which, though said to be nineteenth century,
seemed  wonderfully  modern  — and  the  more  seductive  to
twentieth  century  eyes  for  that  reason.  The  thought  of  an  art
historical  coup  would  also be intoxicating.

(d)  Chic: mounted,  framed,  catalogued  and displayed in a chic
gallery in a chic street, with the champagne flowing, with actors
and  actresses  and  other  beautiful  people present,  the drawings
would  benefit  from  the  dramatic  impossibility  of  saying  any-
thing in  front  of them  other  than  'How  marvellous, darling'.

(e)  Reputation:  perhaps  influenced  by  this  atmosphere,  The
Observer noticed  the display favourably.  Such an  authoritative
and bienpensant  newspaper cannot be said to have made a naive
mistake.  When  challenged,  it  had  to  defend  its  credibility —
especially  against  The Sunday  People.

(f)  Iconoclasm: perhaps partly provoked by the West End ethos,
The Sunday  People set about  an exposure, looking for  facts  —
scientific and documentary, plus some opinions from  those who
had  not  so  far  been  involved.  The  social  dynamics  of  the
confrontation  were  interesting.  Very  few  people  interested  in
art  read  The Sunday  People, but most of them read  The Obser-
ver. So  most  people  interested  in  the  subject  got  an  extremely

322

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

Attribution

one-sided  impression  of  the case, and  were anyway  disinclined
to  believe  that  The Sunday  People could,  in  this  instance,  be
right and the good, responsible Observer, wrong. All my friends,
and the colleagues at work, thought  I had made an embarrass-
ing mistake.
(g)  Authority: both  sides  attempted  to  enlist  the  authority  of
institutions  and  great  names  in  support  of  their  position.  The
watercolour  experts  at  the  British  Museum  and  the  Victoria
and Albert Museum were ranged against the paper conservation
laboratory  at  the  Courtauld  Institute  and  the  Director  of  the
Victoria and  Albert  Museum.
(h)  Institutional pressure:  I was aware of institutional pressure,
as  my  head  of  department  enquired  delicately  whether  I  was
sure of  my ground  (he was an  Observer  reader). My  Director
was  quoted  to  me  as  having  said  testily  that  he was  the  only
person who could speak for the V&A, not some junior whipper-
snapper  upstairs.
(i)  Appeasement  and selective  quotation:  I  remember  saying  to
The Observer,  which  quoted  me, that  I was perfectly  ready  to
change  my  opinion  if  the  facts  warranted,  and  if  it  could  be
explained  to  me how  images from  Chagall  could  be  produced
by  someone  else  ninety  years  before  they  were  invented.  In
print,  the defiant  irony  of that was lost  and  made to  look like
wavering  —  'V&A expert  ready  to change his mind'.
(j)  Obstinacy and arrogance:  But clearly by this time I was also
locked into a position, partly determined  by my own character
and  convictions,  partly  by  a  sense  of  solidarity  with  my  col-
league  at  the  British  Museum.  As you  can  probably  tell  from
the  way  I  tell  the  story,  I  thought  virtually  everyone  else was
either  venal  or  silly,  and  a  lot  of  natural  arrogance  was  thus
mixed  in with a sense of being unjustly  treated.
(k)  Objectivity,  history and science:  Since  I  had  absolutely  no
financial or  other  reason  to  say  anything  in  the  matter  except
what I thought, I was able to adopt  the posture of the objective
expert  — and  of  course,  as  any  P.R.  consultant  would  have
told  me, I  should  have  refused  any  further  comment  after  the
story  had  broken.  I  was  secure  in  the  myths  of  incorruptible
disinterested  scholarship,  and  of  positive  knowledge  derived
from  empirically  verifiable  observations.

That these are myths, or rather that, like myths, they are historically
contingent  and  dependent  for  their  persuasive  force  on  human,
institutional  and  political  factors,  is  the  theme  of  the  rest  of  this
paper.  In  that  spirit,  I  should  start  by  saying  a  little  more  both
about  the history  of the art  historical  discipline  and  about  the  sort
of work  which I normally  do within  it.

323

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

John Murdoch

Very briefly, the importance attached to the authorship of pictures
in  our  culture  is generally  held  to  be a  function  of  the  respect  for
individualism  in  the  Renaissance,  and  in  particular  of  Giorgio Va-
sari's  account  of  the  increasing  perfection  of  the  art  of  pictorial
representation  resulting  from  the  excellencies  of  a  succession  of
great  painters.  However,  the  question  of  personal  authorship  was
not  of  exclusive  importance  for  the  owners  of  pictures  during  the
next two hundred  years or so. Ownership of a particular image was
often  more  important  than  ownership  of  an  authentic  or  original
work from  a particular artist's hand. Copies, and the art of accurate
copying,  were  certainly  not  despised,  even  by  great  connoisseurs
like  Charles  I  of  Britain.  Seventeenth  and  eighteenth  century  art
historians,  such  as  Karel  van  Mander1  and  George  Vertue  (his
notebooks  compiled  in  the  early  years  of  the  eighteenth  century
provided  the  material  for  Horace  Walpole's  Anecdotes of Painting
in England,  1765 — 71) continued  to  collect  information  about  con-
temporary  or  recent  artists  of  their  national  schools, and  to  record
the location  of pictures, describing them according to their  subjects
or traditional identifications. We may see this as part of the encyclo-
paedic  mentality,  analogous  as  a  study  of  man-made  artefacts  to
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  century  studies  of  natural  history  and
topography.  By the nineteenth century, the taxonomic habit of mind
had itself produced  a sense of the importance of classifying  pictures
according to school and artist, and  there was an increasingly  strong
sense  that  Hippolyte  Taine's  determinants  ('race,  milieu  and  mo-
ment')  were  the  definitive  conditions  within  which  artists  worked.
From  a  different  philosophical  direction,  Romantic  attitudes  to
human  individuality  and  to art as the expression of that  individual-
ity,  hugely  increased  the  importance  of  artist's  biographies  and  of
the  precise  order  in  which  pictures  were  painted.  Written  records
were  searched  so  that  the  character  of  each  artist  could  be  under-
stood,  and  so that  pictures could  be recognised  by reference  to  that
unique  character.  In  the  wake  of  the  French  Revolution  and  the
Napoleonic Wars, new private collections of pictures were  founded,
and also the earliest of the great national art museums. The require-
ments  of  these  institutions,  their  enlargement  by  acquisitions  and
the  problem  of  their  rational  arrangement  by  artist  and  national
school,  increasingly  concentrated  the  attention  of art  historians  on
questions  of  taxonomy  and  authorship.  Thus  art  museums,  being
themselves  products  of  the  Enlightenment  and  of  Romanticism,
ensure  the  survival  into  the  twentieth  and  twenty-first  century  of
the  value  systems  and  practices  they  incorporate.  And  museum
curators  remain  primarily  responsible  both  academically  and  pub-
licly  for  maintaining  an  up-to-date  nomenclature  of  the  pictures
they  look  after.

It  is important  to realise, however,  that  at  no time in  the history
of  the  history  of  art,  has  the  pre-occupation  with  attribution  been
exclusive.  For  instance,  in  the  second  quarter  of  the  nineteenth

324

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

Attribution

century, the need to understand  those aspects of Christian  iconogra-
phy which were no longer part  of the traditional  faith  in  Protestant
countries  (if  anywhere),  led  to  the  publication  of  important  hand-
books  by Lord  Lindsay  and  Mrs Jameson.2  Academic  foundations
such as the Warburg  Institute exist to promote such  iconographical
studies of the Art, in the broadest  sense, of the Classical  Tradition.
Particularly  since  the  1930s,  there  has  been  a  strong  academic
tradition of Marxist art history, concerned primarily with the social
determinants and functioning  of art, and only marginally  interested
in  questions  of  authorship.  And  since  the  1960s,  post-structuralist
critiques  of  'intentionality'  and  the  ways  in  which  meanings  are
generated by texts, including visual texts, have placed greater empha-
sis on the audiences  of art  than  on its producers.

Personally,  I  have  worked  mostly  on  the  key  role  of  aesthetic
theory in the formation  of imagery in the years around  1800. I have
also worked  on portrait  images in the seventeenth  century  which, I
would claim, were important  in maintaining and transmitting cultu-
ral  values  associated  with  the  Tudor  Anglican  Settlement  into  the
post-Restoration  years. But  that  work  grew out  of a  task  to which
I was assigned when I joined  the Victoria and Albert  Museum,  and
which  was  very  much  part  of  the  central  taxonomic  role  of  the
Museum,  rather  than  of  my  own  instinctive  preferences.  The  task
was to become an expert on portrait miniatures and their authorship,
and  to catalogue  the collection.

It  is  through  that  task  that  I  was,  as  it  happens,  enabled  to
understand  some  of  the  historical  contingencies  of  the  claim  to
scientific  objectivity  that  is implicit in our public role as curators.
I have described myself in 1974 as Assistant Keeper in the Depart-
ment of Paintings. I was appointed  to that office  the year before by
the  then  Director  of  the  V&A  John  Pope-Hennessey  and  by  the
Keeper of the department Graham Reynolds. Apart from  immediate
tasks, such as the Byron exhibition, I was to take over from  Graham
his special fields of  the watercolours,  the miniatures  (especially  the
early  ones)  and  Constable.  While  I  was  doing  Byron,  John  Pope-
Hennessey  left  and  was  succeeded  by  Roy  Strong,  whose  work  on
Tudor portraiture I knew and greatly admired. Reynolds and Strong
had, in the past, clashed about  the attribution  of a possible Holbein
miniature,  and  in  the  event,  Graham  brought  forward  his  planned
retirement by a year. In  his last months as Keeper  he instituted  for
me  a  twice  weekly  private  session,  two  hours  long,  in  which  he
systematically  took  me  through  the  collection  of  miniatures,  of
which  I  had  no  previous  experience.  For  each  artist  there  was
something distinctive,  the shape of the ear, perhaps,  or more  often
something more minute, such as the way in which the shadow under
the eye was drawn,  or  the  outlining  of  the  nose,  or  the  shading  of
the  background.  He  used  a  hand-held  lens and  knew exactly  what
he was looking  for  in each  object.  If an  object  had  been  attributed
to,  say, Andrew  Plimer,  and  the shape  of the nose or  the  hatching

325

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

John Murdoch

of  the  background  were  not  right,  then,  even  if  the  miniature
purported  to  be signed  or otherwise documented,  one was to doubt
the  signature  rather  than  the  evidence  of  the  nose  or  hatching
strokes.  It  was  only  years  later  that  I  realised  what  Graham  was
doing, that  I was being inducted into a specific  tradition of connois-
seurship,  and  that  there  was,  within  it,  an  apostolic  succession  at
the  V&A.

Graham  had himself joined the department in 1938 as the equiva-
lent  of  an  Assistant  Keeper. Interestingly,  his degree was in mathe-
matics.  One  of  his  duties  was  to  learn  the  specially  difficult  and
arcane  field  of  miniatures,  which  is  studied  only  at  the  V&A,  and
he  was  inducted  into  it  by  Carl  Winter  (1906-1966),  during  the
period  when  Winter  was  beginning  to  try  to  distinguish  the  hands
of  Nicholas  Hilliard  and  Isaac  Oliver,  the  two  great  Elizabethan
miniaturists,  whose  oeuvres  had  become  totally  confused  in  the
welter  of  traditional  and  speculative  attributions  since  the  seven-
teenth  century.  The  work  was  characterised  by  minutely  sensitive
analysis  of the actual  marks made on the vellum by the artists, and
for  the  first  time, proper  allowance was made for  condition  —  not
so much  in describing  the extent of restorers' interpolations, but by
looking  for  and  using  stylistic  markers  that,  in  most  cases,  were
little affected  by restoration or fading. For the first time there would
be a  rational  and  principled  distinction  between  the artists. Winter,
however, was one of  those connoisseurs who published  little and so
it  fell  to  Reynolds,  when  Winter  left  to  become  Director  of  the
Fitzwilliam  Museum  in  Cambridge  in  1946,  to  continue  the  work
and  bring  it  to  fruition.  This  he did  in  the  brilliant  Hilliard-Oliver
exhibition  held  at  the  V&A  in  1947.  In  the  catalogue  he  pays
generous tribute  to  Winter's  'basic work  on this fundamental  task.'
Winter  was  a  great  connoisseur.  He  had  joined  the  department
also as an  Assistant  Keeper, in 1931, when the towering personality
was  Basil  Long  (1881-1937).  Long  had  been  in  the  department
since  1906  and  had  a  string  of  major  catalogues  to  his  credit.  A
brilliant  linguist  who  had  been  at  the University  of  Heidelburg, he
ranged  across  the  whole  field  of  European  old  master  painting,
including  British  art,  but  his special field was the miniature.  In  the
departmental  files  one  comes  across  notes written  by him  when  he
was  a  staff  officer  on  the  Western  Front  during  the  war,  giving
his  assistant  Stokes  back  in  South  Kensington  amazingly  detailed
instructions  on  the  day-to-day  care  of  the  collection.  Among  his
art-historical  papers  I  found  a  list  of  miniaturists  and  alongside
each name was some characteristic trait: long straight noses, a small
white  high-light  in  each  eye,  matt  grey  backgrounds,  a  black  line
under  the  eye-lid.  I  presume  it  was  work  in  progress,  available  as
such  to  his  colleagues,  but  not  yet  ready  for  publication.  Of  the
work that he did complete, the most important was the monumental
British  Miniaturists  of  1929,  which  is  still  standard.  In  effect,  it
established  the  field,  rescuing  it  from  the  enthusiasm  of  amateurs,

326

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

Attribution

dealers and collectors, who both before and after Long, have poured
forth  garbled monographs and general histories. British Miniaturists
is a  comprehensive  study  of  every  artist  then  known,  covering  the
documentary  records and current  locations  of all important  works,
together  with  a  characterisation  of  each  artist's  style: for  example,
on  Samuel  Cooper:

'A  typical  portion  of  the  faces  for  comparison  is  the  method
of  drawing  the  eyelids.  ...  The  shading  of  his  faces  is usually
brown  ... he laid in a ground of opaque white on the parchment
before  painting  a miniature  ...'.

Winter  revered  Long, and  Long trained  Winter.  But in  1936, Long
suddenly began suffering  from  headaches  and  he died  from  a brain
tumour  on  5 January  1937 . Winter  busied himself  with  organizing
a memorial for  him, and collected  enough money to purchase  from
the  Buccleuch  Collection  a  brilliant,  troubling  self  portrait  by  the
poet, barrister, Fellow of the Royal Society and miniaturist, Thomas
Flatman  (1635 — 88).  Acquired  in  1937,  it  was  one  of  the  first
objects catalogued  by the young Graham  Reynolds as he joined  the
department.

One  day  in  the  mid  1980s  I  came  across,  folded  in  a  book  in
the  departmental  library,  a  newspaper  obituary  of  Long  with  all
references  and  dates  unfortunately  cut  off.  In  one  sentence  it  told
that, just after  graduating in the late  1890s, Long had  taken himself
off  to  Milan, where he had  studied  the methods  of  the great  Giov-
anni  Morelli.

Now,  Morelli  (1816 — 1891)  is  an  interesting  man.  Among  the
inventors of art history he has been somewhat obscured by the fame
of  Burckhardt,  Waagen,  Crowe  and  Cavalcaselle,  Bode,  Berenson,
Warburg  et  al. Yet  Morelli  was the brightest  star  of  all,  at  least  in
a literary sense, between the publication of his first essay in 1874 and
his death in 1891. Writing under the pseudonym Ivan Lermolieff,  an
anagram  of  his  name  with  a  Russian  ending,  he  presented  himself
as a sort of Ariel, a deliberately insubstantial figure of the imagina-
tion, but dedicated to the reform  of the deep intellectual and institu-
tional  structure  of  art  history.  Feigning  a  Socratic  naivete,  he
adopted  the  form  of  the  dialogue,  and  his  irony  is  both  delicious
and devastating. We shall return  to his role as Ariel in due course.
In relation to the brief history of art history which I have sketched
above, Morelli  enters  the story in the mid-nineteenth  century  when
attribution  was  well-established  as  the  central,  institutional  pre-
occupation.  The  practice  of  attribution  through  the  recognition  of
the  essential  spirit  (the  Hegelian  geist)  of  the  painting  was  still
standard,  though  it  was  to  be  supported  by  archival  research  and
the study  of drawings.

Morelli, by descent a Swiss Protestant educated in Germany, was
by conviction a protagonist of the Italian Risorgimento and member

327

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

John Murdoch

of the Italian  popular  assembly.  Already a connoisseur  and  activist
in matters of art, he was appointed  in April  1861 as a commissioner
for  the Italian  government  to tour Umbria  and the Marches, to list
and  report  on  the  paintings  in  churches,  monasteries,  and  private
collections. The secretary  of the commission was Giovanni Cavalca-
selle, who thus laid the foundations for his collaboration with Joseph
Arthur  Crowe  on  the  New  History of  Painting in Italy  (1864)  and
many  subsequent  works.  Morelli was appalled  at  the physical  state
of  the  paintings,  and  at  the  ignorance  of  those  in  charge  of  them.
He spent  the next  ten  or  twelve years pressing for  the reform  of the
Italian  museums  and  galleries,  especially  seeking  the  appointment
of  directors  competent  in  the  history  of  art,  and  in  securing  the
passage  of  the  first  of  the  Italian  state laws regulating  the sale and
export  of works  of  art  in  public institutions. During  these years he
travelled widely in Europe, studying collections in Germany, France
and  England,  confirming  his  general  impression  of  widespread  in-
competence  in  the  identification  of  pictures  and  acquiring  a  sharp
sense of the self-serving  arrogance of gallery directors and university
professors.  Ultimately,  having  become  a  member  of  the  Italian
senate, at the age of nearly sixty he ventured into print with a series
of  essays  in  Carl  von  Lutzow's  periodical  Zeitschrift fur Bildende
Kunst (Leipzig  1874 — 6), which caused a sensation  in the  European
art  world.  He  offered  a  detailed  critique  and  expose  of  what  he
claimed  to  be  wrong  attributions  in  the  most  famous  galleries  of
Italy,  pouring  scorn  on  not  only  the  traditional  attributions  but
on  the  recent judgements  of  the  most  powerful  German  scholars.
Following  the  succes  de  scandale  of  this first series, he followed  it
in  1880  with  a  critical  review  of  the  pictures  in  the  galleries  at
Dresden,  Munich  and  Berlin.

The  1880s  were  a  decade  of  gradual,  perhaps  irresistible  success
as,  despite  the  anger  of  the  Berlin  establishment,  galleries  all  over
Europe  fell  into  line with  the maestro's judgements. By 1890, when
his last  book  came  out,  recapitulating  some  of his earliest  material
on  the  Borghese  and  Doria-Pamfili  galleries  in  Rome, his  triumph
was largely  complete.  It  is  time to  look  at his work  and  the  nature
of his impact  on  the  practice  of art history in greater  detail.

For  Morelli,  the  most  important  piece of evidence in  relation  to
authorship was the painting itself. Although archival research might
produce  evidence  of  a  commission,  or  of  payments  to  a  named
artist,  the  definitive  evidence  had  to  be  the  formal  properties,  or
'phraseology', of the painting. His alter ego, an aged Italian connois-
seur,  who  is  encountered  descending  the  steps  of  the  Pitti  one
evening, makes  the  point:

'Let me give an  ...  instance of the very problematic value of a
document  in the hands of a man who does not understand  the
phraseology  of  art.  [A]...  distinguished  archivist  ...  who  has

328

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

Attribution

rendered  good  service in his particular  branch  of research, had
the misfortune  to  discover  a document  some  years  ago  in  our
city  archives,  which  records  that  Fra  Diamante,  an  inferior
painter  of  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  pupil  and
assistant  of  Fra  Filippo  Lippi,  was  commissioned  to  paint  a
fresco  in  the  Vatican,  of  "Christ  delivering  the  keys  to  St.
Peter."  Jubilant  at  his  great  discovery,  he  gave  vent  to  his
mingled  excitement  and  scorn  in  the  following  terms:  "How
little you art-critics know of your business! From Vasari down-
wards you have all ascribed the large fresco in the Sistine chapel
representing  "St.  Peter  receiving  the  keys"  to  Perugino,  and
you  profess  to  see  his  manner  in  it.  But  let  me  tell  you  that
you  are  quite  on  the  wrong  tack;  for  it  is not  the work  of  an
Umbrian  at  all, but  of  our  Florentine,  Fra  Diamante  ...  Here
it  is in black  and white in my document,  as clear  as noonday,
and  before  such evidence criticism  and  strife  must  cease"'.3

Commonsense alone, we might suppose, should have prevented such
a foolishly premature announcement by the archivist. The old man's
companion  replies:

' "As I have not been in Rome I cannot say anything about this
fresco", said I. "Do you consider it to be the work of Perugino?"
"His  best  work",  replied  the  Italian  emphatically,  with  an  air
of complete conviction.

"I  must  confess",  I  observed,  "that  you  have  persuaded  me
of  this  much,  that  the  work  of  art  itself  is, after  all,  the  only
trustworthy  evidence for  purposes  of  identification'".

The only evidence that counts ultimately is therefore  the evidence
contained  in  the  actual  picture  surface,  that  which  bears  marks
made both deliberately and instinctually by the person in whom one
is interested.  The elderly Italian  speaks  again:

' "Only by gaining a thorough  knowledge  of the characteristics
of  each  painter  — of  his  forms  and  of  his  colouring  — shall
we ever succeed in distinguishing the genuine works of the great
masters from  those of their pupils and  imitators, or even  from
copies; and though this method may not always lead to absolute
conviction,  it, at least, brings us to the  threshold."

"That  may  be",  said  I,  "but  you  must  recollect  that  every

human  eye sees form  differently."

"Exactly  so",  said  the  Italian,  "and,  for  this  very  reason,
every  great  artist  sees  and  represents  those  forms  in  his  own
distinctive  manner;  hence,  for  him  they  become  characteristic.
For  they are by no means the result of accident or caprice, but
of internal  conditions."'4

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

329

John Murdoch

The  next  day  the  pair  meet  in  the  Uffizi  and  apply  the  previous
day's  lesson  to  two works attributed  by the gallery  director  to  Fra
Filippo  Lippi:

'"Look  at  this  painting  carefully",  he  said,  as  he  placed  me
before it in the best light. "Among Sandro Botticelli's character-
istic  forms  I  will  mention  the  hand,  with  bony  fingers  — not
beautiful, but always full of life; the nails, which, as you perceive
in  the  thumb  here,  are  square  with  black  outlines,  and  the
short  nose  with  dilated  nostrils,  which  you  see exemplified  in
Botticelli's celebrated and undisputed work hanging close by  —
The  Calumny of  Apelles.  Note,  too,  the  peculiar  lengthened
folds  of  the drapery,  and  the  transparent  golden  red  colour in
both  pictures. If  you  like,  you  may  also  compare  the  nimbus
round  the head of St Augustine, with the glories of other saints
in  authentic works of the  same period  by the  master,  and  you
will,  I  think  be found  to  acknowledge  that  the  painter  of  the
Calumny and  of  the  large  Tondo  in  the  next  room,  must  also
have been  the author  of  this St Augustine."

This  matter-of-fact  way  of  identifying  works  of  art  by  the
help  of  such  external  signs  savoured  more  of  an  anatomist,  I
thought,  than  of  a  student  of  art,  and  was  moreover  entirely
opposed  to  the  usually  accepted  method.  Nevertheless  I  an-
swered:  "You seem to be right  in your conjectures;  but  how is
it that  the  picture came to be ascribed  to Fra  Filippo  and  not
to  Botticelli?"

"Because  those who  named  the  pictures  in  this gallery  were
only  guided  by  the  general  impression,  and  were  not  in  the
habit  of comparing  the works by different  masters of the same
school;  the  principal  reason,  however,  was  that  Vasari,  in  his
life of Fra Filippo, records that the Frate painted a St Augustine
in his Study  for  Bernardo  Vecchietti."'5

Morelli called what the old man was looking for  the Grundform,  or
typical  form,  by which  each  artist  indicates  a part  of  the  anatomy,
or  part  of  a  landscape  background.  Because,  as  he  says,  'most
painters  ...  put  all the  strength  of  their  art  into  the  delineation  of
the  features  [of  the head]  ...  and  pupils,  for  this part  of  the  work,
often  appropriate  ideas from  their masters', one has to look for  the
Grundform in  the  hands  and  ears,  the  less  regarded  parts  of  the
body,  over  which  the  painter's  brush  passes  instinctively,  creating
forms  that  come  from  his  own  unalloyed  vision  — 'For  every
important  painter  has, so to speak,  a type of hand  and ear peculiar
to  himself.'6

Lest  this  should  seem  simplistic,  Morelli  sees  numerous  other
instinctually  'typical'  markers  of  the  painter's  hand.  In  discussing
an  artist  called  Bacchiacca  he lists a number  of them:

330

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

Attribution

'1)  In the foreground  of his landscapes he nearly always introduces
a  wedge-shaped  rock  of  a  light  colour,  over-grown  with  trees
and  bushes  ...

2)  His hands have long bony  fingers
3)  ...  he shows a predilection  for  blue.
4)  He  first  laid  in  the  hair  in  brown,  and  added  the  details  with

glazes of a yellowish colour  ...

5)  [the ear] is sometimes rounder,  sometimes longer  in form  ...
6)  The  close-fitting  sleeves  which  he  gives  to  his  female  figures
show a number of stiff  cross-folds  ... a peculiarity  ...  due to his
study  of Lucas van  Leyden's engravings  ...

7)  In the draperies we often find a fold in the shape of a V.. .'.7
It  is difficult  for  us  now  to  understand  how  revolutionary  — the
word  is actually  used  by  the  narrator  in  Morelli's  dialogue  —  this
seemed  in the late nineteenth  century. Although  he pays lip-service
to  the  German  idealist  tradition,  to  the  idea  that  all  appearances
are  merely  local  incarnations  of  the  geist,  there  is  no  doubt  that
he  felt  the  starting  point  should  be  those  adventitious,  mundane,
instinctual little marks on the canvas. His contribution to the history
of  art  is  in  that  sense  'scientific',  for  it  is  based  on  the  classic
inductive  process, of close observation  and  measurement,  followed
by hypothetical generalisation, which was, from  the 'scientific' revo-
lution of the seventeenth century, held to provide the most plausible
road to certain knowledge. It is interesting that Morelli was actually
trained  as  a  physician  — he  was  thus  professionally  as  well  as
intellectually  of the empirical tradition,  and he claims it  specifically
as his own in the Introduction  to his essay on the Munich  Gallery:

'Yet even the most highly gifted  and  accomplished  connoisseur
will  never  attain  to  certainty  of judgement  without  a  definite
system  of  study,  and  this,  I  believe,  must  be  that  so-called
"experimental  method"  which,  from  the  time  of  Leonardo  da
Vinci, of Galileo, and  of  Bacon,  to  that  of Volta and  Darwin,
has  led  to  the most  splendid  discoveries.  In  the history  of  Art
it  can,  of  course,  only  be  regarded  as  a  means  to  assist  in
identifying  the author  of a picture.'8

In fact,  of course, Morelli was not a white-coated  scientist  disinter-
estedly  seeking after  truth.  We may  here  remember  that  he was  an
Italian  patriot,  hyper-conscious  of  the growing  power  of  Germany
under Bismarck, and it is difficult  to read even his coolest descriptive
prose without being aware that coolness and the claim to objectivity
are part of his weaponry. Thus disguised, he was in fact an amazingly
persistent  and  biting controversialist,  pursuing controversy  with  an
open animus that eventually embarrassed  even his greatest  admirers
and  disciples.  His  principal  opponent  was  Wilhelm  Bode
(1845 — 1929), the  famous  and  infinitely  formidable  director  of  the

331

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

John Murdoch

great gallery at  Berlin which  bears his name. Institutionally,  and by
common  consent  as  to  his  merit  as  a scholar,  Bode was the  leader
of  the German  school  of  art  history, which  had, certainly  since the
1820s, dominated  the entire  European  scene by its  professionalised
scholarship  and  by its  own  separate claims to  'scientific'  authority.
Fundamentally,  the  argument  is over the ownership  of 'science':

'Some  of  the  most  persistent  among  my  numerous  opponents
at Berlin condemned  my interpretation  of the history of Italian
art  as unscientific.  They  more  especially disparaged  the  exper-
imental method which I recommended. None of them, however,
were  able  to  show  that  my  opinions  were  unsound,  nor  were
they capable of proving, by arguments to the contrary, that the
conclusions  to  which  my  researches  had  led  me  were  er-
roneous.'9

He  rejects  contemptuously  the  German  claim  to  scientific

rigour:

'At  Berlin, the "centre  of  the scientific  study of art"  the critics
have  found  it  desirable  to  form  an  alliance,  offensive  and
defensive  [to prevent  the  publication  of dissenting views in the
normal periodicals]. Like the Triple Alliance, which was formed
in that city for the preservation  of the peace of the universe, this
league was to ensure to its members a peaceful  and  unmolested
existence and  to uphold  its  own prestige in matters  of  art.'10

The light-footed  irony  of  this passage, which  is characteristic  of all
Morelli's writing, not just  the  overtly controversial  parts, begins to
show why I have referred  to him  as Ariel, the sprite in  The  Tempest.
Morelli  loathed  the  professionalisation  of  art  and  mocked  its
pomposities  mercilessly:

'I must confess that nothing  appears to me more ludicrous than
that  self-complacent  assurance  and  pretentious  gravity  which,
according  to  Socrates, moved  even  the gods  to  laughter.  ...  If
it be true  ...  that I have had  the good fortune  to correct several
glaring misstatements  in the  history of  Italian  art, it is entirely
owing to the fact  that  I hold  no official  position.  ...  A director
of  a  gallery  or  a  professor  is  apt  to  think  it  due  to  his  high
office  that  he  should  lay  down  the  law  to  others,  and  to  feel
himself  debarred  from  admitting  that  he has anything more to
learn  ...'.•<

But apart from mockery, Ariel also has a function  in the play, which
is to  torment  the  King  of  Naples  and  the usurping  Duke  of  Milan
so  much  that  they  repent  of  their  ways  and  are  reconciled  to
Prospero, the true Duke, who is thus restored  to his dukedom. I do

332

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

Attribution

not know whether Morelli really fought to win, or whether he  fought
for  the mere pleasure  of scoring off  heavier-footed  opponents.  It  is
not  even  completely  clear  that  art  and  attributions  are  the  real
subject  of  his animus, or  whether  he is at  some metaphorical  level
conducting an unwinnable guerilla campaign  against  German  hege-
mony  in  Europe,  and  against  the  manifold  imperialisms  of  the
dominant  German  culture.  Whatever  the  truth  of  that,  he  was,  as
I  have indicated  already,  the winner  in the  1870s and  1880s on  the
issue of attribution  science.

And  within  months of  writing  the last passage quoted  above,  he
definitively  departed  from  the  play  by  dying  (28  February  1891),
and  Bode was  left  fulminating  against  his memory  in the  pages  of
The  Fortnightly  Review.

'You have hardly heard in England of Herr Lermolieff,  in  spite
of  the claims  which  are  put  forward  even  there  on  his  behalf.
This Swiss physician  [Bode had  trained  as a lawyer!], who  was
educated  in Germany  and of late took his seat in the Senate  at
Rome,  has  strung  into  a  theory  his experiences  as  an  old  and
lucky  hand  at  collecting,  and  this  theory  is  to  make  every
believer  in  it  infallible  in  recognizing  an  Old  Master.  As  a
surgeon he had his attention directed to the form  of the  human
body, and  especially  of its extremities, and  when  thus  engaged
he thought he discovered that every great artist, even in painting
portraits,  made  use  of  his  own  extremities  as  models  for  the
subject  in  hand.  ...  The  success  of  this  quack  doctor  was  all
the  more complete,  in  that  he extolled  his  method  with  an  air
of  infallibility,  and  held  up  all  previous  authorities  ...  to  the
contempt  of  his  credulous  following.  Now,  although  this
Romanised  Swiss promulgates his theories on Italian art  in  the
crudest  manner,  and  makes  fun  of  Germans  on  nearly  every
page  of  his  books,  he  has  formed  a  sect  of  German  and  half-
German  believers who endeavour  to propagate  his teaching  by
embittering  the  lives  of  us,  directors  of  picture-galleries,  with
the usual  amenity  of  sectarians.'12

The  thought  of  Bode,  like  Caliban,  alone  again  on  the  enchanted
Museuminsel in Berlin, should remind us of the impossibility  of any
resolution  in such  a  conflict;  should  remind  us  that,  even  if  young
English or American art historians took up and practised the Morel-
lian method,  there was no consensus, no universal  recognition  that
truth  and justice  had  prevailed.  The  whole  episode  consisted  of  a
contest between different  rhetorical  strategies, representing  interests
which, if they were not merely personal, were to an uncertain  extent
political  and  nationalistic.  That  is  the  tradition  of  objective  art
historical  scholarship  to  which  I was inducted  in  my turn  in  1974.
I  realise,  as  I  write  the  date,  that  1974 was  a  hundred  years  after
Morelli  had  published  his first essay.

333

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347

John  Murdoch

Notes

1  Het  Schilder-Boeck...,  [1603]-04.
2  Alexander  Lindsay, Earl  of Crawford  and  Balcarres, Sketches  of the History
of  Christian  Art,  1847;  Anna  Jameson,  Sacred  and  Legendary  Art,
1848-1852.

3  Giovanni  Morelli,  Italian  Painters,  Critical  Studies  of  their  Works,  ed.

C.J.Ffoulkes  with an Introduction  by A.H.Layard,  1892, I, p. 31.

4  Ibid., I, p. 23.
5  Ibid., I, pp. 3 5 - 6.
6  Ibid., I, pp. 7 6 - 7,  illus, pp. 77,  78.
7  Ibid., p. 104.
8  Ibid., II, p. 2.
9  Ibid., II, pp. viii—ix.
10  Ibid., II, p. viii.
11  Ibid., II, pp. vi —vii.
12  W.  Bode,  'The  Berlin  Renaissance  Museum',  The  Fortnightly  Review, Vol.

LVI,  1 October  1891, pp. 506-15;  the quotation  is  on p. 509.

This is a revised version of a paper  presented  to Committee  20 of the  Conference
of  the International  Bar Association  at  Cannes  in  September 1992.

334

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000347


