International Journal of Cultural Property (2012) 19:345–369. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2012 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739112000288

Cultural Heritage on the Web:
Applied Digital Visual Anthropology
and Local Cultural Property
Rights Discourse
Kate Hennessy*

Abstract: The 2003 UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangi-
ble Cultural Heritage specifies that communities are to be full partners in
efforts to safeguard their intangible cultural heritage. Yet the notion of safe-
guarding has been complicated by the politics and mechanisms of digital
circulation. Based on fieldwork in British Columbia and Thailand, I show
that community-based productions of multimedia aimed at documenting,
transmitting, and revitalizing intangible heritage are productive spaces in
which local cultural property rights discourses are initiated and articulated.
I argue that digital heritage initiatives can support decision making about
the circulation—or restriction—of digital cultural heritage while drawing
attention to the complexities of safeguarding heritage in the digital
age.

*School of Interactive Arts and Technology, Simon Fraser University, Surrey

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: I have many people to thank for their contributions to this article. First,
my sincere thanks to members of the Doig River First Nation, and to Amber Ridington, co-curator
of the Dane Wajich exhibit. In particular I would like to thank former Chief Garry Oker, former
Chief Kelvin Davis, and all of the participants in the Dane Wajich project. My special thanks to
Patrick Moore, and to Robin and Jillian Ridington. My sincere thanks also to the organizers of the
annual Intangible Cultural Heritage and Museums Field School in Lampuhn, Thailand, and to the
staff of the Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre in Bangkok. In particular, my
thanks to Alexandra Denes, Director Suvanna Kriengkraipetch, former Director Paritta Chelerm-
pow Koanantakool, Peter Davis, Marilena Alizivatou, Rasmi Shoocongdej, Michelle Stefano, and
Christina Kreps. My special thanks to Wat Pratupa Assistant Abbot Phra Patiphan Puriphanyo, and
to Joy Arunswasdi and Linina Phuttitarn for translations of my interview with the assistant abbot.
Thank you to anonymous peer-reviewers for their very constructive comments. All shortcomings
are of course my own. Elements of an earlier version of this article, focusing on the Doig River First
Nation, was published as “From Intangible Expression to Digital Cultural Heritage,” in Safeguarding
Intangible Heritage, edited by Michelle Stefano et al.

345

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

346

KATE HENNESSY

INTRODUCTION

Cultural heritage is becoming digital heritage: tangible objects in museum col-
lections are being rapidly photographed and made available over the Inter-
net, while documentation of intangible cultural heritage is also being launched
into digital environments in the name of safeguarding. These media are now
available to diverse networked publics, including to the cultural communities
from which they were originally collected.1 UNESCO defined “digital heritage”
in 2003 as:

. . . unique resources of human knowledge and expression. It embraces
cultural, scientific and administrative resources, as well as technical, legal,
medical and others kinds of information created digitally, or converted
into digital form from existing analogue resources. Where resources are
“born digital,” there is no format but the digital object.2

While the tangible and intangible, or the material and immaterial, have been
treated largely as separate fields of study, both have been gathered, interpreted
and exhibited, considered aspects of cultural performance, understood as cul-
tural symbols, and claimed as cultural property.3 Tangible objects have been re-
moved from their cultural and environmental contexts,
just as intangible
expressions have been selected, documented, and archived in locations both
near and far from source communities. As ethnographer Julie Cruikshank
points out, the boundary between words and things is ambiguous; while words
are ephemeral, they become things when transcribed or recorded, and while di-
verse audiences can interpret objects in museums in different ways, words are
used to give meaning to objects. Importantly, “This blurred distinction under-
scores the parallel ways in which verbal utterances and material objects are used
both to symbolize the past and to stake out positions in discussions about cul-
tural representation, copyright of oral narratives and ownership of cultural
property.”4

In the era of the born-digital ethnographic object, words and things take on
new lives as digital surrogates, copies, and remixes. Anthropologists, curators, and
increasingly, local stakeholders who represent their own cultures, languages,
histories, and material culture, are some of the agents of this transformation
from artifact and intangible expression to digital heritage. I am interested in
the entangled but underexplored relationship between the UNESCO Charter on
the Preservation of Digital Heritage and the 2003 UNESCO Convention for the
Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage,5 which provides signatory
nations with guidelines for the identification, inventory, documentation, preser-
vation, and transmission of endangered, yet viable, intangible forms of cultural
expression. Digital cultural heritage is being produced and shared as a range of
media, from digital archives, virtual museum exhibits, community web sites,
and other online multimedia, to indigenous cultural centers and museums. Yet
as the digital proliferates, so does tension over the vulnerability, circulation,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

347

and reach of cultural heritage online. World heritage policies further complicate
this explosion of cultural projection; the UNESCO Charter on the Preservation
of Digital Heritage states: “access to digital heritage materials, especially in the
public domain, should be free of unreasonable restrictions. At the same time,
sensitive and personal information should be protected from any form of intru-
sion.”6 Yet how, and when, is sensitive or personal digital heritage differentiated
from that which is suitable to be circulated in the public domain? How are de-
cisions made about what should be open and what should be closed? How are
local cultural property rights discourses articulated and under what conditions?
What can be learned from the work of local heritage practitioners who are ne-
gotiating diverse approaches to documenting and sharing their cultural heritage
in digital environments?

I suggest that applied digital visual anthropology—the practice of visual an-
thropology that engages a broad spectrum of digital tools and hypermethodolo-
gies to create and communicate ethnographic media—is methodologically and
theoretically positioned to contribute to discourse on digital heritage and cul-
tural property. I argue here that the community-based production of multi-
media aimed at documenting, transmitting, and revitalizing intangible heritage
creates space in which these decision-making processes, or local cultural prop-
erty rights discourses, are initiated and negotiated. I make this argument, first,
based on fieldwork carried out with the Doig River First Nation, a Dane-zគaa
community in northeastern British Columbia, Canada, where oral narrative and
intangible heritage has been a focus of ethnographic collecting. Recent digitiza-
tion and community remediation of ethnographic archives has illuminated ten-
sions over the transformation of intangible expression into digital heritage, where
issues related to cultural representation, copyright, and ownership of cultural prop-
erty are amplified by digital circulation. Doig River’s media projects have facili-
tated local heritage and cultural revitalization discourse that has included keeping
certain culturally sensitive elements of digital heritage off-line. In the spirit of
globalizing heritage policies, I hold the Dane-zគaa example alongside my recent
fieldwork with the Buddhist temple community of Wat Pratupa in Lamphun,
northern Thailand, where local documentation strategies and wide-ranging dig-
ital circulation of cultural heritage has also facilitated the negotiation of appro-
priate forms of sharing sensitive cultural property. In both examples, digital
heritage and local control over its production is central in debates about cultural
property and circulation over the Internet. Juxtaposing these geographically dis-
tant articulations of local cultural property rights discourse emphasizes the par-
ticularities of local interpretations of the ethics and values of circulating digital
heritage. These ethnographic examples hint at a spectrum of possibilities for the
articulation of local cultural property rights discourse that are being negotiated
in relation to UNESCO’s world heritage policies.7 In the era of the born-digital
ethnographic object, these sites have become as infinitely entangled as words and
things.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

348

KATE HENNESSY

DIGITAL HERITAGE AND LOCAL CULTURAL

PROPERTY RIGHTS DISCOURSE

The 2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage de-
fines intangible cultural heritage as:

. . . the practices, representations, expressions, knowledge, skills—as well
as the instruments, objects, artifacts and cultural spaces associated
therewith–that communities, groups and, in some cases, individuals rec-
ognize as part of their cultural heritage. This intangible cultural heri-
tage, transmitted from generation to generation, is constantly recreated
by communities and groups in response to their environment, their
interaction with nature and their history, and provides them with a
sense of identity and continuity, thus promoting respect for cultural
diversity and human creativity. For the purposes of this Convention,
consideration will be given solely to such intangible cultural heritage as
is compatible with existing international human rights instruments, as
well as with the requirements of mutual respect among communities,
groups and individuals, and of sustainable development.8

The Convention further outlines a process by which intangible culture may be
protected for future generations. “Safeguarding” in the Convention is repre-
sented as:

. . . measures aimed at ensuring the viability of intangible cultural heri-
tage, including the identification, documentation, research, preserva-
tion, protection, promotion, enhancement, transmission, particularly
through formal and non-formal education, as well as the revitalization
of various aspects of such heritage.9

While documentation of intangible heritage is clearly only one aspect of safe-
guarding, the proliferation of digital tools now available for documentary record-
ing, archiving, and circulation has implicated digital documentation of the
intangible in the production of the digital cultural heritage. Local, institutional,
and national documentary practices have become spaces of negotiation over own-
ership and ethical circulation of cultural property; such media collaborations and
processes are sites through which local cultural property rights discourse can be
formed. Negotiation over cultural property and digital heritage therefore take
place in overlapping domains—in documentation of cultural expression, in ac-
cess to cultural documentation, and in the design of digital archives that both
facilitate and limit access to documentation and related information.

For example, in his description of Woodland Native American digital documen-
tary practices in cultural performance and ritual contexts, Jason Baird Jackson points
out that as new recording technologies have become available over time, Native
peoples in Oklahoma who are concerned with the conservation of ancestral forms
of dance, music, and ritual have integrated digital documentation into their pro-
duction of digital archives for education, cultural revitalization, and personal use.
These digitally mediated practices have emerged along with tension and anxiety

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

349

about the commercialization of documentation and the loss of the authority of
ceremonial leaders to control how recordings are used. He makes the case that
Woodland Native peoples’ digital documentary practices, which include the use of
cell phone video cameras and other everyday technologies, “ . . . have unfolded
within a local intellectual property (IP) system rooted more broadly in tribal and
regional cultures and social norms.”10
Patrick Moore and I identified similar dynamics among members of the Carcross/
Tagish First Nation who were involved in the digital documentation of the endan-
gered Tagish language.11 Working in partnership with the First Peoples’ Cultural
Foundation and language archiving web site FirstVoices.com,12 participants cre-
ated an environment in which elders and youth could articulate an indigenous
language ideology in resistance to the values and practices of residential schools
and control by outside organizations. Local control of language revitalization ef-
forts through First Voices.com placed emphasis on the holistic nature of language
and culture, showed preference for traditional modes of social interaction, and
demonstrated the centrality of elders’ knowledge. Language revitalization in this
case was connected to more wide-ranging discourse on political authority, land,
and cultural identity, facilitated by a digitally mediated space for Carcross/Tagish
control over representation.

In another example, legal anthropologist Guido Pigliasco shows how the col-
laborative production of a cultural heritage DVD with the Sawau tribe of the is-
land of Beqa, Fiji, was itself a negotiation of intellectual property issues and required
the articulation of a local cultural property rights discourse to make decisions about
what should be shared, and what should be safeguarded off-line.13 The Sawau Project
is focused on the reclamation of documentation of the vilavilairevo, or Sawau fire-
walking, which in recent decades has been widely circulated and commoditized,
but is now claimed by the tribe as their own to control and perform.14 The DVD
project is visually grounded in the geography of Beqa, an archive of repatriated
documentation and newly produced video vignettes indicating the origins of the
fire-walking traditions. The project is described as an inventory of sites, stories,
and shared memories that, in the course of production, “brought to life the aware-
ness of the passage of time, the weight of their grandfathers, and a new self-
consciousness.”15 Engaging with media and local heritage in a collaborative setting
required the negotiation of anxiety and opportunity associated with digital media,
and decision making that leaned toward restricting circulation rather than par-
ticipating in the continued appropriation of practices considered to belong to the
Sawau people of Beqa.

In a final example, Kimberly Christen’s work with Warumungu people in Aus-
tralia and Native American tribes in the United States has demonstrated how the
collaborative design of digital heritage archives creates opportunities for indig-
enous articulation of local cultural property discourse, particularly what should
be made public, and what should remain private, challenging the emerging status
quo of open access. Christen describes how collaboration in the archiving of dig-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

350

KATE HENNESSY

ital heritage creates opportunities to identify processes for the management of dig-
ital materials.16 The Mukurtu Archive and the Plateau Peoples’ Web Portal are both
built on principles of “respectful repatriation” that aim to create digital reposito-
ries that support the ethical circulation of cultural knowledge and property. The
software developed in support of these archives allows users to customize proto-
cols for access based on cultural parameters, and to change these parameters to
reflect their dynamic nature in everyday life.17

These examples position the production and circulation of digital heritage as
central in debates over indigenous cultural property. However, as Fiona Cameron
points out, discourse on digital heritage to date has been largely focused on the
status of digital media as heritage, and of original and authentic objects, referenc-
ing the writing of Walter Benjamin (1968) and Jean Baudrillard (1994).18 There
has been little critical discourse of digital heritage, even though the “ascription of
heritage metaphors to cultural materials in a digital format means that digital media
has become embedded in a cycle of heritage value and consumption, and in the
broader heritage complex.”19 The UNESCO Charter on the Preservation of Dig-
ital Heritage is seen by Cameron to exemplify the uncritical induction of digital
cultural heritage materials into wider processes of globalization and heterogeni-
zation. Of particular issue is the Charter’s emphasis on ensuring maximum public
access to what has been encoded through UNESCO programming as the “Mem-
ory of the World,” or “Information for All.”

At the same time that the Charter advocates open access to digital heritage, it
asserts that “sensitive and personal information should be protected from any form
of intrusion.”20 These statements highlight a key issue in the transformation of
intangible heritage into digital cultural heritage; when and how are decisions made
about the open or closed nature of cultural documentation? As Michael Brown
points out, major policy documents like the Convention for the Safeguarding of
the Intangible Cultural Heritage demonstrate a tension between cultural inter-
nationalists and cultural nationalists, an ongoing concern with “the balance be-
tween heritage as a resource for all of humanity and as something that properly
belongs to, and remains controlled by, its communities of origin.”21 Jane Ander-
son has further articulated the anxieties associated with the opening up and dig-
ital circulation of colonial archives; at the same time that indigenous communities
are demanding recognition as legitimate authors and owners of documents rep-
resenting their cultures, they are faced with the fact that legal ownership is granted
to the individual who made the recording. These archival materials are also anxiety-
inducing because they often do not reflect contemporary cultural identifications
and desired representation, or their anticipated use and circulation.22 These ten-
sions and anxieties are exacerbated in discourse and practices related to the pro-
duction of digital cultural heritage.

As I will describe, members of the Doig River First Nation in British Columbia
made important decisions to keep elements of their digital cultural heritage out of
public circulation as a way to maintain the power of particular heritage objects.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

351

Their leading participation in local intangible heritage safeguarding projects was
crucial in this regard. Members of an ethnic Yong community in northern Thai-
land, choosing another approach, decided that unlimited circulation of sensitive
digital heritage was in the best interest of local knowledge revitalization. As with
the creation of ethnographic documents, including the documentation of intan-
gible cultural heritage, digital heritage is shaped by systems of heritage value and
subjective evaluation about what to preserve—in this schema, what to make
public—and what to keep in private circulation or allow to be lost.

Community participation in documentation—a central moment in decision
making about what to circulate publicly and what to manage privately—is impor-
tant in this regard. A particular irony of the Convention, Michael Brown points
out, is that it “portrays intangible heritage as an objectified resource amenable to
modern management techniques. In such a legalistic vision, heritage cannot be
protected until it is thoroughly documented.”23 Indeed, echoing the language of
salvage anthropology, the UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the In-
tangible Cultural Heritage mobilizes a discourse of loss:

Recognizing that the processes of globalization and social transforma-
tion, alongside the conditions they create for renewed dialogue among
communities, also give rise, as does the phenomenon of intolerance, to
grave threats of deterioration, disappearance and destruction of the in-
tangible cultural heritage, in particular owing to a lack of resources for
safeguarding such heritage.24

The Convention then lays out a State and stakeholder community process of
identification, inventory, documentation, and transmission of intangible heritage
as a measure of safeguarding intangible cultural heritage from the homogenizing
forces of globalization. However, as Brown further notes, the discipline of anthro-
pology “long ago concluded that documentation has only a modest role in the
preservation of culture. To think otherwise is to make the classic error of mistak-
ing a map for the territory it represents.”25 Digital technologies—including digital
video, audio, and photography, as well as computer word-processing programs for
field notes, electronic maps and Geographic Information Systems, social media,
and digital archives—have become normative tools and economically viable re-
sources for the documentation, preservation, and transmission of intangible cul-
tural heritage and its relationships to material culture, the natural environment,
and social, political, and economic conditions. That much of the documentation
of intangible cultural heritage around the world will be born digital means that
meaningful participation by stakeholder communities in the documentation and
safeguarding of their cultural heritage is more important than ever before. This is
significant in relation to the discourse of loss of heritage that also permeates the
digital heritage charter, in which digital media “is at risk of being lost to posterity”
(the threat of loss),26 and “unless the prevailing threats are addressed, the loss of
digital heritage will be rapid and inevitable” (need for action).27 Loss of digital
documentation of intangible heritage—as archived on hard drives, tapes, disks, or

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

352

KATE HENNESSY

web sites, to name a few—is unfortunately a frequent occurrence. Local decision
making around appropriate and sustainable strategies for the long-term safeguard-
ing of digital heritage must be a part of safeguarding initiatives, and will remain
an urgent concern.

It is encouraging to note that such participation from cultural communities,
groups, and individuals is emphasized in Article 15 of the Convention, titled “Par-
ticipation of Communities, Groups and Individuals,” which states that:

Within the framework of its safeguarding activities of the intangible
cultural, heritage, each State Party shall endeavor to ensure the widest
possible participation of communities, groups and, where appropriate,
individuals that create maintain and transmit such heritage, and to in-
volve them actively in its management.28

According to Richard Kurin, this represents a shift in perspective on the role of

culture bearers in determining best practices for safeguarding:

Governments, or university departments or museums, cannot just as-
sume that they have permission to define intangible cultural heri-
tage and undertake its documentation, presentation, protection, or
preservation. Community participation is meant to be significant and
meaningful—involving the consent of community leaders, consulta-
tion with lead cultural practitioners, shared decision making on strat-
egies and tactics of safeguarding and so on. Article 15 strongly empowers
the community in the operation of and realization of the Convention.29

During my fieldwork with the Doig River First Nation between 2004 and 2008,
I co-curated (with Amber Ridington) a collaboratively produced virtual museum
exhibit of the oral narratives and song called Dane Wajich—Dane-zគaa Stories and
Songs: Dreamers and the Land.30 The project used digital cultural heritage from
the Ridington/Dane-zគaa Digital Archive. Archival media were exhibited online along-
side contemporary documentation of narrative and song that had been created by
members of the Doig River community in the course of the project. Dane Wajich
used collaborative methodologies that placed elders, youth, and other community
participants in leading roles. It modeled a strategy for community involvement in
the documentation of intangible heritage that is in keeping with the emphasis of
the 2003 UNESCO Charter on the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intan-
gible Cultural Heritage on roles and responsibilities of local communities in safe-
guarding what they determine to be endangered and significant.31

In the following section, I show how community participation in decision mak-
ing about which elements of ethnographic documentation to make public in the
virtual exhibit, and which to restrict from wider access, made intangible heritage
and digital objects central to conversations about ownership and control of cul-
tural documentation. While community leadership in intangible heritage safe-
guarding efforts made use of available digital technologies to mobilize digital
cultural heritage and to create new born-digital objects, it had results that dem-
onstrate local negotiation of culturally appropriate forms of sharing that counter

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

353

the open-access emphasis of the 2003 UNESCO Charter on the Preservation of
Digital Heritage. The example points to the importance of local strategies for the
safeguarding of digital cultural heritage and the forms of intangible heritage that
it represents, which facilitate decision making about what can be circulated, and
what is sensitive and should be kept out the global heritage complex.

THE CREATION OF THE RIDINGTON/DANE-ZAA DIGITAL ARCHIVE

Unlike tangible objects, intangible cultural expression cannot be carried away by
the ethnographer except as inscribed as ethnographic documents in field notes,
recordings, film, or drawings.32 The act of creation of the ethnographic docu-
ment, and the act of creation of the ethnographic archive to order and preserve
documentation of the intangible is far from neutral; indeed, “what constitutes
the archive, what form it takes, and what systems of classification signal at spe-
cific times are the very substance of colonial politics.”33 The digital ethnographic
archive, much more than a mechanical accumulation of information, is a partic-
ular and historically specific representation of culture and ownership of cultural
documentation.

Robin Ridington began his fieldwork with Dane-zគaa communities at Prophet
River, Halfway River, and with members of the Fort St. John band, who later
became the Doig River and Blueberry River First Nations, in 1968. He developed
a relationship with Charlie Yahey, an elder who came to be the last-known nááche˛
(translated as dreamer, or prophet) in the Peace River region. Nááche˛ are known
to have traveled to heaven and received songs (nááche˛ yiné?) and prophecies that
provided moral and spiritual guidance to people. Dane-zគaa oral tradition asserts
that nááche˛ dreamed ahead to locate the trails of game animals, predicted the
coming of white settlers to the Peace River region, and the industrialization of
the oil-rich landscape.34 Nááche˛ yiné? received in dreams were publicly per-
formed by dreamers, and today by groups of drummers at world-renewal cer-
emonies called the Tea Dance, in which Dane-zគaa bands gather to dance around
a fire to ensure the passing of seasons and helping the spirits of the departed
find their way along the trail to heaven.35 In his early fieldwork, Ridington and
Mills recorded many hours of audiotape of Charlie Yahey’s oratory and dream-
ers’ songs, Tea Dances, and public expression of the nááche˛’s sacred knowledge of
heaven. He also photographed some of the drawings made by nááche˛ of their
visions of heaven that were shown to him by elders.

When Robin Ridington began documenting Tea Dances, nááche˛ yiné?, and oral
narratives, he used a 35-millimeter camera, and an Uher reel-to-reel tape re-
corder. There were limitations attached to these particular documentary tools; be-
cause he had a limited supply of film, tape, and batteries, he turned the recorder
off when he thought that “nothing was happening.”36 The constraints of available
technologies influenced his ideas about what was important to record; the narra-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

354

KATE HENNESSY

tives of Dane-zគaa elders, and the oratory of the nááche˛ Charlie Yahey were clearly
extraordinary, and inevitably took precedence over the documentation of every-
day conversations and soundscapes.37

In 1999, Robin Ridington and partner Jillian Ridington made a transition in
documentary technique. Digital technologies, in the form of audio mini-disk, gave
them the ability to record sound virtually endlessly. Minidiscs were inexpensive
and long-playing. Battery life had also drastically improved, making remote re-
cording lightweight and easy. In 2001, they also changed their approach to visual
documentation, transitioning from still photography to digital photography and
video, and experimenting with nonlinear digital video editing.38

In 2003, responding to community demand for greater access to their collec-
tion, Robin, Jillian, and folklorist Amber Ridington worked with the Doig River
First Nation to procure a grant from the British Columbia Museums Association
to digitize the Ridingtons’ photographic, audio, and video collection of Dane-zគaa
intangible cultural heritage. The entire archive, which by 2003 consisted of ap-
proximately 600 hours of audio recordings, 5000 photographs, and 60 hours of
digital videotape, was to be made available in as digital copies on a hard drive, and
be accessible in the Doig River First Nation’s band hall.39 The archive was named
the Ridington/Dane-zគaa Digital Archive, and a selection of images from the ar-
chive, including series documenting the dreamer Charlie Yahey, and a full catalog
of images, text, and audio and video recordings would be accessible through a
password-protected online database called the Dane-zគaa Archive Catalogue (Fig. 1).40
For the Ridington family, this represented a leap in their ability to “share ethno-
graphic authority with Dane-zគaa First Nations.”41

GAAYE˛A˛’S DRUM

In July of 2005, at a Dane Wajich planning meeting in Doig River First Nation’s
band hall, I videotaped a Dane-zគaa elder named Tommy Attachie as he spoke about
a moose-hide drum skin. The drum skin had been painted with a map of heaven
by a Dane-zគaa nááche˛ named Gaaye˛a˛ more than 100 years before. It had been
inherited by Garry Oker, who was the Chief of Doig River at that time, and who
brought it to the planning meeting. As I have described in detail elsewhere,42 Tommy
Attachie used Gaaye˛a˛’s drum at this meeting, and at subsequent planning meet-
ings, to eloquently articulate the connections between Dane-zគaa material culture,
oral narrative, and land. The drum, the material manifestation of the dreamer’s
medicine power and experience of heaven, was described as integrally connected
to successful hunting and survival on the land, as well as to foreknowledge of the
drastic changes associated with the colonial settlement of Dane-zគaa territory. As
with other Doig River local projects that were facilitated by the digitization of the
Ridington/Dane-zគaa Digital Archive, such as audio CDs of drumming and singing
performances, and video documentaries about history and culture, nááche˛ songs

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

355

FIGURE 1. Dane Wajich: Dane-zគaa Stories and Songs: Dreamers and the Land. 具http://
www.museevirtuel-virtualmuseum.ca/sgc-cms/expositions-exhibitions/danewajich/english/
index.html典

and drawings have become central foci of the Doig River First Nation’s media pro-
ductions. These media convey the continuity of knowledge and nááche˛ practices
and present an alternative cultural history of the region that competes with colo-
nial and industrial narratives.

Gaaye˛a˛’s drum was used by Tommy Attachie to define a methodology for doc-
umenting Dane-zគaa intangible heritage; in the following weeks in that summer of
2007, our group traveled to seven places in Dane-zគaa territory where youth, el-
ders, ethnographers and linguists recorded videos documenting traditional narra-
tives, life histories, and histories of nááche˛ in Dane-zគaa Záágé?(the Beaver language)
and English. These videos and their translations became central elements of the
virtual exhibit, and in early drafts of the exhibit, photographs of Gaaye˛a˛’s drum as
a part of the production process, and archival photographs of Charlie Yahey hold-
ing a special double-sided drum also made by Gaaye˛a˛ were also featured promi-
nently throughout the online project. However, at the end of a nearly two-year
period of exhibit postproduction and community consultation carried out by co-
curator Amber Ridington and me, the decision was eventually made to remove all
images of nááche˛ drums and drawings from the exhibit. Meaningful community
participation in digital documentation and presentation of oral narratives opened
up local debate over the ownership and control of Dane-zគaa digital cultural her-
itage. The debate was centered on (1) ownership of ethnographic documentation,
and (2) control over its circulation in digital form.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

356

KATE HENNESSY

1. Ownership of Cultural Documentation

As Dane-zគaa ephemera have become ethnographic objects, they have become phys-
ical objects (tapes, film, photographic prints); as these ethnographic documents
of intangible cultural heritage have been digitized, they have become digital cul-
tural heritage (digital files and storage devices) that are owned, traded, copied,
and remixed. As Dane-zគaa intangible cultural heritage has been collected, digi-
tized, and made accessible to Dane-zគaa communities in the form of the Ridington/
Dane-zគaa Digital Archive, it has also been claimed as property. The contents
of the Ridington/Dane-zគaa Digital Archive are “copyrighted by the collectors for
their use.”43 This can be so because, under the Canadian Copyright Act, the act
of the creation of a document—for example, pressing “Play” on a digital audio
recorder—is an assertion of ownership and a legal right to control the use of the
document.44 This technicality has underscored the practice of academic anthro-
pology, where the copyright of the ethnographic object, and by proxy, the legal
right to publish, distribute, or even sell these creative works has long rested with
the researcher, rather than with the subject of ethnographic study him- or her-
self.45 While the contents of the Ridington/Dane-zគaa Digital Archive are copy-
righted by the collectors for their use, Robin and Jillian Ridington also declared
the intention that copyright be shared “by the Dane-zគaa peoples represented
by the four Dane-zគaa bands” and that permission to use the material be sought
by the copyright holders.46 In the original grant application to digitize the col-
lection, it was stated that,

Dane-zគaa heritage is collectively owned, and a great number of genera-
tions contribute to our cultural heritage. The documentation of our peo-
ples’ heritage in the Ridington/Dane-zគaa [Digital] Archive represents
indigenous intellectual property and although it is collectively owned, it
will be curated by the Doig River First Nation at their museum, and will
be made accessible to all Dane-zគaa peoples.47

While this statement is meant to protect the rights of the collectors to continue
to use the material for academic research and publication, and the rights of Dane-
zគaa peoples to have a say in how and by whom their cultural heritage is used and
reproduced, copyright of ethnographic documentation was not transferred from
the collectors to its communal owners. The statement illustrates a basic contra-
diction at the heart of debates over cultural property—that collectively owned in-
tangible expression becomes the property of an individual through the act of
documentation. This contradiction was illuminated in the digitization and return
of cultural documentation to Dane-zគaa communities, when indigenous intellec-
tual property rights were granted, but exclusive copyright—ownership—was not.
Given the collective nature of ownership of Dane-zគaa oral narrative, it could not
easily have been done.

These issues were further illuminated in the course of digital visual ethno-
graphic production. Because the painted moose-hide drum made by the nááche˛

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

357

Gaaye˛a˛ was central in defining the methodology for cultural documentation in
the Dane Wajich project, a photograph of the nááche˛ Charlie Yahey holding a
painted drum made by Gaaye˛a˛ was chosen by Doig River project participants from
the Ridington/Dane-zគaa Digital Archive to be featured on the draft home page of
the virtual exhibit. However, shortly after this decision was made, co-curator Amber
Ridington and I were made aware that descendants of Charlie Yahey at the neigh-
boring Blueberry River First Nation were concerned that photographs of their rel-
ative were being used by the Doig River First Nation without their consent. Under
the direction of the Doig River Chief and Council, we visited with family mem-
bers at Blueberry to discuss the use of Dane-zគaa digital heritage in the project.
The family ultimately decided that they did not support the use of these images of
Charlie Yahey by Doig River at that time, and the Doig River Chief and Council
accordingly agreed that individual stakeholders in cultural documentation, or their
descendants, should be consulted for permission to display their cultural heritage,
and that this decision should not be made by band councils without specific fam-
ily permission. All archival media related to Charlie Yahey was subsequently re-
moved from the Dane Wajich exhibit. Community involvement in intangible
heritage documentation, and subsequent engagement with digital cultural heri-
tage in this case both identified and challenged national legal regimes of owner-
ship and facilitated the articulation of a local intellectual property rights discourse.

2. Control of Digital Cultural Heritage

The use of the images of nááche˛ drawings and drums in the exhibit also raised
questions about the extent to which the power of tangible objects are translated
into digital representations, and, accordingly, the appropriateness of making these
images publicly visible elements of digital cultural heritage. During the postpro-
duction of the Dane Wajich exhibit, it was suggested that the drum skin made by
the nááche˛ Gaaye˛a˛ that had been used by Tommy Attachie to define the project’s
documentary methodology should be restored and installed in an exhibit in the
Doig River First Nation’s museum. However, when Amber Ridington and I con-
sulted with local elders about this possibility, we were surprised to find out that
some did not think the drum should be displayed publicly at all. As I have de-
scribed in detail elsewhere,48 local protocols for the care and handling of nááche˛
drums and drawings were raised by some elders as a reason to keep the drum out
of uncontrolled public circulation. Some also felt that photographs of the drum
should be treated the same way, and kept out of view. While some people, partic-
ularly those of younger generations felt that circulating digital images of the drum
would have no negative effect, the decision was made to remove all images of nááche˛
drums and drawings in accordance with more conservative perspectives. Images
of nááche˛ drums were replaced with the unpainted drums made by Dane-zគaa who
are not themselves nááche˛, and which are used in contemporary performance at
Doig River.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

358

KATE HENNESSY

While Dane-zគaa ethnographic documentation and digital heritage has been in-
terpreted and circulated by anthropologists, it has also been reintegrated into Dane-
zគaa social, religious, and political life. I have often entered someone’s home to hear
the songs of Charlie Yahey and other elders playing in the background, or see por-
traits taken of community members displayed on the wall. Charlie Yahey’s voice
“has become as familiar to people who never knew him as it was to those who
attended his Dreamers’ Dances.”49 Drummers and singers at Doig River, some of
whom learned directly from Charlie Yahey and other singers recorded by Robin
Ridington, have enriched their repertoire by listening to recordings of their elders.
They continue to sing and perform them at Tea Dances for the community and
the general public.

These media are also used in significant ways to negotiate unequal relations of
power. Digital copies of recordings of nááche˛ yiné?(dreamers’ songs), used in cul-
turally appropriate contexts, are considered by some to be powerful tools in their
spiritual and political lives. As former Doig River First Nation Chief Kelvin Davis
told me in the summer of 2007, when the ability of the band to resist incursions
of government-sanctioned industrial development on their land was exhausted,
playing the Ridingtons’ recordings of nááche˛ yine from his truck had power, over
time, to disrupt the ravenous extraction of oil and gas. When used with proper
respect, the power of nááche˛ as a form of resistance remains embedded in the
magnetic tape and digital code of copies from the ethnographic archive:

The recordings of the songs, of the prophet’s songs, are very powerful
and if . . . you use it the right way, it will be effective. But if you use it the
wrong way, then the meaning of the song and the power of the songs, I
believe will be, my mother told me years ago, prophets used to say, “Don’t
play with these songs.” If the song giver wants to, he can take the—the
spirit of the songs back and all it is, is going to be, is just songs, that’s it,
nothing more.50

Chief Davis emphasizes that the power of the nááche˛ yiné? was maintained
through proper, respectful use of the songs. Such preservation of power of the
songs is dependent on his intangible knowledge of their care, even in digital form.
His account of the power of dreamers’ songs on tape is consistent with findings of
scholars working with indigenous communities and digital cultural heritage in other
parts of the world. For example, Maori scholar Deirdre Brown, working with Maori
material culture, has shown that the spiritual and cultural meanings in objects can
be transferred to the digital copies in the same way that it had been thought to be
transferred in analog photographs or film.51 The creation of new forms of elec-
tronic waka (vessels) to meet cultural needs offers a way of “subverting technol-
ogies of domination by cultural institutions.”52 In another example from Australia,
Kim Christen has shown how Warumungu women balanced the need to docu-
ment and preserve Dreaming songs with satisfying interest from the public in Waru-
mungu traditions; she describes how decisions were made about the “open” and
“closed” nature of certain songs, the most public of which were recorded and dis-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

359

tributed on CD.53 In these examples, communities with their own requirements
for the documentation, safeguarding, and preservation of digital heritage are mo-
bilizing the power of the heritage industry “to become self-determining agents in
creating their own autobiographies. That is, to tell their own truths about culture,
to embrace and challenge and also resist prevailing heritage regimes of classifica-
tion.”54 Creating space for the articulation of local cultural property rights dis-
course, exercising agency in the documentation of intangible cultural heritage, and
exerting control over the use of new technologies to preserve and safeguard digital
heritage, are central in these efforts.55

DIGITAL HERITAGE, WAT PRATUPA, AND MUANGLAMPHUN.COM

While my fieldwork with the Doig River First Nation pointed to the importance
of participatory media production in creating space for negotiating the circula-
tion of Dane-zគaa digital cultural heritage, my recent fieldwork with the Buddhist
temple community of Wat Pratupa in northern Thailand showed another ap-
proach to the circulation of sacred digital cultural heritage to support local safe-
guarding of intangible cultural heritage. I raise this example both as a point of
comparison with the Dane-zគaa local cultural property rights discourse, and to re-
inforce community-based multimedia production as a space in which discursive
frameworks are negotiated and articulated. The Wat Pratupa example, as I will
explain, also speaks to the common challenges of maintaining digital initiatives
when technical expertise and funding is in short supply. In the long project of
attempting to assess the implications of international heritage conventions and
charters, I argue that observing the community-driven, digitally mediated safe-
guarding strategies—strategies of resistance to loss of local intangible cultural
practices—in diverse contexts should inform the application and reworking of in-
ternational heritage policies. Lila Abu-Lughod’s suggestion that we should look to
resistance as a “diagnostic of power” is productive in considering the “complexity
and nature of forms of domination” impacting the continued transmission and
recreation of local cultural practice.56

Since 2009 I have worked each summer as a lecturer and resource person in the
Intangible Cultural Heritage and Museums Field School in Lamphun, northern
Thailand, organized by the Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Anthropology Cen-
tre and UNESCO, Bangkok.57 I was invited to teach in this field school because of
my work with the Doig River First Nation and the questions that this research had
raised about the role of digital documentation in the safeguarding of intangible
cultural heritage.58 The goal of the field school is to introduce heritage workers,
community museum curators, and students from the Mekong Delta region (Thai-
land, Vietnam, Laos, China, Cambodia, and Bhutan, primarily) to a range of prac-
tical issues, debates, case studies, and critiques of the 2003 Convention for the
Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. In this capacity I was introduced

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

360

KATE HENNESSY

to the community of Wat Pratupa, one of the field school research sites, and worked
directly with students and community members at Wat Pratupa over the last two
field school seasons.

Wat Pratupa was built in 1758 by ethnic Tai Yong, who fled war in the period
that Lanna (Northern Thailand) was under Burmese occupation. When the wars
with Burma ended, and King Kawila was restoring the Lanna territory in the nine-
teenth century, many ethnic Yong were forcibly resettled from Burma to Lam-
phun. One group resettled with a highly respected monk named Kru Ba Lek, who
became the first abbot of Wat Pratupa. The settlers planted mango seeds from
their former village, and named the new village Pratupa-muang, which means
Mango Forest.59 Today the Pratupa community is centered around the cultural,
spiritual, and merit-making activities of the Pratupa Buddhist temple. In 2009,
field school students documented community-wide preparation for the Salak Yorm
festival, in which bundles of offerings and tree-like structures as tall as 17 meters
are built and decorated with handicrafts, money, and food. The Salak offerings are
then won by monks in a lottery on the festival day. The Salak offering is a signif-
icant Buddhist merit-making activity for the families and communities who work
together to create the offerings and to improve their karma. In the past, the Salak
would be created over many years by a young woman, her family, visitors from
other villages, and by potential suitors to make merit for the family and to an-
nounce her coming of age as a woman. The Salak demonstrated her handicraft
skills and financial resourcefulness, and would be crowned with the gold jewelry
that made up her dowry. Today, in Lamphun Province, it is too expensive to pro-
duce a Salak offering for each young woman; rather, communities work together
to create offerings to be won by monks from several monasteries in the Province,
who come together for a single large annual festival that is hosted by a different
Lamphun monastery each year. In 2009, field school students observed and doc-
umented as older members of the Pratupa community gathered under the super-
vision of the Wat Pratupa abbot and Assistant Abbot Phra Patiphan Puriphanyo,
to create the complex handicrafts used to decorate the towering Salak Yorm. We
then attended to Salak festival at Wat Chamadevi in Lamphun and watched as the
towering offerings were won by excited monks and claimed from the community
members who had created them.

At that time, I learned that Assistant Abbot Phra Patiphan Puriphanyo was the
creator and webmaster of a site called www.muanglamphun.com, on which he
posted documentation of these events and of the Salak Yorm festival and related
activities and traditions (Fig. 2).60 The web site, and its related Facebook page,
were used as a strategy for documenting and circulating the distinct practices of
the Wat Pratupa ethnic Yong community. I continued to learn about local digital
media strategies in the second field school in 2010, as I worked with students,
the assistant abbot, and the Pratupa community to explore issues related to
the safeguarding of one aspect of the Salak Yorm, called the Kap Kalong. The
Kap Kalong is a poetic narrative that reiterates the history of the ethnic Yong

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

361

FIGURE 2. Wat Pratupa’s former web site, “Muang Lamphun.”

migration from Burma, and details the contributions of individuals and families
to the construction of the Salak offering. In the past, the Kap Kalong told the
life story of the woman who labored with her family to create the Salak offering.
The Kap Kalong was composed by an individual of great lyrical talent and flu-
ency in the Lanna language, and transcribed by the composer in Lanna script.
In a key moment of merit-making, the Kap Kalong would be performed by
members of the contributing family or community at the Salak Yorm before pre-
senting the Salak to the monk who had won it in the festival lottery. Documen-
tation of the Kap Kalong script and recordings of performance were being
circulated on www.muanglamphun.com. In the third field school in 2011, I worked
with the assistant abbot and members of the Pratupa community to produce a
short documentary video that could be used to promote awareness of the need
to revitalize the Yong language. This video, and the assistant abbot’s photo doc-
umentation of our collaborative process, was also quickly made available on
www.muanglamphun.com.

In the course of our fieldwork, we learned from the assistant abbot, community
educators, Kalong performers, handicraft artisans, and school children that the
Kalong is threatened on several fronts. A gradual shift from the local Yong dialect
to the Central Thai dialect is creating greater distance between young Yong com-
munity members and their Yong heritage. Few people who have not been or-
dained as monks are fluent in the Lanna language, which was and continues to be
used to represent the Yong language. Thai Yong people are now educated in the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

362

KATE HENNESSY

Thai Central dialect, meaning Kalong scripts in Lanna language cannot be under-
stood, and education of new composers of the Kalong is obstructed by Lanna il-
literacy. Second, the Lamphun Provincial government recently chose to promote
the Salak Yorm as a tourist event, and to provide financial incentives for Lamphun
monasteries to participate in the festival. Non-Yong Thai communities and mon-
asteries have been creating Salak offerings, and participating in the festival, but do
not practice the Kap Kalong. Further, expensive and time-consuming Salak hand-
icrafts are being replaced with cheap commercial decorations. From the perspec-
tive of Wat Pratupa representatives, the Salak Yorm festival and associated traditions
have been appropriated by non-Yong communities and the provincial govern-
ment, marginalizing the role of the Kap Kalong and Lanna language expression.
Exacerbating the problem, contemporary economic conditions drive young Yong
to seek employment in factories far away from their home communities, prevent-
ing them from participating in the activities of the Wat Pratupa community and
speaking the Yong dialect with their families.

Faced with these challenges, Assistant Abbot Phra Patiphan Puriphanyo has fo-
cused on the facilitation, digital documentation, and circulation of representa-
tions of Wat Pratupa’s Salak Yorm, Kap Kalong traditions, and language revitalization
initiatives. He was using the www.muanglamphun.com web site as a way to com-
municate Wat Pratupa’s ethnic Yong identity and Buddhist practices to local peo-
ple, to community members working out of the province in factories, and to
diasporic Yong people who are interested in the traditions of their home commu-
nity. The conceptualization and production of www.muanglamphun.com facili-
tated local discussion about what local heritage is appropriate for sharing over the
Internet, and the utility of the Internet in supporting heritage revitalization ini-
tiatives. According to Assistant Abbot Phra Patiphan Puriphanyo, “We believe in
one saying: ‘sharing leads to sustainability.’ The more you share your knowledge,
the more that knowledge will live on. It’s like the case of an herbal medicine ex-
pert. If he dies, his knowledge dies with him.”61

Wat Pratupa’s current approach to sharing was largely shaped in the course of
producing www.muanglamphun.com. The web site first included extensive photo-
graphic documentation of the Salak Yorm festival, historical photographs col-
lected by the assistant abbot from members of the community, and representations
of other traditions that were thought of as needing protection. However, it was
the decision to document and share images of sacred material culture owned by
Wat Pratupa—the contents of a Buddhist palm-leaf manuscript cabinet and a
wooden Buddha carving—and the outside interest that they generated, which stim-
ulated discussion about the role of digital documentation in safeguarding heri-
tage. After images of the manuscripts and Buddha image were posted on the web
site, villagers were surprised when nonlocal documentary filmmakers arrived want-
ing to make a film about Wat Pratupa’s valuable collection. With new awareness of
the digital visibility of the objects, community members became concerned about
the safety of the original objects. Assistant Abbot Phra Patiphan Puriphanyo de-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

363

scribed to me how these events facilitated the articulation of local discourse around
digital circulation:

It was a challenge at first. There were worries that things could be stolen
after display. That doubt also existed within this temple in regards to the
Buddha image. As an alternative, it was decided that although some ob-
jects could not be physically displayed, their photographs could be shown
instead. People were worried that if the library were open for public view,
the cabinet might risk thievery. So I said, think about this. If there were
three keepers whose responsibility was to lock up this cabinet and Bud-
dha image in a safe place forever, would there be any chance that they
would completely forget about them? Wouldn’t it be better if we allowed
other people to know that they existed, if we let them live through re-
telling, remembrance, and documentation? It would be a pity if they were
left to be forgotten. There’s an idiom saying, “If you swallow, it disap-
pears; if you spit it out, it remains.” No matter how wise you are, if you
don’t have a disciple, your wisdom goes to waste. But if you teach your
disciples, your knowledge transcends your own life. It doesn’t matter if
replicas were created, because a genuine is still a genuine. In fact, there
are even more watchers than before because there are more people who
are aware of these significances. A sense of ownership keeps growing,
which may lead to two different strategies: increased security measures,
or increased studies and revitalization. The decision depends on the con-
servators and the community. Just keep this fact in mind, “If you swal-
low, it disappears; if you spit it out, it remains.” Let the knowledge spread
within the community.62

While the web-based documentation activities of Wat Pratupa were central in
defining local cultural property rights, using online resources to spread knowl-
edge within the community were ultimately met with significant challenges. Wat
Pratupa’s use of www.muanglamphun.com continued until early 2012, when the
cost of hosting and maintaining the popular web site became prohibitive. The
extensive archive of historical photographs, audio recordings, and videos are no
longer accessible to the public online. The loss of the web site has driven home
the difficulty of maintaining local digital community archives, which require sta-
ble sources of funding, expertise, and stewardship. The domain name was lost to
another user, and Wat Pratupa’s online activities were migrated to their existing
Facebook page and to the assistant abbot’s personal Facebook page. The owner-
ship and intellectual property-related consequences of posting community con-
tent to Facebook, as opposed to a web site owned and maintained by Wat Pratupa
community, remains to be explored. However, while the role of www.muanglam-
phun.com in the preservation of the community’s digital heritage is diminished,
Facebook-based online sharing activities have continued with dedication from
the assistant abbot and colleagues, and still function to promote local activities
and practices related to the transmission of intangible cultural heritage. While
the original web site played a central role in the articulation of a local cultural
property rights discourse, these newly amplified Facebook activities continue to
function in an analogous way—helping to “spread knowledge within the com-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

364

KATE HENNESSY

munity.” At Wat Pratupa, the emphasis of digital intangible heritage safeguarding
activities has shifted from the creation of a web-based archive to the use of so-
cial networking opportunities provided, free of charge, by Facebook—a solution
that seems to meet the needs of local practitioners at this time.

CONCLUSION

While the Wat Pratupa and Dane-zគaa examples are geographically and culturally
distant, they highlight global challenges inherent in attempts to safeguard intan-
gible heritage using digital documentary technologies. They demonstrate how
diverse cultural communities are negotiating appropriate strategies for the doc-
umentation and transmission of their heritage, from sharing widely over public
social networks like Facebook, to restricting culturally sensitive or sacred mate-
rial to off-line community use. Both ethnographic sites exemplify media produc-
tion spaces in which, as Cruikshank articulates, positions in discussions about
cultural representation, copyright, and ownership of cultural property are being
staked out.63 Both examples further support Abu-Lughod’s assertion that studies
of cultural resistance should be understood as diagnostics of power, rather than
romantic evidence of failures of structures of power; she writes, “. . . we respect
everyday resistance not just by arguing for the dignity or heroism of the resis-
tors but by letting their practices teach us about the complex interworking of
historically changing structures of power.”64 The Dane-zគaa and Wat Pratupa ex-
amples affirm the centrality of digitization and mediation initiatives in both rais-
ing awareness of the impact of new technologies on local heritage and traditions,
and in generating discussion and negotiation about the value of these technolo-
gies in particular cultural communities. As made visible in the Wat Pratupa ex-
ample, and an ongoing challenge in the Dane-zគaa context, is the serious issue of
preservation and persistence of intangible heritage documentation and digital
heritage.

While the UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cul-
tural Heritage mandates community involvement in safeguarding initiatives, dig-
ital tools implicate intangible heritage documentation as digital heritage. Digital
code, which at its most primary function is programmed to make copies, has
displaced the natural duplication constraints of analog media,65 making the ar-
ticulation of local cultural property rights discourse a significant element of
community-based safeguarding efforts. In the era of the born-digital heritage ob-
ject, the safeguarding of intangible cultural heritage and the preservation of dig-
ital cultural heritage are not separate projects. As with the ambiguous boundary
that distinguishes verbal utterances from object66—efforts to document and safe-
guard what UNESCO has defined as intangible cultural heritage must be under-
stood, and critiqued, in relation to the UNESCO discourse on the preservation
of digital heritage. Both of these policy instruments—the Convention for the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

365

Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage and the Charter on the Preser-
vation of Digital Heritage—should be considered and implemented with aware-
ness of the complexities of local cultural property rights discourse and appropriate
strategies for archiving documentation. Accordingly, heritage workers, practition-
ers, and community members should take steps to ensure that meaningful par-
ticipation in digital documentary initiatives includes space for the negotiation
and articulation of diverse local approaches to ownership and circulation of her-
itage, as well as long-term planning for the most appropriate archival forms and
modes of access. The multiple methods and ontologies through which indig-
enous peoples around the world are appropriating new technologies to articulate
their own social, cultural, and political visions67 demonstrate the importance of
sustained attention to and facilitation of meaningful community participation in
efforts to safeguard their digital cultural heritage.

ENDNOTES

1. See Ito, “Introduction” and Peers and Brown, Museums and Source Communities.
2. UNESCO, Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage, art. 1.
3. Cruikshank, “Oral Tradition and Material Culture,” 5–9.
4. Cruikshank, “Oral Tradition and Material Culture,” 6.
5. UNESCO, Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage.
6. UNESCO, Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage, art. 2.
7. Torsen and Anderson, “Intellectual Property and the Safeguarding of Traditional Cultures”
provides a number of significant examples of local negotiations of ownership and approaches to
reconciling Indigenous paradigms with current intellectual property regimes.

8. UNESCO, Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, 2.
9. UNESCO, Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, 3.
10. Jackson, “Boasian Ethnography,” 44.
11. Moore and Hennessy, “New Technologies and Contested Ideologies.”
12. FirstVoices.com is a First Nations language revitalization initiative created by the First Peoples
Cultural Foundation in Victoria, British Columbia, in partnership with Canadian First Nations peo-
ples. See 具www.FirstVoices.com典 for further information.

13. Pigliasco, “Intangible Cultural Property, Tangible Databases, Visible Debates.”
14. Hennessy, “A Ituvatuva Ni Vakadidike E Sawau.”
15. Pigliasco, “Intangible Cultural Property, Tangible Databases, Visible Debates,” 266–267.
16. Christen, “Opening Archives.”
17. Christen, “Opening Archives.”
18. Cameron, “The Politics of Heritage Authorship.”
19. Cameron, “The Politics of Heritage Authorship,” 71.
20. UNESCO, Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage, 2.
21. Brown, “Heritage Trouble,” 48.
22. Anderson, “Anxieties of Authorship in Colonial Archives.”
23. Brown, “Heritage Trouble,” 48.
24. UNESCO, Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, 1.
25. Brown, “Heritage Trouble,” 48.
26. UNESCO, Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, art. 3.
27. UNESCO, Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, art. 4.
28. UNESCO, Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage.
29. Kurin, “Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage,” 15.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

366

KATE HENNESSY

30. “Dane Wajich—Dane-zគaa Stories and Songs: Dreamers and the Land” 具http://www.

virtualmuseum.ca/Exhibitions/Danewajich/典.

31. Hennessy, “Repatriation, Digital Technology, and Culture in a Northern Athapaskan

Community.”

32. See Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, “Objects of Ethnography.”
33. Stoler, “Colonial Archives.”
34. See Brody, Maps and Dreams and Ridington, Trail to Heaven.
35. Ridington, Trail to Heaven.
36. See Ridington and Ridington, “Archiving Actualities” and “Hunting for Stories in Sound.”
37. Ridington and Ridington, “Hunting for Stories in Sound.”
38. Ridington and Ridington, “Hunting for Stories in Sound.”
39. Ridington and Ridington, “Archiving Actualities.”
40. Dane-zគaa Archive Catalog, 2004–2011 具http://fishability.biz/Doig典.
41. Ridington and Ridington, “Archiving Actualities.”
42. See Hennessy, “Repatriation, Digital Technology, and Culture in a Northern Athapaskan
Community” and Ridington and Hennessy, “Building Indigenous Agency through Web-based
Exhibition.”

43. Ridington and Ridington, “Archiving Actualities,” 67.
44. Canada Copyright Act, R.S.C., ch. C-42, s. 18 (1985) (Can.), “Copyright in Sound Record-
ings” states that “the maker of a sound recording has a copyright in the sound recording, consisting
of the sole right to do the following in relation to the sound recording or any substantial part thereof:
(a) to publish it for the first time, (b) to reproduce it in any material form, and (c) to rent it out, and
to authorize any such acts.”

45. Marcus and Clifford, “The Making of Ethnographic Texts.”
46. Ridington and Ridington, “Archiving Actualities,” 67.
47. Ridington and Ridington, “Archiving Actualities,” 67.
48. Hennessy, “Repatriation, Digital Technology, and Culture in a Northern Athapaskan

Community.”

49. Ridington and Ridington, “Hunting for Stories in Sound,” 20.
50. Chief Kelvin Davis, interview by Kate Hennessy, Doig River First Nation Band Hall, 1 August

2007.

51. Brown, Digital Cultural Heritage and Indigenous Objects.
52. Cameron, “The Politics of Heritage Authorship,” 180.
53. Christen, “Tracking Properness,” 420.
54. Cameron, “The Politics of Heritage Authorship,” 180.
55. Christen, “Gone Digital.”
56. Abu-Lughod, “The Romance of Resistance,” 42.
57. Intangible Cultural Heritage and Museums Field School, Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre
具http://www.sac.or.th/databases/fieldschool典: “The Intangible Cultural Heritage and Museums Field
School focuses on the role of the museum in safeguarding, documenting and revitalizing intangible
cultural heritage in the ASEAN region. Led by experts in the fields of museology and anthropology,
this course offers museum and heritage professionals the conceptual and practical tools for engaging
with local communities to safeguard their intangible cultural heritage, such as oral history and nar-
ratives, craftsmanship, festivals, ritual, performance and other forms of traditional knowledge. The
course combines frameworks from ‘new museology’ and ecomuseums with anthropological ap-
proaches for understanding and working with source communities.”
58. Hennessy, “Virtual Repatriation and Digital Cultural Heritage.”
59. Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre, Field School Course Materials, 13.
60. Phra Patiphan Puriphanyo’s web site could formerly be viewed at www.muanglamphun.com;
however, as I describe in the article, the domain name was given up because of lack of resources.
Activities have been moved to Facebook.

61. Phra Patiphan Puriphanyo, interview by Kate Hennessy (trans. Linina Phuttitarn), 18 August

2011, Lamphun, Thailand.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

367

62. Phra Patiphan Puriphanyo, interview by Kate Hennessy (trans. Linina Phuttitarn), 18 August

2011, Lamphun, Thailand.

63. Cruikshank, “Oral Tradition and Material Culture.”
64. Abu-Lughod, “The Romance of Resistance,” 53.
65. Lessig, “Remix.”
66. Cruikshank, “Oral Tradition and Material Culture.”
67. Srinivasan, “Indigenous, Ethnic, and Cultural Articulations of New Media.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abu-Lughod, Lila. “The Romance of Resistance: Tracing Transformations of Power through Be-
douin Women.” American Ethnologist 17, no. 1 (1990): 41–55.

Anderson, Jane. “Anxieties of Authorship in the Colonial Archive.” In Media Authorship, edited by C.
Chris and D. Gerstner. London: Routledge, forthcoming.

Baudrillard, Jean. Simulacra and Simulation. Translated by Sheila Faria Glaser. Ann Arbor: Univer-
sity of Michigan Press, 1994.

Benjamin, Walter. “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” In Illuminations, ed-
ited by H. Arendt and H. Zohn, 217–51. London: Jonathan Cape, 1968.

Brody, Hugh. Maps and Dreams: Indians and the British Columbia Frontier. Vancouver and Toronto:
Douglas and McIntyre, 1988.

Brown, Deidre. “Digital Cultural Heritage and Indigenous Objects, People, and Environments.” In
Theorizing Digital Cultural Heritage: A Critical Discourse, edited by Fiona Cameron and Sarah Kender-
line, 77–91. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007.

Brown, Michael F. “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work on the Protection of Cultural Property.” Inter-
national Journal of Cultural Property 12 (2005): 40–61.

Cameron, Fiona. “Beyond the Cult of the Replicant: Museums and Historical Digital Objects—
Traditional Concerns, New Discourses.” In Theorizing Digital Cultural Heritage: A Critical Discourse,
edited by Fiona Cameron and Sarah Kenderline, 49–75. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007.

———. “The Politics of Heritage Authorship: The Case of Digital Heritage Collections.” In New
Heritage: New Media and Cultural Heritage, edited by Yehuda E. Kalay, Thomas Kvan, and Janice
Affleck, 170–84. London and New York: Routledge, 2008.
Christen, Kim, Chris Cooney, and Allesandro Ceglia. Digital Dynamics across Cultures. 具http://
vectorsjournal.org/projects/index.php?project⫽67典 (2006) accessed 13 August 2011.

Christen, Kimberly. “Gone Digital: Aboriginal Remix and the Cultural Commons.” International Jour-
nal of Cultural Property 12, no. 3 (2005): 315–45.

———. “Tracking Properness: Repackaging Culture in a Remote Australian Town.” Cultural Anthro-
pology 21, no. 3 (2006): 416–46.

———. “Access and Accountability: The Ecology of Information Sharing in the Digital Age.” An-
thropology News, April (2009): 4–5.

———. “Opening Archives: Respectful Repatriation.” American Archivist 74 (2011): 185–210.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

368

KATE HENNESSY

Cruikshank, Julie. Life Lived Like a Story: Cultural Constructions of Life History by Tagish and Tuchone
Women. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1987.

———. “Oral Tradition and Material Culture: Multiplying Meanings of ‘Words’ and ‘Things.’” An-
thropology Today 8, no. 3 (1992): 5–9.

———. The Social Life of Stories: Narrative and Knowledge in the Yukon Territory. Vancouver: Uni-
versity of British Columbia Press, 1998.

Doig River First Nation. “Dane Wajich—Dane-Zគ aa Stories and Songs: Dreamers and the Land,” cu-
rated by Amber Ridington and Kate Hennessy. 具http://www.museevirtuel-virtualmuseum.ca/sgc-
cms/expositions-exhibitions/danewajich/english/index.html典 (2007) accessed 10 June 2012.

Hennessy, Kate. “Virtual Repatriation and Digital Cultural Heritage: The Ethics of Managing Online
Collections.” Anthropology News, April (2009): 5–6.

———. A Ituvatuva Ni Vakadidike E Sawau: The Sawau Project DVD. Visual Anthropology Review
25, no. 1 (2009): 90–92.

———. “Repatriation, Digital Technology, and Culture in a Northern Athapaskan Community.” PhD
thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of British Columbia, 2010.

———. “From Intangible Expression to Digital Cultural Heritage.” In Safeguarding Intangible Her-
itage, edited by Michelle Stefano, Peter Davis, and Gerard Corsane, 33–46. Heritage Matters Series.
London: Boydell and Brewer, 2012.

Ito, Mizuko. “Introduction.” In Networked Publics, edited by Kazys Varnelis, 1–14. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2008.

Jackson, Jason Baird. “Boasian Ethnography and Contemporary Intellectual Property Debates.” Pro-
ceedings of the American Philosophical Society 154, no. 1 (2010): 40–49.

Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Barbara. “Objects of Ethnography.” In Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and
Politics of Museum Display, edited by Ivan Karp and Stephen D. Levine, 386–443. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution, 1991.

Kurin, Richard. “Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage: Key Factors in Implementing the 2003
Convention.” International Journal of Intangible Heritage 2 (2007): 10–20.

Lessig, Lawrence. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy. New York: Pen-
guin, 2008.

Marcus, George E., and James Clifford. “The Making of Ethnographic Texts: A Preliminary Report.”
Current Anthropology 26, no. 2 (1985): 267–71.

Moore, Patrick, and Kate Hennessy. “New Technologies and Contested Ideologies: The Tagish
Firstvoices Project.” American Indian Quarterly 30, no. 1 & 2 (2006): 119–37.

Peers, Laura, and Alison Brown, eds. Museums and Source Communities: A Routledge Reader. Lon-
don: Routledge, 2003.

Phangwana, Patiphan. Wat Pratupa. 具www.muanglamphun.com典 accessed 30 August 2011.

Pigliasco, Guido Carlo. “Intangible Cultural Property, Tangible Databases, Visible Debates: The Sawau
Project.” International Journal of Cultural Property 16 (2009): 255–72.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288

CULTURAL HERITAGE ON THE WEB

369

Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre, Thailand. “Intangible Cultural Heritage and
Museums 201 Field School Course Materials.” Bangkok: Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Anthro-
pology Centre, Thailand, 2010.

Ridington, Amber, and Kate Hennessy. “Building Indigenous Agency through Web-Based Exhibi-
tion: Dane-Wajich—Dane-Zaa Stories and Songs: Dreamers and the Land.” Museums and the Web
2008. 具http://www.archimuse.com/mw2008/papers/ridington/ridington.html典 (2008) accessed 13 Au-
gust 2011.

Ridington, Robin. “Beaver Indians.” In Handbook of North American Indians, edited by June Helm,
350–60. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1981.

———. Trail to Heaven: Knowledge and Narrative in a Northern Native Community. Vancouver: Doug-
las and McIntyre, 1988.

———. Little Bit Know Something: Stories in a Language of Anthropology. Vancouver and Toronto:
Douglas & McIntyre, 1990.

Ridington, Robin, and Jillian Ridington. “Archiving Actualities: Sharing Authority with Dane-Zaa
First Nations.” Comma 1 (2003): 61–68.

———. “Hunting for Stories in Sound: Sharing Ethnographic Authority.” In When You Sing It Now,
Just Like New: First Nations Poetics, Voices, and Representations, 16–27. Lincoln: University of Ne-
braska Press, 2006.
Ridington, Robin, Jillian Ridington, and Doig River First Nation. “The Ridington/Dane-Zaa Digital
Archive.” Dane-Zaa Archive Catalogue. 具http://Fishability.Biz/Doig典 (2004–2010).

Srinivasan, Ramesh. “Indigenous, Ethnic, and Cultural Articulations of New Media.” International
Journal of Cultural Studies 9, no. 4 (2006): 497–518.

Stoler, Ann Laura. “Colonial Archives and the Arts of Governance.” Archival Science 2, no. 1 (2002):
87–109.

Torsen, Molly, and Jane Anderson. Intellectual Property and the Safeguarding of Traditional Cultures:
Legal Issues and Practical Options for Museums, Libraries, and Archives. World Intellectual Property
Association (WIPO), 2010.

UNESCO. Charter on the Preservation of Digital Heritage, 2003.

———. Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, 2003.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000288


