International Journal of Cultural Property (2005) 12:11–39. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2005 International Cultural Property Society
/
DOI: 10.1017

S0940739105050046

ARTICLES

Cultural Property Internationalism
John Henry Merryman*

Abstract: Cultural property internationalism is shorthand for the proposition
that everyone has an interest in the preservation and enjoyment of cultural
property, wherever it is situated, from whatever cultural or geographic source it
derives. This article describes its historical development and its expression in the
international law of war, in the work of UNESCO, and in the international trade
in cultural objects and assesses the ways in which cultural-property world actors
support or resist the implications of cultural property internationalism.

“Cultural property internationalism”is shorthand for the proposition that everyone
has an interest in the preservation and enjoyment of cultural property,1 wherever it
is situated, from whatever cultural or geographic source it derives. In the frequently
quoted words of the 1954 Hague Convention, cultural property is “the cultural her-
itage of all mankind.”2 In an earlier article3 I briefly described and contrasted “cul-
tural internationalism”and“cultural nationalism,”as they concern cultural property.
Here I return to cultural property internationalism, describing its historical devel-
opment and its expression in the international law of war, in the work of UNESCO,
and in the international trade in cultural objects.

What is “cultural property?” It sometimes seems that any human artifact (match-
book covers? baseball cards? fruit box labels? perfume bottles?) can qualify.4 Most
people, however, will discriminate, reserving the “cultural property” title for a more
limited range of objects that are distinguishable from the ordinary run of artifacts by
/
their special cultural significance and
or rarity.Any attempt at a definition will reveal
that the cultural property category is heterogeneous. The problems created by includ-
ing Matisse paintings, archaic Chinese bronzes, and African masks in the same “cul-
tural property”category are not pursued here, although such disparities clearly must,
at some level, eventually require distinctive treatment. As cultural property law and

*Stanford Law School. Email: Merry@law.stanford.edu

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. My thanks to Robert Hallman, Jody Maxmin, Nora Niedzelski-Eichner and
Stephen Urice for their thoughtful criticisms and suggestions.

11

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

12

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

policy are currently structured, however, that process has barely begun. The UNESCO
instruments described later in this article, for example, typically define “cultural
property” to include anything and everything and treat the category as a collective
unit. Much source nation legislation is similarly structured. Most recently, a practi-
cal distinction between antiquities and other cultural objects seems to have emerged.5
The cultural property category is also amorphous and boundless. Thus the 1995
UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects6 applies to
objects “which, on religious or secular grounds, are of importance for archaeology,
prehistory, history, literature, art or science [what else is there?] and belong to one of
the categories listed in the Annex to this Convention.”7

Empirically, cultural property centrally includes the sorts of things that dealers
deal in, collectors collect, and museums acquire and display: principally works of
art, antiquities, and ethnographic objects. These are the foci of a social subsystem we
can call “the cultural property world,” which is populated by artists, collectors, deal-
ers and auction houses, museums and their professionals, art historians, archaeol-
ogists and ethnographers, and source nation cultural officials, among others. These
people and institutions form a kind of ecology; whatever significantly affects one
actor affects the others.

The cultural property world is international. Ethnographic museums in London
and Berlin maintain extensive collections of African, Oceanic, and American objects.
The Metropolitan Museum mounts a Vermeer exhibition from a variety of foreign
and domestic lenders and its own collections. Japanese dealers attend New York and
London auctions to bid on works by French impressionists and German expression-
ists. Swiss dealers offer Greek and Roman antiquities in widely distributed illus-
trated catalogs. American collectors build important art and antiquity collections of
works from Europe,Africa, East and South Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America.
The works of American artists are acquired by Dutch museums and German col-
lectors. In this empirical sense, cultural property internationalism is not an argu-
ment or a hypothesis; it is an observable fact.8

No thinking person argues for free trade in cultural property. Regulation is nec-
essary in order to preserve cultural property and to support its proper international
circulation. Appropriate regulation serves the international interest of “all man-
kind” in the preservation and enjoyment of its “cultural heritage.” Excessive regula-
tion, however, thwarts that same international interest. Regrettably but predictably,
the various cultural-property world actors do not always agree on whether a restric-
tion is or is not “excessive.” The international cultural property world is divided
along this and other dimensions. I address these divisions, with particular emphasis
on their implications for cultural internationalism, at a number of points in this
article.

In my view, source nation regulations preserve the cultural heritage when and to
the extent that they protect fragile objects that are likely to be damaged or destroyed
by movement and when they prevent the dismemberment of complex objects, like
the panels of an altarpiece or the components of a sculptural group. When antiqui-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

13

ties are removed from their contexts in order to preserve, study, and enjoy them,
archaeologists rightly urge and source nations rightly require that the removal be
done with care and that it be accompanied by full documentation. It seems right that
/
objects of ritual
religious importance to living cultures remain with or be returned
to the representatives of those cultures, as were the Afo-a-Kom9 and, under NAG-
PRA,10 American Indian artifacts. And finally, it is internationally important that
the inhabitants of every nation, including the poorest survivors of colonial exploi-
tation, have access to a fully representative collection of objects that represent their
history and culture.

We begin with the history of the idea that cultural property should be protected

from destruction and plunder in war.

CULTURAL PROPERTY AND WAR

Classical international law placed few restraints on the destruction or plunder of
enemy property, cultural or other. Our history of the topic begins with Polybius of
Athens, writing before 146 b.c.:

One may perhaps have some reason for amassing gold and silver; in fact,
it would be impossible to attain universal dominion without appropriat-
ing these resources from other peoples, in order to weaken them. In the
case of every other form of wealth, however, it is more glorious to leave it
where it was, together with the envy it inspired, and to base our nation’s
glory, not on the abundance and beauty of its paintings and statues, but on
its sober customs and noble sentiments. Moreover, I hope that future con-
querors will learn from these thoughts not to plunder the cities subjugated
by them, and not to make the misfortunes of other peoples the adorn-
ments of their own country.11

As a historian, Polybius is here making an argument (“it is more glorious”) and
expressing a wish (“I hope that”) and does not suggest that his proposition is in any
sense law. His wish was not soon fulfilled. In the reigning pattern of conquest estab-
lished by the Romans, victors appropriated works of art and other cultural treasures
from conquered peoples as trophies of war, to be displayed in triumphal marches
and installed in the Roman Forum. The Forum became the world’s first great out-
door museum, adorned with works whose presence affirmed Roman military power
and illustrated its conquests. The Roman style was revived by the Venetians and
other Italian powers during the Crusades and the Renaissance.

The legal status of cultural property in war began to change in the seventeenth
century with Grotius, who summarized the weight of received legal opinion and
international practice from antiquity up to his time in this way:

That it is not contrary to nature to despoil him whom it is honorable to
kill, was said by Cicero. Therefore it is not strange that the law of nations
has permitted the destruction and plunder of the property of enemies, the
slaughter of whom it has permitted.12

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

14

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

While accepting that this harsh rule was law, Grotius argued for its moderation. In a
particularly pertinent passage, he proposed that sacred or artistic works should not
be destroyed where there is no military advantage in doing so, citing Polybius, Mar-
cellus and Cicero:

Polybius says it is a sign of an infuriated mind to destroy those things
which, if destroyed, do not weaken the enemy nor bring gain to the one
who destroys them: such things are temples, colonnades, statues and the
like. Marcellus, whom Cicero praises, spared all the buildings of Syracuse,
public and private, sacred and profane, just as if he had come with his
army to defend them, not to capture them.13

Grotius, a natural lawyer, is here employing general philosophical principles of mod-
eration and proportion: destruction that neither weakens the enemy nor helps the
destroyer is immoderate and disproportionate. Grotius appears to deplore the vio-
lation of these principles, rather than the resulting loss of cultural property.

Two centuries later Vattel provided a more robust argument for the protection of

works of art and architecture in time of war:

For whatever cause a country is ravaged, we ought to spare those edifices
which do honor to human society, and do not contribute to the enemy’s
strength—such as temples, tombs, public buildings, and all works of
remarkable beauty. What advantage is obtained by destroying them? It is
declaring one’s self an enemy to mankind, thus wantonly to deprive them
of these monuments of art and models of taste; and in that light Belisarius
represented the matter to Tittila, King of the Goths. We still detest those
barbarians who destroyed so many wonders of art, when they overran the
Roman Empire.14

Here we see what may have been the earliest expression of true cultural property
internationalism: Vattel argues that cultural property should be spared in the inter-
ests of “mankind” and “human society,” and he broadens the basis for protection to
include aesthetics (“works of remarkable beauty”). Like Grotius, Vattel recognizes
the primacy of military necessity but he also draws a distinction between necessity
and mere convenience:

Nobody presumes to blame a general who lays waste gardens, vineyards,
or orchards, for the purpose of encamping on the ground, and throwing
up an entrenchment. If any beautiful production of art be thereby
destroyed, it is an accident, an unhappy consequence of the war; and
the general will not be blamed, except in those cases when he might
have pitched his camp elsewhere without the smallest inconvenience to
himself.15

We will return to military necessity below.

A major development in the history of cultural property internationalism took
form as a reaction against Napoléon’s appropriation of works of art for the Musée
Français (later to become the Louvre) during his first Italian Campaign in 1796–99.
The planning for this extended plundering enterprise began in Paris, where “as early
as October 16, 1794, the Commission temporaire des arts had appointed a subcom-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

15

mittee of four members to compile full information concerning works of art and
science to be found in countries which the republican armies were expected to
invade.”16 Accompanied by commissioners armed with these lists, Napoléon exacted
huge concessions of works of art from the Italians, formalizing some of them as
“reparations”in the terms of armistice treaties imposed on the losers. Thus the Duke
of Modena surrendered forty-nine pictures; Parma another forty-seven; Milan
twenty-five; Venice its famous bronze horses, the lion from St. Mark’s, sixteen pic-
tures and other treasures; and so it went. The list is long, and at one time Napoléon
boasted that “We have stripped Italy of everything of artistic worth, with the excep-
tion of a few objects in Turin and Naples!”17

The French plunder of Italian art excited strong feelings. Poets declaimed and
intellectuals argued. Some emphasized the benefit to a larger public of mounting
and publicly displaying so great a concentration of important works of art that had
formerly been widely dispersed, often among private holders, and visible only to the
few. The French defended their behavior on a variety of grounds: compensation for
the blood and toil of French soldiers; the cultural superiority of France, which made
it only right that great art be brought and kept there; if France did not “give a home”
to Italian cultural treasures they would be acquired by England or the Tsar through
purchase; they had been ceded to France in treaties and they were now legally French;
and so on. Others referred to the French actions as those of “a band of practiced
robbers” and “hordes of thieves.”18

Among the French intellectuals who opposed the plunder of Italy’s art was Qua-
tremère de Quincy, whose published protest in the form of letters addressed to one
of Napoléon’s generals, Letters to Miranda, contained the following passages (my
translation):

[I]n Europe the arts and sciences form a republic whose members, joined
by the love of and quest for truth and beauty, tend less to isolate them-
selves in their respective nations than to pursue their interests from the
point of view of a universal fraternity. . . . [T]he arts and sciences belong
to all of Europe and are no longer the exclusive property of any nation. . . .
[I]t is as a member of that general republic of arts and sciences, and not as
an inhabitant of this or that nation, that I will discuss the interest that all
parties have in the conservation of all. What is that interest? It is that of
civilization, of perfection of the means of welfare and pleasure, of the
advancement and progress of education and thought, of amelioration of
the human condition. Everything that could contribute to this end belongs
to all peoples; no one has the right to dispose arbitrarily of it.19

The cited volume also sets out two contemporary petitions addressed to the Direc-
toire.20 One, dated 16 August 1796,“supporting the theses of Quatremère de Quincy”
and signed by fifty artists, requested that before removing works of art from Rome
a commission composed of artists and men of letters be appointed by the National
Institute to prepare a report on the topic. The other, dated 30 October of the same
year and signed by thirty-nine artists “to support the seizure of works of art in Italy,”
spoke aggressively throughout of “the honor, the glory of the French name.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

16

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

There is no evidence that Quatremère de Quincy’s plea had any restraining effect
on the French forces in Italy, but it may have influenced the decision of an English
judge in an 1813 prize case, The Marquis de Somerueles.21 The case is unusually
interesting for two main reasons: it appears to be the earliest reported judicial deci-
sion to treat works of art as cultural property excepted from ordinary rules of the law
of war, and the opinion provides a rare and eloquent judicial statement of cultural
property internationalism.

The case arose during the War of 1812 between the United States and England. An
American merchant vessel carrying a shipment of paintings and prints bound from
Italy to the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in Philadelphia was seized by a
British ship and taken to the British Court of Vice-Admiralty in Halifax, Nova Sco-
tia, for judgment as prize.A petition from the Academy, pleading that“even war does
not leave science and art unprotected,”asked that the paintings and prints be released,
and the judge, Dr. Croke,22 so ordered, stating that:

The same law of nations, which prescribes that all property belonging to
the enemy shall be liable to confiscation, has likewise its modifications
and relaxations of that rule. The arts and sciences are admitted amongst
all civilized nations, as forming an exception to the severe rights of war-
fare, and as entitled to favour and protection. They are considered not as
the peculium of this or that nation, but as the property of mankind at
large, and as belonging to the common interests of the whole species.

The similarities to Quatremère de Quincy’s language are striking. His book would
likely have been known to a cosmopolitan English civilian, and Dr. Croke would
have found the book’s argument to be congenial, if only because, in opposing
Napoléon’s actions, it supported the British side in the conflict with France. It seems
probable that Quatremère de Quincy is Dr. Croke’s immediate source for his state-
ment of the law of nations.

There is, however, a more fundamental source for that statement in the humane
component of later Enlightenment and natural law thought about the law of war,23
of which Vattel and Quatremère de Quincy provide examples. The ideal of restraints
on belligerent behavior in order to protect art and science for humanity was in the
air breathed by cosmopolitan Europeans in the latter half of the eighteenth century.
Dr. Croke’s opinion contains substantial internal evidence of this kind of thinking,24
to which he was attuned by his civilian education and outlook.25 Passages in his
opinion clearly reflect the conflict between the humane internationalist ideal to which
he appealed and the nationalist glorification of military campaigns that the French
under Bonaparte (that “foreign despot”) had embraced. The conflict persists today
in the international law of cultural property.26

American writers in the first half of the nineteenth century took a narrower and
less internationalist view than the Europeans. Thus Wheaton, writing in 1836, nei-
ther refers to nor displays awareness of the Letters to Miranda or Dr. Croke’s opinion
in The Marquis de Somerueles. His discussion of the law concerning enemy cultural
property is briefer and less nuanced than Vattel’s:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

17

By the ancient law of nations, even what were called res sacrae were not
exempt from capture and confiscation . . . . But by the modern usage of
nations, which has now acquired the force of law, temples of religion, pub-
lic edifices devoted to civil purposes only, monuments of art, and repos-
itories of science, are exempted from the general operations of war.27

Wheaton’s basis for this relaxation of the ancient rule was, like that of Grotius, the
application of natural law principles of moderation and proportion: the “principle
of international law, which authorizes us to use against an enemy such a degree of
violence, and such only, as may be necessary to secure the object of hostilities.”28
Wheaton makes no reference to a general interest of mankind in the preservation
and enjoyment of cultural property.

Halleck, writing on the eve of the American Civil War, also displayed no aware-
ness of Quatremère de Quincy or Dr. Croke. Unlike Wheaton, however, he distin-
guished destruction from plunder and immovables from movables:

No belligerent would be justifiable in destroying temples, tombs, statutes
[sic], paintings, or other works of art (except so far as their destruction
may be the accidental or necessary result of military operations.) But, may
he not seize and appropriate to his own use such works of genius and taste
as belong to the hostile state, and are of a moveable character? This was
done by the French armies in the wars of conquest which followed the
revolution of 1789. . . . The acquisitions of the Parisian galleries and muse-
ums from the conquest of Italy, were generally obtained by means of treaty
stipulations, or forced contributions levied by Napoleon on the Italian
princes.29

Halleck recognized that opinions differed on the legal effect of such forced treaty
stipulations, but his discussion shows that he clearly favored the view that they were
binding.

In July 1862, when the same Halleck became General-in-Chief of the Union Armies
in the American Civil War, the stage was set for the next development. Francis Lie-
ber, a German emigré who was a professor at Columbia College, had earlier collab-
orated with Halleck in an effort to define guerilla warfare.At Halleck’s request, Lieber
now prepared a proposed code of conduct for the Union forces. Issued as General
Orders No. 100 on April 24, 1863, these Instructions for the Governance of Armies of
the United States in the Field, later known as the Lieber Code,30 contained 157 articles.
The provisions on protection of cultural property appear in articles 34–36:

34. As a general rule, the property belonging to churches, to hospitals, or
other establishments of an exclusively charitable character, to establish-
ments of education, or foundations for the promotion of knowledge,
whether public schools, universities, academies of learning or observato-
ries, museums of the fine arts, or of a scientific character—such property
is not to be considered public property in the sense of paragraph 31 [autho-
rizing seizure of enemy public property]; but it may be taxed or used when
the public service may require it.

35. Classical works of art, libraries, scientific collections, or precious instru-
ments, such as astronomical telescopes, as well as hospitals, must be secured

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

18

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

against all avoidable injury, even when they are contained in fortified places
whilst besieged or bombarded.

36. If such works of art, libraries, collections, or instruments belonging to
a hostile nation or government, can be removed without injury, the ruler
of the conquering state or nation may order them to be seized and removed
for the benefit of the said nation. The ultimate ownership is to be settled
by the ensuing treaty of peace.

The Lieber Code was one of the earliest attempts to state a comprehensive body of
principles to govern the conduct of belligerents in enemy territory. It was widely
admired as an enlightened and humane document, was frequently copied in Europe,
and provided the template for modern international conventions on the law of war.
The influence of the Lieber Code’s treatment of cultural property can be traced
through Article 8 of the Declaration of Brussels (1874)31; Article 56 of the Institute of
International Law’s Manual of the Laws and Customs of War (1880)32; Article 56 of
the “Regulations Respecting the Laws and customs of War on Land” under Hague II
(1907)33; article 56 of the corresponding Regulations under Hague IV (1907)34;
Article 5 of the Convention Concerning Bombardment by Naval Forces in Time of War
of October 8, 1907(Hague IX)35; Articles XXV and XXVI of the Hague Rules of Air
Warfare (1922)36; and other international instruments, culminating in the 1954
Hague Convention, which is discussed below.

As World War II approached, the Roerich Pact,37 promulgated by the Organiza-
tion of American States at its meeting in Washington, D.C. in 1935, was the first
multinational convention entirely devoted to the protection of cultural property in
war. Most American states, including the United States, became members. It stated:

Article 1. The historic monuments, museums, scientific, artistic, educa-
tional and cultural institutions shall be considered as neutral and as such
respected and protected by belligerents. The same respect and protection
shall be due to the personnel of the institutions mentioned above. The
same respect and protection shall be accorded to the historic monuments,
museums, scientific, artistic, educational and cultural institutions in time
of peace as well as in war.

The Roerich Pact was limited to the Western hemisphere, protected only immovable
cultural properties and “institutions,” lacked essential details and, although still in
force, is in practice a dead letter.

Following the signature of the Roerich Pact, attempts were undertaken to draft a
more comprehensive convention for the protection of monuments and works of
art in time of war. In 1939, a Preliminary Draft International Convention for the
Protection of Monuments and Works of Art in Time of War,38 elaborated under the
auspices of the League of Nations International Museums Office, was presented to
governments by the Netherlands, but it was an early casualty of the outbreak of
World War II.

During World War II the German Nazis engaged in a highly organized campaign
of art plunder. The operation was placed in the hands of a “special unit” (Ein-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

19

satzstab) directed by Alfred Rosenberg, a high Nazi official. The Einsatzstab Reich-
sleiter Rosenberg was separate from the German military and uninhibited by the
military’s traditional policy against looting.As the German armies invaded and occu-
pied other nations, the Einsatzstab seized the property of Jews and great quantities of
other works that Nazi party officials, principally Hitler and Goering, directed to be
seized. The quantity of art taken and shipped to Germany was enormous. Rosenberg
produced an illustrated catalog of 39 volumes, with about 2,500 photographs of
works seized. If the entire body of loot had been photographed and catalogued it
would have run to about 300 volumes. The similarities and contrasts with Napoléon’s
Italian campaign are a tempting topic that cannot be pursued here.39

On August 8,1945 the victorious Allied Powers signed the agreement constituting
the Allied Military Tribunal and ordering the Nuremberg trials of major Nazi offi-
cials.At Nuremberg, Rosenberg was charged with multiple crimes against peace, war
crimes, and crimes against humanity. Among the war crimes charged was “looting
and plundering of works of art.”Rosenberg was found guilty of this and other charges
and was hanged.40

A new proposal for an international convention was submitted to UNESCO by
the Netherlands in 1948. UNESCO convened a committee of government experts to
draft a convention in 1951, and an intergovernmental conference of 56 nations held
at The Hague adopted the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in
the Event of Armed Conflict41 on 14 May 1954. Although the United States has not
become a party, Hague 1954 has been widely adopted by other nations (105 as of
March, 2003) and represents the reigning international consensus about the protec-
tion of cultural property from destruction and plunder in war.

In addition to the powerful statement of cultural property internationalism in its
Preamble that “damage to cultural property belonging to any people whatsoever
means damage to the cultural heritage of all mankind, since each people makes its
contribution to the culture of the world,” the Convention contains the following
interesting provision in Article 29:

The High Contracting Parties undertake to take, within the framework of
their ordinary criminal jurisdiction, all necessary steps to prosecute and
impose penal or disciplinary sanctions upon those persons, of whatever
nationality, who commit or order to be committed a breach of the present
Convention.

This post-Nuremberg language is itself an extraordinary expression of cultural prop-
erty internationalism. States by becoming Parties acquire jurisdiction to try as crimes
breaches of the Convention committed by individuals anywhere whose States may
or may not be Parties.

The widespread adoption of Hague 1954 assured a prominent place for cultural
property internationalism in the law of war, but changes in weapons and modes of
warfare since the 1940s and the resulting new threats to cultural property led to
concern about its adequacy. This concern became more general during the early
1990s, particularly during the Gulf War and the wars in the formerYugoslavia. Largely

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

20

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

stimulated (again) by the government of the Netherlands, a series of studies, meet-
ings of experts, and meetings of governmental representatives that began in 1991
eventually led to the diplomatic conference in The Hague in March, 1999, that
adopted the Second Protocol to the Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.42 The protocol increases cultural
property protections and establishes a Secretariat to administer the Convention’s
terms.

All of the authorities and conventions so far mentioned, with the sole exception of
the Roerich Pact, include a significant concession to nationalism: the doctrine of
“military necessity.” As stated in Articles 14-15 of the Lieber Code:

Military necessity, as understood by modern civilized nations, consists in
the necessity of those measures which are indispensable for securing the
end of war, and which are lawful according to the modern law and usages
of war. . . . Military necessity . . . allows of all destruction of property. . . .

Hague 1954 is not greatly different.Article 4(2) provides that the obligation to respect
cultural property “may be waived . . . in cases where military necessity imperatively
requires such a waiver.” Article 6a of the Second Protocol to Hague 1954 retains but
limits and clarifies the military necessity waiver.43

The exception for military necessity, whose origin has been attributed to Prussian
militarism—“La célèbre conception prussienne de la Kriegsraison”44—was strongly
debated at the diplomatic conference that produced Hague 1954 and was retained
by a divided vote. Nahlik describes the debates and says that the United States, Great
Britain, and Turkey insisted on including an exception for military necessity, while
the USSR, Romania, Greece, Belgium, Ecuador, and Spain argued that such an excep-
tion was “incompatible with the spirit and essential principles of the Convention.” It
is ironic that the United States, which argued that it could not ratify the Convention
if it did not contain the military necessity clause, thus compelling its inclusion, has
never become a party to Hague 1954.45

It is not entirely clear when the international interest in protecting cultural prop-
erty from the hazards of war began to expand into a more general cultural property
internationalism. We do know that by 1945, when UNESCO was created, that evo-
lution was well advanced and, in its expanded form, was expressly incorporated into
UNESCO’s cultural property competence, as the following discussion demonstrates.

UNESCO

A United Nations Conference for the establishment of an educational and cultural
organization convened in London in November 1945, attended by the representa-
tives of forty-four countries. Led by France and the United Kingdom, the delegates
hoped to create an organization that would embody a genuine culture of peace. In
their eyes, the new organization should establish the “intellectual and moral soli-
darity of mankind” and, in so doing, help to prevent the outbreak of another world

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

21

war. The Constitution of UNESCO was signed on 16 November 1945. As of October
2003, UNESCO had 190 Member States and 6 Associate Members.

Cultural internationalism obviously is basic to UNESCO’s existence and legiti-
macy. The preamble to its Constitution speaks of “the history of mankind,”“peoples
of the world,”“the diffusion of culture”and “the education of mankind,” and Article
1 states that:

The purpose of the Organization is to contribute to peace and security
by promoting collaboration among the nations through education, sci-
ence and culture in order to further universal respect for justice, for the
rule of law and for the human rights and fundamental freedoms which
are affirmed for the peoples of the world, without distinction of race,
sex, language or religion, by the Charter of the United Nations.

Achievement of these internationalist objectives, however, is limited by a domestic
jurisdiction clause, which also appears in Article 1:

With a view to preserving the independence, integrity and fruitful diver-
sity of the cultures and educational systems of the States members of this
Organization, the Organization is prohibited from intervening in matters
which are essentially within their domestic jurisdiction.46

As a result, UNESCO’s cultural sector activities display a familiar kind of interplay
between group and member interests whose results are ultimately embodied in
UNESCO conventions and recommendations.

Article 1(2)(c) of the UNESCO Constitution states the organization’s cultural
property competence: 1) conservation and protection; 2) recommending inter-
national conventions; and 3) encouraging international exchange. “Conservation
and protection” is a simple but important logical expansion of the protection of
cultural property during war: whether in war or at peace, cultural property should
be preserved against damage or destruction. The third commitment, to encourage-
ment of the international exchange of cultural property, has been variously inter-
preted, as will appear below. UNESCO’s pursuance of the second activity is amply
demonstrated in the legal instruments it has produced,47 to the most important of
which we will turn below.

Something important seems to be missing from the language of Article 1(2)(c). I
have argued elsewhere48 for a related triad of regulatory imperatives. The most basic
is preservation: protecting the object and its context from impairment. Next comes
the quest for knowledge, for valid information about the human past, for the his-
torical, scientific, cultural, and aesthetic truth that the object and its context can
provide. Finally we want the object to be optimally accessible to scholars for study
and to the public for education and enjoyment. This triad may be summed up as
“preservation, truth, and access.” The addition of “truth” adds meaning and weight
to “preservation” and “access.”

As to “recommending international conventions,” the 1954 Hague Convention,
which we have already seen, is one such instrument. Like it, the others assume, and
usually contain language invoking, the international interest in cultural property.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

22

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

They significantly differ, however, in the ways in which they characterize and pursue
that interest, as the following brief examination of some particularly relevant
UNESCO instruments shows.

UNESCO 1970. We begin with the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of
Cultural Property,49 under which, in Article 7(a), States Parties agree to enforce each
others’cultural property export controls and related legislation. The Preamble, how-
ever, consistently with the UNESCO Constitution’s commitment to encouraging
the international “interchange” of cultural property, states that:

the interchange of cultural property among nations for scientific, cultural
and educational purposes increases the knowledge of the civilization of
Man, enriches the cultural life of all peoples and inspires mutual respect
and appreciation among nations

The answer to any apparent inconsistency between promoting international inter-
change and enforcing national export controls appears to be obvious: UNESCO
1970s provisions are aimed only at “illicit” exports;“licit” exports are not a problem.
That distinction, however, requires us to look more closely at the Convention and
the meaning of “licit.”

The Convention defines “cultural property” in Articles 1 and 4 as, in effect, any-
thing that the authorities of a State so designate, and it provides in Article 3 that
“The import, export or transfer of ownership of cultural property” without a cer-
tificate, described in Article 6, “shall be illicit.” Thus, for example, the export of van
Gogh and Matisse paintings by their Italian owners without certificates (which were
denied) would be “illicit.” The same would be true of an Italian collector’s export of
Adolf Hitler water colors of Austrian scenes and exports by French owners of a Yuan
vase, a collection of Italian drawings, and a painting by a Swiss artist of a Swiss scene
painted in Switzerland, for all of which export certificates were denied.

Skeptics might conclude that this Convention, in the name of cultural property
internationalism, actually supports a strong form of cultural property nationalism.
It imposes no discipline on a State’s definition of the cultural property that may not
be exported without permission. It leaves States free to make their own self-interested
decisions about whether or not to grant or deny export permission in specific cases.
The only likely applicants for such permission are, in the words of Article 5(e),
“curators, collectors, antique dealers, etc.” who have little voice in such decision-
making. In this way, the Convention condones and supports the widespread practice
of over-retention or, less politely, hoarding of cultural property. To some skeptical
eyes, this does not look much like encouragement of international exchange. The
problems created by the notorious practice of overretention are explored elsewhere.50

The 1976 Recommendation. UNESCO’s 1976 Recommendation Concerning the
International Exchange of Cultural Property,51 on the contrary, encourages cultural
property exchanges and recommends measures for regularizing and securing such
transactions. One might suppose that this support would extend to circulation

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

23

through market transactions, which are the principal medium for the international
circulation of goods of all kinds. The Recommendation, however, while supporting
the international exchange of cultural property, opposes international trade, stating
that:

the international circulation of cultural property is still largely dependent
on the activities of self-seeking parties and so tends to lead to speculation
which causes the price of such property to rise, making it inaccessible to
poorer countries and institutions while at the same time encouraging the
spread of illicit trading.

This curious statement, exuding disapproval of the market, calls buyers and sellers
of cultural objects “self-seeking parties” and the normal human tendency to base
present action on assumptions about the future “speculation.” It advances the eco-
nomically naive supposition that speculation “causes” the prices of works of art and
other cultural objects to rise, although it seems clear that “speculation,” to the extent
that it can “cause” price behavior at all, can just as easily “cause” prices to fall.

Constricting the licit supply of cultural objects would appear to most knowledge-
able people to be a more effective way to cause prices to rise and to encourage the
spread of illicit trading. That is of course what excessive source nation export con-
trols and their enforcement under the 1970 UNESCO Convention combine to do.
As to“poorer countries,”many of which are source nations, the orderly marketing of
surplus cultural objects could pro tanto displace the black market, while providing a
significant source of income to the source nation and its citizens. That major source
nations typically hoard stocks of marketable surplus objects is confirmed by another
paragraph in the Recommendation’s Preamble:

Many cultural institutions, whatever their financial resources, possess sev-
eral identical or similar specimens of cultural objects of indisputable qual-
ity and origin which are amply documented, and . . . some of these items,
which are of only minor or secondary importance for these institutions
because of their plurality, would be welcomed as valuable accessions by
institutions in other countries.52

It hardly needs to be said that such objects would also be welcomed to the licit
international market by museums, collectors and the art trade.

The Recommendation, however, does not say it. Instead, it rejects the market and
relies exclusively on interinstitutional (government to government and museum to
museum) exchanges as the medium through which to promote enrichment of cul-
tures and mutual understanding and appreciation among nations. Such exchanges
are a valuable tool of museum collections management. They are, however, a form of
barter, with all of barter’s considerable limitations. The market is a much more effi-
cient and productive mechanism for the international circulation of cultural prop-
erty, and to exclude it seems misguided. In its exclusion of market transactions this
Recommendation appears to discourage, rather than encourage, the interchange of
cultural property.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

24

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

In its exclusive preference for interinstitutional and inter-governmental exchanges,
the Recommendation contemplates a cultural property world that is populated solely
by governments and “institutions”:53

“International exchange” shall be taken to mean any transfer of owner-
ship, use or custody of cultural property between States or cultural insti-
tutions in different countries—whether it takes the form of the loan,
deposit, sale or donation of such property—carried out under such con-
ditions as may be agreed between the parties concerned.

Under this interpretation of “international exchange,” there is no place for private
collectors or an active art trade and no scope for a licit market. There is no recog-
nition of the historic roles of collectors and dealers in supporting artists and pro-
moting their work; in building private collections that ultimately enrich museums;
and in pioneering the collection of objects that eventually are recognized for their
cultural importance. Nor is there any recognition of the utility of the market as an
efficient transactional arena and a provider of price indicators of value.

The 1978 Recommendation for the Protection of Movable Cultural Property.54 This
Recommendation is unusual in that it recognizes the existence of collectors, dealers,
and other international market participants, but only to express concern about the
safety of cultural objects in their hands. It warns States that growing public interest
in cultural property has led to “an increase in all the dangers to which cultural prop-
erty is exposed as a result of particularly easy access or inadequate protection, the
risks inherent in transport, and the recrudescence, in some countries, of clandestine
excavations, thefts, illicit traffic and acts of vandalism,” and counsels that:

The growing perils which threaten the movable cultural heritage should
incite all those responsible for protecting it, in whatever capacity, to play
their part: staff of national and local administrations in charge of safe-
guarding cultural property, administrators and curators of museums and
similar institutions, private owners and those responsible for religious
buildings, art and antique dealers, security experts, services responsible
for the suppression of crime, customs officials and the other public author-
ities involved.

In Articles 11-24, in language sometimes reminiscent of Polonius, the Recom-
mendation provides a set of admonitions about protective measures, including in
Articles 14 and 15 those that should be taken to protect cultural objects in private
hands. In no provision does this Recommendation indicate approval of dealers,
collectors, or the market.

The 2001 UNESCO Convention on Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage.55
This Convention provides that States Parties shall preserve underwater cultural her-
itage in situ “for the benefit of humanity in conformity with the provisions of this
Convention.” Underwater cultural heritage is defined as:

all traces of human existence having a cultural, historical or archaeologi-
cal character which have been partially or totally under water, periodically

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

25

or continuously, for at least 100 years such as: (i) sites, structures, build-
ings, artefacts and human remains, together with their archaeological and
natural context; (ii) vessels, aircraft, other vehicles or any part thereof,
their cargo or other contents, together with their archaeological and nat-
ural context; and (iii) objects of prehistoric character.

The Convention demonstrates that UNESCO’s antimarket bias has grown
stronger since promulgation of the 1976 Recommendation, discussed above. Arti-
cle 2 (7) of the Convention states in its entirety:

Underwater cultural heritage shall not be commercially exploited.

This breathtaking provision is elucidated in Rule 2 of the Rules concerning the activ-
ities directed at underwater cultural heritage annexed to the Convention:

The commercial exploitation of underwater cultural heritage for trade or
speculation or its irretrievable dispersal is fundamentally incompatible
with the protection and proper management of underwater cultural her-
itage. Underwater cultural heritage shall not be traded, sold, bought or
bartered as commercial goods.

The statement that market transactions are “fundamentally incompatible with the
protection and proper management of underwater cultural heritage” expresses a
position that, as we shall see below, is broadly embraced by the archaeological estab-
lishment in the United Kingdom and the United States.

As of September 2004, the Convention, which requires 20 adoptions to enter into
/
/
/
/
10
03) and Bulgaria (6
20
force, had been ratified only by Panama (5
03). This appar-
ently unenthusiastic reception may demonstrate a lack of consensus among the
world’s nations concerning the importance of protecting underwater sites, struc-
tures and objects. Or it may represent a reaction to the severity of the Convention’s
prohibition of commercial exploitation and its prohibition, in Article 38, of reser-
vations. Or it may simply reflect national desires to retain unfettered control over
their internal waters, archipelagic waters, territorial sea, and contiguous zones.

UNESCO Declaration Concerning the Intentional Destruction of Cultural Heritage
of 17 October 2003.56
In the wake of the Taliban’s demolition of the Bamiyan
Buddhas, the destruction of Kosovo churches and the Mostar bridge, and the United
States military actions in Afghanistan and Iraq, the General Conference of UNESCO
published this Declaration, which emphatically restates the international interest in
cultural property and calls on all States to act to prevent its intentional destruction.
Article VII also urges States to assert jurisdiction over and prosecute individuals
who commit or order the commission of acts of destruction of cultural heritage.
Your author is not aware that any such prosecutions have been instituted by any
States.

UNESCO Convention For the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of

17 October 2003.57 According to Article 2 of this important instrument:

The intangible cultural heritage . . . is manifested inter alia in the following
domains: (a) oral traditions and expressions, including language as a vehi-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

26

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

cle of the intangible cultural heritage; (b) performing arts; (c) social prac-
tices, rituals and festive events; (d) knowledge and practices concerning
nature and the universe; (e) traditional craftsmanship.

The preamble states the internationalist credentials of this Convention when it
refers to “the universal will and the common concern to safeguard the intangible
cultural heritage of humanity”; recognizes that “communities, in particular indig-
enous communities, groups and, in some cases, individuals, play an important
role in the production, safeguarding, maintenance and re-creation of the intangi-
ble cultural heritage, thus helping to enrich cultural diversity and human creativ-
ity”; and asserts that “the international community should contribute, together
with the States Parties to this Convention, to the safeguarding of such heritage in
a spirit of cooperation and mutual assistance.” States Parties are to draw up inven-
tories of the intangible cultural heritage present in their territories, and an Inter-
governmental Committee is to prepare and maintain a “Representative List of the
Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity” and a “List of Intangible Cultural Her-
itage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding.”

In fact, “safeguarding” the intangible cultural heritage is the primary concern of

the Convention. Article 3 states that:

“Safeguarding” means measures aimed at ensuring the viability of the
intangible cultural heritage, including the identification, documentation,
research, preservation, protection, promotion, enhancement, transmis-
sion, particularly through formal and non-formal education, as well as the
revitalization of the various aspects of such heritage.

The Convention contains no reference to international traffic, whether by barter or
market transaction, in intangible cultural heritage. Nor does it deal with retention.
Indeed, it takes a stretch of the imagination to suggest ways in which a loss of intan-
gible cultural heritage through export might occur. A Korean induces a Japanese
“living national treasure” to emigrate? The few remaining members of an isolated
tribe of First People in Canada join a thriving related group in Minnesota? The
French Minister of Culture persuades the Dance Theater of Harlem to establish its
seat in Paris? As of August 20, 1904, five nations had adopted this Convention. Thirty
adoptions are necessary for it to come into force.

****

This brief survey of UNESCO instruments dealing with cultural property illus-
trates an interesting range of actions taken to meet UNESCO’s three constitu-
tional obligations to the “cultural heritage of all mankind”: conservation and
protection, recommending international conventions, and encouraging inter-
national exchange. Given the difficulties commonly encountered in reaching inter-
national consensus and the notorious inertia of large bureaucracies, UNESCO’s
record as an advocate for cultural property internationalism may seem to others,
as it does to me, impressive.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

27

That record, however, is flawed. The instruments we have examined reveal two
major deviations from UNESCO’s internationalist mission. One, implied in the con-
tents of some of those instruments and openly expressed in the 1976 Recommen-
dation, was pressed to a logical extreme in the 2001 Underwater Convention’s
provision that “Underwater cultural heritage shall not be commercially exploited.”
This drastic and potentially damaging (to underwater cultural heritage) provision
was only made possible by narrowly interpreting the words“international exchange”
in UNESCO’s Constitution to exclude market transactions.

In this way, the international cultural property world’s principal actors (all of the
uncountable numbers of artists and artisans, the zillions of collectors, the thousands
of dealers and auction houses, etc.) and the overwhelming majority of international
cultural property transactions are made to disappear. What remains is a shriveled
and stunted cultural property world, peopled only by governments and “institu-
tions”that lend to, borrow from, and barter with each other.Where did such a dimin-
ished image of the cultural property world come from?

Collectors and the art trade generally respect legal restraints on international trade
in cultural objects. They are encouraged to do so by the widespread adoption in the
major market nations of statements of approved professional practices and codes of
ethics for dealers. Members of the Art Dealers Association of America, for example,
agree to observe the CINOA58 Guidelines. The same or comparable principles have
been adopted by national dealers’ organizations in Britain (the British Art Market
Association) and other nations and by a European federation of dealers’ associations
(Fédération Européenne des Associations de Galeries d’Art).

In 1999 UNESCO adopted a Code of Ethics for Dealers in Cultural Property59 that
was drafted with the assistance of dealers. This Code is remarkable in that, by offer-
ing principles to regulate the conduct of dealers, UNESCO recognized their exis-
tence and implied the legitimacy of collectors, dealers, and a market in cultural
objects (but only in order to express concern about the safety of cultural objects in
their hands). The Code states in its entirety that:

Members of the trade in cultural property recognize the key role that trade
has traditionally played in the dissemination of culture and in the distri-
bution to museums and private collectors of foreign cultural property for
the education and inspiration of all peoples.

They acknowledge the world wide concern over the traffic in stolen, ille-
gally alienated,clandestinely excavated and illegally exported cultural prop-
erty and accept as binding the following principles of professional practice
intended to distinguish cultural property being illicitly traded from that
in licit trade and they will seek to eliminate the former from their profes-
sional activities.

ARTICLE 1 Professional traders in cultural property will not import,export
or transfer the ownership of this property when they have reasonable cause
to believe it has been stolen, illegally alienated, clandestinely excavated or
illegally exported.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

28

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

ARTICLE 2 A trader who is acting as agent for the seller is not deemed to
guarantee title to the property, provided that he makes known to the buyer
the full name and address of the seller. A trader who is himself the seller is
deemed to guarantee to the buyer the title to the goods.

ARTICLE 3 A trader who has reasonable cause to believe that an object has
been the product of a clandestine excavation, or has been acquired ille-
gally or dishonestly from an official excavation site or monument will not
assist in any further transaction with that object, except with the agree-
ment of the country where the site or monument exists. A trader who is in
possession of the object, where that country seeks its return within a rea-
sonable period of time, will take all legally permissible steps to co-operate
in the return of that object to the country of origin.

ARTICLE 4 A trader who has reasonable cause to believe that an item of
cultural property has been illegally exported will not assist in any further
transaction with that item, except with the agreement of the country of
export. A trader who is in possession of the item, where the country of
export seeks its return within a reasonable period of time, will take all
legally permissible steps to co-operate in the return of that object to the
country of export.

ARTICLE 5 Traders in cultural property will not exhibit, describe, attribute,
appraise or retain any item of cultural property with the intention of pro-
moting or failing to prevent its illicit transfer or export. Traders will not
refer the seller or other person offering the item to those who may per-
form such services.

ARTICLE 6 Traders in cultural property will not dismember or sell sepa-
rately parts of one complete item of cultural property.

ARTICLE 7 Traders in cultural property undertake to the best of their
ability to keep together items of cultural heritage that were originally meant
to be kept together.

ARTICLE 8 Violations of this Code of Ethics will be rigorously investi-
gated by (a body to be nominated by participating dealers). A person
aggrieved by the failure of a trader to adhere to the principles of this Code
of Ethics may lay a complaint before that body, which shall investigate that
complaint. Results of the complaint and the principles applied will be
made public.

This Code of Ethics seems to be reasonable and constructive. Unfortunately,
however, the context in which it applies is permeated by source-nation trade
restraints that, as we have seen, are excessive in concept and in practice. Those
excesses are implicitly condoned by other UNESCO instruments, particularly the
1970 Convention.

As was said earlier, no thinking person argues for free trade in cultural property.
Regulation is necessary in order to preserve cultural property and to support its
proper international circulation. Such regulation serves the international interest of
“all mankind” in preservation and enjoyment of its “cultural heritage.” Excessive
regulation, however, violates rather than serves the international interest, and a pro-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

29

hibition against trading clearly is excessive. The archaeologists’ war against acquisi-
tors (collectors, museums, and the art trade), to which we now turn, is another
source of excess.

WAR AND PEACE

Archaeologists have a complex relationship with cultural property international-
ism. The field of archaeology clearly is international; sites and objects of archae-
ological interest exist everywhere, and the profession is interested in all of them.
Individual archaeologists, however, are not typically internationalists. An archaeo-
logist’s fieldwork usually requires commitment to the sites of a specific culture in a
defined area to which the archaeologist typically returns over a period of years and
often becomes deeply attached. When American archaeologists work outside the
United States, they tend to identify more strongly with the host nation than with the
international community or “all mankind.” Archaeologists’ dependence on host
nations for excavation permits, support services, and access to sites further inclines
them to identify with the host nation and support its cultural property policies.

Context is centrally important to archaeology. In conducting excavations, profes-
sional archaeologists carefully document sites, the excavation process, and the pre-
cise locations and postures of unearthed objects. Clandestine excavation and the
undocumented removal of antiquities from archaeological sites, even if carefully
done, destroy potentially important information about the past. The objects taken
become “orphans” whose sources, contextual identities, and meaning are lost or
diminished.

All source nations have laws criminalizing clandestine excavation and the unautho-
rized removal of antiquities from their sites. Often, such laws also declare that antiq-
uities are property of the nation, with the intention of making their unauthorized
removal theft. Archaeologists strongly support such laws and their enforcement by
market nations, as provided in the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of Pro-
hibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cul-
tural Property, previously mentioned; the U.S. Convention on Cultural Property
Implementation Act of 1983, 19 U.S.C. §§2601ff; and the 1995 Unidroit Convention
on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects.60

The above considerations converge to lead archaeologists to support national pol-
icies and laws and international conventions that limit the international movement
of cultural objects. We have seen that the UNESCO Constitution, in Article 1(2)(c),
commits the Organization to three interrelated kinds of cultural property activities:
1) conservation and protection; 2) recommending international conventions; and
3) encouraging international exchange. The prevailing ideology among archaeolo-
gists supports the first two of these but not the third. Archaeologists do not actively
oppose the barter or loan of antiquities by governments and museums. They do,
however, oppose international trade.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

30

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

Indeed, since the 1970s, archaeologists have effectively promoted the thesis that
collectors and dealers are responsible for the illicit trade in antiquities and destruc-
tion of the archaeological record. Their logic is simple: if collectors did not collect
and dealers did not deal there would be no antiquities market, and if there were no
market, the illicit traffic in antiquities would disappear. Although some archaeolo-
gists take a more nuanced view,61 the archaeological establishment as a whole has
vigorously embraced and propagated this reductive argument, which I have criti-
cized elsewhere, though with little apparent effect.62 Consequently, to the archaeo-
logical establishment, every commercial antiquities transaction is suspect. If not
proven to be blameless by archaeologists’ standards it is blameworthy, illicit. Elab-
orate due diligence is not enough. An anecdote will illustrate the point.

In 1987 The Getty Museum adopted an elaborate new due diligence policy for the
acquisition of antiquities. When an interesting object was offered to it, the Museum
thoroughly researched the object and compiled a dossier which was sent to the antiq-
uities authorities of all plausible nations of origin, asking whether they saw any
reason why the Museum should not acquire the object. If any such objection were
made, the Museum declined to acquire it. The Museum’s curator of antiquities also
actively assisted source nations in the recovery of offered objects that appeared to
have been stolen. To many observers this policy appeared to be responsible and
constructive.

In 1989 the Museum organized a private two-day conference of source nation
officials, archaeologists, museum professionals, dealers, lawyers, and academics
(including the author) to discuss this policy and to initiate a dialogue that might
lead to a resolution of differences among the interested parties. Instead, the confer-
ence provided a dispiriting glimpse of a tendency toward archaeological fundamen-
talism when a number of the archaeologists present attacked the Museum’s new
acquisition policy as disingenuous and damaging. Such attacks continued after the
conference.

In 1995 the Getty trustees felt compelled to bow to the archaeologists. They
announced that the Museum would forego the acquisition of any antiquities that
were not previously published or otherwise documented as parts of established col-
lections. Every proposed acquisition or loan would now be treated as “illicit” unless
proved to be “licit.” Some other cultural property world actors have since adopted
this “guilty unless proved innocent” presumption. Archaeologists now feel free to
condemn, as “looters” and worse, collectors who acquire and museums that display
antiquities that no nation claims and that no one has shown to have been improp-
erly acquired.

Excessive source nation retention of cultural property is a potent instrument in
the war against acquisitors. As we have seen, the 1970 UNESCO Convention leaves
it to each State Party, within broad limits and subject to no review, to provide its own
definition of “cultural property”; to establish its own limitations on the “import,
export or transfer of ownership” of cultural property so self-defined; and provides
that any transaction that violates these controls “shall be illicit.” So encouraged,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

31

most source nations have adopted excessively retentive legislation that, in practice,
prohibits the export of objects that bear no significant relation to the nation’s cul-
ture, objects of slight cultural importance, and redundant objects—particularly
antiquities—that it will never study or exhibit.

Consider a typical law prohibiting export of works of art over 100 years old.
Such a law may protect works too fragile to travel, but it also immobilizes sturdier
works that could circulate without significant risk of damage or destruction. The
same law may keep at home works of outstanding importance to the nation’s his-
tory and culture but, as we have seen, it also can be and has been used to prevent
the export of works that have no such relationship or importance. Similarly, a law
that prohibits trade in antiquities can help immobilize objects that ought to be
retained in place, but it will also add to the hoarded stocks of redundant antiqui-
ties that languish unconserved, unstudied, unpublished, unseen, and unloved in
the warehouses of major source nations. The considerable problems thus created
are explored elsewhere.63

UNESCO instruments tell us that the international interchange of cultural prop-
erty “increases the knowledge of the civilization of Man, enriches the cultural life of
all peoples and insures mutual respect and appreciation among nations”64 and leads
to “a better use of the international community’s cultural heritage.”65 Excessive
restraints thwart these internationalist goals by improperly limiting the international
interchange of cultural property.And by artificially expanding the meaning of “illicit”
they reduce the possibilities for a licit cultural property trade.

The liberalization of international trade by the World Trade Organization (WTO)66
and the European Communities (EC) provides a potentially strong counterforce to
the archaeologists’ crusade and source nation overretention. Both the WTO and EC
treaties67 prohibit export controls on “goods,”68 which the European Court of Jus-
tice ruled, in Commission v. Italy, includes works of art.”69 Both treaties, however,
WTO in Article 130 and EC in Article 30, permit national measures for “the protec-
tion of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value.”70 This
key phrase has until now received little judicial attention. Eminent commentators
agree, however, that it should be treated as restrictive.71 “The exception’s purpose is
not to preserve the totality of an artistic patrimony,” but to safeguard its “essential
and fundamental elements.”72

Source nation export controls that prohibit the international exchange of works
that are neither “national” nor “treasures” and do not “protect” them from anything
but export clearly exceed permissible limits under these treaties. Cases involving the
interpretation of WTO Article 130 and EC Article 30 have not yet arisen, but when
they do, some inescapable questions will present themselves. Does the object in ques-
tion fall within an appropriately restrictive interpretation of “national treasures?” If
so, does application of the export control“protect”it? Can the treaty’s application be
evaded by legislation declaring that cultural objects are “national property”? Such
questions will ultimately be answered by the European Court of Justice and the
WTO dispute resolution panels. Will they disarm the source nation-archaeologists

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

32

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

alliance of one of its major weapons and help bring peace to the cultural property
world? We do not know.

WHITHER CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM?

People everywhere, including all of the actors in the cultural property world, share
an interest in the preservation, study, and enjoyment of cultural property. In addi-
tion, collectors, museums, dealers, and auction houses have their own particular
self-interests in an active,licit international art and antiquities market.Source nations,
UNESCO, and archaeologists have their own particular self-interests, which have
led them to oppose or restrict an otherwise licit market and to limit the interchange
of cultural objects to interinstitutional loans and exchanges.

All of these diverse interests are, in principle, legitimate. That they sometimes
conflict simply reflects the reality that the cultural property world is complex. I am
aware of no basis for supposing that any of the conflicting interests, even those of the
archaeologists, dwell on a higher moral plane than any of the others. The reasonable
course is for the interested parties to seek the optimal accommodation of their var-
ious interests, and that requires that the parties speak and listen to each other.

That dialogue,although frequently called for,has yet to begin.Source nations,sup-
ported by UNESCO and archaeologists, continue to hoard cultural objects, in appar-
ent conflict with trade liberalization treaties,while calling on other nations to enforce
their excessive restrictions on export and their blanket declarations of “ownership.”
Prominent archaeologists hold fast to the position that they are right; collectors,muse-
ums,and the art trade are iniquitously wrong; and the international interest in the cir-
culation of cultural objects, if it is considered at all, is adequately served by rhetoric
about interinstitutional loans and exchanges. UNESCO conventions support source
nations and archaeologists, contemplate a cultural property world inhabited solely
by governments and “institutions,” and expressly oppose markets in cultural goods.
In short, the prospects look dark for those who favor a licit international trade in
cultural objects. Under present conditions a large, growing demand confronts a
sharply restricted licit supply. If one set out to design a system that would discourage
a licit market and encourage a black market, it would be difficult to improve on the
present one. As Quentin Byrne-Sutton put it: “On arrive ainsi à la situation ridicule
où une réglementation alimente ce qu’elle cherche à éliminer.”73 Right.

Finally, it should be obvious that such a system, dictated by the preferences of
retentive source nations and zealous archaeologists,even if it is embodied in UNESCO
instruments, does not provide optimal conditions for the preservation of the cul-
tural heritage of all mankind or its optimal distribution for access, study, and enjoy-
ment. Will the situation right itself? Do social systems automatically self-correct
when things get too far out of line? Or, to use another figure, if the pendulum swings
too far in one direction, will it eventually swing back? Will enforcement of the WTO
and EC trade-liberalizing treaty provisions finally start a process that will eventually

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

33

restore the balance? Can articles like this one help, or do they make things worse, or
are they irrelevant? All good questions, to which no one knows the answers.

ENDNOTES

1. The terms cultural “property,” “objects,” “heritage,” and “patrimony” variously appear in legis-
lation and the scholarly and popular literatures, but there do not appear to be any agreed meanings or
standard usage. In this article “cultural property” and “cultural objects” interchangeably serve the same
purpose: to designate objects of cultural significance. “Cultural heritage” includes such objects and
immaterial cultural expressions, such as folklore and traditional knowledge, which are not ordinarily
considered to be cultural property and are not considered in this article. “Cultural patrimony” usually
appears in contexts that assume or express cultural nationalism, i.e., the attribution of national char-
acter (the nation of origin or of the situs) to cultural objects.

2. The quoted words first appear in the Preamble of the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (hereinafter Hague 1954), and are repeated or para-
phrased in the subsequent UNESCO instruments collected in UNESCO, Conventions and Recommen-
dations of UNESCO Concerning the Protection of the Cultural Heritage, cited herein as UNESCO
Conventions and Recommendations.

3. Merryman, “Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property.”
4. Most, perhaps all, value is attributed rather than intrinsic, and the value attributed to a given
object is itself a cultural expression that often changes over time. The point is elegantly developed in
Thompson, Rubbish Theory.

5. In the fourth edition of Merryman and Elsen, Law, Ethics and the Visual Arts, works of art are

considered in Chapter 2 and antiquities are treated in a separate Chapter 3.

6. The UNIDROIT Convention can be viewed at ,http:

c-cult.htm. (Last visited 8

17

04).

/

/

//

/
www.unidroit.org

/

english

conventions

/

7. The Annex lists the following Categories of Cultural Objects:
(a) Rare collections and specimens of fauna, flora, minerals and anatomy, and objects of palaeon-
tological interest; (b) property relating to history, including the history of science and technology and
military and social history, to the lives of national leaders, thinkers, scientists and artists and to events
of national importance; (c) products of archaeological excavations (including regular and clandestine)
or of archaeological discoveries; (d) elements of artistic or historical monuments or archaeological
sites which have been dismembered; (e) antiquities more than one hundred years old, such as inscrip-
tions, coins or engraved seals; (f) articles of ethnological interest; (g) articles of artistic interest, such as:
(i) pictures, paintings and drawings produced entirely by hand on any support and in any material
(excluding industrial designs and manufactured articles decorated by hand; (ii) original works of statu-
ary art and sculpture in any material; (iii) original engravings, prints and lithographs; (iv) original
artistic assemblages and montages in any material; (h) rare manuscripts and incunabula, old books,
documents and publications of special interest (historical, artistic, scientific, literary, etc.), singly or in
collections; (i) postage, revenue and similar stamps, singly or in collections; (j) archives, including
sound, photographic and cinematographic archives; (k) articles of furniture more than one hundred
years old and old musical instruments.

8. Another observable fact is that nonwealthy nations do not have substantial private or museum
collections of artifacts from wealthy nation cultures. The international traffic in cultural objects, like
the traffic in other goods, thus reflects the wealth disparity between the first and third worlds. The
significance of this phenomenon for cultural property internationalism is unclear. To date, most efforts
have focused on aiding in the establishment and preservation of national collections of works of art
and artifacts in third world nations. Chapters IV and V of the UNESCO Convention Concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and National Heritage of 16 November 1972, in UNESCO, Conventions
and Recommendations 75 ff., set out an apparatus for assisting source nations through a “Fund for the
Protection of the World Cultural and National Heritage,” but a survey of the literature produces little
evidence that the Fund has provided significant assistance to needy nations.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

34

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

9. The case of the Afo-A-Kom, a statue that “embodies the spiritual, political and religious
essence of the 35,000 people of the West African kingdom of Kom in Cameroon,” is described in
Merryman and Elsen, Law, Ethics, and the Visual Arts, 267.

10. NAGPRA is the acronym for the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of
1990, 25 U.S.C. §§3001 ff., under which American museums were required to inventory cultural objects
and human remains and, on request, return them to recognized Indian nations.

11. Polybius, in The Histories, (before 146 b.c.). The English text of this quotation is taken from de
Visscher, “International Protection of Works of Art and Historic Monuments,” which itself is a trans-
lation (translator unidentified) of the passage in de Visscher’s originally French article.

12. Grotius, The Law of War III, Chapter V, Section I.
13. Grotius, The Law of War III, Chapter VI, Section XII.
14. Vattel, The Law of Nations III, Chapter 9, Section 168.
15. Vattel, The Law of Nations III, Chapter 9, Section 168.
16. Gould, Trophy of Conquest, 41. For fuller accounts of the art confiscations of the Italian cam-

paign see Gould, Trophy of Conquest, 13ff., and Treue, Art Plunder, 147ff.

17. Quoted in Treue, Art Plunder, 151.
18. For a discussion of the varying reactions, see Treue, Art Plunder: The Fate of Works of Art in War

and Unrest (Basil Creighton trans. 1960), 175ff.

19. Quatremère de Quincy, Lettres au général Miranda sur le déplacement des monuments de l’art de
l’Italie, 88–89. As the title indicates, the letters were an atypical French reaction against and condem-
nation of the appropriation of works of art by the French armies in Napoléon’s Italian campaign.

20. Quatremère de Quincy, Lettres au général Miranda sur le déplacement des monuments de l’art de

l’Italie, 141–146.

21. Stewart, Reports of cases argued and determined in the Court of Vice-admiralty at Halifax, in Nova

Scotia. 482. See also Merryman, “Note on The Marquis de Somerueles.”

22. That the Judge, Alexander (later Sir Alexander) Croke, is referred to as Dr. Croke signifies that,
like other admiralty judges of the time, he was a civil lawyer. Typically, the English civilians held doc-
torates from Oxford or Cambridge and were qualified to appear as advocates before the ecclesiastical
courts and the Court of Admiralty. The entry for Sir Alexander Croke in the Dictionary of National
Biography states that he received BCL and DCL degrees from Oxford and was a member of the College
of Advocates. In the competition between the civilians and the common lawyers, history was on the
latter side, and the College of Advocates was doomed when the Court of Probate Act 1857 abolished the
testamentary jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts and established the common law Court of Pro-
bate. The last surviving member of Doctors’ Commons, alter ego of the College of Advocates, was Dr.
Thomas Hutchinson Tristram, who died in 1912. For the full history see Squibb, Doctors’ Commons.

23. These ideas are developed in chapters 1–3 of Best, Humanity in Warfare.
24. The language of the opinion is dominated by the humane ideal, both in the quoted passage and
throughout its text, while French actions seen to be in conflict with that ideal are condemned: “[T]he
present governor of France, under whose controul that country has fallen back whole centuries in
barbarism. . . .” (p. 483).“The lawless government of France. . . .” (p. 484). There is, of course, a subtext.
Britain was also at war with France, which supported the Americans, and much of the opinion can be
read as an effort to separate the Americans, whose interests lay with“the land of their forefathers,” from
France, the “common enemy.”

25. “In part due to their romantic search for the ius gentium of the Roman law texts, and in part to
their very real international career system, later English civilians developed a commitment to cosmo-
politanism and to the ideal of a rational, universal legal science. This civilian commitment was often in
sharp contrast to the localized outlook of the common lawyers.” Coquillette, The Civilian Writers of
Doctors’ Commons, 8.

26. See Merryman, “Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property.”
27. Wheaton, Elements of International Law, Section 346, 341.
28. Wheaton, Elements of International Law, Section 347.
29. Halleck, International Law, Ch. XIX, Sections 10–11.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

35

30. The Lieber Code is set out and discussed in Hartigan, Lieber’s Code and the Law of War, and in

Friedman, The Law of War, 158ff.

31. Friedman, The Law of War, 194.
32. Institute of International Law, Resolutions of the Institute of International Law Dealing with the

Law of Nations, 36-37.

33. Convention with Respect to the Law and Customs of War on Land of July 29, 1899, in Friedman,

The Law of War, 234.

34. Convention on the Laws and Customs of War on Land of October 18, 1907, in Friedman, The Law

of War, 323.

35. 36 Stat. 2351, TS No. 542.
36. The Hague Rules of Air Warfare of December, 1922-February, 1923, in Friedman, The Law of

War, 437.

37. League of Nations, Interamerican Treaty on the Protection of Artistic and Scientific Institutions

and Monuments (hereinafter the Roerich Pact).

38. U.S. Department of State, Draft Declaration and Draft International Convention for the Protec-

tion of Monuments and Works of Art in Time of War.

39. The topic is discussed at ,http:

//

/
www.houseofice.com

/

history

napoleonandhitler.shtml. last

/
consulted 8

/

11

04.

42. The Second Protocol may be viewed at ,http:

40. See materials in Merryman and Elsen, Law, Ethics and the Visual Arts, 26–33.
41. The texts of the Convention and its accompanying Protocol (the “First Protocol”) are set out in
UNESCO, Conventions and Recommendations, 13. For a history and commentary on the Convention
see Toman, The Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.
/
/
culture
www.unesco.org

/
html_eng
/
protocol2.shtml. (Last viewed on 8
04) and is reproduced in Merryman and Elsen, Law, Ethics and
the Visual Arts, 1174. For accounts of the genesis and content of the Second Protocol see Desch, “The
Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict,” Henckaerts, “New Rules for the Protection of Cultural Property in Armed Conflict,”
593. As of December 2003, 20 nations had become parties to the Second Protocol. The United States is
not a party.

/
hague

/
laws

17

//

/

43. Article 6 (a) of the Second Protocol provides that: “a waiver on the basis of imperative military
necessity pursuant to Article 4 paragraph 2 of the Convention may only be invoked to direct an act of
hostility against cultural property when and for as long as: i. that cultural property has, by its function,
been made into a military objective; and ii. there is no feasible alternative available to obtain a similar
military advantage to that offered by directing an act of hostility against that objective; . . . the decision
to invoke imperative military necessity shall only be taken by an officer commanding a force the equiv-
alent of a battalion in size or larger, or a force smaller in size where circumstances do not permit
otherwise; . . .”

44. Nahlik, La Protection internationale des biens culturels en cas de conflit armé, 87.
45. The military necessity doctrine is more fully considered in Merryman, “Two Ways of Thinking

About Cultural Property.”

46. Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and cultural Organization Adopted
in London on 16 November 1945 and amended by the General Conference at its second, third, fourth,
fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, twelfth, fifteenth, seventeenth, nineteenth, twentieth, twenty-
first, twenty-fourth, and twenty-fifth sessions.

47. There are 33 such UNESCO instruments. They are listed and reproduced at: ,http:

//

ev.php-URL_ID513649&URL_DO5DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION5-

04). Those promulgated up to 1980 are published in UNESCO,

/

/

portal.unesco.org
471.html. (last consulted 5
Conventions and Recommendations.

en

25

/

/

48. Merryman, “The Nation and the Object.”
49. UNESCO, Conventions and Recommendations, 59ff. As of 5
50. Merryman, “The Retention of Cultural Property,” Merryman, “A Licit International Trade in

04 there were 104 parties.

/
28

/

Cultural Objects,” Merryman, “Cultural Property, International Trade, and Human Rights.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

36

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

51. UNESCO, Conventions and Recommendations, 183.
52. Gaskill makes the point more strongly in “They Smuggle History,” 21: “Almost nobody has any
idea what enormous, fantastic mountains of such‘duplicates’exist in the state-owned museums around
the Mediterranean. Italian archaeologists laugh hollowly when newspapers report the theft of some
‘unique, priceless’ Etruscan vase. They know, but the public does not, how many thousands of these
‘unique, priceless’ vases they already have in storage and quite literally don’t know what to do with.”
53. The Convention defines “cultural institution” in Art. 1: “‘cultural institution’ shall be taken to
mean any permanent establishment administered in the general interest for the purpose of preserving,
studying and enhancing cultural property and making it accessible to the public and which is licensed
or approved by the competent public authorities of each State.”

54. UNESCO, Conventions and Recommendations, 211.
55. Online at ,http:

/
en
/
URL_SECTION5201.html. Last visited on 8
ratifications, by Panama and Bulgaria.

portal.unesco.org

//

/

ev.php-URL_ID513520&URL_DO5DO_TOPIC&
31
04. As this is written there appear to be only two

/

56. The Declaration is available at ,http:

/
ev.php-URL_ID517718&
en
/
URL_DO5DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION5201.html. Last viewed on 10
2
/
ev.php-URL_ID517716&
en
portal.unesco.org
/
/
URL_DO5DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION5201.html. Last visited 9
7
04.

57. The Convention may be viewed at ,http:

portal.unesco.org

04.

//

//

/

/

/

58. CINOA (Confédération des Négociants en Oeuvres d’Art) is an international confederation of
/
www.cinoa.org

art and antiquities dealer associations. Its full Guidelines can be found at ,http:
index.cfm. (Last visited 11

/
59. The Code is set out at, together with information about its origin, at www.unesco.org

/
culture

04).

10

//

/

/

/
legalprotection

/
committee

/
html_eng

60. The Convention can be viewed at ,http:

ethics3.shtml., last viewed 14 October 2004.

//

/
www.unidroit.org
english

/
/
c-cult.htm.
conventions

last visited 9

17

04.

/

/

61. See for example Chippindale and Gill,“Material Consequences of Contemporary Classical Col-

lecting,” 505–506.

62. Merryman, “A Licit International Trade in Cultural Objects,” 19; Merryman, “Archaeologists

Are Not Helping,” 26.

63. See for example, Merryman, “The Retention of Cultural Property,” Merryman, “A Licit Inter-
national Trade in Cultural Objects,” Merryman, “Cultural Property, International Trade, and Human
Rights.”

64. The quoted words appear in the Preamble of the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of

Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export, and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property.

65. The quoted words appear in the Preamble of the 1976 UNESCO Recommendation Concerning

the International Exchange of Cultural Property.

66. The World Trade Organization had 148 members as of 13 October 2004.
67. The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and other international trade agreements

incorporate the same provisions by reference.

68. Article 29 of the EC Treaty prohibits“Quantitative restrictions on exports, and all measures hav-
ing equivalent effect” between Member States. The equivalent GATT provision appears in Article XI.
69. The European Court of Justice held, in Commission of the European Communities v. Republic of
Italy, Judgment of 10 December 1968, Case 7-68, that works of art are “goods” within the meaning of
the Treaty of Rome and thus, in principle, subject to the same trade liberalizing rules as other “goods.”
70. The English version of the Treaty of Rome uses “national treasures,” as does the French version.
The German version is nationales Kulturgut and the Italian is patrimonio nazionale. Commenting on
this difference in nomenclature, Biondi,“The Merchant, the Thief & the Citizen,” states in footnote 27:
“However, there is no doubt that the definition should be uniform, and considering the ECJ’s case law
on other exceptions, it might be argued that [for Italy] the expression ‘national treasures’ should be
preferred as it is narrower.”

71. This topic is explored in Pescatore, “Le Commerce de l’art et le Marché Commun,” and Biondi,

“The Merchant, the Thief & the Citizen.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

37

72. Pescatore,“Le Commerce de l’art et le Marché Commun.” Judge Pescatore wrote the decision of

the European Court of Justice in the Commission v. Italy case, mentioned in note 69 above.

73. Byrne-Sutton, Le trafic international des biens culturels sous l’angle de leur revendication par l’Etat

d’origine, 1.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Best, Geoffrey Francis Andrew. Humanity in Warfare. New York: Columbia University Press, 1980.

Biondi, Andrea. “The Merchant, the Thief & the Citizen: The Circulation of Works of Art Within the
European Union.” Common Market Law Review 34 (1997): 1173–1195

Byrne-Sutton, Quentin. Le Trafic International des Biens Culturels Sous l’Angle de Leur Revendication
par l’Etat d’Origine: Aspects de Droit International Privé. Zurich: Schulthess, 1988.

Chippindale, Christopher, and David W. J. Gill. “Material Consequences of Contemporary Classical
Collecting,” American Journal of Archaeology 104 (2000): 463–511.

Coquillette, Daniel R. The Civilian Writers of Doctors’ Commons, London: Three Centuries of Juristic
Innovation in Comparative, Commercial and International Law. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 1988.

Desch, Thomas. “The Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.”Yearbook of International Humanitarian Law 2 (1999): 63–90.

de Vattel, Emer de. The Law of Nations; or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the Conduct and
Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, edited by Joseph Chitty. Philadelphia: T. & J. W. Johnson, 1852.

de Visscher, Charles. International Protection of Works of Art and Historic Monuments. International
Information and Cultural Series 8. Washington: U.S. Department of State, 1949. (Reprinted from Doc-
uments and State Papers of June 1949).

Friedman, Leon. The Law of War: A Documentary History. New York: Random House, 1972.

Gould, Cecil Hilton Monk. Trophy of Conquest; The Musée Napoléon and the Creation of the Louvre.
London: Faber and Faber, 1965.

Grotius, Hugo, 1583–1645. The Rights of War and Peace; Together with the Law of Nature and of Nations,
translated by A. C. Campbell. New York: M. Walter Dunne, 1901.

Halleck, Henry Wager. International Law: Or, Rules Regulating the Intercourse of States in Peace and War.
San Francisco: H.H. Bancroft, 1861; Holmes Beach, Fl.: Gaunt, 2000.

Hartigan, Richard Shelly, ed. Lieber’s Code and the Law of War. Chicago: Precedent, 1983.

Henckaerts, Jean-Marie.“New Rules for the Protection of Cultural Property in Armed Conflict.” Inter-
national Review of the Red Cross 835 (1999): 593–620.

Institute of International Law, Resolutions of the Institute of International Law Dealing with the Law of
Nations, edited by James Brown Scott. New York: Oxford University Press, 1916.

League of Nations. Interamerican Treaty on the Protection of Artistic and Scientific Institutions and Mon-
/
uments [the Roerich Pact]. League of Nations Treaty Series 167 (1935): 279. ,http:
fletcher.tufts.edu
multi

roerich.html. (Last visited 8

www

04)

13

//

/

/

/

/

Merryman, John Henry, “Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property.” American Journal of Inter-
national Law 80 (1986): 831–53. Reprinted in Merryman, Thinking About the Elgin Marbles, 67–91.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

38

JOHN HENRY MERRYMAN

———. “The Retention of Cultural Property.” University of California at Davis Law Review 21 (1988):
477–513. Reprinted in Critical Essays, 122–156.

———. “The Nation and the Object.” International Journal of Cultural Property 3 (1994): 61–76.
Reprinted in Critical Essays, 158–73.

———. “Archaeologists Are Not Helping.” The Art Newspaper, January 1996. Reprinted in Critical
Essays, 28–83.

———. “A Licit International Trade in Cultural Objects.” International Journal of Cultural Property 4
(1995): 13–60. Reprinted in Critical Essays, 176–226.

———. “Note on The Marquie de Somerueles.” International Journal of Cultural Property 5 (1996):
321–29.

———. Thinking About the Elgin Marbles: Critical Essays on Cultural Property, Art and Law. London,
Dordrecht & Cambridge, Mass.: Kluwer Law International, 2000.

———. “Cultural Property, International Trade, and Human Rights.” Cardozo Arts & Entertainment
Law Journal 19 (2001): 51–67. Republished as Occasional Papers in Intellectual Property from Benjamin
N. Cardozo School of Law, No. 9.

——— and Elsen, Albert E. Law, Ethics and the Visual Arts. Fourth Edition. London, The Hague, New
York: Kluwer Law International, 2002.

———. “A Licit International Trade in Cultural Objects.” In TEFAF (The European Fine Arts Foun-
dation), Art Market Matters, 13–36. Helvoirt, Netherlands: TEFAF, 2004.

Nahlik, Stanislaw E.“La Protection internationale des biens culturels en cas de conflit armé.”Recueil des
Cours 120, I (1967): 61–163.

Pescatore, Pierre.“Le Commerce de l’art et le Marché Commun.” Revue trimestrielle de droit Européenne
21 (1985): 451–62.

Polybius. The Histories. Translated by W. R. Paton. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; Lon-
don: Heinemann, 1960.

Quatremère de Quincy, Antoine-Chrysostome. Lettres au général Miranda sur le déplacement des mon-
uments de l’art de l’Italie, reproduced with an introduction and notes by Édouard Pommier. Paris:
Macula, 1989.

Squibb, George Drewery. Doctors’ Commons: A History of the College of Advocates and Doctors of Law.
Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1977.

Stewart, James. Reports of cases argued and determined in the Court of Vice-admiralty at Halifax, in Nova
Scotia. London: J. Butterworth, 1813.

Thompson, Michael. Rubbish Theory: The Creation and Destruction of Value. Oxford and New York:
Oxford University Press, 1979.

Toman, Jiri. The Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. Aldershot: Dartmouth
Publishing Co.; Paris: UNESCO, 1996.

Treue, Wilhelm. Art Plunder; the Fate of Works of Art in War, Revolution and Peace, translated by Basil
Creighton. London: Methuen, 1960.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046

CULTURAL PROPERTY INTERNATIONALISM

39

UNIDROIT. Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects of 24 June 1995. http:
/
www.unidroit.org

c-cult.htm (accessed 18 August 2004).

conventions

english

/

/

//

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Convention Concerning the Protec-
tion of the World Cultural and National Heritage of 16 November 1972. In UNESCO, Conventions and
Recommendations, 75.

———. Conventions and Recommendations of UNESCO Concerning the Protection of the Cultural Her-
itage. Paris: UNESCO, 1983. Reprinted and updated in 1985.

U.S. Department of State. Draft Declaration and Draft International Convention for the Protection of
Monuments and Works of Art in Time of War. Documents and State Papers 1 (1949 [1939]): 859.

Wheaton, Henry. Elements of International Law, edited by Richard Henry Dana, 8th ed. Boston: Little,
Brown, 1866.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:13, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050046


