OPINION

World Heritage, between Universalism

and Globalization

 *

Is world heritage, a recent idea, already outdated? I will leave this question to the
eminent historians with their debates concerning heritage. What I note, on the
other hand, from my experience as a practitioner of multilateral cultural diplo-
macy, is that the perception of heritage is narrowly dependent on the sudden
changes in the global context and therefore on history in the making. I will illus-
trate this in the remarks that follow by examining this particular moment, or the
idea that heritage is made up of politics on a world level. How did international
society “manufacture” world heritage, by combining abstract concepts with prac-
tical experience, by sailing between Utopia and empiricism? How did it succeed
in combining the universal and the diverse, the established past and the changing
present? In which temporary results has it succeeded and what novel challenges
does the dynamic of globalization propose?

1  ,  
    

The notion of world heritage is historically linked to UNESCO. The idea of pro-
tecting cultural heritage on a global scale certainly started between the two world
wars by the League of Nations in 1931 at the Conference of Athens. However, it
was UNESCO that returned to the idea to give it concrete content and a doctrinal
framework. As its 1946 Constitution states, among the missions of the organiza-
tion is an obligation to watch over “the conservation and protection of the world’s
inheritance of books, works of art and monuments of history and science.” Con-
crete action began in 1960 with the international campaign to save the temples of
Nubia, a landmark operation that was notably followed by campaigns in Venice
(1966), Carthage and Borobudur (1970), and Angkor (1991). The great extent and
spectacular repercussions of these enterprises rallied unprecedented contributions

*Ambassador, Permanent French Delegate to UNESCO. This paper was ﬁrst presented at the 12th
Heritage Debate in France [Entretiens du Patrimoine] on November 28, 2001. Translation by Katharine
Ivancevich.

323

324  

in favor of threatened sites. At the same time, recognition of the need to establish
a universally recognized ethical-legal foundation to safeguard world heritage, along
with the concurrent activity of the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature, prompted UNESCO to examine the subject further with the Convention
Concerning  the  Protection  of Cultural  and  Natural World  Heritage  that  was
adopted  in  1972.  The  convention  became  the  favored  interventional  tool  of
UNESCO in 1978, the date of the ﬁrst inscription on the World Heritage List.

Concerning “world heritage,” I agree that the inscriptions on the list, because
of their “outstanding universal value,” constitute a common heritage of human-
ity to merit placement under the protection of the international collective. 

We know that the convention covers heritage material (monuments, ensem-
bles, and sites) that is a tangible reality in a determined area. It excludes the great
works that are found in museums, libraries, or archives. It ignores the intangible
heritage that, beneﬁting from a more recent interest, has become an object of a
reﬂection for UNESCO. Within UNESCO there is a movement to develop a
speciﬁc international instrument to address intangible heritage. The association of
cultural and natural heritage, in a single text, expresses the importance of the in-
teraction between human activity and nature. Under the program, the convention
does not establish a speciﬁc regime of protection. It does not add a supranational
legal layer to national regulations. It is a text designed to incite action rather than
to prescribe action.

In this sense, the world heritage is at the same time a material reality (a stock
of good physical quality), but also, and certainly, a concept that gives sense to this
reality and the program of action that follows from it. These three elements are in-
separably associated.

What results do we expect from UNESCO in this domain? Essentially two
things: that it act as a producer of norms and an orchestrator of international co-
operation, and that it combine the normative and the operational with maximum
efﬁciency. As we prepare to celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of the convention 
in 2002, the moment is particularly appropriate to evaluate the manner in which
UNESCO has discharged its purpose.

      

If one looks at the objectives and the results, UNESCO conducted its action of
sensitivity and protection with success in creating a universal vision and a shared
heritage. Compared to the situation thirty years ago, the theme of heritage has
been imposed on the world, for better or worse, as a stake in international rela-
tions. For better, it is an accrued conscience of the imperative to safeguard heritage
and reinforce the means of protection. For worse, it is the covetousness that is ex-
ercised against sites that are more and more economically proﬁtable; these sites are

     325

sometimes taken hostage because of their symbolic value. This may continue, as in
the case of the Buddhas of Bamiyan, until there is pure and simple destruction.
That is to say, even if UNESCO is weakly armed against the appetites of ﬁnancers’
impulses, there is no doubt that the situation would be much worse if UNESCO
did not play its role.

The effect, thanks to the direction developed by UNESCO, is an interest in
heritage that has ceased to be a privilege reserved for wealthy states, as well as mas-
sive support for the convention and infatuation with inscription on the list. In
terms of support, the universal objective has almost been attained since, as of Oc-
tober 30, 2001, 167 states out of 188 that make up UNESCO had ratiﬁed the con-
vention and included among them the United States (which was the ﬁrst to sign in
1973), although the U.S. has meanwhile withdrawn from the organization. By com-
parison, the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the
Event of Armed Conﬂict of 1954 has 102 Parties; the Convention on the Means
of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Owner-
ship of Cultural Property of 1970 has 92; the Unidroit Convention of 1995 has 16. 
Since the list began in 1978, 690 cultural and natural sites have been placed on
it, an average of 30 per year across 122 countries. The rhythm has strongly acceler-
ated over the course of the last few years to reach 60 inscriptions in 2000; this has
caused problems, as we will see. This increase has resulted, quasi-mechanically, in
an augmentation in the number of states taking part. At each annual session of the
Committee for World Heritage, new states proceed with a ﬁrst listing. This was the
case for South Africa, Nigeria, and Turkmenistan in 1999; and for Azerbaijan, Be-
larus, Malaysia, Nicaragua, and Suriname in 2000.

Under the operational plan, the mechanisms put in place by the convention
resulted in a reinforcement, on a global and national level, of the politics of pro-
tection that were until then very unequally developed and rarely coherent from one
region to the next. Of course, UNESCO has no power to police or to sanction. Its
authority is purely moral. It exercises its authority in various ways: persuasion or
political pressure on governments, the classiﬁcation of a site of heritage in peril,
the promise of technical and ﬁnancial assistance. In this way it can stop the proj-
ects whose realization would bring grave, possibly irreparable, effects to registered
goods now or in the future. On the long list of catastrophes avoided, I should
mention the placement of a bauxite treatment factory near an archaeological site
in Delphi; the ﬂooding of sites of rock art in the valley of Coa in Portugal by the
construction of a dam; the disﬁgurement of the plateau of Giza by the creation of
a highway near the pyramids; and the immense saline construction on the site of
El Vizcaino in Mexico or that of cable car access for tourists in Machu Picchu.
UNESCO intervenes sometimes to support the actions of small states in the face
of powerful economic forces and sometimes to prevent governments from under-
taking operations that could damage the integrity of protected monuments.

The safeguard action is limited in situations of conﬂict, particularly when fa-

326  

natics from various sides ethnicize a monument. Because it had been discovered to
be Muslim, hostile cannon took the old bridge of Mostar. Because they offended
notions of Islam, the Buddhas of Bamiyan were destroyed by the fury against im-
ages. One does not fail, on these occasions, to remark on the powerlessness of
UNESCO. But one must remember, besides the fact that the two sites were not in-
scribed, that the organization is accustomed to creating an international mobi-
lization and, in the case of Bamiyan, intervened with the authorities in Kabul to try
to dissuade the carrying out of this heinous crime. The lack of success of its ef-
forts led UNESCO to examine the means of prevention and to sanction acts de-
scribed by the Director-General as “crimes against the common heritage of hu-
manity.” As one is strongly reminded by a reading of The World Report on Heritage in
Peril, 2000, by ICOMOS, the list of threatened sites will always be much longer
than that of sites that have been saved from speculation, fanaticism, or misplaced
modernism. 

Beyond speciﬁc safeguard actions, the most signiﬁcant result has been the in-
stallation of a permanent device of international cooperation where there had not
been one in the past. The result, in effect, is to give a commitment to solidarity
that is at the heart of the notion of world heritage. In the spirit of the authors, the
convention of 1972 established itself fully in the prospect of development. It is a
tool to help poor countries confronted with huge disparities between the ampli-
tude of the means necessary to safeguard their heritage and the lack of ﬁnancial
and technical resources. To that end, the economy of the convention settles on a
mechanism of redistribution between the north and the south for which the World
Heritage Fund is key. The Fund generates $5 million per year, a very modest sum
when compared to the money that is needed. The objective is to help developing
countries equip themselves with long lasting protection capacities that are at the
same time humane, technical and legal, allowing them to deal with the integrity of
the heritage chain, the identiﬁcation of proper management, and the presentation
of the sites. 

Thus, the essence of the beneﬁt of the fund is that it allocates ﬁnances to the
mechanisms of assistance. This is a matter of appreciating the differences between
inscribed sites, of putting administrative plans in place, of bringing experts to-
gether to help, or of coming to assistance in urgent times of natural catastrophes
(the Abomey royal palace was inscribed after a tornado) or times of conﬂict (help-
ing with the restoration of Dubrovnik after the 1991 bombardments).

Limited by its own modest resources, in its wake UNESCO has trained
other international institutions, in particular the agencies and the banks that fund
the development, which are progressively integrating heritage cooperation into
their strategies. The World Bank began a program to develop historic sites with
tourism goals. The Interamerican Development Bank intervened in the revitaliza-
tion of historic areas in Latin America. The Asian Bank did the same in its geo-

     327

graphic zone. The European Union embarked on heritage actions in the context of
MEDA and ASIA-Urbs programs. Islamic foundations are active in Bosnia and
Indonesia. Many new actors are strongly taking part in international heritage sol-
idarity, adding important resources. This context is equally favorable to the putting
in place of innovative bilateral actions. As an example, I point to the agreement
signed in 1997 between UNESCO and France concerning the protection and de-
velopment  of monumental  and  urban  heritage. This  agreement  has  formed  a 
stable and permanent partnership to mobilize French expertise and resources, no-
tably those of decentralized French communities, to the beneﬁt of the smallest
countries. 

Long considered a luxury of the afﬂuent, heritage has asserted itself, in the
course of the past two decades, as a recognized component of development. From
now on heritage will be taken into account when anyone reﬂects on new strategies
of development. UNESCO played a decisive role in bringing to consciousness a
collective responsibility with regard to world heritage. 

      

Despite successes in the ﬁeld of practical action, the doctrinal place for world her-
itage remains precarious. In effect, the implementation of the convention created
acute contradictions between universal ambition, subscribed to by UNESCO, on
the one hand, and notions of state sovereignty and cultural diversity, on the other. 
In proclaiming its “outstanding universal value,” in placing it under the pro-
tection of “the international community as a whole,” in stating that it is a good
of “all of humanity,” the Convention of 1972 afﬁrmed with force the universal
essence of world heritage, which is more than a simple assertion of national her-
itage. The prerogatives of the states and the elements of world heritage are not ig-
nored by the text. Article 6 takes care to be precise in specifying the character of
universal heritage, but it respects the sovereignty of the states over their territories.
Article 11.3 stipulates that an inscription of a site on the list requires the consent of
the state concerned. The preamble proposes that collective assistance complement
the action of the state without substituting for the state. 

In practice, the necessity of working with the sovereign states has further re-
duced the essential area in which a collective authority may exercise control in
order to achieve a common good. I will use two illustrations among many.

The ﬁrst relates to the activities of the authorities on world heritage: the
World Heritage Committee, which is the intergovernmental organ, and the Cen-
tre, which provides its secretariat. The management of a world public good pre-
supposes the existence of an international authority endowed with real powers of
decision, guidance, and arbitration. The role is theoretically allotted to the World

328  

Heritage Committee. In fact, the committee behaves quite as much as an associa-
tion for the defense of national interests as an instrument of collective manage-
ment. The sovereignty of the states is frequently invoked to block or to modify ac-
tions that are likely to counter political or economic interests, or even religious
ideologies. For a sovereign state, recognizing the universal value of a site situated
in its territory is to admit that the international community has a right to super-
vise its management. This means accepting a certain form of dispossession, even if
it is only symbolic. Whether it is powerful and balks at giving up a margin of ma-
neuverability, or weak and quick to denounce undue interference with management
of its property, no state lightly resigns itself to sacriﬁcing an attribute of sover-
eignty on the altar of the common interest. This explains, in particular, the resis-
tance with which certain states oppose the inscription of their sites on the List of
World Heritage in Danger (which covers thirty-one sites), since they consider this
a sanction or an interference, even though this is sometimes the last chance to save
a threatened site. While the United States (with two inscribed sites, the Everglades
and Yellowstone) has played the game correctly, Nepal, for example, has obsti-
nately refused to have Katmandu inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Dan-
ger for eight years, despite serious modiﬁcations to the site established by missions.
As for the World Heritage Centre, composed of international civil servants and
of experts, it has neither sufﬁcient means nor, above all, the political authority to
ensure that the spirit and the letter of the convention prevail when they are mani-
festly misapplied. 

The second illustration of the contradiction between universality and national
sovereignty concerns the established procedure for the list. The text of the con-
vention provides (article 11) that the states submit to the committee an inventory
of places that are situated in their territories that are susceptible to inscription on
the list; the committee will establish, from this list, the list of sites considered to
have an exceptional universal value, by applying the criteria that the committee has
established. The inscription of a site on the list can be made only with the con-
sent of the state. In reality this procedure, leaving to the committee the initiative
and the choice of which things to inscribe, is misunderstood. It is the state and the
state alone that proposes not a long inventory over which the committee exercises
its choice but one or more speciﬁc things that it wishes to see inscribed. The com-
mittee, instrument of common will, acts in fact as an organ of registration for the
wishes of the states, even if these are ﬁltered through the technical evaluations of
the independent consultative bodies (ICOMOS and IUCN).

The doctrinal consistency of world heritage is compromised by the difﬁculty
of clearly articulating the relationship between universality and cultural diversity.
For the last ten years, the controversy has focused on the theme of “imbalance”
or  even  “lack  of representativity” of the  list.  Despite  the  1994  adoption  of a
“global strategy” intended to rectify this situation, a double imbalance, geographic

     329

and thematic, persists. From the geographic point of view, one region alone, Eu-
rope, contains more than half of the cultural sites inscribed on the list. Ten coun-
tries (seven in Europe plus China, India, and Mexico) account for one-third of the
inscribed sites (242 out of 690). At the other extreme, Africa appears to be the
poor relation, with only 53 sites inscribed in 22 countries. The absence of inscribed
African sites, whether archaeological or urban, devalues the list and even the con-
cept of world heritage. 

Thematic inequality is no less clear. The typology established by ICOMOS
produces a clear preponderance of three categories of cultural items that are es-
sentially pertaining to European civilization: archaeological sites, historic cities,
and Christian monuments. Conversely, vernacular heritage and cultural landscapes
represent less than 10% of the whole list. As for modern heritage, its numbers are
further reduced: fewer than 3 percent are industrial sites and only 9 cultural sites
out of 501 come from the twentieth century.

These imbalances reﬂect in the ﬁrst place the unequal capacity of countries to
attain the status of world heritage. They also come from incoherencies in the way
the selection criteria are applied, as well as inadequate consideration of the ﬁnal
composition of the list. Should the list be limited or left open indeﬁnitely? How
can the uniqueness and the representativity of the inscribed sites be reconciled?
Should the list reﬂect equitably the diverse cultures of the world or not? These
questions have spawned interminable debates of experts, conceptually fertile but
rarely followed by practical effects in the absence of a political consensus on the
remedies to be prescribed. In the absence of an a priori conception of the ideal list,
we have let the selection machine turn, in empirical fashion, year after year, ac-
cording to the accumulative logic of cataloguing, more likely to satisfy considera-
tions of national prestige or the economic interests of states, than to design a rea-
sonable framework for the world’s collective good. 

Above all, and amazing as it may seem, the concept of “outstanding universal
value,” the keystone of the normative structure of the convention and the princi-
pal criterion for selection, has never been the object of a truly operational deﬁ-
nition. In particular, world heritage lacks the support of an encompassing con-
ception of culture that takes into account the facts of anthropology. This results
in crystallization of the artiﬁcial distinctions between natural and cultural goods,
material remains and spiritual values, history and authenticity. The rigidity of
these categories, lacking in pertinence in most non-European civilizations, has
privileged the classic architectural heritage—grand monuments and urban areas
that are charged with history—to the detriment of forms of heritage that inte-
grate intangible values, such as sacred sites, traditional habitats, and religious or
merchant routes. What is common, and therefore universalisable, in the regard that
our society gives to its built or landscape heritage and through that to its history,
versus that given, for example, by the Aborigines of Australia, who contest, twenty

330  

years after its inscription, the perimeter of the Kakadu National Park, because its
boundaries break the continuity of an intangible track linking two sacred sites?
There are civilizations for which the notion of heritage is not the same as the no-
tion of monuments. The efforts made by the world heritage organs to integrate
this dimension of the problem, which exposes representations and a symbolic sys-
tem unfamiliar to the Western paradigms, remain too timid to absorb the contra-
diction between universality and diversity. Even if the trend has evolved favorably
since 1972, there still remains resistance to be overcome from a purely monumen-
tal and elitist approach to reach an approach that would integrate the idea of her-
itage within its environment. 

If one adds to these doctrinal uncertainties the dissuasive character of the in-
scription procedures, inspired by standards in force in those countries equipped
with established administrations but whose complexity often discourages states of
more recent traditions lacking solid legal and documentary foundations, one un-
derstands how these states ﬁnd it difﬁcult to see themselves in a structure that is
nevertheless supposed to respond to their needs. 

The scientiﬁc relevance of representativity in relation to heritage can always be
contested. However, the reality of imbalance and the ethnocentric grievance it en-
courages has given rise in recent years to the supposition of north-south tensions.
This evolution would be very harmful if, in the name of a “politically correct”
concept of world heritage, each state or each cultural community believed in its
right to claim a quota of sites in implementation of a presumed right of repre-
sentativity of its heritage or even its power of negotiation. If it is not based on sci-
entiﬁc premises, the representativity of world heritage would risk being reduced to
questionable political arithmetic.

      ?

The objectives of the convention’s drafters have thus been attained only unequally.
This mediocre result illustrates the difﬁculty of enacting an international heritage
protection regime that is at the same time operationally effective and conceptually
coherent. Since the convention’s inception, the context has changed profoundly.
Heritage ﬁnds itself being bestowed with meanings and goals that go beyond the
simple imperative of conservation, making it, alternatively or simultaneously, a sign
of identity, an engine of development, a tool of cooperation, or a vehicle of tourism.
At a time when, to summarize, everything is heritage and everything is global, the
expression “world heritage” no longer has the same meaning it did in 1972. It may
be queried whether the aim of universalism is still the goal when economic and
ﬁnancial logic penetrates and remodels the cultural sphere and tends to impose, as
an alternative, a “global model” of heritage. 

     331

A world market of heritage is coming into being under our eyes where, not so
long ago, the economy of this sector was characterized by poverty. To speak of a
market is to speak of a predominantly ﬁnancial approach, investments oriented to-
wards proﬁtability, diversiﬁcation and competition of operators and additional
pressure on the sites to be protected. The impact of this is that a growing num-
ber of activities concerning world heritage take place outside of UNESCO’s con-
trol in conditions that do not always offer guarantees of the required quality. 
Respect for the integrity and authenticity of sites, the concern to ensure their
transmission to future generations, and the maintenance of the social context in
which  they  have  been  inscribed  or  their  value  as  documentation  risk  being
sacriﬁced to other priorities. There is no shortage of examples of historic urban
centers which, having beneﬁted from the UNESCO label, are emptied of their
populations and turned into museums for the sole enjoyment of lucky visitors. It
is also well known that when the heritage is deprived of the vigilance of its nat-
ural protectors, it quickly becomes fragile. With respect to the universalist and co-
operative model put in place by the Convention of 1972, the logic of globaliza-
tion draws up an alternative model in which the notion of a common good fades
behind a utilitarian concept of world heritage that assimilates it to a commercial
product and hands it, thus normalized, over to instant consumption. Uniqueness
gives way to standardization. Because of the need for a uniform mode of produc-
tion and consumption, the “ready to wear” heritage tends to impose new rules: the
same techniques of restoration, the same labeling, the same lighting, and the same
promotional brochures from one end of the planet to the other. 

By this count, heritage will soon leave the sphere of values to dissolve into the
economy of organized leisure. The conservation of monuments and sites will cease
to be a goal in itself and become the basis of activities designed to attract the
growing streams of tourists. The pressure is stronger in the poorest countries that
ﬁnd a valuable source of revenue in the exploitation of their monumental or nat-
ural resources. In the Galapagos Islands, an inscribed site since 1978, the develop-
ment of tourism earns $100 million a year. It is not unusual for the UNESCO
label to be hijacked for commercial purposes and used as a brand name in the cat-
alogues of tour operators. The exponential growth of tourist activity is one of the
factors linked to globalization that weighs the most heavily on the future of her-
itage. According to the ﬁgures of OMT (World Organization of Tourism), the
number of tourists in 1977 was 249 million (on the day before the ﬁrst inscrip-
tions) compared to 613 million in 1998. World heritage sites represent 15 to 20 
percent of tourist destinations. Control of such a ﬂood exceeds the responsibility
of the heritage authorities on their own. It has inspired a concerted approach
among UNESCO, WTO, governments, and the tourist industry. Nothing would
be served by enacting unrealistic prohibitions or placing blame on poor countries.
They are simply adapting to a growing consumer demand for “exotic heritages.”

332  

All things considered, these countries are far from irreproachable as to the safe-
guarding of their own heritage against the abuses of tourist exploitation. In addi-
tion, it would not be very wise to bring charges against tourism when it is known
that in certain circumstances, such as Angkor, the arrival of a permanent presence
in isolated sites serves as a defense against vandalism and pillage. This is thus the
archetype of a global question that calls for wide-ranging consideration of a gen-
eral set of rules, at global level, for the whole issue. It is clear that this has yet to be
made.

Such a set of rules is even more desirable because the standardization caused
by globalization also has the paradoxical effect of accentuating differentiations in
the perception of heritage. Rich countries have reached a point in their history
where the safeguarding of heritage is sometimes pursued until the smallest relic be-
comes sacred. At the same time, traditional rural societies are coming to the stage
of galloping urbanization. In their frantic race to modernize, often identiﬁed with
its least commendable international forms, they are tempted to neglect the ver-
nacular heritage as archaic and, from Lebanon to China, to open up the old quar-
ters to the bulldozers, without a second thought.

As  it  currently  functions,  globalization  values  heritage  only  to  its  greater 
devaluation. The additional resources it creates add up to an irreparable loss of
meaning. Between unattainable universality and alienating globalization, what is
the future of world heritage? Are we moving towards a two-speed regime combin-
ing a sanctiﬁcation of a minute group of masterpieces and a commercialization
of all that is economically proﬁtable? In the great geo-political game, heritage
tends to escape its inventors. This makes it even more necessary to reinforce spe-
cialized international rules. The choice for international society is between regu-
lation and laissez-faire, construction of public policy on a global scale or devolu-
tion to the forces of the market alone.

    ?

Let us ﬁrst dispose of one false trail. “Is it necessary to revise the Convention?”
Leon Pressouyre asked in 1992, in the conclusion of a lively little brochure that has
lost nothing of its topicality (La Convention du Patrimoine mondial, vingt ans après [The
World Heritage Convention, Twenty Years On, a booklet published by UNESCO in
1992]). He responded, wisely in my opinion, in the negative. To the same question
raised today I would again respond, still more categorically: “Certainly not!” Re-
vision would be interesting only in order to make the obligations of the text more
compelling. But how many states would be ready to accept stronger obligations?
The principles proclaimed in the text are not being challenged. They have lost
nothing of their relevance. It is rather the conditions in which they have (or have
not) been implemented. It is ﬁtting not to revise the convention but to revisit it, to

     333

make a less limited interpretation, to take into account the evolution of ideas, of
practice, and of context. This reexamination could focus on three key questions:
what should be the controlling organs, what should be the principles of conser-
vation, and what should be the style of ﬁnancing for world heritage in the con-
temporary world?

.1   ?
World heritage suffers from institutional anemia. Its political and technical organs
are far from having at their disposal the necessary authority to provide a regulatory
regime and international cooperation worthy of the name. The legitimacy of the
committee has been progressively eroded because of the narrowness of its base—
it has become a sort of club of initiates rather than the crucible of a voluntary col-
lective will. Of the 167 states that are parties to the convention, 105 have never held
a seat on the committee and one dozen, essentially European countries, have been
on it for more than ﬁfteen years. The majority of developing countries feel under-
represented. This is not the best way to forge a political consensus. To end a north-
south disagreement, a ﬁrst step has just been taken to ameliorate the representation
problems. The states newly elected to the committee in 2001 in effect accepted, fol-
lowing the French proposal, to voluntarily limit their mandate from six to four
years in order to accelerate the rotation of its members. As for the World Heritage
Centre, an energetic reinforcement of its ﬁnancial and human resources is imper-
ative if it is to play its role effectively as an organ of management. However, it is
confronted by the double constraint of managing a growing number of inscribed
sites and conducting more and more complex operations integrating urban plan-
ning, the support of local development, or the awareness-raising of their inhabi-
tants—all this with a range of partners that is constantly becoming more diverse.
The strategies and the tools of cooperation would also beneﬁt from renova-
tion. Too much scattered activity, too many operations, together with inadequate
evaluation of the results, have caused the dissipation of resources. The time has
come to construct a new model of cooperation that is neither a false cover for un-
justiﬁed interference, nor a veneer for the transfer of resources as well as for the
mobilization of partners, by setting those partners strict rules of play. The cre-
ation of binational teams, the building of local capacity, and the installation of
local long-lasting structures must all be primary objectives. Three years ago France
established a tool of partnership which does respond to these principles: the 1997
agreement already mentioned. In this framework several pilot projects based on de-
centralized bodies have been realized, notably those between Chinon (France) and
Luang Prabang (Laos) and between Lille (France) and Hue (Viet Nam), or are
being prepared (Lille and Saint Louis-du Sénégal; Nantes and Havana [Cuba]).
This  instrument  has  become  a  precedent,  and  UNESCO  is  in  the  process  of
preparing agreements of the same kind with Italy and Spain.

334  

.    ?
World heritage requires a shared vision of the end goals and the norms of con-
servation: what should one protect at the international level, for what purposes and
according to what rules? The ﬁnal goal is not to place a dome over a stock of “wit-
ness” sites, but to inspire respectful behavior and to forge tools of heritage man-
agement useful in all circumstances. World heritage may not be reduced to a cata-
logue of brilliant exceptions; it should constitute a collection of experience that
is useful to all. The ﬁrst urgent matter is to dam the ﬂow of new inscriptions and
to reserve inscriptions for categories of neglected sites and geo-cultural areas, as
well as to reinforce the scientiﬁc rigor of evaluations. After many resolutions that
have remained a dead letter, things have begun to move: the committee has just
limited the annual number of inscriptions proposed to thirty and established pri-
ority criteria, favoring underrepresented countries and categories of sites.

The growing popularity of heritage requires a rigorous redeﬁnition of the du-
ality “protection/presentation.” Heritage must not become a decorative explana-
tion of policies of territorial management missing elements of identity, nor be lost
in a magma of indiscriminate developmentalism. It can constitute the connecting
thread of a new understanding of the territory and of sustainable management of
its  context,  based  on  a  dynamic  equilibrium  between  human  activity  and  the
preservation of the natural and built environment. For more than twenty years, the
application of the convention has allowed the collection of an abundant harvest of
data which it would be helpful to analyze. It will be even more useful in the future
if it is based on pilot projects that can be replicated, thus permitting the use of
models and the dissemination of good practices, facilitating the exchange of cross-
experiences, encouraging the setting up of networks of site managers, especially
between north and south, and mobilizing civil society. The list will ﬁnd its justi-
ﬁcation only if each site inscribed, far from being represented as proudly self-
sufﬁcient, becomes a bridgehead from which radiates a shared vision and a model
of good practice. Activities of this kind have been undertaken on some recently in-
scribed sites. To give a French example, Saint-Emilion (listed under that title in
1999) has just been endowed with a heritage charter. The Loire Valley (inscribed as
a cultural landscape in 1999) has put in place a Development Committee com-
prising all those concerned with the management of a cultural landscape that is
unusual in its extent and its complexity. We must hope that these initiatives will be
used as a model and that the sites inscribed are transformed into as many experi-
mental laboratories and into a real wealth of models for innovative management.
Finally, the omissions and repetitions of the list, resulting from a restricted
and  hierarchal  approach,  must  be  remedied  by  instituting  systematic  work  of
identiﬁcation and inventorying and by opening more widely the repertory of cat-
egories of sites. The list has done generously by the monumental heritage. Now 
it must move the cursor towards cultural landscapes, routes, vernacular heritage,

     335

transborder sites, and contemporary architecture. France has striven to show the
way because, in its last seven inscriptions, four cultural landscapes, one of which
is transborder, are numbered (Mont-Perdu, Canal du Midi, Saint-Emilion, and
Loire Valley) and one route (Pilgrimage routes of Santiago de Compostela). This
necessary evolution should be based on a renewed understanding of the relation-
ship between a universalism that is not a façade for ethnocentrism and a diversity
that is not another name for seeking seclusion.

.    ?
World heritage needs ﬁnancing that is sustainable in the long term and properly al-
located. As for its resources, UNESCO cannot be the sole provider. The resources
of the World Heritage Fund, which have a ceiling of 1 percent of the contribution
which the member states make to the organization, have not kept pace with the
growth of the number of the sites inscribed. UNESCO must therefore look for
additional resources from the states, from international organizations, and the pri-
vate sector. Considering the infatuation from which the world heritage presently
beneﬁts, there is a strong potential for contributions. The amount of voluntary
contributions is already equal to the ordinary budget of the fund. The economic
means have broadened, multiplied, and become more complex. The real question
now is how to use them to best effect and to channel them to priorities deﬁned by
agreement. The installation of a division of work by which the maker of norms
and the provider of funds do not work in concert must be avoided. UNESCO has
a key role to play to ensure the coherence of the norm makers and funders by es-
tablishing, in agreement with its partners, criteria for operations and priorities for
allocation. Not only commercial exploitation is to be controlled. It is also impor-
tant to see that certain funders, because of their ﬁnancial power, do not liberate
themselves from the norms of restoration for ideological or religious reasons. Ex-
amples are not lacking—from the Fatimid mosques of Cairo to the Muslim her-
itage of Bosnia—monuments distorted because they did not conform to the re-
ligious orthodoxy of the ﬁnancers of the “renovation.”

 ,    

France is clearly a participant in the theoretical problem of world heritage as it
continues to evolve. This would be the case merely because of the impact from the
global back to the national level by means of the inscriptions: 26 French sites are
on the list (which places this country fourth behind Italy, Spain, and China). Nev-
ertheless, to have a fair appreciation of the local impact of world heritage, it is bet-
ter to consider the sites themselves rather than the number of listings. The in-
scription of the Pilgrimage Routes of Santiago de Compostela in 1998 includes 69

336  

sites that have been listed simultaneously and four cultural landscapes representing
considerable territorial enlargements (the perimeter of the Loire Valley alone cov-
ers 800 square kilometers and 160 communes). By way of the physical reality of a
body of sites that has not stopped growing since 1978, France is fully linked to the
dynamics of the world heritage for which it is mobilizing a very active network of
decentralized entities, separate administrative services, local associations, and com-
mercial enterprises. World heritage is also more and more relying on the daily ac-
tivity in situ of local actors. For local site managers, inscription stimulates them to
look for innovative solutions to unexpected management problems, which are not
easily solved in the immediate localities or in the already existing administrative
structures. Inscription also frequently occasions a realization of the international
dimension of the question and the ﬁrst step towards a dialogue with other cultures. 
If France is deriving some beneﬁts to its own heritage policy through the ac-
tion of UNESCO, it can and should bring much in return. Indeed, our country
has at its disposal a panoply of assets that endow it with a mission to be a driving
force in the service of a global strategy: a recognized model of management, the
result of many historical layers of experience; a strong presence in multilateral con-
texts; proven experience in cooperation; and professional networks active round
the world. Heritage, which brings together a broad range of activities, constitutes
both a vehicle of cultural inﬂuence and a tool of solidarity.

In this area France and UNESCO are almost always in unison. The signing
and implementation of the bilateral agreement of 1997 marked a decisive step in
the reinforcement of cooperation that is both operational and intellectual. Not
content with strongly urging a rebalancing of the world heritage, France is acting
within its own administrative services by exercising a policy of restraint and di-
versiﬁcation of its proposals for inscription, of openness and generosity in coop-
eration, and of doctrinal innovation.

At the time when world heritage is facing a crisis of growth and identity, some
aspects of which we have tried to describe, France must stand by and support the
action of UNESCO, the only universal institution having the capacity and legiti-
macy to steer collective international action and to render heritage a world public
good recognized and protected as such.


