The Case Against Statutes
of Limitations for  Stolen Art*
Stephanos Bibas**

Summary

When a thief steals a work  of art and resells  it to a bona fide pur-
chaser, most commentators favor protecting the buyer's title against
a claim by the original owner. American law on this issue has been
in flux,  and today  most  American  States  resolve  these  disputes by
balancing  the  buyer's  blameworthiness  against  the  owner's  delay
and fault. Such ad hoc statutes of limitations are misguided because
they encourage art theft,  reward morally culpable buyers, and leave
the law unclear and unpredictable. Instead, the law should award title
automatically to theft victims who immediately report their losses to
the police  and an international  computerized  database of  art thefts.
Doing  so  would  create  clear  incentives  for owners  to  report  thefts
and for buyers and art merchants to check the database, thus drying
up the market for stolen art.

Introduction

In the mid-1960's, a mailroom clerk at the Guggenheim  Museum in
New  York City stole a Marc Chagall watercolor entitled  The  Cattle
Dealer. Museum officials did not notify the police, the FBI, Interpol,
or other museums or galleries of the theft. In 1967, Jules and Rachel
Lubell bought  The  Cattle Dealer from a reputable New York gallery
and displayed  it in their home for over two decades.  After  learning
of  the  painting's  location  in  1985,  museum  officials  demanded  its
return. When Mrs. Lubell refused, the museum began a lawsuit that
dragged on for years.1 Mrs. Lubell claimed ownership as an adverse
possessor  and  under  the  statute  of  limitations.2  In  1991,  the  New

••  Associate, Covington & Burling, Washington, D. C. B. A., Columbia Univer-
sity,  1989;  Honours  B. A.,  University  of  Oxford,  1991;  J. D.,  Yale  Law
School,  1994.  The author would  like  to  thank  Ray  Dobson,  Fall  Ferguson,
Bill  Hohengarten, Constance  Lowenthal,  Renee Lettow,  Elizabeth Reynolds,
Carol  Rose, Phil Wagman, and Caroline Wakeford for their assistance.

73

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos  Bibas

York  Court  of  Appeals  sent  the  case  back  to  the  trial  court  for  a
determination  of the relative blameworthiness  of the parties,  further
prolonging  the  litigation.3

The  balancing-test  approach  adopted  by  the  New  York  Court  of
Appeals  in  Guggenheim exemplifies  one of several  tangled  threads
in the law of stolen  chattels.4  Many of the commentators  who have
written  about  statutes  of  limitations  for  personal  property  advocate
adverse  possession,  a doctrine  borrowed  from  land  law.5  Other  au-
thors endorse  a multi-factor  balancing  of the equities called  the dis-
covery rule, an approach similar to the one adopted in Guggenheim*
Related  doctrines,  such  as  the due  diligence  and  laches  rules,  also
balance the relative equities of the parties.7

All of these approaches are flawed. Adverse possession, a doctrine
that  works  well  for  real  estate,  is  not  suited  to  the  very  different
realm of movable, concealable personal property. Because it ignores
an  owner's  diligence,  adverse  possession  doctrine  hurts  diligent
owners who have reported thefts but are unable to find their property.
Since  multi-factor  balancing  tests  do  not  automatically  award  title
to  theft  victims,  they  do  not  adequately  deter  trafficking  in  stolen
goods. Adverse possession  law and balancing tests do not automati-
cally reward theft  reporting, nor does either doctrine routinely penal-
ize  the  purchase  of  stolen  property.  Thus, neither  approach  creates
adequate  incentives  to  report  thefts  and  deter  the  buying  of  stolen
art.8 Judges and  academics have been too preoccupied  with ex post
dispute resolution to see the ex ante impact of their rules upon  future
behavior.  Therefore,  current  approaches  fuel  the  market  for  stolen
goods and encourage more  thefts.

This  Note's  thesis  is  simple:  victims  of  art  thefts  who  promptly
report  the thefts  to  the  police  and  to  a computerized  theft  database
should  never  be  legally  barred  from  recovering  their  property.  In
other  words,  statutes  of  limitations  should  not  apply  to  actions
brought  by  owners  who  have  promptly  taken  two  simple  steps  to
protect their legal titles. Often, a so-called bona fide purchaser (BFP)
is negligent when investigating title to an artwork. Now that an inter-
national  computerized  art-theft  registry  is  available,  buyers  should
be encouraged to check  the registry and should be held liable if they
fail  to do so.

Part  1  of this Note surveys the arguments commentators have mar-
shalled  in support of statutes of limitations for personal property and
considers  the judicial  trend  toward  restricting  protection  of  BFP's.
Courts  have  gradually  offered  more  protection  to  owners  but  have
done so ad hoc, suggesting that the time is ripe for  wholesale legis-
lative  reform.  Part  2  criticizes  the  arguments  for  protecting  BFP's
from  diligent  owners'  claims.  Part  3  outlines  an  alternative  legal
regime  that  would  protect  a  BFP  if  and  only  if  the  owner  had  not
reported  the  theft.  This  Note  concludes  that  protecting  owners  by
abolishing  limitation  periods  for  many  types  of  personal  property
would  be both economically  efficient  and morally just.

74

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations for Stolen Art

1  Limitation  Periods  for Chattels: Commentators  and

Courts

To understand why the current law is unsatisfactory, one must under-
stand  what  the  law  is  and  how  it  arose.  Adverse  possession,  for
instance, is a land  law doctrine  that  courts first imported  into cases
involving stolen animals. Adverse possession may have suited stolen
horses in the late  nineteenth  century,  but  it works  poorly  for  small,
concealable  objects  (such  as  artworks)  in  a  highly  mobile  society.
Recognizing that this real-property doctrine is inappropriate for most
personal  property,  courts  and  commentators  have  moved  toward
case-by-case  balancing  of  the  relative  diligence  and  blameworthi-
ness of each theft  victim and each buyer. Judges and academics have
gradually recognized that theft  victims often  deserve to recover their
art from buyers of  stolen  goods.  But because  no one  has  advocated
bright-line  rules,  the  law  has  perpetuated  perverse  incentives  for
buyers not to investigate title and has failed  to encourage  victims to
report thefts,  as Part 2 argues.

Section  1 lays out  the common  law  rule that protects  an  original
owner's  title  to  stolen  goods.  More  than  a  century  ago,  American
courts  and  commentators  began  supporting  adverse  possession  of
chattels,  a  doctrine  that  favors  buyers.  Section  2  explores  this  ap-
proach. More recently, courts have drifted  away from protecting buy-
ers by tempering  limitation  periods  in various circumstances.  In art
theft  cases  in particular, they have been  less willing to find for pos-
sessors  than  most  academics  would  be.  Sections  3  and  4  consider
doctrines  the  courts  have  used  to  curtail  protection  for  buyers  of
stolen art: the demand-and-refusal  rule, the laches rule, the due dili-
gence doctrine, and the discovery  rule. Section  5 considers  the rea-
sons behind  the gradual  erosion  of protection  for  possessors. When
courts face  real cases  involving  real  people, judges and juries  intui-
tively  blame  the  possessor  because  he9  is  usually  the  least  cost
avoider  and  is at  least  as negligent  as the theft  victim.  Courts  have
increasingly  favored  owners,  but  they  have  done  so  in  an  ad  hoc
fashion.  As  Part  III  argues,  Congress  should  replace  this  ad  hoc
judicial  approach  with an  explicit,  bright-line  rule  that  would  deter
art  theft.

1.1  The Common  Law of  Stolen  Property
At  common  law,  a  thief's  title  is  void.10  The  thief  cannot  give  a
buyer, even  a BFP, good  title."  Thus, a buyer  does  not take title  if
somewhere back in the buyer's chain of title a claim rests on  theft.12
Over  the  past  century,  the  various  doctrines  of  limitation  periods
described  below  have  carved  out  exceptions  to this  rule. Neverthe-
less,  the  Uniform  Commercial  Code  perpetuates  the  common  law
rule:  unless  one of  the  limitation  doctrines  applies, title  remains  in
the original  owner.13

75

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

1.2  Adverse Possession  of Chattels
1.2.1  Academic Literature
Under adverse possession doctrine, a possessor who has actual, ex-
clusive, open, notorious, continuous, and hostile possession  of land
under a claim  of right for  the  statutory  period can  take good  title
and  thereby  defeat  the  original  owner's  claim.14  Academics  have
long argued that adverse possession  of chattels is desirable for pre-
cisely the same reasons that adverse possession of land is: namely, to
punish the original owner's delay, to protect the possessor's  settled
expectations, and to avoid the evidentiary problems caused by stale
claims.15

Some authors have recognized differences between realty and per-
sonalty but have nonetheless supported adverse possession for both.
John Dawson, for instance, noted that the usual requirement of open
and notorious possession  does not fit chattels well  because chattels
are movable  and often  inconspicuous.16  Nonetheless,  he  supported
adverse  possession  of  chattels  as  a way  of  protecting  a  BFP's re-
liance  interest.17  Similarly,  Patty  Gerstenblith  notes  that even  if a
possessor uses personal property openly, notoriously,  and visibly, a
diligent  owner  may  still  have  no  notice  of  her  property's  where-
abouts.18 Thus, Gerstenblith  says, courts face  a difficult  choice  be-
tween  two  innocent  parties.19  Nevertheless,  she  supports  adverse
possession  of  chattels  because  it  protects  commercial  expectations
and  rewards  possessors'  good  faith.20  In  her  opinion,  an  adverse
possession  rule that relies on possessors' good faith is a clear, pre-
dictable,  fair  substitute  for  the  requirement  of  open  and notorious
possession.21

1.2.2  Case Law on Adverse Possession

By barring untimely suits by owners to recover property, statutes of
limitations indirectly defeat the common law rule that a thief cannot
pass  title.  Though  most  statutes  of  limitations  for  recovering  per-
sonal  property  do  not  mention  the  requirements  for  adverse  pos-
session  of land, courts have read such standards into the statutes.22
This approach was firmly  settled by the first quarter of this century.
The  majority  of  reported  cases  on  adverse  possession  of  chattels
between  1870 and  1930 involved horses, cattle, sheep, and mules.23
This case law, crafted to fit stolen animals that remained in one state,
did not work nearly as well  when it was later extrapolated to cover
smaller, concealable  goods (such  as artworks) that had been trans-
ported to a different  state or nation. Because adverse possession  of
chattels unfairly penalizes theft victims who cannot find their goods,
many jurisdictions have replaced adverse possession  law with vari-
ous balancing-test doctrines.24

In the seminal case of Dragoo v. Cooper,25 Cooper sued to recover
a stolen horse from Dragoo, a BFP who had held the horse for four

76

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes  of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

years.  The  court  held  for  Dragoo.  "[W]e  perceive  no  valid  reason
why the rule of construction adopted in suits relating to realty  [i. e.,
adverse possession] shall  not be applied in actions for the recovery
of personalty."26 The court claimed that the policies of quieting titles
and  preventing  lawsuits  apply  equally  to  chattels  and  land.27  The
Dragoo scenario recurred in different  states, with different  animals,
over the next six decades. Courts gradually imported more and more
of the land law tests into the law of chattels. One court, for example,
stressed that a possessor had held openly and notoriously.28

Animals are mobile and thus hard to find. To address this problem,
some  courts  interpreted  the  open-and-notorious  test  to  require that
the possessor hold the property openly and notoriously in the vicin-
ity of  the  theft: "[I]t has been uniformly held that the two-year stat-
ute of limitation is applicable to an action for the recovery of stolen
property,  where  the  property  is  held  in  open  and  notorious  pos-
session  and  within the jurisdiction  of  the  court."29  Likewise,  the
Dragoo  court  declared  that  "departing  from  the  state"  would  toll
the  statute  of  limitations.30  This  doctrine  guaranteed  the  owner  a
reasonable  chance  to  find  her animal  and bring  suit.31  In contrast,
where a possessor held a mare openly and notoriously in the locale
of the theft,  he deserved title because of the owner's  "utter lack  of
diligence" in finding  and recovering the mare.32

With this refinement of the open-and-notorious  test, adverse pos-
session  may  have  worked well  for  livestock  in  the  late  nineteenth
century. Animals, like land, are durable, valuable, and responsive to
investment,  such  as  feeding  and medical  care.  The  requirement  of
open and notorious possession  in the jurisdiction  insured locational
stability. Animals grazed on open land and were visible to the public.
Many  animals  bore  brands  or  distinguishing  marks  that  uniquely
identified  them from a distance.33 Communities were much smaller
and word of  mouth  much more  potent.  If a stolen  horse stayed in
the owner's community for several years without being found, it was
relatively likely that the owner had neither actively looked for it nor
alerted  her  neighbors.  Punishing  an  owner's  laziness  might  have
made  sense  in  small  rural  communities—adverse  possession  law
barred stale claims and rewarded the possessor for feeding  and car-
ing for the animal.34

But this reasoning was plausible only when one could blame delay
on an owner's laches (i. e., lack of diligence). Over time, communi-
ties grew larger, people grew more mobile, and courts extended ad-
verse  possession  to  less  noticeable  goods.  Furthermore,  the  tolling
of statutes of limitations for property outside the jurisdiction disap-
peared from the case law.35 These changes made it increasingly im-
plausible to blame owners for not bringing suit sooner.

Courts that had to assign the loss to one of two innocent parties
split in their approaches. Most interpreted open and notorious use to
mean using  property  as openly  as an ordinary  owner would; these
courts usually sided with possessors. For example, one case held that

77

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

using a typewriter in plain view  in a business counted as open and
notorious  possession.36  Another  case  treated  use  of  a  violin  in  a
possessor's  house and at music  lessons as sufficiently  open and no-
torious.37 In a third case, having a piano in one's house sufficed  as
"public" use, even though  two witnesses testified  that they had not
known about the piano.38 Another court treated the use of bonds for
loan collateral  as sufficient  because the possessor "h[e]ld the bonds
as  openly  and  notoriously  as  the  nature  of  the  property  would
permit."39

A small minority of courts read "open and notorious" as requiring
use that an owner was likely to discover; these courts usually sided
with  owners.  The  Supreme  Court  of  California  held  that  using  a
piano in one's house "was not open and notorious, but clandestine,
and  the  owner  was  without  the  means  of  knowing  in whose  pos-
session  it  actually  was."40  An  Oklahoma  court  asked  whether  the
possessor  held  a diamond ring "openly  and notoriously  ...  within
plaintiff's  vicinity  so  that plaintiff  had a reasonable  opportunity  of
knowing the ring's whereabouts."41  Utah law went even further and
tolled the statute until an owner had actual  knowledge of facts that
should have put her on notice.42 These cases began the trend toward
insuring  fairness  to owners.  This  focus  on  the  owner's  knowledge
and culpability  presaged  the  laches  and  discovery  rules,  discussed
below in Part 1.4. As a result of these concerns, such major jurisdic-
tions  as  New  York  and  New  Jersey  have  abandoned  adverse  pos-
session  law in favor of balancing-test doctrines.43

1.3  The Demand-and-Refusal  Rule

One  line  of  cases  holds  that  an owner's  cause  of  action  against a
BFP does not  accrue until  the owner demands that the BFP return
her property  and the  BFP  refuses.44  In contrast,  a cause  of  action
arises at once against a thief or other wrongdoer, and so no demand
is necessary.45 For example, the demand requirement protects a BFP
from  criminal  prosecution  for  possession  of  a  stolen  car until  the
owner has demanded its return and the BFP has refused. The ration-
ale for demand and refusal, in contexts other than limitation periods,
is that the BFP, unlike the thief, does no intentional wrong by hold-
ing the property and therefore should not be liable until made aware
of the owner's claim.46 The requirement fosters private dispute resol-
ution and immunizes a BFP from civil  and criminal  liability for the
taking (though he must still  return the property).47  In other words,
the rule  is  supposed  to protect  a  BFP by postponing  liability  until
after he learns of the theft  victim's claim and refuses to honor it.

Without  examining  the  policies  behind  the  rule,  several  courts
have applied the demand-and-refusal  requirement to toll  statutes of
limitations  until  the owner makes a demand  and the possessor re-
fuses to return the property.48 Though this version of the rule extends
to all types of chattels, a number of these cases have involved stolen

78

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of Limitations  for Stolen Art

art or artifacts.49  Since  this  rule  allows  the owner to  bring  suit no
matter  how  much  time  has  elapsed  between  the  theft  and  her de-
mand, courts that sympathize with owners use the rule "as a bulwark
against the handiwork  of evil, to guard to rightful  owners the fruits
of their labors."50

Though sympathy for theft victims is understandable, the method
chosen to protect these victims is not. The pure demand-and-refusal
requirement  eviscerates  limitation  periods  by  allowing  owners  to
postpone making a demand indefinitely.  It helps thieves, for whom
the statute of limitations runs at once,51 while harming innocent buy-
ers. And far from serving its original goal of protecting a BFP from
lawsuits, it makes him perpetually  vulnerable to suit.

Because of these problems, most courts have abandoned the pure
form of the rule. Some cases have addressed these problems by run-
ning the limitation period from the time when an owner first gained
the right to  make  a demand  (i. e.,  the  time of  the  theft  or conver-
sion).52  This change  effectively  abolishes  the demand requirement.
Other cases,  as the  next  Section  shows,  have  used  laches  and due
diligence doctrines to soften the demand-and-refusal  requirement.

1.4  Laches, Due Diligence,  and the Discovery Rule

Courts  in  chattel  replevin  cases  have  adopted  doctrines  variously
labeled as laches, due diligence, and the discovery rule, all of which
rest on ad hoc  balancing  of  myriad relevant factors.  Cases  such as
Guggenheim  have  applied  the  doctrine  of  laches  to  insure  that an
owner  does  not  delay  in  locating  the  possessor  and  making  a de-
mand.53  This approach  involves  a multi-factor  balancing  of  all  the
equities, including  the owner's diligence,  the buyer's behavior, and
prejudice to the buyer.54 For instance, though the Guggenheim Mu-
seum never reported the theft, the court left open the possibility that
the  museum  could  recover  if  other  factors  weighed  in  its  favor.55
This  balancing  method  resembles  the  discovery  rule  discussed
below.

One Second Circuit case, DeWeerth v. Baldinger, interpreted New
York law as requiring an owner to use reasonable diligence to locate
and demand the return of stolen property.56 The court laid down no
guidelines  for  how  much diligence  would  suffice,  saying  only  that
diligence "depends upon the circumstances  of the case."57  Because
the owner had neither publicized the theft  nor used post-World War
II mechanisms for recovering stolen art, the Second Circuit reversed
the district court's finding  of diligence  as erroneous.58 As a federal
court  sitting  in  a diversity  action, the  Second  Circuit  purported  to
predict  how  New  York courts  would  rule.59  But  shortly  thereafter,
the New  York Court  of  Appeals,  in  Guggenheim,  rejected  the due
diligence  rule  as  a  misunderstanding  of  New  York  law.60  Indeed,
because the facts of each case differ, the Guggenheim court rejected

79

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

the  very  idea  of  codifying  what  actions  constitute  laches  or  dili-
gence.61

Several  courts have explicitly  adopted a so-called discovery  rule
for the recovery of chattels, usually  in cases involving  stolen art.62
Under the rule, courts balance all the equities of the case,63 including
when a diligent  owner would  have  located  the chattel,  in deciding
whether it would be fair to toll the statute of limitations. In O 'Keeffe
v. Snyder, for example, Georgia  O'Keeffe  sued a BFP for replevin
of three  stolen  paintings.64 The  intermediate  court applied  adverse
possession law and held that a possessor could not gain title without
displaying art openly and notoriously in a museum.65 The New Jer-
sey Supreme Court eschewed adverse possession  law because it ig-
nores an owner's actions and because the test for open and notorious
use of  land does not  fit  most  chattels.66  Instead, the court  adopted
an equitable  discovery  rule,  focusing  on the owner's  diligence  but
also  considering  "the equitable  claims of all  parties."67  Unlike  ad-
verse possession, the discovery rule places the burden on owners to
justify  deferring  the  limitation  period.68  The  court  refused  to  lay
down  rules  about  how  diligent  theft  victims  should  be.69  The  two
other art cases applying the discovery rule have likewise interpreted
the rule as requiring a fact-specific  inquiry into the equities and the
amount of diligence required.70

Despite the profusion of labels, the laches, due diligence, and dis-
covery  rules are similar if  not equivalent.  These flexible balancing
tests  weigh the owner's diligence  and delay, the buyer's  innocence
and reliance, the existence of prejudice, and other equitable factors.
For instance, the discovery  rule  looks  at when the owner knew  or
should have known of the art's location. One cannot, however, assess
when an owner should have known without first  asking what steps
a diligent owner should have taken, and so the discovery rule is akin
to due diligence.

Two commentators  advocate  a due diligence  approach based on
guidelines  for  what  buyers  and  owners  must  do  to  preserve  their
rights.71  They claim that the law cannot set out definitive  standards
for evaluating  due diligence  in all circumstances.72  Instead, courts
should  develop  "rebuttable  presumptionfs]"  based  on  a  buyer's
checking  theft  registries  and  buying  from  established  dealers.73
These rules of thumb would also  require theft  victims to publicize
searches, check catalogues of an artist's work, and notify  the police.
Neither author, however, proposes any bright-line standards.74 Like-
wise,  the  discovery  rule  is  quite flexible. Three commentators  en-
dorse the discovery rule because of its equitable, flexible multi-fac-
tor balancing test.75

Note that the laches, diligence, and discovery doctrines are much
more  favorable  to  theft  victims  than  is  adverse  possession.  These
new rules give victims some power over when they lose their  rights
to  sue.  The  increasing  prevalence  of  these  rules  is  evidence  of  a

80

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes  of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

trend toward protecting many theft victims at the expense of BFP's.
The next  Section  speculates  about  why  courts  have  moved  in this
direction.

1.5  Why Courts Have Gradually Restricted Protection for Buyers

Interestingly, though most academics endorse  limitation periods for
chattels, courts  have been  much less enthusiastic.  As noted, courts
have increasingly  tempered statutes of limitations  in ways  favoring
owners. In the ten reported cases involving art or artifacts in which
possessors invoked the statute of limitations, the only two that held
for  the  possessor  relied  on  the  owner's  utter  lack  of  diligence  in
locating  the art.76 Five of  the cases  ruled for the owner outright.77
Three other cases proceeded for further factfinding,  despite evidence
of the  owner's lack of diligence  in two of them.78

This judicial  drift  favors  diligent  owners and even  some not-so-
diligent  owners out of  sympathy  for theft  victims.  Courts have be-
come  increasingly  uncomfortable  with  awarding  title  to  possessors
because possessors  often  buy under suspicious  circumstances with-
out investigating title.  For instance, one buyer bought two priceless
fifteenth-century  Diirer paintings for $450 from a former soldier who
showed  up  at  the  buyer's  home  and  claimed  to  have  bought  the
paintings in Germany.79  In another case, an art dealer purported to
believe  a  seller's  story  that  an  unnamed  ailing  archaeologist  had
suddenly  decided  to  sell  rare Byzantine  mosaics.  Though  the mo-
saics were in Munich, the American dealer rushed to close the trans-
action in Switzerland, a country to which buyers of stolen art flock
in  order  to  claim  Swiss  law's  protection  of  buyers.80  Even  when
there are no affirmative hints of theft, buyers often do little to inves-
tigate title, relying solely on a seller's word.81

Some courts have given owners leeway even when they have not
been  diligent.  Although  the  O'Keeffe court  backed  away  from  an
extreme pro-victim doctrine,  it left  open the possibility  of recovery
despite the owner's  failure to search for the paintings until  twenty-
six  years  after  the  theft.82  In  the  Guggenheim case,  the  museum
had not notified  law enforcement  agencies, nor had it notified other
museums,  galleries,  or artistic  organizations.83  On the  other hand,
the buyers could have discovered Guggenheim's ownership by con-
sulting a catalogue of Chagall's work,  but they had neglected to do
so.84  Noting  that  the  equities  did  not  favor  either party,  the court
decided  not  to bar the  owner's  claim  despite  its  lack  of  diligence.
Giving  too  much  protection  to  buyers,  and  placing  the  burden  of
locating stolen art on owners, "would, [the court] believe[d], encour-
age illicit trafficking  in stolen art."85 The court cited Governor Cuo-
mo's fears that crafting  a rule too favorable to buyers would make
New York a haven for stolen art.86 Accordingly, the court "place[d]
the burden of investigating  the provenance of a work of  art  on the

81

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos  Bibas

potential  purchaser"  and  remanded  the case  for  an  equitable  balan-
cing of the parties'  claims.87

The  Guggenheim case  is revealing.  Even  where the owner  could
have done much  more to recover the art, the court  refused  to  favor
the  buyer  for  fear  of  encouraging  theft.  The  court  recognized  that
buyers  have the power  to  investigate  provenance  and, by doing  so,
can curtail the market for stolen art. It therefore  saw no moral reason
to  favor  buyers and treated  both  parties  as equally  guilty. Note  that
the  gallery  that  sold  the  painting  to  the  Lubells  bought  it  from  a
dealer who had bought  it from the suspected thief.88 Evidently,  nei-
ther the dealer nor the gallery had thoroughly verified  the art's title.
If the  law placed the loss on buyers, a buyer could  still  recover  the
value of the art from the gallery  by suing  for breach of warranty  of
title.89  Art  dealers, as  repeat  players,  are  well-suited  to  investigate
title and to spread the risk of loss, which suggests that the law should
ultimately  place  losses  on  dealers.  Part  2  develops  these  ideas
further.

Judges  and juries  have  felt  the  need  for  change,  but  they  still
operate  within  a framework of  outmoded  doctrines.  The  next  Part
explores the themes of  fairness  and ability to investigate and  shows
how they undermine the arguments for favoring buyers over diligent
owners under any circumstances. Because courts have chipped  away
at statutes of limitations for buyers, the law is in flux and thus breeds
litigation.  The  flaws  exposed  in  the  next  Part  support  a  wholesale
retreat from statutes of limitations. It is time to crystallize the courts'
vague  intuitions  into  a  rule  clear  enough  to  provide  guidance  to
buyers and theft  victims.

2  The Case Against  Protecting  Buyers of Stolen Art

The gradual judicial  shift  in favor  of theft  victims suggests that cur-
rent rules protecting  buyers of  art and other chattels are  unsatisfac-
tory. Proponents of statutes of limitations rely on three related  argu-
ments:  limitation  periods  increase  the  marketability  of  chattels  by
obviating  burdensome  title  investigation;  they  protect  morally
blameless possessors; and they prevent courts from becoming  mired
in  evidentiary  problems  raised  by  very  old,  so-called  stale  claims.
First,  this  Part  rebuts  these  three  arguments.  Section  1 argues  that,
though  limitation  periods  are  touted  as  fostering  marketability  of
chattels,  maximum  marketability  is not  a  virtue  but a  vice  because
it facilitates art theft.  Section 2 refutes  the moral arguments for pro-
tecting buyers. Section  3 contends that values of justice,  efficiency,
and  international  comity  outweigh  the  problems  raised  by  stale
claims  and  that,  in  any  event,  old  claims  do  not  cause  many  evi-
dentiary problems. In addition to rebutting the three arguments listed
above, this Part raises one independent objection  to the current law.

82

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of Limitations for Stolen Art

Section  4  criticizes  the  discovery  rule,  laches,  and  due  diligence
doctrines as too vague and thus too unpredictable to generate proper
incentives.

2.1  Facilitating Art Sales Encourages Theft

Many commentators argue for limitation periods by noting that they
increase marketability of chattels by quieting title.90 In other words,
statutes of limitations foster commerce by limiting or obviating any
title  search that a buyer must undertake before  buying  an artwork.
This  argument  rests  on  the  unstated,  flawed  premise  that  the  law
should always maximize marketability. But the law's goal should not
be to maximize marketability per se, but rather to achieve optimum
marketability by inducing buyers to weigh the costs of investigation
against its benefits.91  If art has a readily discernible, honorable prov-
enance,  there  is  no  impediment  to  its  sale.  The  cloud  over  an art-
work's  title  arises  when  its  provenance  is  unclear or questionable.
But  this  is  precisely  where  the  law  should  make  buyers  cautious
and encourage them to investigate. In some cases, buyers buy under
suspicious  circumstances.92  Buyers  often  rely  on  a gallery's repu-
tation without requesting any other evidence of title.93 "'[I]n an in-
dustry whose transactions cry out for verification  of  ...  title  ...  it is
deemed poor practice to probe ,..'"94 Even reputable auction houses
such as Sotheby's have been known not to investigate title.95

Statutes of limitations may have been necessary to achieve opti-
mum marketability in a bygone era when investigation was difficult,
costly, time-consuming, and incomplete. But today, buyers and mer-
chants  can  readily  investigate  title.  They  can  consult  a catalogue
raisonne of an  artist's work to determine the lineage and most recent
ownership of each work.96 And, since  1991, they have been able to
consult an international  computerized database of stolen art.97

Because  statutes  of  limitations  promote  maximum  marketability
rather than optimum marketability, they  increase the profitability of
art theft  and thus encourage  more thefts.  As of  1990, art theft  was
second  only  to  drug  smuggling  as  the  most  lucrative  crime  in the
world,98 involving two to six billion dollars worth of art  each year.99
One quarter of these  thefts  happen  in America.100  Thieves  operate
according to the law of  supply and demand; the demand for stolen
art fuels  thefts.101  Logic  and anecdotal  evidence  suggest  that  laws
protecting buyers have encouraged theft and created havens for laun-
dering  stolen art.102  Because  buyers presently  bear the costs of in-
vestigating title but do not internalize the costs of failing to investi-
gate, they do too little title searching and buy too much stolen art.
Instead  of  maximizing  marketability  by  protecting  buyers  of
stolen goods, the law should create incentives for buyers to investi-
gate provenance.103  But adverse possession  law, by focusing  solely
on a possessor's  acts of possession  after purchase, maximizes mar-
ketability at the cost of failing to create incentives to investigate. And

83

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

the discovery rule, laches, and due diligence tests are so unclear that,
as Part 2.4 argues, they do not guide behavior.  Because these rules
do not strongly  encourage  investigation,  they  also create too much
marketability.  By facilitating art sales, the law facilitates art theft.

2.2  Buyers Do Not Merit Repose Because Owners Who Report

Thefts Have Morally Stronger Claims

Some authors argue that limitation periods for chattels are good be-
cause they protect possessors' repose.'04 These commentators seem
to  be  arguing that a possessor  morally  deserves repose.  This argu-
ment rests on the fallacious premise that a possessor has a stronger
moral claim than an owner who has reported a theft.

First,  because  a buyer can  easily  investigate  an artwork's prov-
enance,  he  is  negligent  if  he  fails  to  investigate frilly. When  the
owner has notified  authorities and theft  databases, a buyer is more
culpable even if this blame does not amount to bad faith. Commen-
tators oversimplify  the situation by talking about two innocent par-
ties;  a buyer  is  likely  to  be  several  shades  more  culpable  than an
owner who has reported the theft.

Buyers often  buy through art dealers and galleries. Those buyers
claim  to be  innocent  because  they  rely  on  the  advice  of reputable
professionals.  This, however,  is an insufficient  reason  to exonerate
buyers. The  issue  is  not only  whether buyers  in fact  rely  on mer-
chants, but also whether we  think  that buyers should rely on mer-
chants without seeing evidence of a title search. In other words, the
efficiency  and practicality of title investigation should influence the
law's  assessment  of  innocence.  Current  law does not give  a buyer
enough incentive to make sure that his seller has verified title. Fur-
thermore, in deciding where to place the loss, one must consider the
actual  incidence  of the  loss: who will  actually wind up paying the
bill? If the loss falls on the buyer, the buyer can recover an indem-
nity from the vendor for breach of warranty of title under the Uni-
form Commercial Code.105 Thus, the real choice is between placing
responsibility on the theft victim and placing it on the merchant (or
the buyer if there is no solvent merchant).106 As knowledgeable re-
peat players, merchants can spread the risk of loss, insure against it,
and develop  routine title  search procedures.  In addition, merchants
are more blameworthy than theft  victims because they have bought
(directly or indirectly) from a thief. When buying art from a nonmer-
chant, a buyer could  spread the risk of  loss by purchasing title in-
surance.107 The cost of such insurance would be proportional to the
size of the cloud around the title, thus making stolen artworks much
less marketable. These factors all suggest that the law ought to place
the loss on the buyer in order to encourage merchants to verify title
and to encourage art buyers to buy from reputable, solvent merchants
who investigate.

84

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

As  Part 2.4  argues, case-by-case  determination  is  unreliable and
costly, inadequately deters thefts, and creates collective action prob-
lems.  Thus, the  law  should  place  the risk of  loss  on  that  class  of
persons  more  likely  to be blameworthy,  namely  possessors.  Doing
so  would  create the  certain,  predictable,  ex  ante  incentives  needed
to deter carelessness.108

Finally,  one  can draw  an  analogy  between  an  innocent  owner's
ignorance  and  disabilities  such  as  infancy,  insanity,  and  imprison-
ment, all of which toll the running of adverse possession of land.109
In  these  cases,  the  law  subordinates  a  possessor's  repose  to  an
owner's  fair chance  to bring an action.  Likewise,  where  an owner
cannot bring suit out of blameless ignorance of who has her chattel,
the  law  should  treat  her  ignorance  as  a  disability  and  so  toll  the
limitation period.

It  is  important  to  distinguish  owners  who  report  thefts  from
owners who do not. The latter, by sleeping on their rights, may have
induced  detrimental  reliance  by  an  innocent  purchaser.  They  may
have less than honorable motives for not reporting, such as trying to
evade state,  inheritance, and capital  gains taxes upon recovery and
trying  not  to  provoke  a tax  audit.110  Even  honest  motives  for not
reporting are often  selfish,  such as a desire  to avoid drying up the
market  for  a  stolen  artwork  and  thereby  driving  it  further  under-
ground.111  As Part 2.4 argues, this motive is rational for individuals
but collectively encourages art theft because not publicizing has the
ex ante effect of encouraging future thefts. The law should solve this
collective  action  problem  by  pressuring  all  theft  victims  to report
thefts and by rewarding them for doing so.

2.3  Stale Claims

Limitation  periods are often justified  as a way  of  foreclosing  stale
claims.112 According to this argument, old claims present thorny evi-
dentiary problems. Witnesses die;  memories fade; receipts disappear.
Rather than allowing a theft victim to sue a BFP's heir who has no
knowledge  about the deceased  BFP's  purchase, or trying to recon-
struct  missing  evidence,  the  law  should  avoid  these  vexing  ques-
tions. By refusing to hear suits brought after the statute of limitations
has run, the law promotes judicial economy, insures fairness to pos-
sessors, and deters delay in bringing suit.

Even  if  abolishing  limitation  periods  would  induce  more  old
claims, other values outweigh the costs of staleness. First, abolishing
limitation periods would abolish  the perverse  incentive  to drive art
underground for the statutory period.  Second, we have  increasingly
accepted  problems  of  staleness  as  the  price  of justice.  Many  tort
victims cannot discover their injuries or the causes of those injuries
for many years. In such cases, fairness to innocent victims and deter-
rence of tortfeasors support relaxation of statutes of limitations. For
example,  asbestosis  and  medical  malpractice  cases  that  arise  fifty

85

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

years  after  the  alleged  torts present  proof  problems,  but  competing
values (such  as fairness  and  deterrence) require us to tolerate stale-
ness.113  Likewise,  in  adverse  possession  of  land,  we  tolerate  stale
claims  brought  by  an  owner  suffering  a  disability  against  a  pos-
sessor;  fairness  to the  disabled  trumps  staleness.114  An owner's  in-
ability  to  find  her  stolen  art  is  analogous  to  a  disability.  When  an
owner  has  reported  a  theft,  staleness  is  a  price  worth  paying  for
justice."5

Furthermore, very stale claims are not a large problem  for the law
of  replevin.  Even  without  limitation  periods,  an  owner  would  not
bring  a  century-old  claim,  since  her  evidence  would  have  decayed
to  the point  that  she  would  be  unable  to bear  her burden  of  going
forward  with  the  evidence.116  Thus, even  without  a doctrine  of  de
jure  limitation  periods  for  chattels, proof problems would often  re-
sult  in de  facto  limitation  periods. In those  cases  in which  a victim
can satisfy  her burden of proof, however, statutes of limitations arbi-
trarily  foreclose  suits  that  are  not  truly  stale.  Additionally,  an
owner's  desire to get  art  back  as  soon  as she  locates  it, before  her
evidence  decays,  should  discourage  delay.117  To  protect  a  BFP
whose  evidence  has decayed,  a court  could  take  these  proof  prob-
lems  into  account  in  its  decision  on  the  merits,  instead  of  using
a  statute  of  limitations  to  foreclose  the  suit  as  a  threshold  matter.
Furthermore,  if  all  thefts  were  reported  to a  computerized  art-theft
database, the database would serve a recordkeeping function  by pre-
serving theft reports and evidence of title investigations by BFP's.118
Finally, clear rules  requiring  immediate  reporting  of thefts  and  im-
mediate  suit  upon  discovery  of  an  artwork's  location  (as  proposed
in Part 3) would  further  deter delay by theft  victims.

2.4  Discovery  Rules, Laches, and  Diligence Tests Are Too Unclear

Courts that  use the discovery  rule for recovery  of chattels have ad-
opted  a  flexible  version  that  relies  on  a  multi-factor  balancing  of
the equities and culpabilities of the parties.1|(> Likewise, courts have
softened  the demand-and-refusal  rule by importing a laches  inquiry
that balances the relative blameworthiness of the parties.120 Several
commentators endorse multi-factor balancing instead of adverse pos-
session  because  the  former  is  more  flexible.121  One  court  that  ap-
plied  a due  diligence  test  refused  to  lay  out  standards.122  Even  the
two commentators who favor  clearer versions of due  diligence like-
wise  shy  away  from  bright-line  rules.  Under  Charles  Webb's  and
Leah  Eisen's approaches, the law would  require art theft  victims to
use "the  best  help available" but  would  give no definitive  guidance
as to what methods are best.123

Flexibility is intuitively appealing. Supple guidelines allow judges
and jurors  to  take  account  of  the  equities  in  individual  cases,  en-
abling courts to mete out individuated justice. Furthermore, for many
years there was no single best way of reporting thefts  and  investiga-

86

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for  Stolen  Art

ting title, so the law was unable to prescribe a hard-and-fast  rule  for
all cases.

Nevertheless, the  flexibility  of these tests  is a  liability, not an as-
set,  because  they  are too  vague.  Under  laches  and  discovery  rules,
courts must gaze at the entire set of facts  and pick the more deserv-
ing  party.  This  approach  gives  parties  no  guidance  ex  ante  about
what they  are supposed  to do. For instance, the  Guggenheim court,
in  the  name  of  flexibility,  refused  to  set  out  any  "common  stan-
dard^]" of diligence  for  owners to follow.124  Vague balancing  tests
fail  to create clear  incentives  for an owner to track  down  her goods
and  for  a  possessor  to  investigate  an  artwork's  provenance  before
buying.  For  deterrence  to  work,  sanctions  must  be  predictable  and
certain. These  muddy  rules  do  not  assure  that  a  possessor  will  pay
for  his neglect,  and  therefore  do not  deter  a possessor's  negligence
in investigating  title. The murkiness  of these rules breeds  litigation.
It  makes  settlement  less  likely  and  summary judgment  impossible
because of  the need  for  a  full  trial  on  the equities  upon  remand.125
And vagueness can breed subjectivity  and arbitrariness.

Even  the  clearest  proposals  that  have  been  offered  are  not  clear
enough.  Webb's  and  Eisen's  proposals  for  rebuttable  presumptions
and  guidelines  would be  an  improvement  over  current  standardless
doctrines.  However,  Webb and  Eisen  still  insist that  "no  exhaustive
standards for what constitutes due diligence could be set out to cover
every situation."126 By requiring victims to "seek the best help avail-
able" while  refusing  to  specify  which  methods  would  be  necessary
and sufficient,127  these proposals are vulnerable to the same unclear-
ness  objections  made  above.128  Because  of  the  advent  of  a  com-
puterized  art-theft  database,  it  is  now  possible  to  spell  out  exactly
what steps theft  victims and art buyers should take. As Part 3 argues,
the law should craft  a clear rule that relies on this new  technology.
It might seem that trial courts would appropriately penalize a pos-
sessor's  negligence  and  reward  an  owner's  relative  innocence  in
most  cases.  But  this  argument  ignores  the  problems  with  ex  post
adjudication.  Balancing tests are unreliable because they force courts
to  rely  on  a  possessor's  self-serving  testimony  about  his  state  of
mind and the steps he took  to investigate.

Furthermore, and most  important of all, theft  victims suffer  from
a collective  action  problem.  For each  individual  owner,  it may  be a
rational  "tactical  decision"  not  to  publicize  the  theft  and  thereby
avoid  driving  the  stolen  art  "further  underground."129  According  to
this reasoning, publicizing a theft  makes a stolen artwork  dangerous
to  try  to  sell.  This  danger  keeps  the  art  in  the  thief's  hands  for  a
long time until the "hot" art cools down, thus delaying  the  owner's
recovery.130  The  Guggenheim  court,  looking  at  an  isolated  case,
made the  mistake  of using this ex  post  perspective  in  its  balancing
test.131  But the calculus changes when  we move from  ex post, indi-
vidual, tactical decisions to ex ante, societal, strategic choices. From
the  societal  point  of  view,  it  makes  sense  to  require  publicity  and

87

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos  Bibas

theft reporting in one case so that future thefts become less lucrative
and thus less likely to occur.132 The situation is analogous to ransom:
though paying ransom may benefit an individual owner, it winds up
harming  future  owners  because  the  expectation  of  ransom encour-
ages more thefts.133  But judges miss this point because they act ex
post and case by case, as the Guggenheim court's misguided reason-
ing exemplifies. Therefore, we cannot count on case-by-case inquiry
to generate an optimal amount of deterrence.

In  sum,  flexibility  is  a  liability  when  one  is  trying  to  generate
predictable  incentives  and  deterrence.  Instead  of  flexibility  and
vague admonitions to be diligent, we need bright-line rules. Because
buyers are, as a class, better able to avoid  losses and more blame-
worthy than owners who have reported thefts, the law should place
the burden of investigation on possessors.

We have almost come full circle. In the nineteenth century, courts
abandoned the common  law's absolute protection of owners by ad-
opting  adverse  possession  of  chattels.  That  rule  has  eroded  ever
since,  as courts have  become  increasingly  concerned  with  fairness
to theft victims and discouraging theft. The current doctrinal muddle,
however, is unsatisfactory.  It is time to return to a rule as clear and
simple as the common law, but one that creates strong incentives for
buyers and owners to use modern information technology.  The next
Part sets out such a rule.

3  Abolishing  Protection  for Buyers of Reported  Stolen

Art

Congress should clean up the muddled state of the  law by adopting
a bright-line rule.134 Though state legislatures or courts could adopt
reforms, congressional  legislation would assure clarity and uniform-
ity.135  This  Note's  proposal  is  simple:  If  an  owner  has  promptly
notified  the  police  and  the  art-theft  database,  she  should  face  no
legal  bars to recovering  her art.  If an owner has not  done  so, her
claim  should  be  barred against  a  BFP but  not  against  a bad  faith
holder.  These  two  rules  are prospective  ones designed  to generate
incentives. For  thefts that have occurred before these rules are adopt-
ed,  diligent owners should be able to recover.

3.1  Owners Who Report Thefts to Police and the Database Should

Automatically Win

Owners who report thefts to the police and the theft database should
face no legal  bars to recovery.136 The law's prescription  for owners
would be clear and simple, as opposed to an imprecise command to
be  diligent.  This  rule  would  strongly  encourage  owners  to  report
thefts  to  the  police  and  the  database.  It would  strongly  encourage
buyers to investigate an artwork's provenance, since an owner could

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

always reclaim her art if the  art had been reported stolen, regardless
of the buyer's  good  faith.  In addition, the clarity  of the  law would
reduce litigation costs by enabling owners to get summary judgment
and by encouraging possessors to settle out of court.137

This proposal would work because a possessor can protect himself
by  checking  the theft  registry  and an owner can  report her loss  to
the registry.  Good  registry  systems  obviate  the  need  for  limitation
periods.  For instance,  the  Torrens  system  of  land title  registration
abolishes  adverse  possession.138  Ideally,  one  would  want  a  title
registration system for all  art, not just stolen art.139 But that system
would  require  passing  legislation140  and  negotiating  international
treaties. It would require potential  victims to register their artworks
before thefts, which many are reluctant to do.141  It would also incur
huge startup costs, anathema in this era of fiscal  frugality.  The Tor-
rens  system  has  not  taken  root  because  of  its  cost  and  incon-
venience.142 There is little reason to think that a Torrens system for
art would succeed either. Granted, artworks, unlike land, are created
every  day  and  could  be  registered  by  their  artists  without  having
proceedings to adjudicate the rights of third parties.  But registering
art already  in circulation  would require giving worldwide notice to
all  potential  third party claimants  and holding judicial  proceedings
to protect  those  claimants. Thus, a title registry  for art would  face
the same costs and inertia that have stalled the Torrens scheme.

In contrast  to  a  title  registry,  a  theft  registry  requires  only  that
theft victims report art thefts. The advent of computer networks and
high-quality digitized color images has made possible the recent cre-
ation of an  international theft registry.143 A major international com-
puterized  database,  The  Art  Loss  Register,  has  been  operating  for
three years.144 The database stores descriptions and photographs of
thousands of stolen items in a central  computer.145 For a small  fee,
buyers  can  search  the  registry.146  The  Art Loss  Register automati-
cally searches auction catalogues for Sotheby's, Christie's, and Phil-
lips,147  thus  protecting  those  who  buy  from  these  auction  houses.
Likewise, galleries could offer this service to their buyers as part of
closing the sale. The existence of a theft registry will enable insurers
to assess risk and thus offer inexpensive title insurance.

Under the Uniform Commercial Code, a sales contract includes a
warranty of good title.148 If an  owner reclaims her stolen art, a buyer
can use this warranty to recover  his loss,  i. e.,  the market value  of
the  art,  from  the  merchant.149  Thus,  once  the  law  guaranteed  the
owner's recovery of her  art and the buyer's receipt of an  indemnity,
galleries and auction houses would investigate title for buyers.150 As
noted, merchants  are well-placed  to  investigate,  spread  losses, and
insure against  losses.151  Therefore, the law should place  the risk of
loss on buyers because the actual  incidence of that loss will  fall on
merchants and because doing so will encourage buyers to buy from
reputable, solvent merchants who investigate.152

89

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos  Bibas

One might argue that checking title in all circumstances would be
unduly  burdensome  and  costly.  However,  there  is  little  reason  to
believe  that this  is true, given  that The Art  Loss Register  automati-
cally checks every  item offered  for  sale at major  galleries  and  auc-
tion houses. Moreover, the law would not directly require buyers (or
merchants) to investigate; but, by imposing strict liability upon them,
it  would  give  them  extremely  strong  incentives  to  investigate.153
Buyers  (or  merchants)  could  then  weigh  the  costs  and  benefits  of
searching  through  databases.  If  a  painting  had  come  directly  from
the artist, and the artist verified  its title, the costs of checking would
outweigh  the benefits  and so merchants would not check  databases.
In  most  circumstances,  however,  provenance  is  sufficiently  impro-
vable to justify  a merchant's  adopting a prophylactic  rule  requiring
a  search  for virtually  every  piece of art sold.

Indeed, this Note's proposal  would be cheaper than those that  do
not  specify  what  steps  theft  victims  must take.  Webb, for  instance,
says that theft  victims should have to "seek the best help available,"
suggesting  that  they  should  avail  themselves  of  a  plethora  of  me-
thods.154  In contrast, this Note's proposal, by  laying out two neces-
sary  and  sufficient  steps  for  owners  to  take, would  avoid  needless
duplication of reporting. By concentrating data in one or two reposi-
tories, this proposal  would  tell buyers and owners exactly  where to
share  information  and so would  minimize the costs of  investigating
and  reporting.

The  Guggenheim case155  highlights  one  problem  that  registries
would  face.  In that  case, the  museum  was  uncertain  of  the  date  of
the theft  because the painting was stolen from  storage.156 Large mu-
seums, which may have millions of artworks, display only about one
tenth  of  their  collections  at  any  one  time.  The  rest  often  stays  in
storage for years, where thefts  may go unnoticed.157 Thus, before an
inventory  revealed  a theft,  a thief could  resell  a  stolen artwork  to a
BFP,  who  would  be  unable  to  find  out  about  the  theft  (unless  a
catalogue raisonne noted  the museum's ownership).

The blameless  BFP  seems  to deserve  protection  in  this case, es-
pecially  if  no  catalogue  raisonne  lists  the  painting.  Nevertheless,
sound  policy  reasons  favor  giving  theft  victims  a  grace  period  in
which  to  discover  and  report  a  theft.  First,  if  the  law  protected  a
BFP, 
it  would  create  an  incentive  for  thieves  to  set  up  collusive
transfers  to launder art quickly before  an owner could report a  theft.
It  might  be  difficult  ex  post  to  distinguish  blameless  buyers  from
opportunistic  fencers.  A grace  period,  on  the  contrary,  would  chill
hasty  and  suspicious  purchases.  Second,  art  merchants  could  carry
insurance, protecting  buyers against  the possibility  of a recent  theft
and spreading the costs of theft.  Giving owners a short grace period
would create incentives  for them to inventory collections  frequently
and  report  thefts  promptly.  Given  the  advent  of  bar  code  systems
that  facilitate  computer-aided  inventories,  a  six-month  or  one-year
grace period  for  museums  might  be reasonable.158 (A better way to

90

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations for Stolen Art

solve this problem would be to computerize museum catalogues and
link  them  to  theft  databases, effectively  creating  a  title  registry  for
museums. One company, the International  Registry of Antiques  and
Fine Arts, is trying  to catalogue  museum  collections.159  As  argued,
however,  such  title  registries  may not  be  practicable  or  widespread
in the near  future.)160

In short, theft  registries allow  an owner  to publicize  her  loss and
enable a buyer to check the title to his purchase. Placing  liability on
buyers  and  thus  effectively  on  merchants  would  encourage  mer-
chants,  the  least  cost  avoiders,  to  stop  trafficking  in  stolen  art.161
And by depressing demand for stolen art, this Note's proposal would
diminish  the  incentives to  steal and  hence reduce  art  thefts.

3.2  Owners Who Do Not  Report Thefts  to Police  and the  Database

There  are  three  possible  scenarios  in  which  owners  do  not  report
thefts.  In the  first,  the  BFP  has  checked  theft  databases,  found  no
listing of the  theft,  and so went ahead and bought  the art. The buyer
should  win  in  this  situation.  He  has  detrimentally  relied  on  the
owner's  failure  to report the theft  and has acted prudently  in check-
ing  the  database.  In  contrast,  the  theft  victim  has  been  too  slothful
even  to take  two  simple  steps to  notify  buyers. Thus, the  owner  in
this situation is more culpable and is the least cost avoider. To make
a  registry  system  effective,  the  law  must  punish  those  who  fail  to
file.162

The  second  possible  scenario  is one  in  which  the  possessor  is a
thief,  fencer  of  stolen  goods, or  other  bad  faith  holder.  For  reasons
of morality  and discouraging  theft,  bad  faith  holders  should  not  be
able to assert the  statute  of  limitations  as a defense.163  Thieves de-
serve no repose from the rightful owner's  claim.

The  third,  toughest  case  is  the  one  in  Guggenheim,  where  an
owner who did not report a theft  sued a BFP who did not investigate
title.  Because  both  parties  are  equally  guilty  of  not  taking  action,
and  because  the  owner's  failure  to  report  did  not  induce  the  pur-
chase,  fairness  does  not  lean  one  way  or  the  other.  In  the  case  of
two  lazy  parties,  Webb  advocates  penalizing  the  buyer  because  he
lacks good faith  and probably has not detrimentally  relied on having
the  chattel.164  But  the  lazy  buyer  seems  no  less  culpable  than  the
lazy owner.  Furthermore, the buyer may well  have relied  on  having
the chattel.  This line of reasoning does  not distinguish  lazy  owners
from lazy buyers.

Favoring lazy owners would undercut this Note's policy of  forcing
owners to register thefts.  Purely by chance, some lazy owners would
recover their chattels while others would not. Because of the collec-
tive  action  problem  discussed  above,165  owners  might  take  their
chances and not report thefts  in the hopes that doing so would  keep
the artwork from being driven underground.  If a significant  number
of  owners  did  so,  the  incentives  for  buyers  to  investigate  would

91

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos  Bibas

diminish.  Because  buyers'  incentives  hinge  on  owners'  reports,
strengthening  the  incentive  for  owners  to  report  would  encourage
both parties to take appropriate  steps.  In other words, the situation
is asymmetric: Placing losses on buyers would discourage reporting
by  owners.  In contrast,  placing  losses  on owners would encourage
owner reporting. And because owners who report losses would auto-
matically  win against  buyers, placing  losses on owners who fail  to
register  would  encourage  buyer 
investigation.  Therefore,  to
strengthen  incentives  for  both  parties,  the  law  should  place  losses
on owners by foreclosing  a suit by a lazy owner against a lazy BFP.

3.3  Dealing with Art That Was Stolen in the Past

The  impetus  behind the  clear rules described  above  is  to  generate
strong incentives to investigate and report thefts.  One cannot, how-
ever, influence  transactions that have already taken place. Thus, the
ex  ante  focus  of  this  Note  is  inappropriate  for  dealing  with  past
thefts.

It is, however, important to clarify  the future duties of victims of
past  thefts.  To  put  future  buyers  on  notice,  victims  who  wish  to
retain their rights to recover should be required to register their thefts
with  the police and the  database within one  year of  the enactment
of this proposal.166

Next, one must ask who should win as between a victim of a past

theft and a BFP who has bought stolen art before the enactment of
this  proposal.167  For  reasons  of  morality  and  efficiency,  victims
should  usually  win.  As a class, buyers  are at  least  as negligent  as
owners,  since  they  often  buy  under  suspicious  circumstances  and
neglect  to  investigate.168  Letting  owners recover  is consistent  with
the law's deeply rooted protection of property rights and its refusal
to  treat a theft  as  a legal  transfer  of  title.169  Buyers  will  often  be
able  to  recoup  their  losses  from  the  merchant  who  sold  them  the
artwork.170 Merchants of stolen art are both blameworthy (since they
are in the  best  position  to  investigate  title) and capable  of bearing
and spreading  losses  via  insurance.  Merchants may in turn be able
to pass their losses up the chain of title until the loss eventually rests
on  the  one  who  bought  directly  from  the  thief71  and  so  is  most
culpable.  Finally,  international  comity  also  favors  protection  of
victims.172

Clear rules are less important when they cannot generate ex ante
incentives,  though  they  still  serve  to  reduce  litigation  costs. Thus,
the  law could  temper this pro-owner rule  with a somewhat  clearer
version of laches.173 To reduce litigation costs, courts should eschew
Guggenheim's  vague balancing and should announce what steps by
an owner automatically defeat a laches defense.174  If an  owner took
no significant  steps to report a theft (such as notifying the police or
a catalogue raisonne)  and this silence prejudiced the buyer, laches

92

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations for Stolen Art

should bar recovery.  Where a buyer has taken  pains to  investigate
and found nothing because of an  owner's laziness, the owner should
pay for her sloth.

4  Conclusion: Other Types of Chattels

Does  the  foregoing  reasoning  apply  to  other  types  of  chattels?  It
would  be  a  mistake  to  lump  all  chattels  together  without  further
thought, just as it was a mistake to lump real and personal property
together for purposes of  adverse possession  doctrine. Nevertheless,
many of the arguments set out above apply with great force to goods
besides art.

Chattels for which there are already title registries, such as motor
vehicles and thoroughbred and pedigreed  animals, are most similar
to art. Dealers could check title just as galleries and auction houses
would check  for art buyers.  Because  of  the existence  of  registries,
buyers of these goods are the least cost avoiders.

The argument against protecting buyers is  somewhat  weaker for
other valuable,  unique  goods,  such  as  expensive jewelry,  antiques,
and electronic  items bearing serial numbers. It is quite possible that
abolishing  buyer  protection  for  these  goods  would  encourage  the
creation of a theft registry. Furthermore, there is already a theft regis-
try of sorts in the interstate computer networks of law  enforcement
agencies such as the FBI. By reporting a theft to the authorities, an
owner could effectively  put buyers on notice, especially  if the  com-
puter networks communicated with vendors.

Tough cases include fungible and inexpensive goods, for which a
registry  would  be  more  hassle  than it  is  worth.  The reasoning ad-
vanced in this Note hinges on the availability, or at least  feasibility,
of registries, which enable buyers to protect themselves. Where there
are no registries  and investigating title would be costly  or imposs-
ible,  this Note's  reasoning  is  largely  inapplicable.  But the question
may be moot. The law may not matter much for fungible and inex-
pensive goods, because an owner will face insurmountable problems
in  identifying  and  recovering  such  goods.  Search  costs  may  be
higher than the good's  value,  deterring an owner  from  looking  for
it.  Even  if  she  does  search,  the  owner  will  be  unlikely  to  sue  to
recover inexpensive  goods  after  several  years.  Therefore,  even  if
there is no de jure limitation period, there will  be de facto  adverse
possession.

The  answers  to  the  foregoing  questions  are  less  important  than
asking  the questions  in the  first  place.  Commentators have  repeat-
edly  stressed buyer protection while  ignoring the  importance of in-
centives to investigate and report thefts.  Perhaps the foregoing  case
study  of  art will  spark  debate  about who  is  best  placed  to prevent
the  sale  of  stolen  goods  and  who  is  most  blameworthy.  Only  by
focusing  on  these  questions  can  we  dry  up  the  market  for  stolen
goods and so reduce the incentives to steal.

93

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos  Bibas

Notes

•  Reprinted with permission from 103 Yale L. J. 2437 (1994). Copyright  1994

Stephanos Bibas and the  Yale Law Journal.  All rights reserved.

1  See  Solomon  R. Guggenheim  Found,  v.  Lubell,  569  N. E.2d  426,  427-28
(N. Y.  1991)  (noting that lawsuit  began on Sept. 28,  1987); Richard Perez-
Pefia,  Suit Over Chagall  Watercolor Is Settled Day After Trial Starts, N. Y.
TIMES,  Dec.  29,  1993,  at  B3  (noting  that  lawsuit  was  settled  on  Dec.  28,
1993).

2  Solomon  R. Guggenheim  Found, v. Lubell, 550 N. Y. S. 2d 618,  619 (App.
Div.  1990), certified question answered and aff'd, 569  N. E.2d 426  (N. Y.
1991).

3  Guggenheim, 569 N. E.2d at 431. After the trial on remand began, the parties
finally  settled the lawsuit on December 28,  1993. Under the settlement, Mrs.
Lubell  will  keep  the  painting,  but  she  and  the  two  dealers  who  sold  the
painting  will  pay the Guggenheim  Museum an undisclosed  sum  of money.
Perez-Pefia, supra note 1.

4  Though  the term "chattel" technically  does not include intangible  personal
property,  for the  sake  of readability  this  Note  uses "chattel" and "personal
property" interchangeably  because  the  distinction  is  not  important  for  this
Note's purposes.

5  See infra Part  1.2.  Each author stresses a different justification  for adverse
possession  of  chattels.  See  Patty  Gerstenblith,  The Adverse Possession  of
Personal  Property, 37  BUFF.  L. REV.  119,  163  (1988)  (underscoring  need
to protect good  faith  and commercial  certainty); R. H.  Helmholz,  Wrongful
Possession of  Chattels: Hornbook Law and  Case Law, 80  Nw.  U. L.  REV.
1221,  1235-36  (1986)  (stressing  importance  of  quieting  title);  Nicholas
D. Ward, The Georgia Grind: Can the Common Law Accommodate the Prob-
lems of  Title in the Art  World,  Observations on a  Recent Case,  8  J. C.  &
U. L. 533, 554 (1981 -1982)  (relying on "the need for repose"); Comment,
14  RUTGERS  L. REV. 443, 444-45  (1960)  (stressing  need to quiet  titles and
bar stale  claims).  These  recent  articles  have  not  moved  beyond  the  older
literature,  which  relied on similar reasons  in support of adverse  possession
of chattels. See J. B. Ames, The Disseisin of Chattels (pt. 2), 3 HARV.  L. REV.
313(1890) (assimilating adverse possession of chattels to adverse possession
of  land); John  P. Dawson,  Fraudulent Concealment and  Statutes of Limi-
tation,  31  MICH.  L. REV.  875,  897-901  (1933)  (favoring  protection  of re-
liance  interests);  William  F. Walsh,  Title  by Adverse Possession (pt.  1),  16
N. Y. U. L. Q.  REV. 532, 536 (1939) (emphasizing need to bar stale claims).
infra  Part  1.4;  see  also  Paula  A. Franzese,  "Georgia  on  My
Mind"-Reflections  on O'Keeffe  v. Snyder,  19 SETON HALL L. REV.  1  (1989)
(implicitly endorsing discovery  rule); John G. Petrovich, Comment,  The Re-
covery  of Stolen Art: Of Paintings, Statues, and Statutes of Limitations, 27
UCLA  L. REV.  1122,  1151  (1980)  (advocating  discovery  rule  that  would
balance  defendant's  interest  in  repose,  plaintiffs  interest  in  meritorious
claim, problems of proof, and hardship to faultless  plaintiff).

6  See 

7  Laches and due diligence  doctrines temper statutes of limitations by taking
into account the owner's diligence and other factors relevant to the fairness
of returning the chattel. See infra Part 1.4; see also Sydney M. Drum, Com-
ment, DeWeerth v. Baldinger: Making New York a Haven for  Stolen Art?, 64
N. Y.  U.  L. REV.  909,  942  (1989)  (endorsing  demand-and-refusal  rule  as
qualified by laches); Leah E. Eisen, Commentary,  The Missing Piece: A Dis-

94

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

cussion of Theft,  Statutes of Limitations, ami Title Disputes in the Art  World,
81  J. CRIM.  L. &  CRIMINOLOGY  1067,  1100-01  (1991) (endorsing  version
of due diligence rule); Stephen  L. Foutty, Recent  Development,  Autocepha-
lous Greek-Orthodox  Church  of  Cyprus  v. Goldberg  &  Feldman  Fine Arts,
Inc.:  Entrenchment  of the Due  Diligence  Requirement in Replevin Actions
for  Stolen Art, 43  VAND.  L. REV.  1839,1841  (1990) (endorsing due diligence
rule);  Andrea  E. Hayworth,  Note,  Stolen Artwork:  Deciding  Ownership Is
No Pretty Picture, 43  DUKE  L. J. 337,  374-83  (1993)  (endorsing  demand-
and-refusal  rule as qualified  by laches); Charles  D. Webb, Jr., Note, Whose
Art Is It Anyway?  Title Disputes  and Resolutions in Art  Theft Cases,  79 K.Y.
LJ.  883,  895  (1990-1991)  (endorsing  version  of  due  diligence  rule).
Though  these  commentators  treat  the  differences  between  laches  and  due
diligence as significant.  Part  1.4 notes similarities between the two and Part
2.4  argues  that both  rules  are  far too  vague.  Thus, neither  rule  adequately
deters the buying of stolen art.

8  The Cultural Property Implementation Act already covers cultural, archaeol-
ogical,  or  ethnological  property  stolen  from  another  country's  museums,
monuments,  or public  institutions.  19  U. S.  C.  §§ 2601,  2607  (1988).  See
generally  Paige  L. Margules,  Note,  International Art  Theft  and  the Illegal
Import and Export of Cultural Property: A Study of Relevant  Values,  Legis-
lation, and Solutions, 15  SUFFOLK  TRANSNAT'L  L. J. 609 (1992). Therefore,
this Note does not deal with works that fall  under that Act.

9  This  Note  uses  male  pronouns  for  buyers  and possessors  and  female  pro-

nouns for owners and theft  victims.

10  See  3  WILLIAM  BLACKSTONE,  COMMENTARIES  *145  (describing  rationale
underlying actions for replevin and detinue: "For there must be an end of all
social  commerce  between  man and man,  unless  private  possessions  be  se-
cured from unjust  invasions: and, if an acquisition of goods by either  force
or  fraud  were  allowed  to  be  a  sufficient  title,  all  property  would  soon  be
confined  to the most strong, or the most cunning; and the weak and simple-
minded part of mankind (which is by far the most numerous division) could
never be secure of their possessions.").

11  Kunstsammlungen  zu  Weimar  v.  Elicofon,  678  F.2d  1150,  1160  (2d  Cir.

1982); Ward, supra note  5, at 549 & n.94.

12  Suburban  Motors v.  State  Farm  Mut. Auto.  Ins., 268  Cal.  Rptr.  16,  19 (Ct.

App.  1990);  Schrier  v.  Home  Indem.  Co.,  273  A.2d  248,  250-51  (D.C.
1971); Inmi-Etti  v. Aluisi, 492 A.2d 917, 923  (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 1985).

13  See  U. C. C. §§  1-103  (stating that pre-U. C. C. common  law still  applies
except where displaced by particular U. C. C. provisions),  1 -201(32),  (33)
(defining  purchase and purchaser  in terms of passage  of title  via voluntary
transactions),  2-403(1)  (stating  that  purchaser acquires all  title  that trans-
feror had) (1988); see also  Webb, supra note 7, at 884 & n.12  (citing these
U. C. C. sections). The U. C. C. does protect a BFP who buys from a seller
with voidable title.  U. C. C. § 2-403(1)  (1988).  But a voidable title, which
arises,  for  instance,  when  a check  is  dishonored,  is  very  different  from  a
thief's  void title.  Ward, supra  note  5, at 549-50.  Since a thief  has no title
to  transfer,  not even  a  voidable  title,  a purchaser from a thief  acquires  no
title.

14  See  JESSE DUKEMINIER  &  JAMES E.  KRIER,  PROPERTY  100  (2d  ed.  1988).  See
generally  CHARLES  C. CALLAHAN,  ADVERSE  POSSESSION  (1961).  Note  one
important  difference  between  land  and chattels:  Many jurisdictions  require
that an adverse possessor have color of title, i. e., title resting on a document.
See  DUKEMINIER &  KRIER, supra, at  104. Title deeds exist for land, making

95

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

the color of title requirement  useful  for weeding out undocumented  claims.
In contrast, because there are no standard documents of title for most chat-
tels,  it is impossible to apply the color of title test to chattels.

15  See, e.g., Ames, supra note 5, at 323-25;  Walsh, supra note 5, at  535-36.
Several works treat adverse possession of chattels only briefly  and make the
analogy between  land and chattels in passing,  taking  it for granted that the
two  deserve  like  treatment.  See,  e.g.,  3  AMERICAN  LAW  OF  PROPERTY
§  15.16,  at  837  (A. James  Casner  ed.,  1952);  Comment,  supra  note  5,  at
444-45.

16  Dawson, supra note 5, at 898-99.
17  Id. at 897-901.
18  Gerstenblith, supra note 5, at 124.
19  See id.
20  Id. at 163.
21  Id. at  162-63.
22  O'Keeffe  v.  Snyder,  405  A.2d  840,  847  (N. J.  Super.  Ct.  App.  Div.  1979),

rev'd and remanded on other grounds, 416  A.2d 862 (N. J.  1980).

23  Another recurring  case  involved  fixtures  of which  former  owners  or occu-
pants of land retained ownership, but which they left behind and only belat-
edly  returned to  claim.  Courts recognized  that  such  fixtures  were  personal
property  but  nonetheless  applied  adverse  possession  doctrines.  See,  e.g.,
Isham v. Cudlip,  179 N. E.2d 25 (111. App. Ct.  1962) (applying adverse pos-
session  to  house  sold  as  chattel);  Chapin  v.  Freeland,  8  N. E.  128 (Mass.
1886) (applying adverse possession to counters in general  store); Preston v.
Briggs,  16 Vt.  124 (1844) (applying adverse possession  to barn).  Applying
adverse  possession  to fixtures makes  sense,  because  fixtures  share  many
characteristics of land: durability, high  value, responsiveness to investment,
and locational  stability. The owners could  have returned to claim  their  fix-
tures at any time; their delay was thus blameworthy.

24  See infra Part  1.3-4.
25  72 Ky. (9 Bush) 629 (1873).
26  Id. at 632.
27  See id.
28  Dee  v.  Hyland, 3  P. 388,  388  (Utah  1883)  (awarding title to  BFP of horse
even though owner had notified sheriff, ranchers, and cattle drovers of theft).
Another court  noted  that a  BFP had been  "claiming  and holding  [a mare]
notoriously  and  adversely."  Hull  v.  Davidson,  25  S. W.  1047,  1047  (Tex.
Civ. App.  1894). One case stressed a BFP's "open, notorious, and undisputed
possession  [of  a  stolen  mare]  under  an  honest  claim  of right." Leavirt  v.
Shook,  83  P.  391,  391  (Or.  1905).  Another  case  rested  its  decision  on  a
possessor's having held openly, notoriously, peaceably, and exclusively. Ad-
ams v. Coon, 129 P. 851,852 (Okla.  1913). Several cases expressly permitted
tacking.  E.g.,  Gaillard  v.  Hudson,  8  S. E.  534,  534  (Ga.  1889);  Gatlin  v.
Vaut, 91  S. W. 38. 40 (Indian Ten.  1905), aff'd sub nom. Vaught  v. Gatlin,
120  P. 273  (Okla.  1911). Tacking  is  a doctrine that permits a possessor  to
add the length of time his seller possessed a piece of property to the length
of his own possession  in computing whether the adverse possession period
has run.

29  Torrcy v. Campbell,  175 P. 524, 525 (Okla.  1918) (emphasis added).
30  Dragoo v. Cooper, 72 Ky. (9 Bush) 629, 631  (1873).
31  Gatlin, 91  S. W. at 40.
32  Luter v. Hutchinson, 70 S. W.  1013,  1014 (Tex. Civ. App. 1902).
33  See  Torrey, 175  P. at  525  (noting  that  cow  had  distinguishing  marks,  so

anyone looking for her could have identified her).

96

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

34  Note  that  rewarding  possessors  for  caring  for  animals  is  analogous  to re-
warding  maritime  salvagers  for  salvaging  the  property  of  another.  See
GRANT  GILMORE  &  CHARLES  L.  BLACK,  JR.,  THE  LAW  OF  ADMIRALTY  532
(2ded.  1975).

35  This  author  has  found  no  cases  decided  after  1918  that tolled  a statute  of
limitations because property was outside the jurisdiction (except where there
had been affirmative  fraudulent concealment).

36  Burroughs Adding Machine Co. v. Bivens-Corhn Co.,  119 P.2d 58, 59 (Okla.

1941).

37  Reynolds  v.  Bagwell,  198  P.2d 215,  217  (Okla.  1948); cf.  United  States v.
One Stradivarius Kieserwetter Violin,  197 F.  157,  159 (2d Cir.  1912) (keep-
ing  violin  on  table  at  home  and  showing  it  to  guests  prevented  tolling  of
statute  of  limitations  for  concealment;  not  an  adverse  possession  case,
however).

38  Connor  v.  Hawkins,  9  S. W.  684,  685  (Tex.  1888).  The  reported  opinion
sheds  no  light  on  who these  witnesses  were.  Presumably,  they  were  called
to testify  because they were acquainted with the possessor.

39  Joseph  v.  Lesnevich,  153  A.2d 349,  357  (N. J. Super.  Ct.  App.  Div.  1959).
While  the paragraph  from  which  the quotation comes  discusses the lack  of
fraudulent concealment, the preceding paragraph makes clear that possession
need  only  be  open  and  notorious  enough  to  negate  a charge  of  fraudulent
concealment,  regardless of an owner's  ignorance.

40  San Francisco Credit Clearing  House v. Wells, 239  P. 319, 321  (Cal.  1925).
41  Riesinger's  Jewelers,  Inc.  v.  Roberson,  582  P.2d  409,  413  (Okla.  Ct.
App. 1978)  (holding  that  owner's  opportunity  to  know  ring's  whereabouts
was substantial question of fact precluding summary judgment).

42  Madsen v. Madsen, 269  P.  132,  134 (Utah  1928).
43  See infra Part  1.3-4.
44  See, e.g., Gillet v. Roberts, 57 N. Y. 28 (1874). Note that demand-and-refusal

cases come primarily from New  York courts.

45  See. e.g.,  O'Connell  v. Chicago  Park Dist.,  34 N. E.2d  836,  840 (III.  1941)
(holding that, where possession  was tortious at outset,  limitation period be-
gan running at once and  later demand did not  start it running again); Solo-
mon  R. Guggenheim  Found,  v.  Lubell,  569  N. E.2d 426,  429  (N. Y.  1991);
Gerstenblith, supra note  5, at  139 n.61.
46  Gerstenblith, supra note  5, at  132-33.
47  Id. at  133-34.
48  E.g.,  Kunstsammlungen  zu  Weimar  v.  Elicofon,  678  F.2d  1150,  1161  (2d
Cir.  1982)  (dealing  with  art  stolen  in  World  War  II); Goodbody  &  Co. v.
McDowell,  530  F.2d  1149,  1151  (5th Cir.  1976) (shares of stock); Republic
of  Turkey v.  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  762  F. Supp. 44, 45  (S. D. N Y.
1990)  (artifacts  stolen from Turkish burial  mounds);  Interstate  Mfg.  Co. v.
Interstate Prods. Co., 408 P.2d 478,481  (Mont.  1965) (machinery and power
wagon); Guggenheim. 569 N. E.2d at 429 (stolen Chagall watercolor); Men-
zel  v.  List,  267  N. Y.  S. 2d  804,  809  (Sup.  Ct.  1966)  (Chagall  paintings
plundered by Nazis), modified on other grounds, 279 N. Y. S. 2d 608 (App.
Div.  1967), modification rev'd, 246 N. E.2d 742 (N. Y.  1969); see also Dur-
yea v.  Andrews,  12 N. Y. S. 42, 43  (Sup. Ct.  1890) (holding  that statute  of
limitations  began  to  run  upon  demand  for  return  of  stolen  horse,  but  not
mentioning refusal).

49  See, e.g., cases cited supra note 48.  Many of the cases cited in that footnote
are from New  York. Because  New  York is an art mecca and many  museum
plaintiffs are there, many stolen art cases fall within the demand-and-refusal
rule.

97

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos  Bibas

50  Menzel, 267  N. Y. S. 2d at 820; see also Kunstsammlungen zu  Weimar,  678
F.2d at  1156 (ruling on suit by plaintiff who made demand twenty-one years
after theft).

51  See supra note 45 and accompanying text.
52  See.  e.g.,  Al-Roc  Prods.  Corp.  v.  Union  Dime  Sav.  Bank,  425  N. Y.  S. 2d
525,  526  (App.  Div.  1980);  Federal  Ins. Co.  v.  Fries,  355  N. Y. S. 2d 741,
747  (Civ.  Ct.  1974);  see  also  Stroganoff-Scherbatoff  v.  Weldon,  420
F. Supp. 18, 22 n.5 (S. D. N Y.  1976) (dictum).

53  See.  e.g..  Republic  of  Turkey  v.  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  762
F. Supp. 44,  46-47  (S. D. N  Y.  1990);  Solomon  R. Guggenheim  Found, v.
Lubell, 569 N. E.2d 426,431  (N. Y. 1991). Two commentators advocate this
approach. See Drum, supra note  7, at 942-43;  Hayworth, supra note  7, at
373.

54  See. e.g., Guggenheim,  569  N. E.2d at 431.
55  See id. at 431.
56  836  F.2d  103,  108-09  (2d Cir.  1987), cert, denied, 486  U. S.  1056 (1988).
Several  commentators  endorse  this  approach.  See  Eisen,  supra  note  7,  at
1100;  Foutty, supra note 7, at  1860; Webb, supra note 7, at 895.

57  DeWeerth,  836  F.2d at  110; see also  Foutty, supra note 7, at  1860 ("[Deter-
mination of due diligence  is fact  sensitive and must be made on a case-by-
case basis  ...").

58  DeWeerth,  836  F.2d at  109-12.
59  Id. at  106,  108.
60  Solomon  R. Guggenheim  Found, v. Lubell, 569 N. E.2d 426, 429-30  (N. Y.

1991).

61  Id. at 430-31.
62  Autocephalous  Greek-Orthodox  Church of  Cyprus  v. Goldberg  & Feldman
Fine  Arts,  Inc., 917  F.2d 278, 288-89  (7th Cir.  1990) (applying  discovery
rule to stolen mosaics), cert, denied,  112 S. Ct. 377 (1991); Senfeld  v. Bank
of Nova Scotia  Trust Co. (Cayman)  Ltd., 450 So. 2d  1157,  1162 (Fla.  Dist.
Ct.  App.  1984)  (applying  discovery  rule  to  stolen  money);  0'K.eeffe  v.
Snyder,  416  A.2d  862,  870  (N. J.  1980) (applying  discovery  rule  to action
for  replevin  of  stolen  paintings); see  also  Mucha  v.  King,  792  F.2d  602,
611-12  (7th  Cir.  1986)  ("Although  the tide  in  Illinois  is  running  strongly
in  favor  of  the  discovery  rule  ...  it  must  remain  a  matter  of  speculation
whether an  Illinois  court  would  apply  it  in  a case  such  as  this  ..."); CAL.
CIV.  PROC.  CODE  § 338(c)  (West  Supp. 1993)  (adopting  discovery  rule  for
stolen artworks and scientific  and historical  artifacts);  PRELIMINARY  DRAFT
UNIDROIT  CONVENTION  ON  STOLEN  OR  ILLEGALLY  EXPORTED  CULTURAL
OBJECTS art. 3(3) (Int'l  Inst. for the Unification  of Private Law  1993) (Uni-
droit  Study  LXX-Doc.  40)  (proposing  harmonization  of  countries'  laws,
under which statute of limitations for cultural objects would run from when
owner knew (or, alternatively, should have known) of object's whereabouts).
63  This rule's vagueness is the fault of the  courts, which have never enumerated
lists of  what  factors  matter  in  this  inquiry  or how  heavily  to  weight  each
one.  They merely  tell  the finder of fact to determine what would be fair in
all the circumstances, including the circumstance of when a reasonably dili-
gent owner would  have found her art.

64  416 A.2d at 864-65.
65  O'Keeffe  v.  Snyder,  405  A.2d  840,  845-46  (N. J.  Super.  Ct.  App.  Div.

1979), rev 'd and remanded, 416 A.2d 862, 863 (N. J. 1980).

66  416  A.2dat871-72.
67  Id. at 872.

98

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

68  Id. at 873.
69  See id.
70  See Autocephalous Greek-Orthodox  Church of Cyprus  v. Goldberg & Feld-
man Fine Arts, Inc., 917  F.2d 278, 289 (7th Cir.  1990) ("[T]he due diligence
determination is  ...  highly  'fact-sensitive and must be decided on a case-by-
case basis."') (quoting Autocephalous Greek-Orthodox  Church of Cyprus v.
Goldberg  &  Feldman  Fine  Arts,  Inc.,  717  F. Supp. 1374,  1389  (S. D.  Ind.
1989)),  cert,  denied,  112  S. Ct.  377  (1991);  Mucha  v.  King,  792  F.2d 602,
611  (7th  Cir.  1986)  (noting  that  courts  will  not  apply  discovery  rule  "if
problems of proof created  by the passage  of time outweigh  the hardship to
a plaintiff who could not as a practical matter have sued any earlier than he
did").

71  See Webb, supra note  7, at 896-98;  Eisen, supra  note  7, at  1092.
72  See Webb, supra note 7, at 897 ("[N]o exhaustive standards for what consti-
tutes  due  diligence  could  be  set  out  to  cover  every  situation....");  Eisen,
supra note 7,  at 1092.

73  Webb, supra note  7, at 897.
74  Id.; Eisen, supra note 7, at 1092.
75  See Petrovich, supra note 6, at 1156-57; see also Franzese, supra note 5, at
22 (obliquely praising discovery rule); Ward, supra note 5, at 541 (endorsing
discovery  rule  in  passing).  Because  the  discovery  rule  sometimes  subordi-
nates a possessor's repose to a diligent owner's rights, the leading proponent
of adverse possession  for chattels criticizes this rule. In Gerstenblith's view,
O'Keeffe "significantly  undermines the policy  of the statute of  limitations"
favoring  repose and unfairly  assimilates  an innocent  possessor  to a wrong-
doer. Gerstenblith, supra note  5, at  144. She prefers adverse possession be-
cause  it  focuses  on  the  possessor's  acts  and  good  faith  rather  than  the
owner's diligence.  Id. at  145.

76  DeWeerth v. Baldinger,  836  F.2d  103,  111-12  (2d Cir.  1987), cert, denied,
486  U. S.  1056  (1988);  Desiderio  v.  D'Ambrosio,  463  A.2d  986,  988-89
(N.J.  Super. Ct. Ch. Div.  1983).

77  Autocephalous  Greek-Orthodox  Church  of  Cyprus  v. Goldberg  & Feldman
Fine  Arts,  Inc., 917  F.2d  278  (7th  Cir.  1990), cert,  denied,  112  S.Ct.  377
(1991); Mucha v.  King, 792  F.2d 602 (7th Cir.  1986); Kunstsammlungen zu
Weimar v. Elicofon, 678  F.2d  1150 (2d Cir.  1982); Redmond v. New Jersey
Historical  Soc'y,  28  A.2d  189 (N. J.  1942); Menzel  v.  List, 267  N. Y. S. 2d
804 (Sup. Ct.  1966), modified on other grounds, 279  N. Y. S. 2d 608 (App.
Div.  1967), modification rev'd, 246 N. E.2d 742 (N. Y.  1969).

78  Republic of Turkey v. Metropolitan Museum of Art, 762 F. Supp. 44 (S. D. N.
Y.  1990); O'Keeffe  v.  Snyder, 416  A.2d  862  (N. J.  1980)  (noting  evidence
of  owner's  lack  of  diligence);  Solomon  R. Guggenheim  Found,  v.  Lubell,
569 N. E.2d 426 (N. Y.  1991) (same).

79  See Kunstsammlungen zu  Weimar,  678  F.2d at  1155-56.
80  See  Stanley  Meisler, Art & Avarice, L. A.  TIMES,  NOV.  12,  1989, Magazine,
at 8,  10-11.  The  facts described  in the text gave rise to the Autocephalous
Greek-Orthodox Church  case. 917  F.2d at 279-84.

Even  Pablo Picasso was guilty  of  ignoring  hints of theft.  When a friend
sold him stolen Iberian sculptures that Picasso had seen in the Louvre, "deny
it though  he  might,  Picasso  must have realized  exactly  what  he was  being
offered."  John  Richardson,  Picasso  Among  Thieves,  VANITY  FAIR,  Dec.
1993, at  198, 204. Nevertheless, because "he had to possess these objects,"
Picasso "delud[ed] himself  into accepting the thief's  story. Id. at 204, 224.

99

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

81  E.g., Porter v. Wertz, 416 N. Y. S. 2d 254, 257, 259 (App. Div.  1979) (noting
that buyer did not inquire about seller's reputability nor his title to painting,
in  keeping  with  custom  among buyers  that  "it  is  deemed  poor practice  to
probe" into title).

82  O'Keeffe  v. Snyder, 416 A.2d  862, 866 (N. J.  1980).
83  Solomon  R. Guggenheim  Found,  v.  Lubell,  569  N. E.2d  426,  428  (N. Y.

1991).

84  Solomon  R. Guggenheim  Found, v.  Lubell,  550 N. Y. S. 2d 618, 623 (App.
Div.  1990), certified  question answered and aff'd,  569  N. E.2d 426  (N. Y.
1991).

85  Guggenheim,  569 N. E.2d at 431.
86  Id. at 430.
87  Id. at 431.
88  See id. at 428; Perez-Pefta,  supra note 1.
89  See, e.g.,  Menzel  v.  List, 267  N. Y. S. 2d 804,  808  (Sup. Ct.  1966) (noting
that  buyer who  had to  return painting  to  owner recouped  its  market  value
from gallery  that  sold  painting  to  buyer),  modified, 279  N. Y.  S. 2d  608
(App.  Div.  1967), modification revd,  246 N. E.2d 742 (N. Y. 1969).

90  See, e.g., Gerstenblith, supra note 5, at  160-61,  163; Helmholz, supra note

5, at  1235-36; Comment, supra note 5, at 444-45.

91  Courts should not, however, employ vague, case-by-case  balancing tests to
weigh these costs and benefits. See infra Part 2.4. A bright-line rule placing
liability on buyers would make buyers internalize the costs of searching and
the costs  of  not  searching,  producing  an  optimal  amount  of  investigation.
See infra text accompanying note 153.

92  See supra  notes  79-80  and  accompanying  text.  The  inquiry  into  a  pos-
sessor's  good  faith  necessarily  relies  on  his  testimony  and  version  of  the
events.  As  Part 2.4  argues,  this  makes  it difficult  in many cases  for courts
to discern  ex  post  when a  possessor could  and  should  have done  more  to
investigate. Therefore,  it is better to create incentives by placing the risk of
loss on possessors ex ante.

93  See. e.g., Menzel  v. List, 246 N. E.2d 742, 743 (N. Y.  1969) ("The  [defend-
ants] knew  nothing of  the  painting's previous  history and made no inquiry
concerning  it,  being content  to rely  on the reputability  of the  Paris gallery
as to authenticity and title.").

94  Porter v. Wertz, 416 N. Y. S. 2d 254, 259 (App.  Div.  1979) (quoting district
court opinion)  (noting that buyer did not  investigate  seller's  reputability or
verify  claim of ownership); see also O'Keeffe  v. Snyder, 416 A.2d 862, 872
(N. J.  1980) ("[PJaintings  worth vast  sums of money  sometimes  are bought
without  inquiry  about their provenance."); James  Walsh, It's a  Steal, TIME,
Nov.  25,  1991,  at  86,  87  (stating  that,  according  to  New  York  Police  art
detective  Richard  Volpe,  art  thieves  succeed  only  through  negligence  or
complicity  of galleries and collectors).

95  See Grace Glueck,  Who Owns Stolen Artifact? College Confronts a Museum,

N. Y. TIMES, Apr. 30,  1991, at A I, B3 (implying that, though Sotheby's sold
artifact  and checked  for  possible  illegal  exportation,  it  did  not  investigate
possibility  of  theft);  Carol  Vogel,  Museum Keeps  Stolen Artifact, College
Gets Cash, N. Y.  TIMES, Apr.  11,  1992, at AI4  (same); see also  Menzel  v.
List, 267 N. Y. S. 2d 804, 808 (Sup. Ct.  1966) ("Art galleries of such stand-
ing assume, without the necessity of inquiry, that an offer of sale constitutes
a representation of authenticity and good title."), modified on other grounds,
279  N. Y. S. 2d 608 (App. Div.  1967), modification rev'd, 246  N. E.2d  742
(N. Y. 1969).

100

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

96  A  catalogue  raisonne  is  a  definitive  listing  (usually  by  a  prominent  art
expert)  of every known  artwork  by  a particular artist.  For each  work, the
catalogue usually contains a physical description (including an illustration),
a history of exhibitions of the  work, the work's provenance, and published
references to the work. Usually, one catalogue becomes the definitive refer-
ence work on which scholars and merchants rely when discussing an artist's
works. See DeWeerth v. Baldinger, 836 F.2d  103, 112 (2d Cir.  1987); Mary
McKenna, Comment, Problematic Provenance:  Toward a  Coherent  United
States  Policy  on  the  International  Trade in  Cultural  Property,  12  U. PA.
J.  INT'L  Bus.  L.  83,  104  n.89  (1991).

97  International Art Loss Register Opens for  Business, ARTNEWSLETTER (Int'l
Found,  for  Art  Research,  New  York,  N. Y.),  Feb.  5,  1991,  at  I;  see  also
infra Part 3 (advocating  solution based on international  databases).

98  Don  L  Boroughs  et  al.,  The Hidden Art of  Theft,  U. S.  NEWS  &  WORLD

REP., Apr. 2,  1990, at 13.

99  Walsh, supra note 94, at  86-87.
100  Maria Puente, Art Thefts:  Bold Strokes Turn a Profit: FBI Cracks Down as

Crimes Rise, USA  TODAY, June 29,  1993, at 8A.

101  Id. ("[Bjecause art still fetches good money,...  '[tjheft  is increasing for one
reason: greed' 
") (quoting Donald Mason, ex-FBI art theft investigator);
Picassos  and Braques Stolen from Museum,  N. Y. TIMES,  NOV.  9,  1993, at
C20 ("[A]s the price of masterpieces has soared, the black-market demand
has  kept  pace,  inspiring  thefts  ...");  Walsh,  supra  note  94,  at  86  ("[In-
satiable demand  for artworks and antiquities" has raised prices and so en-
couraged  theft); see  Meisler, supra  note  80,  at 37  ("'If  someone  wants to
own [pre-Columbian art] in the United States, people will bring [the art] to
the United States.'") (quoting Mexican official  Marentes).

102  For instance, Switzerland harbors "notorious auctions  ...  whose  main pur-
pose  is  to  establish  credentials  for  a  dubious  work"  of  art.  BONNIE
BURNHAM,  THE  ART  CRISIS 45  (1975).  In the  case  of  the  stolen  Cypriot
Byzantine mosaics discussed above, the sale took place in a Geneva airport,
presumably  because  of  Switzerland's  lax  laws.  Meisler, supra  note  80, at
11.  Britain's anachronistic  protection of those who buy  stolen  goods  from
a  few  statutorily  designated  "marches  ouverts"  has  made  those  markets
"clearing  houses  for  stolen  goods.  So  blatant  is  this  abuse  that  a  Danish
tour  company  advertises  coach  trips  to  Bermondsey  [in  London]  in  the
early hours,  to buy  stolen  goods."  Harriet Crawley,  Forget the  Video, It s
Your Paintings They're After, DAILY  TELEGRAPH  (London), June  16,  1992,
at 16. Many other countries have lax laws that protect buyers and so encour-
age  art  laundering.  See  Boroughs  et  al.,  supra  note  98,  at  13  (decrying
Japan's lax laws); Constance  Lowenthal,  The Japanese Connection, WALL
ST.  J., Mar. 23,  1990, at  Al3  (same); Walsh, supra note  94, at 87 (noting
laxity of laws in Switzerland, Liechtenstein, and Cayman  Islands); cf. Irvin
Molotsky,  3  V. S. Agencies  Urge  Veto of Art-Claim Bill, N. Y.  TIMES, July
23,  1986, at C15 (reporting that State Department, Justice Department, and
United  States  Information  Agency  urged Gov.  Mario Cuomo to veto short
statute  of  limitations  for  recovering  art  for  fear  of  making  New  York a
haven for stolen art and encouraging  theft).

103  The law should also  increase incentives  for owners to report thefts  so that

buyers can find out about stolen artworks. See infra Part  3.1-2.

104  See  Dawson, supra  note  5,  at  897  & n.63; Gerstenblith,  supra  note  5, at
160-61,  163; Ward, supra  note 5, at 554, 558; see  also  Helmholz, supra
note 5, at  1236-37  (endorsing security of possessor's title).

101

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

105  SeeV.C.C.  § 2-312( 1 Xa) (1988) (stating that every salecontract includes
warranty of title); Deborah D. Hoover, Note,  Title Disputes in the Art Mar-
ket: An Emerging Duty of Care for  Art Merchants,  51  GEO.  WASH.  L. REV.
443,449-50(1983).

106  One  might  ask  why  the  law  should  place  losses  on  buyers  if  the  law's
ultimate aim  is to make  losses  rest on merchants. There are good  reasons
to place liability on buyers even though they will usually recover indemnit-
ies from merchants. If only merchants were held liable, buyers would have
an incentive  to bypass art dealers, because dealers would have to increase
purchase  prices to reflect  the risk of being held liable. In contrast, placing
liability  on  buyers  would  encourage  them  to  deal  with  reputable,  solvent
merchants who investigate. Buyers would have strong incentives not to buy
from fly-by-night or insolvent merchants because, if they did so, they might
be unable to recover indemnities.  By serving as self-insurers  or taking out
title insurance on behalf of all their customers, merchants would perform a
risk-spreading function.  To protect themselves  from liability and disrepute,
these merchants would investigate  artworks' provenance.  In short, placing
liability  on  merchants to the exclusion  of  buyers  would  drive  buyers into
shady back-alley  transactions; placing liability on buyers but providing for
indemnities from'merchants would bring art sales aboveground, facilitating
the  kind  of  scrutiny  that  would  make  the  sale  of  stolen  art  difficult  and
unprofitable.

107  Title insurance may not have arisen yet because international art-theft data-
bases are a very recent phenomenon. See Gregory Jensen,  Worldwide Regi-
sters  Battle Art Theft Epidemic, WASH.  TIMES, June  14,  1990, at  E3. Now
that they exist, it should be possible to use these databases to estimate  risk
and set a premium.
108  See infra Part 2.4.
109  CALLAHAN, supra note  14, at 75.
110  See Judd Tully, Hot Art, Cold Cash, I. ART,  NOV.  1990, at  1,4  (suggesting
that  art  theft  victims,  to  avoid  scrutiny  by  tax  collectors,  do  not  report
thefts).

111  See Solomon R. Guggenheim Found, v. Lubell, 569 N. E.2d 426,431  (N. Y.

1991).

112  See supra note  15, sources cited therein, and accompanying text.
113  See. e.g.,  Femandi  v.  Strully,  173  A.2d 277  (N. J.  1961)  (extending  limi-
tation  period  out of  fairness  to patient  who did not  immediately  discover
wing nut that surgeon had left in her abdomen).

114  See supra text accompanying note  109.
115  For example, the values of justice and international comity should outweigh
the  problems  of  stale  claims  in  suits  by  foreign  nations  to  recover  their
national  treasures.  Many  plaintiffs  in  U. S.  art  cases  have  been  nations
seeking  to  recover  treasures  plundered  from  their  museums,  graves,  and
churches.  See.  e.g.,  Autocephalous  Greek-Orthodox  Church  of  Cyprus v.
Goldberg & Feldman Fine Arts, Inc., 917 F.2d 278 (7th Cir. 1990) (allowing
Republic  of  Cyprus  and  church  to  recover  mosaics  stolen  from  church),
cert, denied, 112 S. Ct. 377 (1991); Kunstsammlungen zu Weimar v. Elico-
fon,  678  F.2d  1150 (2d Cir.  1982) (allowing  Federal Republic of Germany
to recover paintings apparently stolen by American GI from museum during
World  War II); Republic  of  Turkey  v.  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  762
F. Supp. 44  (S. D. N  Y.  1990) (allowing Turkey to sue  to recover artifacts
excavated  from  burial  mounds);  William  H. Honan,  It's Finally  Agreed:
Germany To  Regain a  Stolen  Trove,  N. Y.  TIMES,  Feb.  26,  1992,  at C15;

102

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations for Stolen Art

Mark  Rose,  Greece Sues for  Mycenaean Gold,  ARCHAEOLOGY,  Sept.-Oct.
1993, at 26; see  also  DeWeerth  v.  Baldinger,  836  F.2d  103 (2d Cir.  1987)
(holding untimely  suit by West German national to recover painting stolen
from  home  by  American  Gl  during  World  War  II),  cert,  denied,  486
U. S.  1056  (1988);  John  Darnton,  Repatriating  the  Inventory of  History,
N. Y. TIMES, Sept.  19,  1993, § 4  (Week  in  Review), at 1.

Limits on plundered nations' rights to recover might harm relations with
these countries.  For example, New York considered enacting a short statute
of  limitations  for  art  in  museums  to  replace  its  demand-and-refusal  rule.
Molotsky, supra note  102, at C15.  But the U. S. State  Department, Justice
Department, and United States Information Agency all strongly urged Gov-
ernor  Mario Cuomo  to  veto  the  bill.  Id.  He  did  veto  the  measure,  citing
inadequate  notice  to other countries and the  State  Department's  fears that
New  York would become  a haven  for looted art. The strenuous  objections
of  the  three  federal  agencies  suggests  that  restricting  foreign  countries'
rights  to recover stolen art would strain diplomatic relations.  Cf.  LEONARD
D. DUBOFF,  THE  DESKBOOK  OF  ART  LAW  120  (1977)  (notify  that nations
"feel  obligated  to aid a  friendly  nation  in recovering  one  of  its  displaced
national treasures").

For similar reasons, Congress refused to pass the Cultural  Property Re-
pose  Act,  which  would  have  established  a  five-year  statute  of  limitations
for foreign governments. S.  1523, 99th Cong.,  1st Sess. (1985);  131  CONG.
REC.  E2249  (daily  ed.  May  16,  1985)  (statement  of  Rep.  Gephardt,  dis-
cussing H. R. 2389); see  Drum, supra note 7, at 919. The Cultural Property
Implementation Act already protects other nations' rights to recover stolen
cultural,  archaeological,  and ethnological  property. See supra note  8. Pro-
tecting  nations' right to  recover stolen  art would  further  the comity  con-
cerns that the Act partially addresses.

While a longer  statute of  limitations  would  ameliorate  these problems,
it would not completely  solve them. Any artificial  limitation  period would
cut off a nation's right to recover after an arbitrary number of years (except
for a balancing test, which would be subject to the objections in Part 2.4).
As the cases cited above show,  decades often  elapse  before  nations  locate
stolen  artworks.  Thus,  limitation  periods  would  unfairly  penalize  nations
that diligently  attempt to recover their art, resulting  in diplomatic  friction.
Compared  to the twin  values  of  fairness  and comity,  stateness  is a minor
concern.

116  Granted, old  suits  would  still  have  some  nuisance  value; plaintiffs  might
therefore  seek  lucrative  settlements  by  bringing  meritless  strike  suits.
Courts could  alleviate  this  problem  by  using  summary judgment  aggress-
ively to weed out suits lacking evidentiary support.

117  One could  argue that  a  fraudulent  claimant  ("pseudo-owner")  might  wait
many years and then come forward after a purchaser's evidence of owner-
ship  had  decayed.  But  there  is  little  reason  to  think  that  many  pseudo-
owners would come forward. Even if pseudo-owners did make claims, they
would face  multiple  legal  obstacles under the rule advocated  in this Note.
Most importantly, a theft  victim's recovery of property  from a BFP would
be barred if the victim  had not  immediately  reported the loss to registries
and to the  police,  who could  investigate  claimed  losses.  Second, pseudo-
owners  would  need  to adduce  other evidence  of  ownership,  such as a re-
ceipt,  testimony  of  others, or an insurance  company  listing.  These  pieces
of evidence would be subject to adversarial testing, which should weed out
perjury and forgery. Third, art changes hands periodically, and at each sale

103

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

buyers would  check  theft  registries  under this Note's  plan. See infra Part
3.1.  Thus, the issue of theft  is likely to be resolved within a decade or two
of  a theft  listing.  The one exception  is  for art held by museums,  but mu-
seums  keep  good  records  and  should  therefore  be  able to  refute  spurious
allegations.  Fourth, the  law  could  impose  civil  and criminal  penalties  for
fraudulent claims.

118  The Art Loss Register, a computerized art-theft database, keeps a record of
all searches.  See infra note  146. This record would allow  a BFP to  verify
that he had used the database to investigate title.

119  See supra text accompanying  notes  62-70.
120  See supra text accompanying  notes  53-54.
121  See supra note 75 and accompanying text.
122  DeWeerth  v.  Baldinger,  836  F.2d  103,  110 (2d  Cir.  1987)  ("The  question
of  what  constitutes  unreasonable  delay  in  making  a demand  ...  depends
upon the circumstances of the case."), cert, denied, 486 U. S.  1056 (1988).

123  Webb, supra note 7, at 897; see also  Eisen, supra note 7, at 1092.
124  See Solomon R. Guggenheim Found, v. Lubell, 569 N. E.2d 426,431  (N. Y.
1991)  (holding  that  during  further  proceedings,  trial court  would  have to
balance  all  equities  and circumstances,  but  refusing  to  lay  out  guidelines
as to how diligent owner must be).

125  See id.
126  Webb, supra note 7, at 897; see also  Eisen, supra note 7, at 1092.
127  Webb, supra note 7, at 897. A charitable reading of Webb's argument might
stress  that  because  information  technology  will  evolve, judges  should  be
able periodically  to update the steps owners and buyers should take. Even
so,  this  Note's  approach  would  work  better.  First,  updating  of  reporting
duties  should  occur  through  clear  legislation  rather than  ad hoc  cases  so
that owners and buyers have adequate notice. Consider an analogy  to land
registration: if the law told buyers to register in "the best systems available"
rather  than  in  the  county  clerk's  office,  the  unclearness  would  breed
confusion-even  if courts had the power to make ad hoc determinations of
which system would be best. Second, even if registries improve technologi-
cally, an owner's duty to report specified information will  remain the same.
Data from old registries could presumably be imported into new ones. Even
if better methods  come along,  the basic  databases  will  remain  serviceable
and solve the problems of information exchange.

128  A  note  by  Deborah  Hoover  suggests  that,  to  qualify  as  good  faith  pur-
chasers, art merchants should be required to investigate title "whenever the
circumstances of a transaction call for further inquiry." Hoover, supra note
105, at 464. This remedy suffers from three flaws. First, it places no explicit
obligation  on  theft  victims to report losses.  If reporting is  not  required or
strongly encouraged, a buyer's inquiry may be useless. Second, the remedy
apparently  applies only  to merchants.  See id.  at 463. This proposal  could
create  a perverse  incentive  that  would  drive art sales  out of the hands  of
reputable  dealers  and  into  back-alley  transactions.  Instead  of  being  lax
about private transactions, the law  should encourage  scrutiny by reputable
dealers. Third, this unclear proposal would require investigation "whenever
the circumstances of a transaction  call  for further  inquiry." As argued, the
law needs bright-line  standards to deter theft,  reduce  litigation, and create
clear incentives for both victims and buyers. This vague formula is subject
to all the objections to unclear doctrines made above.

129  Solomon  R.Guggenheim  Found,  v.  Lubell,  569  N. E.2d  426,  428,  431

(N. Y. 1991).

104

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

130  Steven F. Grover, Note, The Need for  Civil-Law Nations To Adopt Discovery
Rules in Art Replevin Actions: A Comparative Study, 70 TEX. L. REV. 1431,
1436 (1992) ("[M]ost  owners  fear that by reporting the thefts  they  would
eliminate  the  thief's  market  for  the  stolen  art and  thereby  force  their art
underground.").

131  See Guggenheim, 569 N. E.2d at 431.
132  See Franklin Feldman & Bonnie Bumham, An Art Theft Archive:  Principles

and  Realization,  10  CONN.  L  REV.  702,  723  (1978)  (arguing  that,  once
word  gets  out  that  a large  computerized  database  exists  and that  victims
are using it, the database's existence  will  deter art theft); see  also Grover,
supra note  130, at  1439 (noting that one  major reason that theft databases
might not deter art theft  is that many victims do not report thefts).

Art dealers  face an analogous collective action problem under a regime
that does not  penalize  sellers  of  stolen  art.  If an  individual  art dealer  in-
quires  about  the provenance  of  an artwork  that  he  wants to  buy, he  must
bear the  cost of  investigation.  If  he discovers  that the artwork  was  stolen
and refuses  to buy  it, the seller may just  sell  it to another,  less  scrupulous
dealer. Thus, investigation is unprofitable  and honest merchants labor under
a competitive  disadvantage.  To overcome this disincentive,  the law should
impose liability on sellers of stolen art. See supra text accompanying notes
105-07.

133  See  3  LYNDEL  V.  PROTT &  P.  J.  O'KEEFE,  LAW  AND  THE CULTURAL  HERI-

TAGE MOVEMENT 382  (1989).

134  See supra Part 2.4  for an explanation of the need for clear rules.
135  Legislative  action  is  preferable  to judicial  action  because  of  the  need  to
modify  federal  and state statutes of limitations. Also, a legislature is better
able to hold  hearings  for all  interested  parties and to announce  a detailed
prospective rule applicable to all cases, rather than just a retrospective rule
for  the  case  at  hand.  Federal  action  is  preferable  to  state  action  because
trafficking  in  stolen  art  is  interstate  and  international.  Without  a  federal
law, disparate state laws might induce forum shopping and might encourage
art buyers to flock  to the state with the most lax  laws. Furthermore, diver-
gent  state  laws  might  affect  diplomatic  relations  with  plundered  nations
seeking to recover their national  treasures from American buyers.

136  An owner, however, would still be subject to the statute of limitations after
she discovered the artwork's possessor and its whereabouts. This proposal
does not  license  delay  in bringing  suit  once  an owner actually  has all  the
facts needed to sue.

137  Compare  this  proposal  to the  current  cloudiness  of  the  law,  under  which
many  adverse  possession  cases  have  been  litigated  for  years.  See.  e.g.,
Kunstsammlungen  zu  Weimar  v.  Elicofon,  678  F.2d  1150.  1153  (2d  Cir.
1982) (deciding in favor of owner in  1982 in suit filed in  1969); DeWeerth
v.  Baldinger,  836  F.2d  103,  106,  112  (2d  Cir.  1987)  (ruling  in  favor  of
possessor in  1987 in suit filed in  1983), cert, denied, 486 U. S.  1056 (1988);
O'Keeffe  v.  Snyder, 416  A.2d  862,  864,  867 (N. J.  1980) (remanding suit
filed in  1976 for additional  fact-finding  in  1980); Solomon R. Guggenheim
Found,  v.  Lubell,  569  N. E.2d 426,  428-29  (N. Y.  1991) (remanding  suit
filed in  1987 for additional  fact-finding  in  1991); Perez-Pena, supra note 1
(noting  that  Guggenheim case  went  back  for trial  and was  settled  in  De-
cember  1993).

138  See Myres S. McDougal  & John W. Brabner-Smith, Land Title Transfer:  A
Regression, 48  YALE L. J.  1125,  1130 (1939).  Under the Torrens system, a
proceeding analogous to a quiet title action  is used to require all who may

105

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

have claims to a piece of land to assert their claims. After this proceeding,
the registry  issues a conclusive certificate  of title  listing all  interests in the
parcel  of land. All  later claims must be registered,  whereupon  the registry
issues an updated certificate. The law does not recognize unregistered inter-
ests,  such as adverse  possession  that begins aAer the quiet title action. To
sell  a registered piece  of  land, the seller must surrender the old  certificate
of title, and a new one is then issued to the buyer. See id. at  1129-31.

139  See Hoover, supra note  105, at 458-59.
140  See id. In contrast, states without limitation period statutes could adopt this
Note's proposal via common  law development, because theft  registries are
already in place.

141  Many art owners try to hide their assets to avoid estate taxes, for example.
Thus, a title registry would be incomplete and would fail. Telephone Inter-
view  with  Dr.  Constance  Lowenthal,  Executive  Director,  Int'l  Found,  for
Art Research  (Jan. 24,  1994) [hereinafter  Lowenthal  Interview]. Museums
and governments,  however, are tax-exempt  and usually do not try to hide
their assets, so a title registry might work  for those entities.

142  See  DUKEMINIER  &  KRIER,  supra  note  14, at  769.  For an explanation  of

the Torrens system, see supra note  138.

143  See Telephone Interview with Rayburn B. Dobson, Chief Executive Officer,
Int'l  Registry of Antiques & Fine Arts (Jan. 26,  1994) [hereinafter  Dobson
Interview] (explaining  that registries were  not feasible  until  recent advent
of optical  storage systems on computers).

144  See ARTNEWSLETTER, supra note 97, at  1. In addition, certain law enforce-
ment  agencies  keep databases of stolen art. The  FBI maintains a National
Stolen Arts File, Interpol keeps a database called Art Program, Italy's Cara-
binieri  (the  equivalent  of  the  FBI)  has a  large  database,  Canada  runs the
Canadian  Heritage  Information  Network  (CHIN)  for art in Canadian  mu-
seums, and the German Bundeskriminalamt police unit at Wiesbaden keeps
a  database. Grover, supra  note  130, at  M40  (discussing  FBI); Telephone
Interview  with  Caroline  Wakeford,  The  Art  Loss  Register  (Feb. 4,  1994)
[hereinafter Wakeford  Interview] (discussing  Bundeskriminalamt); Lowen-
thal  Interview, supra note  141  (discussing  FBI, Interpol, and Carabinieri).
None  of  these  law  enforcement  databases  is  accessible  to  the  public.  Id.
Another private art-theft database called Lasernet Theftline began operation
in  1990, Jensen, supra note  107, but went out of business in August,  1992,
Wakeford  Interview, supra.

The  Art Loss  Register is a for-profit  enterprise run by the  International
Foundation  for  Art Research,  Lloyd's of  London,  and the  British  Institute
for the  Protection  of Cultural  Property.  ARTNEWSLETTER,  supra  note  97.
Other backers of the database include Christie's, Sotheby's, the British An-
tique Dealers Association, and the venture capital company 3i. Id. There is
no reason to supplant  this private  database with a public one, given  fiscal
constraints  and  the  responsiveness  of  private  enterprises  to  their clients'
needs.  Cf. Dobson  Interview, supra note  143 (advocating private registries
as  way  of  heading  off  government  regulation  of  the  art  market,  which
could be cumbersome and costly and might even open door for government
real location of art).

Because  the  law  would require victims to use the registries, one might
worry about controlling excessive  fees.  One approach  would be to  have a
public  board  regulate  fees,  much  as commissions  regulate  utilities'  fees.
This approach, however, is only necessary when there is no competition to
regulate  prices.  Even  competition  between  two  databases  is  sufficient  to

106

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

regulate prices and terms of service.  Lexis and Westlaw,  for instance, hold
a  duopoly  over  on-line  databases  for  legal  research  and  yet  have  strong
incentives to compete  for market share by innovating and offering  free use
to students. Another approach  would  require The  Art Loss  Register to ac-
cept  theft  listings  for  a modest  set  fee,  but  would  allow  it  to  set its  own
prices and terms of service for searches by buyers. To generate competition,
the FBI would expand its network  into a full-service  database accessible to
the public.  Because  theft  victims would have to report their losses to both
databases, the price of reporting thefts  would require regulation.  But since
thefts  would  be  listed  with  both  registries,  buyers  would  need  to  check
only  one registry, and thus competition  would  regulate  the price of buyer
searches.

145  Lowenthal  Interview,  supra  note  141  (stating  that  The  Art  Loss  Register
has  50,000  records,  including  many  color  images;  each  record  contains
victim's  name  and  address,  insurer,  police  report  number,  date  of  theft,
location  of theft,  value (which  must be greater than $1000),  artist, date of
creation, medium  of the artwork, measurements,  and any  inscriptions).  If,
as  this  Note  urges, the  law  required  registration  of  thefts  and  encouraged
buyers to consult the registries,  insurers  would  have  a strong incentive  to
require  the  insured  owner  to  file  photographs  and  descriptions  with  the
insurer.  Cf.  Russ  Banham,  Here  Today,  Gone  Tomorrow:  Fine Art Losses
Can  Be  Mitigated  by  Upgrading  Security  and  Recording  the  Identity of
Each Piece,  INS.  REV., Oct.  1990, at 53, 58  (citing  Dr. Constance Lowen-
thal, who argues that good  recordkeeping '"would  so  improve the chances
of  recovery  that  insurance  companies  could  consider  giving  discounts  to
those who do it'").  Indeed, insurance companies  could  go  further and de-
mand color photographs of all  insured items.

146  ARTNEWSLETTER, supra note 97, at  1. Individual  theft victims can register
thefts  in  The  Art Loss  Register  for  $40  per  item.  Prospective  buyers can
request  searches for $50 per item. Insurance companies negotiate contracts
providing for unlimited use of the database for $4000 to $40,000 per year.
The auction houses of Sotheby's, Christie's, and Phillips pay an undisclosed
fee  for  automatic  searching  of  their auction  catalogues  for  paintings  and
drawings. Lowenthal Interview, supra note 141. Note that the registry keeps
track of "when, why, and by whom any inquiry is made. Tracking a stolen
artwork  even through people who refuse to handle  it  for sale  is key  to its
recovery...."  ARTNEWSLETTER,  supra note 97, at 1.

147  Lowenthal  Interview, supra note  141.
148  U. C. C.  § 2-312(lXa)  (1988); see  Hoover, supra note  105, at 449-50.
149  E.g.,  Menzel  v.  List,  267  N. Y.  S. 2d  804,  807-08,  820  (Sup.  Ct.  1966)
(announcing  jury  verdict  awarding  possessor  $22,500  market  value,  not
$4000  purchase  price,  from  gallery  that  sold  painting  to  him),  modified,
279 N. Y. S. 2d 608 (App. Div.  1967), modification rev'd, 246 N. E.2d 742
(N. Y. 1969). Statutes of limitations should not impede such claims, as long
as the limitation period does not begin running until discovery of the defect
in  title.  Currently,  Section  2-725  of  the  Uniform  Commercial  Code  im-
poses  a  four-year  Statute  of  limitations  on actions  for breach  of  warranty
of title. To implement this Note's proposal, it would be necessary to modify
this provision so that the Statute of limitations would not begin to run until
the buyer discovered the defect in his title. Cf. DUKEMINIER & KJUER, supra
note  14, at 649  (noting  that,  in  contract  for  sale  of  land,  statute  of  limi-
tations  for  covenants  of  general  warranty  and  quiet  enjoyment  does  not

107

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Stephanos Bibas

begin to run until  some  future  act,  such as assertion  of superior title, dis-
turbs buyer's ownership).

150  See generally Hoover, supra note  105.
151  See supra text accompanying notes  105-07.  One might argue that placing
liability on buyers who will get indemnities from merchants would drive a
wedge between the two, souring their relationship. This fear is unfounded.
Both  buyers  and  merchants  would  want  to  insure  that  art  has  not  been
stolen.  Merchants, by making title searches a routine part of closing sales,
would safeguard both themselves and their customers.  It would be in mer-
chants' economic  interests to keep their customers happy and to avoid the
liability that would attach to selling stolen art.

152  See supra notes  105-07  and accompanying text.
153  In practice, as the rest of the paragraph in the main text argues, the distinc-
tion  would  not  be  terribly  important.  My  point  is  that  buyers  would  be
free to undertake an economically efficient  level of investigation, which in
practice would generally amount to routine investigation. Note also that the
liability is not perfectly strict; as Part 3.2 argues, buyers who do not investi-
gate should prevail over victims who do not report their losses.

154  See Webb, supra note 7, at 897.
155  Solomon  R. Guggenheim  Found, v. Lubell, 569 N. E.2d 426 (N. Y.  1991).
156  See id. at 428. While the theft must have occurred between  1965 and  1967,
the museum claimed that it did not know of the theft  until it completed  its
decennial  inventory  in  1970. Id.

157  Telephone  Interview  with  Elizabeth  Reynolds,  Chief  Registrar,  Brooklyn
Museum  (Jan.  20,  1994)  [hereinafter  Reynolds  Interview].  It is, however,
reasonable  to expect  individual  theft  victims  to report thefts  within a  few
weeks.  Likewise,  once a victim has learned that a theft has occurred, that
victim  needs only  a very  short  time, perhaps  one  or two  weeks, to report
the theft.  The only problem is guaranteeing  that institutional  victims have
enough time to discover their losses before the limitation period expires.

158  Large  museums  currently  inventory  their  collections  at  most  once  every
five to ten years. Lowenthal  Interview, supra note  14. However, technology
exists that would permit inventories far more frequently. Computerized bar
code inventory  systems are widely available that make it possible for even
the largest  museums to inventory  their collections  once every  six months.
The  systems  are simple enough that night  guards could inventory  objects
each  night  as  they  made  their  rounds.  One  system  on  the  market  uses
tamper-proof,  forgery-proof  bar codes  that  frustrate  attempts  to remove a
bar code  and  place  it  on  another  object.  Bar  code  tape  that  contains  a
hologram of the picture being coded will  soon be available.  Dobson Inter-
view, supra note  143. Only a minority of museums currently use bar code
inventory systems.  Reynolds  Interview, supra note  157. Because such sys-
tems are available  and could solve  the problem of delayed  notification  of
buyers, the law should encourage  their use by imposing a grace period as
short as is  feasible, namely  six  months to one year for museums. Alterna-
tively, museums could set up their own title registries and link them to the
databases, obviating the need for constant  inventories.

159  Dobson  Interview,  supra  note  143  (stating  that  International  Registry  of
Antiques  & Fine  Arts  is setting  up catalogues  for the Clark  Art Museum,
the  Museum of  American  Indian Art, and the  Brandywine  Museum and is
negotiating  with  other  museums;  however,  that  company's  focus  is  on
Europe, where  European Union law  will  soon require national  registration
of art).

108

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227

Statutes of  Limitations  for Stolen Art

160  See supra note  141 and accompanying text (noting problems that title regis-
tries face but also noting that tax-exempt  museums may  have fewer disin-
centives to register than tax-dodging private  individuals have).

161  Note  that  merchants  are  only  the  least  cost  avoiders  when  an  owner has
already  reported  a  theft  or  the  merchant  buys  under  suspicious  circum-
stances. When an owner has reported a theft,  it becomes  relatively  simple
for a merchant or buyer to investigate and avoid buying that stolen artwork;
hence  merchants  (or buyers  in sales  without  merchants)  are the  least  cost
avoiders. When a merchant buys in good  faith, an owner's failure to report
a  theft  is just  as  much  a  factor  in  promoting  stolen  art  as  a  buyer's  or
merchant's failure to investigate.

162  U. C.  C.  § 9-301  cmt.  9  (1988)  (noting  that  U. C.  C.'s  subordination  of
unperfected security interests has "a purpose-in common with similar rules
in all  filing  and  recording  systems-to  impose  sanctions  for  not  adhering
to filing or recording requirements," for otherwise  registry  systems  would
be  ineffective).

163  See supra  Part  1.1  (discussing  common  law  rule  that thieves  do  not  take
good  title).  For  these  purposes,  bad  faith  must  mean  more  than  a  mere
failure  to  check  theft  databases  or  other  acts  of  simple  negligence.  Bad
faith must embrace reckless and willfully  blind acts, for otherwise the law
would  protect  collusive  transactions  designed  to  fence  stolen  goods.  To
determine bad faith, then, courts should look at a series of objective  factors
that  suggest  affirmative  blindness  to  suspicious  circumstances,  such  as:
whether a painting has been cut out of its frame; whether the buyer bought
at a price so far below  market value as to be suspicious; whether the buyer
took  no  steps  whatsoever  to  investigate  title;  whether  the  seller's  story
about title was implausible; whether the seller was an established  art mer-
chant; and whether the  sale  was  hurried  or took  place  in a  suspicious lo-
cation (such as the Geneva  airport,  which  was  used to gain  the protection
of lax Swiss laws in a sale of Byzantine mosaics, supra text accompanying
note 80).

164  See  Webb, supra  note  7,  at  896  (arguing  that  persons  lacking  good  faith
deserve no protection, and stipulatively defining buyers who fail to investi-
gate title as persons  lacking good faith).

165  See supra text accompanying notes  129-33.
166  One year is an arbitrary  period. Any short time period would  suffice,  pro-
vided  it gave victims enough notice  yet  was not so  long as to leave  future
buyers needlessly  uninformed.

167  As  argued,  bad  faith  holders  should  never  win.  See  supra  text  ac-

companying  note  163.

168  See supra notes 92-97  and accompanying text.
169  See Eisen, supra note 7, at  1098-99;  Hayworth, supra note 7, at  375-76.
170  See supra text accompanying  note  105 (discussing  merchant's  liability  for

breach of warranty of title).

171  In theory, this person could recover from the thief, but in practice the thief

is nowhere to be found.

172  See supra note  115.
173  See supra Part  1.4 (describing current doctrine of laches).
174  See Solomon R. Guggenheim Found, v. Lubell, 569 N. E.2d 426, 431 (N. Y.
1991) (declining  to set  forth clear due diligence  reporting requirement  for
art theft victims).

109

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:10:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739196000227


