 

Rights, Indigeneity, and the Market of 
Rastafari
Jovan Scott Lewis*

 

Abstract: This article is concerned with the ways in which discourses of rights 
serve to destabilize indigenous logics when used for gains in the market. It does 
so through examining a Rastafarian tour group who uses their participation 
in the tourism market to challenge what they believe are infringed cultural 
property rights. As a means of commercially defending these rights, the group 
employs a discourse of indigeneity. In this process, they have gained partial 
recognition from the World Intellectual Property Organization and increasing 
acknowledgement from the Jamaican government. However, while the basis of 
indigeneity strongly supports the case of intellectual and cultural property rights, 
this recognition ultimately further identifies the group, and Rastafari in general, 
with Jamaica.

INTRODUCTION

The Rastafari Indigenous Village (RIV) is a Rastafari-themed educational and cultural 
tour founded in Montego Bay, Jamaica, in 2008, by members of a local socially con-
scious Rastafarian arts group, the Indigenous Initiating Circle of Nature (IION). 
The Rastafari of IION, according to a key RIV member, Arlene, are a “social family 
network united by their shared concerns over the slow responses of the Rastafari 
movement to rapid socioeconomic changes taking place within Jamaican society.”  

*Assistant Professor, Departments of Geography and African American Studies, University of 
California, Berkeley, CA, United States; Email: jovan@berkeley.edu

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: I would like to thank all of the members of the Rastafari Indigenous 
Village for welcoming me into their community and especially Arlene, First Man, Ras Rod, Maureen, 
and Jah Teba for their kindness, openness, and insight. In memory of Kanaka and Golden Ankh of 
the village.

57

 (2017) 24:57–77. Printed in the USA.Copyright © 2017 JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

They articulate their concerns through their talents as artisans, poets, musicians, 
craftspersons, designers, and as a fusion Reggae-Nyabinghi music group. Nyabinghi  
music is traditional Rastafari drumming, named after one of the oldest Rastafari 
denominations, played during religious services and rituals. As a network, the IION 
share aspirations to raise positive awareness, to increase education in their com-
munities, and to create economic opportunities through collective and cooperative 
development.

The idea for the RIV came to the group in 2007 when a party of 90 black American 
tourists approached them with a request for an immersive experience into Rastafari 
culture that focused on the wellness aspects of Rastafarian food, herbal remedies, and 
spirituality. Given the size of the tourist group, the IION approached the Tourism  
Product Development Company (TPDC) for assistance in organizing the event. 
The TPDC is a government agency charged with overseeing the standards of tourism 
“products,” namely attractions like craft markets and tours. Another function is 
advising various local communities on the development of new tourism projects 
related to regulations, training, and overall compliance.

With the help of Arlene, who was their contact at the TPDC, the group held a suc-
cessful event, leading them to recognize that creating a similar, more permanent 
experience would be an opportunity to take advantage of a clear gap in the market. 
Doing so could help them achieve their social agenda and provide income for the 
members. Additionally, this would be a chance to present Rastafari culture to visi-
tors and to share its message on their terms, correcting what members considered 
thin,  one-dimensional  portrayals  of  Rastafari  that  were  heavily  oriented  toward 
Bob Marley and reggae music. Admitting that tourism could be used as a mechanism 
of development, sustainability, and outreach was difficult for the group because of 
Rastafari’s anti-capitalist tradition.1 The tourist industry is often viewed extremely 
negatively, with many Rastafari members of the group remarking that “tourism 
is ‘whore-ism.’” This sentiment drew on the Rastafari ideology’s strong aversion 
to all things “Babylonian,” a Rastafari designation for the Western state and their 
religious, political, social, and economic apparatuses and the inequity and injustice 
that they represent. Anything Babylonian is conventionally considered verboten 
to Rastafari practitioners. Moving toward this endeavor caused a rift in the group, 
leading to the early departure of several members. Arlene’s academic training and 
interest in heritage tourism led her to become a partner in the newly founded ven-
ture. Together, with First Man—one of the co-founders of the RIV and its primary 
spokesperson—they formed a tour company, under a limited liability registration 
as  “the  Rastafari  Indigenous  Village”  and  a  non-profit  organization,  the  Royal 
Africa Hall Benevolent Society, to qualify for public funding.

At the start of my fieldwork in 2011, the RIV was led by First Man and Arlene. 
However, because the village does not officially subscribe to a hierarchical orga-
nization, the term “guided” was preferred. The members of the village included the 
performer and original IION station member, Izinigha, who also oversaw the vil-
lage craft mall; Maureen, who ran the onsite “ital” kitchen; the village’s Nyabinghi 

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

59

drummers Jah Teba, Golden Ankh, Fire Shine, and Jah B; and local dub poet Ras Rod. 
Ras Rod would, over the duration of my fieldwork, take on a more central role in 
the direction of the village. There was a larger auxiliary membership to the village, 
who seldom participated in the day-to-day tours but took part in special events. 
The village’s members came from impoverished to modest backgrounds, and one 
of them lived on the premises for lack of residence elsewhere.

The RIV members entrusted Arlene, First Man, and Ras Rod with the direction of, 
and decisions for, the village and mainly enjoyed the fact that they simply were able 
to earn an income while pursuing their interests. Work in the village gave them a 
sense of autonomy, as it was a space where they “had no boss,” which was explained 
by Arlene to be the village’s intentional “horizontal” organizational structure. This 
flat structure is also derived from the tendency toward acephalous organization 
that is prevalent among Rastafarian groups and from the long enduring ethic of 
self-enterprise and suspicion of authority espoused by the culture.2 However, while 
their income was somewhat steady, it was still insufficient for them to avoid work 
outside the village. This fact would at times temper their sense of investment in the 
village project. Therefore, they often struggled in interviews to articulate their ambi-
tions for the village and what long-term value it held for them. For this reason, this 
article depends heavily on the accounts of First Man, Arlene, and Ras Rod.

In this article, I examine the radically alternative strategy employed by the 
RIV to stake claim to the country’s cultural reputation, for which they believe their 
culture is under-credited. Their approach is radical because while the RIV believes 
this participation creates financial opportunities for village members, as well 
as mitigates their cultural exploitation, the tour integrates the RIV, and, therefore, 
Rastafari, into the circuit of tourist revenue and, thus, into the state and the wider 
economic scheme that profits from their culture. Integration into this system is 
part of the exploitative “Babylon.” This moral opposition to the state adds analytical 
complexity to more conventional accounts of the challenges between state and cap-
italist imperatives against the indigenous claiming of rights, by further elucidating 
the ethical stakes for indigenous groups in their efforts to secure rights. Addition-
ally, the RIV case shows how indigeneity, when based on flexible and contingent 
criteria, becomes a similarly flexible tool in the seeking of commercial gain. This 
article analyzes the RIV’s market participation and their claims of indigenous cul-
tural property rights to reconsider the relations between the market, cultural prop-
erty, and indigeneity. In doing so, it moves beyond cultural property as a means 
by which indigeneity is defended against capitalist dispossession to explore instead 
how it is produced within that capitalist challenge.

INDIGENOUS FRUSTRATIONS

Unlike indigenous groups defined through the experience of settler colonialism, 
Rastafarian claims to indigeneity are made problematic by the culture’s late post-
emancipation inception and the choice of membership. The Rastafari community 

60 

JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

does not, in fact, qualify as an indigenous community under prevailing interna-
tional models. Under those models, groups are indigenous by “having a historical 
continuity with pre-invasion and pre-colonial societies that developed on their 
territories, consider themselves distinct from other sectors of the societies now 
prevailing on those territories, or parts of them.”3 Rather than employing the  
notion of indigeneity as articulated in the Pacific, Africa, North America, and South 
Asia, members of the RIV chart a path to their autochthonous identity through the 
particular model of the Maroon community in Jamaica, which has had success in 
obtaining indigenous recognition.

Jamaica’s Maroon communities, descendants of militant and organized group-
ings of escaped African slaves who through multiple successful skirmishes and 
battles  with  Spanish  and,  later,  British  colonists,  won  sovereign  recognition 
and territory from the British in the sixteenth century.4 The cultural retention 
made possible by this early separation from the still enslaved populations on 
the  island’s  plantations  accorded  the  Maroons  a  sense  of  ethnic  and  cultural 
distinction. In the vein of this Maroon model, Rastafari indigeneity has become 
defined by various instruments that provide indigenous status through the mech-
anism of traditional knowledge. Their claim of indigeneity through traditional 
knowledge creates a discourse around cultural property that includes individual 
self-identification  as  members  of  an  indigenous  community;  the  entitlement 
of displaced persons to the continuity of pre-displacement tradition; and the 
rights of a traditional community and minority group.5

Traditional knowledge as a category of cultural property produces alternate 
imaginaries that help realize claims of indigeneity and sovereignty.6 These imagi-
naries are possible, as Haidy Geismar asserts, through the process of “provincial-
ization,” a process where indigenous and sovereign claim making adopted global 
property models. Provincialization and its property forms “consolidate multiple 
discussions of rights, allowing participation in wider spheres of exchange, while 
at the same time limiting the terms of their engagement.”7 With the RIV, provin-
cialization works in concert with what Tania Li has termed the “management of 
dispossession”—the means by which the concept of indigeneity defends against the 
dispossessing or displacing endeavors of capitalist interests.8 In these scenarios, 
indigeneity runs up against capitalist-enabled dispossession, or other external 
challenges, which, in response, engender alternative political and economic subjec-
tivities, strategies, and moralities. What the RIV case demonstrates is that the expe-
rience of capitalist dispossession can produce and define indigeneity.

The RIV’s economic strategy proposes and generates their indigeneity and is the 
basis on which they make their claims to autochthony, the logic being that they are 
safeguarding their indigenous culture from exploitation through market participation. 
Through cultural property, the RIV members reposition themselves within Jamaica’s 
economy in the manner that Geismar and Li contend, which they do through 
a narrative of indigeneity defined by the histories of slavery, colonialism, and 
the post-independence persecution that chiefly constitutes Rastafarian ontology. 

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

61

In other words, they are indigenous in part because of those experiences, and cul-
tural property, as emblematic of those experiences, serves as a potent imaginary for 
the development and assertion of indigeneity. Deborah Thomas provides useful 
insight into how to analyze Rastafari’s alternate indigeneity in this manner through 
considering the history of Rastafari persecution in Jamaica:

[T]he framing of Rastafari as Jamaica’s indigenous population … is not 
only a bit of rhetorical sleight-of-hand … it is also an attempt to redefine 
“indigenous” as that which has been created and developed on Jamaican 
soil, though not necessarily prior to European conquest. … [Indigeneity] is 
mobilized instead to draw attention to a history of disenfranchisement—
both politically and in relation to land ownership. Redefining indigeneity 
in this way, then, gives teeth to the reframing of citizenship … [t]o position 
Rastafarians as indigenous is thus not only to emphasize the connection 
to land and their rejection of the technologies and simulacra that provide 
toxic  structure  to  the  modern  condition  or  to  focus  on  aspects  of  the 
lifestyle that are rooted in a relationship to the natural landscape that few 
Jamaicans currently maintain. It is also to invert the usual hierarchies, to 
convince people around the world of Rastafarians lifestyle.9

Claims to indigeneity, on the basis of Rastafari’s complicated history, as Thomas 
asserts, enable the legitimation of Rastafari citizenship and place within the geo-
graphical and political landscape of Jamaica. However, the “social and affective … 
content of indigenous territoriality” is challenged by the Rastafari’s cultural influ-
ence in Jamaica, which complicates claims to explicit ownership of Rastafarian cul-
tural products.10 There is a public and shared notion of culture in Jamaica, to which 
Rastafari significantly contribute,11 not to mention globalization’s amplification of 
Rastafari’s continuing influence and reach.12 This influence is problematic because 
the cultural property rights of Rastafari lie within the claims of indigeneity made 
on a collective, yet distinct, basis of possession where that collectivity, especially in 
the context of commercial infringement, is mandated by cultural difference.13

According to Katherine Verdery and Caroline Humphrey, such difference is 
“a homology between the oneness of the group or ‘people’ and certain kinds of 
objects in which they see their identity as residing.”14 The categorical dichotomy 
in conventional cases of settler colonies makes such difference simpler to deter-
mine than in Jamaica, a former British colony now populated in the majority by 
the descendants of once-enslaved Africans, where there is no ethnic distinction 
between Rastafarians and other black Jamaicans. The exception here are the claims 
of indigeneity made by Maroons, whose cultural distinctness became contracted 
in the 1738 treaty with the British. Moreover, the electability of Rastafari adher-
ence complicates who does or does not count as part of the “people”—whether 
Rastafarian, Jamaican, or both—and who can access their objects. Because of the 
blurred lines between Rastafarian and Jamaican identification, there is a need for 
Rastafari to assert their difference and their separation.

There is an already long-established system of differentiation employed within 
Rastafari based on an adherence to the culture’s various tenets and countless 

62 

JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

permutations of identification and belonging based on one’s diet, race, nationality, 
politics, religious rigor, and sexual orientation. The result is a continuously debated, 
subjective, and fluid rubric that determines the degree to which one is authentically 
Rasta. Considering the widespread adoption and consumption of Rastafari style 
and cultural practices, this process has become increasingly open-ended. Thus, to 
make a case for claims to indigeneity, Rastafari must configure indigeneity as more 
than a compound of Jamaican birth, a history of disenfranchisement, race, and an 
emphasis on a natural, rooted way of life. This is done through emphasizing the 
role of objects in particular commercial efforts, activities, and presentations, which 
does much to advance the creation of Rastafarian indigeneity. This strategy has had 
some success through the RIV tour. The tour demonstrates indigeneity through 
knowledge of Jamaica’s medicinal flora, the drumming and chanting of “ancient” 
Nyabinghi music, and their chosen garb of decorated burlap in the Rastafarian 
colors of red, gold, and green. Indigeneity in the village is thus a position of identity 
manifested in practices and products qualified as traditional knowledge.

THE RIV TOUR

The RIV, located on a roughly three-acre-sized parcel of land, was conceived as an 
authentic living, interactive museum that introduces a broad range of visitors to 
the many facets of Rastafari and Jamaica. It is a “working village” in that, while only 
one of the “villagers” lives on the premises, they work together as a community  
to live the philosophy, movement, and lifestyle of Rastafari. Visitors to the village 
numbered more than 1,000 in 2011 and included Jamaican school children, university 
students, and residents but mostly overseas tourists. These visitors included a mix 
of middle-income Europeans and Americans, who were almost always white. The 
tour companies with whom the RIV partnered, however, significantly determined 
the makeup of the clientele. One, in particular, Caribic Tours, had a strong base 
with tourists from Germany and the Netherlands. Toward the end of my fieldwork 
in 2013, as the village benefited from broader publicity by the Jamaica Tourist Board, 
the visitors became much more diverse.

After the tourists leave their tour bus and pass through a garden and across a lawn 
owned by the RIV’s lessors, they approach the Montego River, which at this point 
in the stream bed stands no deeper than a foot (see Figure 1). The group hears how 
rivers are vital to Jamaica and that the country’s original Taíno name, Xamayca, 
means “the land of wood of water.” As the guests remove their shoes and roll up their 
pant legs preparing to cross, the guide explains the spiritual symbolism of rivers 
saying: “[L]ike life you never go through the same river twice.” The group is invited 
to take a reflective moment to “give thanks” and use the opportunity to “take 
one step at a time and to share the world-space communally.” The tourists are very 
taken by this moment. In the process of crossing, some guides opt to explain that 
in Yoruba heritage the river is represented by the river goddess named Oshun, the 
“river mumma.” The guide tells visitors that Oshun controls the river, and he or 

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

63

Figure 1.  Village Member Preparing to Meet Guests across the River (courtesy of author).

she invites them to make an offering to her by throwing five $1 Jamaican coins into 
the river.

Having crossed to the other bank, guests decide to either slip on their shoes 
or to take in the full experience barefoot like their guide. A tall bamboo wall that 
panels the background is the next point of discussion. The guide tells the group 
that bamboo is technically a grass, and one of the world’s fastest growing grasses, 
and that it helps clean the air, and she also explains how the Jamaican bamboo dif-
fers from its Asian variant. The group’s interest piques when the guide mythi-
cally explains how bamboo must be cut only on the darkest of nights, absent of 
moonlight. By this point, the Nyabinghi drums being played in the village can 
be heard in the distance. As the group moves along the path toward the sound, 
the  guide  draws  attention  to  a  Poinciana  tree,  whose  pod  seeds  provide  the  
beads used in the maraca-like shakers played in conjunction with the Nyabinghi 
drum orchestra. Guests are encouraged to shake fallen pods as they walk along. 
Next, the guide shows the group an area with Castor plants and shares the plant’s 
medicinal benefits. The guide then advertises that castor oil made by a local woman 
is available for purchase in the village.

Talk of the plant segues into a discussion of the banana trees coming up on 
the approach. The trees are a treat for North American and European visitors, 
who, though representing the largest consumer markets for bananas, have seldom, 
if  ever,  encountered  the  trees  in  person.  The  visitors  receive  a  lesson  on  the 
uses for bananas, both unripened (green) and ripened ones, and, as an allegory 
demonstrating  the  relatedness  between  all  nature,  are  told  that  bananas,  like 
human babies, take nine months to grow. Past the bananas, the group comes 
upon an old, semi-functional manual sugar cane mill. The guide simulates how 
the cane is pushed through while turning the top mechanism to produce the 
juice, during which he introduces the history of slavery and sugar production 

64 

JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

on  the  island.  Tall  coconut  trees  are  just  beyond  the  mill,  and,  as  the  group 
moves  nearer  to  them,  they  receive  a  brief  history  on  how  sixteenth-century 
Spanish  settlers  introduced  the  tree  to  the  island  as  well  as  a  description  of 
the uses for coconut’s water, oil, and husks. The group is warned not to stand 
underneath the “generous” trees. Passing Heliconias and other attractive flora like 
ginger and lilies and stopping briefly to sample the unfamiliar Otaheite apples, 
the group is shown the “shame me macka” herb, which is the star of the walk 
because of its rapid contraction and expansion when touched.

The  full  pulse  of  Nyabinghi  drumming  welcomes  the  group  as  they  enter 
the grounds and rest on shaded bamboo benches with a full view of the village. 
Coconuts  are  cut  fresh  for  demonstration,  and  the  guests  drink  the  coconut 
water in small bowls made of dried coconut shell. The second segment of the 
tour starts with a lecture on the histories of Rastafari, slavery, and Jamaica in a 
blended narrative that conveys an articulate Rastafarian cosmology. The guide  
directs the groups’ attention to the bonfire lit in the center of the village. He explains 
the symbolic importance of fire as an object and agent of spiritual purification. 
The group is brought near the bonfire to “the seal,” a small ritualistic basin of water 
surrounded by herbs, which sits in the center of a rock outline of Jamaica. At the 
seal, the guide talks about the importance of entering into a sacred space and being 
balanced within it and one’s self. The guide explains that the herbs have balancing 
energies and that those who enter the village should likewise be spiritually aligned 
and are invited to become so by circling the seal three times (see Figure 2).

Next, the guests arrive at the “ital” kitchen. “Ital,” a variant of the word “vital,” 
is indicative of a vegan, unprocessed diet that has a religious significance equivalent 
to kosher and halal. Maureen, who runs the kitchen, gives a presentation on what 
comprises the Rastafari diet and extols its salubrious effect. Displaying a variety of 
herbs, nuts, and fruit, Maureen details their nutritional and medicinal components, 

Figure 2.  Guests Walking around the Seal (courtesy of author).

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

65

often challenging more daring visitors to try the diminutive “bird pepper,” or Pequin 
pepper, a hot chili pepper cultivar, which she asserts is good for digestion. After 
the kitchen, the group moves on to a labyrinth made of three-foot-high bamboo 
posts. The labyrinth is one in a worldwide network of labyrinths registered with 
the Labyrinth Society. Guests are encouraged to meditate as they make their way 
through the maze, which is described as a “healing garden.” Behind the labyrinth, 
an herbal spa overlooks the river where massages and “bush baths” are provided.
After a few guests venture through the labyrinth, the rest of the group passes 
a little hut, with a hammock hung inside, known as the “chill out hut.” There, 
tourists take pictures standing in front. It stands as a representation of a purported 
village residence. Across from the hut, one of the “villagers” demonstrates ital cook-
ing by beating herbs in a large mortar and tending to a yam roasting on a wheel 
rim stove (Figure 3). Opposite the hut is the herb garden with over 90 varieties of 
herbs and plants used within the local medicinal repertoire. Called the village’s 
herbal “farmacy,” the guide typically goes over about six or so herbs like “search 
mi heart,” “leaf of life,” “dog tongue,” and “guinea hen.” As the group explores the 
selection, the guide explains that marijuana is not grown in the garden because, 
contrary to popular belief, the plant is illegal in the country.

Figure 3.  Tourist Photographing Village Member at Cooking Exhibit (courtesy of author).

66 

JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

The tour then culminates with a visit to “the big hut,” modeled on the tab-
ernacle  erected  for  traditional  Nyabinghi  ceremonies,  where  members  of  the 
Nyabinghi sect of Rastafari celebrate major holy days. Inside the big hut, guests 
sit on bamboo chairs and benches that face a gathering of drums. The hut is dec-
orated with pictures of key members of the Rastafari pantheon—Haile Selassie, 
Marcus Garvey, and Empress Menen of Ethiopia—as well as their speeches and 
with other African and African diasporic iconographies, such as the Egyptian ankh 
and the Ashanti adinkra symbols. All of the members of the village are present in 
the hut, and the program continues with a talk about the principles, beliefs, and 
practices of Rastafari. During this lecture, guests eat a light snack of fruits served 
in bamboo, coconut, or calabash dishes. Poetry is recited alongside chanting and  
singing, accompanied by the soaring Nyabinghi drumming. The chanting continues 
while guests are invited to try the drums. Photos of village members are permitted 
at this point, and those who attempt to take photos beforehand are told that doing 
so would be objectifying the villagers, reminding guests that they are partaking in 
a cultural exchange and a not one-way spectatorship. At the presentation’s end, 
guests can purchase personalized engraved shakers and other Rastafarian and 
Jamaican-themed souvenirs at the onsite “craft mall” and visit the museum with 
more information and Rastafari artifacts. There are also three two-story cottages 
with toilet facilities to accommodate guests who wish to remain in what many 
come to regard as paradise.

RIGHTS AS MARKET ETHICS

The RIV tour taps into a worldwide trend of lifestyle ideologies oriented toward 
slower and more traditional forms of living. One way in which they have aligned 
themselves in this manner is their affiliation with the slow food movement, sending 
representatives to the organization’s 2008 Terra Madre conference in Italy. These 
activities are consonant with well-established health conscious practices, products, 
and lifestyles touted as the antidote to the fast-paced lives led in the developed world. 
Rivke Jaffe, building on the term “eco-chic,” has coined the phrase “ital chic,” which 
she defines as “consumption that combines environmental, ethical, and health con-
cerns with a luxurious, chic sensibility … articulated principally through the indige-
nous practices, philosophy, and aesthetics associated with Rastafari.”15 In identifying 
ital chic, Jaffe borrows Ennis Edmonds’s definition of “ital” as “a commitment to 
using things in their natural or organic states.”16 The ital principle is central to the 
Rastafari lifestyle, which comprises members’ “livity” or spiritual life. It is the com-
modification of the Rastafarian “ital livity” that Jaffe has identified as the driving 
force behind ital chic. Ital chic is a taking up of local, traditional practices through the 
international popularity and pull of Rastafarian culture, which is recognized as being 
part of the global trend toward balanced, organic, clean living.

Processes like ital chic appropriate Rastafarian culture, symbols, and aesthetic 
forms for commercial profit with little or no benefit returned to Rastafarians or 

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

67

any particular community among them. A number of products that carry direct, 
or suggestive, markings or references to the culture note this process, such as 
restaurants, natural food and beauty products, and even the wearing of dreadlocks. 
This  appropriation  also  encompasses  a  broad  range  of  sentiments,  such  as  
rebelliousness or creativity, thereby opening the “auratic, affective, social worth” of  
Rastafari culture for use in much broader commercial contexts.17 Examples include 
the Rastafarian red, gold, and green tricolors being used on a regular display in 
Adidas’s copyrighted three-stripe motif. Another is the employment of Rastafarian 
terms in the names and promotion of products, such as London-based Jamaican 
Blue Mountain coffee start-up and Irieville’s brand of “Irie Coffee.” The use of the 
term “irie,” which is a superlative form of being “all right,” serves in this case to 
demonstrate both the impact of ital chic as a presentation of relaxation as well a 
sense of coolness. Critically, it shows that ital chic can also include the use of Rasta 
language.

A prominent example of this use of language was Volkswagen USA’s 2013 Super 
Bowl advertisement, “Get Happy.” It featured a white American office worker in 
a  nondescript  company  of  manifestly  disgruntled  and  pessimistic  employees 
and opened with the classic nine-to-five worker moan: “I hate Mondays.” In the  
advertisement, the lead actor, speaking in Jamaican patois encourages everyone to 
be more optimistic with a heavy dosing of “Jamaicanized” phrases, such as “turn 
that frown upside down.” When the positive affirmations fail, he eventually succeeds 
by giving a few colleagues a ride in his Volkswagen Beetle, and they begin speaking 
in patois as a result. The Jamaican media criticized the commercial as a racist 
parody of Jamaican culture. Yet, however “Jamaican” the advertisement appeared, 
the terms used throughout the commercial were predominantly Rastafarian. For 
example,  the  cast  regularly  responds  with  the  traditional  affirmative  Rastafarian 
phrase: “Yes, I”—the “I” pronoun used in Rastafari speech, known as “Iyaric,” to 
represent the God principle in man, commonly referenced as “I and I.” Aside from 
the terms, the general positivity expressed is a strong reference to the stereotypical 
relaxed attitudes of Rastafarians, often ascribed to all Jamaicans. These products 
trade on the aesthetics and “spirit” of Rastafarian culture. They “(dis)articulat[e]” 
the “brand logics” of Rastafarian cultural products by distilling and perverting the 
ethical principles that lie within the language and material presentations of Rastafari 
culture to profit from its values.18 These broad and economically generative com-
mercial circuits trade on the performative, aesthetic, and ideological productions 
of Rastafari and are therefore seen as infringements upon Rastafarian rights that 
offer neither compensation nor recognition. The RIV uses the village project to mit-
igate this loss of revenue from products and, perhaps more importantly, control 
over the cultural image by trading on the phenomenon of ital chic.

The RIV understands the market through an ethic of rights, through which their 
religion, language, and heritage take the form of cultural property. The infringement 
of cultural property becomes read through the long endured transgression of the 
rights of black people. The desire to fight against marginalization and oppression 

68 

JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

serves as the basis of the rights claims that Wayne Modest has identified as being 
part of the trend of “new indigeneities.”19 Modest continues that the result of these 
claims is a “complicated relationship between objects, history, place, and Caribbean 
identity.”20 Inherent in these complications is a “resistance to the uncontrolled 
proliferation of signs,” where cultural property claims seek recompense for both 
historical and contemporary abuse, which have culminated with the current unau-
thorized use of Rastafari cultural images and objects.21 For the RVI, the configu-
ration and utilization of cultural property rights serve as an equalizing force in the 
commercial re-appropriation of Rastafarian culture.

Without provisions that protect cultural property, various cultural communities 
and their related industries in Jamaica, like Rastafari, are vulnerable to exploitation 
by outside groups. First Man expounded on this point, saying:

We  don’t  have  any  real  ownership  on  nothing,  and  without  having 
ownership, “free trade” is what is taking place. Other people can really 
come and take away our ideas and culture because we don’t have the 
instruments to protect our self. A man can come and buy people’s things, 
set up a factory or choose a factory on the outside, and there is no inter-
ference from government, and then you find you have no legs to stand 
on more than to just quarrel. All you can do is to have something in place 
that shows that this is wrong, [otherwise] we are not going to know what 
to tell government, and we are going to continue to battle in trying to get 
it from them people.

The quarreling to which First Man refers is an argument of market morality, 
claiming  injustice  in  the  market  system  particularly  when  the  government  is 
complicit. Without sufficient institutional safeguards or processes that provide 
commercial security for craftspeople or others in the creative industry, the only 
recourse is to quarrel.

First Man’s views are shared by both the Jamaican Intellectual Property Office 
(JIPO) and the Jamaican Promotions Corporation (JAMPRO), which are the two 
agencies respectively charged with protecting Jamaica’s intellectual and cultural 
property and promoting the country’s commerce. JIPO seeks to curtail the increasing 
amount of foreign profiting from Jamaican-inspired products by the creation and 
issue of protective seals and markings as well as by bringing suit against any breach 
of copyright. Charles Robertson, a top administrator for JAMPRO, conceded in 
an interview with me that the government has been “a poor steward of Jamaica’s 
cultural property.” The poor stewardship was due to the limits of these agencies’ 
power and reach, which has meant that little is possible in the way of addressing con-
cerns over intellectual and cultural property infringement. He explained that JAMPRO 
has witnessed Chinese and Indian businesses capitalize on Jamaica’s brand through 
manufacturing, and, likewise, other foreign groups profit from Jamaican-branded  
sauces, coffees, music, and culture. He stated: “A number of foreign [companies in] 
countries seem to take the brand and develop a product surrounding it and sell 
it back to us.” He noted the efforts of his organization and JIPO to begin the task 

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

69

of registering items, images, and so on, but he admitted that the challenge is their 
regulation: “We don’t have the resources to police, for example, if someone in the 
US infringes on our copyright. We can’t sue them from Jamaica it has to be done 
there, so the brand has to be registered there and then you litigate in the States.” 
Robertson’s admission demonstrates the complexity of Michael Brown’s titular and 
seminal question: “Who owns Native culture?” a question complicated by the limited 
resources available to claimants in the Caribbean, whether they are Rastafarians or 
the state.22

It is important to note that Robertson’s understanding of cultural property 
is not the affective, ontological product of the Rastafari but, rather, the statist 
notion of asset ownership, which assumes the language of rights as prevalent in 
Euro-American  property  discourses.  This  distinction  is  problematic  because, 
on these latter terms, issues concerning any claims are situated within a “prop-
erty  regime”  or  the  “dominant  set  of  shared  understandings  about  property 
in a given political economy.”23 The property regime of the state would rebut 
Rastafarian property ideals tied to their philosophies and principles, which are 
incongruous with state and capitalist objectives. Through the language of these 
terms, the notion of rights as understood by the RIV become difficult to locate 
in the regime of property ownership as it is recognized in Jamaica because state-
adhered property discourses ultimately favor the Jamaican government and cor-
porate entities.

The dilemma that Rastafari face is whether to be conscripted into, and thereby 
complicit with, the state or to continue to permit the regular commercial infringe-
ment of their identified rights. For the RIV, the best course of action has been the 
creation of attractive products that gain protection through market dominance. 
First Man explains: “We need to try and make our own markets, and there are 
so many products that the Rasta man can do right now, like the Village. No one 
can really right now do a product like the Village and have it as authentic as it 
can be.” The commercial value and potential diversity of Rastafarian commod-
ities would, according to First Man, naturally arise from the village project in other 
products and projects. One such idea was the easy merchandising of Jamaican Blue 
Mountain Coffee, which is marketed in RIV packaging. This model of marketing 
locally made goods under the RIV brand was conceived to encompass some future 
products, including soaps, oils, and crafts. In addition, each facility in the village 
was thought to be an independent attraction. One could come to the village solely 
for the spa services or to stay in the cottages without necessarily partaking in the 
tour. The village’s strategy has indeed succeeded in gaining state and commercial 
recognition, and it has received investment from the Jamaica Social Investment 
Fund (JSIF) and promotion from the Jamaica Tourist Board. Despite the Jamaican 
government being unable to defend against infringements on what it considers 
Jamaica’s  cultural  property,  much  less  that  of  Rastafari,  as  noted  in  Charles 
Robertson’s account, the creation of the village brings those elements into the 
highly protected domain of the country’s tourist industry.

70 

JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

GONE INTO BABYLON: MARKET MORALITIES

The RIV’s recognition by the Jamaican state has enabled a kind of indigenization 
but only as far as its culture is viable as an economic resource. Being brought into 
the Jamaican nation-state, however, determines legal recognition and the making 
of legal claims on its terms, which has led to social and political concessions, begin-
ning with the effective abandonment of the Rastafarian political aversion to state 
engagement.24 This assertion might seem difficult to square with the benefits to 
the RIV, which include a development grant worth over Jamaican $20 million  
(US $200,000) to fund significant renovations in the village, which was awarded by 
the JSIF and the Rural Economic Development Initiative (see Figure 4). The support 
from the state has brought the village into the official catalog of attractions listed by 
the Jamaica Tourist Board, placing it squarely within the remit of this organization’s 
promotion  of  ital  chic.  The  RIV  is  a  prototypical  example  of  emerging  forms  of 
heritage and community tourism in Jamaica, classified as the “village-as-business” 
model, which is intended to aid community infrastructure development to establish 
businesses around community tourism. Village as business projects have gained the 
attention of the United Nations (UN) Education, Scientific and Cultural Organiza-
tion’s World Heritage Centre as well as the interest of several governments invested 
in developing community and heritage-based tourism programs. A South African 

Figure 4.  Event Celebrating the RIV JSIF Partnership (courtesy of author).

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

71

delegation  of  entrepreneurs,  scholars,  and  state  officials  expressed  their  enthusi-
asm for the model when visiting Jamaica and the village during my fieldwork. They 
sought to learn how to apply the model to Rastafarian “villages” in the country, indi-
cating, perhaps ironically, how the RIV contributes to the continued proliferation of 
the commercialization of Rastafarian cultural practice.

The RIV’s increased support from government funding initiatives and agencies 
was not without criticism from other Rastafarian groups, who claimed that the 
RIV’s involvement in tourism directly contradicted the principles of Rastafari’s 
anti-Babylonian ideology. In explaining the difficulty of their position, Arlene 
recalled:

We had to go around to the community of Rasta and explain that what 
we are doing is progress. I had to let them know that it is criteria based 
… to receive any funding you have to be in tourism, you have to be a 
benevolent society, be an LLC ... all of these things. And the community 
said, “of course [we] are using the name of Rastafari to collect how much 
money.”

It was also difficult for some members of the village to move away from the self-
funded model and apply for government funding. First Man reflected on the at 
times difficult discussions about what some members considered to be the village 
“going into Babylon.” He mused: “Even though you might say you don’t want to 
take Rastafari totally into that mode, you certainly don’t want a situation where 
we can’t manage to survive in the 21st century. You have to be able to deliver on 
(provide for) certain things.”

For the RIV, indigeneity and rights work to reconcile this seeming contradiction. 
But the capitalist implication of indigeneity does not sit well with the Ethio-Africa 
Diaspora Union Millennium Council, more concisely known as the “Rastafari 
Millennium Council” (RMC). Founded in 2007, the RMC is an umbrella orga-
nization composed of multiple Rastafarian groups, including the RIV, which 
works on behalf of the broader Rastafari community with the aim of representing 
their causes and protecting their rights. Two of the Council’s four-point mission 
objectives exclusively address intellectual and cultural property and the theft and 
abuse of symbols, emblems, music, and cultural marks—the tangible and intan-
gible heritage of the Rastafari community worldwide.

To improve their situations or seek redress, the RMC, like the RIV, makes prop-
erty claims through a “politics of recognition.”25 However, rather than seek state 
protection the RMC has appealed to the UN World Intellectual Property Organi-
zation (WIPO) in their fight to address their claims of infringement. WIPO has for 
some time demonstrated support for Jamaica’s Maroon communities, and members 
of the RMC have recently been able to attract their attention. Council members 
have begun participating in WIPO activities during the organization’s visits to the 
country. Once such event that took place during my fieldwork saw delegates from the 
Charles Town Maroon community of Portland, Jamaica, Council members, and one 
RIV delegate participate in a multi-day seminar on the documentation of indigenous 

72 

JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

cultural practices (see Figure 5). The RMC’s assertion of indigeneity is the basis for 
the relationship with WIPO and mirrors the attempts by indigenous groups to trans-
late and mobilize their indigeneity into political and economic recognition.

While the RMC and the RIV both make claims of cultural property and seek 
to appeal to organizations like WIPO, what differentiates, and has caused some 
friction between, the two is the RIV’s active participation in the tourist market, 
which complicates the Rastafari’s core counter-position to capitalism. For the RIV, 
the “wait-and-see” process of indigenous recognition is insufficient for actually 
protecting their rights, especially in that the process in which the Maroons have 
advanced the furthest still has not financially benefited their community. First 
Man declared that “the Maroons are searching for a model themselves, and they 
still don’t have one that empowers the individual; everyone is working trying 
to get paid, which is the same with us [for] now, but for the future, their model 
has no definition.”

According to Ras Rod, the RIV is “Rastafari put into a framework of mod-
ern existence” and a blueprint for sustainability of the community. First Man, 
picking up on that sentiment, explained that Rastafari began in a “technological 
time, and was spread by technology.” Thus, they “exist in a modern time [but] 
are choosing ancient ways, [as a] modern people who are making a decision to 
balance technology ... to move on into the twenty-first century ... and it’s an 
attitude that is necessary for development.” To defend their market participa-
tion, Ras Rod asserted that the “[RIV] model is Haile Selassie model” and that 
they are “following along the words of the Almighty.” His statements refer to 
the recommendations for development in the canonical text and autobiography 

Figure 5.  RIV Member Taking Part in WIPO Cultural Documentation Project with 
Equipment Provided by WIPO (courtesy of author).

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

73

of the Rastafari deity and former Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie I.26 Thus, 
for members, the village is a potential model not just for Rastafari but also for 
all indigenous communities, as the group envisages a day when the village can 
develop beyond an attraction and perhaps into an actual village where Rastafari 
buy and cultivate land and manufacture goods.

Rastafari  possibly  become  compromised  in  the  space  of  this  justification. 
However, that space may yet provide the “possibility of alternatives” that resolves 
Rastafari’s intersectional conflict of state, market, and culture.27 The model for 
Rastafari, thus, risks the simultaneous sanitization and pacification of the sharp-
est aspects of Rastafari culture.28 Bretton Alvaré demonstrates this possibility 
among a group of former radical Rastafari in Trinidad who endeavored to found a 
non-governmental organization (NGO) to access funding for their social pro-
jects.29  Proceeding  through  the  requirements  of  the  state’s  NGO  registration 
process challenged the group’s revolutionary ideology, causing a re-evaluation 
of their notions of social justice. In order to not only qualify but also to com-
pete with other NGOs for the funds, the group had to conform to what were 
considered  compromised  conventions  of  NGO  practice.30  Compliance  then 
potentially engenders the distancing from various subjectivities and principles, 
like radicalism, that are intrinsic to Rasta ideology and practice. Jaffe notes that 
in  the  commercialization  of  Rastafari,  the  group  must  undergo  a  process  of 
becoming “clean and proper” to achieve acceptability.31 The question remains 
how, or even if, partaking in the business of Rastafari helps to attain the rights 
of property or if the group simply becomes another stakeholder in the success 
of “the creeping commodification of their cultural products and practices.”32 
However, this is complicated since the group, comprised of members who are 
mostly poor, have to contend not only with the market’s demands and inequalities 
but also with how to reconcile the possibilities it offers with their moralities.

CONCLUSION

As stated at the beginning of this article, the ideology of Rastafari itself was a 
means by which black Jamaicans coped with the systemic suffering produced 
by  the  Jamaican  colonial  state.  The  group  came  to  epitomize  “the  sufferer,” 
serving as a lasting reminder of the wickedness of that system. However, this suf-
fering, over time and conveyed through Rastafarian-popularized reggae music, 
became the basis of commercial interest. The RVI was envisioned as a format to 
recoup the “interest” of Rastafarian commerce from those who have capitalized 
on the culture. This process, though, has not been without its complications 
and controversies. Again, Rastafari’s anti-capitalist orientation runs in direct 
contradiction to the commercial model of the village. However, as evidenced 
by tourism marketing, there is a firm sense that Jamaican commercial potential 
is tied up in the “‘exploitable’ collective self” of Jamaican culture, an issue that 
stands at the heart of this discussion.33

74 

JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

Thomas has noted the apparent contradictions and incongruences between the 
prevailing ethos of Rastafari and its adherents’ “resistance to tethering their futures 
on the whims of a neoliberal global market that privileges movement, entrepreneur-
ship, and individualism.”34 She warns against the temptation to give projects like the 
village a cynical read and suggests instead to view the project in light of its temporal 
context, suggesting that we

[t]hink  about  what  Rasta’s  shift  from  disengagement  to  engagement 
means in contemporary context and, in the process, consider the kinds 
of engagement that are possible today, compared with those that might 
have  been  possible  at  other  moments.  …  [I]f  during  the  modernist 
moment  of  the  mid-20th  century  Rastafarians  condemned  the  state, 
defined citizenship in relation to Africa, refused wage labor and instead 
emphasized self-determination and self-sufficiency through forms of 
communal living, in the neoliberal era they seek greater recognition 
from and representation within the Jamaican state. So while they con-
tinue to emphasize self-determination and self-sufficiency, the means 
by which this might be realized have changed.35

At the heart of the RIV’s project of intellectual property is a radical proposition 
with the potential to ultimately challenge who truly owns, or at least can speak 
for, Jamaica’s cultural brand. The RIV project could disrupt what has been for so 
long the un(der)-credited popular packaging of Caribbean culture as Rastafarianism. 
However, by its conscription into Jamaica’s national branding campaign, the 
RIV has lessened its ability to challenge the unrestricted notion of what Jamaica’s 
brand is, as the Jamaican state seeks the broad commodification of homebred  
cultural activities and resources as a strategy for development36 through the crea-
tion of distinctive “image industries” linked to tourism.37 If the RIV had pursued 
its project of seeking intellectual property rights to their fullest realization, they 
could have been able to demonstrate that much of the cultural content of brand 
Jamaica does not rest on a generally Jamaican authenticity but, instead, draws its 
aesthetic forms from the utopian cultural, and, to an extent, political, vision of the 
Rastafarian movement.

So, then, does the village project demonstrate “the ways in which consumption, the 
state, and Rastafari have come together at a specific point in Jamaica’s history?”38 
Or is it alternatively a capitalist manifestation and logic that depresses Rastafari 
resistance through commodification? Although popular Rastafari narratives con-
tinue to present Rastafarians as exiled in Jamaica from their African homeland,39 
there is a recognition as to how Rastafari might be reconciling their place within 
the Jamaican polity. Neil Roberts, taking his cue from Sylvia Wynter’s meditation on  
how Rastafari’s longing for Africa has caused them to “stumble upon their Jamaican 
roots,”40 writes that the character of Rastafari “has undergone alternations because 
of the globalization of movements, transformations in understandings of the moral 
economy, and domestic state realignments resulting from global flows in an increas-
ingly interconnected age.”41 The RIV proves Roberts’s point through its project of 
cultural property rights and its relationship to the market. This project’s central 

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

75

logic of indigenous claim making complicates a cultural commitment to market resis-
tance because the very use of indigeneity to separate the market from Rastafarian 
values demands a market-based employment of indigeneity as a means for Rastafarian 
claims to rights. The case of the RIV, therefore, shows the extent to which market 
logics frame contemporary notions of rights and how the market conscripts posi-
tional identities, such as indigeneity, in their procurement. At the same time, how-
ever, the RIV shows the market-enabled manipulability, and, thus, productivity, 
of those identities, perhaps creating in time greater and more versatile openings to 
rights claiming.

ENDNOTES

1. Chevannes 1995.
2. Edmonds 2002.
3. Martinez Cobo 1986.
4. See Heuman 1986.
5. Goffe 2009.
6. See Geismar 2013, xi.
7. Geismar 2013, 61–62.
8. Li 2010, 385.
9. D. Thomas 2011, 212–13.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10. Povinelli 2004, 193.
  11. See Brown 2003, 28.
  12. Roberts 2014, 187.
  13. Strathern 1999; Comaroff and Comaroff 2009.
  14. Verdery and Humphrey 2004, 7.
  15. Jaffe 2010, 31–32.
  16. Edmonds 2002; Jaffe 2010, 32.
  17. Comaroff and Comaroff 2009, 27.
  18. Nakassis 2012, 701.
  19. Modest 2012, 185.
  20. Modest 2012, 186.
  21. Brown 2003, 86.
  22. Brown 2003.
  23. Verdery and Humphrey 2004, 6, 17.
  24. See Li 2000; Brown 2003.
  25. Verdery and Humphrey 2004, 8.
  26. Selassie 1999; see also Alvaré 2014.
  27. Geismar 2013, 215.
  28. Jaffe 2010, 40.
  29. Alvaré 2010.
  30. Alvaré 2010, 180, 193.
  31. Jaffe 2010, 33.
  32. Comaroff and Comaroff 2009, 21.
  33. Comaroff and Comaroff 2009, 5.
  34. D. Thomas 2011, 207.
  35. D. Thomas 2011, 218.
  36. K. Thomas 2013, 218; Jamaican Promotions Corporation 2011.
  37. Maurer 2004, 310.

JOVAN SCOTT LEWIS

76 

  38. Jaffe 2010, 40.
  39. Edmonds 2012.
  40. Wynter 1970.
  41. Roberts 2014, 187.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alvaré, Bretton T. 2010. “‘Babylon Makes the Rules’: Compliance, Fear, and Self-Discipline in 
the Quest for Official NGO Status.” PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review 33, no. 2: 
178–200.

Alvaré, Bretton T. 2014. “Haile Selassie and the Gospel of Development: Hegemony and Faith-Based 
Development in Trinidad and Tobago, West Indies.” Journal of Latin American and Caribbean 
Anthropology 19, no. 1: 126–47.

Brown, Michael F. 2003. Who Owns Native Culture? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Chevannes, Barry. 1995. Rastafari: Roots and Ideology. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.

Comaroff, Jean, and John L. Comaroff. 2009. Ethnicity, Inc. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Edmonds,  Ennis  B.  2002.  Rastafari:  From  Outcasts  to  Culture  Bearers.  Oxford:  Oxford  University 
Press.

Edmonds, Ennis B. 2012. Rastafari: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Geismar, Haidy. 2013. Treasured Possessions: Indigenous Interventions into Cultural and Intellectual 
Property. Durham: Duke University Press.

Goffe, Marcus. 2009. “Protecting the Traditions of the Maroons and Rastafari: An Analysis of the 
Adequacy of the Intellectual Property Laws of Jamaica and Proposals for Reform.” SCRIPTed 6, 
no. 3: 575–615.

Heuman, Gad J. 1986. Out of the House of Bondage: Runaways, Resistance and Marronage in Africa and 
the New World. London: Cass.

Jaffe,  Rivke.  2010.  “Ital  Chic:  Rastafari,  Resistance,  and  the  Politics  of  Consumption  in  Jamaica.” 
Small Axe 14, no. 1: 30–45.

Jamaican Promotions Corporation. 2011. “Investing in Jamaica,” http://jamaicainvestmentforum.com/
sites/default/files/publications/InvestingInJamaica2011_Web.pdf (accessed 12 August 2016).

Li, Tania M. 2000. “Articulating Indigenous Identity in Indonesia: Resource Politics and the Tribal 
Slot.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 42, no. 1: 149–79.

Li, Tania M. 2010. “Indigeneity, Capitalism, and the Management of Dispossession.” Current Anthro-
pology 51, no. 3: 385–414.

Martinez Cobo, José. 1986. “Study of the Problem of Discrimination against Indigenous Populations,” 
Doc.  E/CN.4/Sub.2/1983/21,  5  August  1983,  http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/MCS_
intro_1983_en.pdf (accessed January 2014).

Maurer, Bill. 1997. Recharting the Caribbean: Land, Law, and Citizenship in the British Virgin Islands. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

RIGHTS, INDIGENEITY, AND THE MARKET OF RASTAFARI 

77

Maurer, Bill. 2004. “Cyberspatial Properties: Taxing Questions about Proprietary Regimes.” In Prop-
erty in Question: Value Transformation in the Global Economy, edited by K. Verdery and C. Humphrey, 
297–318. Oxford: Berg.

Modest, Wayne. 2012. “Material Bridges: Objects, Museums and New Indigeneity in the Caribbean.” 
In Anthropologists, Indigenous Scholars and the Research Endeavour: Seeking Bridges towards Mutual 
Respect, edited by J. Hendry and L. Fitznor, 185–95. New York: Routledge.

Nakassis, Constantine. 2012. “Counterfeiting What? Aesthetics of Brandedness and Brand in Tamil Nadu, 
India.” Anthropological Quarterly 85, no. 3: 701–21.

Povinelli, Elizabeth A. 2004. “At Home in the Violence of Recognition.” In Property in Question: 
Value Transformation in the Global Economy, edited by K. Verdery and C. Humphrey, 185–206. 
Oxford: Berg.

Roberts, Neil. 2014. “Violence, Livity, Freedom.” Small Axe 18, no. 1: 181–92.

Selassie I, Haile. 1999. My Life and Ethiopia’s Progress: The Autobiography of Emperor Haile Selassie I, 
vol. 1. Chicago: Frontline Books.

Strathern, Marilyn. 1999. Property, Substance, and Effect: Anthropological Essays on Persons and Things. 
London: Athlone Press.

Thomas,  Deborah.  A.  2011.  Exceptional  Violence:  Embodied  Citizenship  in  Transnational  Jamaica. 
Durham: Duke University Press.

Thomas, Kedron. 2013. “Brand Piracy and Postwar Statecraft in Guatemala.” Cultural Anthropology 
28, no. 1: 144–60.

Verdery, Katherine, and Caroline Humphrey. 2004. Property in Question: Value Transformation in the 
Global Economy. Oxford: Berg.

Wynter, Sylvia. 1970. “Jonkonnu in Jamaica: Towards the Interpretation of Folk Dance as a Cultural 
Process.” Jamaica Journal 4, no. 2: 34–48.


