 International Journal of Cultural Property   (2015)   22:  487– 504 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2015 International Cultural Property Society 
 doi:10.1017/S0940739115000284 

              

    Pattern Recognition: Governmental 
Regulation of Tartan and Commodification 
of Culture 
       Megan Rae     Blakely   *   

   

         Abstract:     It is notoriously difficult to design and attach suitable legal rights 
to intangible cultural heritage (ICH), due to its nature as an evolving, living 
heritage. This article investigates the effects of government intervention relating 
to Scottish tartan in order to trace the relationship between formal proprietary 
rights, commodification, and cultural branding. The article proceeds in three 
steps: from (1) the historical context of the Jacobite rebellion and the subsequent 
Victorian assignment of the tartan to clans; to (2) the formation and function 
of the subsequent self-regulating community tartan registers; and (3) the 2009 
governmental intervention with the establishment of a governmental tartan 
register, subsuming the community groups’ role in self-regulating tartan. While 
past ICH protection efforts have focused primarily on developing countries, 
the example of tartan raises wider concerns about the social and economic 
impact of the subtle erosion or, conversely, the ossification of living heritages. 
Finally, some alternatives are considered within the IP regime, such as sui 
generis protection, while highlighting the challenges of reconciling the domestic 
regulation of diverse ICH.      

     “…by all the information I could procure their only Crimes (are) 
Poverty and Tartan, which too often Appear coupled.”   1   

  -1 August 1747, Jailer Hugh Forbes.   

   INTRODUCTION 

 Cultural  heritage  provides  a  unique  identity  with  myriad  enriching  benefits  to 
regions and peoples. In the face of increased cultural homogenization in part due 

  *  CREATe Centre ,  University of Glasgow . Email:  m.blakely.1@research.gla.ac.uk  

487

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

 488   

 MEGAN RAE BLAKELY

to globalization, accelerated through technological development, cultural heritage 
preservation is increasingly an international and domestic concern. Cultural her-
itage is frequently divided into two categories: tangible and intangible. Tangible 
cultural heritage,  2   such as art and landmarks, is easier to define and thus easier to 
categorize and protect under existing legal systems or agencies. While cultural and 
legal  academic  literature  has  recently  begun  to  explore  concepts  and  impacts  of 
intangible cultural heritage (“ICH”),  3   a brief mention is often the extent of ICH 
coverage,  which  may  be  partially  due  to  definitional  vagaries  as  well  as  a  great 
diversity in regional ICH.  4   According to the Convention for the Safeguarding of 
Intangible  Cultural  Heritage,  ICH  can  consist  of  traditional  knowledge,  songs, 
craftsmanship, dance, and other practices, as well as the associated cultural arti-
facts and spaces.  5   These are simply illustrative of the concept; widely varying global 
living heritage passed generationally must be allowed to organically evolve, often 
defying  the  process  of  identification  so  desirable  in  the  realm  of  legal  protec-
tions. Pinning down these expressions presents dangers of ossification and loss of 
meaning as a living practice for the relevant communities, leaving a historical piece 
of recorded data without present cultural meaning and counteracting the purpose 
of protection efforts entirely. Additionally, a further consequence of the difficulties 
in  precisely  defining  ICH  is  the  challenge  of  measuring  value,  and  thus  legisla-
tive bodies or non-governmental organizations seeking funding or attempting to 
design effective ICH protection programs, particularly when intersecting with the 
realm  of  intellectual  property  protections,  can  face  abundant  hurdles,  ranging 
from obtaining free, prior, and informed consent to agreeing upon definitions of 
proper community representation.  6   

 When seeking protection under existing legal regimes, the nature of ICH may 
initially lend itself well to the intellectual property protections. Gaining this protec-
tion will often require alterations of form to the ICH, either for economic or exclu-
sionary benefit; in this context, “commodification can be defined as the conversion 
of intangible cultural property into items of economic worth that can be traded for 
commercial gain by such means as license, rental, or sale.”  7   The mere process of 
alterations due to outside economic factors raises concerns about the effect on the 
practicing community: “the process of transmogrifying songs and legends, chants 
and rituals, and collective heritage into products of trade has been seen by some 
as diminishing the inherent spirituality or dignity of native heritage.”  8   However, 
not all ICH will undergo any drastic transmogrification to be commodified; for 
instance, one piece of ICH which has come to define Scotland—and needed little 
modification to be a marketable article—is the tartan.  9   The tartan sett, or pattern, 
instantly creates association with Scottish culture, history, and genealogy. Tartan 
combines the intangible design element with the frequent manifestation into a tan-
gible article, allowing for an easier transition into a salable form. Thus this type of 
ICH that is already manifest in a tangible good, as opposed to ICH such as oral 
histories or rituals, is more frequently used in cultural branding and marketing as no 
additional derivative product is needed for commodification. Interested community 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

PATTERN RECOGNITION  

  489 

groups  have  historically  documented  and  registered  tartan  designs  for  reference 
and posterity, especially following the widespread clan adoptions in the early 1800s. 
However, in 2008, the Scottish Government passed the Scottish Register of Tartans 
Act, which came into force on 5 February 2009. This established a records division 
within the National Records of Scotland, to register, preserve, and maintain tartan 
designs for a fee. The registration does not purport to establish new or affect exist-
ing intellectual property rights in the designs; most tartan designs are ineligible for 
copyright protection already due to unknown authorship or expiration. 

 This article seeks to explore the effects of government intervention on commu-
nity ICH safeguarding and regulation as well as of cultural branding on economic 
and social cultural value. Scotland is a small country in a union, with a distinct, 
rich—yet still traceable—ICH history with recent governmental intervention into 
community regulations. This presents the opportunity to examine the understud-
ied role of ICH in developed countries through the lens of tartan. Part II will explore 
the historical development and influence of tartan; Part III will examine the struc-
ture and effectiveness of community tartan regulation while Part IV explores the 
nature  and  impact  of  governmental  intervention  in  community-regulated  ICH; 
and Part V will consider alternative methods for preserving ICH.   

 HISTORY OF TARTAN AND CULTURAL INFLUENCE 

 While tartan is now inexorably linked with Scotland, widespread early Celtic use 
dates back to around the sixth to eighth century.  10   Until the nineteenth century, 
none of the designs were heraldic, or associated with clans, and were associated 
only with regions throughout early Celtic migration. Color variances were due to 
the availability of dyes and personal preferences. The National Records of Scotland 
(“NRS”)  holds  the  first  known  written  mention  of  a  Scottish  Highland  tartan. 
Dated from 1538, Exchequer records for King James V list checkered pattern tights 
as  ‘Heland  tartane.’  11    Records  are  sparse  following  this  first  mention  until  the 
1700s, and the Dean Orphanage and Cauvin’s Trust of Edinburgh maintain one 
of the earliest tartan production and pattern records.  12   This spinning book holds 
records of wool spun and distributed by the Orphan Hospital Manufactory and 
Paul’s Work from 1734 to 1737.  13   The spinning book also contains a shorter record 
of tartans supplied from 1751 to 1752.  14   

 The Dress Act of 1746 attempted to exert social control over Highland clans by 
banning tartan as well as Gaelic culture and language.  15   The Dress Act was repealed 
in 1786, and by that point, tartan had already become integrated into mainstream 
Scottish  culture,  including  the  Lowlands.  For  example,  Edinburgh  military  uni-
forms  displayed  tartan  patterns,  and  Bonnie  Prince  Charlie  donned  tartan  in 
1746.  16   The tradition of royalty and tartan continued, and King George V also wore 
tartan on a Scottish excursion in 1822.  17   

 Despite a historically verified royal and public use, Highland tartan was asso-
ciated with crime or poverty for centuries.  18   For instance, the NRS holds a letter 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

 490   

 MEGAN RAE BLAKELY

from a Scottish jailer, Hugh Forbes, stating his prisoners have committed only the 
crimes of poverty and tartan.  19   Around the turn of the century, the image and asso-
ciation of tartan deliberately shifted through royal and Lowland use as well as the 
Victorian-era romanticization of the Highlands and invention of clan association. 
 As tartan became fashionable and a national symbol of Scotland, national brand-
ing, marketing, and clan identifications normalized. The first registry to request clan 
associations was the Highland Society of London in 1778, which sent requests to clan 
leaders to “be respectfully solicited to furnish the Society with as Much of the Tartan 
of his Lordship’s Clan as will serve to Show the Pattern and to Authenticate the Same 
by Attaching Thereunto a Card bearing the Impression of his Lordship’s Arms.”  20   
However, many of the clan leaders were unaware of what their official tartan might 
be but were pleased with the official recognition. For instance, Baron MacDonald 
responded thusly: “Being really ignorant of what is exactly The Macdonald Tartan, 
I request you will have the goodness to exert every Means in your power to Obtain 
a  perfectly  genuine  Pattern,  Such  as  Will  Warrant  me  in  Authenticating  it  with 
my Arms.”  21   The tartan moved so far from its warring Highland clan and criminal 
associations that it was incorporated into advertising and tourism promotion in the 
nineteenth century, with animated traditional Highland dress even found on post-
cards  as  early  as  1920.  22    Even  the  present  day  modern,  ancient,  and  muted  color 
configurations of official tartans are simply due to the intensity of the dyes available, 
with the older dyes offering a less intense palate due to transport over long distances 
and are meant to mimic naturally faded fabrics as chemical dyes were not available. 
There is no distinct clan identification difference between new and old; this is a clear 
example of branding and classification formed by modern registries. 

 Taking  into  account  the  ingrained  historical  and  cultural  influence  of  tartan, 
the  Scottish  Government  considers  it  to  be  “one  of  Scotland’s  most  iconic  and 
valuable assets.”  23   An analysis commissioned by the Scottish Parliament, executed 
by ECOTEC, concluded that “the tartan industry is a significant contributor to the 
overall  Scottish  economy;  and  larger  in  economic  terms  than  suggested  by  pre-
vious industry estimates.”  24   Economic benefit is frequently used as a benchmark 
of cultural value, including when justifying cultural regulation, promotion, or pro-
tection; scholars or policymakers may calculate a numeric value through measure-
ment of financial profitability, participant attendance, or production volume.  25   

 While  this  economic  measurement  approach  provides  a  tangible,  concrete 
value, this approach poses a serious danger of oversimplifying the social impact of 
cultural value to the point of reductionism. This reductionist approach to assess-
ing value of intangible cultural heritage may allow for more successful lobbying 
for preservation, but economic benefit does not encompass the true present cul-
tural value of ICH. Basing cultural value on economic return skews value heavily 
towards  Western  structures  of  ICH  regulation  and  production.  Further,  if  poli-
cymakers and stewards of ICH too frequently lean on economic benefits of ICH, 
ICH with less apparent or indirect economic benefits may dwindle by means of 
recognition and preservation exclusion. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

PATTERN RECOGNITION  

  491 

 “Tartan’s importance to Scotland cannot be overestimated. It is deeply embedded 
in Scottish culture and is an internationally recognised symbol of Scotland.”  26   This 
symbol  serves  to  maintain  identity  and  local  solidarity  and  also  directs  positive 
attention towards Scotland through heritage and genealogical tourism as well as 
private and public scholarship. This attention to maintaining and preserving 
Scottish tartans crosses over to preserving and practicing other Scottish ICH, such 
as Highland dance, song, attractions, and historical contributions. The tartan’s 
powerful Scottish identity reaches globally, serving as a symbol of Scottish pride 
and nationalism at festivals such as New York Tartan Week and an official Tartan 
Day in Arkansas.  27   In this way, using tartan to brand Scottish culture demonstrates 
a softer, less political national branding, still seeking to emphasize positive, shared 
features of the community through an intangible piece of property which can be 
displayed in a tangible fashion. 

 Despite all efforts, placing a calculable value on cultural diversity may not be 
possible through traditional means, and scholars have explored cultural diver-
sity and value through the lens of biodiversity and value.  28   UNESCO has fur-
ther extended the connections between the development of cultural diversity 
and biodiversity in ecosystem development and sustainability.  29   These connec-
tions demonstrate a precedent for protection even in the absence of calculable 
value.  For  instance,  biodiversity  preservation  is  based  on  the  “precautionary 
principle,” a theory that mandates protection in the event of suspected harm to 
the environment or public good, even in the absence of scientific consensus of 
such harm.  30   Scientists still make discoveries about intricate interdependencies 
and new uses and functions for animals and plants previously thought “useless” 
or “unimportant.” These unforeseen or clandestine functions of existing and 
evolving diversity should provide sufficient rationale for biodiversity protec-
tion as well as ICH preservation whether the true value of the ICH is known, 
is yet unknown, or cannot be calculated at all. Under these theories, a lack of 
precise  value  should  not  hinder  or  diminish  protection  of  cultural  diversity, 
especially considering the soft or indirect impacts of preserving ICH.   

 COMMUNITY REGULATION 

 Until  recent  years,  tartan  producers  and  community-led  organizations  gov-
erned tartan documentation and regulation to the exclusion of any government 
intervention.  31   The Scottish Tartans World Register (“STWR”) catalogued tartans 
centrally in a registry that contained nearly 3,000 designs. The STWR would make 
note of a design for free and charge £50 to officially register a design.  32   While a 
fairly comprehensive registry, the STWR did not hold a monopoly on records 
and registration. The Scottish Tartans Society (“STS”) operated as another inde-
pendent registry for tartan design.  33   Although now defunct as a registry, the STS 
remains as a web resource.  34   In addition to documenting tartans and other Scottish 
history, the STS also opened a tartan museum in the United States in order to 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

 492   

 MEGAN RAE BLAKELY

bridge international interest. The museum still stands in the state of North Carolina, 
which holds a large population of Scottish descendants.  35   Thus the activities of 
community-led registries extended beyond design documentation and registra-
tion to acting as cultural liaisons and networking hubs. 

 In 2008, Scottish lawmakers moved to create an official government register of 
tartans, modeled largely after the existing community-based registers, with aims to 
promote the Scottish tie to international tartans and fuel the domestic economy.  36   
During  legislative  debate,  representatives  presented  arguments  which  supported 
official  register  with  legal  authority.  In  addition  to  improving  tartan  image  and 
giving confidence to users, lawmakers cited benefits to tourism and related activities, 
such  as  genealogical  tourism.  37    Further,  government  registration  tends  to  offer 
commercial neutrality with no exposure to private commercial risk.  38   However, 
much of the basis for co-opting this organizational system can be attributed to a 
cultural branding which would create indirect benefits for Scotland through as-
suring continued association with the tartan. 

 Strong arguments against establishing a government-run tartan register were also 
put forth, many of which pointed to the lack of a measurable, significant benefit to 
establishing a state-run register. The most direct query asks: “Is there any damage 
being done to the Scottish economy by ‘unregulated tartans’? If the answer is ‘No,’ 
then  Parliament  has  no  business  debating  this  at  public  expense.”  39    Of  particular 
relevance to the intellectual property system is the critique that the tartan register is 
“a toothless tiger,” conveying no additional legal rights and “reinvents the wheel,” as 
community registers were widely accepted and respected as effective and reliable.  40   
The  government  register  further  depends  on  existing  register  cooperation  (which 
did occur) but nonetheless can create confusion among the existing registers. On the 
side of public administration, this type of redundant register may open floodgates 
for similarly burdensome administrative public bodies, stressing financial and man-
power resources.  41   Finally, a government-run register might make registered tartans 
more available to the public but does not guarantee consistency or reliability, as such 
initiatives are subject to administrative changes and budget constraints.  42   

 On 9 October 2008, the Scottish Register of Tartans Act 2008 (“the Tartans Act”) 
was passed, receiving royal assent on 8 November 2008.  43   The Tartans Act took effect 
and launched on 5 February 2009. The new government-run registry received official 
support from community-run registries, and incorporated their existing databases 
into the NRS registry.  44   Further, many of the structural and procedural elements of 
tartan registration were adopted from the existing community regulators. 

 While the Tartans Bill stated its purpose as promoting and preserving cultural 
heritage, the cost to register is £20 higher than the STA registration, at £70. “Total 
costs could reach £75,000 a year for the project, which MSPs were told could run at 
a loss.”  45   Further, an independent briefing concluded that a “full recovery of costs 
is not possible.”  46   

 Enterprise  Minister  Jim  Mather  released  the  following  statement  on  the 
Tartans Act: “I hope the work on a register will continue to be backed by industry 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

PATTERN RECOGNITION  

  493 

and political consensus. And I hope the register will become a focus for authen-
ticating  all  the  superb  varieties  of  tartan    we    design  and  produce”  [emphasis 
added].  47   While Mather stated that part of the goal of passing tartan legislation 
includes authentication of tartan designed and produced in Scotland, the Tartans 
Act contains no requirement for association in any way with Scotland. As domes-
tic legislature has limited international powers to restrict international design 
and production of intellectual property, accomplishing the benefit of Scotland-
centered design and production of tartan without creating an internationally 
recognized right, such as a certification mark or protected designation of origin.  48   
Further, many tartans may be registered with no Scottish company holding a 
license to sell or produce a copyrighted tartan held by a commercial entity which 
is actively economically exploiting the tartan. Notably, lawmakers did bring into 
legislation debate that the official association with Scotland will maintain the link 
and provide indirect benefits.  49   

 To  more  fully  compare  the  motivation  and  aims  of  the  Tartans  Act  with  the 
stated aims, an examination of the text of the Act indicates the breadth of influence 
and reveals the indirect benefits to be primary and the direct purported benefits 
correlational, not causal, only—if occurring at all. Only the following criteria must 
be met to officially register a tartan with the NRS:

  -  that the tartan meets the definition contained in the Act and is suffi-

ciently different to all other tartans already recorded in the Register 

 - that the name of the tartan is unique, acceptable and suitably authorised 
 - that the application fee of £70 is paid.  50    

  The Keeper of the Scottish Register of Tartans has discretion to refuse any appli-
cation which does not meet the criteria.  51   In addition to thread count and color 
information, registrees must provide “a description of the tartan including your 
reasons  for  designing  it  and  explaining  your  choice  of  colours;  the  name  of  the 
tartan and evidence of your association with that name.”  52   If the tartan includes a 
proper name, the registree must include disclaimer that anyone sharing the proper 
name may wear the tartan design. However, the registration affects no intellectual 
property rights and offers no enforcement mechanism other than removal from 
the registry.  53   So while a disclaimer must be made, a registree could not utilize the 
Tartans Act to exclude others from wearing a tartan with a proper name identifier. 
 The primary criteria for acceptance onto the register centers around the design 
of the tartan and whether it is “sufficiently different” from designs currently on the 
register.

  “Sufficiently different means that it must be possible to clearly differen-
tiate your tartan from all the other thousands of tartans already recorded, 
distinguishable by eye at a distance of approximately 2m (6ft). In practice 
this means that

    

  i.       the geometry of a design must be sufficiently different, ie. the blocks 
of solid colours and the mixtures used in a design must be arranged 
in a different pattern to all other designs already recorded.  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

 494   

 MEGAN RAE BLAKELY

   

   

  ii.       a  new  tartan  will  use  different  colours  in  substantially  different 
proportions and ordered differently to all tartans already recorded. 
Changing the shades of the colours used is insufficient to differ-
entiate a new design since tartans are traditionally recorded in 
the base colours of red, yellow, green, blue, brown, grey, black 
and white. Any shade of blue will still be recorded as blue, like-
wise green etc.  

  iii.       over-check(s) or additional stripe(s) in contrasting colour(s) can 
be added to create a new tartan, providing the over-check or stripe 
is clearly visible when woven.”  54     

    The Tartans Act additionally identifies qualities which will not be counted as suf-
ficiently  different.  For  instance,  increasing  or  decreasing  the  size  of  the  sett  will 
not create sufficient difference nor will varying a shade of the colour; “Therefore, 
for  example,  light  blue,  navy  blue  and  purple  are  all  considered  to  be  blue  and 
changing the shade from light to dark blue will not change the basic pattern.”  55   

 Certain tartan designs are eligible for protection already under international and 
domestic intellectual property law, and equally important to establishing what the 
Tartans Act does do is establishing what it does not. The Tartans Act does not affect 
any other intellectual property rights available to a rightsholder or preclude others 
from using or producing a design independently of other intellectual property 
rights. The majority of countries around the globe are governed under the Berne Con-
vention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Rights (“the Berne Convention”), 
an international treaty setting minimum regulatory standards and national treat-
ment provisions related to copyright.  56   The Berne Convention mandates the pro-
tection  of  literary  and  artistic  works,  which  may  include  patterned  designs,  like 
a tartan, subject to no formal registration, as long as the design meets the basic 
copyright requirements such as authorship and duration.  57   As the Berne Conven-
tion sets minimum standards, domestic lawmakers may set enhanced protections 
as well, so additional or longer protection may be offered for registrations. Under 
UK law, the Copyright, Designs & Patents Act (“the CDPA”), intellectual property 
rightsholders have the exclusive right to copy, make, sell, create derivatives, and 
pursue infringers for the protected time period, generally 70 years following the 
death of the author.  58   In the United Kingdom, tartans also might be protected as 
registered designs under the Registered Designs Act of 1949 for five years from the 
date of first registration, renewable up to 25 years.  59   Power to change UK intellec-
tual property law is not devolved to the Scottish Parliament so the Tartans Act was 
unable to make provisions to introduce new intellectual property rights or change 
existing intellectual property law in the UK.  60   

 However, most tartan will be ineligible for any type of conventional intellectual 
property protection unless it is newly created.  61   Likely due to this lack of eligibility 
for intellectual property protection, litigation surrounding use and misuse of tartan 
designs is sparse. Thus the intellectual property system as it stands provides little 
recourse for individuals or clans with cultural associations or ownership in a tar-
tan design in the event of exploitation or commercialization. However, one recent 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

PATTERN RECOGNITION  

  495 

case,  Abraham Moon & Sons Ltd. v. Thornber & Others , found infringement of the 
copyright in a new tartan design and in the “ticket stamp,” the written instructions 
for expert weavers.  62   Despite defendants’ cites to numerous cases holding that 
instructions cannot be copyrighted, the judge was persuaded that the complexity 
and  information  held  in  a  ticket  stamp  communicated  a  visual  image  to  expert 
weavers and had “real visual significance”; thus it was a graphic work, protected 
by copyright.  63   There has yet to be any further case law on tartan, so it is uncertain 
whether this decision offers any certainty for new designers as previous case law has 
discounted similar constructs as uncopyrightable instructions.  64   

 As existing IP protection seems insufficient to ubiquitously protect tartan, two 
alternatives might be well suited: geographical indications or a type of  sui generis  
protection through legislation. Both types of protection are already used around 
the globe, to various extent, to protect regionally specific design and thereby the 
surrounding ICH. Interestingly, the UK protects another type of pattern and textile 
production, Harris Tweed, through special legislation and trademark. The Harris 
Tweed Act of 1993 created the Harris Tweed Authority for the following purpose: 
“To  promote  and  maintain  the  authenticity,  standard  and  reputation  of  Harris 
Tweed;  for  preventing  the  sale  as  Harris  Tweed  of  material  which  does  not  fall 
within the definition…”  65   The legislation defines Harris Tweed as “a tweed which 
has been hand woven by the islanders at their homes in the Outer Hebrides, fin-
ished in the islands of Harris, Lewis, North Uist, Benbecula, South Uist and Barra 
and their several purtenances (The Outer Hebrides) and made from pure virgin 
wool dyed and spun in the Outer Hebrides.”  66   Passing  sui generis  style legislation 
in accompaniment to a trademark is a unique solution but is highly customized. 
Harris Tweed is essentially a localized commercial operation, with three mills and 
self-employed resident weavers, which lent very well to legislative protection. With 
such a high commercial demand for the tweed, trademarking the product and sup-
porting the local industry with legislation secured the residents’ livelihoods, main-
tained  the  association  with  the  geographical  origin,  and  provided  the  economic 
means for islanders to continue the tradition. 

 Geographical indication (GI), or appellation of origin, is an IP protection which 
seems  to  fit  nicely  into  the  stated  goals  of  the  Tartan  Act.  GIs  are  indications 
of origin from a region or locality and also indicate a geographically attributable 
quality or characteristic, which may include the geographical name (as with Scotch 
whisky)  or  may  simply  have  acquired  a  strong  association  with  the  designated 
regions (as with Basmati rice).  67   Many GIs might appear to overlap with trademark 
rights;  however,  they  are  distinguishable  as  “trademarks  as  a  private  monopoly 
right and geographical indications as a collective public right.”  68   This distinction 
would seem to indicate a GI rather than a trademark is more appropriate for ICH. 
However,  the  desirability  of  GI  protection  is  lessened  by  a  lack  of  international 
legal cohesion and tartan’s nonagricultural nature. 

 First, GI protection has been granted primarily to food and wine in the EU,  69   and 
certain countries may use different legal mechanisms, such as  sui generis  protection 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

 496   

 MEGAN RAE BLAKELY

or trademark law, to protect origin designations.  70   From a practical perspective, 
pushing  for  expanding  GI  protection  in  a  global  forum  at  WIPO  may  not  be  a 
worthwhile path, politically or economically, despite the rising implementation of 
expansive GIs in the EU. Second, while the tartan register does delineate quality 
and originality standards for registration, it is unclear whether consumers would 
associate a higher quality tartan with Scottish production origin. Historical origin 
is distinct from production origin, and if the purpose of a GI is to ensure quality 
and  prevent  consumer  deception  as  to  origin,  tartan  may  not  garner  such  pro-
tection. Practically speaking, the manufacture, design, and distribution is already 
geographically widespread and attempts to reign in and claw back these elements 
to Scotland would likely prove futile. Third, based on the goals stated for passing 
legislation, maintaining global  association  between Scotland and tartan seems to be 
paramount. Foreign registrations are allowed and encouraged; the Tartan Act has 
no requirement for involving Scottish industry or even listing a Scottish connection 
in the description. A voluntary official register thus serves as a positive reinforce-
ment measure rather than offering negative punitive consequences for not regis-
tering. By preserving this association, more indirect benefits through tourism and 
branding may occur rather than direct, local benefits through defending limited 
and highly monitored production, as with the Harris Tweed Act. 

 Despite the apparent suitability of GIs for protecting ICH in general, the system 
is not widely utilized across the globe. In 1958, the Lisbon Agreement for the Pro-
tection of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration came into 
effect but, to date, has secured only 27 total parties.  71   The possible expansion and 
international harmonization of GIs has been contested by some WIPO negotiation 
members, citing issues ranging from impact on innovation to global fair trade.  72   
Nonetheless,  developing  countries  with  primarily  agricultural  or  geographically 
dependent quality measures, e.g., Antigua coffee or Darjeeling tea, rely upon GIs 
for economic and associated traditional craftsmanship protection.  73   While GIs are 
often promoted as a “pro-development intellectual property right,”  74   trademarks 
and GIs are dangerous to use when protecting ICH and ICH-related goods as the 
protection  is  exposed  to  the  risk  of  “genericide.”  75    Genericide  occurs  when  the 
trademarked name becomes so widely associated with the good that there is no 
longer a consumer identification function, such as with aspirin or elevator.  76   These 
terms were previously brand names which became the overarching term for the 
product. Thus trademark may not be the best protection on its own if, within a 
given market, there is a high risk of genericide. This may already be the case with 
tartan; a consumer may not refer to a non-Scottish checked pattern as “plaid” and 
the Scottish counterpart as “tartan.” This makes trademark too thin a protection 
for important ICH and was a likely catalyst for the additional legislative protection 
for Harris Tweed. 

 One further issue surrounding a registration system is appointing a single indi-
vidual or entity to hold registration title. In contrast to much intellectual property 
regulation,  the  Tartans  Act  does  allow  an  applicant  to  register  a  tartan  with  an 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

PATTERN RECOGNITION  

  497 

unknown designer. Given the age and unknown origin of many of these designs, 
this is a necessary allowance. However, in an intellectual property context, what 
rights are conferred to registrees who are not the original designer? As the regis-
ter guidelines disclaim conferring any intellectual property rights,  77   much of the 
expectations and indirect rights associated with a tartan register are due to piggy-
backing on already effective, accepted community self-regulation. Further, if two 
individuals hold copyrights to tartans that are deemed too sufficiently similar for 
both to meet the register eligibility requirements, the register operates on a first 
to file basis. Most removal requests that are approved are related to a brand name 
trademark infringement.  78   

 Obtaining  clan  approval  to  register  a  clan  tartan  is  an  interesting  adaptation 
which appears to grant a form of community or collective right. While the right 
does not extend as far as an enforceable intellectual property collective copyright, 
the structure presents the ability to exercise a form of collective control over an 
official recognition to ICH.  79   While older tartans with an unknown designer will 
fall into the public domain, this official register is offering a form of ancillary intel-
lectual property rights in practice, whether foreseen or not. Consumers, designers, 
and  producers  will  recognize  governmental  authority,  and  the  mere  listing  may 
deter use of a tartan that is truly in the public domain, especially as the register 
grants no intellectual property rights, potentially chilling creative contribution to 
the general public good.   

 ALTERNATIVE COURSES FOR CULTURAL PRESERVATION 

 If a government does choose to step in and intervene in community-regulated ICH, 
typically it will operate for cultural preservation only, i.e., not a fee charging 
registrar but in a museum-like function. Charging an official fee to register ICH 
without  conveying  additional  rights  appears  to  be  an  unusual  governmental 
action, atypical of safeguarding movements that have primarily indirect social 
and economic benefits. For instance, in contrast to a fee-based Tartan Register, 
Scotland also has created a free listing register and online wiki for ICH free of 
charge and serving a similar function.  80   

 At the time of writing, 158 countries have ratified the UNESCO Convention for 
the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (“the ICH Convention”).  81   In 
contrast to the World Heritage List, which focuses on tangible cultural locations,  82   
the ICH Convention focuses on “Oral traditions and expressions, Performing arts, 
Knowledge  and  practices  concerning  nature  and  the  universe,  Social  practises, 
rituals and festive events, Traditional craftsmanship.”  83   Notably absent from the 
signatories  are  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom.  While  speculation 
regarding this absence may point to concerns about the integrity of domestic intel-
lectual property systems and sovereignty, a UK representative simply stated that the 
United Kingdom had no intangible culture to protect.  84   This claim, while wholly 
erroneous, is not uncommon in certain developed countries and is one driver of 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

 498   

 MEGAN RAE BLAKELY

the  acceptability  of  commercialization  of  ICH,  which  may  diminish  its  cultural 
value. At minimum, identification and recognition through joining this interna-
tional treaty would help to protect the diverse ICH within the United Kingdom. 

 On  the  legislation-heavy  side,  separate  law  regarding  protection  of  ICH 
might be implemented. However, this approach is often implemented with minority 
indigenous  populations,  who  were  previously  and  currently  marginalized  in 
representation.  85   While entire bodies of law meant to protect minority cultures 
may  not  be  relevant  or  efficient  for  domestic  ICH  legislation,  the  argument 
that a majority population needs no legal protection for ICH falls short in the 
face of globalization and rampant commercialization. Thus some type of legal 
recognition of ICH and not only of intellectual property or of tangible cultural 
heritage is necessary. 

 Should ongoing legislative action to register tartans discontinue due to funding 
or administration change, a more informal partnership through the NRS could be 
formed to support UK community organizations and to ensure continuity as well 
as the nature of ICH without stifling the evolution of the ICH. For instance, Welsh 
community organizations continue to run the  Eisteddfod Genedlaethol Cymru,  a 
traditional  festival  celebrating  Welsh  language  and  traditional  culture  as  well  as 
contemporary  manifestations,  consistent  with  the  spirit  and  community  benefit 
that ICH offers.  86   

 If the government register does continue, in order to fully accomplish the goals 
of the Tartan Act, specifically to fuel Scottish design and production, the Act could 
be altered to reflect the political rhetoric surrounding its passage.  87   Limiting pro-
duction  and  licensing  to  Scottish  businesses  or  mandating  a  certain  amount  of 
compulsory  licensing  to  Scottish  businesses  could  create  more  of  the  economic 
and social benefit sought by the Act. Alternatively, a direct tie to Scotland in the 
description and function may better meet the goals of the Act. The current climate 
of Scottish nationalism following the recent referendum may present an interesting 
context to discuss this further. 

 Lastly, the government might provide no registration function involvement at 
all and leave any incentive or identification to the intellectual property system. The 
2003 Convention includes an article regarding the role of community participation 
in ICH management:

  Within  the  framework  of  its  safeguarding  activities  of  the  intangible 
cultural heritage, each State Party shall endeavour to ensure the widest 
possible participation of communities, groups and, where appropriate, 
individuals  that  create,  maintain  and  transmit  such  heritage,  and  to 
involve them actively in its management.  88    

  While  recognizing  the  value  of  community  management  and  input  into  ICH 
management, “widest possible participation” is vague in definition and application. 
Additionally,  community  participation  itself  is  wrought  with  practical  imple-
mentation difficulties, such as self-selecting representative community members, 
unequal bargaining power, and paternalistic impact on the ICH itself.  89   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

PATTERN RECOGNITION  

  499 

 The  Scottish  Government  sought  the  cooperation  and  input  of  representatives 
from existing clan and community tartan registers, and no law prohibits alternative 
registers should the community find the government structure unsatisfying. How-
ever, the motivation and return for operating a duplicate register is greatly dimin-
ished  in  the  face  of  officially  sanctioned  registration,  and  no  further  community 
participation  is  incorporated  formally  into  the  register  operations.  This  practical 
discouragement of community organization may impact the external benefits which 
already arose from community regulation of ICH, such as festival sponsorship, web 
resources, and community-run museums, as well as unknown future events or orga-
nizations with social and economic benefits through collective action.  90     

 CONCLUSION 

 ICH offers many social and economic benefits to the originating culture as well 
as diverse cultures globally,  91   and domestic governments as well as international 
preservation  organizations  which  assess  economically  developed  countries’  ICH 
as lower priority for preservation and less dangerous to brand and market place 
these  equally  valuable  contributions  to  ICH  at  risk.  While  the  risk  may  appear 
more  pressing  in  developing  countries  where  scarce  resources  are  or  should  be 
prioritized for infrastructure and other foundational progress, developed countries 
becoming increasingly homogenously Westernized are devoting comparably few 
resources to protecting ICH or are utilizing those resources to commodify ICH. 

 This recent conversion from community to government regulation of ICH 
presents many opportunities for data collection which could indicate the cultural 
social and economic effects in just such an under-investigated instance. Such subtle 
erosion is a challenge to measure, but one indicator of domestic social investment 
and  return  is  the  rate  at  which  new  tartans  are  registered  before  and  after  gov-
ernment intervention; the rate of new applications should be measured by both 
quality and quantity. 

 At most recent count, twelve fictional characters held registered tartans.  92   How-
ever,  the  effect  of  associated  traditional  Scottish  Highland  garb  and  culture  with 
fictional characters, corporate entities, and commercial ventures has not been fully 
investigated; nonetheless, over-commercialization of culture through branding and 
marketing presents a danger of loss of cultural value to the community of origin.  93   

 While  measuring  commercialization,  the  confounding  factor  of  the  tartan’s 
previous  commercialization  during  the  Victorian  era  must  be  considered.  The 
previous commercialization into a tangible, salable good may mitigate the effect 
of  more  recent  governmental  intervention  into  community–regulated  ICH  as 
the  ICH  may  already  be  viewed  as  a  marketable  product  and  less  a  culturally 
valuable piece of ICH. Further, social effects of this intervention can be indica-
tors of proper ICH preservation and safeguarding. For instance, whether modern 
social traditions, such as clan and celebratory utilization, increased or decreased 
or changed in nature. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

 500   

 MEGAN RAE BLAKELY

 Cultural heritage which contains tangible and intangible elements, like tartan, 
offers the opportunity for community groups to leverage the existing knowledge 
of  that  heritage  for  further  social  and  cultural  protection.  While  many  Scottish 
people  still  carry  on  their  historical  tartans,  the  commercial  exploitation  of  the 
tartan  threatens  to  lessen  the  value  of  this  ICH,  94    thus  removing  the  social  and 
economic benefits that many international organizations seek to preserve in devel-
oping countries. Further, the global benefit to preserving unique ICH is incalcu-
lable and fundamentally enriches cultural diversity. 

 Further research may indicate whether additional legislative action to preserve cul-
tural heritage in a developed economy would offer sufficient protection to outweigh 
the administrative implementation and enforcement burden of such lawmaking to 
ensure a majority ethnic population in a Westernized country can preserve and main-
tain unique ICH. However, heavy government involvement in the registration and 
oversight of ICH could ossify the culture in its present state, contradicting the social 
transmission and evolving nature of ICH. A positive first step in the protection of UK 
cultural heritage would be to ratify the ICH Convention as well as to adopt commu-
nity cultural oversight into governmental structures. This ratification would provide 
the international acknowledgement and resources to best promote and protect UK 
ICH and allow participation in a global forum as well as communicate a vote of gov-
ernmental confidence to the unique cultural communities within the country.    

  ENDNOTES 

  
 1  .   “History.” The Scottish Register of Tartans,  http://www.tartanregister.gov.uk/history.aspx  
(accessed 5 August 2015); 1 August 1747 Hugh Forbes, Musselborough prisoners, NRS reference: 
RH15/38/105.  
  
 2  .   Tangible cultural heritage is further divided into movable and immovable cultural heritage. 
UNESCO Database of National Cultural Heritage Laws,  UNESCO.COM ,  http://portal.unesco.org/
culture/en/ev.php-URL_ID=33928&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html   (accessed 
5 August 2015).  
  
 3  .   “Preoccupation with culture (in its high, mass, popular or anthropological meanings) across a 
range of disciplines is not at all new but a recognition of the ways in which culture is reified, asserted, 
claimed, defended, managed or preserved in and through legal institutions is both relatively novel 
and rather overdue.” Coombe  2005 , 2.  
  
 4  .   The use of “heritage” rather than “property” is an intentional decision within the field. Even 
though intellectual property and cultural heritage can overlap, a number of distinctions call for sep-
arate  terminology.  For  instance,  intellectual  property  (or  in  this  case,  cultural  property)  indicates 
monopolistic exclusionary rights which may be commercially exploited by a rightsholder or be parsed 
into rights that may be lost through legal mechanisms. Particularly for cultural property, the state 
maintained the property for its own economic benefit. Cultural heritage is more representative of the 
concept of preserving and protecting expressions and traditions passed through generations, as well 
as ensuring potential public access. See Prott and O’Keefe  1992 .  
  
 5  .    The Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage , UNESCO (2003) ( hereafter  
ICH  Convention);  during  negotiations  for  and  since  the  Convention’s  adoption,  scholars  expressed 
concern that defining ICH in codified documents could further perpetuate existing cultural divisions. 
“The use of the terms ‘indigenous’ and ‘traditional’ help to perpetuate a historical distinction between 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

PATTERN RECOGNITION  

  501 

 11  .   Records of the Exchequer, 1538, NRS reference: E21/34,  http://www.tartanregister.gov.uk/

(tangible) Western and (intangible) non-Western cultural heritage. We therefore support a defini-
tion of intangible heritage that does not limit instances to the ‘traditional’ or ‘indigenous’, or even 
to cultural forms that have already been passed on from ‘generation to generation’.” See generally 
Deacon et al.  2003 .  
 6  .   Lixinski  2013 .  
  
 7  .   Paterson and Karjala  2003 .  
  
 8  .   Ibid.  
  
  
 9  .    For  the  purposes  of  the  Register,  the  definition  of  ‘tartan’  is  that  contained  within  the  Scottish 
Register  of  Tartans  Act  2008  Section  2:  “A  tartan  is  a  design  which  is  capable  of  being  woven 
consisting of two or more alternating coloured stripes which combine vertically and horizontally 
to form a repeated chequered pattern.” “Guidance.” The Scottish Register of Tartans,  http://www.
tartanregister.gov.uk/Guidance.aspx  (accessed 5 August 2015). The tartan kilt in its modern form has 
a fascinating history, enmeshed in the politics and power, influenced by both cultural mythmaking 
and commercial endeavours. See Trevor-Roper  1983 .  
  
 10  .   “History.” One of the earliest manifestations of tartan, a simple check form, inside a jar filled 
with Roman coins, was found in Falkirk, Scotland and dated to the third century, AD. Record 000-
100-036-743-C, Nat’l Museums Scotland,  http://nms.scran.ac.uk/database/record.php?usi=000-100-
036-743-C  (accessed 6 August 2015).  
  
history.aspx  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
  
 12  .   Spinning Book of the Orphan Hospital Manufactory and Paul’s Work, Edinburgh (part of 
the records of the Dean Orphanage and Cauvin’s Trust), NRS reference: GD417/262,  http://www.
tartanregister.gov.uk/history.aspx  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
 13  .   Ibid.  
  
 14  .   Ibid.  
  
 15  .   “Tartan and the Dress Act of 1746.” Scottish Tartans Authority,  http://www.tartansauthority.
  
com/resources/archives/the-archives/scobie/tartan-and-the-dress-act-of-1746/   (accessed  5  August 
2015).  
 16  .   GD128/Box 38/Bundle 4, NRS reference: RH19/36/2.  
  
 17  .   NRS reference: GD157/2548/3.  
  
 18  .   1 August 1747, Hugh Forbes.  
  
  
 19  .   “On 1 August 1747, Hugh Forbes wrote a letter concerning the plight of three shearers, 
imprisoned by the magistrates of Musselburgh:  ‘by all the information I could procure their only 
Crimes  (are)  Poverty  and  Tartan,  which  too  often  Appear  coupled.’   He  urges  his  correspondent 
not to allow the shearers to die of hunger now that their 3d (pence) a day allowance has been 
withdrawn.” Ibid, no page number.  
  
  
  
  
scotland.gov.uk/News/Releases/2007/07/09113114 .  
  
  
nonmarket values and may be a more useful economic tool in the cultural value context.  
  
  
farkansas.net/encyclopedia/entry-detail.aspx?entryID=2342  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
 28  .   See generally Throsby  2011  and Grant  2012 .  
  
 29  .   UNESCO  2008 .  
  
  
 30  .   “Where there are threats of serious or irreversible environmental damage, lack of full scientific 
certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost effective measures to prevent environmental 
degradation.” United Nations Environment Programme 1999.  

 20  .   Urquhart  1994 .  
 21  .   Ibid.  
 22  .   NRS reference: GD1/1295/5.  
 23  .   “National Tartan Register to be Set Up.” The Scottish Government, 9 June 2007,  http://www.

 24  .   Ibid.  
 25  .    Contingent  valuation  is  an  alternative  economic  measurement  method  used  for  calculating 

 26  .   “National Tartan Register to be Set Up.”  
 27  .   “Arkansas Tartan.” Encyclopedia of Arkansas History and Culture,  http://www.encyclopediao-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

 502   

 MEGAN RAE BLAKELY

 45  .   “Holyrood Supports the Tartan Register,”  BBC News , 19 June 2008,  http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/

 32  .    “Recording  Tartan.”  Scottish  Tartans  World  Register,  site  archived,   www.scottish-tartans-

 33  .   “FAQ.” Scottish Tartans Museum,  http://www.scottishtartans.org/faq.html  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
 34  .   “Tartans of Scotland.”  http://www.tartans.scotland.net/  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
 35  .   “FAQ.”  
 36  .   Additionally in 2008 Scotland completed an inventory of ICH in Scotland. McCleery  2008 .  
 37  .   Herbert  2008 , 7, citing R. Burnside (2006),  Scottish Register of Tartans Act . SPICe Briefing 

 38  .   Ibid.  
 39  .   Ibid., 13.  
 40  .   Ibid.  
 41  .   Ibid., 7.  
 42  .   Ibid., 13.  
 43  .   Ibid.  
 44  .    “Search  the  Register.”  Scottish  Register  of  Tartans,   http://www.tartanregister.gov.uk/search.

  
 31  .   Intellectual property law protection regarding rights to relevant aspects of tartan as intellectual 
property still apply. “Inclusion of a tartan in the Register indicates that the tartan and its name are 
unique to the Register and meet the registration criteria of the Scottish Register of Tartans Act 2008. 
No other rights are conferred. For further information on UK design right or to register your design, 
please visit the UK Intellectual Property Office at  www.ipo.gov.uk .” “Guidance.”  
  
world-register.com  (accessed July 2008).  
  
  
  
  
  
No 06/103. Edinburgh: Scottish Parliament.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
aspx  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
  
hi/scotland/7461981.stm  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
 46  .   Herbert  2008 , 14.  
  
 47  .   “National Tartan Register to be Set Up.”  
  
 48  .    See  generally,  “Types  of  Protection.”  International  Trademark  Association,   http://www.
  
inta.org/TrademarkBasics/FactSheets/Pages/GeographicalIndicationsFactSheet.aspx  (accessed 5 August 
2015).  
 49  .   Herbert  2008 , 14.  
  
 50  .   “Guidance.”  
  
 51  .   Ibid., at s. 3 and s. 7.  
  
 52  .   Ibid.  
  
  
 53  .   “Some tartans are for the use of certain groups of people only, e.g., a clan or family tartan, a per-
sonal or a corporate tartan. You may record here any restrictions you wish to impose on the wearing, 
the use and re-use or production of your tartan, however the Keeper is not responsible for enforcing 
any such restrictions and has no authority to do so. For further information on designs or to register a 
design in the UK, please visit the UK Intellectual Property Office at  www.ipo.gov.uk. ” Ibid.  
  
  
  
www.wipo.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo001en.htm  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
  
  
  
design/d-applying/d-before/d-needreg.htm  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 60  .   Scotland Act 1998, Schedule 5, Part 2 (3) (C4).  
 61  .   CDPA, at Part I.  
 62  .   [2012] EWPCC 37 (5 October 2012).  
 63  .   Ibid.  
 64  .   Ibid.  
 65  .   Harris Tweed Act (1993),  http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukla/1993/11/body/enacted .  
 66  .   Ibid.  

 57  .   Ibid.  
 58  .   The Copyrights, Designs and Patents Act (CDPA) (1988).  
 59  .   “Do I Need to Register My Design?” Intellectual Property Office,  http://www.ipo.gov.uk/types/

 54  .   Ibid.  
 55  .   Ibid.  
 56  .   The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary & Artistic Works, 1161  U.N.T.S . 3,  http://

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

PATTERN RECOGNITION  

  503 

 67  .   Nair and Kumar  2005 .  
 68  .   Ibid., 6.  
 69  .   Thual  2009 .  
 70  .   Dutfield and Suthersanen  2008 .  
 71  .    “Assembly  Lisbon  Union.”  World  Intellectual  Property  Organization,   http://www.wipo.int/

  
  
  
  
  
treaties/en/ShowResults.jsp?lang=en&search_what=B&bo_id=11  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
 72  .   Josling  2006 .  
  
 73  .   Nair and Kumar  2005 , 8–9.  
  
 74  .   Dutfield and Suthersanen  2008 , 197.  
  
 75  .   Nair and Kumar  2005 , 205.  
  
 76  .   Ibid.  
  
 77  .   “Guidance.”  
  
 78  .   Ibid.  
  
  
 79  .   “The applicant must be the head or chief of the family or clan, or have the written authority of 
the head or chief. Where there is no chief or head, the authority of the Clan Society will be acceptable 
to register a Clan Society tartan.” Ibid.  
  
 80  .   “Documenting Intangible Cultural Heritage in Scotland,” United Kingdom National Comm. 
for UNESCO,  http://www.unesco.org.uk/documenting_intangible_cultural_heritage_(ich)_in_scotland  
(accessed 5 August 2015).  
 81  .   ICH Convention.  
  
  
 82  .    The  ICH  Convention  was  partially  motivated  as  a  “corrective”  to  the  World  Heritage  List 
exclusion of valuable cultures without maintained cultural locations, which disproportionately 
affected southern hemisphere countries. Kurin  2004 .  
  
  
  
environment.nsw.gov.au/achreform/  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
  
  
  
  
  
tative sociological study to measure impact would be valuable.  
 91  .   Comaroff and Comaroff  2009 .  
  
  
 92  .   R. Suehle, “Twelve Fictional Characters with Officially Registered Tartans,”  Wired , 21 September 
2012,  http://www.wired.com/geekmom/2012/09/registered-fictional-tartans/  (accessed 5 August 2015).  
  
  

 86  .   Howell  2013 , 107.  
 87  .   “Holyrood Supports the Tartan Register.”  
 88  .   ICH Convention, Participation of Communities, Groups, and Individuals, Part III, Art. 15.  
 89  .   Botes and von Rensburg  2000 .  
 90  .   As the Act has now been in effect for over five years, a comprehensive qualitative and quanti-

 83  .   ICH Convention.  
 84  .   Howell  2013 , 106.  
 85  .   E.g.,  “Aboriginal  Cultural  Heritage  Reform,”  NSW  Environment  &  Heritage,   http://www.

 93  .   See generally Comaroff and Comaroff  2009 .  
 94  .   But see Scafidi  2001 .   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Botes  ,   L.  , and   D.     van Rensburg  .  2000 . “ Community Participation in Development: Nine Plagues and 
Twelve Commandments .”  Community Development Journal   35 , no.  1 :  41 – 58 .  

    Comaroff  ,   John L.  , and   Jean     Comaroff  .  2009 .  Ethnicity, Inc.   Chicago :  University Press of Chicago .  

    Coombe  ,   R  .  2005 . “ Legal Claims to Culture in and Against the Market .”  Law, Culture and the 
Humanities   1 , no.  1 :  35 – 52 .  

    Deacon  ,   H.  ,   L.     Dondolo  ,   M.     Mrubata  , and   S.     Prosalendis  .  2003 .  The Subtle Power of Intangible 
Cultural Heritage: Legal and Financial Instruments for Safeguarding Intangible Heritage .  Cape Town : 
 HSRC Publishers .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284

 504   

 MEGAN RAE BLAKELY

    Dutfield  ,   G.  , and   U.     Suthersanen  .  2008 .  Global International Property Law .  Cheltenham, UK :  Edward Elgar .  

    Grant  ,   C  .  2012 . “ Analogies and Links between Cultural and Biological Diversity .”  Journal of Cultural 
Heritage Management and Sustainable Development   2 , no.  2 :  153–63 .  

    Herbert  ,   S  .  2008 . “ Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill: Parliamentary Consideration Prior to Stage 3 .” 
 Scottish Parliament Information Centre (SPICe) Briefing 08/24 (29 April),   http://www.scottish.parliament.
uk/Research%20briefings%20and%20fact%20sheets/SB08-24.pdf  (accessed 14 October 2015).  

    Howell  ,   D  .  2013 . “ The Intangible Cultural Heritage of Wales: A Need for Safeguarding? ”  International 
Journal of Intangible Heritage   8 : 104–16.  

    Josling  ,   T  .  2006 . “ The War on  Terrior : Geographical Indications as a Transatlantic Trade Conflict .” 
 Journal of Agricultural Economy   57 , no.  3 : 337–63.  

    Kurin  ,   R  .  2004 . “ Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage in the 2003 UNESCO Convention: A Critical 
Appraisal .”  Museum International   56 , no.  1–2 :  66 – 77 .  

    Lixinski  ,   L  .  2013 .  Intangible Cultural Heritage in International Law .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

    McCleery  ,   Alison  ,  et al .  2008 . “ Scoping and Mapping Intangible Cultural Heritage in Scotland Final 
Report .”  Edinburgh: Edinburgh Napier University and Museums Galleries Scotland ,  http://www.
museumsgalleriesscotland.org.uk/research-and-resources/resources/publications/publication/71/
scoping-and-mapping-intangible-cultural-heritage-in-scotland-final-report  (accessed 14 October 2015).  

    Nair  ,   R. L.  , and   R.     Kumar  .  2005 .  Geographical Indications: A Search for Identity .  New Delhi :  LexisNexis 
Butterworths .  

    Paterson  ,   R.  , and   D.     Karjala  .  2003 . “ Looking Beyond Intellectual Property in Resolving Protection of 
the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Indigenous Peoples .”  Cardozo Journal of International and Com-
parative Law   11 , no.  2 : 633–70.  

    Prott  ,   L.  , and   P.     O’Keefe  .  1992 . “ ‘Cultural Heritage’ or ‘Cultural Property’? ”  International Journal of 
Cultural Property   1 , no.  2 : 307–20.  

    Scafidi  ,   S  .  2001 .  Intellectual Property and Cultural Products ,  81 B.U. L. REV. 793 .  

    Throsby  ,   D  .  2011 . “ Cultural Capital .” In  A Handbook of Cultural Economics ,  2nd ed. , edited by 
  R.     Towse  , 142–46.  Cheltenham :  Edward Elgar Publishing .  

    Thual  ,   D.  ,  et al .  2009 .  Study on the Protection of Geographical Indications for Products other than Wines, 
Spirits, Agricultural Products or Foodstuffs .  Commissioned by the Directorate General for Trade of the 
European Commission ,  http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2011/may/tradoc_147926.pdf  (accessed 
5 August 2015)  

    Trevor-Roper  ,   H  .  1983 . “ The Invention of Tradition: The Highland Tradition of Scotland .” In  The Inven-
tion of Tradition , edited by   E.     Hobsbawn   and   T.     Ranger  ,  15 – 42 .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press .  

   UNESCO .  2008 . “ Links between Biological and Cultural Diversity: Report of the International Workshop 
(26–28 September 2007) .”  Paris :  UNESCO .  

   United Nations Environment Programme .  1999 .  Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 
UNCED 1992 ,  http://www.unep.org/Documents.Multilingual/Default.asp?DocumentID=78&ArticleID=
1163&l=en  (accessed 5 August 2015).  

    Urquhart  ,   B  .  1994 .  Identifying Tartans: The New Compact Study Guide and Identifier .  London :  Apple .    

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:30:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739115000284


