International Journal of Cultural Property (2010) 17:217–255. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2010 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S094073911000010X

Legalizing “Compensation” and the
Spoils of War: The Russian Law on
Displaced Cultural Valuables and the
Manipulation of Historical Memory
Patricia Kennedy Grimsted*

Abstract: This article analyses the historical and political background of the
Russian law on cultural property displaced to the Soviet Union at the end of
the Second World War (April 1998, with amendments in 2000). Following the
1990–1991 revelations about the extensive cultural treasures captured by Soviet
authorities at the end of the Second World War, there was hope abroad for
restitution, with a series of bilateral agreements with the countries of origin,
but in spring 1994 the Duma blocked further restitution. We follow the fierce
debates, the Constitutional Court ruling (1999), the amended law (July 2000),
and its implementation under the Ministry of Culture.

We show the wide-scale Russian support of the law, with its concept of

“compensatory restitution” that virtually nationalizes the spoils of war, with
only scant provisions for restitution to those who fought against the Nazi
regime and those victimized by it. What explanation emerges involves the
manipulation of historical memory by the Stalinist regime, as the cultural
trophies assume symbolic importance in the “myth and memory” of “victory”
in the Great Patriotic War. Restitution to legal owners is to be considered only
in exchange for equally substantial compensation for wartime loss and
suffering of the population at large.

A decade ago the Washington Conference on Holocaust-Era Assets highlighted
what had become a major issue on the international scene. A new call went out
for restitution of cultural property, and especially art, still displaced as a result of
the Second World War, with special consideration for victims of the Holocaust. At
the conclusion of the conference 44 delegations, including the Russian Federation,

*Senior Research Associate, Ukrainian Research Institute, and Associate, Davis Center for Russian
and Eurasian Studies, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA; Honorary Fellow, International Institute
of Social History, Amsterdam. Email: grimsted@fas.harvard.edu

217

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

218

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

signed the Washington Principles on Nazi-Looted Art.1 Starting in 2008, a series
of international conferences have been reflecting on achievements over the decade
since the Washington Conference. One of the first, a workshop at the Harvard
Law School in February 2008, zeroed in on one of the most controversial elements
covered in the Washington Conference.

Extensive displaced cultural valuables from all over Europe are still in Russia,
where restitution efforts have been stalled by passage in 1998 of a new law that
favors nationalization over return to their homelands. The sensational revelations
about secret depositories of “beautiful loot,” an estimated 12 million books, and
untold linear kilometers of archives from all over Europe had come only with the
collapse of the Soviet Union. At the close of World War II, the Red Army’s trium-
phal march to Berlin and the Soviet flag raised over the German capital destroyed
Hitler’s plans for a spectacular museum in his hometown of Linz. The Western
Allies were busy returning most of the vast cultural property Nazi agencies had
collected to the various countries from which it was seized.

Stalin, by contrast, launched his own counterplans for a Trophy Administration
and a super museum heralding victory on the Eastern Front. Under his orders
Soviet authorities lost no time in emptying the salt mines and castles in parts of
Germany and Eastern Europe occupied by the Red Army that had served as evac-
uation sites for cultural treasures from German museums, libraries, and archives.
Some of the cultural property transferred to the Soviet Union under Stalin’s or-
ders had earlier been plundered by the Nazi regime under Hitler’s orders. Many of
the twice-plundered items from occupied lands and others from within the Reich
itself had been seized from Holocaust victims, although Russians were slow to rec-
ognize the Holocaust. When news of the secret depositories spread around the
world, Western countries hoped those cultural hostages could soon go home, as
had Hitler’s loot found in the Western occupation zones half a century earlier.2
Instead, after years of debate, the new and hoped-for democratic regime in Mos-
cow passed a law justifying and virtually nationalizing the Russian spoils of war.
The U.S. State Department volume of Proceedings, rushed into print in 1999,
included not only the “Washington Conference Principles on Nazi-Confiscated Art”
(Appendix G) but also an English translation of the Russian Federal Law No. 64-FZ
of 15 April 1998, “On Cultural [Valuables Displaced] to the USSR as a Result of
the Second World War and Located [on] the Territory of the Russian Federation”
(Appendix M).3 The 1998 law is still in force today in the Russian Federation, as
amended by a follow-up law in 2000, after the Constitutional Court issued some
objections, and with slight modifications in 2004. (See the latest English transla-
tion of the amended law by Akinsha and Grimsted in Appendix 1 of this issue.)
The head of the Russian delegation assured the conference that his country was
prepared to cooperate in the identification and to entertain claims for cultural
valuables “confiscated by the Nazis from their victims . . . even after the expiration
of the . . . 18-month period [of limitations set by the law] beginning from April
21, 1998.”3

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

219

Ten years after the signing of that first version of the Russian cultural property
law, and its discussion at the Washington Conference, the international debate about
the fate of the long-hidden cultural property in Russia from public and private
foreign collections is unresolved. Stalin’s victory museum never emerged. Many
archives have gone home to Western Europe, most of the returns involving pay-
ment of “storage charges” and other expenses, together with an “exchange” com-
ponent of archival Rossica from the receiving countries. But from the vast art booty,
only the symbolic stained glass from the Marienkirche in Frankfurt on Oder have
returned to their homeland. While the present article cannot offer resolution, we
may nonetheless attempt to put the law in historical and sociopolitical context
and try to understand the popular support of it in Russia. International lawyers
have difficulty defending the law, as apparent in several legal and ethical analyses
already published elsewhere.4 Many would sympathize with Russian President Boris
Yeltsin, who strongly opposed the Russian law, understanding that a law favoring
nationalization over restitution on the cultural front would keep Russia at odds
with the rest of Europe and with Holocaust heirs in the United States as well.

Germans refuse to recognize the law or to negotiate under its provisions: They
signed a “Treaty . . . on Good-Neighborliness, Partnership and Cooperation” with
the USSR in November 1990, followed by an “Agreement . . . on Cultural Cooper-
ation” with the successor Russian Federation in December 1992.5 Even the Rus-
sian Constitutional Court in its judgment of constitutionality left aside the rather
debatable legal concept of compensatory restitution. As one commentator put it,
“Legal issues do not and cannot have the last word in the battle over the politics
and ethics of relocated art,” but even choosing the adjective “relocated” rather than
“displaced” also affects diverging interpretations of the issues at hand.6 A Western
historian can only venture a few highlights and impressions.

Factors in the wide-scale Russian support of the law are harder to comprehend.
Before commenting on implementation of the law and the scant achievements in
restitution under its auspices, we sketch briefly the political context of its passage
and the flavor of fierce debates that ensued. Other articles in this issue concentrate
on more specific issues. Clearly we must look beyond international law, beyond
the lack of Western legal traditions in Russia, or the absence of a concept of pri-
vate property in the Soviet Union, to the sociopolitical context and the manipu-
lation of historical memory by the Stalinist regime. What explanation emerges
seems to revolve around the symbolic importance of those long-hidden cultural
trophies as “myth and memory” of “victory” in the Great Patriotic War, as the
Second World War is still known in Russia.

1992: RESTITUTION HOPES

After all the revelations about the secret depositories in 1990 and 1991, initially
there was some immediate talk of restitution in Moscow. Indeed in 1992, there

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

220

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

was still hope. In June 1992, a Decree of the Russian Government created the State
Commission for Restitution of Cultural Valuables to decide and advise on such
issues.7 The commission was not formally abolished until March 2001, long after
the term “restitution” had been virtually banished in Russia, but the commission
had done very little to encourage any form of restitution and was already at a
standstill by June 1993.8

In 1992 the Netherlands had started negotiations for the return of the Koenigs
Collection of master drawings; eventually they did gain the right of examination,
an inventory, and an exhibition at the Pushkin Museum in 1995.9 The Dutch were
the first to sign an agreement for archival restitution in 1992, but the Dutch ar-
chives did not go home until after passage of the 1998/2000 law, and not before
Queen Beatrix visited Moscow in 2001 to sign an agreement for their return (one
batch at the end of 2001 and the rest late in 2003), another example of the high
stakes required in the politics of cultural restitution. That part of the Koenigs Col-
lection that surfaced in Ukraine went home to the Netherlands in 2003 (having
been taken by a Ukrainian Trophy Brigade that also visited Weesenstein Castle
outside of Dresden), but the rest of the drawings are still in Moscow, and the Dutch
have since despaired of pressing their claim.

In June 1992 some 600 Dutch books went on exhibit at the Foreign Literature
Library (VGBIL) in Moscow, and in October 1992, they were returned to the
Netherlands, in what was—and still can be termed—“Russia’s Only Restitution
of Books to the West.” What was not known at the time was that the Dutch
books that were returned had arrived in Minsk in the fall of 1945 in a shipment
containing an estimated half million books plundered by the Nazis from sev-
eral countries in Western Europe and then appropriated by a Soviet trophy
brigade in Silesia. Moreover, the 600 books returned to Amsterdam from
Moscow were only a small part of an estimated 20,000–30,000 twice-plundered
Dutch books that had arrived in the USSR. The batch of 600 had been for-
warded to Moscow initially because there was no censor to deal with them in
Minsk, and then no one in the Belarusian capital could catalogue, let alone read,
them.10

Following the 1992 Dutch agreements, a higher level French diplomatic agree-
ment was signed in Paris by French and Russian foreign ministers in November
1992, a year after publication in Moscow and then in Paris of Grimsted’s findings
about the seven linear kilometers of French archives in Moscow, including mili-
tary intelligence (II-ème Bûreau) and National Security (Sûreté nationale) records.11
The archives were to be returned to France by 1994.

Other countries signed bilateral cultural agreements with the Russian Federa-
tion, including Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Luxem-
bourg, Poland, and the United Kingdom, most of them containing articles providing
for the mutual restitution of displaced cultural property, including archives.12 None
of those agreements still on the books were mentioned in the 1999 decision by the
Constitutional Court in its ruling on the constitutionality of the Russian 1998 law,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

221

although the Russian Constitution puts international agreements above domestic
laws.

1994: STOP RESTITUTION AND START DEBATE

Debate over the Russian law actually started with the issue of the French archives.
In fulfillment of the 1992 agreement, almost two-thirds of the French archives
were returned during the winter of 1993–1994. However, when Duma deputies
learned about more French trucks arriving in Moscow to take home the rest, they
objected bitterly and quickly passed a decree sending the trucks home empty in
May 1994. Debate on the law then opened in earnest: the Duma cited the lack of
international laws and the inadequacy of domestic legislation to justify its refusal
to permit further restitution.

Attitudes demanding compensation accompanied the emerging would-be cap-
italist mentality, but there were no attempts to define compensation in a legal frame-
work. In the course of 1994 debate, one Duma deputy suggested that France and
other countries should be charged storage fees for the materials held secretly in
Russia for 50 years.13 In fact, the current law does impose storage fees and ap-
praisal charges in any cases of restitution abroad. France had paid half a million
dollars, but the money was lost before it could reach the holding archive. Any
private returns require full monetary compensation in exchange for the value of
the property returned.

Deputies and other Russian politicians justified provisions that “restitution of
cultural treasures” to the “aggressor nations . . . could be possible only by exchange
for Russian cultural treasures.” Deputies openly argued that many of the plundered
cultural treasures from Russia had gone across the ocean from the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany, rather than being returned to the Soviet Union after the
war. For archives they could accurately cite the example of the so-called Smolensk
Archive, which in 1995 was in fact still held in the U.S. National Archives, after the
U.S. Senate refused to permit the return of those more than 500 Communist Party
files that had been scheduled during a presidential summit in 1992. (Those files
were finally returned to Russia in 2002.) But of course Duma deputies were not
aware that, while U.S. intelligence agents had taken 500 files to the States, the So-
viets had found five train wagons full of records from the same archive in Silesia,
which secretly went back to Smolensk in the spring of 1945. And when the United
States had offered to return the 500⫹ files in 1963, Soviet authorities declined to
file a claim, given the negative propaganda potential of the files demonstrating
adverse affects of Soviet collectivization.14

During the initial bitter debates, Russian legislators, backed by legal specialists
from the Academy of Sciences Institute of State and Law, claimed that all cultural
treasures (including archives) “rescued by the Soviet Army” or brought to Mos-
cow under government orders were transferred legally: Stalin, and later his depu-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

222

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

ties, signed the appropriate orders. Interestingly enough today, Stalin’s February
1945 decree, establishing the Trophy Administration under the State Committee
of Defense (GKO), executed just after the Yalta Conference, has still not been de-
classified to this day, nor have the subsequent implementing decrees on the Trophy
Brigades in the same series. The text of several of the most important Stalin de-
crees appeared in a sensational unauthorized edition in 1994; the author died mys-
teriously a year later.15 Yet those are the decrees on which are based the legality of
the Soviet “trophies” as spoils of war, or today as justly deserved compensation for
Russian wartime loss and destruction. Fifty years later in the Duma, a highly placed
Academy legal specialist and representative cried out, “We owe nothing to no one,”
offering a Soviet-style legal justification for not surrendering wartime trophies,
despite already signed bilateral agreements.16

There were, nevertheless, other circles in Russia, including the Yeltsin govern-
ment, that were arguing for compromise and more internationally appropriate so-
lutions. Statements pointing out the inadequacies of the law were submitted to
the Duma in April 1995 by the Ministry of Culture and the State Archival Service
of Russia (Rosarkhiv). Writing in 2009, a Ministry of Culture legal specialist re-
calls how it was shown that passage of the law “would appear as a unilateral Rus-
sian rejection of its international obligations and evoke a negative impact on
international relations of the Russian Federation with various European govern-
ments.”17 In September 1994 a progovernment Izvestiia banner headline denounced
the parliamentary prohibition on restitution as “A Scandal Unworthy of Russia.”18
Thus the debate continued for the next six years. In following the legislative steps
involved in the passage of the law, it is important to remember that in the mid-
1990s there was a fierce debate on the issue, but Russian politicians were not ready
to listen.

1995: FROM THE FAR SHORE—NEW YORK

DEBATES THE “SPOILS OF WAR”

While debates continued in Moscow in January 1995, across the ocean a major in-
ternational conference on the “Spoils of War” gathered in New York City, sponsored
by the Bard Graduate Center with support of the Soros Foundation. Half a century
after the end of the Second World War, we heard a vocal confrontation between Ger-
many and Russia on the issue of cultural restitution. One of the most memorable
sessions featured several of the then-elderly American “Monuments Men” (Mu-
seum, Fine Arts, and Archives [MFA&A] officers), who had guided the U.S. postwar
cultural restitution program.19 Michael Kurtz had just explained how the divisive
attitudes to restitution at the end of the war among the four victorious Allies pre-
vented any joint agreement on restitution from Germany (as he details again in his
article, “The Allied Struggle over Cultural Restitution, 1942–1947,” in this issue).
Hence, each country handled the matter as it saw fit in its own Zone of Occupation

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

223

in Germany. However, “No Allied agreement . . . ever specified that works of art or
other materials could be used for reparations purposes.”20

The British and Americans carried out an elaborate program of restitution to
the countries of origin. The United States returned half a million cultural items to
the Soviet Union, but none of the Monuments Men on stage recalled that fact.
The Russians had never heard that story either before the late 1990s—another
case of Soviet manipulation of wartime and postwar historical memory. If the
Russian copies of the inventories of cultural property returned to the USSR had
been preserved, none of my colleagues in the Ministry of Culture had seen them
before publication of facsimile copies (signed by Soviet restitution officers) from
the U.S. National Archives in 2001, the “Spoils of War Returned.”21 Many of the
Soviet documents with restitution receipts have since surfaced among recently de-
classified Ministry of Foreign Trade records, as revealed in a February 2009 Russian-
German conference in Moscow.22

To be sure, the Americans did not find all of the German-captured treasures,
and many German items slipped illegally into U.S. soldiers’ knapsacks or were si-
phoned off by dealers and other postwar looters. As a most spectacular example,
the New York conference heard a special panel on the case of the Quedlinburg
treasures with the ninth-century Samuel Gospels, a prominent example of Ger-
man cultural heritage taken as war booty to Texas by an American GI. That trea-
sure was finally returned to its homeland in 1990, after settlement through U.S.
courts with a monstrous finder’s fee, the acceptance of which is now apparently
setting a precedent for the Russians.23

Unlike U.S. Army regulations that sought to prohibit such trophies at the time,
Stalin ordered Soviets Trophy Brigades to Germany to bring home as much loot
as possible. Perhaps we should pose the question—was plunder in 1942 and 1943
different from a legal standpoint than plunder in the name of spoils of war or
would-be unilaterally seized compensation in 1945 and 1946? Even if Russians
today may have forgotten, Soviets during the war were quite aware of inter-
national legal concepts and precedents. In November 1942, a Soviet Information
Bulletin condemned the Nazi cultural atrocities and looting on the Eastern Front.
It reminded the world of Article 56 of the 1907 Hague Convention, which

forbids the seizure, damaging and destruction of property of educa-
tional and art institutions, . . . and articles of scientific and artistic value
belonging to individuals and societies as well as to the State. But the
Hitlerite clique in criminal manner tramples upon the rules and laws of
warfare universally accepted by all civilized nations.24

The Hague Convention was actually the work of a prerevolutionary Russian
diplomat, Feodor Martens. But that international agreement did not stop a victo-
rious Stalin from ordering the seizure of trophies as compensatory reparations
from Germany, estimated at no less than 400,000 railway freight wagons of loot
during 1945 alone—from dismantled German factories and museum treasures to
pianos and wine.25 Documents in both the U.S. and French archives well demon-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

224

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

strate that the Western Allies had inventories of what the Soviets were taking from
German museums, but they never confronted the Soviets on that issue at the time.
That knowledge did not stop U.S. postwar restitution to the USSR. The Cold War
was already brewing: The political future of Germany was more important to the
Western high command.

The official Russian position today follows Stalin’s decreed conception that “to the
victor go the spoils”—reinforced by the argument that those transfers to the Soviet
Union were carried out legally after the war as compensation to which Russia was le-
gitimately entitled, as opposed to Nazi illegal seizure and destruction of cultural
property during the war. Yet such a concept of compensation is hardly a measurable
legal principle, nor does it follow from the Yalta agreement for Soviet economic rep-
arations on which Stalin insisted at the time. Rather, compensation has become a
vague rallying cry, as a concept closer to trophies or spoils of war. Certainly it is far
removed from the legal implications of restitution in kind, because the basis of losses
were never established that might have justified in-kind replacement, as Konstantin
Akinsha explains in his article in this issue, “Stalin’s Decrees and Soviet Trophy Bri-
gades: Compensation, Restitution in Kind, or ‘Trophies’ of War?”

A large part of the German cultural property taken to the Soviet Union was
returned to East Germany during the Soviet era, including many (but not all) paint-
ings from the Dresden Gallery, as Pushkin Museum director Irina Antonova re-
ported in New York.26 Indeed, during the Soviet period particularly under Nikita
Khrushchev, when it was politically expedient, there had been some major returns
of trophy cultural valuables and archives, especially to Eastern bloc brothers. But
today many Russians complain openly in the press about the return of many (but
hardly all) of the paintings from the Dresden Gallery in the late 1950s. Today,
restitution no longer serves as political compensation to socialist “brothers.” With
the emergence of a purportedly democratic new regime in Moscow, restitution
has been turning into commercial demands for capitalist-style compensation.

Much of the German-owned cultural property from public and private collec-
tions taken to Russia has not gone home, including two Gutenberg Bibles that could
well count as cultural heritage. Another such example is the Bremen Kunsthalle col-
lection, seized—and in this case literally saved—in Germany by a private Soviet sol-
dier. Since he and his Red Army buddies took it home without orders, its return to
Bremen could not come under the 1998 law. Before his death, Baldin repeatedly re-
quested successive Soviet—and then Russian—leaders to return the collection home
after he learned of its provenance; but the collection is still in Russia, as we learn in
the article, “Why Can’t Private Art “Trophies” Go Home from the War? The Baldin-
Bremen Kunsthalle Case,” by Konstantin Akinsha in this issue.

The Cold War was still brewing, not only at the conference in New York but
also in Moscow, symbolically represented in a photograph on the front page of
the newspaper Pravda in March 1995 (Figure 1).

In the picture, an American Monuments Man, Captain James Rorimer (later
director of the Metropolitan Museum), is directing U.S. soldiers carrying plundered

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

225

FIGURE 1. Clipping from the full-page report in the Moscow newspaper Pravda, no. 57 (29
March 1995). Report on “Spoils of War” conference in New York City, by Vladimir Teteriat-
nikov,“The‘Cold War’Behind Museum Blinds.”The 1945 photograph (from the Signal Corps
Collection in the U.S. National Archives) pictures American MFA&A officer James Rorimer
(later director of the Metropolitan Museum), directing soldiers removing works of art from
the Castle of Neuschwanstein in Bavaria to be taken to the Munich Central Collecting Point
for restitution. That castle had been one of the main repositories for looted art from France
run by the Einsatzstab Reichsleiter Rosenberg during the war. The Pravda caption reads
“American Troops with Trophy Works of Art.” Reproduction courtesy of the editors of Pravda.

canvases down the stairs in the Bavarian castle of Neuschwanstein to be trans-
ported to the Munich Central Collecting Point, one of the several restitution pro-
cessing centers under U.S. Military Government in Germany (OMGUS), for return
to their country of origin. That fairy-tale Bavarian castle had been the Einsatzstab
Reichsleiter Rosenberg’s (ERR’s) prime repository for plundered art from French
Jewish collections. This photograph has become familiar in many accounts of the
Western Allied cultural restitution after the war, and it coincidentally appeared in
an article celebrating the Monuments Men in the Smithsonian Magazine just be-
fore the Harvard Law School Workshop in February 2008.27

In Moscow, however, the photograph was manipulated to present an opposite
and more ominous connotation of American “trophies”: The caption on the front
page of Pravda (Truth) read merely, “American troops with trophy works of art,”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

226

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

with no explanation about their destination. It appeared symbolically a week be-
fore a preliminary draft of the Federal Law under discussion was first adopted by
an overwhelming majority by the upper house of the Russian legislature, the Coun-
cil of the Federation. The banner headline read, “‘The Cold War’ behind Museum
Blinds,” the sole illustration for a full-page report extremely critical of the “Spoils
of War” Conference in New York City. The article was subtitled “How Russian Art
Experts Are Surrendering into Captivity Masterpieces That Turned Up in the USSR
After Victory over Germany in 1945.”28

The contrasting Western and Russian use of the same image illustrates how the
attitudes of the Cold War persist over the fate of Russia’s “beautiful loot” and the
differing perceptions of the spoils of war in Russia. Yet we do not come any closer
to understanding why the large ultra-patriotic segment of opinion was so strong
in Russia at the time and continues to prevail. Nor does it make any more sense
when we learn that the author of the Moscow article, Vladimir Teteriatnikov, one
of the most vocal proponents of passage of the law, was in fact a Russian émigré
art historian who had come to the United States in the 1970s and already had
American citizenship.29

Among those fiercely criticized in the Pravda article was Ekaterina Genieva, di-
rector of the VGBIL in Moscow, whom many of us know as one of the more rea-
sonable proponents of cultural restitution. She spoke openly about the 11 million
German books transferred to the Soviet Union and suggested at the conclusion of
the conference in New York that, if restitution issues for art were going to leave
the European continent divided, perhaps the further restitution of library books,
such as those unneeded early German imprints taking up extra shelf space in her
Moscow library, if returned to Germany, could “make us friends” again and help
create “a shared European community.”30 The Pravda article, on the other hand,
considered Genieva’s “anti-Russian rhetoric a disgrace to the Russian delega-
tion.”31 Genieva had earlier suggested that

claims to property [or] ownership rights . . . by the German side lose any
validity when the scale of guilt is taken into account. But claims to own-
ership on the Russian side, and demands for compensation for damages,
also do not hold up if we take into account the wrong done in terms of
noncompliance with international law regarding the protection of cul-
tural property, the present state of affairs, and the present state of a sig-
nificant number of the trophy holdings in Russia.32

Teteriatnikov, to be sure, did not quote that opinion of Genieva in his article. He
simply concluded, “The international conference in New York, bringing together
leading specialists, came to the conclusion that there is no legal basis to require
Russia to give up its trophies.”33

The initial draft of the law was already before the Russian legislature.34 Three
weeks later the Russian lower house, the State Duma, declared “A moratorium on
the return of cultural valuables displaced in the years of the Great Fatherland
War”—until the law could be enacted.35

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

227

Neither did Teteriatnikov take notice of the concluding address by Lyndel Prott
representing UNESCO at the New York conference, where three years before the
Washington Principles, she movingly set forth a review of UNESCO efforts and
the “Principles for the Resolution of Disputes Concerning Cultural Heritage Dis-
placed during the Second World War.”36 Today, an edited version of Prott’s prin-
ciples is still being considered by UNESCO, which, if not completely adulterated
in the process, may serve as a weaker, although more internationally acceptable,
variant of the Washington Principles for all types of displaced cultural valuables.37
A year later when Russian Minister of Culture Evgenii Sidorov opened an ex-
hibition of the Koenigs drawings at the Pushkin Museum in Moscow in October
1995, he suggested the exhibit symbolized “a liberation of the last prisoners of
war—the cultural valuables.”38 Teteriatnikov, as if in reply, published a pamphlet
arguing Russia’s right to the Koenigs Collection of master drawings. He based his
argument on captured German documents held today in Moscow, demonstrating
that the German banker Franz Koenigs, who lived in exile in the Netherlands until
he was assassinated in 1940, had sold the collection to Hitler’s agent legitimately.39
To be sure, Teteriatnikov made no mention of the January 1943 London Declara-
tion, whereby the Soviet Union and 16 Allies declared “null and void” Nazi-style
wartime “sales” and seizures. (Incidentally, Article 2 of the current Russian Law
references that Declaration but erroneously attributes it to the United Nations).
Not all Russians today follow Teteriatnikov’s rhetoric, but a decade and a half later
in mid-2010, the Russian-held part of the Koenigs Collection was still in Moscow,
and Dutch restitution specialists are discouraged about further pursuit of their
claim.

1996: RUSSIA JOINS THE COUNCIL OF EUROPE—WITH

UNFULFILLED CONDITIONS

In the fall of 1995, Russia’s failure to resolve unfinished chapters in restitution of
cultural treasures and archives to other European countries was the subject of hear-
ings before the Council of Europe (CoE). Ukraine had already been accepted as a
member of the CoE by November 1995 without obligations, but Russian accep-
tance was delayed. Some members went so far as to suggest that Russia should not
be admitted before it made good on the cultural and archival claims of member
States. As a compromise, Russia was required to sign a statement of intent in order
to be admitted to CoE membership in January 1996. Along with points regarding
human rights and other issues, two points made specific reference to cultural valu-
ables, and Russia agreed:

xi. to negotiate claims for the return of cultural property to other Eu-
ropean countries on an ad hoc basis that differentiates between types of
property (archives, works of art, buildings etc.) and of ownership (pub-
lic, private or institutional);. . .

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

228

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

xiv. to settle rapidly all issues related to the return of property claimed
by Council of Europe member states, in particular the archives trans-
ferred to Moscow in 1945.40

Since that document was signed, those conditions never appeared in the Russian
press, as far as I know, and certainly were not heard, let alone ratified, by the
legislature.

Not even half a year later, in the heat of the 1996 Russian presidential cam-
paign, a week after Victory Day (9 May), the Duma passed a first reading of the
proposed law nationalizing the spoils of war. Indicative of extreme nationalist at-
titudes, a week later Teteriatnikov published another full-page diatribe against res-
titution in Pravda—“Will the Russian People Be Robbed Again?”—listing various
acts or proposals for restitution. That blacklist even included library books that
Moscow had transferred to western Ukraine in 1939 after that area had been an-
nexed from Poland.41 And it included other cultural valuables that had been trans-
ferred to Ukraine after the war. When many in the Yeltsin administration were
named as offenders, Deputy Minister of Culture Mikhail Shvydkoi, accused of “sell-
ing out to Germany,” sued and won his case for slander. Shvydkoi then stressed
Russia’s right to “compensation” and the need for a “mechanism” of “equivalent
exchange” in cases where other countries have a legitimate claim for displaced cul-
tural treasures.42

JULY 1996: LEGISLATIVE SETBACK

After the Russian Duma passed the law almost unanimously on 5 July 1996, Ger-
many and other European countries that were affected became understandably
bitter. Official diplomatic protests were registered in Bonn and Moscow. The for-
eign reaction may have had a sobering effect on Russian lawmakers. On 17 July,
the Russian upper house, the Council of the Federation, rejected the law, after
representatives from the victorious Yeltsin administration emphasized the extent
to which its passage would conflict with numerous international agreements and
would compromise “Russian international prestige.”

After defeat of the law in the upper house in July 1996, historian Igor Maksi-
mychev wrote that “the thesis ‘We owe nothing to no one’ entails grave unpleasant
consequences for our country. We do not live on the moon, but rather surrounded
by other countries who always owe us something and to whom we have debts
ourselves.” His suggestion that Russia’s “weakened moral authority” would be
strengthened and restored by its “adherence to generally accepted norms of inter-
national law” brought a strong counterreaction.43 The rare book specialist Alek-
sandr Sevast’ianov, who had written against restitution in the past, in reply, once
again argued in favor of the law that the Council of the Federation threw out and
bitterly denounced the “anti-patriotic and liberal currents of the 1991–1993 pe-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

229

riod,” which were favoring restitution of the “Spoils of War”—which, in his view,
were much “more than trophies” for Russia.44

At the end of the summer of 1996, Minister of Culture Evgenii Sidorov, who a
year earlier had been burned in effigy by conservative nationalists for his support
of restitution, summarized the deficiencies of the proposed law and its alternative
variant. He set forth a convincingly reasoned summary of the importance of res-
titution for Russia on the international front—especially to countries other than
Germany.45 But the extent to which the Yeltsin government favored restitution
was one more point to be trumpeted by the opposition, as the Communist and
nationalist-oriented parties increased their strength in the 1996 parliamentary
elections.

1996–1997: THE LAW GAINS MORE SUPPORT

Support for the law became intense. As chair of the Duma Committee on Culture,
Nikolai Gubenko, himself a native of Odessa, who had lost both parents in the
war, was a popular actor and the last minister of culture under Soviet President
Mikhail Gorbachev. He continued to push for passage of the law, emphasizing
that all of the treasures brought to the Soviet Union were transported “legally,”
according to Allied agreements. “The law indeed provides justice” and would be
supported by “those who perished” in that war and their loved ones—“the votes
of 22 million, if only they could speak.” Lawmakers in both houses again cried out
that Russia had received nothing back from Germany that was taken by the Nazi
invaders.46 The implication clearly was that the Russian cultural treasures not re-
turned had been taken across the ocean. Sometimes Gubenko even made the ac-
cusation explicit, as he did in a BBC broadcast in September 2007, where he claimed
that there was Russian cultural property locked away in Fort Knox for 100 years.47
Minor editorial changes addressed some of the earlier technical criticism of the
law, and the term “ownership” had disappeared from the title, but the only new
article guaranteed ownership rights for the newly independent states on the basis
of their status as former Soviet Union republics. The slightly revised text of the
law passed the Duma almost unanimously on 5 February 1997—291 to 1 with 4
abstentions.48 And then the upper house, the Council of the Federation, passed
the law on 5 March.

MARCH–MAY 1997: OVERRIDING THE PRESIDENTIAL VETO:

YELTSIN’S LAST STAND

Aware of the potential international outcry about the violation of international
law and agreements, and undoubtedly with an eye toward his upcoming visit to
Germany, President Yeltsin vetoed the law on 18 March 1997. In his official mes-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

230

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

sage to the Duma, Yeltsin emphasized that the law contradicted the Constitu-
tion.49 The law came back to the Duma on 4 April. But the specific legal points
raised by Yeltsin, and the Administration’s view on the incompatibility of the law
with international legal norms and Russian bilateral agreements, fell on deaf ears.
Antagonism between the Duma and the president was apparent at every turn.

At a presidential summit in Baden-Baden in April 1997, President Yeltsin re-
sponded to a press inquiry regarding restitution: Russia is a “civilized nation and
will find a civilized solution” to the restitution issue.50 But his admission of the
need for any restitution put him at odds with the new Russian parliament and an
estimated “eighty percent of the population at large who believe that all cultural
treasures should stay in Russia,” and were “not about to be convinced otherwise
by logic, treaties, or credits.”51

The Duma was much more prepared to listen to the law’s chief patron, Nikolai
Gubenko, who emphasized the “symbolic significance” of the struggle for victory
in adopting the law. This time, Gubenko suggested, “It could be appropriately com-
pared to the Battle of Stalingrad.” Fully justifying provisions that “restitution of
cultural treasures” to the “aggressor nations” could “be possible only by exchange
for Russian cultural treasures,” he glossed over other presidential objections.
Gubenko stated that he was thinking only of “the 27 million who perished [dur-
ing the Great Patriotic War] and the graves on the Volga.” He suggested on public
TV that even symbolic restitution to Germany would be like “spitting on those
graves.” Ultra-nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovskii bitterly complained about any pro-
spective Yeltsin restitution to the German “fascist scoundrels.”52 International re-
action was so intense that even the New York Times carried a front-page story,
suggesting that the matter of Nazi-looted “trophy art” and archives still held in
Russia had “emerged as one of Russia’s most vexing foreign policy quandaries.”
The accompanying picture showed French records still in the stacks of the former
Special Archive.53

The Council of the Federation overrode the presidential veto on 14 May 1997,
with 141 of 178 representatives voting in favor of the law. Citing allegations of
voting irregularities, as well as conflict with Russia’s international legal obliga-
tions, President Yeltsin again defied the legislature by refusing to sign the law for
almost a year. A decision of the Constitutional Court (6 April 1998) forced his
hand, when it ruled that it could not consider the issue of constitutionality be-
fore the president signed the law.54 He did so 15 April 1998, creating a Federal
Law.55

FALL 1998: GUBENKO DEFENDS THE LAW IN WASHINGTON

The following November Gubenko took part in the Washington Conference on
Holocaust-Era Assets, defending his support of the new Russian law. In Wash-
ington, he stressed that “the Soviet Union suffered the most.” And hence “Russia

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

231

has a normal right to compensation.” He claimed, “The law is based on the in-
ternational legal principles and other acts, specified in Article 2 of the Law.” He
argued that “the property rights of Russia including the right to transferred cul-
tural valu[abl]es acquired as compensation for damage caused emerge just from
these documents,” as he cited various peace treaties with Italy, Bulgaria, Hun-
gary, and Romania. And he cited arguments that international lawyers would
define as “restitution in kind.” The only problem with that claim, as Konstantin
Akinsha explains in his article in this issue, “Stalin’s Decrees,” is that Russia never
defined its losses or what it had already removed from Germany, making it im-
possible for the Allies to establish procedures for restitution in kind. Gubenko
ended with an appeal to a public opinion poll in Russia that 86% of the popu-
lation supported the law. “And it is natural,” he said, “because the language of
this Law is the language of justice.” He described the loss of his own parents in
the war and concluded that “it will be a shame to divide into ‘ours’ and ‘aliens’
those victims who survived. We must unite all efforts aimed at just compensa-
tion for every victim of the tragedy regardless of nationality.”56 The Washington
Conference listened to Gubenko, but delegates from many of the attending na-
tions could not accept his position.

1998: FOREIGN DENUNCIATION OF THE LAW

Even before President Yeltsin signed the law in April 1998, an issue of the Spoils of
War: International Newsletter in the summer of 1997 presented the preliminary
text of the law and a series of critiques from international lawyers in Belgium,
Hungary, Switzerland, Poland, and the United States. Russian professor Mark Bo-
guslavskii, now based at the Institute for Eastern European Law at Christan-
Albrechts University in Kiel, repeated many of the tenets of the law itself in his
contribution, starting with the principle of compensatory restitution. He noted,
“The Law takes for granted that this principle was anchored in the Peace Treaties
of 1947 and in other international law files,” although he offered neither legal ci-
tations nor analysis of the issue.57 A Hungarian specialist listed numerous points
on which the Russian law violates international law and treaties, stressing that “Hun-
gary is entitled to the restitution of the Hungarian property removed to the Soviet
Union as a result of World War II.”58 A Ukrainian specialist on restitution issues
was highly critical of Russian nationalization, to the exclusion of

Ukraine and other former Soviet republics that suffered in the war [and]
must have a deciding voice in determining the fate of the stocks of art
treasures stolen as war booty. There are enormous cultural assets [that]
should be re-allocated fairly on the basis of international norms and dem-
ocratic principles.59

Wojciech Kowalski, a leading Polish legal specialist on restitution law found many
of its provisions “entirely unclear and dubious,” concluding with the following:

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

232

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

What is known for sure is that such an act will not help to build new
and better relations between “affected states” as was many times de-
clared to be the policy of the Russian Federation. With the passage of
time people can certainly forgive even wanton destruction of towns and
villages but will never forget lost heritage that constitutes a part of their
national identity.60

Other criticism of the law by recognized international legal specialists pinpointed
numerous irregularities that conflict with international law. Kurt Siehr (Univer-
sity of Zurich), a deputy editor of the International Journal of Cultural Property,
explained that “none of . . . the international instruments [mentioned] on which it
is based and which allegedly justify ‘compensatory restitution’ . . . legalize pillage,
or any confiscation of foreign cultural property,” for indeed, “such behavior was
forbidden under international customary law.” He called attention to the errors in
citation of international agreements in Article 2 of the Federal Law, which inci-
dentally were never corrected in the 2000 amendments.61

Siehr fully recognized the extent to which “Russia suffered severely from Ger-
man occupation and plundering.” But then he queried, “How can this be com-
pensated or how can cooperation be guaranteed if Russia takes unilateral measures?”
In conclusion, he quoted the “Wiesbaden Manifesto” of 7 November 1945, signed
by American MFA&A cultural officers in contempt of the U.S. decision to remove
202 German paintings to the United States:

No historical grievance will rankle so long, or be the cause of so much
justified bitterness, as the removal, for any reason, of a part of the her-
itage of any nation, even if that heritage may be interpreted as “a prize
of war.” The same is true for keeping such a prize of war.62

The foreign policy impact of passage of the Russian nationalization law could well
be seen in the context of what might well be called “Russia’s new cultural ‘Cold
War’ with Europe.”63

1999: THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT RULES

President Yeltsin’s case against the law went back for examination by the Consti-
tutional Court, both on technical grounds in connection with alleged irregular
voting procedures in the final passage of the law as well as the conflict between
the law and Russia’s international legal obligations. A compromise and some-
what confusing, if not contradictory, ruling of the Russian high court was handed
down on 20 July 1999, declaring parts of the law “unconstitutional,” but refrain-
ing from invalidating the law. While the Court “ruled that parliamentary proce-
dures were violated when the law was passed,” the concluding article declared
the enactment of the law “was not in conflict with the Constitution.” Among
other details, not unexpectedly, the high court determined that cultural valuables
seized from Nazi Germany at the end of World War II and now located on Rus-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

233

sian territory should not be returned to former “aggressor countries.” At the same
time, it ruled that countries that fought against Hitler, as well as victims of the
Holocaust and the Hitler regime, are entitled to the restitution of their cultural
heritage.64

2000: AN AMENDED LAW IMPLEMENTED UNDER

THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE

Further delays in implementation followed, because many questions were left un-
resolved by the Constitutional Court decision. The matter went back to the legis-
lature, and in November 1999 the Duma undertook a first reading of the proposed
amendments. A Federal Law incorporating those amendments emerged with Pres-
ident Vladimir Putin’s signature on 25 May 2000.65 But that was only the start.
Not only does the Russian law essentially nationalize the spoils of war, but it also
forbids return of cultural property to Germany and other Axis countries. It does,
nevertheless, make very complicated and costly provisions for restitution in ex-
ceptional cases—for Holocaust victims, family relics, and property belonging to
those who fought against Nazi and Fascist regimes.

Pending claims could not be processed immediately, however, because various
implementing decrees would be required.66 A Directive ( postanovlenie) of the Gov-
ernment of the Russian Federation (2 December 2000, no. 913), implementing the
new law, put the Ministry of Culture in charge of processing restitution claims.67
Subsequent Government Directives (11 March 2001, no. 174) have established and
then amended procedures for management of “displaced” cultural trophies and
processing potential claims from foreign countries under the Ministry of Culture.
That March 2001 Government Directive also named the members of a new Inter-
agency Council on Questions of Cultural Valuables Displaced as a Result of the
Second World War, which was to review all foreign claims. The council includes
the directors of major museums and also Gubenko, who shepherded the nation-
alization law through the Duma, where until 2003 he chaired the Committee on
Culture.68

Under the terms of the law, claims from abroad for cultural valuables must be
presented through diplomatic channels of the country involved, negotiated on a
state-to-state basis, but eventually processed by the appropriate office under the
Ministry of Culture (from March 2004 until May 2008, the Ministry of Culture
and Mass Communications).69 Under the presidency of Dmitrii Medvedev, a new
Department of Cultural Heritage (Departament kul’turnogo naslediia), estab-
lished within the Ministry in September 2008, was to be the office involved in
implementing claims from abroad for displaced cultural property; however, with
a subsequent Ministry Order (prikaz) of 24 December 2009, it was renamed the
Department of Cultural Heritage and Fine Arts (Departament kul’turnogo nasle-
diia i izobrazitel’nogo iskusstva). Noticeably, however, the latest December 2009

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

234

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

Order with more details regarding the function and responsibilities of that de-
partment does not give it authority for evaluating initial claims from foreign coun-
tries for cultural valuables held in Russia or for initial diplomatic negotiation with
potential claimants.70 Accordingly, foreign claimants still have to start through dip-
lomatic channels, but they will necessarily have to proceed through the Ministry
of Culture.

In the case of archives, however, negotiations must also be pursued through
the Federal Archival Agency (Rosarkhiv), now under the Ministry of Culture,
and with the holding repository. So far claims for records have been entertained
only for those held in the former Special Archive, now part of the Russian State
Military Archive (RGVA). Although many fonds (or individual files) have been
moved to other archives since their arrival in Moscow, Rosarkhiv has not been
willing to consider restitution of any materials currently held in other state ar-
chives. A full list of fonds (record groups and collections) in RGVA has been
published, and in almost all cases, more detailed file-level finding aids for hold-
ings from the former Special Archive may be openly examined by researchers.71
Except for the Rothschild archive from Vienna, claims have been handled only
on a country-to-country basis, negotiated by the national archives of the claim-
ant country, or in the French case, the Archives of the Ministry of Foreign and
European Affairs.

The law does provide for private claims to be handled through the Russian
courts, but only one case has been attempted, so far unsuccessfully, by an heir
(now an American citizen) to the Hungarian Herzog Collection. One case of
archival restitution has been made to a private family—that of the Rothschild
family archives from Vienna that were returned in 2001 to The Rothschild Ar-
chive in London. That return, however, was billed as an “exchange” rather than
restitution, involving as it did hefty “compensation,” namely, a gift to the Russian
Federal Archives of some 5000 letters of Russian Emperor Alexander II and his
morganatic wife, which had been purchased in London for the occasion at a
high price from Sotheby’s.71a

Several procedures have been amended during the decade since the passage of
the law. For example, in 2006 a provision was enacted bearing on any unique cul-
tural items designated of “special cultural significance.” Such items now require a
separate federal law passed by the legislature before return to their country of or-
igin is permitted. That has already happened in the case of the additional 11 pieces
of stained glass from the Marienkircke in Frankfurt on Oder identified in the Push-
kin State Museum of Fine Arts (GMII) in Moscow, after the rest had been re-
turned in 2002 (Figure 2). A special law was enacted by the Duma in June 2008 to
permit their return.72 A separate federal law had earlier also been required in the
case of the early rare books from Sárospatok College (northeast Hungary), and
the same situation has arisen with the Pahlavi parchments from the National Li-
brary in Vienna, now held in the Hermitage, which were also declared of “special
cultural significance.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

235

FIGURE 2. Cover of the State Hermitage Exhibition Catalogue, Marienkirche Stained-Glass
Windows (St. Petersburg: SLAVIA, 2002). The medieval stained-glass windows were sub-
sequently restored to the church in Frankfurt on Oder. Image courtesy of the Slavia publish-
ing house.

2002–PRESENT: INVENTORIZATION AND

THE 18-MONTH STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS

As of June 2010, there is still no publicly available centralized register of displaced
works of art or library books in the Russian Federation that were brought to the
USSR after the Second World War, although various catalogues and other publica-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

236

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

tions cover some collections.73 According to the law as amended in 2000, claims may
be filed “for precisely defined cultural valuables” anytime an “interested State . . . be-
comes aware that those valuables . . . are located on the territory of the Russian Fed-
eration.” However, claims from abroad may be filed only within 18 months of
appropriate federal agency publication of information about such displaced cul-
tural property. Article 9 explains this point for “interested States,” and Article 10 of
the Law explains the provision in the case of “former Enemy States.” The claiming
state must also “officially confirm that it has not received any lump sum compen-
sation for the loss of these valuables from Germany or any other former enemy State.”
Thus under the 2000 law, the clock still starts ticking at the time of official govern-
ment authorized publication of a description of the property to be claimed. How-
ever, if no publication has occurred, or if the owner is not aware of any publication,
how can such a statute of limitations be applied? The question of what constitutes
“authorized publication,” and the progress in such publication remain unclear as of
June 2010.

Problems in the application of a statute of limitations thus arise due to the fail-
ure of adequate publication of information about displaced cultural valuables now
located within Russian territory. The March 2001 implementing regulations as-
signed the Ministry of Culture the task to provide a nationwide inventory of the cul-
tural property that was transferred or “displaced” to Russia as a result of the war, with
the provision for publication and posting on the Ministry web site. A full catalogue
was to be published by the end of 2005. As early as the end of March 2001 the Min-
istry of Culture issued its own internal regulation (prikaz) regarding “inventoriza-
tion,” ordering all cultural institutions to undertake a full accounting of their trophy
holdings of displaced cultural property in Russia. More detailed instructions and
budgetary provisions for cultural institutions under the ministry appeared in sub-
sequent months.74 However, such provisions have still not been fulfilled.
Earlier, at the beginning of 2003, a web site sponsored by the Ministry of Culture—
http://www.lostart.ru/—appeared on the Internet with an opening page listing 19
museums and libraries that were expected to supply lists of their trophy foreign cul-
tural holdings. However, only a few of the repositories pictured displayed any such
lists of trophy cultural treasures. A sizeable number of works of art (with images)
appeared as being held in the Pushkin State Museum of Fine Arts and the Grabar
Restoration Center in Moscow. Catalogue data for many trophy books appeared for
the Russian National Library in St. Petersburg, the State Public Historical Library in
Moscow, and the State Regional Library in Nizhnii Novgorod. The site was only in
Russian and operated with no searching capacity, but it was an important start. Even
the New York Times ran a story about the new glasnost in March 2003.75 Within a
month of posting, the Poles identified several paintings taken by the Nazis from a
museum in Breslau (now Polish Wrocław). The Dutch found four canvases that had
belonged to Dutch Holocaust victims, and the Germans also found six previously
unidentified items from private collections of Holocaust victims.76 By the end of the
year, nonetheless, the web site was history, although limited access was still possible

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

237

through cross listings on other sites, but eventually access through those means also
disappeared.

The Ministry Order (prikaz) of 3 September 2008 establishing the Department
of Cultural Heritage within the Ministry called for the compilation of an appro-
priate electronic database for the identification and description of displaced cul-
tural valuables in state institutions of the Russian Federation and subordinate
entities, including those items not eligible for foreign restitution claims. However,
the procedures involved were not clarified for over a year and could not be im-
plemented because the Ministry Regulation issued in May 2009 dealing with pro-
visions for publishing information was never confirmed and then was nullified in
September 2009 on the grounds of “juridical conflict.”77

More recently the Ministry Order (prikaz) of 24 December 2009, creating the
renamed Department of the Cultural Heritage and Fine Arts within the Ministry,
which is currently responsible for displaced foreign cultural valuables held by Rus-
sian state institutions, also gives the department responsibility for publishing in-
formation about them. Among other points covered, the new Order

Provides that cultural valuables displaced during the Second World War
and located on the territory of the Russian Federation be duly appor-
tioned amongst cultural institutions by way of compensation for dam-
ages sustained by these cultural institutions resulting from the plunder
and destruction of their property by forces of former enemy States.

Further, the new Department is specifically designated as responsible for the “prep-
aration of . . . an electronic database of all cultural valuables displaced as a result
of the Second World War and located on the territory of the Russian Federation,”
along with a register of such cultural valuables intended for exchange.77a As of
mid-2010, however, it is not clear if or how soon the database will be publicly
available, or how much has been accomplished in descriptive work during recent
years. Obviously it will not be a speedy task, and that has not been aided by suc-
cessive changes within the ministerial bureaucracy.

Recently, the Ministry web site has been expanding, with listings of the on-going
extensive series of published catalogues of Russian wartime losses, most of which
are now electronically accessible in a designated section of the website. A separate
webpage now details Russian cultural valuables that have been repatriated from for-
eign countries since 1997, and another lists published catalogues of trophy valuables
prepared by a number of different institutions, including those from special exhibi-
tions. There are also lists of related Russian legal instruments albeit not complete.78

INVENTORIZATION UNRESOLVED:

CULTURAL TREASURES MISSING IN ACTION

Many Russian museums and libraries are working on the identification of their
displaced cultural property, but staff shortages and lack of expertise regarding for-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

238

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

eign holdings impede the overwhelming task. It is unlikely that the situation can
be improved anytime soon without considerable additional efforts, and most prob-
ably not without some financial and technical assistance from abroad. Indeed, al-
most all of the published catalogues of trophy holdings now listed (with covers
displayed) on the Ministry web site have been prepared with significant foreign
subsidies.

One revealing example of still-unresolved Moscow identification problems is
the case of an estimated 10,000 unidentified works of graphic art still held by the
GMII, as reported in November of 2006. In Vienna after the Anschluss, 41 Rem-
brandt etchings were removed from the Rudolf Gutmann Collection for transfer
to Hitler’s projected Linz Museum. Available documentation confirms that the etch-
ings ended the war as part of the graphics collection from Dresden evacuated to
Weesenstein Castle near Pirna in 1943, and that they were surrendered to Soviet
custody in July 1945, but there the trail ends.79 Efforts to track down their hiding
place in Russia, or even possibly Ukraine, have so far been unsuccessful.

An Austrian art historian visited the Graphics Department of the Pushkin Mu-
seum in Moscow several years ago bearing images of the missing etchings, as one
step in the search. The curators there were quite openly receptive to the inquiry,
coming as it did in the Rembrandt 400th anniversary year, and they were even
quite intrigued with the possibility such treasures might be found in their mu-
seum. However, they admitted to the visitor that an estimated 10,000 works of
graphic art had recently been transferred to their division from former secret de-
positories. Since passage of the law and new Ministry of Culture regulations re-
quiring inventory, those items were still awaiting description, before they (and the
catalogues) could be made available to the public, because the museum had in-
adequate staff to process all of them. Five years later, there is still no public inventory.
Perhaps given the still-missing major components of war-related displaced cul-
tural valuables, and especially those of victims of the Holocaust, further collabo-
rative assistance from abroad could assist Russian museums, libraries, and archives
in improving provenance research techniques and identifying more items. Such
joint enterprises are costly, and from the experience thus far, they are hardly guar-
anteed to move those cultural “prisoners of war” into the restitution pipeline. There
are still too many bureaucratic and legal obstacles in Russia, even when repatria-
tion is appropriate to legal owners, replenishing the cultural heritage of families
or countries from which valuables were torn by war. Nevertheless, even if they still
must remain prisoners in Russia, at least they could be removed from the missing
in action list, and their legitimate owners or heirs would know their whereabouts.

RESTITUTION UNDER THE LAW

Within the Russian Federation itself, it took 10 years after the revelations about
displaced cultural treasures to develop a legal basis and procedures for processing

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

239

restitution claims. Now Russia is the only country to have enacted such a law, thus
appearing to be a law unto itself. As many analysts have noted, the resulting law
puts the emphasis on nationalization rather than restitution of cultural property
“displaced to the Russian Federation as a result of the Second World War.” Some
Russian colleagues of a more patriotic bent keep asking me, “Why don’t other
countries have such a law?” My answer has always been that other countries, in-
cluding Ukraine, have recently managed major examples of restitution of dis-
placed cultural property without needing such a law. Ukraine returned the so-
called Bach Archive (the Sing-Akademie Musikarchiv) to Germany in 2001,80 and
as noted earlier, that part of the Koenigs Collection of master drawings that sur-
faced in Ukraine was returned to the Netherlands in 2003.

A decade since the passage of the 1998 law, we could report in the volume Re-
turned from Russia case studies and lists of archives returned to five countries—
France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Rothschild Archive in
London. Many examples of the return of Jewish and Masonic archives seized from
Holocaust victims could be listed amid much larger quantities of French military
intelligence archives, along with Dutch and Belgian military records. And even
before the law was passed, although in accordance with its stipulations, archives
were returned to the Principality of Lichtenstein and the United Kingdom. In the
case of archives in contrast to art, Russia has been willing to return some but still
not all of its trophies, to the extent that those issues deserve separate, more de-
tailed discussion (see the Grimsted article, “Why Do Captured Archives Go Home?:
Restitution Achievements under the Russian Law,” in this issue).80a

Hungary had been one of the first to line up a restitution agreement, with the
Treaty on Friendship and Cooperation with the Russian Federation in place by 6
December 1991. With a bilateral commission in place soon after that, Hungary
has been able to document many of its cultural treasures still in Russia. Books
from the Sárospatak College Library in northeast Hungary discovered in Nizhnii
Novgorod were exhibited, a catalogue was published in Moscow sponsored by the
Soros Foundation in 1997, and a large exhibit was shown in Moscow in 2001.81
However, it was not until March 2006 that President Putin opened an exhibition
in Budapest of a symbolic 146 early books returned to Hungary (Figure 3). That
was the first library restitution under the 1998/2000 law, and it took place on the
politically expedient occasion of the 50th anniversary of the Soviet invasion of
1956. The Hungarians paid 400,000 (U.S.) dollars in storage, conservation, and
digitization fees to the Regional Library in Nizhnii Novgorod (before 1990 Gorkii),
where the books had been held in secret for the previous 50 years. Among other
political and economic factors involved, the signing of an agreement for natural
gas may have proved to be of special significance in the cold winter of 2009. The
Sárospatak case was a clear example where symbolic cultural restitution can serve
much higher political expediency, as explained in other more detailed accounts.82
The Foreign Literature Library in Moscow (VGBIL), which had essentially engi-
neered that restitution case, published a book with a collection of articles about

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

240

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

FIGURE 3.
In the National Museum of Budapest, Russian President Vladimir Putin (cen-
ter) and Hungarian President Lászlo Sólyóm (left), attend the opening ceremony for the
exhibition of early books from the library of the Calvinist college of Sárospatak in north-
east Hungary on 1 March 2006. The books that had been removed from a bank vault in
Budapest at the end of the Second World War were being returned from the State Library
in Nizhnii Novgorod. Photo by Ilya Pitalev, Kommersant, Moscow.

the return of the Sárospatok Collection. However, those accounts did not cover
the political or economic context, nor did the volume mention the perhaps em-
barrassing details about the Soviet-period suppression of information about the
collection and its chance identification in the early 1990s.83

By contrast to the catalogue of books that are now returned to Hungary, a cat-
alog of displaced works of art now in Russia from Hungarian private Jewish col-
lections was published in Moscow in 2003 (with western sponsorship), and some
of the displaced Hungarian art objects were exhibited in Nizhnii Novgorod in 2005,
but all those treasures still remain in Russia, to say nothing of more rare books
from Jewish collections in Nizhnii Novgorod.84 The Herzogs were a prime exam-
ple of a family brutally persecuted and driven from their homeland, lucky enough
to have survived the Holocaust. At the Harvard Law School workshop we heard
about the lawsuit introduced in Russian courts under provisions of the 1998/2000
law by the heirs of the Baron Herzog Collection, now U.S. citizens. Represented by

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

241

New York and Moscow counsel, that claim has not gotten to first base, perhaps all
too indicative of potential foreign Holocaust-era claims for cultural valuables that
are not being honored in the Russian Federation.85

Two decades after the revelation of the Soviet secret depositories for captured
art, and a decade since the Russian law was first enacted, there have been only
two returns of art objects claimed under the law. The Marienkirche in Frankfurt
on Oder has seen its stained glass windows restored, and in return the German
government in compensation has restored one of the many early churches in
Novgorod that had suffered so mercilessly at the time of the 1941 invasion. The
second group of 11 Marienkirche glass panels, identified at the Pushkin Museum
in Moscow, were declared of special cultural significance, which explains why an
additional law was required by the Duma to permit their return in 2008.86

As a second case of returned art, four fragmentary early mosaics went back to
Ukraine in 2002. Those were not Russian trophies, but rather one of many still-
unresolved examples of art objects seized by the Germans during the war and
returned from Germany to the Soviet Union by the Americans, but never re-
turned to Kyiv. Yet that small symbolic return represents only a small part of
that story of displaced cultural valuables. The Cathedral of Saint Michael of
the Golden Domes, dating from the eleventh century, was one of the Kyivan
churches destroyed by the Stalin regime in 1934–1936, but many of its twelfth-
century mosaics were preserved. The famous mosaic of Saint Demetrius of
Thessalonica had been lent for an exhibit in Moscow in 1938, together with two
frescoes and a fragment of a bas-relief; those Kyivan treasures still remain today
in the Tret’iakov Gallery. Since independence, the Golden Domes Cathedral has
been reconstructed in Kyiv, but more fragments returned from Germany after
the war remain in Novgorod, all of which have been explained in a carefully
researched account by a Ukrainian specialist.87 That Ukrainian example is not
unique and does not involve a Holocaust claim. However, there has been little
receptiveness for other potential claims for the art that filled the secret deposi-
tories, nor seemingly any willingness on the Russian side to return other attributes
of cultural heritage amid the spoils of war or any of the twice-looted art to Ho-
locaust victims.

2001: PUTIN’S PRIVATE “GESTURES OF GOOD WILL”

Early in the Vladimir Putin regime, we saw a few politically expedient gestures of
goodwill. In contrast to Russian nonrestitution, Ukraine returned the early Bach
family music scores with the archive of the Sing-Akademie to Berlin in Septem-
ber 2001, even after the head of the Russian archival administration (Rosarkhiv)
advised his Ukrainian counterpart not to return the collection to Berlin.88 The
Ukrainians found justification for the return, however, since it was a privately
owned collection before evacuation to Silesia during the war. Then, as if to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

242

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

offset any potential political gain for Ukraine, Russian President Putin, during a
period when restitution “gestures of goodwill” were deemed appropriate for Ger-
many, arranged for a major photo-op with the return of three paintings from
the Dresden Gallery. These paintings had fallen into the private hands of a Rus-
sian oligarch developer, Timur Timerbulatov, and as such, they would not have
come under the 1998/2000 Federal Law. Apparently, that event close to home
kept German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder from going to Kyiv in person to
accept delivery of the Berlin Music Archive from the Sing-Akademie. (Commen-
tators pointed out that it was Putin’s first visit to Dresden since his KGB assign-
ment there in the Soviet era.)89

TROPHIES, VICTORY, AND THE MANIPULATION

OF HISTORICAL MEMORY

Returning to our initial query, foreign analysts—myself among them—have dif-
ficulty understanding the underlying political psychology and complex of atti-
tudes surrounding the Russian cultural property law under discussion. In defending
the right to nationalize Stalin’s cultural trophies, do most Russians really want to
keep their country apart from Western Europe, as their Soviet forbearers kept them
since the Revolution? We should not overplay the loss of empire or the centuries-
old Russian intellectual controversy between Russia and the West, although cer-
tainly both do appear to be involved.

Even more important in trying to understand the antirestitution attitude is the
Russian attitude toward the Second World War, and the celebration of victory in what
is still called the Great Fatherland War (sometimes translated as the Great Patriotic
War) in Russia. Stalin is still the hero leading the Soviet people to the victory that
the Soviet propaganda machine created and instilled in public consciousness. Per-
haps not surprising in that connection were the reports of Russian public opinion
poll at the end of 2008, in which Stalin emerged no less than in third place among
the country’s most popular ever leaders (despite rumored downward manipulation
of the results).90 Stalin’s plans for the monumental museum to rival Hitler’s plans
for Linz were displayed at the 1995 New York conference by Konstantin Akinsha and
Grigorii Kozlov.91 But like the plans for that triumphal museum, most of the cul-
tural trophies were hidden away for half a century. Those trophies, many still not
identified, have become a symbol of that victory—“more than trophies,” as we heard
from one Russian commentator. When Grigorii Kozlov prepared a documentary film
under contract for Russian TV about the “Super Museums for Dictators,” it was
nonetheless withdrawn from the Russian media in 2005.92

The issues before us today stem not so much from different conceptions of law
and justice held by the Soviet Union and the West as they date from the fundamen-
tal divisions among the Allies in the final years of Second World War and the Cold
War that followed. Many in the West believed that the heavy burden of reparations

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

243

imposed on Germany by the Versailles settlement after the First World War was a
major factor in Hitler’s rise to power. Having already flattened Germany to rubble
by bombing raids in order to exact surrender, the Western Allies did not want to re-
peat what they viewed as the mistakes of Versailles. Stalin, on the other hand, wanted
all the reparations he could get for his country, so brutally devastated by war, and
took many whole factories, along with the art, pianos, and wine.

The Second World War is still with us on the cultural front, with many cultural
prisoners of that war and cultural missing in action still remaining in Russia. Even
more than the war itself is the memory of that war deep in the soul of the Russian
people. The communist system and the Soviet empire Stalin created and saved in
that war may have collapsed at the end of 1991, but the real as well as the mythic
image of victory in the Great Patriotic War of the Fatherland still has a powerful
sway on the public mind. Nina Tumarkin’s perceptive essay, “The Great Patriotic
War as Myth and Memory,” deserves attention by those monitoring the restitution
debates in Moscow. With considerable insight, Tumarkin demonstrated the extent
to which the memory and horrors of the war were exploited by the postwar Stalin-
ist regime through propaganda and half-truths about the Soviet role, as a cover-up
for some of the less palatable aspects of Stalin’s conduct of the war. All of this has
contributed to and intensified the cult of the war and the victorious Soviet lead-
ers, as glorified in museums and public statuary and celebrated in annual military
displays on Victory Day.93

Stalin’s body may have been removed from the Red Square tomb after 1956,
when the cult of personality was rebuked, and when many of the cultural trophies
were returned to Germany. But his ghost has returned. He and his symbolic trophies
of victory have not been removed from Russian popular memory. The cult of the
war and Soviet victory as developed in postwar decades may well be seen as the
manipulation of historical memory. Such manipulation may explain why Rus-
sians have never heard about postwar American or British restitution to the USSR,
and why some still believe that their lost cultural treasures plundered by the Ger-
mans during the war are still hidden away in Fort Knox. Even specialists in the
Russian Ministry of Culture before 2001 never saw copies of the inventories of the
half million cultural treasures that the Americans returned to the USSR from Ger-
many after the war.

The image of Stalin’s victory was compounded by the exaggerated statistical
compilations about Soviet war losses compiled by the Extraordinary State Com-
mission on the Registration and Investigation of the Crimes of the German-
Fascist Occupiers and their Accomplices and the Damage Done by them to Citizens,
Collective Farms, Public Organizations, State Enterprises, and Institutions of the
USSR (ChGK). And today total losses for the entire Soviet Union are often ma-
nipulated as Russian since the collapse of the Soviet empire, as further justifica-
tion for Stalin’s postwar cultural reparations or compensation policy. In truth,
however, as Wolfgang Eichwede reminded us in New York in 1995, “Two-thirds of
all cultural losses suffered by the former Soviet Union are losses of Ukraine, . . .—

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

244

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

[a] fact usually overlooked in the Russian-German controversy.”94 Meanwhile the
displaced cultural treasures in the Russian Federation resulting from that policy
(many of them still unidentified) and the rejection of restitution efforts in favor
of compensation, even for wartime Western Allies, bolster historical memory. They
remain part of the continuing legacy of Stalin and the Soviet regime he molded to
the European continent and beyond.

In their commitment to the need for further compensation, large segments of
the Russian public appear unconcerned that many of their cultural prisoners of
that war remain in captivity and have no interest or relevance to them. They can-
not read the Dutch books or the Sephardic Greek Community documents in La-
dino from Salonica. They cannot find the Rembrandt etchings amid the uncataloged
museum trophy reserves. Many Russians appear oblivious to the fact that many of
those cultural treasures were the property of people in other countries who were
also victims of Nazi aggression, and who were allied with Russia in the fierce fight-
ing to rid their homelands of the invader. Indeed, too many blank spots persist in
the historical record of the war, particularly within Russia, where the manipula-
tion of historical memory has restored Stalin to martyrdom.

Today when we consider the Russian law within the historical context of its
passage and the strong support it still has in the court of Russian public opinion,
we see the continuing strong belief that to the victor should go the spoils—even if
those spoils are part of the cultural heritage of other peoples. We have to under-
stand the extent to which the Russian body politic still celebrates the victory of
the Red Army in the Great Patriotic War and believes still more compensation is
due from the German invader and his allies for the millions of Soviet citizens that
perished and the millions of rubles of cultural loss and devastation.

We are forced to look beyond the technical legal tenets of law itself. We under-
stand why Stalin’s decrees establishing the Trophy Administration and the Trophy
Brigades are still classified in the former Central Communist Party Archive. Those
are the legal bases that from the Russian perspective appear to make the Russian
spoils of war legal—even within the updated text of the Russian law. Many of the
documents regarding Western cultural restitution to the Soviet Union are likewise
not available to researchers in Russian archives, as are many of the documents
regarding trophy shipments from the West after the war. With no Freedom of In-
formation Act in the Russian Federation today, the blank spots about the war and
its aftermath will continue to prevail, and the manipulation of historical memory
will prevent the resolution of many potential claims for cultural property. The
Washington Principles versus Russian Historical Memory will be a hard case to
resolve. But still we see no resolution in the Harvard Law School workshop con-
flict, Spoils of War versus Cultural Heritage.

ENDNOTES

1. U.S. Department of State, Washington Conference Proceedings. See the several presentations

regarding the “Washington Principles” by Under Secretary of State Stuart Eizenstat.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

245

2. See Akinsha and Kozlov, Beautiful Loot, 30–42, and their earlier articles in ARTnews. April
1991 and sequels; see also the variant German presentation, Akinsha, Kozlov, and Toussaint, Oper-
ation Beutekunst; see also Ritter, Kulturerbe als Beute? The article by Ritter, “The Soviet Spoils Com-
missions” is largely based on the Akinsha and Kozlov documents and is incomplete.

3. Kopteltsev in U.S. Department of State, Washington Conference Proceedings, 318–19. In his
extensive analysis of the Russian “War Trophies,” Längström comments (with some optimism) on
the Russian assurance from the Washington Conference, in the United States, “Epilogue—Russia
Promises to Assist in the Recovery of Property Looted from the Jews,” 292. The State Department
translation of the original 1998 law uses “Treasures” rather than “Valuables,” “Transferred” rather
than “Displaced,” and “in” rather than “on” the Territory.

4. See, for example, Gattini, “Restitution of Works of Art,” 67–88; Wilske, “International Law
and the Spoils of War,” 223–82; and more recently, Montén, “Soviet World War II Trophy Art,” 37–
98. See also Längström, “‘War Trophies,’” and additional international legal analyses listed below,
especially the special issue of the Spoils of War: International Newsletter, no. 4 (August 1997).

5. See Fiedler, “Legal Issues Bearing on the Restitution,” 175–78; and Hiller, “The German-

Russian Negotiations,” 179–85.

6. Bleiker, “The Politics and Ethics of Relocated Art,” 320.
7. “Ob obrazovanii Gosudarstvennoi komissii po restitutsii kul’turnykh tsennostei: Postanovlenie
Pravitel’stva RF,” 23 June 1992, no. 426. A reedited version of the Government Decree of 28 December
1992, no. 1027, is published in Sobranie aktov Prezidenta i Pravitel’stva RF, 1993, no. 2, st. 105. All of the
Russian legal instruments cited in this article are listed with English translations of their titles and often
of relevant articles, along with their full publication data (including Internet sources) in the list com-
piled by Grimsted included as Appendix 2 in this issue. A 2009 official Russian Ministry of Cultural
legal specialist summarizes the provisions of the Commission: Snytkin, “Voprosy pravovogo reguliro-
vaniia kul’turnykh tsennostei,” 347–49.
8. Viktoria Arutiunova, “Reshaetsia sud’ba komissii po restitutsii,” Kommersant”, no. 115(338),
(22 June 1993), 具http://www.kommersant.ru/doc.aspx?fromsearch⫽143cfa82-ede6–4a43–9a5f-
d70095554d41&docsid⫽51335典. See more about the Commission in the article by Akinsha, “The
Baldin-Bremen Kunsthalle Case,” in this issue.

9. See Gattini, “The Fate of the Koenigs Collection,” 81–108, with citations to relevant literature.
10. Hoogewoud, “Russia’s Only Restitution,” 72–74. See also Grimsted, “The Road to Minsk,”

351–404.

11. Kuz’min, “Vyvezti”; see also the follow-up interview with Anatolii Prokopenko, by Ella Mak-
simova, “Arkhivy Frantsuzskoi razvedki skryvali na Leningradskom shosse,” Izvestiia, no. 240 (9 Oc-
tober 1991).

12. These agreements (and in some cases treaties) are all listed in the appended list of related

Russian legal instruments (Appendix 2, in this issue).

13. See the transcript of the State Duma session, “Federal’noe Sobranie, Parlament Rossiiskoi

Federatsii.”

14. See Grimsted, The Odyssey of the “Smolensk Archive”; regarding the 2002 return, see the Grim-

sted contribution in Vozvrashchenie “Smolenskogo arkhiva”/The Return of the “Smolensk Archive.”

15. Knyshevskii, Dobycha, and the review article by Deich, “Dobycha—V adres Komiteta.” See
more about this publication and an image of its cover in the article by Akinsha, “Stalin’s Decrees,” in
this issue.

16. Evgenii Stroev, “Pora poniat’: My nikomu nichego ne dolzhny,” Rossiiskaia gazeta, 4 August
1994. Stroev is an academician in the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAN) and was chairman of the
Committee for Questions of Science, Culture, and Education of the Council of the Federation. The
phrase was earlier used by Pushkin Museum director Irina Antonova, as for example, in her article,
“My nikomu nichego ne dolzhny. Eshche raz o vozvrate kul’turnykh tsennostei,” Nezavisimaia gazeta,
5 May 1994.

17. Snytkin,“Voprosy pravovogo regulirovaniia kul’turnykh tsennostei,” 349.
18. “Skandal, ne dostoinyi Rossii,” Izvestiia, no. 172 (8 September 1994), 5.
19. Standen, et al., “Repatriations following World War II,” 121–46.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

246

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

20. Kurtz, “The End of the War and the Occupation,” 113–16.
21. Grimsted, U.S. Restitution of Nazi-Looted Cultural Treasures. See also a variant of the intro-
duction: Grimsted, “Spoils of War Returned,” at 具http://www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/
2002/spring/spoils-of-war-1.html典.
22. These long-closed documents were first mentioned publicly in a report by Margarita Zinich
of the Academy of Sciences Institute of Russian History at the conference “Trofei—Poteri–Ekvivalenty/
Trophäen—Verluste—Äquivalente” at the German Historical Institute in Moscow. Regrettably, the
promised conference proceedings have not yet been published, and Zinich’s article has not appeared
elsewhere. Further investigation and a longer analysis by Grimsted are underway.

23. Lowenthal et al., “Quedlinburg Treasures,” 148–59.
24. USSR Embassy, Information Bulletin, no. 138 (19 November 1942): 6.
25. See Knyshevskii, Dobycha, 20.
26. Antonova, “Instances of Repatriation by the USSR,” 145–47. Regarding the Dresden case, cf.

also Akinsha and Kozlov, Beautiful Loot, 193–202.

27. Poole, “Monumental Mission,” 52.
28. Vladimir Teteriatnikov, “‘Kholodnaia voina’ za muzeinymi shtorami: Kak rossiiskie iskuss-
tvovedy sdaiut v plen shedevry, okazavshiesia v SSSR posle pobedy nad Germaniei v 1945 godu,”
Pravda, 29 March 1995, 4. The caption reads in Russian “Amerikanskie voennye s trofeinymi proiz-
vedeniiami iskusstva.”

29. Regarding Teteriatnikov, see Ralph Blumenthal, “A Maverick Art Scholar Pursues a Tangled
Case,” New York Times, 24 September 1996, C11, C13. Further behind-the-scenes explanation for
Teteriatnikov’s publications in Russia is still needed. His personal papers are now held by the New
York Public Library.

30. Genieva, “German Book Collections in Russian Libraries,” 221–24.
31. Teteriatnikov, “‘Kholodnaia voina’ za muzeinymi shtorami,” Pravda, 29 March 1995, 4.
32. Genieva, “German Book Collections in Russian Libraries,” 224.
33. Teteriatnikov, “‘Kholodnaia voina’ za muzeinymi shtorami,” 4.
34. “O proekte Federal’nogo Zakona ‘O prave sobstennosti na kul’turnye tsennosti, pereme-
shchennye na territoriiu Rossiiskoi Federatsii v rezul’tate Vtoroi mirovoi voiny’”: Postanovlenie Soveta
Federatsii Federal’nogo sobraniia Rossiiskoi Federatsii. Sobranie zakonodatel’stva RF, no. 14 (3 April
1995), st. 1217, 2268.

35. “O moratorii na vozvrashchenie kul’turnykh tsennostei, peremeshchennykh v gody Velikoi
Otechestvennoi voiny’: Postanovlenie Gosudarstvennoi Dumy Federal’nogo sobraniia Rossiiskoi
Federatsii,” 21 April 1995, no. 725-I GD, Sobranie zakonodatel’stva RF, no. 19 (8 May 1995), st.
1721.

36. Prott, “Principles for the Resolution,” 225–30.
37. For example, UNESCO, “Report by the Director-General,” 177EX/17.
38. Sidorov, Foreword to Five Centuries of European Drawing, 5; regarding the background of the
exhibition and the parallel exhibition of part of the collection from the Netherlands, see Leistra, “A
Short History of Art Loss,” 56–57.

39. Teteriatnikov, Problema kul’turnykh tsennostei. See Simpson, The Spoils of War, app. 9, “Inter-
Allied Declaration Against Acts of Dispossession Committed in Territories Under Enemy Occupa-
tion or Control,” 287.

40. Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, “Opinion No. 193”—when Russia was admitted

to membership on its basis.

41. Vladimir Teteriatnikov, “Ograbiat li vnov russkii narod? Tragicheskaia sud’ba kul’turnykh tsen-

nostei, peremeshchennykh v rezul’tate Vtoroi mirovoi voiny,” Pravda, no. 73 (22 May 1996), 4.

42. Mikhail Shvydkoi, “Sokhranit’ ostrov sotsializma v vide kul’tury nevozmozhno,” Rossiiskie vesti,

no. 204 (26 October 1996), 10.

43. Igor F. Maksimychev, “‘Peremeshchennoe,’ ne znachit ‘nich’e’: Nanesti ushcherb natsional’nym

interesam mozhno i iz samykh blagorodnykh pobuzhdenii,” Nezavisimaia gazeta, 26 July 1996, 2.

44. Aleksandr Sevast’ianov, “Bol’she, chem trofei—polemika. . .s Igorem Maksimychevym,” Neza-

visimaia gazeta, 14 September 1996, 6.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

247

45. Evgenii Sidorov, “U zolota Shlimana ne mozhet byt’ ‘khoziaina.’ Ne politicheskie spekulianty,
a zakon i zdravyi smysl dolzhny reshit’ sud’bu peremeshchennykh tsennostei,” Izvestiia, no. 159 (25
August 1995), 9.

46. From the text of deliberations, Russian Federation, “Sovet Federatsii Federal’nogo Sobraniia,”

53–63.

47. Reference is to the program “Twice Saved or Twice Stolen?” produced by Mark Burman and

Charles Wheeler, broadcast on BBC Radio 4, 4 September 2007.

48. See the transcript of the Duma session, Russian Federation, “Gosudarstvennaia Duma,” 19–

23, 56.

49. Excerpts from Yeltsin’s message to the Duma were presented by Svetlana Sukhova, “Iskusstvo

dolzhno prinadlezhat,” Segodnia, no. 54 (19 March 1997).

50. As reported on Russian television, 18 April 1997.
51. As noted by Piiuk, “Ty mne–Ia tebe,” 14.
52. The quotations from Gubenko are from a press conference reported on Russian television, 16

March 1997, fragments of which were reported by Piiuk, “Ty mne—Ia tebe,” 13–14.

53. Michael R. Gordon, “Hot Issue for Russia: Should It Return Nazi Plunder?” New York Times,

17 April 1997, 1.

54. “Po delu o razreshenii spora mezhdu Sovetom Federatsii i Prezidentom Rossiiskoi Federatsii,
mezhdu Gosudarstvennoi Dumoi i Prezidentom Rossiiskoi Federatsii ob obiazannosti Prezidenta
Rossiiskoi Federatsii podpisat’ priniatyi Federal’nyi zakon ‘O kul’turnykh tsennostiakh, pereme-
shchennykh v Soiuz SSR v rezul’tate Vtoroi mirovoi voiny i nakhodiashchikhsia na territorii Rossi-
iskoi Federatsii’”: Postanovlenie Konstitutsionnogo Suda RF, 6 April 1998, no. 11-P, in Sobranie
zakonodatel’stva RF, 1998, no. 16 (20 April), st. 1879, 3624–28.

55. “O kul’turnykh tsennostiakh, peremeshchennykh v Soiuz SSR v rezul’tate Vtoroi mirovoi voiny
i nakhodiashchikhsia na territorii Rossiiskoi Federatsii”; Federal’nyi zakon, 15 April 1998, no. 64-FZ,
in Sobranie zakonodatel’stva RF, no. 16 (20 April 1998), statute 1879. The text that emerged then
should be used only for comparison purposes. See an English translation of the law with amend-
ment of 2000 and 2004 as Appendix 1 in this issue.

56. Gubenko, in Washington Conference Proceedings, 513–18.
57. Boguslavskii, “About the Basic Legal Principles of the Russian Law,” 27–29. Note that English
translation erroneously used “values” for “valuables.” Boguslavskii discusses the principle of “com-
pensatory restitution” at greater length in his later monograph, Kul’turnye tsennosti v mezhdunarod-
nom oborote, but still does not provide an adequate basis for the principle in international law.

58. Gehér, “Hungarian Considerations,” 27–29.
59. Kot, “The Ukraine and the Russian Law,” 9. See also the criticism by Ukrainian legal specialist
Viktor Akulenko, “A Bill which Faces the Past,” 19–20. Note that this journal has often adopted the
erroneous English translation of the Russian “tsennosti” as “values” instead of “valuables.”

60. Kowalski, “Russian Law: The Polish Perspective,” 36–38.
61. Siehr, “Comment on the Russian Federal Law,” 38–39.
62. Siehr, “Comment on the Russian Federal Law,” 39. The full text of the Wiesbaden Manifesto is

reprinted in Simpson, The Spoils of War, 133.

63. Grimsted, “‘Trophy’ Archives and Russia’s New Cultural ‘Cold War’ with Europe,” 3–16.
64. “Po delu o proverke konstitutsionnosti Federal’nogo zakona ot 15 aprelia 1998 goda ‘O
kul’turnykh tsennostiakh, peremeshchennykh v Soiuz SSR v rezul’tate Vtoroi mirovoi voiny i na-
khodiashchikhsia na territorii Rossiiskoi Federatsii’”: Postanovlenie Konstitutsionnogo Suda RF, 20
July 1999, no. 12-P, in Sobranie zakonodatel’stva RF, 1999, no. 30 (26 August), statute 3989, 6988–
7007, and available at 具http://lib.ksrf.ru/doc.asp?ID49108典. See the statements by the then Minister
of Culture Vladimir Egorov and several museum leaders in “Nachinaem restituirovat’. No Germa-
nii ne dadim nichego,” Kommersant”, no. 127 (21 July 1999), 10, and “Spravedlivoe reshenie v
nespravedlivykh obstoiatel’stvakh,” 1. Most recently, the Constitutional Court decision is analyzed
by a Ministry of Culture legal specialist, Snytkin, “Voprosy pravovogo regulirovaniia,” esp. 350–57.
65. The text of the amendments—“O vnesenii izmenenii i dopolnenii v Federal’nyi zakon ‘O
kul’turnykh tsennostiakh, peremeshchennykh v Soiuz SSR v rezul’tate Vtoroi mirovoi voiny i na-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

248

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

khodiashchikhsia na territorii Rossiiskoi Federatsii’”: Federal’nyi zakon, 25 May 2000, no. 70-FZ,
appears in Sobranie zakonodatel’stva RF, 2000, no. 22, st. 2259; and the 1998 law as amended 25 May
2000, appears at 具http://www.lostart.ru/documents/detail.php?ID⫽862典; an English translation ap-
pears in this issue as Appendix 1.

66. See the list of related legal instruments compiled by Grimsted as Appendix 2 of this issue,
illustrating many legal details in the long and highly complicated development and implementation
process.

67. “O vnesenii izmenenii i dopolnenii v Polozhenie o Ministerstve kul’tury Rossiiskoi Fede-
ratsii”: Postanovlenie Pravitel’stva RF, 2 December 2000, no. 913, Sobranie zakonodatel’stva RF, no.
50 (11 December 2000), st. 48952.

68. “O merakh po realizatsii Federal’nogo zakona ‘O kul’turnykh tsennostiakh, peremeshchen-
nykh v Soiuz SSR v rezul’tate Vtoroi mirovoi voiny i nakhodiashchikhsia na territorii Rossiiskoi Fe-
deratsii’”: Postanovlenie Pravitel’stva RF, 11 March 2001, no. 174. A further Government regulation
on 22 August 2001 changed the composition of the Interagency Council (Postanovlenie Pravitel’stva
RF, no 617). But that regulation was cancelled by a new 31 March 2005 Directive. The latest Order
( prikaz) regarding the composition of the Interagency Council was issued on 14 April 2009.

69. The text of the law printed in Appendix 1 (in this issue) incorporates the appropriate 2004

amendments.

70. The latest 2009 renaming of the Department and further delineation of its functions were
provided in the Order (prikaz) of the Ministry of Culture: “Ob utverzhdenii Polozheniia o Depar-
tamente kul’turnogo naslediia i izobrazitel’nogo iskusstva”: Prikaz Ministerstva kul’tury RF ot 24
dekabria 2009 g., no. 878. Available electronically at 具http://pravo.roskultura.ru/law/order/24/12/
2009/1/image/5272.html典.

71. See Grimsted, “Why Do Captured Archives Go Home?” this issue, for more details about the

displaced archives held in the former Special Archives.

71a. See Victor Gray, “The Return of the Rothschild Archives,” in Returned from Russia, 287–95.
72. See the law permitting the return of the additional eleven pieces of stained glass, “O pere-
dache Federativnoi Respublike Germaniia vitrazhei iz tserkvi Sviatoi Marii (Marienkirkhe) v gorode
Frankfurte-na-Odere, peremeshchennykh v Souiz SSR v rezul’tate Vtoroi mirovoi voiny i khrania-
shchikhsia v Gosudarstvennom muzee izobrazitel’nykh iskusstv imeni A. S. Pushkina”: Federal’nyi
zakon ot 3 aprelia 2008 g., no. 42-FZ. Sobranie zakonodatel’stva RF, 2008, no. 14 (7 April), st. 1361.
Available electronically: 具http://www.lostart.ru/documents/detail.php?ID_932典.
73. Many of these are listed in Russian on the Ministry of Cultural portal “Cultural Valuables—
Victims of War” (so far only in Russian, “Kul’turnye tsennosti—Zhertvy voiny”) at 具http://
www.lostart.ru/典.

74. Order ( prikaz) of the Ministry of Culture, 30 March 2001, no. 305, “Ob inventarizatsii pere-

meshchennykh kul’turnykh tsennostei.”
75. Sophia Kishkovsky, “A New Glasnost on War’s Looted Art,” New York Times, 12 March 2003,
E1; text available at 具http://www.nytimes.com/2003/03/12/arts/a-new-glasnost-on-war-s-looted-
art.html?pagewanted⫽1典 and 具http://www.museum-security.org/03/033.html#6典.

76. These findings were mentioned by Akinsha in an interview by Anna Tolstova, “Veter vre-

meni.” Akinsha further explained these findings to me in personal conversation.

77. The Order (prikaz) of the Ministry of Culture 4 May 2009 and its subsequent nullification

are listed in their chronological order in Part III of the Grimsted compilation in Appendix 2.

77a. The Order (prikaz) of the Ministry of Culture 4 May 2009 was superceded by the Order of
24 December 2009: “Ob utverzhdenii Polozheniia o Departamente kul’turnogo naslediia i
izobrazitel’nogo iskusstva”: Prikaz Ministerstva kul’tury RF ot 24 dekabria 2009 g., no. 878. Available
electronically at 具http://pravo.roskultura.ru/law/order/24/12/2009/1/image/5272.html典.

78. See more details about the Ministry web site in the introduction to Appendix 2, the anno-
tated list of Russian legal instruments relating to displaced cultural valuables and restitution issues.
79. The Gutmann Rembrandt etchings were one of the examples of still missing Austrian cultural
valuables in Grimsted, “Flying Mercury Comes Home,” 113–14. They are listed in the catalogue of
losses from Austrian Jewish collections prepared by Sophie Lillie, Was einmal war, 438–65.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

249

80. See Grimsted, “Bach is Back in Berlin,” electronic version (revised and illustrated): 具http://

www.huri.harvard.edu/work7.html典 (June 2003).

80a. The Grimsted article, “Why Do Captured Archives Go Home?” in this issue updates the more
extensive coverage in Grimsted, Hoogewoud, and Ketelaar (eds), Returned from Russia. See particu-
larly Grimsted, “Introduction,” and chapter 5, “Russian versus Soviet Restitution,” especially pp. 116–31.
81. Trofeinye knigi iz biblioteki Sharoshpatakskogo reformatskogo kolledzha; a few of the books were
exhibited in the Nizhnii Novgorod Museum in 1998, and then in 2001, when then were also exhib-
ited at VGBIL in Moscow.

82. See Grimsted and Akinsha, “The Sárospatak Case,” 215–49.
83. Genieva and Monok, eds., Sharoshpatakskaia kollektsiia; sponsored by the Hungarian Minis-
try of Education and Culture and the Hungarian Cultural Center in Moscow, a Hungarian edition
appeared simultaneously. See in contrast the facts and explanation in Grimsted and Akinsha, “The
Sárostatak Case,” which was not included in the VGBIL volume.
84. See the extensive Catalogue of Art Objects from Hungarian Private Collections; a free PDF file
is available at the VGBIL web site, 具http://www.libfl.ru/restitution/catalogs/index.html典. See also the
exhibition catalogue, Hortusbellicus (2005); an earlier exhibition (June–October 1998) did not fully
identify the provenance.

85. See the 2001 preliminary decisions in [Nierenberg versus Government of the Russian Feder-
ation], Decision of the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation of 14 March
2001, no. 31pv-01pr: Russian text: Postanovlenie Prezidiuma Verkhovnogo suda Rossiiskoi Fede-
ratsii, 14 marta 2001, no. 31pv-01pr (available at the commercial website 具http://base.consultant.ru/典.
86. Russian text: “Ob otnesenii vitrazhei iz tserkvi Sviatoi Marii (Marienkirkhe) k unikal’nym
kul’turnym tsennostiam”: Prikaz Federal’nogo agentstva po kul’ture i kinematografii RF 16 June
2006, no. 256. (available at 具http://www.lostart.ru/documents/detail.php?ID_887典; 具http://pravo.
roskultura.ru/law/order/16/06/2006/1/image/3314.html典).

87. See the detailed reports by Kot and Koreniuk, “Mikhailivs’ki pam’iatky,” 63–82, XXVI–XXVIII,
and Kot’s report on the wartime migration of the treasures in “The Ukraine and the Russian
Law,” 37–41. See more details and documentation in Grimsted, Trophies of War and Empire, 60–63, 218.
88. Hennadii Boriak, who then headed the Ukrainian Archival Administrative Agency, Derzh-
komarkhiv, personally told me about the letter he received from Roskomarhiv chief Vladimir Kozlov.
89. Regarding the Dresden paintings, see Kira Dolinina, “Trofei s izmailovskoi barakholki privez
Vladimir Putin v Drezdenskuiu galereiu,” Kommersant”, 28 September 2001, 13. Putin and high-
profile businessman Timur Timerbulatov also presented another Dresden painting to German Chan-
cellor Schroeder in April; see “Germanii podarili kartinu s izmailovskoi barakholki,” Kommersant,”
12 April 2001, 13. See more about the political context in Grimsted, “Bach Is Back,” 67–104.
90. For example, 具http://www.topnews.in/stalin-remains-unsinkable-popularity-contest-2102133典.
91. Regarding Stalin’s planned super museum, see Akinsha and Kozlov, Beautiful Loot, 30–42 (image
opposite 144); a picture also appears in the same authors’ article “The Discovery of the Secret De-
positories,” 164.

92. The banned film was shown by Grigorii Kozlov at a conference at the Foreign Literature Li-
brary (VGBIL) in Moscow in November 2005. Kozlov personally told me about the cancellation of
the film after it was commissioned for Russian television.

93. See Tumarkin’s essay, “The Great Patriotic War as Myth and Memory,” 26–31; Tumarkin’s
subsequent book, The Living & The Dead, expands her analysis; see also Tumarkin’s essay, “The War
of Remembrance,” 194–207. Other sensitive essays in that volume of social history broaden our un-
derstanding of the effects of the war on Soviet society.

94. Eichwede, “Models of Restitution,” 219.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Akinsha, Konstantin, and Grigorii Kozlov, with Sylvia Hochfield. Beautiful Loot: The Soviet Plunder
of Europe’s Art Treasures. New York: Random House, 1995. Earlier UK edn published 1995 as Stolen

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

250

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

Treasure: The Hunt for the World’s Lost Masterpieces (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1995). Up-
dates the authors’ earlier articles in ARTnews, April 1991 and sequels.

———. “Spoils of War: The Soviet Union’s Hidden Art Treasures.” ARTnews. April 1991, 130–41.
And the sequel “The Soviets’ War Treasures: A Growing Controversy.” ARTnews, September 1991,
112–19.

———. “The Discovery of the Secret Depositories.” In The Spoils of War: World War II and Its Af-
termath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property, edited by E. Simpson, 162–65.
New York: Abrams, 1997.

———, and Clemens Toussaint. Operation Beutekunst—Die Verlagerung deutscher Kulturgüter in die
Sowjetunion nach 1945. Suppl. vol. 12. Nuremberg: Germanisches Nationalmuseum, 1995.

Akulenko, Viktor. “A Bill which Faces the Past.” Spoils of War: International Newsletter, no. 4 (August
1997): 19–20.

Antonova, Irina. “Instances of Repatriation by the USSR.” In The Spoils of War: World War II and Its
Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property, edited by E. Simpson, 145–47.
New York: Abrams, 1997.

Bleiker, Roland. “The Politics and Ethics of Relocated Art.” Australian Journal of International Affairs
53, no. 3 (1999): 320.

Boguslavskii, Mark. “About the Basic Legal Principles of the Russian Law.” Spoils of War: Inter-
national Newsletter, no. 4 (August 1997): 27–29.

———. Kul’turnye tsennosti v mezhdunarodnom oborote: pravovye aspekty. Moscow: Iurist, 2005.

Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly. Opinion No. 193. On Russia’s Request for Membership of
the Council of Europe. Adopted by the Assembly, 25 January 1996.

Deich, Mark. “Dobycha—V adres Komiteta po delam iskusstv postupilo iz pobezhdennoi Germa-
nii svyshe 1 milliona 208 tysiach muzeinykh tsennostei.” Moskovskie novosti, no. 50 (23–30 October
1994): 18.

Egorov, Vladimir. “Spravedlivoe reshenie v nespravedlivykh obstoiatel’stvakh.” Kul’tura, no. 27 (29
July–4 August 1999): 1.

Eichwede, Wolfgang. “Models of Restitution (Germany, Russia, Ukraine).” In The Spoils of War: World
War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property, edited by E.
Simpson, 216–20. New York: Abrams, 1997.

Embassy of the USSR (Washington, DC). Information Bulletin, no. 138 (19 November 1942).

Fiedler, Wilfried. “Legal Issues Bearing on the Restitution of German Cultural Property in Russia.”
In The Spoils of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cul-
tural Property, edited by E. Simpson, 175–78. New York: Abrams, 1997.

Five Centuries of European Drawings: The Former Collection of Franz Koenigs: Exhibition Catalogue,
2.10.1995–21.01.1996. Milan: Leonardo Arte, 1995. Parallel Russian ed. Piat’ vekov evropeiskogo risunka.
Risunki starykh masterov iz byvshego sobraniia Frantsa Kenigsa. Katalog. Moscow: GMII im. A. S.
Pushkina/Milan: Leonardo Arte, 1995.

Gattini, Andrea. “The Fate of the Koenigs Collection: Public and Private International Law Aspects.”
International Journal of Cultural Property 6, no. 1 (1997):81–108.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

251

———. “Restitution of Works of Art Removed from German Territory at the End of the Second
World War.” European Journal of International Law 7 (1996): 67–88.

Gehér, József. “Hungarian Considerations Regarding the Russian Law on Cultural Property.” Spoils
of War: International Newsletter, no. 4 (August 1997): 27–29.

Genieva, Ekaterina Iu. “German Book Collections in Russian Libraries.” In The Spoils of War: World
War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property, edited by E.
Simpson, 221–24. New York: Abrams, 1997.

———, and Istvan Monok, eds. Sharoshpatakskaia kollektsiia i istoriia ee vozvrashcheniia v Vengriiu.
Sbornik statei. Moscow: ROSSPEN, 2008.

Gray, Victor. “The Return of the Rothschild Archives.” In Returned from Russia: Nazi Archival Plun-
der in Western Europe and Recent Restitution Issues, Grimsted, Hoogewoud, and Ketelaar, eds.,
pp. 287–95.

Grimsted, Patricia Kennedy. “Bach is Back in Berlin: The Return of the Sing-Akademie Archive from
Ukraine in the Context of Displaced Cultural Treasures and Restitution Politics.” Spoils of War: In-
ternational Newsletter, no. 8 (May 2003), 67–104. Electronic version (revised and illustrated): 具http://
www.huri.harvard.edu/work7.html典 (June 2003).

———. A full bibliography of Patricia Kennedy Grimsted publications regarding displaced cultural
treasures (many with links to the full texts) is now available on the web site of IISH (Amsterdam),
具http://www.iisg.nl/archives_and_restitution/bibliography.php典; N.B. Electronic texts of many of the
Patricia Kennedy Grimsted publications listed are available at this web site or through hot links.

———, and Konstantin Akinsha. “The Sárospatak Case: Rare Books Return to Hungary from Nizh-
nii Novgorod. A New Precedent for Russian Cultural Restitution?” Art Antiquity and Law 11, no. 3
(September 2006): 215–49.

———, ed. Vozvrashchenie “Smolenskogo arkhiva”/The Return of the “Smolensk Archive.” Bilingual
ed., edited by Marianna Tax Choldin, Karina Aleksandrovna Dmitrieva, Ekaterina Iur’evna Genieva,
and Patricia Kennedy Grimsted. Moscow: ROSSPEN, 2005.

———, F. J. Hoogewoud, and Eric Ketelaar, eds. Returned from Russia: Nazi Archival Plunder in
Western Europe and Recent Restitution Issues. UK: Institute of Art and Law, 2007. See particularly
Patricia Kennedy Grimsted, “Introduction,” and chapter 5, “Russian versus Soviet Restitution,” es-
pecially pp. 116–31. A paper edition with an updated Introduction by Patricia Grimsted is forth-
coming in Fall 2010.

———. “Flying Mercury Comes Home to Pavlovsk: Perspectives on the Return of Wartime Cultural
Trophies in Austria and Russia.” Art Antiquity and Law 10, no. 2 (June 2005): 113–14.

———. “Spoils of War Returned: U.S. Restitution of Nazi-Looted Cultural Treasures to the USSR,
1945–1959.” Prologue: Quarterly of the National Archives and Records Administration 34, no. 1 (Spring
2002): 27–41. Also available at 具http://www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/2002/spring/spoils-
of-war-1.html典.

———. The Odyssey of the “Smolensk Archive”: Plundered Communist Records for the Service of Anti-
Communism. Carl Beck Occasional Papers in Russian and East European Studies, no. 1201. Pitts-
burgh: University of Pittsburgh, Center for Russian and East European Studies, PA, 1995.

———. “The Road to Minsk for Western Trophy Books.” Libraries and Culture 30, no. 4 (Fall 2004):
351–404. Originally published in Russian as “Trofeinye knigi iz Zapadnoi Evropy: Doroga v Minsk
cherez Ratibor (Ratsibuzh). Ograblenie bibliotek ERR (Operativnym shtabom Reikhsleitera Rozen-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

252

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

berga).” In Matieryialy trietsikh mizhnarodnykh knihaznauchykh chytanniau ‘Kniha Belarusi: Poviaz’
chasou’ (Minsk, 16–17 verasnia 2003 g.) (Minsk: Natsyianal’naia bibliiatieka Belarusi, 2005): 39–90.

———. Trophies of War and Empire: The Archival Heritage of Ukraine, World War II, and the Inter-
national Politics of Restitution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press for the Ukrainian Research
Institute, 2001. See esp. chap. 10, “The Nationalization of Cultural Treasures in Russia: A New Cul-
tural Cold War in Europe,” 389–422.

———. “‘Trophy’ Archives and Russia’s New Cultural ‘Cold War’ with Europe.” Problems of Post-
Communism (May–June 1998): 3–16.

———. U.S. Restitution of Nazi-Looted Cultural Treasures to the USSR, 1945–1959: Facsimile Docu-
ments from the National Archives of the United States. Compiled by and with an introduction by
Patricia Kennedy Grimsted; foreword by Michael J. Kurtz. Prepared in collaboration with the Na-
tional Archives of the United States. CD-ROM edition. Washington, DC: GPO, 2001.

———. “Why Do Captured Archives Go Home? Restitution Achievements under the Russian Law.”
International Journal of Cultural Property (2010, this issue).

Gubenko, Nikolai. In Washington Conference on Holocaust Era Assets November 30–December 3, 1998:
Proceedings, edited by J. D. Bindenagel, et al., pp. 513–18. Department of State publication 10603.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1999. Also available as CD-ROM and online at
具http://www.state.gov/www/regions/eur/wash_conf_material.html典.

Hiller, Armin. “The German-Russian Negotiations over the Contents of the Russian Repositories.”
In The Spoils of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cul-
tural Property, edited by E. Simpson, 179–85. New York: Abrams, 1997.

Hoogewoud, F. J. “Russia’s Only Restitution of Books to the West: Dutch Books from Moscow (1992).”
In The Return of Looted Collections (1946–1996). An Unfinished Chapter: Proceedings of an Inter-
national Symposium to mark the 50th Anniversary of the Return of Dutch Book Collections from Ger-
many in 1946, edited by F. J. Hoogewoud, E. P. Kwaadgras, et al., 72–74. Amsterdam, 1997.

Hortusbellicus. Shedevry zapadnoevropeiskogo iskusstva iz ‘vengerskoi kollektsii’: Katalog vystavki. Nizh-
nii Novgorod: “Dekom,” 2005.

Katalog proizvedenii izobrazitel’nogo iskusstva iz chastnykh vengerskikh kollektsii/Catalogue of Art Ob-
jects from Hungarian Private Collections. Bilingual edn. Moscow: “Rudomino,” 2003. Proekt “Obreten-
noe nasledie”/Project “Heritage Revealed.” Available for free download at: 具http://www.libfl.ru/
restitution/catalogs/index.html典.

Knyshevskii, Pavel. Dobycha: Tainy germanskikh reparatsii. Moscow: Soratnik, 1994.

Kowalski, Wojciech. “Russian Law: The Polish Perspective.” Spoils of War: International Newsletter,
no. 4 (August 1997): 36–38.

Kopteltsev, Valentin. In Washington Conference on Holocaust Era Assets November 30–December 3,
1998: Proceedings, edited by J. D. Bindenagel, et al., pp. 318–19. Department of State publication
10603. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1999. Also available as CD-ROM and
online at 具http://www.state.gov/www/regions/eur/wash_conf_material.html典.

Kot, Sergei [Serhii]. “The Ukraine and the Russian Law on Removed Cultural Valu[abl]es.” Spoils of
War: International Newsletter, no. 5 (June 1998): 9.

———, and Iurii Koreniuk. “Mikhailivs’ki pam’iatky v rosiis’kykh muzeiakh.” Pam’iatky Ukraïny 1,
no. 122 (1999):63–82, XXVI–XXVIII.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

253

Kurtz, Michael J. “The End of the War and the Occupation of Germany, 1944–1952: Laws and Con-
ventions Enacted to Counter German Appropriations, the Allied Control Council.” In The Spoils of
War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property,
edited by E. Simpson, 113–16. New York: Abrams, 1997.

Kuz’min, Evgenii. “‘Vyvezti. . . unichtozhit.’ . . spriatat’ . . .” Sud’by trofeinykh arkhivov’ [interview
with P. K. Grimsted]. Literaturnaia gazeta, no. 39 (2 October 1991): 13.

Längström, Tarja. “‘War Trophies’ from World War II in Russia—Robbery or Restitution?” Finnish
Yearbook of International Law IIX (1998): 249–96.

Leistra, Josefine de. “A Short History of Art Loss and Art Recovery in the Netherlands.” In The Spoils
of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property,
edited by E. Simpson, 53–57. New York: Abrams, 1997.

Lillie, Sophie. Was einmal war: Handbuch des enteigneten Kunstsammlungen Wiens. Vienna: Czernin
Verlag, 2003.

Lowenthal, Constance, Willi Korte, William Honan, and Thomas R. Kline. “Case Study: The Quedlin-
burg Treasures.” In The Spoils of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and
Recovery of Cultural Property, edited by E. Simpson, 148–59. New York: Abrams, 1997.

Montén, Lina M. “Soviet World War II Trophy Art in Present Day Russia: The Events, the Law, and
the Current Controversies.” DePaul-LCA Journal of Art & Entertainment Law 15, no. 37 (2004): 37–98.

Piiuk, Boris. “Ty mne–Ia tebe,” Itogi, no. 16(49), (22 April 1997): 13–14.

Poole, Robert M. “Monumental Mission.” Smithsonian (February 2008): 44–54.

Prott, Lyndel. “Principles for the Resolution of Disputes Concerning Cultural Heritage Displaced
during the Second World War.” In The Spoils of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Re-
appearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property, edited by E. Simpson, 225–30. New York: Abrams,
1997.

Ritter, Waldemar. Kulturerbe als Beute? Die Rückführung kriegsbedingt verbrachter Kulturgüter—
Notwendigkeit und Chancen für die Lösung eines historischen Problems. Suppl. vol. 13. Nuremberg:
Germanisches Nationalmuseum, 1997.

———. “The Soviet Spoils Commissions: On the Removal of Works of Art from German Museums
and Collections,” IJCP 7, no. 2 (1998): 446–55.

Russian Federation. “Gosudarstvennaia Duma: Stenogramma zasedanii.” Biulleten’, no. 74(216), (5
February 1997): 19–23, 56.

———. Federal’noe Sobranie, Parlament Rossiiskoi Federatsii, “Zasedaniia Gosudarstvennoi Dumy,
20 maia 1994 goda.” Biulleten’, no. 34, (Moscow, 1994): 4, 26–33.

———. Sobranie aktov Prezidenta i pravitel’stva Rossiiskoi Federatsii. Moscow: Izd. Administratsii
Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii, July 1992–April 1994.

———. Sobranie zakonodatel’stva Rossiiskoi Federatsii. Moscow: Izd. Iuridicheskaia literatura, 1994–;
also available in a CD-ROM edition. Issued in weekly segments, this compilation (SZ) is currently
available on the Internet going back to 2003: 具http://jurizdat.ru/editions/official/lcrf/archive_list.htm典.

———. Sovet Federatsii Federal’nogo Sobraniia, Zasedanie deviatoe, Biulleten’, no. 1(107), (17 July
1996): 53–63.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

254

PATRICIA KENNEDY GRIMSTED

Siehr, Kurt. “Comment on the Russian Federal Law of 1997 on Cultural Valu[abl]es.” Spoils of War:
International Newsletter, no. 4 (August 1997): 38–39.

Sidorov, Evgenii. “Foreword.” In Five Centuries of European Drawings: The Former Collection of Franz
Koenigs: Exhibition Catalogue, 2.10.1995–21.01.1996. Milan: Leonardo Arte, 1995. Parallel Russian
ed. Piat’ vekov evropeiskogo risunka. Risunki starykh masterov iz byvshego sobraniia Frantsa Kenigsa.
Katalog. Moscow: GMII im. A. S. Pushkina/Milan: Leonardo Arte, 1995.

Simpson, Elizabeth, ed. The Spoils of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance,
and Recovery of Cultural Property. New York: Abrams, 1997.

Snytkin, D. V. “Voprosy pravovogo regulirovaniia kul’turnykh tsennostei, peremeshchennykh v Soiuz
SSR v rezul’tate Vtoroi mirovoi voiny i nakhodiashchikhsia na territorii Rossiiskoi Federatsii.” In
Pravo i kul’tura, edited by V. K. Egorov, Iu. A. Tikhomirov, and O. N. Astaf ’eva, 347–49. Moscow: Izd.
RAGS, 2009.

Spoils of War: International Newsletter, no. 4 (August 1997). Special issue (devoted to the 1998 Rus-
sian law on cultural property).

Standen, Edith, James S. Plaut, Craig Hugh Smyth, Walter I. Farmer, Bernard Taper, and S. Lane
Faison, Jr., and Ely Mauer. “Repatriations following World War II.” In The Spoils of War: World War
II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property, edited by E. Simpson,
121–46. New York: Abrams, 1997.

Teteriatnikov, Vladimir. Problema kul’turnykh tsennostei, peremeshchennykh v rezul’tate Vtoroi miro-
voi voiny (dokazatel’stvo rossiiskikh prav na “kollektsiiu Kenigsa”). Moscow, Tver: Obozrevatel, 1996.

Tolstova, Anna. “Veter vremeni—nikomu nichego ne otdavat’”, Kommersant-Vlast’, 2005, no. 51 (26
December 2005).

Trofeinye knigi iz biblioteki Sharoshpatakskogo reformatskogo kolledzha (Vengriia) v fondakh Nizhe-
gorodskoi gosudarstvennoi oblastnoi universal’noi nauchnoi biblioteki: Katalog/Displaced Books from
Sárospatak Calvinist College Library (Hungary) in the Collections of Nizhny Novgorod Regional Re-
search Library: Catalogue, compiled by E. V. Zhuravleva, N. N. Zubrov, and E. A. Korkmazova. Mos-
cow: “Rudomino,” 1997.

Tumarkin, Nina. “The Great Patriotic War as Myth and Memory.” The Atlantic 267, no. 6 (June
1991): 26–31.

———. The Living & The Dead: The Rise and Fall of the Cult of World War II in Russia. New York:
Basic Books, 1994.

———. “The War of Remembrance.” In Culture and Entertainment in Wartime Russia, edited by
Richard Stites, 194–207. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.

UNESCO. “Report by the Director-General on the preparation of a draft declaration of Principles
Relating to Cultural Objects Displaced in Connection with the Second World War.” Paris (17 Sep-
tember 2007), 177EX/17.

U.S. Department of State. Washington Conference on Holocaust Era Assets November 30–December 3,
1998: Proceedings, edited by J. D. Bindenagel, et al. Department of State publication 10603. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1999. Also available as CD-ROM and online at
具http://www.state.gov/www/regions/eur/wash_conf_material.html典.

USSR Embassy (Washington, DC). Information Bulletin, no. 138 (19 November 1942).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X

LEGALIZING “COMPENSATION” AND THE SPOILS OF WAR

255

Wheeler, Charles, and Mark Burman (producer). “Twice Saved or Twice Stolen?” BBC Radio 4 (4
September 2007).

Wilske, Stephan. “International Law and the Spoils of War: To the Victor the Right of Spoils? The
Claims for Repatriation of Art Removed from Germany by the Soviet Army during or as a Result of
World War II.” UCLA Journal of International Law and Foreign Affairs 3 (1998–1999): 233–82.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:06:28, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911000010X


