International Journal of Cultural Property (2008) 15:321–345. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2008 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739108080181

The Protected Objects Act in New
Zealand: Too Little, Too Late?
Piers Davies* and Paul Myburgh**

Abstract: The Protected Objects Amendment Act (POA) was passed by the
New Zealand Parliament in 2006, so New Zealand could fulfil its obligations
under the UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property 1970
and the UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural
Objects 1995. This represents a significant delay after the drafting of these two
conventions. This article explores why New Zealand has taken so long to give
domestic effect to these conventions and examines the manner in which they
have been given domestic legal effect in the POA. The article also focuses on
issues of Ma¯ori cultural property, the practical implementation of the POA,
and the cultural heritage climate in New Zealand.

INTRODUCTION

The Protected Objects Amendment Act (POA) was passed by the New Zealand
Parliament in August 2006 so that New Zealand could fulfil its obligations under
the UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property 1970 (UNESCO
Convention) and the UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cul-
tural Objects 1995 (UNIDROIT Convention). This is a significant delay after the

*Wackrow, Williams & Davies, New Zealand. Email: piers@wwandd.co.nz
**The University of Auckland, New Zealand. Email: p.myburgh@auckland.ac.nz

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The authors would like to express their gratitude to the following people
who provided valuable assistance, in their personal or professional capacities, in the writing of this
article: Bernadette Arapere, Dr. David Butts, Chanel Clarke, Elizabeth Cotton, Jane Kominik, Garry
Law, Dr. Jane Legget, Professor Campbell McLachlan QC, Professor Robert Paterson, Grant Powell,
Professor Folarin Shyllon, Brodie Stubbs, Professor David Williams, Dominic Wilson, and the two
anonymous referees. The usual disclaimer applies.

321

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

322

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

drafting of these two conventions. The reasons for this, and the manner in which
the conventions have been given domestic effect in New Zealand law, are matters
of considerable interest.

To understand why New Zealand has taken so long to ratify the conventions, it
is necessary to examine briefly the historical and geographical background. New
Zealand has a population of more than 4 million. Its occupation by human beings
is recent. The first settlers, Ma¯ori tribes from further north in the Pacific, ap-
peared between 1200 and 1300 c.e. European settlement did not take place in sig-
nificant numbers until the British Crown negotiated the Treaty of Waitangi with
several Northern Ma¯ori subtribes (hapu¯) on February 6, 1840, after which it was
signed by most, but not all, Ma¯ori tribes and subtribes elsewhere in New Zealand.
Since the mid-1980s the Treaty of Waitangi has been considered the country’s
founding document by the educated elite of judges, legislators, and bureaucrats.1
We deal with the significance of the Treaty of Waitangi and its effect on the POA
in a later section of this article.

New Zealand was an enthusiastic British colony for many years, supporting the
British Empire and sending troops to a succession of colonial and international
wars. In 1947 it reluctantly accepted independence.2 This conservatism, based partly
on caution (almost timidity) and partly on a strong sense of loyalty, is one of the
main elements of New Zealand’s foreign policy.

The other element is an enthusiasm for multilateral solutions and treaties. This
began with support for the League of Nations from 1936 onward3 and intensified
with a strong commitment from 1945 onward to the founding of the United Na-
tions.4 New Zealand later adopted a strong antinuclear stance, which brought it
into disfavor with France in the 1970s and the United States beginning in 1984.
This element arose out of idealism and the fact that New Zealand is a string of
islands with the population spread around the edges of the country. The capital
city Wellington and the largest city Auckland, together with two out of the re-
maining three main cities, have significant ports. New Zealand has always been
heavily dependent on external trade. New Zealanders are aware of international
dimensions, and there is no attraction in isolationist policies.

Although New Zealanders are comparatively well off, with a significant tax
base for the size of the nation, New Zealand has not funded its representation in
international affairs to the degree that its interests would seem to merit. There
are limitations on the potential representation by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Trade, with a tendency to concentrate on issues vital to New Zealand’s trade
and economic interests. Consequently, New Zealand tends to be represented at
World Trade Organization negotiating sessions but more intermittently when it
comes to cultural heritage treaties. For example, although New Zealand attended
the final meeting on the UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Under-
water Cultural Heritage 2001 and enthusiastically supported the convention, it
was not represented at all the governmental expert meetings leading up to the
convention.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

323

NEW ZEALAND’S INVOLVEMENT WITH THE UNESCO

AND UNIDROIT CONVENTIONS

The UNESCO and UNIDROIT Conventions are not merely of theoretical interest
to New Zealand. Although New Zealand’s cultural heritage is comparatively small,
it has suffered from the export of cultural material ever since Captain Cook es-
tablished contact in 1769.5 This included the export of preserved, tattooed Ma¯ori
heads (toi moko) for 30 or 40 years from the late eighteenth century onward. These
were often traded for muskets, adding a much deadlier dimension to intertribal
warfare. This was followed by a period of trading in the skulls and bones of Ma¯ori
and Moriori (the indigenous inhabitants of the Chatham Islands). These bones
(koiwi tangata) were sought for scientific studying by museums, especially in En-
gland and Europe, commencing in the 1840s, because intelligence was then thought
to be determined by skull size.6 This trade, although repugnant, was not contrary
to the applicable British laws; but it was contrary to Ma¯ori customary law (ti-
kanga), and in many instances the skeletons were illegally taken by deception or
by theft. In addition, many Ma¯ori treasures, including carvings, ornaments, cloaks,
and weapons, were obtained, sometimes under dubious circumstances, and ex-
ported to museums and private collections overseas.

By the early twentieth century, there was a realization that New Zealand was
disposing of its Ma¯ori heritage. This lead to the enactment of the Ma¯ori Antiqui-
ties Act in 1901, followed by the more general Historic Articles and Antiquities
Acts in 1962 and 1975, respectively. By increasing the protection against the illegal
removal and export of antiquities and artifacts, these statutes represented a first
step in responding to the issues raised in the UNESCO Convention.

Antiquities Act 1975

This act covered any antiquity, which was broadly defined in section 2 as includ-
ing any chattel of “national, historical, scientific or artistic importance; and relates
to the European discovery, settlement, or development of New Zealand and, is or
appears to be, more than 60 years old.” Also included were any ship, boat, or air-
craft or part thereof that had been wrecked for more than 60 years and that was of
“national, historical, scientific or artistic value or importance.” Artifacts were de-
fined as

any chattel, carving, object or thing which relates to the history, art, cul-
ture, traditions, or economy of the Ma¯ori or other pre-European inhab-
itants of New Zealand and which appears to have been manufactured or
modified in New Zealand by any such inhabitant or brought to New
Zealand by an ancestor of any such inhabitant or used by any such in-
habitant prior to 1902.

The penalties were not particularly substantial in 1975, and quickly became ludi-
crous with the surging inflation of the 1970s and 1980s.7

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

324

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

The Ortiz Case and its Aftermath

A key weakness of the Antiquities Act (and its predecessors) was that it did not
provide the means to recover cultural treasures that had been stolen or illegally
exported. This weakness was fully exposed in the case of Attorney-General of New
Zealand v. Ortiz.8 Five storehouse (pa¯taka) panels, masterpieces of Ma¯ori carving,
were recovered from a swamp in New Zealand and reappeared some years later in
the United Kingdom. They were removed from New Zealand without the New
Zealand government’s permission. The New Zealand government instructed its
attorney-general to recover the panels but was unsuccessful in the House of Lords.
The resulting intergovernmental protests and discussions led to the Common-
wealth Scheme for the Protection of the Material Cultural Heritage.9

However, the outcome of the Ortiz case did not speed up the process of New
Zealand’s ratification of the UNESCO Convention. Instead, this languished on the
to-do list for another 20 years.

Summary of Initiatives Taken Between 1975 and 2006

In the three decades after 1975 there were several serious attempts to strengthen
the protection afforded by the Antiquities Act and/or to give domestic effect to
the UNESCO Convention. The first initiative was the Protection of Movable Cul-
tural Heritage Bill, which began life as a Department of Internal Affairs issues
paper in 1990 and was scheduled to be introduced as a government bill by the
National government in 1996.10 Instead, a private member’s bill, the Taonga Ma¯ori
Protection Bill, was introduced by Tau Henare in 1996. After several lengthy de-
lays in 1999, the Ma¯ori Affairs Select Committee finally concluded, on a biparti-
san basis, that the focus of this bill was too narrow and recommended that it be
incorporated into the Department of Internal Affairs’ broader Protection of Mov-
able Cultural Heritage proposal. In the same year, however, Tau Henare lost his
seat in the general election, and his bill consequently lapsed. In 2003 in its sec-
ond term, the Labour government introduced a proposal for an Antiquities
Amendment Bill, which eventually became the Protected Objects Amendment
Bill 2005.

The competing cultural heritage and private ownership issues involved in the
Antiquities Act touch on some core values of New Zealand society and were there-
fore always going to be controversial. Consequently, both major political parties
were loathe to grasp this particular nettle.11 There was also a strong desire to make
sure that any replacement legislation got it right. This was made more difficult by
a proliferation of overlapping legislative initiatives with different focuses: The Pro-
tection of Movable Cultural Heritage proposal specifically sought to regulate ex-
port of cultural property more effectively after the Ortiz decision; the Taonga Ma¯ori
Protection proposal focused exclusively on Ma¯ori cultural property; and neither

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

325

measure covered other general cultural heritage issues dealt with, albeit in a seri-
ously outdated fashion, in the Antiquities Act.

As well as these legislative initiatives, there was also the draft scheme for pro-
tecting cultural heritage within the Commonwealth, which, as discussed earlier,
eventually became the Commonwealth Scheme for the Protection of the Material
Cultural Heritage at Mauritius in November 1993. In addition, in 1993 Jonathan
Keate published an important law reform proposal to improve the protection of
New Zealand’s movable cultural heritage.12 So the failure to resolve this issue was
caused by a lack of political will rather than a lack of initiatives.

Departmental Restructuring 1990 to 2000

Another element that probably contributed to the delay in implementing the
UNESCO Convention was the 1991 restructuring of the functions of the Depart-
ment of Internal Affairs. This was part of the enthusiasm of both the Labour
government and the National government in the late 1980s and early 1990s to
restructure government departments from large administrative departments into
smaller ministries, which developed and advised on policy. The Labour govern-
ment first proposed a free-standing entity focusing on arts and culture under the
umbrella of the existing Department of Internal Affairs in 1987, to provide a
“clearer and more coherent system.” This idea was taken up by the incoming
National government in 1991. However, the State Services Commission advised
on fiscal policy grounds that the new Ministry of Cultural Affairs should be a
stand-alone entity. This resulted in some Department of Internal Affairs arts and
cultural portfolios and staff moving across to the Ministry of Cultural Affairs,
whereas others were transferred to other ministries or remained with the Depart-
ment of Internal Affairs. The administration of the Antiquities Act remained with
the department, apparently because it was categorized as a heritage issue, along
with war graves and national monuments, rather than as a contemporary arts
and culture issue. There it languished, until it was transferred across to the en-
larged Ministry for Culture and Heritage (MCH) in 2000. This piecemeal ap-
proach to reapportioning portfolios meant that the Department of Internal Affairs
“lost a co-ordinating role for its traditional responsibilities in a manner that was
bound to increase staff overheads.”13 In general, the removal of the culture and
arts budget from the Department of Internal Affairs led to a loss of emphasis
and a decrease of spending on heritage issues. In particular, the Antiquities Act
review process stagnated and attracted criticism.14

Now that all heritage matters are brought together in the MCH, there is a more
comprehensive overview of, and greater policy emphasis on, heritage issues, as well
as more adequate funding for heritage initiatives. This undoubtedly contributed
to how the work on the Protected Objects Bill moved ahead steadily between 2000
and 2006. It also means that a solid foundation has been created for future heri-
tage work.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

326

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

Historic Places Acts

Evolving alongside the Antiquities Act were the Historic Places Acts. The Historic
Places Act 1980 and its successor, the Historic Places Act 1993, put much more
emphasis on preservation of archaeological sites. The object of the 1993 act is to
promote the identification, protection, preservation, and conservation of the his-
torical and cultural heritage in New Zealand. Although the Historic Places Act
regime complemented the Antiquities Act 1975 to a certain degree, each had a
different emphasis and focus.

THE PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

Adopting Conventions

Like other Anglo-Common Law countries, New Zealand can only give effect to a
convention by passing the necessary legislation through parliament. There are a
number of ways to do this. One direct way is to adopt the convention text as
a schedule to a new act and to give it the force of law.15 Another, more indirect
method of giving domestic effect to international instruments is to paraphrase
the intentions and requirements of the convention in New Zealand legislation.16
In the drafting of the POA, a halfway house method of domestic implementa-
tion was adopted, in which the English texts of the UNESCO and UNIDROIT
Conventions were inserted by the Protected Objects Amendment Act 2006 into
the Antiquities Act 1975 as schedules 2 and 3 of the new Protected Objects Act;
but the convention texts themselves were not given the force of law in New Zea-
land. Instead, the key articles of the UNESCO and UNIDROIT Conventions were
restated and paraphrased in the sections of the POA, with cross-references to the
relevant convention articles in the schedules. This was thought necessary to stan-
dardize and integrate the texts of both conventions into a single statute and pro-
vide for clear domestic rules, but it may ironically give rise to some uncertainty of
interpretation. As discussed in the following text, there are a few significant dif-
ferences between the convention articles and the sections of the POA that give
domestic effect to them. The starting point for a judge interpreting the POA is to
apply the sections of the POA rather than the convention texts set out in the sched-
ules. However, in the event of a conflict of interpretation between a section of the
POA and the convention text, a court should arguably favor the convention text,
given that one of the objects of the act is to enable New Zealand’s participation in
the UNESCO and UNIDROIT Conventions.17 This inevitably generates uncer-
tainty. For example, should a court give precedence to section 10E(4) of the POA,
which provides that no compensation is payable for the restitution of a stolen
protected foreign object, or to article 4(1) of the UNIDROIT Convention in sched-
ule 3 of the POA, which provides that compensation is payable to bona fide pos-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

327

sessors of stolen protected foreign objects? For this reason, it would have been
better to have given the convention texts themselves the force of law, and to have
provided a statutory memorandum clearly explaining how the two convention texts
should be interpreted and integrated.

Parallel Conventions

Given that 114 states are party to the UNESCO Convention, but only 29 states are
party to both the UNESCO and UNIDROIT Conventions, it is of particular in-
terest that New Zealand opted to give domestic effect to both conventions at the
same time. This approach accords with UNESCO’s official recommendations.18
The official New Zealand government position is that it was necessary to adopt
both conventions because they complement each other:19

The UNESCO convention provides a broad framework for cooperation
in this field, while the UNIDROIT convention was developed to provide
for more concrete remedies. Taken together, these treaties address many
of the legal problems that otherwise bedevil attempts to recover cultural
heritage objects.

However, parallel accession to the UNESCO and UNIDROIT Conventions is not
as straightforward as this official statement might suggest, and UNESCO provides
no detailed or practical official guidance on how to do so. To date, Nigeria and
New Zealand are the only two Common Law jurisdictions party to both conven-
tions, and New Zealand has preceded Nigeria in enacting domestic legislation. Other
Common Law countries have exhibited a distinct lack of enthusiasm toward the
UNIDROIT Convention, mainly because of concerns over the prohibition on res-
ervations to the convention, the broad interpretation of cultural property, the
lengthy limitation periods on return of illicit cultural objects, and the overriding
of domestic and private international law rules protecting the rights of bona fide
purchasers for value.20 There was little public debate as to whether New Zealand
should accede to the UNIDROIT Convention. It may have been thought that it is
in New Zealand’s interests, as an export rather than market nation in the illicit
trade of cultural property, to accede to the UNIDROIT Convention, in the hope
that this may facilitate the return of New Zealand cultural property that has al-
ready found its way overseas, mainly to museums and collections in the United
Kingdom, Europe, and the United States. However, the reality is that not one of
these states, and few other market nations, has ratified the UNIDROIT Conven-
tion. This renders the prospect of recovery of illicitly exported New Zealand cul-
tural property somewhat remote.

Analysis of the Protected Objects Amendment Act

The title and dating of the POA are unorthodox in the sense that one would have
expected the POA either to be categorized as an amendment to the Antiquities Act

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

328

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

1975 or to be styled as a new act, the Protected Objects Act 2006. Instead, al-
though the MCH elected to jettison what was presumably thought to be the overly
narrow and old-fashioned nomenclature of antiquities in favor of protected ob-
jects, it insists that the Protected Objects Act 1975 is not a new act but merely an
amendment to the Antiquities Act 1975.21

However, every substantive section of the original act has been amended, major
provisions have been inserted, and three new schedules have been added to the
POA, two of which comprise the UNESCO and UNIDROIT Convention texts.
The conventions are not implemented retrospectively in the POA but only took
effect on May 1, 2007. The extent of these changes is so significant that the POA
can only be described as a cut-and-paste version of the original, quite literally so
in the case of the hard copy version of the consolidated Antiquities Act/Protected
Objects Act 1975. Eventually, this problem with the hard copy version will be re-
solved when it is reprinted, but a date has yet to be scheduled by the Parliamen-
tary Counsel Office. There have been some lapses in the application of cut and
paste. For example, the definitions of antiquity and artifact only apply up to Oc-
tober 31, 2006, because they are repealed from November 1, 2006, by the Pro-
tected Objects Amendment Act 2006. However, section 2(1)(e) of the POA still
refers to “antiquities more than 100 years old, such as inscriptions, coins and en-
graved seals.”

The peculiarity of the title and dating of the POA also creates practical diffi-
culties in simply finding the statute. People who are unaware of the unusual leg-
islative drafting process and are seeking the new act in the two most logical places,
either as an amendment to the Antiquities Act 1975 or the Protected Objects Act
2006, will seek in vain.22 Thus it would probably have been simpler and better to
start afresh with a completely new act.

The general provisions implementing the UNESCO and UNIDROIT Conven-
tions in the new part I of the POA focus on the protection of three key categories
of objects: protected New Zealand objects, unlawfully exported foreign objects,
and stolen protected foreign objects.

The definition of “protected New Zealand object” in section 2 of the POA broadly
follows the definitions of cultural property in the conventions. A protected New
Zealand object is an object that forms part of the movable cultural heritage of
New Zealand that is of importance to New Zealand, or to a part of New Zealand,
for aesthetic, archaeological, architectural, artistic, cultural, historical, literary, sci-
entific, social, spiritual, technological, or traditional reasons; and falls into one or
more of the extensive categories of protected objects set out in schedule 4 of the
POA. These categories include art objects, documentary heritage objects, science,
technology, industry, economy and transport objects, and social history objects
that are at least 50 years old and are not represented by at least two comparable
examples permanently held in New Zealand public collections. They also include
archaeological and historical objects of non-New Zealand origin relating to New
Zealand. The possibility of a conflict between the laws of the jurisdiction of origin

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

329

and New Zealand law is avoided by the requirement that they must have been in
New Zealand for at least 50 years and are, or have been, in a public collection.
This category includes objects of Polynesian creation or modification brought to
New Zealand before 1800, or created or modified by the former Polynesian in-
habitants of the Kermadec Islands before 1800.

A further category of note is that of nga¯ taonga tu¯turu, which replaces the def-
inition of Ma¯ori artifacts under the old Antiquities Act. Nga¯ taonga tu¯turu are
defined as objects more than 50 years old that relate to Ma¯ori culture, history, and
society and that were, or appear to have been, imported into New Zealand by Ma¯ori,
manufactured or modified in New Zealand by Ma¯ori, or used by Ma¯ori. Given the
importance of Ma¯ori cultural heritage to New Zealand, all taonga tu¯turu (regard-
less of how many representative examples of this type of taonga tu¯turu there may
be in permanent public collections) are designated as protected New Zealand ob-
jects in schedule 4 of the POA.

Further categories include taxonomically significant New Zealand natural sci-
ence specimens (such as fossils, meteorites, and kauri gum) and early numismatic
and philatelic objects. This category specifically includes the 1772 Resolution and
Adventure Medal23; the Pattern Waitangi Crown24; New Zealand bank notes pro-
duced before 1933; examples of the New Zealand Cross, Victoria Cross,25 George
Cross; and associated medals awarded to New Zealanders or relating to New Zea-
land. The final category consists of any objects, assemblages, scientific samples,
and organic remains derived from a New Zealand archaeological site, as defined
by the Historic Places Act 1993. The Historic Places Act defines a New Zealand
archaeological site as

any place in New Zealand that—

(a) Either—

(i) Was associated with human activity that occurred before 1900;

or

(ii) Is the site of the wreck of any vessel where that wreck oc-

curred before 1900; and

(b) Is or may be able through investigation by archaeological meth-
ods to provide evidence relating to the history of New Zealand.

This reliance on the Historic Places Act definition is unfortunate, because the def-
inition is deficient in a number of respects. The express limitation of archaeolog-
ical sites to places in New Zealand limits the protection of the Historic Places Act,
and hence also the POA, in respect of underwater cultural heritage to wreck sites
in inland waters and the territorial sea. This excludes shipwreck sites in the New
Zealand contiguous zone, Exclusive Economic Zone, or continental shelf, which,
although likely to be limited in number, may be historically significant. The use of
a fixed cutoff date of 1900 for protected archaeological sites is arbitrary and in-
creasingly likely to give rise to anomalies. It is also inconsistent with the other
categories of protected New Zealand objects, which are afforded that status once
they are 50 years old. It seems distinctly odd that archaeological objects should

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

330

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

receive a lesser level of protection. And, as discussed earlier, because the Historic
Places Act definition focuses specifically on the geographical site rather than the
relevant cultural property originating from the site, it does not offer comprehen-
sive protection. The POA seeks to overcome this problem by protecting objects
“derived from” a New Zealand archaeological site. However, experience with the
Historic Places Act suggests that it is notoriously difficult to establish the prov-
enance of historical objects, particularly those taken from historic shipwrecks. It is
therefore unfortunate that the POA does not include any provision for the burden
of proof in the event of a dispute regarding the provenance of objects that may
have been derived from an archaeological site.

Section 5 of the POA prohibits the export or attempted export of protected
New Zealand objects from New Zealand, unless prior approval has been obtained
from the chief executive of the MCH. Exporters must demonstrate to the satis-
faction of the chief executive that they have undisputed title to the relevant object.
Unfortunately, however, the POA does not require more detailed evidence of how
such ownership was acquired. The chief executive must have granted a certificate
of permission for the export, and the export must comply with any terms or con-
ditions imposed.26 The chief executive may also exempt categories of protected
New Zealand objects from the export prohibition, if sufficient examples of these
categories are already held in public ownership in New Zealand.

The chief executive’s discretion to allow export of New Zealand–protected ob-
jects is fettered in three main respects. First, section 7A provides that permanent
export is never permitted where the chief executive determines that a protected
New Zealand object is, among other things, “substantially physically authentic”
and is of “such significance to New Zealand or part of New Zealand that its export
from New Zealand would substantially diminish New Zealand’s cultural heritage.”
Second, the chief executive must consult two or more expert examiners in decid-
ing whether to allow export of protected New Zealand objects. Although the ex-
pert examiners only provide the chief executive with advice and recommendations,
these will presumably be determinative of the result in most cases—a decision by
the chief executive that flies in the face of all expert advice is considerably more
vulnerable to appeal to the Minister for Culture and Heritage or to judicial review.
The act states that the chief executive must provide reasons for the decision to
allow or prohibit export. Although it is unclear from the act whether the expert
examiners’ reports will also be made available to the exporter as a matter of course,
it is suggested that, in the interests of a transparent process, they ought to be. In
any event the reports will be available to exporters under the Official Information
Act 1982. Expert examiners are protected under the POA from being held person-
ally liable for any recommendations made in good faith. Third, any registered ob-
jects of national significance cannot be permanently exported. The Nationally
Significant Objects Register must include all protected New Zealand objects that
the chief executive has determined may not be exported and may include other
significant cultural heritage objects submitted by their owners for inclusion in the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

331

register.27 The register is unavailable for public inspection, presumably because
this would facilitate theft and fraud.

Anyone exporting, or attempting to export, protected New Zealand objects
without the chief executive’s permission and “without reasonable excuse” com-
mits an offence under section 5(2) of the POA and may incur a maximum fine
of NZ$100,000 or 5 years of imprisonment, or both (or NZ$200,000, where the
offence is committed by a body corporate). These punishments represent a sig-
nificant increase on the Antiquities Act regime.

However, although section 5(2) of the POA purports to give domestic effect to
article 3 of the UNESCO Convention, it does not go as far as article 3, which
states that the “import, export or transfer of ownership of cultural property ef-
fected contrary to the provisions adopted under this Convention by the States Par-
ties thereto, shall be illicit.” Although unlawful import of protected foreign objects
is covered elsewhere in the POA, unlawful transfer of ownership of protected ob-
jects is not. It may have been thought unnecessary to include a prohibition on
illicit transfers of ownership within New Zealand, because these would already be
covered by existing New Zealand criminal law. However, this would only seem to
be true of cases of theft of protected New Zealand objects. Section 5 of the POA
does not explicitly render illegal, void, or voidable, transfers of ownership in New
Zealand that contravene the domestic cultural property laws of other state parties
to the convention.28 The POA also arguably does not meet the obligation, set out
in article 13(a) of the UNESCO Convention, to “prevent by all appropriate means
transfers of ownership of cultural property likely to promote the illicit import or
export of such property.” Although New Zealand courts may decide that some
ownership transfers are void, on the ground that they are contrary to public pol-
icy or are illegal contracts under the Illegal Contracts Act 1979, this will not nec-
essarily always be the case. It is disappointing that article 3 of the convention was
not implemented more fully and faithfully in section 5 of the POA. Arguably, if
the validity of a transfer of ownership of a protected New Zealand object is brought
into question because completion of the contract would breach the comparable
cultural heritage laws of other states, or are likely to promote illicit import or ex-
port, New Zealand courts should apply the provisions of the UNESCO Conven-
tion and regard such ownership transfers as illicit, rather than confining themselves
to the arguably narrower ambit of section 5 of the POA.

The second main category of objects protected under the act is that of unlaw-
fully exported protected foreign objects. The definition of protected foreign ob-
jects in section 2 of the POA mirrors the definition of cultural property in the
UNESCO and UNIDROIT Conventions. Section 10A of the POA provides that a
foreign protected object that has been unlawfully exported may not be imported
into New Zealand. There may be some thorny issues surrounding the interpreta-
tion of unlawfully exported. Is this to be tested against the yardstick of the do-
mestic laws of the state of origin, or the conventions? Does unlawful export include
only strictly illegal exports, or also exports that are merely prohibited, contrary to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

332

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

the rules or public policy? Apparently deliberately, to allow for the blending of the
two convention texts, the POA eschews both the broader terminology of the
UNESCO Convention (“effected contrary to the provisions adopted under this
Convention”) and the narrower terminology of the UNIDROIT Convention (“il-
legally exported”). Provided unlawfully exported is broadly interpreted, this pro-
vision should give effect to New Zealand’s international obligations in respect of
imports of illicit cultural property under articles 3 and 7 of the UNESCO Con-
vention, and articles 5 and 6 of the UNIDROIT Convention.

Section 10B provides that a reciprocating state (defined as a State Party to the
UNIDROIT Convention, or a State Party to the UNESCO Convention that pro-
vides for reciprocal treatment of unlawfully exported New Zealand cultural prop-
erty equivalent to the protection afforded by articles 5 and 6 of the UNIDROIT
Convention) may bring a claim in the New Zealand courts against the possessor
of the object within the standard 3- and 50-year limitation periods provided by
article 5(5) of the UNIDROIT Convention.29 The court must order the return of
the unlawfully exported protected foreign object if the claimant establishes that
the removal of the object from the claimant’s territory impairs one of the interests
set out in article 5(3) of the UNIDROIT Convention.

Section 10C provides that the possessor of the object is entitled to fair and
reasonable compensation from the reciprocating state if the object was acquired
after it was unlawfully exported and the possessor did not know, and could not
reasonably be expected to have known, at the time it was acquired that it was
unlawfully exported. This provision, which mirrors article 6 of the UNIDROIT
Convention, makes a significant inroad into the normal application of the nemo
dat rule in New Zealand law.

The third main category covered by the act is that of stolen protected foreign
objects. Section 10D deals with objects stolen from the inventories of foreign cul-
tural institutions (defined as museums, religious or secular public monuments, or
similar institutions in states parties to the UNESCO Convention) and imported
into New Zealand. Section 10D, which is loosely based on article 7(b)(ii) of the
UNESCO Convention, provides that the reciprocating state must apply to the chief
executive for recovery of the stolen object. If the claim is established, the chief
executive must ask the New Zealand Customs Service to seize the object under the
Customs and Excise Act 1996 and transfer it to the MCH. The MCH then returns
it if the reciprocating state pays just compensation to anyone who has valid title
or is an innocent purchaser and covers all costs relating to the return and delivery
of the stolen object. This process is not expressly made subject to any limitation
periods. Because this is a political process involving executive forfeiture and ad-
ministrative return, rather than a court claim based on a cause of action, it is
presumably not subject to the Limitation Act 1950. The section effectively allows
the chief executive to order the seizure of property in New Zealand on the basis of
an ex parte application brought on the part of the reciprocating state, and does
not allow the possessor to object to the seizure or put its side of the case. There

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

333

also does not appear to be a right of appeal against the chief executive’s order.
Where the status of an allegedly stolen object is disputed by the possessor, the
chief executive’s order may presumably be challenged by an application for ad-
ministrative review, or on the basis that it constitutes an unlawful seizure under
the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990.

Section 10E, which is based on articles 3 and 4 of the UNIDROIT Convention,
provides for restitution claims against the possessors of stolen foreign protected
objects. Such claims may be brought in the New Zealand courts within the stan-
dard 3- and 50-year limitation periods in article 3(3) of the UNIDROIT Conven-
tion. However, these limitation periods do not apply where the stolen object formed
an integral part of an identified monument or archaeological site in the claimant
state, is part of a foreign collection, or was made by a member or members of a
tribal or indigenous community for traditional or ritual use by the community
and is to be returned to them. In a departure from the UNIDROIT Convention,
section 10E(4) provides that no compensation is payable for the restitution of a
stolen protected foreign object, unless the object has been stolen from a foreign
cultural institution, which is dealt with under section 10D(2)(b).

Section 10F confirms that sections 10A to E are not retrospective. They only
apply to protected foreign objects that are unlawfully exported or stolen on or
after May 1, 2007.

There are obvious overlaps between sections 10A–C and D–E. Thus, for exam-
ple, a protected object stolen from a foreign museum and illegally imported into
New Zealand is both an unlawfully exported foreign protected object (sections
10A–C) and a stolen foreign protected object (sections 10D–E). This mirrors the
acknowledged overlaps between chapters II and III of the UNIDROIT Convention.30
However, it is not immediately clear why it is necessary to provide a separate
but overlapping regime in section 10D for the administrative seizure of objects
stolen from foreign cultural institutions (based on article 7(b)(ii) of the UNESCO
Convention), in addition to the general regime in section 10E for restitution of
stolen protected foreign objects through the courts (based on articles 3 and 4 of
the UNIDROIT Convention). It is understood that powers of administrative sei-
zure were thought necessary as an immediate or interim measure, pending judi-
cial proceedings. Section 10(4) of the POA does provide that any protected foreign
objects seized by Customs must be transferred to and held by the MCH, until “any
proceedings related to that object” under the POA or the Customs and Excise Act
1996 are completed. This presumably includes claims for recovery of objects sto-
len from foreign museums made to the chief executive by reciprocating states under
section 10D, restitution claims brought by the lawful owner through the New Zea-
land courts under section 10E, and civil and criminal proceedings brought under
the Customs and Excise Act. However, these parallel administrative and judicial
processes relating to stolen protected foreign objects appear unnecessarily com-
plex, and give rise to the specter of a multiplicity of conflicting claims, with inev-
itable delays and uncertainty before stolen protected foreign objects can be returned.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

334

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

It would probably have been cleaner to apply the more sophisticated UNIDROIT
Convention model of judicial restitution to all cases of unlawfully exported and
stolen protected foreign objects.

There are a few other inconsistencies in the drafting of section 10 of the act. For
example, in section 10C(1) the terminology of “fair and reasonable compensa-
tion” used in article 6(1) of the UNIDROIT Convention is adopted, but the par-
allel wording of article 4(1) of the UNIDROIT Convention is not adopted in respect
of sections 10D and E. As previously mentioned, the formulation of “just com-
pensation” from article 7(b)(ii) of the UNESCO Convention is used instead.31
Furthermore, the UNESCO Convention definition of “foreign cultural institu-
tions,” which does not include archaeological sites, is adopted in section 10D; but
the UNIDROIT Convention wording of “identified monument or archaeological
site” is used in section 10E. This may give rise to the decidedly odd result that,
although overlapping section 10D and 10E claims for seizure or restitution are
available for objects stolen from foreign museums, the former remedy is unavail-
able for objects stolen from foreign archaeological sites. Also, as discussed earlier,
whether compensation is available on restitution of stolen objects depends on
whether they fall under sections 10D or 10E, which seems rather arbitrary.

MA¯ORI ISSUES

Unlike the United States and Canada, where many separate treaties were negoti-
ated between the governments and the indigenous tribes or nations, New Zealand
only has one treaty between the Crown and Ma¯ori: The Treaty of Waitangi (Te
Tiriti o Waitangi). The Treaty of Waitangi itself is comparatively short and is in
both English and Ma¯ori. Unfortunately, there are key differences between the two
texts, which have continued to provide misunderstanding and dispute. Where cul-
tural property is concerned, the Ma¯ori language version of article the second guar-
anteed “the unqualified exercise of their chieftainship over their lands, over their
villages and all their treasures” (taonga).32 The English language version is not
identical. The Ma¯ori wording has provided the basis for recent Waitangi Tribunal
hearings (Wai 262) over Ma¯ori claims to intellectual property, cultural items, and
treasures.

The Treaty of Waitangi was not signed by all the major tribes (iwi), although it
was carried from one end of New Zealand to the other. Important iwi, like Tuhoe,
refused to sign. Many who did quickly became unhappy about how it was being
implemented by the Crown. Hone Heke, the first signatory, ended up in military
conflict with the British within 5 years.

The Treaty of Waitangi was increasingly ignored, especially once New Zealand
came under settler control, and was filed away in the National Archives where it
suffered damage from water and rats. More than a century later the Labour gov-
ernment set up the Waitangi Tribunal to deal with Ma¯ori grievances after 1975.33

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

335

Under Chief Judge Edward Durie, the tribunal began to hear and report in the
early 1980s on several major Treaty of Waitangi claims. In 1985 the tribunal’s mem-
bership was increased and it was allowed to hear historic grievances back to 1840.34
At the same time the government started inserting references to compliance with
the Treaty of Waitangi or its principles into major New Zealand legislation. In
1987 a landmark New Zealand Court of Appeal decision, New Zealand Ma¯ori Coun-
cil v. Attorney-General,35 held that the references to the principles of the Treaty of
Waitangi were to be taken seriously and that the New Zealand government had
inherited a partnership with the Ma¯ori people as a result of the Treaty.

The Court of Appeal’s judgment suspended the vigorous debate between those
who argued that the Treaty of Waitangi was a nullity, those who argued that the
Treaty of Waitangi had been a fraud to cheat the Ma¯ori tribes, and those who
argued that the New Zealand government had a duty to honor the Treaty. Profes-
sor David Williams argues that the approach of the government and the courts
during the 1980s resulted in the creation of a beneficial myth: that the Treaty of
Waitangi’s preamble and articles are an explicit immigration contract in which
Ma¯ori welcomed those who wished to settle in New Zealand.36

During the aforementioned Wai 262 hearings, the question of the New Zealand
government’s Treaty obligations to repatriate Ma¯ori taonga was raised. Jane Ko-
minik, the deputy chief executive and policy group manager of the MCH, gave
evidence to the Waitangi Tribunal that the New Zealand government could do
more but was reluctant to do so, because this would trigger claims in respect of
cultural property in New Zealand that had come from other peoples.37 This points
to an interesting issue: although Ma¯ori press to repatriate their treasures, New Zea-
land museums are holding the treasures of other peoples, largely those of coun-
tries in and around the Pacific.38

Although the POA has replaced “antiquity” with the Ma¯ori words “taonga tu¯-
turu,”39 and makes use of several other Ma¯ori concepts, it still displays a funda-
mentally Eurocentric approach, with the emphasis on individual ownership and
property, whereas such concepts are unknown or inappropriate in the context of
taonga held by traditional indigenous societies. The POA also does not address
intellectual property issues, which can have major implications for Ma¯ori.40

Although the POA represents a significant improvement over the 1975 Act and
has introduced more commensurate penalties, from a Ma¯ori standpoint it really is
mostly a case of too little too late. Indeed, similar comments were made more
than a century earlier during the passing of the Ma¯ori Antiquities Act 1901.41 The
enactment of the POA could also be described as bolting the door of the store-
house after the food has been taken. Many treasures have already been dispersed
to museums or private collections overseas. Arapata Hakaiwi of the Museum of
New Zealand, Te Papa Tongarewa, in Wellington has said that the British Museum
alone is holding approximately 3,000 Ma¯ori items.42

The immediate effect of the enactment of the POA on the Auckland art market
seems to have been to inflate the auction prices for items that are still available.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

336

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

For example, a pre-European canoe prow found in Taranaki in the 1920s recently
sold for NZ$61,592. This underlines the fact that the POA is not retrospective and
does not apply to taonga found before 1976. This was raised by the Hauraki claim-
ants as a fundamental flaw in the POA in the recent Waitangi Tribunal hearing
relating to the Tauranga Moana Inquiry. The Crown witnesses in that inquiry re-
sponded with the argument that the legislation should not be retrospective.43

Other important criticisms of the POA made by the Hauraki claimants and Ngäti

Kahungunu include the following:44

• Ownership of discovered taonga
• Procedure for determining ownership
• Custody/care of taonga pending ownership
• Illegal export of taonga.

It is unlikely that a large amount of finely carved buried taonga awaits discov-
ery in New Zealand. There may be masterpieces that were buried in times of dan-
ger, as in the Ortiz case, but most of these taonga have already been discovered.
More commonplace items like adzes are more likely to be found. These are han-
dled in accordance with section 11 of the POA. Section 11 of the POA approaches
the issue of ownership of discovered taonga by making the Crown the prima facie
owner.45 Some iwi have tried to circumvent this provision by asking archaeolo-
gists working in their areas to sign memoranda in which they agree to pass all
objects found during surveys into the custody of the iwi. This is unlikely to be
legally effective, but it may present de facto advantages if archaeologists comply.
The New Zealand Archaeological Association has warned against signing such mem-
oranda.46 The procedure for determining ownership of taonga has been simpli-
fied, but there are still real concerns over the speed with which ownership issues
will be handled, the information provided by the Crown about taonga, and the
resources of the MCH to deal with these issues.47

It has been commented that Ma¯ori skepticism of heritage assessment processes
is not misplaced—although indigenous heritage is respected and valued in prin-
ciple, the practice is often deficient.48 Several of the above mentioned criticisms
levelled at the POA applied equally to the Antiquities Act 1975,49 and the forms
used under the Antiquities Act were subject to similar criticism.50

Another question is whether the Ma¯ori Land Court is the appropriate body to
determine ownership of taonga. The Ma¯ori Land Court is a specialist court of
record, but its status is more equivalent to a District Court rather than the High
Court or an appellate court. The Ma¯ori Land Court was supposed to determine
ownership issues under section 12 of the Antiquities Act 1975, but in practice vir-
tually no ownership orders were made. Custody was granted instead.51 We have
found little express criticism of the choice of the Ma¯ori Land Court to determine
such matters,52 but a major concern is whether the Ma¯ori Land Court’s resources
will be sufficient to perform its role properly.53 Inadequate resourcing has fre-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

337

quently hampered the work of the Waitangi Tribunal and claimants appearing be-
fore it. Discussions with legal practitioners working in the area indicate that
although there is no real concern about the Ma¯ori Land Court determining own-
ership issues, there is considerable disquiet about the aforementioned issues raised
by the Hauraki claimants and Ngäti Kahungunu.

Governmental deference to the Treaty of Waitangi may have already peaked, with
increased tensions regarding a number of critical Treaty of Waitangi issues. This is
evident in the handling of the foreshore and seabed issue: The government
precipitately enacted retrospective legislation, the Foreshore and Seabed Act 2004,
to defeat the outcome of a New Zealand Court of Appeal decision that could have
allowed Ma¯ori to make claims based on customary rights to the foreshore and sea-
bed.54 Balanced against this is the government’s recent flurry of claims settlements,
including the Central North Island Forests Land (Treelords) settlement. Ma¯ori are
increasingly recognizing the importance of their traditional cultural values.55

COMPATIBILITY WITH THE 2001 UNESCO CONVENTION ON

UNDERWATER CULTURAL HERITAGE

Although New Zealand attended the November 2001 meeting of UNESCO and en-
thusiastically supported the adoption of the convention on the Protection of the Un-
derwater Cultural Heritage, there has subsequently not been a great deal of progress
in examining the convention and deciding whether New Zealand should adopt it.56
Such debate as there is, has been limited to people particularly involved in this area.
Obviously, there would have to be compatibility between the POA and any leg-
islation bringing into effect the 2001 UNESCO Convention. However, we do not
consider this particularly difficult because there would need to be a complete re-
vision of several other statutes in any event.

The indications are that there is no particular governmental enthusiasm for em-
barking on this project as a matter of priority. The MCH has not included it in its
current legislative program. This situation could well change upon the 2001 con-
vention being ratified by the necessary 20 countries and coming into effect. The
New Zealand government is most likely to be encouraged if Australia ratifies the
convention.

PRACTICE

Compliance Forms

The MCH has published forms for compliance with the POA, including the Ap-
plication to Export and the Application for Inclusion on the Nationally Signifi-
cant Objects Register.57

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

338

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

These forms are expressed in clear language with a minimum of legalisms. How-
ever, they are most definitely monocultural and are written solely in English. There
is no use of the Ma¯ori language even where that would clearly be more appropri-
ate. There is no specific recognition of Ma¯ori tribal organizations, trusts, or com-
mittees; yet such entities are expected to register to be collectors of Taonga Tu¯turu.
Even the concept of being a collector is quite alien to Ma¯ori and is likely to cause
discomfort. We hope that the forms will be seen as a work in progress and that
before too long they will reflect bicultural realities.

There are also some potential gaps in the system. For example, a registered col-
lector can give or bequeath a protected object to a relative who is not required to
be a registered collector.58 This means that a protected object could disappear
completely.

Web Site
The web site of the MCH, http://www.mch.govt.nz/, is an excellent user-friendly
and informative resource. Included among the materials are the helpful Guide-
lines for Taonga Tu¯turu.

Discovery and Export of Taonga Tu¯turu

Announcements have been appearing in the Public Notices column of the main
English-language daily newspapers advertising the discovery of taonga tu¯turu. These
appear in the larger circulation newspapers, like the New Zealand Herald as well as
in more localized regional newspapers, like the Southland Times. Notifications are
also listed on the MCH web site.

To publicize the finds among Ma¯ori networks, the MCH contacts the New Zea-
land Historic Places Trust, local authorities, and Te Puni Ko¯kiri (Ministry of Ma¯ori
Development) and asks for suggestions on who to contact and how the notifica-
tion should be made. The MCH tries to cast its net as widely as possible and also
reaches out to those in the immediate locality. For example, if a find comes to
light near a marae, the MCH talks to the elders of that marae. In some cases, the
MCH is guided by protocols already established as a result of the Treaty of Wait-
angi claims process; but the MCH will not rely exclusively on these protocols, be-
cause there are sometimes issues of overlapping claims, and other iwi or hapu¯
may be interested and want to get involved. Although the notices should arguably
be in Ma¯ori and English, the reality is that hardly anyone reads public notices
apart from the occasional lawyer. It is far more important that the MCH follows
its current procedures and its determination to track down all affected iwi and
hapu¯. During the first 12 months after the POA came into force, 24 separate no-
tifications were made of discoveries throughout New Zealand, varying from adzes
to anchor stones and canoe prows.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

339

Although there are unlikely to be difficulties for museums wishing to tempo-
rarily export taonga tu¯turu overseas for exhibitions, the permanent export of ta-
onga tu¯turu is likely to be more restricted. The MCH approved one taonga tu¯turu
for permanent export during the first 12 months after the POA came into force.

Museums and the Nationally Significant Objects Register

Apart from the four major museums in Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, and
Dunedin, there are numerous other provincial and local museums, as well as pri-
vate museums and historic homes. All are potential holders of valuable items.

It is unclear whether museums will eventually register their most important
treasures on the Nationally Significant Objects Register. At present the register con-
sists of items for which an export permit was refused. The assumption may be
that items are safe if they are in a museum, but the theft of the Kelly Tarlton ship-
wreck treasures, for example, shows that this is not always the case.59

Responses From Archaeologists

Archaeologists have responded promptly to the legislation changes, have identified
issues and problems, especially in relation to the finding of artifacts, and have de-
veloped guidelines through the New Zealand Archaeology Professional Develop-
ment Cell.60 The New Zealand Historic Places Trust is also developing a National
Research Framework to act as a guide for undertaking archaeology in New Zealand.61

CONCLUSION

The POA represents a marked improvement over the Antiquities Act 1975, and
the enactment of a modern cultural heritage regime in New Zealand is a cause for
celebration. Remaining difficulties and uncertainties surrounding the parallel im-
plementation of the UNESCO and UNIDROIT Conventions will hopefully be re-
solved by the courts. Our view is that the POA will for the most part be effective
at a practical level in protecting what cultural heritage remains in New Zealand.
However, the inordinate delay in enacting the legislation was inexcusable. For much
of Ma¯ori cultural heritage, the POA is indeed too little, too late. Many taonga have
been lost to New Zealand and may never be recovered.

More work must be done to address the justifiable concerns that Ma¯ori have
about the treatment of taonga tu¯turu under the POA, and the implementation of
the act. In particular, the forms under the POA should be seen very much as a
work in progress. These should be revised in the light of practical experience, and
steps should be taken to make them less monocultural.

The MCH holds the most significant key to the POA’s success. The practical
administration of the act is ultimately what counts. In this regard, the MCH seems

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

340

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

to be positive, open, and receptive to ideas. This bodes well for the future protec-
tion of cultural heritage in New Zealand.

ENDNOTES

1. Williams, “Myths,” para. 2.
2. The Statute of Westminster, 1931; 22 George V, c. 4 (U.K.)
3. McNeish, Dance of the Peacocks, 102.
4. Chase, “Peter Fraser at San Francisco.”
5. The first recorded sale was to Joseph Banks in March 1770. Banks paid for the bartered head
with “‘a pair of old drawers of very white linen.’ . . . And so the trade began, with a white man’s
recycled underwear.” See Te Awekotuku, Mau Moko, 48.

6. See “Skulls and Bones,” reporting an interview with Te Papa Museum repatriation manager,

Te Herekiekie Herewini.

7. See generally Paterson, “Protecting Taonga,” 114–19; sections 5, 11, 13, and 15 of the Antiq-

uities Act 1975.

8. [1984] Appeal Cases 1, [1983] 2 All England Law Reports 93 (House of Lords). The House of
Lords refused to give extraterritorial effect to the forfeiture provision in the Historic Articles Act
1962 (N.Z.), on the basis of the established conflict of laws and international law principle that a
forum state will not enforce a claim brought by a foreign sovereign, directly or indirectly, to enforce
the penal, revenue, “or other public” laws of a foreign state. Their Lordships also interpreted the
wording of the statute as simply generating the possibility of forfeiture to the Crown, rather than
automatic forfeiture on export or attempted export. The unfortunate result of this decision was to
limit the effectiveness of the New Zealand statute to instances where cultural property was inter-
cepted and forfeited to the Crown before it left New Zealand.

9. See O’Keefe, “Protection of the Material Cultural Heritage,” 147ff; and O’Keefe, “Mauritius
Scheme,” 295ff. An adverse consequence of the Ortiz case was that the New Zealand government
made no further attempts to recover illicitly exported New Zealand cultural property. In the later
Poverty Bay Club case, for example, the emphasis was on prosecution rather than on the recovery of
the relevant cultural property (the Captain Cook Instruction) from the United Kingdom, because
“English courts will not uphold the statutes of another country” (see Kominik, “Protecting our Past,”
39).

10. The proposed Protection of Movable Cultural Heritage Bill does not appear to have ever been
formally introduced in Parliament. For a highly critical analysis of the 1990 issues paper, see Tunks,
McRae, and Wild, “Protection of Movable Cultural Property Bill,” 50ff. Tunks, McRae, and Wild
describe the issues paper as “the Antiquities Act 1975 in designer clothing (with a few nips and
tucks).” See also Butts, “The Antiquities Act Review,” 48. But compare Kominik and Cooper, “Letters
to the Editor,” 88, in response to criticism by Tunks, McRae, and Wild.

11. See New Zealand Parliamentary Debates, Second Reading, Taonga Ma¯ori Protection Bill,

May 1, 1996, Vol. 554, 12245, Hon John Luxton (Minister for Ma¯ori Affairs):

However, when we start to look at it in some greater depth we find the reasons
that Governments have been rather tardy and reluctant to get too involved in
the detail of this area. It is a very difficult area in which to promote legislation;
one where ownership rights are indeterminate, even in today’s society.

12. Keate, “Proposal,” 97ff.
13. Bassett, The Mother of All Departments, 250–51. Bassett also notes at 250 that there were “vary-
ing degrees of enthusiasm” for the new ministry, and that “[p]arochialism amongst the staff of ex-
isting agencies was most noticeable.”

14. See Butts, “The Antiquities Act Review,” 49, who also describes the review process as “secretive.”
15. For example, the Maritime Transport Act 1994 incorporates the English text of the Inter-
national Convention on Salvage, 1989, as a verbatim schedule and provides that the “provisions of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

341

the Convention shall have the force of law in New Zealand.” See section 216 and schedule 6 of the
Maritime Transport Act 1994.

16. For example, the domestic implementation of the Convention on Limitation of Liability for
Maritime Claims 1976 in part 7 of the Maritime Transport Act 1994 diverges from the convention
text in significant respects. See Tasman Orient Line CV v. Alliance Group Ltd (The “Tasman Pioneer”)
[2003] 2 Lloyd’s Reports 713; [2004] 1 New Zealand Law Reports 650 per Williams J at para 30:
“Parliament in this country adopted a ‘peculiar and unsatisfactory technique’ of paraphrasing the
London convention rather than merely enacting it.”

17. Section 1(A)(e) of the Protected Objects Act 1975; cf. Sellers v. Maritime Safety Inspector [1999]
2 New Zealand Law Reports 44, 59–62 (CA): Legislation is to be interpreted consistently with New
Zealand’s international law obligations.
18. See http://erc.unesco.org/cp/convention.asp?KO⫽13039&language⫽E and http://www.unidroit.
org/english/implement/i-95.pdf; UNESCO Information Note: CLT-2005/Conf/803/2, Paris, June 16,
2005: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001399/139969E.pdf (accessed May 15, 2008): “Both
Conventions should ideally be considered for ratification and for those States that have not yet joined
either, this should be done at the same time. . . .”

ment, discussed in Gaimster, “Recent UK Measures,” 93.

19. New Zealand Parliamentary Debates, Second Reading, Protected Objects Amendment Bill 2006,
May 10, 2006, Vol. 631, 2962, Hon Mahara Okeroa (Associate Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage).
20. See, for example, the Report of the Illicit Trade Advisory Panel (ITAP) to the UK Govern-
21. See http://www.mch.govt.nz/protected-objects/faq.html (accessed May 15, 2008). See also Sid-
dle, “Protected Objects Amendment Bill,” 36, who argues that the changes brought about by the
POA “will not affect the majority of collectors and traders” and that the amendments “are primarily
about improving the operation of the Act, by improving the clarity of definitions around protected
objects.”
http://www.legislation.govt.nz/ (accessed May 15, 2008).

22. Only the consolidated text of the Protected Objects Act 1975 is available under “Statutes” at

23. A bronze medal struck in England in 1772 and distributed to Ma¯ori when the Resolution and
Adventure visited New Zealand in 1773 on Cook’s second voyage. Cook noted in his journal of July
1772:

[T]heir Lordships [of the Admiralty] also caus’d to be struck a number of Med-
als, on the one side the Kings head and on the other the two Sloops & the time
they were at first intended to sail from England, these Medals are to be distrib-
uted to the Natives of, and left upon New Discovered countries as testimonies of
being the first discoveries.

24. A silver coin minted in Britain in 1935, depicting King George V on the obverse and Ta¯mati
Wa¯ka Nene and Governor Hobson signing the Treaty of Waitangi on the reverse. Only three are
known to exist.

25. In 2006, prior to the enactment of the POA, there was significant controversy over the planned
sale of Sir Charles Upham’s Victoria Cross and Bar by his family to a British private collector. The
medals were offered to the New Zealand government for NZ$3.3 million. The government declined
to purchase them, but indicated that permission under the Antiquities Act 1975 to export the med-
als was unlikely to be forthcoming. This impasse was eventually resolved by a deal whereby the med-
als were purchased by the Britain’s Imperial War Museum with assistance from a private trust, on
the understanding that they will remain in New Zealand for 999 years. The medals were on public
display at the Queen Elizabeth II Army Memorial Museum at Waiouru until stolen in 2007. They
were subsequently recovered as a result of a $300,000 reward offered by British medal collector Lord
Michael Ashcroft and Nelson businessman Tom Sturgess.

26. See article 6 of the UNESCO Convention. Section 5 of the POA does not explicitly state that
the certificate of permission must accompany the export, as required by article 6(a) and (b) of the
UNESCO Convention.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

342

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

27. See http://www.mch.govt.nz/protected-objects/register.html (accessed May 15, 2008).
28. See O’Keefe, Commentary, 42–45 on the academic debate regarding the meaning of the term

“illicit” in the context of article 3.

29. The latter longstop period is significantly longer than the limitation periods usually provided
for in New Zealand domestic law; compare with the Limitation Act 1950, sections 4 and 5, which
provide for a 6-year limitation period for tort and conversion of property, after which time a bona
fide possessor acquires good title to the goods.

30. See Prott, Commentary on the UNIDROIT Convention, 28, 52–53
31. It may be argued that this is nit-picking, in that “just compensation” is roughly equivalent to
“fair and reasonable compensation”; but this issue was debated at length at UNIDROIT, and the
alternative proposal of “equitable compensation” was emphatically rejected. See Prott, Commentary
on the UNIDROIT Convention, 41–42. In this respect, section 10E does not faithfully reflect the UNI-
DROIT Convention.

32. As translated from “te tino rangatiratanga o o ratou wenua, o ratou kainga me o ratou taonga

katoa” by Sir Hugh Kawharu, “Appendix,” 321.

33. Waitangi Tribunal Act 1975.
34. Treaty of Waitangi (Amendment) Act 1985.
35. [1987] 1 New Zealand Law Reports 641. See also Ruru, “Treaty of Waitangi Principles,” 87ff;

and Baragwanath, “New Zealand Ma¯ori Council.”

36. See Williams, “Myths,” and “Law and National Identity.”
37. New Zealand Herald, “No Policy Set for Returning Taonga,” January 24, 2007. Available at
http://www.nzherald.co.nz/section/1/story.cfm?c_id⫽1&objectid⫽10420565 (accessed on May 15,
2008); see also New Zealand Herald, “Government Treads Softly Around Taonga Issue,” January 25,
2007. Available at http://www.nzherald.co.nz/topic/story.cfm?c_id⫽350&objectid⫽10420778 (ac-
cessed May 15, 2008). However, the MCH does fund the repatriation office of the Museum of New
Zealand, Te Papa Tongarewa, which is having increasing success.

38. For example, the Auckland War Memorial Museum has an extensive collection of cultural
treasures from around the Pacific, some of which could be subject to repatriation claims, depending
on the circumstances in which they were originally obtained. Those claims may very well be moral
rather than legal. Certainly, the Auckland Museum has returned to iwi items obtained in question-
able circumstances (Tapsell, Pukaki, 154–58).

39. This was welcomed by Georgina Te Heuheu in the Committee debates on the Protected Ob-

jects Amendment Bill:

[I]t is very proper that Ma¯ori phraseology has been entered into the Bill, espe-
cially in these times when we as New Zealanders are all so much more aware of
the need to protect our treasures and of the importance of protecting taonga
Ma¯ori, Ma¯ori treasures. These things belong to all of us as New Zealanders and
they help to underpin our identity and our feeling of nationhood, one with the
other.

New Zealand Parliamentary Debates, July 25, 2006, Vol. 632, 4382.
40. See the Mataatua Declaration on Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights of Indigenous Peoples
1993. Available at http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/tk/en/folklore/creative_heritage/docs/
mataatua.pdf (accessed May 15, 2008).

41. Compare Tapsell quoted in Stokes, “Shutting the Gate”; and Keate, “Proposal,” 98–99; and

New Zealand Parliamentary Debates, Vol. 119, 350, 11 October 1901.

42. See Stokes, “Shutting the Gate”; Paterson, “Protecting Taonga,” 114. Keate, “Proposal,” 98, puts
this figure at approximately 2,500. Even with regard to taonga held in New Zealand museums, there
is often dissatisfaction with where they are held and how they reached there. See Tapsell, Pukaki, 19,
20, 154–58; and Closing Submissions on Behalf of Ngati Kahungunu,” paras 102, 116–19.

43. Closing Submissions on Behalf of Hauraki Claimants, paras 38–39. See also Closing Submissions

on Behalf of Ngati Kahungunu, paras 105–06.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

343

44. Closing Submissions on Behalf of Hauraki Claimants, paras 31–54; and Closing Submissions on

Behalf of Ngati Kahungunu, paras 102–22.

20.2.6.

45. See also the Waitangi Tribunal’s comments in the Hauraki Report 2006 Vol. 3 Wai, 686, para
46. NZAA Professional Resources. Available at http://www.nzarchaeology.org/profes.htm (accessed

May 15, 2008).

47. Closing Submissions on Behalf of Ngati Kahungunu, paras 110, 110.1, and 110.2.
48. See Donaghey, “They Do Things Differently,” 93, 97.
49. Closing Submissions on Behalf of Ngati Kahungunu, paras 97–101.
50. Butts, “The Antiquities Act Review,” 49; and Legget, “Finders Keepers,” 2–3.
51. Legget, “National Treasures,” 8–9.
52. There was brief criticism by the Honorable Tau Henare during the debates on the POA Bill:

New Zealand Parliamentary Debates, July 25, 2006, Vol. 632, 4384.

53. Honorable Georgina Te Heuheu in the debates on the POA Bill: New Zealand Parliamentary

Debates, July 25, 2006, Vol. 632, 4382.

54. Attorney General v. Ngati Apa [2003] 3 N.Z.L.R. 643; see also Williams, “Myths.”
55. See “Maori Put More Value on Culture,” reporting a Nielsen survey finding that three-
quarters of Ma¯ori said traditional values were really important to them, compared with less than
half in 2004.

56. See generally Davies and Myburgh, “New Zealand,” 209–15.
57. Protected Objects—Forms. Available at http://www.mch.govt.nz/protected-objects/forms.html

(accessed May 15, 2008).

58. See the declaration part of the Application for Registration as a Collector Taonga Tu¯turu form

and section 13(1) of the POA.

59. Ingram and Wheatley, New Zealand Shipwrecks, 297. See also endnote 25.
60. New Zealand Archaeology Professional Development Cell, “Guidelines”; and “Issues and

Problems.”

61. McGovern-Wilson, “New Zealand Historic Places Trust.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Baragwanath, David. “New Zealand Ma¯ori Council v. Attorney-General [1987] 1 NZLR 687: A Per-
spective of Counsel.” “In Good Faith” Symposium: 29 June 2007, The University of Otago.

Bassett, Michael. The Mother of All Departments: The History of the Department of Internal Affairs.
Auckland, New Zealand: Auckland University Press, 1997.

Butts, David. “The Antiquities Act Review 1988–1994: Time to Mobilise.” New Zealand Museums
Journal 24 (1994): 48–49.

Chase, Eugene P. “Peter Fraser at San Francisco.” Political Science 11 (1959): 17–24.

Closing Submissions on Behalf of Hauraki Claimants in the Matter of the Tauranga Moana Inquiry,
Wai 215, Wai 100, and Wai 650, November 29, 2006.

Closing Submissions on Behalf of Ngati Kahungunu in Wai 262 #S2, April 16, 2007.

Davies, Piers, and Paul Myburgh. “New Zealand.” In The Protection of the Underwater Cultural Her-
itage, edited by Sarah Dromgoole, 189–215. Leiden and Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 2006.

Donaghey, Sarah. “‘They Do Things Differently There . . . .’ Historic Heritage Value and Its Assess-
ment Beyond New Zealand.” Archaeology in New Zealand 50 (2007): 87–98.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

344

PIERS DAVIES AND PAUL MYBURGH

Gaimster, David. “Recent UK Measures Against the International Illicit Trade in Cultural Objects:
Examining the New Regulatory Framework.” In Who Owns Objects? The Ethics and Politics of Col-
lecting Cultural Artefacts, edited by Eleanor Robson, et al., 91–103. Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2006.

Ingram, Charles, and Percy Wheatley. New Zealand Shipwrecks, 8th ed. Revised by Lynton and Edith
Diggle and Keith Gordon. Auckland, New Zealand: Hodder Moa, 2007.

Kawharu, Sir Hugh. “Appendix.” In Waitangi: Ma¯ori and Pa¯keha¯ Perspectives of the Treaty of Wait-
angi, edited by I.H. Kawharu, 319–21. Auckland, New Zealand: Oxford University Press, 1989.

Keate, Jonathan. “A Proposal to Improve the Protection of New Zealand’s Movable Cultural Heritage
by Means of a Statutory Trust.” Victoria University of Wellington Law Review 23 (1993): 97–124.

Kominik, Jane. “Protecting Our Past for the Future—The Antiquities Act.” Archifacts (1989): 38–39.

Kominik, Jane, and Bill Cooper. “Letters to the Editor.” Archifacts (1990): 85–89.

Legget, Jane. “Finders Keepers? Yeah Right. Found Objects, Taonga and Ideas about Property Own-
ership.” (unpublished) 2005.

———. “National Treasures: The Protected Objects Amendment Bill—Almost an Act.” (unpub-
lished) 2006.
“Ma¯ori Put More Value on Culture.” New Zealand Herald, October 30, 2007. Available at http://
www.nzherald.co.nz/section/1/story.cfm?c_id⫽1&objectid⫽10472849 (accessed May 15, 2008).

McGovern-Wilson, Rick. “New Zealand Historic Places Trust National Research Framework: Dis-
cussion Paper.” Archaeology in New Zealand 51 (2008): 22–35.

McNeish, James. Dance of the Peacocks. Auckland, New Zealand: Vintage, 2003.

New Zealand Archaeology Professional Development Cell. “Guidelines for Archaeologists in Rela-
tion to the Finding of Artefacts.” Archaeology in New Zealand 50 (2007): 239–48.

New Zealand Archaeology Professional Development Cell. “Issues and Problems in Relation to the
Finding of Artefacts on Archaeological Sites.” Archaeology in New Zealand 50 (2007): 249–52.

O’Keefe, Patrick J. Commentary on the UNESCO 1970 Convention on Illicit Traffic. Leicester, United
Kingdom: Institute of Art and Law, 2000.

———. “Mauritius Scheme for the Protection of the Material Cultural Heritage.” International Jour-
nal of Cultural Property 3 (1994): 295–300.

———. “Protection of the Material Cultural Heritage: The Commonwealth Scheme.” International
and Comparative Law Quarterly 44 (1995): 147–61.

Paterson, Robert K. “Protecting Taonga: The Cultural Heritage of the New Zealand Ma¯ori.” Inter-
national Journal of Cultural Property 8 (1999): 108–32

Prott, Lyndel V. Commentary on the UNIDROIT Convention. Leicester, United Kingdom: Institute of
Art and Law, 1997.

Ruru, Jacinta. “Treaty of Waitangi Principles 20 Years On.” New Zealand Law Journal (2007): 87–88.

Siddle, Edward. “The Protected Objects Amendment Bill.” Te Ara—Journal of Museums Aotearoa 31
(2006): 36–38.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181

NEW ZEALAND’S PROTECTED OBJECTS ACT

345

“Skulls and Bones Held at Oxford Coming Home,” New Zealand Herald, 4 (February 2008). Avail-
able at http://www.nzherald.co.nz/section/1/story.cfm?c_id⫽1&objectid⫽10490396 (accessed May
15, 2008)

Stokes, Jon. “Shutting the Gate After Taonga Have Bolted.” New Zealand Herald, August 8, 2006.
Available at http://www.nzherald.co.nz/section/1/story.cfm?c_id⫽1&objectid⫽10395074 (accessed
May 15, 2008).

Tapsell, Paul. Pukaki: A Comet Returns. Auckland, New Zealand: Reed, 2000.

Te Awekotuku, Ngahuia. Mau Moko: The World of Ma¯ori Tattoo. Auckland, New Zealand: Penguin
Viking, 2007.

Tunks, Andrea, Jane McRae, and Jane Wild. “Protection of Movable Cultural Property Bill Issues
Paper—Two Comments.” Archifacts (1990): 50–54.

Williams, David. “Myths, National Origins, Common Law and the Waitangi Tribunal.” Murdoch Uni-
versity Electronic Journal of Law 11 (2004). Available at http://www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/
v11n4/williams114.html (accessed May 15, 2008).

———. “Law and National Identity: Where Does the Treaty Fit In?” British World Conference IV,
Broadening the British World. Auckland, New Zealand: University of Auckland, July 14–16, 2005.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080181


