Aboriginal Rights to Cultural

Property in Canada

catherine e. bell* and robert k. paterson**

This article explores the rights of Aboriginal peoples in Canada concerning movable Aboriginal cul-
tural property. Although the Canadian constitution protects Aboriginal rights, the content of this pro-
tection has only recently begun to be explored by the Supreme Court of Canada in a series of im-
portant cases. This article sets out the existing Aboriginal rights regime in Canada and assesses its
likely application to claims for the return of Aboriginal cultural property. Canadian governments have
shown little interest in attempting to resolve questions concerning ownership and possession of Abo-
riginal cultural property, and there have been few instances of litigation. Over the last decade a num-
ber of Canadian museums have entered into voluntary agreements to return cultural objects to Abo-
riginal peoples’ representatives. Those agreements have often involved ongoing partnerships between
Aboriginal peoples and museums concerning such matters as museum management and exhibition cu-
ratorship. A recent development has been the resolution of speciﬁc repatriation requests as part of mod-
ern land claims agreements. The compromise represented by these negotiated solutions also character-
izes the legal standards being developed to reconcile existing Aboriginal rights and the legitimate policy
concerns of the wider Canadian society.

1 introduction

On August 5, 1998, the Nisga(cid:213)a First Nation of British Columbia signed a historic
treaty with the federal and provincial governments of Canada.1 A unique aspect of
this agreement is the commitment by Canada and the province of British Colum-
bia to return sacred and other cultural property, which currently forms part of the
collections  of the  Canadian  Museum  of Civilization  (Hull,  Quebec)  and  the
Royal British Columbia Museum (Victoria, British Columbia), to the Nisga(cid:213)a. Al-
though other land claims agreements have provided for Aboriginal ownership and
management of heritage property,2 this is the (cid:222)rst land-claim agreement that places
an express obligation on governments to return Aboriginal cultural property to its

*Associate Professor, Faculty of Law, University of Alberta (Edmonton). Professor Bell teaches in the
areas of Aboriginal law, dispute resolution, and property law. Recently she has been conducting
research in Métis rights, Aboriginal rights to self-government, and repatriation of Aboriginal cultural
property. Her second book, Contemporary M(cid:142)tis Justice: The Settlement Way, will be published in 1999 by
the Saskatchewan Native Law Center.
**Professor of Law, Faculty of Law, University of British Columbia.
International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 8, No. 1, 1999, pp. 167— 211
' 1999 International Cultural Property Society

167

168 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

community of origin.3 Once the (cid:222)nal agreement is signed, it will receive constitu-
tional protection as a modern treaty under section 35(3) of the Constitution Act,
1982.4

With the exception of modern land-claims agreements, repatriation claims in
Canada are predominantly addressed through private negotiations between af-
fected museums and Aboriginal peoples. Agreements reached re(cid:223)ect a variety of
options for responding to repatriation claims endorsed by the 1992 Joint Task
Force of the Assembly of First Nations and the Canadian Museums Association,
which in turn emerged as a result of Aboriginal opposition to a 1988 exhibit by
the Glenbow Museum in Calgary, Alberta, titled, (cid:210)The Spirit Sings.(cid:211)5 These op-
tions re(cid:223)ect the range of control over cultural property sought by Aboriginal peo-
ples and the concerns of museums relating to the surrender of their collections.
Although some Aboriginal peoples seek return, others feel Canadian museums
should continue to play a signi(cid:222)cant role as educators and custodians through
shared authority to manage the cultural property in question on a permanent basis,
or until Aboriginal communities are in a position to develop appropriate facilities
and curatorial expertise in their own locales. Museums reluctant to repatriate Abo-
riginal cultural property have a number of concerns. These concerns include po-
tential legal liability to donors or Aboriginal groups with competing claims, costs
of veri(cid:222)cation and transfer, compliance with their public mandate to preserve
and care for collections held in trust for the Canadian public, public access, reim-
bursement, and preservation. As a result, no single policy or process has been
adopted by Canadian museums in negotiating repatriation claims. Rather, all of
the options recommended by the task force are materializing in the form of sep-
arate private agreements. Instances of such agreements will be discussed in part 4
of this article and include returns by churches, museums, universities, and, most re-
cently, pursuant to treaty, as in the case of the Nisaga(cid:213)a.

In previous writings, we have discussed the role legislation can play in assist-
ing negotiated claims within and outside Canada.6 For example, domestic repatri-
ation legislation might help in negotiations with museums prepared to lend, but
not return, Aboriginal cultural property by establishing guidelines to follow in the
event of competing claims, creating dispute resolution mechanisms to overcome
deadlocks in negotiations, and releasing museums from liability arising from po-
tential breaches of statutory, contractual, or common-law obligations (if they have
repatriated in good faith). However, process, cost, and relational issues arising
from the enactment of repatriation legislation in the United States have generated
some skepticism in Canada regarding the extent to which legislation can aid the
repatriation process.7 Of particular concern to those who have made progress in
negotiations is the fear that legislation would endanger future relations by creating
an atmosphere of distrust and rights-based confrontation. The creation of a new
legislated regime would also involve adjustments to existing political arrangements

aboriginal rights to cultural property 169

that divide ownership and control over all historical and archaeological resources
in or on public and private lands between the federal, territorial, and provincial
governments, depending on the location of the property in question.8 Although
the federal and some provincial governments have considered the possibility of
qualifying their statutory ownership of Aboriginal cultural property, the inability
to (cid:222)nd a compromise satisfactory to all affected groups and the position of many
Aboriginal groups that their rights are inherent and need not be quali(cid:222)ed by leg-
islation have also prevented signi(cid:222)cant legislative reform.

Because legislation is unlikely, in the near future, to play a meaningful role in
the process of repatriation, and because Aboriginal peoples are currently resolv-
ing their claims through a conciliatory process, the reader may question the rele-
vance of legal rights in the Canadian repatriation process and our decision to se-
lect the topic of Aboriginal rights to cultural property in Canada as the main
subject of this article. The principal relevance of legal rights lies in their relation-
ship to the negotiation process. Experienced negotiators know that the forceful as-
sertion of legal rights in negotiations can lock parties into rights-based positions
that obscure the true nature of the con(cid:223)ict that has to be resolved.9 In repatria-
tion claims, focusing on legal rights could result in either/or positional bargaining
on who has title, preventing further exploration of options for mutual gain. Thus,
negotiators must exercise care in deciding when the assertion of legal rights will
help or hinder their progress. Regardless of the reasons raised to avoid expressly
acknowledging or articulating legal rights in negotiation sessions, legal rights con-
tinue to play a role in preparing and de(cid:222)ning the parameters of potential agree-
ments. In particular, they play a signi(cid:222)cant role in the assessment of the best and
worst alternatives to negotiated agreements(cid:209)a calculation that involves numerous
factors, including the likelihood of satisfying minimum concerns through the
courts.

A traditional legal analysis drawing on principles of property law and legis-
lation may support the conclusion that museums have the strongest claim to own-
ership and lead to the assumption that the abandonment of reliance on legal rights
is most bene(cid:222)cial to Aboriginal claimants. Actions based on original ownership
may be barred by legislation placing limits on the time period within which judi-
cial action can be taken or may be nulli(cid:222)ed by legislation placing ownership of ar-
chaeological and other historical resources in the Crown. A museum secure in this
knowledge and aware of the dif(cid:222)cult burden of proof placed on Aboriginal liti-
gants in Canadian courts may view litigation as a better alternative to returning
property through negotiation and approach the table willing to consider only lim-
ited options that fall short of return. However, as our examination of recent trends
in Aboriginal rights law suggests, the consideration of Aboriginal rights in poten-
tial repatriation claims makes the predictability of a judicial outcome much more
complex.

170 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

This article explores the potential rami(cid:222)cations of Delgamuukw v. British Co-
lumbia and other decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada on Aboriginal rights
to ownership and control of movable Aboriginal cultural property.10 We begin
with an explanation of the existing Aboriginal rights regime in Canada and then
apply it to repatriation claims. We contextualize our (cid:210)rights talk(cid:211) because our ob-
jective is to illustrate how the complexity of Canadian law supports the existing
negotiation process. Our analysis, however, also supports the conclusion that legal
rights are not stacked on one side of the negotiation table and that negotiations
based on the assumption of certainty of museum title are founded on incomplete
legal analysis. We conclude by providing examples of enforceable legal rights re-
cently derived through the Nisaga(cid:213)a treaty and private agreements. With the ex-
ception of addressing the potential source and constitutional nature of the repa-
triation rights articulated in the Nisga(cid:213)a treaty, we do not engage in a critical
rights-based analysis of these negotiated regimes, for we believe the desirability
and success of negotiation is best de(cid:222)ned by the attitudes and perceptions of those
most affected.

2 aboriginal constitutional rights

Section 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 recognizes and af(cid:222)rms the (cid:210)existing
aboriginal and treaty rights(cid:211) of the Aboriginal peoples of Canada.11 R. v. Sparrow
was the (cid:222)rst decision of the Supreme Court of Canada to interpret this section
and to establish a process for litigating Aboriginal rights claims that invoke section
35 protection.12 Although the criteria for meeting each step in this process have
been elaborated upon since the initial ruling in Sparrow, the framework for analy-
sis remains the same. It includes:

1. identi(cid:222)cation of the nature and content of the Aboriginal right;
2. determination of whether the right is still an (cid:210)existing(cid:211) right recognized
and af(cid:222)rmed by section 35 (or whether it has been lawfully extinguished
prior to the enactment of section 35);
3. determination of whether federal or provincial legislation constitutes a
prima facie infringement with the exercise of an (cid:210)existing(cid:211) Aboriginal right;
and
4. analysis of the legitimacy of justi(cid:222)cations for continued government
interference.

The onus of establishing the nature and characteristic of the right and prima facie
infringement is on the Aboriginal claimant. Factors such as the reasonableness of
the nature of the interference, imposition of undue hardship, and denial of a pre-
ferred means to exercise the right are relevant to the establishment of prima facie

aboriginal rights to cultural property 171

infringement, but they are not prerequisites. The threshold of proof on this issue
lies  somewhere  between  a  positive  response  to  all  three  questions  and  the
signi(cid:222)cantly easier burden of demonstrating that (cid:210)on its face, the legislation comes
into con(cid:223)ict with an Aboriginal right because of its objects or effects.(cid:211)13 The onus
to prove pre-1982 extinguishment and justi(cid:222)ed infringement of unextinguished
Aboriginal  rights  rests  on  the  Crown.  Justi(cid:222)cation  is  a  two-part  process. The
Crown must prove that infringement occurred in pursuance of a valid legislative
objective and that, in pursuing these objectives, it acted in accordance with its
(cid:222)duciary obligation toward Aboriginal peoples. Although the exact nature of this
obligation has yet to be de(cid:222)ned, relevant considerations include minimal infringe-
ment, fair compensation, and consultation with the affected Aboriginal group.

2.1 nature, source, and content: original principles
Aboriginal rights protected by section 35 of the Constitution Act have been char-
acterized as inherent, sui generis (unique) legal rights that arise independent of
government acts of creation and recognition. Although they were once viewed as
a bundle of property rights associated with title claims of Aboriginal peoples to
speci(cid:222)c parcels of land (Aboriginal title), the Supreme Court of Canada has now
embraced a broader interpretation of Aboriginal rights. Aboriginal rights include
Aboriginal title and the right to exercise activities, practices, traditions, and cus-
toms integral to the culture of Aboriginal peoples (free-standing rights).14 Claims
for recognition of free-standing rights may be brought independently of an Abo-
riginal title claim. The sui generis nature of these rights means that Anglo-Canadian
property, contract, and other analogous areas of law do not bind the courts in
their assessment of content of Aboriginal rights.

Aboriginal rights existed in Canadian common law prior to the enactment of
section 35. Their source is occupation of lands before the assertion of sovereignty
and precontact Indian social organization. In R. v. Van der Peet (1996), Lamer C. J.
elaborated on their source and elevation to constitutional status. He emphasized
that section 35(1) (cid:210)did not create the legal doctrine of aboriginal rights; aborigi-
nal rights existed and were recognized under common law.(cid:211)15 Section 35 elevates a
preexisting legal doctrine to constitutional status. Consequently, establishing the
existence of a right at common law that has not been extinguished by valid gov-
ernment action prior to the enactment of section 35 is suf(cid:222)cient for its recognition
and af(cid:222)rmation under section 35. Section 35 Aboriginal rights may no longer be ex-
tinguished. However, these rights are not absolute. Rather, their exercise may be
limited  by  the  federal  and  provincial  governments  if such  limitations  can  be
justi(cid:222)ed in accordance with the Sparrow justi(cid:222)cation test.

R. v. Sparrow was the (cid:222)rst decision of the Canadian Supreme Court to elabo-
rate on the scope of Aboriginal rights that could receive section 35 protection.
Dickson C. J. (as he then was) applied general principles of constitutional inter-

172 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

pretation to section 35 and maintained that Aboriginal constitutional rights are to
be de(cid:222)ned in a (cid:210)generous and liberal(cid:211) manner and with suf(cid:222)cient (cid:210)(cid:223)exibility so as
to permit their evolution over time.(cid:211)16 Combined with the direction that courts
must be sensitive to the Aboriginal (cid:210)perspective itself on the meaning of the rights
at stake,(cid:211) these principles of interpretation were perceived by many to be a rejec-
tion of the frozen theory of Aboriginal rights.17 This theory, developed in the con-
text of Aboriginal title claims, asserted that the content of Aboriginal title was
limited to historical uses enjoyed prior to the assertion of sovereignty over the
lands in question. Sparrow also introduced the integral test for de(cid:222)ning the (cid:210)Abo-
riginal(cid:211) nature of a rights claim. According to this test, the characterization of a
right as (cid:210)Aboriginal(cid:211) depends on whether it was, and continues to be, an integral
part of the culture of an Aboriginal group. However, the failure of the court to
specify standards to measure the integral nature of an alleged right generated de-
bate on a number of issues.

The reference to continuity in Sparrow led to arguments that discontinuance
and subsequent revival of the exercise of an alleged section 35 right interrupted the
continuity necessary to support a contemporary Aboriginal rights claim. Debate
also arose on the appropriate date to begin measuring continuity and whether the
same date applied to Aboriginal title and free-standing rights(cid:213) claims. An ancillary
issue was whether activities that became integral to Aboriginal societies as a result
of European in(cid:223)uence could be characterized as (cid:210)Aboriginal.(cid:211)These and other is-
sues of identi(cid:222)cation and de(cid:222)nition were addressed six years later in the Van der Peet
case.

2.2 identification and definition of aboriginal rights:
revision of original principles
In R v. Van der Peet, Dorothy Van der Peet, a member of the Sto:lo First Nation, was
charged with selling ten sockeye salmon to a non-Aboriginal person for (cid:222)fty dol-
lars in violation of British Columbia (cid:222)shing regulations. The salmon were caught
by her common law spouse under a valid Indian food (cid:222)sh license. The (cid:222)shing reg-
ulations, however, prohibited the sale and barter of (cid:222)sh caught under that license.
Dorothy Van der Peet alleged that the restrictions imposed by the (cid:222)shing regula-
tions unjusti(cid:222)ably infringed upon her Aboriginal right to sell (cid:222)sh.

Debate arose at trial, and throughout the various levels of appeal, on the
proper characterization of the contemporary Aboriginal right at issue. The provin-
cial court held that the right could not be framed as a right to sell (cid:222)sh because
there was no evidence that the Sto:lo traditionally participated in a market system
of exchange consistent with (cid:210)contemporary tests for (cid:212)marketing.(cid:213) (cid:211)18 In the appeal
to the Supreme Court of British Columbia, Selbie J. ruled that the absence of a
prohibition against the sale of (cid:222)sh in traditional Sto:lo society was suf(cid:222)cient to
support a historical and contemporary Aboriginal right to sell (cid:222)sh. His ruling was

aboriginal rights to cultural property 173

overturned on appeal to the Court of Appeal of British Columbia on the ground
that a historical practice alleged to be the source of a contemporary Aboriginal
constitutional right cannot be characterized as (cid:210)Aboriginal(cid:211) if it became (cid:210)preva-
lent merely as a result of European in(cid:223)uences.(cid:211)19 Characterizing the issue before
the court as a right to sell (cid:222)sh on a commercial basis, the majority concluded that
the exchange of (cid:222)sh on a casual basis at the time of European contact was in-
suf(cid:222)cient to support a contemporary commercial right. In his dissenting opinion,
Lambert J. A. (of the Court of Appeal of British Columbia) argued that Sparrow
required a more generous and (cid:223)exible approach to the identi(cid:222)cation and de(cid:222)nition
of Aboriginal constitutional rights. In his opinion, both the historic and the con-
temporary rights were properly characterized in more abstract terms as a right to
(cid:222)sh for a livelihood. The fact that the Sto:lo began trading with Europeans as soon
as they arrived suggested that sale and barter of (cid:222)sh was not a break from their tra-
ditional activities, but a continuance of a traditional activity that merely evolved to
a greater scale in response to new circumstances. Also dissenting, Hutcheon J. A.
maintained that there was no (cid:210)authority for the proposition that the relevant point
for identifying Aboriginal rights is prior to contact with Europeans and European
culture.(cid:211)20 The Supreme Court of Canada subsequently granted leave to appeal the
majority opinion of the British Columbia Court of Appeal.

Speaking for a majority of the Supreme Court of Canada, Lamer C. J. drew
a distinction between constitutional rights of a (cid:210)general and universal(cid:211) nature and
(cid:210)special(cid:211) constitutional rights applicable only to (cid:210)one part of Canadian society.(cid:211)21
In his opinion the Dickson Supreme Court had erred in Sparrow when it applied
generous and liberal principles of constitutional interpretation to section 35 rights.
Interpretation of section 35 requires more speci(cid:222)city to ensure that its scope is nar-
rowed in a way that captures  (cid:210)both the Aboriginal and the rights in Aboriginal
rights.(cid:211)22 Adopting this reasoning, he created a new set of criteria for characteriz-
ing and interpreting rights protected by section 35. These criteria are now known
as the Van der Peet test. The (cid:222)rst part of the test requires that the claim be articu-
lated in terms of the speci(cid:222)c Aboriginal activity in con(cid:223)ict with the government
legislation in issue. Applying this part of the test to Dorothy Van der Peet(cid:213)s claim,
he concluded that the proper characterization of the claim is not a right to sell (cid:222)sh,
to sell (cid:222)sh on a commercial basis, or to sell (cid:222)sh for a livelihood; rather, it is the
(cid:210)exchange of (cid:222)sh for money or for other goods.(cid:211)23 The second part of the test
speaks to the (cid:210)Aboriginal(cid:211) nature of the right claimed. Only those practices, cus-
toms, and traditions that existed prior to European contact and that continue to
be integral to Aboriginal culture, receive section 35 protection. De(cid:222)ning (cid:210)integral(cid:211)
as meaning central, Lamer C. J. suggested that a practical way to measure central-
ity is to ask (cid:210)whether without this practice . . . the culture in question would be
fundamentally altered or other than what it was.(cid:211)24 Central aspects of Aboriginal
society can be contrasted to those that are true of every human society and those

174 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

that are only (cid:210)incidental or occasional.(cid:211)25 However, the requirement of continu-
ity does not mean Aboriginal groups must (cid:210)prove an unbroken chain of continu-
ity between their current practices, traditions and customs, and those which existed
prior to contact.(cid:211)26 Rather, proof of a postcontact activity that is integral to a con-
temporary First Nation may be suf(cid:222)cient to create a presumption of precontact
origin. Adopting this reasoning, Lamer C. J. concluded that the trial judge com-
mitted no clear and palpable error in (cid:222)nding that prior to contact, exchanges of
(cid:222)sh were only incidental to the broader precontact Sto:lo practice of (cid:222)shing for
food.

The Van der Peet test generated substantial criticism and further uncertainty re-
garding the scope of rights embraced by section 35. Would the date of European
contact now be the effective date to identify the historical foundations of all Abo-
riginal rights claims, or would Van der Peet only be applied to free-standing Abo-
riginal rights? Prior to Van der Peet, the assertion of sovereignty, which could be ear-
lier or later than (cid:222)rst contact depending on the territory in question, was the
effective date to ascertain original occupation for an Aboriginal title claim. Would
the content of Aboriginal title be limited only to those land uses that were integral
to an Aboriginal culture prior to contact? Must each use alleged to form part of
Aboriginal title be proved independently, or would a broad range of historic and
more contemporary uses be assumed once occupation of a de(cid:222)ned territory was
established? Delgamuukw, decided a year later, answers these questions.

The original claim of the Gitskan and Wet(cid:213)suwet(cid:213)en peoples in Delgamuukw
was for ownership of and jurisdiction over 22,000 square miles of land in north-
west British Columbia. The jurisdiction claim was reformulated into a claim for
self-government or self-regulation on appeal to the Court of Appeal of British
Columbia.  After  that  appeal,  and  before  an  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  of
Canada, Van der Peet was decided and applied in R. v. Pamajewon to a claim seeking
recognition of an inherent right to self-government.27 Charges in the latter case re-
lated to the operation of high-stakes bingo and other gambling activities without
the appropriate provincial licenses having (cid:222)rst been obtained. The appellant First
Nations asserted that the right to pass by-laws dealing with lotteries on reserve
lands was inherent in their broader Aboriginal rights to self-government, to be
self-regulating in economic activities, and to use and manage their own land. How-
ever, Lamer C. J. held that even if section 35 included a right to self-government,
the appropriate legal standard to de(cid:222)ne the right in issue before the Court was
set out in Van der Peet. The assertion of (cid:210)self-government,(cid:211) (cid:210)self-regulation(cid:211) and the
right to (cid:210)use and manage land(cid:211) was too general a characterization of the right at
issue. The only issue the Court would consider was whether or not, prior to con-
tact, the appellant Nations participated in, and regulated, high-stakes gambling
on reserves. Evidence did not support a (cid:222)nding in their favor on this speci(cid:222)c point.

aboriginal rights to cultural property 175

The precedential value of Pamajewon and the proper framing of self-government
claims  is  discussed  later  in  our  application  of Aboriginal  law  to  repatriation
claims. The point here is the effect it had on the Delgamuukw litigation. As a result
of Van der Peet and Pamajewon, counsel for the Gitskan and Wet(cid:213)suwet(cid:213)en conceded
that they (cid:210)advanced the right to self-government in very broad terms, and there-
fore in a manner not cognizable under s.35.(cid:211)28 This, combined with the errors of
fact made by the trial judge, resulted in a conclusion that a new trial was required
on this issue. Errors made by the trial judge in assessing Aboriginal testimony also
resulted in a call for a new trial on the Aboriginal title claim.

In Delgamuukw, Lamer C. J. addressed the relationship between Aboriginal
title and free-standing rights and the criteria to be adopted in de(cid:222)ning these
rights. These rights fall along a spectrum in accordance with their degree of con-
nection to the land. At one end are rights to speci(cid:222)c activities integral to the dis-
tinctive culture of an Aboriginal group brought independent of claims to title. In
the middle are site-speci(cid:222)c rights, which, of necessity, take place on a particular
piece of land (such as hunting). The historical and contemporary existence of
these rights does not depend on proof of unextinguished Aboriginal title. At the
far end of the spectrum is Aboriginal title itself. Although obiter comments in his
discussion of self-government generate uncertainty regarding a strict interpreta-
tion of Van der Peet to self-government claims, Lamer(cid:213)s discussion of the spectrum
of Aboriginal rights suggests that Van der Peet applies to all free-standing and site-
speci(cid:222)c rights claims, but not to Aboriginal title claims. In the case of Aborigi-
nal title, occupation must be proved at the date sovereignty was asserted over the
territories in question. Although there must be continuity between present and
pre-sovereign occupation, proof of present occupation may be used as evidence
of pre-sovereign occupation. Similarly, in the case of free-standing rights, evi-
dence of postcontact practices may be used to support the existence of precon-
tact activities.

Unlike free-standing rights, the right to Aboriginal title is to be described in
broad  and  (cid:223)exible  terms  as  (cid:210)the  right  to  occupy  and  possess(cid:211)(cid:209)a  phrase  not
quali(cid:222)ed by the need to prove all (cid:210)traditional and customary uses of those lands.(cid:211)29
It is conceived of as something less than ownership and its content remains vague.
However, implicit in the description of title is the (cid:210)protection of historic patterns
of occupation and recognition of the continuity of the relationship of an Abo-
riginal community to its land over time.(cid:211)30 Uses irreconcilable with this protection
are excluded from title. This quali(cid:222)cation could result in narrowing title to its his-
toric dimensions much in the same way free-standing rights are frozen prior to
contact. Contemporary uses not compatible with traditional uses integral to the
culture of the claimant group at the date sovereignty was asserted may be excluded
from title.

176 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

2.3 rules of evidence and issues of proof
The burden of proof assumed by Aboriginal litigants in establishing the existence
of an Aboriginal right at common law is onerous and is one of the reasons why
Aboriginal peoples are reluctant to bring their claims before the courts. Although
Canadian courts will admit oral history, judges are reluctant to give weight to oral
histories that consist of out-of-court statements passed through successive gener-
ations of Aboriginal peoples. Accepting the truth of these statements runs con-
trary to the hearsay rule, which maintains that out-of-court statements cannot be
admitted as evidence of the truth of the content of such statements. This reluc-
tance is also fueled by concerns about the frailty of the human memory, the con-
tent of oral histories, and judicial understandings of truth that require the sepa-
ration of historical facts from what Aboriginals perceive to be legends, stories, or
myths, cultural bias in favor of written and physical evidence, and rules of evi-
dence that assume the truth of ancient documents. As a result, Aboriginal litigants
corroborate their evidence with Western scienti(cid:222)c opinion. As archaeological evi-
dence is not always available or suf(cid:222)cient, the testimony of anthropologists and
historians is often invoked. This inevitably results in a battle of experts on both
sides, which in turn produces lengthy and costly litigation. The testimony of an-
thropologists may also be treated as suspect if they are perceived to have become
too connected to the claimant group. The obvious irony is that the greater the ex-
pertise of the anthropologist acquired through af(cid:222)liation with a particular group,
the greater the chance of judicial apprehension of bias. Coupled with the comfort
Western judges take in written historical accounts, it becomes obvious why litiga-
tion remains a last resort for Aboriginal peoples. The rules of evidence offered by
Lamer C. J. in Van der Peet and Delgamuukw may operate, however, to signi(cid:222)cantly re-
duce this burden.

In Delgamuukw, Lamer C. J. repeated his ruling in Van der Peet that the unique
nature of Aboriginal rights demands (cid:210)unique treatment of evidence which accords
due weight to the perspectives of Aboriginal peoples.(cid:211)31 In practical terms, this
means Aboriginal peoples do not have to produce (cid:210)conclusive evidence(cid:211) from pre-
contact times and that Canadian courts should (cid:210)come to terms with oral histo-
ries of Aboriginal societies.(cid:211)32 In particular, judges must identify speci(cid:222)c reasons
for questioning the credibility of oral history that are not inherent features of all
oral histories. If they do not, their treatment of oral history will be considered a
suf(cid:222)ciently serious error to invoke interference by an appellate court. This point
is illustrated in the treatment of the adwaak of the Gitskan and the kungax of the
Wet(cid:213)suwet(cid:213)en, at trial. These oral histories are described by McEachern C. J. as a
(cid:210)sacred (cid:212)of(cid:222)cial(cid:213) litany, or history, or recital of the most important laws, traditions
and traditional territory(cid:211) of the Gitskan and Wet(cid:213)suwet(cid:213)en peoples.33 They are re-
peated and performed at feasts where dissenters have the opportunity to challenge
them and assure their authenticity. Although these histories were ruled as admis-

aboriginal rights to cultural property 177

sible as an exception to the hearsay rule, no independent weight was given to them
as proof of the Gitskan and Wet(cid:213)suwet(cid:213)en claims. McEachern C. J. stated that it
was impossible to make a distinction between the mythological and real aspects of
these histories and discounted them because they were not (cid:210)literally true.(cid:211)34 He
also raised concerns about the frailty of human memory, lack of suf(cid:222)cient detail,
and the connection Aboriginal witnesses relating oral history had to the outcome
of the dispute. Although framed in relation to the speci(cid:222)c testimony given, these
issues arise in the consideration of all oral histories. If these general considerations
were considered suf(cid:222)cient reasons to discredit oral history, it would always be un-
dervalued by Canadian courts.

Because oral histories are critical in establishing the origins of contemporary
rights claims, Delgamuukw(cid:213)s rulings on evidence may make it easier for Aboriginal
litigants to meet the (cid:222)rst requirement in Aboriginal rights litigation: proof of his-
torical occupation of land or a speci(cid:222)c precontact activity. However, the chances
of a negative result could be increased by attacks on the credibility of speci(cid:222)c Abo-
riginal witnesses giving testimony on behalf of their communities. Other relevant
considerations may include the existence of a process for veri(cid:222)cation of oral his-
tories within the affected communities and the existence of expert archaeological
evidence or written historical accounts that contradict the oral history given. Cul-
tural bias in favor of the latter means of verifying historical fact may still result in
con(cid:223)icts being resolved to the detriment of Aboriginal litigants.

2.4 extinguishment and justification
The reference to (cid:210)existing(cid:211) Aboriginal and treaty rights in section 35 means that
only those rights that were not lawfully extinguished prior to 1982 receive consti-
tutional protection.35 One of the ways Aboriginal rights could be extinguished was
by legislation evidencing a (cid:210)clear and plain intent(cid:211) to extinguish.36 The require-
ment of a clear and plain intent to extinguish does not mean that legislation must
contain express language extinguishing a common-law Aboriginal right. Nor does
it require that Canadian governments acknowledge the existence of an Aboriginal
right and consider the potential impact of legislation on that right at the time of
enactment. Rather, what is required is a consideration of all purposes of the leg-
islative scheme of which the legislation or regulation at issue forms a part. Take,
for example, the Supreme Court(cid:213)s analysis of the impact of federal (cid:222)shing regula-
tions on Aboriginal rights to (cid:222)sh. In Sparrow, and subsequently in the 1996 cases
collectively referred to as the Van der Peet trilogy, the Supreme Court identi(cid:222)ed con-
servation as the primary purpose of the federal (cid:222)shing regulations.37 The Court
noted that the regulations place limits on the Indian food (cid:222)shery, but that they
also contain speci(cid:222)c provisions intended to protect the Indian food (cid:222)shery. These
dual purposes do not re(cid:223)ect a clear and plain intent to terminate common-law
Aboriginal rights to (cid:222)sh for sustenance, commercial, or other purposes.

178 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

Delgamuukw now makes it clear that only the federal government can extinguish
Aboriginal rights. Under section 91(24) of the Constitution Act, 1867, the federal
government has jurisdiction over (cid:210)Indians and lands reserved for the Indians.(cid:211)38
However, provinces can pass laws of general application within spheres of provin-
cial jurisdiction that interfere with the exercise of Aboriginal rights.39 For example,
provincial hunting laws aimed at the general population may limit Aboriginal
rights to hunt during a particular season. In Delgamuukw, Lamer C. J. held that, by
de(cid:222)nition, these laws of general application cannot extinguish an Aboriginal right.
If the clear and plain intent of the province was to extinguish the Aboriginal right
to hunt, the legislation would not be a law of general application and would be
ultra vires the jurisdiction of the province.

Aboriginal rights that were not extinguished prior to 1982 are protected in the
Constitution in their original, unregulated, common-law form.40 Provincial laws of
general application may continue to have the incidental effect of interfering with
these rights, but only if they meet the justi(cid:222)cation test (cid:222)rst articulated in Sparrow.
The federal government(cid:213)s powers are also limited by this test. The reader will recall
that the justi(cid:222)cation test has two parts: proof of a valid legislative objective and
compliance with (cid:222)duciary obligation. Gladstone and Delgamuukw elaborate on the
potential range of valid objectives and the concept of (cid:222)duciary obligation in this
context. In Gladstone, Lamer C. J. distinguishes the claim of the Heilstuk from the
claim of the Musqueam in Sparrow on the basis that the alleged Heilstuk Aborig-
inal right to sell the right to herring spawn on kelp had no internal limitations.
The Heilstuk successfully established the equivalent of a modern commercial right
to sell herring spawn on kelp in precontact Heilstuk society. In Sparrow, the right
recognized by the Dickson court was not a commercial right to (cid:222)sh, but a right to
(cid:222)sh for food for ceremonial purposes. The very de(cid:222)nition of the right in Sparrow
limited the amount of (cid:222)sh that the Musqueam could catch. In contrast, the only
limits on the right of the Heilstuk recognized in Gladstone were the (cid:210)external con-
straints  of the  market  and  the  availability  of the  resource.(cid:211)41 The  practical
rami(cid:222)cations of recognizing an Aboriginal resource right with no inherent limi-
tations led to a more detailed consideration of legitimate justi(cid:222)cations to interfere
with constitutionally protected Aboriginal rights.

Agreeing with the ruling in Sparrow that the Crown(cid:213)s legislative objective must
be (cid:210)compelling and substantial,(cid:211) Lamer C. J. extends these objectives to include
the protection of interests of the (cid:210)broader political community of which Aborig-
inal societies form a part.(cid:211)42 Consequently, the (cid:210)pursuit of economic and regional
fairness, and the recognition of historical reliance upon, and participation in, the
(cid:222)shery by non-Aboriginal groups are valid reasons for regulating the exercise of an
Aboriginal right.(cid:211)43 As Kent McNeil argues, the effect of this interpretation of
valid legislative objectives is to dilute Aboriginal constitutional rights by interests

aboriginal rights to cultural property 179

not considered constitutional or legal in their nature. Drawing on Sparrow and the
dissenting opinion of McLauchlin J. in Van der Peet he argues:

While it is clear from the Sparrow decision that aboriginal rights are not
absolute, the examples that the Court gave there of compelling and substan-
tial objectives which justify infringement of those rights involved objectives
that either maintain the rights by conserving the resources on which the
rights depend or ensure that the rights are not exercised in a dangerous way.
Other compelling objectives might involve balancing the constitutional rights
of Aboriginal peoples with the constitutional rights of non-aboriginal
Canadians in circumstances of potential con(cid:223)ict. But, Lamer C.J. went much
further than that in Gladstone. For him, it appears that objectives of suf(cid:222)cient
importance to Canadians generally can be compelling and substantial, even
where no con(cid:223)icting constitutional rights are involved. This looks very much
like the (cid:210)public interest(cid:211) justi(cid:222)cation rejected in Sparrow.44

An expanded range of valid legislative objectives is also endorsed by the Supreme
Court of Canada in Delgamuukw. Noting that all justi(cid:222)cations must re(cid:223)ect the
broader purpose of section 35 to reconcile prior occupation by Aboriginal peoples
with the assertion of Crown sovereignty, Lamer C. J. elaborates on some of the
speci(cid:222)c legislative objectives that might justify interference with rights derived
from unextinguished Aboriginal title. These include provincial initiatives such as
(cid:210)the development of agriculture, forestry, mining and hydroelectric power, the
general economic development of the interior of British Columbia, protection of
the environment or endangered species, the building of infrastructure and the set-
tlement of foreign populations to support these aims.(cid:211)45

The broad range of legislative objectives endorsed in Gladstone and Delgamuukw
suggests that the Crown will have little dif(cid:222)culty justifying interference with the
exercise of any Aboriginal rights that have a signi(cid:222)cant impact on resources or
non-Aboriginal interests. However, the Crown, whether provincial or federal, will
still have to ensure that relevant legislation is being implemented in accordance
with the (cid:222)duciary obligation owed to Aboriginal peoples. Breach of that obligation
could result in a variety of remedies at the discretion of the court, including com-
pensation, title to land, or entitlement to an increased share of resources.

The concept of (cid:222)duciary obligation is an emerging concept in Canadian law.
In the context of natural resource claims, Sparrow suggests this obligation requires
that Aboriginal peoples be given priority over non-Aboriginal peoples when their
rights and interests collide. However, Gladstone distinguishes Sparrow and states that
in a situation where the Aboriginal right in issue has no internal limitations, pri-
ority need not be given to the Aboriginal right. To do so could amount to the cre-
ation of an exclusive right. In such circumstances it is suf(cid:222)cient that the Crown

180 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

demonstrate that (cid:210)in allocating the resource, it has taken into account the existence
of the Aboriginal rights.(cid:211)46 In Delgamuukw, Lamer C. J. expands on this point. The
Crown(cid:213)s (cid:222)duciary obligation requires that both the process and the allocation of
resources at issue re(cid:223)ect the prior interest of Aboriginal peoples if such interest is
proven to exist. For example, in the context of title claims, the prior interest may
be re(cid:223)ected in opportunities provided to affected First Nations to participate in
resource development. In addition, consultation is always required when govern-
ments interfere with existing Aboriginal rights. The degree of consultation re-
quired varies from good-faith consultation to consent of the affected Aboriginal
peoples. Courts will determine this on a case-by-case basis depending on the na-
ture of the right and interference in issue.

3 application to repatriation claims

The sui generis nature of Aboriginal rights means that in resolving ownership issues
in a repatriation claim, a Canadian court will not limit its analysis to principles of
property and contract law and legislation. Rather, these laws will be interwoven
with principles derived from the emerging law on Aboriginal rights and Aborigi-
nal perspectives on the meaning of the right at stake. Take, for example, the rec-
onciliation of concepts of individual and collective ownership.47 Assuming that an
Aboriginal group is able to establish that the cultural property in issue was tradi-
tionally and continues to be viewed as collective property, Aboriginal perspectives
on the rights of individuals to transfer such property will be considered along with
common-law principles of property and contract law to establish the tests for le-
gitimate acquisition and transfer of title. In situations where an individual has re-
moved, sold, or donated collective property without consent of the appropriate
community authority, the combination of Aboriginal perspectives with principles
of property law may operate to invalidate title that assumes the object is capable
of individual ownership.48

This blended approach to the resolution of disputes has been adopted in
repatriation claims in the United States. Once lack of consent is established in ac-
cordance with the traditional laws of the Aboriginal litigant, the common law
principle of nemo dat quod non habet has been applied to ascertain the legitimacy of
title asserted by the person in possession of the object in question.49 The princi-
ple of nemo dat, also part of Canadian law, provides that a person cannot transfer
greater rights in property than she or he already has. The effect of the application
of nemo dat is shown in the following example, in which the Seneca Nation asserted
ownership to a bark, which, in accordance with Seneca law, could not be owned
or transferred by individual members of that Nation: (cid:210)The bark in question . . .
was the property of the plaintiffs. Those who purchased it from individual Indi-

aboriginal rights to cultural property 181

ans got no title, and they could confer none on the defendants. Everybody who
meddled with the bark became a trespasser. It is no defense that the defendants
acted for others in buying the bark, or that they purchased without notice that
their vendors had not title; or that their acts, of which the plaintiffs complain were
done in good faith.(cid:211)50 As Canada does not have a judicial history of recognizing
traditional Aboriginal law, the reasoning supporting the blending of common law
and Aboriginal perspectives may differ. However, the results may be the same. Fur-
ther, it should be noted that there are some legislated exceptions to nemo dat in
Canada that may arise in a particular repatriation claim, such as purchase and sale
in an open market. A detailed analysis of these exceptions is beyond the scope of
this article. The most signi(cid:222)cant and universal limitation posed on the operation
of nemo dat is limitation of action legislation, which requires that actions for re-
covery of personal property be brought within a certain period of time. The time
limits vary from province to province. The impact of this legislation on repatria-
tion claims is discussed in our consideration of extinguishment and justi(cid:222)cation
below.

What follows is an application of Canadian Aboriginal rights law to the is-
sues of de(cid:222)nition, proof, extinguishment, and justi(cid:222)cation that may arise in repa-
triation claims. In particular, we ask: What is the likelihood of an Aboriginal peo-
ple(cid:213)s  being  able  to  establish  a  common-law  right  to  collective  ownership  and
control of Aboriginal cultural property? If this right exists, what is the impact of
heritage conservation and limitation of action legislation on the common-law
right? In particular, did it extinguish the common-law right prior to its elevation
to a constitutional right in 1982? And if the common-law right has not been ex-
tinguished, can continued legislative interference with this right be justi(cid:222)ed? Since
the Supreme Court of Canada has yet to consider the existence of a collective
Aboriginal right to ownership and control of Aboriginal cultural property, we can
only speculate on what the answers to these questions will be.

3.1 existence of a common-law aboriginal right
to cultural property
The new spectrum analysis of Aboriginal rights embraced by the Supreme Court
of Canada suggests that the criteria to establish the existence of a common-law
right to ownership and control of Aboriginal cultural property will likely depend
on whether the claim is brought as part of a claim to Aboriginal title or indepen-
dently of such a claim. As discussed above, the determination of the individual or
collective nature of that ownership will depend upon the weight given to the Abo-
riginal perspective and the traditions of the claimant Aboriginal group that existed
prior to contact (or the assertion of sovereignty) and continue to exist today.
However, because Aboriginal law in this area is in the process of evolution, it is un-
clear whether more criteria will emerge as new categories of Aboriginal rights

182 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

claims come before the courts. In particular, it is possible that modi(cid:222)cations could
be made to the Van der Peet test by drawing a distinction between claims to free-
standing rights that have signi(cid:222)cant impact on the everyday lives of Canadian cit-
izens and those which do not. The Van der Peet criteria emerged, and have been ap-
plied to date, in situations where signi(cid:222)cant government, regional, and private
revenues were at stake (such as gambling and commercial salmon (cid:222)shing). Nu-
merous  intervenors,  the  national  press,  and  signi(cid:222)cant  economic  rami(cid:222)cations
drew the Supreme Court(cid:213)s attention to the practical and political consequences of
making decisions that would affect many Canadian citizens in their daily lives. It
is unclear whether equally strict criteria would be applied to free-standing rights
claims that do not generate the same pragmatic concerns.

In the context of repatriation claims, courts might be persuaded that the po-
tential economic rami(cid:222)cations, the likely impact on non-Aboriginal Canadian cit-
izens, and the public criticism generated by a successful repatriation claim were
substantially different from the practical implications arising from the resolution
of claims affecting ownership of natural resources and other signi(cid:222)cant sources of
provincial revenue. In situations where the property at issue was originally obtained
through means that are considered illegal (such as theft), or where a museum is un-
able to identify the chain of title resulting in its current possession, the adoption
of more (cid:223)exible criteria is even more compelling, since only a portion of museum
collections  would  be  affected.  On  the  other  hand,  the  need  for  greater  pre-
dictability and certainty in this area of the law, the potential costs to museums as-
sociated with verifying title, the role of museums in preserving cultural property
that might otherwise have been lost or destroyed, and the national interest in the
preservation of historical property are equally compelling reasons for a court to
adhere to the existing criteria articulated in Van der Peet. If Van der Peet is applied
to free-standing repatriation claims, however, Aboriginal peoples will still likely be
successful in establishing a common-law Aboriginal right to ownership and con-
trol of movable cultural property that prior to contact was and continues to be in-
tegral to their culture.

The application of the Van der Peet identi(cid:222)cation test to a hypothetical claim
for return of a pipe considered by a First Nation in Alberta to have spiritual and
medicinal properties illustrates this point. Assume for the purpose of this hypo-
thetical that the pipe was used in a variety of traditional ceremonies, and that the
First Nation seeks ownership and return of the pipe so that it can continue to be
used in some or all of these ceremonies. The provincial museum that possesses the
pipe is willing to consult the First Nation in relation to its interpretation, storage,
display, and use, and to lend it for ceremonial purposes. However, the museum is
not willing to surrender ownership or control of the pipe. The pipe in question is
over 100 years old and came into the possession of the museum as a result of ar-
chaeological excavations conducted on privately owned land. The provincial His-

aboriginal rights to cultural property 183

torical Resources Act vests ownership of archaeological property in or on public
or private lands in the province.51 Section 1 of that statute de(cid:222)nes archaeological re-
sources as a work of man that (cid:210)(i) is primarily of value for its prehistoric, historic,
cultural, or scienti(cid:222)c signi(cid:222)cance, and (ii) is or was buried or partially buried in
land in Alberta or submerged beneath the surface of any watercourse or permanent
body of water in Alberta.(cid:211)The provincial museum is the repository of all provin-
cial archaeological resources and has come into possession of the pipe by virtue
of that designation. The province has legal title, but the museum is mandated to
care for it on behalf of the citizens of Alberta. Given the relationship of the
province to the pipe, it too has been named as a defendant in the repatriation
claim.

The requirement in Van der Peet that free-standing Aboriginal rights claims be
speci(cid:222)cally articulated requires consideration of the provisions in the Alberta His-
torical Resources Act that con(cid:223)ict with the assertion of an Aboriginal right to
ownership and control of the pipe. As the repatriation claim in our hypothetical
does not result from a charge being laid against the Aboriginal litigant, the fram-
ing of the issue will not be in terms of a speci(cid:222)c offense. However, the source of
the ultimate con(cid:223)ict over identi(cid:222)cation of ownership is based in provincial law.
Consequently, the characterization of the rights claim before the court could be
something like the right to ownership and control of provincial archaeological re-
sources originating in the claimant First Nation. It might be narrowed even further
to ownership and control of the particular pipe in question arising from both its
precontact origins and its use in a speci(cid:222)c ceremony.

Van der Peet requires that for a right to be (cid:210)Aboriginal(cid:211) it must be sourced in
a precontact Aboriginal society, and it must not have become central to that soci-
ety as a result of European in(cid:223)uence. Adapting this requirement to a repatriation
claim, the next question might be: (cid:210)Was this particular pipe created by a member
of the First Nation prior to European contact?(cid:211) Since it is only 100 years old, the
answer to this question would likely be no. The claimant First Nation may, how-
ever, be able to persuade the court that consideration of the pipe apart from the
ceremonies for which it is intended is a distinction that has never been recognized
by them. The rule that courts are to give meaning to the (cid:210)Aboriginal perspective of
the right at stake(cid:211) may result in a judicial reluctance to treat the pipe as an inani-
mate object or to ascertain its centrality to Aboriginal culture independent of the
context in which it was used. If this is the case, the relevant issue may not be the
age of the pipe, but its importance in the performance of ceremonies that were,
and continue to be, integral to the claimant First Nation(cid:213)s culture. Traditions re-
garding the sacred properties of the pipe, the role of the original ancestral pipe
carrier, and traditional laws of the First Nation will be relevant in this regard.

Rather than focusing on the (cid:210)Aboriginal(cid:211) nature of the pipe, the First Nation
may found its claim in traditional law. It may have a law that prohibits the acqui-

184 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

sition of pipes by someone who is not recognized as an authorized pipe carrier
and claim a right to enforce this law as part of a broader claim to self-government.
This law may also maintain that because of its cultural and spiritual properties,
this particular pipe is owned collectively by the First Nation and cannot be ac-
quired, transferred, or destroyed without the authority of the spiritual leaders of
that Nation.

Applying Van der Peet, the Aboriginal right at issue is the speci(cid:222)c traditional
law that con(cid:223)icts with the assumption of Crown ownership under the Historical
Resources Act. The right asserted may be the right to enact and enforce laws re-
garding ownership, acquisition, and transfer of certain pipes because of their use
in particular ceremonies. The Aboriginal nature of the law in question will depend
on whether it existed prior to European contact and continues to be integral to the
culture of the claimant First Nation. Inability to prove the continual existence of
the law from precontact to the present will not necessarily block the claim. Fur-
ther, proof of the present role of this law may be suf(cid:222)cient to establish its pre-
contact existence. Similarly, the cessation and subsequent revival of the practice of
enforcing the law will not necessarily block the claim. The fact that the city of Ed-
monton does not always enforce speed limits does not mean that speed limits do
not exist. It simply means that the city has chosen not to enforce the law in accor-
dance with its discretion from time to time. However, even if the court recognizes
the existence of a traditional law, there are still several ways to conclude that it is
unenforceable. For example, a court may conclude that the ability to enact and en-
force laws relating to Aboriginal cultural property was extinguished through the
assertion of British sovereignty, the division of legislative powers between the fed-
eral and provincial governments under the Constitution Act, 1867, or federal leg-
islation. Even if it has not been extinguished, continued interference with the en-
forcement of this law may be justi(cid:222)ed. We elaborate on these latter two points in
our discussion of extinguishment and justi(cid:222)cation below.

It is also possible for repatriation of Aboriginal cultural property to form
part of a broader claim to Aboriginal title. Take, for example, a totem pole that
was attached to land or a building and removed, without permission, to a provin-
cial museum. A First Nation, which has established unextinguished title to the
land in question, declares ownership and seeks return of the pole. Principles of
Canadian property law would consider the degree to which the totem pole was
af(cid:222)xed to the land or building, and whether or not it was attached to enhance the
better use of the totem pole as a totem pole or to enhance the use of the build-
ing or land from which it was removed. In the latter scenario, it would be con-
sidered real property, part of the land itself, not personal property. In the former
scenario, it may be classi(cid:222)ed as personal property, but the action of entering the
land to remove it may be an act of trespass and a violation of Aboriginal rights
considered to be part of Aboriginal title: namely, the right to control entrance to

aboriginal rights to cultural property 185

and removal of property from Aboriginal land. Aboriginal rights law also requires
that the First Nation perspective and pre-sovereign modes of occupation be con-
sidered in ascertaining the scope and content of its unextinguished Aboriginal
title. Aboriginal concepts of their relationship to the land may not (cid:222)t neatly into
Anglo-Canadian divisions between real and personal property. The Aboriginal
perspective may be that totem poles have a spirit of their own, or that they are
collective property because of the relationship of totem poles to Aboriginal land,
history, spirituality, culture, or ceremonies.

Delgamuukw clari(cid:222)es that the content of Aboriginal title is best understood as
a broad and (cid:223)exible right to use and occupy land for various purposes, and that
Aboriginal peoples need not prove all traditional and customary uses of the land
as part of their title claim. Consequently, it may not be necessary to prove that the
particular totem pole in issue was integral to the use of a particular parcel of land
prior to the assertion of sovereignty. Nor would it be necessary to prove the exis-
tence of speci(cid:222)c laws regarding trespass or the removal and transfer of totem poles
prior to the assertion of sovereignty. Rather, the relevant questions are: Has the
First Nation established suf(cid:222)cient occupation of the area from which the pole was
removed to support a claim to Aboriginal title? If so, are ownership and control of
totem poles in, on, or removed from Aboriginal lands consistent with their historic
patterns of occupation and their relationship to the land over time? If the answer
to both questions is yes, then arguably this speci(cid:222)c right forms part of the Abo-
riginal title. It is beyond the scope of this paper to analyze the criteria to estab-
lish suf(cid:222)cient occupancy to support a title claim. Aboriginal title, however, may be
a broad enough concept to include ownership of Aboriginal cultural property that
is proved to be intimately related to a particular piece of Aboriginal land.

The right to control land may also be broad enough to include the right to
make laws affecting the use and control of the land. It should be remembered that
the claim in Pamajewon, discussed earlier in this paper, did not form part of a
broader claim based on unextinguished Aboriginal title. It was a free-standing
rights claim. Lamer C. J. states in Delgamuukw that Van der Peet and Pamajewon ren-
dered the claim to jurisdiction and self-government by the Gitskan and Wet(cid:213)-
suwet(cid:213)en peoples too vague to be considered by the court. The jurisdictional claim
in that case was not circumscribed by reference to laws and institutions of gov-
ernment intimately connected to use and occupation of land. In these circum-
stances, a court may be prepared to apply identi(cid:222)cation criteria that fall somewhere
between the narrow guidelines set out in Van der Peet and the general assertion of
rights in Delgamuukw. A court may or may not apply Pamajewon and Van der Peet to
aspects of government that by their very nature are inextricably connected to un-
extinguished Aboriginal life. An example taken from the common law of property
is the right to exclude others.

The choice of law for resolving disputes relating to individual and collective

186 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

ownership and acquisition and transfer of title may become an issue regardless of
whether a repatriation claim is brought as part of a claim to title. Proving that an
object is (cid:210)Aboriginal,(cid:211) or that it is properly viewed as forming part of Aboriginal
land, does not mean that someone else cannot legitimately acquire title to it. If the
Aboriginal cultural property in question was acquired through donation or sale
by a member of the affected claimant group, that group will need to establish its
traditions in relation to that property in accordance with the analysis of free-
standing rights and Aboriginal title just given.

Finally, consideration will have to be given to the rules of evidence articulated
in Delgamuukw in the treatment of Aboriginal evidence produced to support the ex-
istence of Aboriginal rights at common law. These rules require that a court ap-
proach and interpret common-law rules of evidence (cid:210)with a consciousness of the
special nature of aboriginal claims, and of the evidentiary dif(cid:222)culties in proving a
right which originates in times where there were no written records of the prac-
tices, customs and traditions engaged in.(cid:211)52 As indicated earlier, this means that the
requirement of continuity will not be strictly construed. It will not be necessary
for Aboriginal litigants to produce conclusive evidence of the ownership and use
of cultural objects or traditional laws affecting their ownership and use from pre-
contact times (or, in the case of repatriation claims, based on unextinguished title
prior to the assertion of sovereignty over their land).

Aboriginal testimony that consists of the use of oral history to establish tra-
ditions relating to ownership and control of cultural property will also face fewer
challenges than in the past. It will not be necessary to produce direct testimony as
to the creator of the object or to produce members of the affected Aboriginal so-
ciety  who  were  alive  at  the  time  the  alleged  Aboriginal  right  to  the  property
emerged. However, Aboriginal methods for veri(cid:222)cation of testimonies that have
passed through successive generations and the personal credibility of individuals
giving testimony may become more central in assessing the weight to be given to
oral history. Expert evidence will, therefore, still assist in bolstering a claim proved
through oral traditions. Battles of experts may plague repatriation litigation, as has
been the case in other forms of Aboriginal litigation, generating complicated,
lengthy, and expensive trials. If substantial expert opinion contradicts assertions
founded in oral history, it may be discounted. Given their training and cultural ori-
entation, judges will still be likely to prefer to rely on written historical accounts
of non-Aboriginals regarding the use and control of cultural objects where such
evidence exists. The credibility of anthropological testimony will continue to be an
issue, and appellate courts may defer to the (cid:222)ndings of trial judges on this point.
Physical evidence originating in the hard sciences (such as archaeology) that es-
tablishes the geographical and cultural origins of objects at issue will continue to
carry signi(cid:222)cant weight. In some repatriation claims this evidence may not be avail-
able to Aboriginal litigants.

aboriginal rights to cultural property 187

3.2 extinguishment of an aboriginal right
to cultural property
There is a myriad of federal and provincial laws that relate to so-called heritage
matters.53 Under the Constitution Act, Canada(cid:213)s provinces have jurisdiction over
provincial Crown land and (cid:210)property and civil rights within the province.(cid:211) The
federal government has jurisdiction over federal property, Indians and Indian re-
serves, shipping, navigation, and the regulation of trade and commerce. Both lev-
els of Canadian government have used their power under Canada(cid:213)s constitution to
enact laws concerning preservation of the archaeological heritage, but they have
not done so in a coordinated manner.

Ownership of property located on reserve land is governed by the Indian
Act.54 The federal government does not claim ownership of movable cultural prop-
erty on these lands, but certain restrictions have been placed on the care and dis-
position of material objects. For example, section 91 of the Indian Act requires
that the written consent of the Minister of Indian and Aboriginal Affairs be ob-
tained to transfer title to Indian grave houses, totem poles, carved house poles, pic-
tographs, and petroglyphs located on reserve lands. Objects listed in this section
that were removed or sold before it came into force or before the land in issue be-
came reserve land would not fall within the scope of this provision. The existence
of this section, however, would bolster a claim for return regardless of prior legal
standards. Cultural property in, on, or removed from other federal land is governed
by legislation affecting the lands in question. This legislation (such as national
parks legislation) does not expressly address federal ownership of movable cultural
property. Consequently, the rights of the federal government are sourced in its
common-law rights as owner of the land in question. Generally this means the
Crown has ownership in objects attached to or buried in the land, but it may
have rights subordinate to those of a (cid:222)nder of objects lying on the land if the
Crown has not evidenced an intent, through land management and otherwise, to
control the land and all of the objects upon it. The Crown(cid:213)s rights to all of these
objects may also be subordinate to the rights of previous possessors, such as
First Nations.55

In 1990 the Canadian Minister of Communications announced draft legisla-
tion  concerning  the  ownership,  protection,  and  management  of archaeological
property on land within federal jurisdiction.56 The draft federal law would have
vested ownership in the federal Crown of the artifacts described (these included
burials, wrecks, and specimens found on or under the land and lost or abandoned
for over (cid:222)fty years).57 The law provided for consultation procedures with cultural
and religious groups in the case of newly discovered objects and allowed for the
conclusion of agreements with Aboriginal peoples for ownership and control of ar-
chaeological resources. Despite attempts to consult with First Nations and resolve
Aboriginal concerns about heritage issues, the draft legislation was not pursued.

188 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

This brief consideration of federal legislation makes it clear that a common-
law right to ownership and control of Aboriginal cultural property, if it existed
prior to 1982, has not been extinguished by federal legislation. Not only is federal
legislation concerning ownership of archaeological and other historical resources
absent, but in most circumstances this issue continues to be resolved, in respect of
objects found in or on federal lands, according to common-law principles. Further,
the speci(cid:222)c reference to cultural property in the Indian Act does not indicate a
clear and plain intent on the part of the federal government to extinguish Aborig-
inal ownership of cultural property on or off reserve lands. The requirement to
obtain ministerial consent for the transfer of certain objects must be contextual-
ized within the overall purpose of the legislation to protect Aboriginal land and
control the activities that occur on that land. As in the case of the (cid:222)shing regula-
tory regime discussed earlier, the inclusion of a purpose to protect Indian people
does not lend itself to a ruling of clear and plain extinguishment.

If a repatriation claim is based on the existence of traditional law, the impact
of the assertion of sovereignty, the division of powers, and the Indian Act on the
survival of Aboriginal government activities must be considered. The Supreme
Court of Canada has indicated that it will not question the legitimacy of the as-
sertion of sovereignty over Aboriginal peoples and their lands. Indeed, it has in-
dicated that section 91(24) of the Constitution Act, which gives the federal gov-
ernment jurisdiction over (cid:210)Indians and lands reserved for the Indians,(cid:211) means that
there is (cid:210)no doubt(cid:211) that sovereignty and legislative power over Indians is vested in
the Crown.58 However, the recognition of Crown sovereignty and the existence of
section 91(24) do not necessarily lead to the conclusion that traditional laws af-
fecting ownership and control of Aboriginal cultural property have been extin-
guished. A fundamental presumption in section 35 analysis is that common-law
Aboriginal rights to land and free-standing rights survive the assertion of sover-
eignty and are capable of constitutional protection. The purpose of section 35(1)
is to reconcile the existence of these rights with Crown sovereignty. Reconciliation
requires proof of clear and plain extinguishment or justi(cid:222)cation of government in-
terference.

Looking at the history and purpose of the Canadian constitution (including
the 1982 amendments), the division of legislative power between the federal and
provincial governments may not be viewed as suf(cid:222)cient manifestation of a (cid:210)clear
and plain intent(cid:211) to extinguish powers of Aboriginal government proven to exist
at common law. For example, in Partners in Confederation, the Royal Commission on
Aboriginal Peoples (RCAP) argues that the belief that the division of powers ex-
tinguishes all forms of Aboriginal self-government (cid:210)confuses the question of the
scope of federal and provincial powers with the question of the exclusiveness of those
powers.(cid:211)59 In the commission(cid:213)s opinion, the Constitution Act, 1867, is one of sev-
eral instruments that anticipate the existence of more than one government and

aboriginal rights to cultural property 189

the ability of governments to hold concurrent powers. Consequently, the federal
government must point to speci(cid:222)c legislation that extinguishes powers of Aborig-
inal government and the ability of First Nations to enact laws. In the case of a
claim brought by a First Nation (as distinguished from the Inuit or M(cid:142)tis peo-
ples), the relevant legislation to consider is the Indian Act as it speaks to the cre-
ation and powers of Indian government. Again, the RCAP argues that, looking to
the cumulative effect of federal Indian legislation, although the federal government
(cid:210)purported to alter the existing governmental powers of Indian groups,(cid:211) those al-
terations assumed the existence of Indian political organization and (cid:210)severely dis-
rupted and distorted their political structures(cid:211) but did not effectively extinguish
them.60 Consequently, in the commission(cid:213)s opinion, a broad and abstract right to
self-government survives. Because the Supreme Court has resisted the articulation
of rights in general terms, the relevant question in repatriation claims based on tra-
ditional laws is whether the Indian Act extinguishes the ability to enact laws af-
fecting ownership and control of Aboriginal cultural property. An analysis of the
speci(cid:222)c terms of the act could lead to the conclusion that although the federal gov-
ernment has interfered with this right by enacting a by-law—making regime, it has
not clearly and plainly extinguished the Aboriginal right to enact and enforce tra-
ditional laws respecting cultural property.

Rights to Aboriginal cultural property may also be extinguished by a treaty
or a modern land-claim agreement. Since parties to historical treaties did not have
legal counsel, speak English, or necessarily understand the full legal rami(cid:222)cations
of treaty negotiation, different standards of interpretation are applied to histori-
cal treaties and modern land-claims agreements. First, with respect to historical
treaties, the notion that a right to control objects on Aboriginal land forms part of
Aboriginal title could operate against treaty peoples, since treaties have been in-
terpreted by Canadian courts to extinguish Aboriginal title and replace common-
law rights derived from title with those articulated in the treaty. On the other
hand, because of the signi(cid:222)cant power imbalances and problems arising from lan-
guage barriers, Canadian courts have maintained that treaties are to be interpreted
in a manner that re(cid:223)ects how the Aboriginal signatories to the treaty understood
the treaty. Any ambiguities in the terms of the treaty are to be resolved in their
favour.61 Application of these principles to a repatriation claim could result in a
ruling that aspects of title not anticipated by the Aboriginal signatories at the time
of signing, such as control over cultural property intimately connected to the land,
have not been extinguished. Despite the existence of a treaty, remnants of unex-
tinguished Aboriginal title may remain.

The Supreme Court of Canada has not yet addressed the impact of treaties
on the survival of Aboriginal rights to self-government and traditional law. How-
ever, its willingness to consider free-standing self-government claims in Pamajewon,
albeit framed in more speci(cid:222)c terms, suggests that Aboriginal understandings of

190 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

the continuance of these rights after the existence of a treaty will be considered.
The construction of treaties in the United States supports the conclusion that
upon entering into treaties, Indian Nations do not cease to be self-governing. In-
stead, powers of government both internal and external to Indian territory are pre-
sumed to remain unless they have been expressly surrendered or overruled by con-
gressional enactments or reasonable state regulation.62 The reasoning supporting
this conclusion is based in principles of colonial law that also apply in Canada.
The Supreme Court of Canada has referred to colonial and United States law in
its characterization of early treaties with the British Crown as sui generis instruments
that fall somewhere between relations conducted between sovereign states and the
relations that states have with their citizens. In both Canada and the United States,
however, this characterization of treaties has not been interpreted as requiring
Aboriginal consent to terminate Aboriginal rights to self-government or other
treaty rights. Nevertheless, the characterization of treaties as jurisdictional arrange-
ments, coupled with Canadian rules of treaty interpretation, could mean that pow-
ers of Aboriginal government survived the treaty-making process in Canada. If so,
the focus in a repatriation claim by a treaty nation may again be the existence of
federal legislation that expressly terminates traditional laws relating to ownership
and control of Aboriginal cultural property.

One of the most controversial aspects of the modern land-claims negotiation
process is the insistence by federal, provincial, and territorial governments that all
rights arising from Aboriginal title be surrendered in exchange for rights articulated
in the land-claim agreement. Because these agreements are protected under section
35(3) of the constitution as modern treaties, their terms cannot be unilaterally ter-
minated by the Crown. It may be possible for governments to interfere with the ex-
ercise of the terms of these agreements in the future if such interference can be
justi(cid:222)ed and is not precluded by the agreement itself. Arguably, the standards for
justi(cid:222)cation will be stricter than those applied to Aboriginal rights, since breaking
such an agreement automatically calls into question the honor of the Crown. The
constitutional nature of these modern agreements has resulted until recently in the
articulation  of self-government  agreements  in  separate  documents  from  land-
claims agreements, even though land and government issues may be negotiated si-
multaneously.63 The federal rationale for this practice was to prevent the terms of
self-government from being elevated to constitutional status as part of the modern
land-claim agreement. In the absence of an express clause to the contrary, all aspects
of Aboriginal title and Aboriginal rights to government are replaced by the terms
of the modern-day agreements. Rules of interpretation designed to protect Abo-
riginal signatories of historical treaties do not apply to modern agreements. Con-
sequently, it is not surprising that the Nisga(cid:213)a agreement makes speci(cid:222)c reference to
the return of cultural property currently in the possession of provincial and fed-
eral museums. A failure to articulate speci(cid:222)cally this right could result in a legal rul-

aboriginal rights to cultural property 191

ing that it has been extinguished. The details of the Nisga(cid:213)a agreement relating to
repatriation are discussed in the (cid:222)nal part of this paper.

The above analysis illustrates that the federal government would have a dif-
(cid:222)cult time proving that it has extinguished a common-law Aboriginal right to
ownership and control of cultural property in the absence of the existence of a
modern land-claim agreement. The (cid:222)nal issue in relation to extinguishment is
whether provincial legislation can effectively operate to bar the enforcement of
such a right. Since Delgamuukw has now clari(cid:222)ed that a province cannot extinguish
an Aboriginal law through laws of general application, this issue is properly con-
sidered in an analysis of justi(cid:222)cation.

3.3 justification for interference with a constitutional
aboriginal right to cultural property
Even if an Aboriginal litigant establishes an (cid:210)existing(cid:211) right to collective owner-
ship and control of cultural property, such a right may not be enforceable if the
federal or provincial legislation limiting its exercise can be justi(cid:222)ed. For the pur-
pose of illustrating this point, we focus on the most likely intrusive legislation:
provincial heritage conservation and limitation of actions legislation.

All Canadian provinces have legislation concerning archaeological and historic
resources located on public provincial or private lands. Most of these laws pro-
vide a means for the designation of historic resources, the reporting of (cid:222)nds, gov-
ernment  ownership  of archaeological  resources,  and  control  of excavations
through some form of permit system. The focus of provincial legislation respect-
ing archaeological resources on or attached to public or private lands is on the pro-
tection and conservation of such materials, with recognition of limited access or
use rights for certain speci(cid:222)c purposes (such as scienti(cid:222)c and historical research).
Aboriginal peoples(cid:213) beliefs and expectations are only marginally addressed. In most
provinces the Crown asserts ownership of archaeological objects on or under both
private and public land. Property rights in objects acquired before such statutory
vesting occurred are determined by common-law principles (including the recog-
nition of customary Aboriginal property interests). Most provincial archaeologi-
cal and historic resources legislation establishes various conservation procedures,
such as stop orders to prevent damage to sites, permit systems for digs, and obli-
gations on the part of (cid:222)nders to report discoveries.

The reader will recall that continued application of this legislation to an ex-
isting Aboriginal right to cultural property will depend on whether or not the
province has a valid legislative objective and whether it is enforcing that objective
in a manner that is consistent with its (cid:222)duciary obligation. Although repatriation
does not invoke the same regional and national economic concerns as resource
rights litigation, (cid:210)compelling and substantial(cid:211) reasons may still be invoked to con-
tinue ownership of archaeological and other historical resources in the province. It

192 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

may be argued that the broader Canadian public relies upon the preservation and
protection of this property to understand its national and regional history and the
role of Aboriginal peoples in the formation of current economic, political, social,
and other institutions. Return of cultural property to communities could result
in Canadians as a whole losing the opportunity to learn from and about practices,
traditions, and peoples integral to Canada(cid:213)s multicultural society. It may also be ar-
gued that government interference operates to the bene(cid:222)t of Aboriginal peoples by
ensuring the proper care and protection of Aboriginal cultural property that might
otherwise be destroyed. Further, the costs associated with verifying title and return
would affect various governmental institutions and be assumed by Canadian tax-
payers.

Regardless of the legitimacy of these concerns, they do not justify Crown
ownership of all Aboriginal cultural property currently caught within provincial
heritage property regimes. They may provide suf(cid:222)cient reason to limit the property
recognized as (cid:210)Aboriginal(cid:211) through strict application of the Van der Peet criteria.
They may also support the imposition of judicial conditions on the return of cer-
tain property, such as the establishment of appropriate repositories in Aboriginal
communities, public access to certain items, or the production of replicas to be
housed in affected museums. They are not suf(cid:222)ciently compelling, however, to le-
gitimize provincial expropriation of Aboriginal ownership of the broad range of
Aboriginal cultural property currently affected by provincial heritage conservation
legislation.

If a court does (cid:222)nd these reasons suf(cid:222)ciently compelling and substantial, the
province must still prove that it is accomplishing its objectives in a manner con-
sistent with its (cid:222)duciary obligation. At a minimum this may require provincial
museums to enter into co-management and loan agreements with First Nations
that desire access to Aboriginal cultural property. It may also mean that sacred,
ceremonial, and other objects integral to historical and contemporary Aborigi-
nal cultures must be returned. Priority may also have to be given to Aboriginal
peoples over the interests of the broader Canadian public. Giving priority to
Aboriginal ownership would not result in exclusive ownership of all Aboriginal
cultural property by communities of origin as long as the right at issue is con-
strued narrowly (for example, only to precontact objects integral to an Aborigi-
nal culture). Thus, current provincial legislation may need to be revised to re(cid:223)ect
this prior interest. The content of such amendments would have to be derived
through consultation with the affected Aboriginal communities and may even re-
quire their consent.

So far, British Columbia has been the only Canadian provincial jurisdiction to
explore, through amendments and proposed amendments to its heritage legis-
lation, alternatives to the traditional approaches dealing (or not dealing) with

aboriginal rights to cultural property 193

Aboriginal cultural heritage. This process began in 1992, when the British Colum-
bia government supported an Aboriginal Heritage symposium at Cape Mudge on
Vancouver Island. In 1992 the government also produced a Draft Heritage Con-
servation Act.64 A guide produced by the government explaining the parts of the
proposed law relating to the stewardship of Aboriginal heritage sites and artifacts
states:

[A] fundamental concern to Aboriginal groups was that the existing heritage
protection system is not sensitive to Aboriginal cultural values. Instead, they
felt, it is geared more towards protecting sites and objects as archaeological
resources(cid:209)resources for the scienti(cid:222)c study of past cultures(cid:209)rather than as the
heritage legacy of living cultures. In order to address these concerns,
Aboriginal groups are demanding stewardship responsibility for their
heritage and culture. In response to this, the proposed legislation enables
greater Aboriginal participation in decision-making regarding provincial
heritage resource management.65

The draft law did not establish a speci(cid:222)c format for Aboriginal participation in
the stewardship of archaeological and other heritage resources in British Colum-
bia, but it did at least envisage such participation taking place. The draft law con-
tained detailed provisions dealing with burial remains and cultural artifacts. In re-
spect of (cid:210)native human remains and grave goods(cid:211) the draft law vested ownership
in  the  (cid:210)native  people  of British  Columbia(cid:211) or  in  descendants  or  descendent
groups66 and provided that such items that are in possession of the Crown were
deemed to be held in trust.67 The draft law also attempted to deal with the re-
moval of archaic objects from heritage sites and the risk of their removal from
British Columbia. In so doing, the draft law unfortunately managed both to of-
fend certain Aboriginal groups (by a provision deeming pre-1858 found objects to
be the property of the Crown) and to risk the possibility of being unconstitu-
tional, in that it seemingly strayed into federal jurisdiction (because of provisions
dealing with the international movement of heritage objects).68 Rather than deal
in detail with dif(cid:222)cult questions concerning the ownership of found objects, the
draft law set up a system for the determination of ownership by the courts in cer-
tain cases.69

In view of opposition to the draft law, the provincial government next devel-
oped an entirely new bill, which became law in 1994, as the Heritage Conservation
Act.70 The British Columbia government explained its reversal of position on the
earlier draft law as follows:

While the heritage legislation enables and facilitates the establishment of
new relationships between the province and First Nations, this will be a

194 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

gradual process. Consequently, to allow for appropriate consultation with
the Aboriginal policy forums, legislative action on a number of signi(cid:222)cant
items related to First Nations(cid:213) cultural heritage has been deferred.

These issues pertain to the ownership, sale and possession of aboriginal
artifacts and repatriation of Crown-held heritage objects. Deferring these
items will allow for better coordination and integration of First Nations(cid:213)
concerns with upcoming legislative and program initiatives on land and
resource use planning, establishment of protected areas and environmental
assessment requirements.

Through ongoing discussions with First Nations, several non-legislative
items have also been identi(cid:222)ed which directly impact the preservation of
aboriginal heritage. These include the preservation of aboriginal languages,
providing new training in museum work for First Nations(cid:213) people, offering
support for aboriginal land use studies and heritage resource inventories and
providing assistance to First Nations(cid:213) cultural centres.71

The new Heritage Conservation Act extends the designation procedure that al-
ready existed for heritage sites to (cid:210)heritage objects.(cid:211)72 Such objects are subject to
designation and registration procedures that involve rights of notice, objection,
registration and compensation.73 The removal of such objects from the province
is also prohibited.74 The effect of these provisions appears to be to create a way for
the province(cid:209)on an ad hoc basis(cid:209)to establish, over time, a list of what it con-
siders to be its patrimony (including that of its Aboriginal peoples). The scope of
the law will, therefore, largely depend on how aggressively or imaginatively it is ac-
tually administered in the future.

The new British Columbia heritage law re(cid:223)ects the rapidly changing relation-
ship of Aboriginal peoples and the provincial government. This is illustrated by
provisions such as those dealing with formal agreements concerning the conserva-
tion and protection of Aboriginal heritage sites and objects and the inclusion of
a provision stating that neither such agreements nor the act itself will derogate
from the Aboriginal and treaty rights of any Aboriginal people.75

The abandoned draft heritage laws described above (both federal and provin-
cial) suggest that it is no longer politically feasible in Canada for a government to
introduce legislation that proposes a solution to the ownership of newly discov-
ered indigenous cultural objects by means of vesting title to such material in the
Crown. This assertion of title by legislation may also violate existing constitu-
tionally protected Aboriginal rights. The new British Columbia Heritage Conser-
vation Act eschews questions of title in favor of a regime that focuses on preser-
vation or protection of objects in a way similar to that developed in relation to

aboriginal rights to cultural property 195

sites. This appears to leave the question of ownership and possession of First Na-
tions artifacts for resolution through negotiation or litigation and to support her-
itage laws that focus on collaborative preservation and conservation of signi(cid:222)cant
cultural properties.

As is the case with heritage conservation legislation, details of provincial lim-
itation of actions legislation vary from province to province. All provinces have
legislation that limits the time within which actions can be brought to recover
movable property. In most cases the time begins to run at the date of wrongful in-
terference with the property at issue. These limitations are informed by a general
principle of fairness that maintains possessors should not be (cid:210)subject inde(cid:222)nitely
to the threat of being sued over a particular matter.(cid:211)76 They are also justi(cid:222)ed on the
basis that they provide for greater certainty of title, encourage prompt settlement
of disputes, and protect reasonable expectations of innocent purchasers. In most
provinces,  failure  to  bring  an  action  in  the  time  designated  extinguishes  the
claimant(cid:213)s right to ownership. A common exception arises when there has been
fraudulent concealment of a cause of action. In such circumstances, time will not
begin to run until the fraud is discovered or ought reasonably to have been dis-
covered. Other unique exceptions might be created for repatriation claims based
on the evolving nature of Aboriginal rights law and the ability to ascertain a date
when Aboriginal litigants knew, or ought reasonably to have known, about their
potential Aboriginal right to ownership.

Again we argue that these justi(cid:222)cations are not suf(cid:222)ciently compelling to
allow a provincial government to do indirectly what it cannot do directly, namely,
extinguish a common-law Aboriginal right. Further, if the de(cid:222)nition of cultural
property subject to Aboriginal ownership is suf(cid:222)ciently narrow, disruption of
limitation periods will not result in chaos and uncertainty regarding the security
of a museum to title to all Aboriginal cultural property in its collections.77

3.4 conclusion of repatriation analysis
The importance and complexity of potential repatriation claims means that the
(cid:222)rst claim affecting a signi(cid:222)cant number of Aboriginal cultural objects, or a
valuable object, would likely (cid:222)nd its way to the Supreme Court of Canada. Given
the costs inherent in litigating Aboriginal rights claims, this process for resolv-
ing disputes may not be an option for many Aboriginal peoples. They may pre-
fer to resolve cultural property issues through a consensual process that respects
Aboriginal tradition and also recognizes the role museums have played in pre-
serving that tradition. For these reasons, we suggest that negotiation, not litiga-
tion,  continue  to  be  the  most  appropriate  process  for  resolving  repatriation
claims. We conclude our analysis of Aboriginal rights to cultural property in
Canada  by  highlighting  the  Nisga(cid:213)a  treaty  and  private  agreements  that  have
emerged through negotiation.

196 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

4 negotiated rights to aboriginal 
cultural property

Because Canada has no legislation dealing with the possession or return of Aborig-
inal cultural property, Canadian museums operate in a very different legal envi-
ronment from their counterparts in the United States. For example, they are under
no obligation to publish inventories of Aboriginal cultural property in their pos-
session or respond to Aboriginal requests for loans or returns. Despite this con-
trasting legal situation, pressures similar to those in the United States have led to
practices resembling those experienced in that country.

The prevailing characteristic of repatriation of Aboriginal cultural property
in Canada has been negotiations leading to solutions acceptable to both sides.
While the form and format of these repatriations has varied from unilateral de-
cisions to part with possession by private parties (such as churches) to the return
of whole collections pursuant to treaty agreements between governments and First
Nations, they have almost always occurred without recourse to court proceed-
ings. This section will discuss the principal categories under which repatriation of
Aboriginal cultural property has occurred and the salient characteristics of each.

4.1 canadian museums and first nations
The last decade has seen controversies developing in relation to museum exhibi-
tions in Canada and other countries.78 It was one such instance that led to funda-
mental changes in the political and professional relationships between Canadian
museums and First Nations. In 1988, the Glenbow Museum in Calgary, Alberta,
organized an exhibition titled (cid:210)The Spirit Sings,(cid:211) in conjunction with the Winter
Olympic Games, which took place in the city that year.79 The exhibit contained a
number of masks lent by foreign museums. The Lubicon Lake First Nation ob-
jected to their exhibition in public and organized a boycott of the display.

Several Mohawk bands then sought an interim injunction to prevent the dis-
play of a False Face mask at the exhibition.80 The trial judge decided not to issue
an interim injunction pending trial. Shannon J. thought that although the claim
to ownership of tribal cultural property was a serious issue to be tried, the appli-
cants were unable to show that irreparable harm would result from the continued
display of the mask. He supported this view by noting that the mask had been on
display at various museums for many years and the Mohawk had not previously
objected to those displays.

The Lubicon Cree were supported by the Assembly of First Nations, and the
latter agreed to cosponsor a national conference with the Canadian Museums As-
sociation on issues connected with the relationship between Canadian museums
and Aboriginal peoples. The conference was held in Ottawa in November 1988 and

aboriginal rights to cultural property 197

led to the establishment of a task force on museums and First Peoples whose mis-
sion was to develop a framework for a new relationship between Canadian muse-
ums and Aboriginals. The outcome went far beyond questions connected to repa-
triation and also addressed improved access to museum collections by Aboriginal
peoples as well as increased involvement of Aboriginals in the management of
such institutions and their collections.

In December 1991, the Task Force on Museums and First Peoples produced its
report titled (cid:210)Turning the Page: Forging New Partnerships Between Museums and
First Peoples.(cid:211)81 The report was released in February 1992 and outlined principles
and recommendations for change. Following the report, an application was made
to the Canadian federal government to fund a Council for Museums and First
Peoples, which would work to further the partnership ideals envisaged in the task
force report.82 This approach was unsuccessful, and the implementation of the re-
port was then left to individual museums, regional museum associations, and the
Canadian Museums Association, working with Aboriginal groups. In contrast to
the United States, therefore, Canada lacks a centralized system to administer and
monitor the recommendations of the task force. Most signi(cid:222)cantly, the task force
recommendations lack any force of law, and their observance or implementation
relies on the individual discretion of museums and museum associations.

The task force acknowledged that the spark leading to its work had been
the Glenbow Museum exhibition of 1988, which had returned to the assump-
tions behind many exhibitions of Aboriginal cultural property in Canadian mu-
seums: that Aboriginal people were either extinct or on the verge of being so
and that there was no need to involve Aboriginal people in the preparation of
exhibitions of their own culture. The report cites Chief George Erasmus (for-
mer Assembly of First Nations National Chief): (cid:210)We (the Aboriginal peoples)
are well aware that many people have dedicated their time, careers and their lives
to showing what they believe is the accurate picture of indigenous peoples. We
thank you for that, but we want to turn the page.(cid:211)83 The task force went on to
develop principles and recommendations that could form the basis for estab-
lishing new relationships between Aboriginal peoples and Canadian museums.
The speci(cid:222)c recommendations in the task force report deal with interpretation,
access, repatriation, and training. The report recommends that Aboriginal peo-
ples be involved in preparing exhibitions and other projects that include Aborig-
inal culture. It goes on to recommend that increased opportunities be made avail-
able by museums and galleries for the employment of Aboriginal peoples and
their representation on management organizations(cid:209)such as boards of directors.
It suggests that museums disclose more information about their Aboriginal col-
lections and allow Aboriginal people access to objects and relevant documentation.
The report also recommends that funding be provided for professional and tech-
nical training of Aboriginal people in connection with Aboriginal initiatives, such

198 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

as cultural centers. It also urges that museums recognize the legitimacy of the cre-
dentials of Aboriginal individuals and groups who possess knowledge of particu-
lar cultures.

The most detailed recommendations in the task force report concern the
question of repatriation of Aboriginal cultural property. In connection with its
recommendations regarding repatriation, the task force report deals separately
with human remains and objects of (cid:210)cultural patrimony.(cid:211) It separates human re-
mains into three categories. The (cid:222)rst is that of persons who evidence indicates are
remembered by name. Their remains must be offered for disposition at the request
of the families, heirs, or clans. Where human remains are af(cid:222)liated with a named
First Nation, they must be reported to that Nation and reinterred in a traditional
manner in cooperation with the museum. Human remains and associated burial
objects that cannot be af(cid:222)liated with a named First Nation are to be treated and
disposed of after consultation between museums and representatives of Aborigi-
nal peoples.

The task force recommendation concerning the treatment, use, presentation,
and disposition of what it describes (without further de(cid:222)nition) as (cid:210)sacred and
ceremonial objects and any other objects of cultural patrimony(cid:211) is to set out a se-
ries of optional treatments. The report distinguishes between objects that are
judged to have been (by current legal standards)  (cid:210)acquired illegally(cid:211) and those
(cid:210)obtained legally.(cid:211) In the former case, the objects should be returned, together
with a transfer of title, to the originating cultural group or individuals. In the lat-
ter situation of presumed legitimate acquisition, museums are to negotiate, upon
request, returns of sacred and ceremonial objects and other objects of special im-
portance with appropriate Aboriginal communities on a case-by-case basis, tak-
ing into account moral and ethical concerns as well as legal considerations. The
task force report also outlines three alternative strategies, in addition to the phys-
ical return of objects accompanied by a transfer or return of legal title. It suggests
that museums lend sacred and ceremonial objects for use by Aboriginal commu-
nities and that museums allow the replication of materials in their collections. Fi-
nally, the report encourages museums to engage in shared management of their
collections of Aboriginal material by involving First Nations in such areas as
de(cid:222)ning access, determining storage conditions, and recognizing the traditional
ownership systems of originating cultures.

Since its publication, the task force report has played a signi(cid:222)cant role as a
framework  for  newly  emerging  forms  of partnership  between  museums  and
Aboriginal peoples in Canada. Many museums and museum associations have
adopted the report as a basis for developing their own relationships with Aborig-
inal peoples. First Nations individuals are now members of the boards of directors
of several Canadian museums and are routinely involved in the preparation and
presentation of exhibitions. In the absence of any umbrella or national organiza-

aboriginal rights to cultural property 199

tion, detailed information about the interpretation and application of the task
force recommendations is unavailable. This may not be as much of a problem in
Canada, given the relatively small size of our museum community, as it might be
elsewhere, but it clearly compromises the scope for the successful implementation
of the task force recommendations.

The inherent complexity of repatriation processes is well illustrated by an ex-
ample from British Columbia.84 In 1993, a privately owned human-(cid:222)gure bowl
(known to the Saanich people as Sddlnewhala) from Vancouver Island was about
to be sold outside Canada. Under the Cultural Property Export and Import Act,
a permit for such an export is required.85 The system established by the federal act
allows Canadian institutions (mostly museums) to be given an opportunity to ac-
quire by purchase objects whose export is prevented. Ironically, First Nations do
not currently enjoy such a purchasing privilege. In the case of the bowl, however,
the Simon Fraser University Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology sought gov-
ernment funds to enable it to purchase the bowl. Without more, the museum
would have offended both Canadian archaeologists (whose association objects to
trade in such objects) and First Nations (who would undoubtedly claim the object
belongs to them). To resolve this impasse, the Simon Fraser Museum, upon ac-
quiring the bowl, immediately executed a transfer of title to the bowl in favor of
the Saanich Native Heritage Society and signed a custodial agreement under the
terms of which the museum agreed to care for the bowl while the society was al-
lowed to request its return for purposes of display or traditional use. This exam-
ple is a concrete instance of the application of the principles set out in the task
force report, though it shows how complex their application may be and how
much a desired solution may turn on the expertise and goodwill of those actually
involved in the repatriation process, given the absence of clearly applicable legal
principles and rules.

An enormous quantity of Canadian indigenous cultural property is currently
to be found outside Canada.86 This, in turn, limits the process of repatriation,
since Canadian law usually will not apply to attempts to secure returns of such ob-
jects. The task force report supports the repatriation of foreign-held material and
suggests the involvement of national governments, UNESCO, and the Interna-
tional Council of Museums in this process. One signi(cid:222)cant step in this direction
was the conclusion, in 1997, of a bilateral agreement between Canada and the
United States respecting the return of illegally exported archaeological and ethno-
graphic material.87 This agreement provides for U.S. restrictions on the importa-
tion of itemized archaeological and ethnographic material and obliges the United
States to take measures to recover and return those objects that lack proper docu-
mentaton. The bilateral agreement, however, only applies prospectively and does
not apply to objects that left Canada prior to the agreement entering into force
under United States law.

200 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

4.2 privately negotiated returns of aboriginal 
cultural property
As this article illustrates, land and resource issues have been the center of Aborig-
inal  legal  claims  in  Canada.  Cultural  property  issues  have  rarely  come  before
courts, and when they have it has only been specialized questions of law that have
tended to be addressed.88 In some instances the lack of cases supporting Aborigi-
nal title has been used as a justi(cid:222)cation by the court to deny other forms of relief.89
Against  this  background  of uncertainty  regarding  the  law  surrounding
Aboriginal cultural property claims, there has been a growing number of instances
where objects have been voluntarily returned as a result of privately negotiated
agreements. Probably the best known and possibly the earliest of such agreements
was an agreement in 1975 by the then National Museum of Man (now the Cana-
dian Museum of Civilization) in Hull, Quebec, to return a collection of potlatch
objects to the U(cid:213)mista Cultural Centre in Alert Bay, British Columbia.90 The return
of these objects was a culmination of events beginning in 1885, when potlatches
were  prohibited  by  federal  law. The  prohibition  drove  the  ceremonies  under-
ground, and in 1922 forty-(cid:222)ve First Nations persons were convicted of offenses
under the 1885 law. The potlatch law was repealed in 1951, but it was not until the
1960s that negotiations began aimed at having the earlier con(cid:222)scated potlatch ob-
jects returned to their creators. The return by the National Museum was followed
in 1988 by a similar return of objects from the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto.
Gloria Cranmer Webster, the daughter of the Kwakiutl Chief who gave the 1921
potlatch that led to the con(cid:222)scations, has said of the museum returns: (cid:210)Most de-
mands for repatriation are based on the argument that treasures are vital to the
spiritual health of native communities. That was not the basis in our case. We did
not need our masks returned so that we could use them. . . . Our goal in having our
treasures come was to rectify a terrible injustice that is part of our history.(cid:211)91 It is
beyond the scope of this article to describe all of the returns of Aboriginal cul-
tural objects that have occurred since the potlach example. Aboriginal cultural
property is possessed not only by museums, but also by churches, universities, gov-
ernment agencies, and private collectors. Instances of voluntary returns in these
cases seem to be increasing in frequency. An indirect incentive for such returns is
provided by the federal Cultural Property Export and Import Act, which creates
tax bene(cid:222)ts for donors of cultural property (including Aboriginal cultural prop-
erty) to Canadian museums. Although such donations do not secure the return of
such objects by museums, once material is owned by museums it may be dealt with
(and perhaps returned) under the task force recommendations affecting such col-
lections discussed earlier.92

An example of the return of cultural property by a church was the agreement
of the Anglican Diocese of British Columbia to return several old Nisga(cid:213)a arti-
facts. In handing back the objects, the Right Reverend Barry Jenks, Bishop of the

aboriginal rights to cultural property 201

figure 1. four dzunukwa masks and a gikam (chief(cid:213)s mask at bottom left) in the
potlatch collection of the u(cid:213)mista cultural centre, alert bay, british columbia. these
masks and numerous other ceremonial items were (cid:210)gathered(cid:211) in 1921 and distributed
among several canadian museums and individual collectors. in 1979, after many years
of negotiations, the national museum of man (now the canadian museum of civili-
zation) returned a large group of potlatch items, including these masks. photograph
(by vickie jensen) reproduced by permission of the u(cid:213)mista cultural centre.

Anglican Diocese of British Columbia, stated: (cid:210)The church is pleased to return
these artifacts. We hope this gesture symbolizes another genuine and positive rec-
onciliation between the church and the First Nations people. We are aware of mis-
takes made by the church a century ago. Today, the Anglican Church is an ally of
the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation and its (cid:222)ght for self-government and self-determination.(cid:211)93
The agreement by the Anglican Church to return the objects in this case appears
to have been motivated by a desire for reconciliation on its part. A similar desire to
achieve a new level of cooperation (rather than argue the niceties of legal title) ap-
pears to have been the basis for the return by the Royal Canadian Mounted Po-
lice Museum in Regina of a painted buffalo skin to the Blood Tribe Kainaiwa Re-
serve in Alberta.94 The skin had been painted by Chief Crop Eared Wolf, in the
early 1880s. It had then been sold or given to a family of ranchers, who in turn had
donated it to the Police Museum in 1945. The last descendant of the ranching fam-
ily had no objection to the artifact being returned to the Blood Tribe that had re-
quested it. A ceremonial exchange occurred on September 22, 1995, on the Blood

202 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

figure 2. in 1980, sam scow was photographed holding a carved wooden frontlet from
the potlatch collection of the u(cid:213)mista cultural centre. this frontlet was stolen from
the centre on august 27, 1995, and has not been recovered. photograph (by vickie
jensen) reproduced by permission of the u(cid:213)mista cultural centre.

Reserve, when a replica of the hide for the museum was exchanged for the origi-
nal object.

Another development that seems to (cid:222)t under the category of privately nego-
tiated return is the return from their collections by American institutions, osten-
sibly acting under the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act,
to Canadian First Nations. It would seem that such returns are especially appro-
priate when the American members of a tribe whose members live in both coun-
tries have successfully sought the return of objects from United States institutions.

4.3 the nisga(cid:213)a agreement
The Nisga(cid:213)a Final Agreement was signed on August 4, 1998, between the Nisga(cid:213)a
First Nation of British Columbia and the governments of Canada and British Co-
lumbia.95 The Nisga(cid:213)a homeland is located in the Nass River Valley in northwest-
ern British Columbia. The treaty was rati(cid:222)ed by the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation in November
1998 and awaits rati(cid:222)cation by the British Columbia legislature and the Parliament
of Canada. It is envisaged by Canada and British Columbia that the Nisga(cid:213)a treaty

aboriginal rights to cultural property 203

will be the (cid:222)rst of about (cid:222)fty additional treaties with First Nations in British Co-
lumbia. The Nisga(cid:213)a treaty, therefore, has special signi(cid:222)cance as a precedent for
those future negotiations. A treaty process has now been established in British Co-
lumbia to deal with both land claims and self-government, and a tripartite treaty
commission now facilitates negotiations.

As a result of the Nisga(cid:213)a agreement nearly 2,000 square kilometres of land
will be con(cid:222)rmed as Nisga(cid:213)a land (around 8 percent of the traditional Nisga(cid:213)a ter-
ritory in the Nass River Valley). A system of self-government will be established,
including, possibly, a Nisga(cid:213)a court. There are provisions in the treaty on (cid:222)shing
and hunting rights. Capital payments in the amount of $190 million (Canadian)
will be paid over a period of years. With other sums for speci(cid:222)ed purposes, the
total payment is about $312 million (Canadian).

Chapter 17 of the Nisga(cid:213)a Treaty, titled (cid:210)Cultural Artifacts and Heritage,(cid:211) rep-
resents the (cid:222)rst time that a treaty with a Canadian First Nation has dealt in detail
with the issue of repatriating cultural property created by the First Nation con-
cerned but now in possession of government institutions. Most of the chapter
deals with the two museum collections of the government parties to the treaty: the
Canadian Museum of Civilization (Hull, Quebec) and the Royal British Colum-
bia Museum (Victoria, British Columbia).

While it appears that the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation originally requested the return of all
Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts in both museums(cid:213) collections, the treaty provides for the return of
only portions of the Nisga(cid:213)a collections in each museum. Four appendixes to the
treaty list the Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts in each museum collection and divide the collection
of each museum. Possession or ownership of a portion of each museum(cid:213)s collec-
tion must be transferred to the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation. The compromise on repatriation
represented by the treaty accords with the partnership philosophy regarding Aborig-
inal cultural property in Canadian museums extolled by the Canadian Museums
Association and Assembly of First Nations Task Force Report discussed above.

While the terms of chapter 17 respecting those Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts that are to be
unequivocally returned to the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation are the same for both museums, the
number and type of artifacts vary signi(cid:222)cantly. The Canadian Museum of Civi-
lization is to return 109 objects from its collection to the Nisga(cid:213)a. This (cid:222)gure rep-
resents about 25 percent of the Nisga(cid:213)a objects held by that museum. Though the
objects concerned are divided into some twelve separate categories, they mostly
appear to be objects of a sacred character. In comparison, the nature of Nisga(cid:213)a
cultural artifacts that the Royal British Columbia Museum has agreed to return
outright is wider in scope. No objects created for the museum by Nisga(cid:213)a artisans,
no objects made since 1951 (the date of the repeal of the anti-potlatch law), and no
donated objects are included in the British Columbia Museum return. Of some
430 Nisga(cid:213)a cultural objects in the Royal British Columbia Museum collection,
over 40 percent will be returned. The categories of objects being returned (e.g., ar-

204 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

rows, knives, adzes, and mats) seem wider than that of only sacred objects, in com-
parison to the Canadian Museum of Civilization return.

With respect to objects not subject to unquali(cid:222)ed return, chapter 17 sets out
new procedures. In the case of the Canadian Museum of Civilization, paragraph
15 states that the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation and the museum (cid:210)will share possession of the
Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts(cid:211) not subject to immediate return. It seems that the terms of such
(cid:210)sharing(cid:211) will depend on separate (cid:210)custodial agreements(cid:211) negotiated under para-
graph 17 of chapter 17. Any custodial agreements must respect Nisga(cid:213)a laws and
practices relating to Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts and (cid:210)comply with federal and provincial laws
of general application and the statutory mandate of the Canadian Museum of
Civilization.(cid:211)96 Paragraph 19 justi(cid:222)es citing in full:

19. Custodial agreements under paragraph 17 may set out:

a. The Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts to be in the possession of the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation
and those to be in the possession of the Canadian Museum of
Civilization;
b. conditions of maintenance, storage, and handling of the Nisga(cid:213)a 
artifacts;
c. conditions of access to and use, including study, display, and
reproduction, of the Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts and associated records by the
public, researchers, and scholars;
d. provisions for incorporating new information into catalogue records
and displays of the Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts; and
e. provisions for enhancing public knowledge about the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation
through the participation of Nisga(cid:213)a citizens in public programs and
activities at the Canadian Museum of Civilization.

If either the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation or the Canadian Museum of Civilization proposes
to deaccession a Nisga(cid:213)a artifact in which it has any legal interest, it must consult
the other, which then has a right of (cid:222)rst refusal to acquire the artifact on the same
terms as in the proposed deaccession.97

It is interesting to note that there was no similar agreement (to that reached
with the Canadian Museum) that possession be shared in the case of Nisga(cid:213)a cul-
tural artifacts remaining under the control of the Royal British Columbia Mu-
seum. There is, however, the same provision for the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation and British Co-
lumbia  (not  the  Royal  British  Columbia  Museum)  to  negotiate  custodial
agreements respecting the Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts retained by the Royal British Columbia
Museum. The provisions respecting the form of such custodial agreements with
British Columbia and the Canadian Museum are similar. There is additional pro-
vision for loan agreements (paragraph 34 (a)) and facsimiles (paragraph 34 (b)).
A provision envisaging professional and technical training for Nisga(cid:213)a citizens in
museum and conservation skills is presumably absent from the terms of agreement

aboriginal rights to cultural property 205

with the Canadian Museum because it will be more feasible to furnish such pro-
grams within British Columbia.

Chapter 17 makes the dispute resolution chapter of the treaty applicable to
any disagreement in respect of a determination as to whether an artifact is a Nisga(cid:213)a
artifact.98 If an artifact was originally obtained from a Nisga(cid:213)a person, a Nisga(cid:213)a
community, or a Nisga(cid:213)a heritage site, there is a rebuttable presumption that it is
a Nisga(cid:213)a artifact.99 There are separate provisions dealing with the effect of these
provisions on the objects listed in the appendixes to the treaty.100

Chapter 17 of the Nisga(cid:213)a Treaty also deals with access by the Nisga(cid:213)a to
Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts and human remains in public and private collections besides those
of the two museum collections subject to detailed repatriation responsibilities
under the treaty.101 The Nisga(cid:213)a Nation has entered into negotiations with the
Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto to obtain the return of Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts in the
museum(cid:213)s collection. Similar discussions are taking place with the University of
British Columbia Museum of Anthropology (Vancouver) and the Smithsonian
Institution (Washington, D.C.). The Nisga(cid:213)a Nation plans to build a museum in
one of its villages that will house, among other things, the cultural artifacts re-
turned pursuant to the Treaty.

The treaty provides that the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation owns any Nisga(cid:213)a artifact found
(presumably by a non-Nisga(cid:213)a individual) within Nisga(cid:213)a lands (cid:210)unless another
person establishes their ownership of the artifact.(cid:211)102 It is not clear what relevance
Nisga(cid:213)a tribal custom would have on such questions of ownership by nonnative
(cid:222)nders, but such disputes are presumably outside the scope of the dispute resolu-
tion chapter of the treaty.103

Nisga(cid:213)a artifacts that are found in British Columbia and come into the pos-
session or control of the provincial government are to be lent to the Nisga(cid:213)a Na-
tion.104 A similar obligation arises in respect of the government of Canada.105 Para-
graph 43 of chapter 17 provides for the delivery to the Nisga(cid:213)a Nation of human
remains of individuals of Nisga(cid:213)a ancestry that are removed from a heritage site.
This requirement is made subject to federal and provincial law.

5 conclusion

While considerable uncertainty still surrounds the meaning of Aboriginal title and
rights in Canadian law, a series of Supreme Court of Canada cases is leading to
an evolution of understanding of these issues. This jurisprudence provides the
legal background against which any individual claim to possess Aboriginal cultural
property will be examined in the future. It also furnishes the ingredients for the
resolution of any attempt to negotiate or arbitrate a repatriation claim outside of
court proceedings. The result seems to be a greater sense amongst Aboriginal peo-

206 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

ples that they are no longer dependent solely on the goodwill of Canadian gov-
ernments and other institutions when it comes to claiming the return of certain
cultural properties. Canadian museums and some governments have anticipated
those developments through devising alternative solutions. The 1992 task force re-
port has led to a level of uniformity across Canada in the fashioning of returns
by museums and other strategies to involve Aboriginal peoples in the role of mu-
seums in general. British Columbia has pioneered legislative and treaty strategies
that re(cid:223)ect a commitment to an ongoing partnership between Aboriginal peoples
and non-Aboriginals. The compromises that characterize these ad hoc solutions to
repatriation  of Aboriginal  cultural  property  in  Canada  echo  the  principle  of
justi(cid:222)able infringement developed by the Canadian courts to reconcile Aboriginal
rights and the broader concerns of Canadian society in general. While the current
legal situation affecting Aboriginal cultural property remains relatively unde(cid:222)ned
in Canada, the legal and policy basis seems to have emerged for the future solution
of some of the problems of the past.

notes

1. See Nisga(cid:213)a Final Agreement (1998). The treaty has been approved by the Nisga(cid:213)a First Nation
and enacted by the British Columbia legislature as the Nisga(cid:213)a Final Agreement Act, S. B. C.
1999, c.2. It awaits federal implementating legislation that will likely face no opposition to its
passage.
2. For example, in the Yukon ownership of ethnographic resources found on settlement land,
previously vested by legislation in the Yukon and federal government, is now placed in Yukon
First Nations. In the Nunavut Agreement, archaeological specimens are jointly owned by the
government of Canada and the Nunavut Trust. Further, the Canadian Museum of Civilization
and ethnographic agencies of the territorial government have an obligation to lend ethno-
graphic material to the Nunavut Trust and other institutions in Nunavut. See Landclaim Umbrella
Final Agreement Between the Government of Canada, The Council of Yukon Indians, and the Government of the
Yukon chap. 13 (Ottawa: DIAND, 1990) and Agreement Between the Inuit of Nunavut Settlement Area and
Her Majesty in the Right of Canada arts. 33 and 34 (Ottawa: Dept. of Indian Affairs and Northern
Development, 1990).
3. The term (cid:210)Aboriginal cultural property(cid:211) is used in this article to refer to movable objects that
have sacred, ceremonial, historical, traditional, or other purposes integral to the culture of a
First Nations community and may be viewed as collective property of an Aboriginal people.
Aboriginal perspectives on identi(cid:222)cation of cultural property and persons with authority to
alienate or convey such property may vary in accordance with the laws, traditions, and property
systems of the claimant group.
4. Being Schedule B of the Constitution Act, 1982 (U.K.), 1982. c.11.
5. Unlike the experience in the United States, repatriation litigation has not been a common ex-
perience in Canada. An exception is the suit brought by the Mohawk bands of Kahnawake, Ak-
wesasne, and Kanestake, which sued the Glenbow-Alberta museum for return of a False Face
Mask and other objects displayed in the 1988 Spirit Sings exhibition. See Mohawk Bands v.

aboriginal rights to cultural property 207

Glenbow-Alberta Institute [1988] 3 C.N.L.R. 70 (Alta. Q.B.) and the discussion that follows
on page 196 of this article.
6. See, e.g., C. E. Bell, Limitations, Legislation and Domestic Repatriation, Special Issue Univer-
sity of British Columbia Law Review 149 (1995) and The Context and Practice of Repatriation Law, D. N.
Edgar and R. K. Paterson, Report Prepared for the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples
(Feb. 1, 1994).
7. The reference here is to the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, 25
U.S.C. ⁄⁄ 3001— 13 (1988).
8. (cid:210)Historical,(cid:211) (cid:210)heritage,(cid:211) and (cid:210)ethnographical(cid:211) resources are de(cid:222)ned differently in federal,
provincial, and territorial legislation. Generally the de(cid:222)nitions adopted include movable objects
discovered in or on the land deemed to be of value for historic, prehistoric, cultural or scienti(cid:222)c
signi(cid:222)cance. (cid:210)Archaeological(cid:211) property is similarly de(cid:222)ned and in some cases involves an age
criterion. See, e.g., The Alberta Historical Resources Act, R.S.A. 1980, c. H-8, and the British
Columbia Heritage Conservation Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c.187.
9. The concept of (cid:210)interest(cid:211) or (cid:210)principled(cid:211) negotiation is growing in the international legal
community and is becoming popular with Canadian lawyers and negotiators. The current ap-
proach to repatriation can be viewed as part of this broader movement toward a negotiation
process that focuses on interests, not legal positions, and attempts to generate a variety of po-
tential solutions (options for mutual gain) that leave both sides to the negotiation satis(cid:222)ed.
This approach to negotiation is being taught by the Harvard School of Negotiation and is cur-
rently being taught in Canadian law schools, special negotiation courses, and workshops and,
signi(cid:222)cantly  for  Aboriginal  peoples,  to  all  Canadian  federal  lawyers  and  negotiators.  See
R. Fisher and W. Ury, Getting to Yes: Negotiating an Agreement Without Giving In (New York, New
York: Penguin, 1995).
10. [1998] 1 C.N.L.R. 14.
11. Supra note 4. Section 35(1) reads, (cid:210)The existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aborigi-
nal peoples of Canada are hereby recognized and af(cid:222)rmed.(cid:211)
12. R. v. Sparrow [1990] 3 C.N.L.R. 160.
13. R. v. Van der Peet [1996] 4 C.N.L.R. 177, in dissenting opinion of J. L(cid:213)Heureux-Dub(cid:142) at 226.
14. The analysis of Aboriginal rights in this article was (cid:222)rst developed in C. E. Bell, New Di-
rections in the Law of Aboriginal Rights, 77 Canadian Bar Review 36 (1998).
15. Supra note 13, at 192— 93.
16. Supra note 12, at 171, 179.
17. Id. at 182.
18. Cited in Van der Peet, supra note 13, at 186.
19. Id.
20. Id. at 188.
21. Id. at 190.
22. Id.
23. Id. at 203.
24. Id. at 204.

208 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

25. Id. at 208.
26. Id. at 206.
27. [1996] 4 C.N.L.R. 164.
28. Supra note 10, at 80.
29. Id. at 60.
30. Id. at 63.
31. Id. at 48.
32. Id.
33. Quoting McEachern, C.J. in id. at 51.
34. Id. at 53.
35. Supra note 11.
36. Supra note 12, at 175.
37. The trilogy consists of R. v. Van der Peet, supra note 13; R. v. Gladstone, [1996] 4 C.N.L.R.
65; and R. v. N.T.C. Smokehouse Ltd., [1996] 4 C.N.L.R. 130.
38. (U.K.) 30 & 31 Vict., c.3.
39. This power arises by delegation from the federal government under section 88 of the Indian
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c.I— 5. It is also sourced in Federal-Provincial Natural Resource Transfer
Agreements in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Alberta.
40. Sparrow, supra note 12.
41. R. v. Gladstone, supra note 37, at 90.
42. Id. at 95, 97.
43. Id. at 98.
44. K. McNeil, How Can Infringement of Constitutional Rights be Justi(cid:222)ed? (8 Constitutional
Forum 33, 35 (1997).
45. Supra note 10, at para. 165
46. R. v. Gladstone, supra note 37, at 92.
47. For a more detailed analysis, see C. E. Bell, Aboriginal Claims to Cultural Property in
Canada: A Comparative Analysis of the Repatriation Debate, 17 American Indian Law Review 457,
460— 465 (1992— 93).
48. Ascertaining appropriate community authority may be dif(cid:222)cult as it may not necessar-
ily be the band council or other political body. For example, in the case of sacred property
it could be the elders or religious societies within the community. Again, the Aboriginal
perspective will be relevant here. As discussed below, the determination of the collective na-
ture of property and the de(cid:222)nition of proper consent will likely depend on the establish-
ment of pre-contact traditions that continue to be integral to the contemporary claimant
group.
49. He who hath not cannot give.

aboriginal rights to cultural property 209

50. Seneca Nation of Indians v. Hammond, 3 Thompson and Cook 347, 349 (N.Y. 1874). See
also Walter R. Echo-Hawk, Museum Rights vs. Indian Rights: Guidelines for Assessing Com-
peting Legal Interests in Native Cultural Resources, 14 New York University Review of Law and So-
cial Change 437, 441— 44 (1986). This problem may be more complicated in Quebec, where the
nemo dat principle does not apply.
51. R.S.A., 1980, c.H— 8
52. Lamer C.J. quoting himself in Van der Peet in Delgamuukw, supra note 10, at 47.
53. The main federal laws now in force are the Historic Sites and Monuments Act, R.S.C. 1985,
c.H— 4, the National Parks Act, R.S.C. 1985, c.N— 14, the Territorial Lands Act, R.S.C. 1985,
c.T— 6 and the Canada Shipping Act, R.S.C. 1985, c.S— 9.
54. Supra note 39. This legislation places legal title to reserve land in the Crown and bene(cid:222)cial
title in the First Nation. The determination of which Crown has legal title may vary with the
location of the reserve land. However, only the federal government can pass laws affecting re-
serve lands.
55. Supra note 47, at 474, 490— 94.
56. Proposed Act Respecting the Protection of the Archaeological Heritage of Canada (Ot-
tawa, 1990).
57. See M. Haunton, Canada(cid:213)s Proposed Archaeological Heritage Protection Act, 1 International
Journal of Cultural Property 395 (1992). See also C. E. Bell, supra note 47, at 495— 99.
58. Supra note 12, at 177.
59. Partners in Confederation 32 (Ottawa: Canada Communications Group, 1983).
60. Id. at 35.
61. See, e.g., R. v. Badger, [1996] 2 C.N.L.R. 77, 92.
62. Worcester v. Georgia, 31 U.S. (6 Pet.) 515, 519 (1832)
63. The Nisga(cid:213)a treaty, supra note 1, is the (cid:222)rst modern agreement to address both land and gov-
ernment issues in the same agreement.
64. See Heritage Legislation: A Draft Bill (B.C. Ministry of Tourism and Ministry Responsi-
ble for Culture, Victoria, 1992).
65. See The Proposed Heritage Legislation and Aboriginal Heritage Stewardship (1992), p.1.
66. Supra note 64, s. 28(5).
67. Id. s. 28(6).
68. Id. s. 30.
69. Id. s. 32.
70. Heritage Conservation Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 187.
71. See Introduction to Bill 21, Heritage Conservation Statutes Amendment Act, 1994 (Province
of B.C., Ministry of Small Business, Tourism and Culture, 1994), p. 5.
72. Section 1 of the Act (supra note 70) de(cid:222)nes (cid:210)heritage object(cid:211) as meaning (cid:210)personal prop-
erty that has heritage value to British Columbia, a community or an aboriginal people.(cid:211)

210 c. e. bell and r. k. paterson

73. Supra note 70, ⁄⁄ 9— 11.
74. Id., ⁄⁄ 13(1) and 14(4)(e).
75. Id., ⁄⁄ 4 and 8.
76. Ontario Law Reform Commission, Report on Limitation of Actions (Toronto: Dept. of A.G.,
1969).
77. For a more detailed analysis of limitation of actions legislation, see C. E. Bell, supra note 6.
78. See Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and Politics of Museum Display (I. Karp and S. D. Levine eds.,
Smithsonian, 1991); and S. Ottenberg, Into the Heart of Africa, 24 African Arts 79 (1991).
79. For different perspectives on this event, see Museums and Politics: The Spirit Sings and the Lu-
bicon Boycott, 6 MUSE 12 (1998).
80. See Mohawk Bands v. Glenbow-Alberta Institute, supra note 5.
81. Task Force Report on Museums and First Peoples (Turning the Page: Forging New Partnerships Between Mu-
seums and First Peoples) (2d ed., Ottawa, 1992).
82. T. Nicks, The Task Force on Museums and First Peoples, Special Issue, University of British
Columbia Law Review 143 (1995).
83. See G. Erasmus, opening address to (cid:210)Preserving Our Heritage: A Working Conference for
Museums and First Peoples(cid:211) (Ottawa, Nov. 1988).
84. See B. H. Winter, New Futures for the Past: Cooperation Between First Nations and Mu-
seums in Canada, Special Issue, University of British Columbia Law Review 29 (1995).
85. R.S.C. 1985, c.C— 51, ⁄⁄ 7— 17.
86. D. Cole, Captured Heritage:The Scramble for Northwest Coast Artifacts (Toronto 1985).
87. Agreement Between the Government of Canada and the Government of the United States of America Con-
cerning the Imposition of Import Restrictions on Certain Categories of Archaeological and Ethnographical Mater-
ial (April 10, 1997) (reprinted here at 245— 84).
88. Supra note 80.
89. See, e.g., Nanoose Indian Band et al. v. The Queen and Intrawest Corp. et al. (Supreme Court
of British Columbia, unreported decision by Hutchison J.) (June 28, 1995, No. 94.3420, Vic-
toria, B.C. Registry).
90. See G. Cranmer Webster, The Potlach Collection Repatriation, Special Issue, University of
British Columbia Law Review 137 (1995).
91. Id. at 140— 41.
92 This may also have the effect of making donors reluctant to part with objects they wish to
stay in museum hands. In the United States, one major collector has consigned objects from
her collection for sale at auction rather than risk their return to Indian tribes; see M. Coke, Sa-
cred and Secular Clash at an Auction, New York Times, December 3, 1998.
93. See Artifacts Come Home, Hak(cid:213)ak(cid:213)a(cid:213)a (The Key) (vol. 2, no. 2) (undated).
94. See W. Beahen, Return of Cultural Artifact to Blood Tribe/Kainaiwa, 61 The RCMP Quar-
terly 25 (1996).

aboriginal rights to cultural property 211

95. Supra note 1. For information about the treaty, contact the British Columbia Ministry of
Aboriginal Affairs at http://www.aaf.gov.bc.ca/aaf/.
96. Id. Chap. 17, para. 18. The Canadian Museum of Civilization is governed by the Museums
Act, S.C. 1990, c.3.
97. Id. Chap. 17, para. 20.
98. Id. para. 5.
99. Id. para. 6.
100. Id. paras. 13— 15 and 27— 30.
101. Id. para. 35.
102. Id. para. 40.
103. Id. paras. 3— 5.
104. Id. para. 41.
105. Id. para. 42.


