 (2011) 18:143–178. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2011 Power Relations in the Traditional
Knowledge Debate: A Critical
Analysis of Forums
Charles Kamau Maina*

Abstract: An ongoing debate on the protection of traditional knowledge was
prompted by the United Nations General Assembly declaration of the Inter-
national Decade of the World’s Indigenous Peoples in 1995 and the declaration
of the Second International Decade in 2004. These two declarations challenged
governments and the international community to address, nationally and inter-
nationally, issues that affect indigenous communities. One such issue is the pro-
tection of traditional knowledge. The three key international multilateral forums
that are debating traditional knowledge issues are the World Intellectual Prop-
erty Organization, the World Trade Organization, and the Convention on Bio-
logical Diversity. Using a political economy framework, this study analyzes the
policymaking processes and mandates of the three multilateral forums in order
to highlight stakeholders’ levels of involvement in these processes. The study
found that the multilateral forums’ power structures, mandates, and decision-
making processes disadvantage indigenous peoples and hinder their full partici-
pation in the forums’ processes. The study recommends establishing a forum
that would take into account indigenous peoples’ worldviews; otherwise policy
outcomes from these discussions will probably disadvantage indigenous peoples.

INTRODUCTION

The United Nations (UN) General Assembly declared 1995–2004 the International
Decade of the World’s Indigenous Peoples and 2005–2014 the Second International
Decade of the World’s Indigenous Peoples, challenging governments and the in-

*Faculty of Information and Media Studies, University of Western Ontario, Canada. Email:
cmaina2@uwo.ca.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Many thanks to Professor Margaret Ann Wilkinson and Professor Mi-
chael Coyle, both of the Faculty of Law, University of Western Ontario, for their invaluable support
during my doctoral research on which this article is based. I also greatly appreciate the suggestions
made by the two anonymous journal reviewers.

143

144

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

ternational community to address, nationally and internationally, issues that af-
fect indigenous communities. The protection of traditional knowledge is one such
issue. Discussions on the protection of traditional knowledge have ensued in var-
ious multilateral and indigenous peoples’ forums worldwide. Three key multilat-
eral forums that are debating traditional knowledge issues are the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).

Various regional, national, and local initiatives to protect traditional knowledge
are also in place. These initiatives range from model legislations to national systems
tailored to a specific country’s traditional knowledge protection circumstances and
priorities. Indigenous communities have also recognized the urgent need to protect
their knowledge and practices and have, through various declarations, made known
their views on international protection of their knowledge. As Blakeney observes,
declarations by indigenous people are a result of their realization that the inter-
national protection of their knowledge and cultural expressions depends upon their
own efforts.1 Several of the declarations by indigenous peoples are critical of the
failure of the existing mechanisms to protect traditional knowledge. Other factors
have also led to increased international interest in the protection of traditional
knowledge. On the one hand, there has been an increased international recognition
of indigenous peoples’ activities as creative, innovative, and important contribu-
tions to science, research and development, and general human progress.2 On the
other hand, increased instances of biopiracy have created an urgent need to protect
and control the use of traditional knowledge and practices.3

Although the debate about the preservation of traditional knowledge and cul-
tures is not new, my analyses of the ongoing debate shows that stakeholders diverge
on the definition and delineation of traditional knowledge, the key issues on its pro-
tection, the objectives and methods of protection, and the forum that should be de-
bating these issues. Stakeholders’ views are summarized later in Table 1.4 Regardless
of the underlying rationales and interests, it is definite that traditional knowledge
protection is an issue of international significance. However, how and where the de-
bate should proceed remains a contentious issue among the various stakeholders.
While there are discussions on what forum would be best to deal with traditional
knowledge, there is no research on the power structures and decision-making pro-
cesses in the forums that are currently debating traditional knowledge.

In this article, I focus on the power structures and decision-making processes
in the forums where traditional knowledge protection issues are being debated.5
This examination of the forums’ organizational and decision-making structures is
important for two main reasons. First, it is used to establish how indigenous peo-
ples, as the ones who are most affected by the issues under debate, are involved.
Second, this analysis is important in determining how decisions and policies are
made in these forums and whose agenda is dominating the debate—and therefore
whose worldviews are likely to drive policy outcomes. Thirdly, scrutiny of these
forums is also important in order to highlight how power relations and structures

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

145

affect policymaking processes and policy outcomes. This examination is prompted
by my conviction that the power structures in the forums that are currently de-
bating traditional knowledge issues could explain why the international debate
has not had much impact on the traditional knowledge protection status quo.

METHODOLOGY

Using a thematic analysis of policy documents that are emanating from, as well as
submitted to, the international forums and declarations made by indigenous peo-
ples, this study identifies the various claims and proposals that stakeholders are
making. This study also analyzes the structural organization of these forums in
order to establish power relations among stakeholders. Thematic text analysis is
used to identify and compare recurring themes and concepts in the analyzed pol-
icy documents and interviews. Stone describes thematic text analysis as an analy-
sis that identifies either recurring or changing themes and concepts in texts.6
Boyatzis adds that thematic analysis is “a way of seeing” and “a process for encod-
ing qualitative information.”7 Thematic analysis allows one to see “something that
had not been evident to others, [that is], [t]hey perceive a pattern, or theme, in
seemingly random information.”8 This “way of seeing” involves first, perceiving a
pattern in the data, classifying or encoding the pattern, which involves giving the
perceived pattern “a label or definition or description” and finally the analysis,
which involves “interpreting the pattern.”9

My analysis of policy documents provided stakeholders’ views at the inter-
national multilateral forums. In order to include grassroots level views of tradi-
tional knowledge holders, I conducted semistructured interviews with 15 elders
from a nonproportional sample of First Nations (indigenous peoples) communi-
ties in Ontario, Canada.10 The choice of elders as interviewees was made because,
as Elder Vern Harper observes, these are individuals whom members of a com-
munity respect due to the great deal of wisdom and experience that they have
amassed throughout their lives. They are

respected and cherished individuals who have amassed a great deal of
knowledge, wisdom, and experience over [a] period of many, many years.
They are individuals who have also set examples, and have contributed
something to the good of others. In the process, they usually sacrifice
something of themselves, be it time, money or effort.11

According to Kulchyski, McCaskill, and Newhouse, an elder is one “thought of as
a very highly respected older person who has the knowledge of the ancient spir-
itual and cultural ways of her or his people.”12 The authors note that “among some
First Nations, to become an Elder requires elaborate initiation processes involving
various degrees of knowledge . . . [but] in other cases, Elders may become recog-
nized as such by their people when they reach a certain age.”13 It is worth noting
that not all First Nations communities use the term elder and although different

146

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

First Nations communities appear to define and identify elders differently, elders
irrespective of the community are

exceptionally wise in the ways of their culture and the teachings of the
Great Spirit. They are recognized for their wisdom, their stability, and
their ability to know what is appropriate in a particular situation. The
community looks to them for guidance and sound judgement. They are
people who are spiritual leaders, who . . . live the culture, they know the
culture, and they have been trained in it.14

Early into this study, my observations that not all of the elders were conversant
with the international debate prompted inclusion of discussants to fill this gap. Six
First Nations discussants were interviewed. All discussants were conversant either
with traditions of their communities or with the traditional knowledge protection
debate at the regional and international levels but were themselves neither elders nor
traditional knowledge custodians. Four discussants were community members in-
volved with their communities’ traditional knowledge preservation initiatives such
as language classes, education curriculum, and cultural centers. The other two dis-
cussants were community members who at the time held public service positions
that allowed them to attend international meetings in international forums such as
the CBD and WIPO.

Participating elders were from a sample drawn using a nonprobability design,
which Singleton and Straits describe as a design that does not involve the process
of random selection.15 This nonprobability sampling design is appropriate to this
study for three reasons. First, although the various First Nations groups and com-
munities are known, elders in the various communities are not readily known be-
cause they are not public figures, which made it impossible to generate a random
sample.16 The unknown number of elders, either in a community or Canada-
wide, makes irrelevant the issue of whether or not the sample is big enough and
representative. A nonprobability sample design allowed the inclusion of any eli-
gible, community-identified, and cooperative participants.

Second, a nonprobability design was appropriate because the insights that the in-
terviews sought were grounded on the preliminary findings from documentary analy-
sis. These preliminary findings formed the basis for the identification of themes,
concepts, and propositions. The interviews were a search for patterns that would help
understand some of the findings from documentary analyses. This approach en-
sured that interviews focused only on providing in-depth understanding of the in-
digenous peoples views found in the documentary evidence. This approach could
not specify the number of participants because the number of elders was unknown.
Data collection continued until a “saturation” point—the point where participants
were no longer providing new information. This flexibility in the approach enabled
the emergence of new pertinent issues that the study did not, on the onset, seek to
explore. The purpose of interviews with First Nations elders was therefore aimed at
mapping their views onto those of indigenous peoples’ in the international forums,
as opposed to soliciting a representative and generalizable voice for indigenous

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

147

peoples. Indeed, such a generalizable voice would not suffice because each group and
community has unique ways of life. Interviews were aimed at providing in-depth un-
derstanding of the findings from analyses of documentary evidence, which pro-
vided insights into the voices of other indigenous peoples outside of Canada. The
indigenous views that are expressed by indigenous peoples worldwide are comple-
mented by, and further understood through the grassroots views of First Nations
people of Canada. As Singleton and Straits posit, when the objective of a study is to
gain an in-depth understanding of a problem, a nonprobability sample suffices with-
out concerns for precise statistical generalization.17

Finally, the major First Nations groups in Ontario have an unequal number of
communities. These unequal numbers make probability sampling unsuitable be-
cause drawing a sample with probability proportional to size would result in big
communities having a higher chance of being included in the sample. Such sam-
pling would have been inefficient as smaller First Nations communities in On-
tario would not be as well represented in the sample. A nonprobability sample
approach allowed the study of the small groups in their own right and in com-
parison with the bigger groups.

POLITICAL ECONOMY OF THE DEBATE

I use a political economic framework to analyze the traditional knowledge protec-
tion debate. Mosco defines “political economy” as “the study of the social relations,
particularly the power relations, that mutually constitute the production, distribu-
tion, and consumption of resources”18 and very generally as “the study of control
and survival in social life.”19 This study does not examine the production and con-
sumption of resources per se. However, it indirectly involves world economies in that
information and intellectual property products now play a big role in those econ-
omies, which have become more porous with globalization, a phenomenon that has
made it challenging to manage the resultant global market. I will note here that glob-
alization has changed the nature and functioning of the international economy. This
change poses new challenges to the interactions in a global market.

In order to counter the challenges that a global market poses, several initiatives
have been taken to govern the relations among the multitude of actors in the global
market. Such initiatives include establishment of trade organizations such as the
WTO, trading blocs such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA),
and international multilateral agreements such as the Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (hereinafter, the TRIPS). Given the role
that intellectual property plays in this global economy, it is no surprise that there
are more, and broader, international agreements such as TRIPS and measures to
govern relations in the production and consumption of intellectual property. The
traditional knowledge protection debate concerns ongoing efforts to either extend
the already existing systems or design a new system to govern the relations be-
tween knowledge holders (producers) and users (consumers).

148

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

Covert and Structural Dimensions of Power

I will use covert and structural dimensions of power to examine power structures
in the debate. According to Gill and Law, actor A achieves covert power over actor
B through agenda-setting processes.20 Covert power allows an actor to set prior-
ities for policymaking by, as Gill and Law note, excluding some items from con-
sideration. Bachrach and Baratz add that an actor also gains covert power through
“non-decision-making,” which is “the practice of limiting the scope of actual
decision-making to ‘safe’ issues by manipulating the dominant community values,
myths, and political institutions and procedures.”21 Consequently, Bachrach and
Baratz emphasize the importance of including both decision-making and non-
decision-making processes in an examination of power structures.

Structural power is at the center of what are termed North–South relations, in
which those in the Southern Hemisphere are presented as lacking skills, technol-
ogy, and capital and as being systematically disadvantaged by those in the North-
ern Hemisphere. Structural power involves both material and normative aspects
that, according to Gill and Law, create “patterns of incentives and constraints” that
then condition the relationship between actor A and actor B.22 The role of intel-
lectual property in the context of development has often been framed as part of
the North–South divide.23 Traditionally, intellectual property rights are a subject
of disagreement between North and South. In a nutshell, it is thought that there
are suspicions between North and South about the objectives of intellectual prop-
erty rights. According to the view of the South, intellectual property rights are a
reconstituted form of neo-colonialism that undervalues nonscientific forms of
knowledge but allows that knowledge’s appropriation.24 The North, however, holds
the opinion that intellectual property rights are development-oriented policies that
the South should adopt in order to catch up.25

Using the aforementioned political economy framework and dimensions of
power to analyze the traditional knowledge debate, the study highlights how eco-
nomic and social power and control could foster new coalitions and sources of
resistance and, consequently, reform existing structures and policies. The study
examines how different stakeholders could form coalitions that either foster or
oppose power structures and consequently reframe the debate in ways that could
promote policy changes.

Situating Indigenous Peoples in the Debate

In this study, I argue that as traditional knowledge owners, indigenous peoples
have a right to control how their knowledge is used. Consequently, I emphasize
the need to ensure that traditional knowledge protection is consistent with indig-
enous peoples’ worldviews. Using the aforementioned indigenous peoples’ right as
owners of traditional knowledge to control their knowledge and a political econ-
omy of intellectual property, I explore the possibility of discordance in the stake-

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

149

holders’ views and proposals. The political economy framework used in the study
situates indigenous peoples’ right to control their knowledge within various in-
ternational instruments, intellectual property included, that address various in-
digenous issues.

Several international instruments on indigenous peoples’ human and cultural
rights reinforce traditional knowledge holders’ right to control their knowledge.26
Several declarations by indigenous peoples also frame this indigenous peoples’ right
to their knowledge as an issue of self-determination, which Walker defines as the
principle that a people ought to be able to freely determine their own governmental
forms and structure without outside interference and influence.27 Self-determination
is either external or internal. External self-determination, which many states have
achieved, involves the formation of a new state through secession from colonial
power. Conversely, internal self-determination allows a people to control their po-
litical, economic, social, and cultural development within an existing state. Although
internal self-determination has often been tied to, and politicized to, external self-
determination, the former type of self-determination is what indigenous peoples are
seeking in relation to traditional knowledge. Through internal self-determination,
indigenous peoples want the right to control their political and cultural develop-
ment within the boundaries of already existing territories; that is, they do not seek
to be sovereign territories. The term self-determination is used in this article in the
context of internal self-determination.

The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (DRIP) reaffirms
universal and fundamental human rights as they apply to indigenous peoples.
The DRIP affirms indigenous peoples’ right of self-determination through which
they should “freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development.”28
Regarding traditional knowledge, the DRIP also affirms indigenous peoples’
right “to maintain, control, protect and develop their cultural heritage, tradi-
tional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, as well as the manifesta-
tions of their sciences, technologies and cultures, . . . [and] to maintain, control,
protect and develop their intellectual property over such cultural heritage, tradi-
tional knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions.”29 In its Preamble, the
DRIP recognizes the need to respect and promote indigenous peoples’ inherent
rights and characteristics and also notes that “control by Indigenous Peoples over
developments affecting them and their lands, territories and resources will en-
able them to maintain and strengthen their institutions, cultures and traditions,
and to promote their development in accordance with their aspirations and
needs.”30 According to the DRIP, indigenous peoples’ collective right to preserve
and develop their cultural identity “derive[s] from their political, economic and
social structures and from their cultures, spiritual traditions, histories and
philosophies.”31

According to the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169
on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples (hereinafter, the ILO Convention 169), indig-
enous peoples have the right to

150

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

decide their own priorities for the process of development as it affects
their lives, beliefs, institutions and spiritual well-being and the lands they
occupy or otherwise use, and to exercise control, to the extent possible,
over their own economic, social and cultural development. In addition,
they shall participate in the formulation, implementation and evalua-
tion of plans and programmes for national and regional development,
which may affect them directly.32

The starting point for recognizing the above right, the ILO Convention 169 posits,
would be member states to “consult the peoples concerned, through appropriate
procedures and in particular through their representative institutions, whenever
consideration is being given to legislative or administrative measures which may
affect them directly.”33 I am convinced of the need to consult knowledge holders
and involve them in decisions and policies on issues that would affect the gener-
ation and transmission of their knowledge. Indeed, this conviction is demon-
strated by my direct involvement of the traditional knowledge holders through
interviews with a sample of First Nations elders in Ontario, Canada.

THREE LARGEST MULTINATIONAL INSTITUTIONAL FORUMS

The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)

WIPO was established in 1970 “with a mandate from its Member States to pro-
mote the protection of intellectual property throughout the world, through
cooperation among states and in collaboration with other international organi-
zations.”34 WIPO’s main objectives are to administer international intellectual
property-related treaties, to provide members with assistance in intellectual prop-
erty laws, and to seek harmonization of national laws in order to promote intel-
lectual property protection internationally.35 WIPO’s involvement in traditional
knowledge issues goes back to the 1970s and 1980s when, in conjunction with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),
it held discussions on the protection of folklore. These discussions resulted in
the WIPO-UNESCO Model Provisions for National Laws on the Protection of
Expressions of Folklore as a template that nations could use as national guide-
lines for future legislation and to extend the protection of traditional knowledge
across national boundaries.

In its exploration of new ways that intellectual property can serve the needs of
the world’s diverse population, WIPO identified, as an area for further work, the
needs and expectations of groups that the intellectual property systems had not
reached. According to WIPO, among such groups are traditional knowledge hold-
ers.36 Subsequently, in 1998 and 1999, WIPO carried out fact-finding missions in
various parts of the world in order to identify intellectual property protection needs
and expectations of traditional knowledge holders.37

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

151

The Intergovernmental Committee (IGC)

In WIPO, the Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic
Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC) is the forum that discusses
traditional knowledge issues. The IGC was established in 2000 to provide a forum
for members to discuss, among other issues, the protection of traditional knowl-
edge and expressions of folklore.38 The IGC has been reviewing legal and policy
options for traditional knowledge protection based on international, regional, and
national experiences and has developed two sets of draft provisions: one on the
protection of traditional cultural expressions (TCEs) or folklore and another on
the protection of traditional knowledge against misappropriation and misuse.39
These draft provisions draw upon submissions by, and input from, various stake-
holders: member states, industry, indigenous communities, and intergovernmen-
tal and nongovernmental organizations.

The draft provisions on protection of traditional knowledge indicate the per-
spectives and approaches that are guiding the IGC’s debate on the protection of
traditional knowledge. The IGC’s commissioned commenting processes to dis-
cuss and redraft the provisions have resulted in a draft document on objectives
and principles for the protection of traditional knowledge. Although the IGC
has not adopted the draft provisions on traditional knowledge protection and
although their development might continue beyond the publication of this arti-
cle, this study analyzed these draft provisions because as WIPO notes, as they
currently stand, they “have no formal status, [but] they illustrate some of the
perspectives and approaches that are guiding work in this area. . . . [The draft
provisions] could suggest possible frameworks for, . . . [and] are being used as
points of reference in, a range of national, regional and international policy dis-
cussions and standard-setting processes.”40

The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)

The history of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) began with the 1987
Governing Council decision 14/26 of the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), which called upon UNEP to convene an Ad Hoc Working Group of Ex-
perts on Biological Diversity, which later became the Intergovernmental Negoti-
ating Committee (INC) in 1991.41 The purpose of this Working Group was to
look into harmonizing the existing conventions on biodiversity. The culmination
of the work of the Working Group was the adoption of an agreed text of the CBD
through the Nairobi Final Act of the Conference for the Adoption of the Agreed
Text of the Convention on Biological Diversity. At the Earth Summit held in Rio
de Janeiro in June 1992, the convention opened for signatures and entered into
force in December 1993.

The CBD’s guiding objectives are contained in the convention’s provisions as
contained in Articles 6–20. However, Article 1 states CBD’s principle objectives as

152

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its com-
ponents and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of
the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to
genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies,
taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies,
and by appropriate funding.42

In addition to its provisions, the CBD has also established institutional arrange-
ments “which provide a mechanism for the further development, and for monitor-
ing the implementation, of the Convention through meetings, work programmes,
reviews and negotiations.”43 Subsequently, the convention has established the Con-
ference of the Parties (COP) and two other institutions.44 The COP, which is the CBD
forum that debates traditional knowledge issues, is discussed in the next section.

The Conference of the Parties (COP)

The COP, established under Article 23 of the CBD, is the convention’s governing
body, whose key function is to ensure and review the implementation of the CBD
and to steer the convention’s development. The COP keeps under review the im-
plementation of the CBD. Although the COP’s work is interconnected with that of
other CBD institutions, it is the main CBD institution that deals with traditional
knowledge issues. The COP has initiated work in five thematic areas that elaborate
and clarify various aspects of the convention. These five thematic areas address ma-
rine and coastal biodiversity, agricultural biodiversity, forest biodiversity, the bio-
diversity of inland waters, and dry and subhumid lands.45 The COP’s agenda also
includes other issues that are of relevance to all five thematic areas. One such cross-
cutting issue that affects many aspects of biodiversity is traditional knowledge.

To address traditional knowledge issues, the 1994 fourth meeting of the COP
established the Working Group on the Implementation of CBD’s Article 8(j) and
Related Provisions of the Convention. According to the CBD Article 8(j), each
contracting party must

as far as possible and as appropriate subject to national legislation, re-
spect, preserve and maintain knowledge, innovations and practices of
indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles rel-
evant for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and
promote their wider application with the approval and involvement of
the holders of such knowledge, innovations and practices and encour-
age the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of
such knowledge innovations and practices.46

According to the CBD, the Working Group’s program of work entails the imple-
mentation of the commitments of this article, the enhancement of the role and
involvement of indigenous and local communities. In addition, the program also
entails “the development of elements of sui generis systems, developing indicators
for the retention of traditional knowledge and methods and measures to address
the underlying causes of the loss of such knowledge, the development of an eth-

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

153

ical code of conduct to ensure respect for the cultural and intellectual heritage of
indigenous and local communities.”47

The World Trade Organization (WTO)

Before the WTO began its operations in 1995, the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT) had provided the rules for the trading system since 1948. The
WTO’s involvement in traditional knowledge arose mainly because its “Members’
obligations concerning non-discrimination in international trade interact with the
protection of [traditional knowledge].”48 Although traditional knowledge was not
on the agenda of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations (herein-
after, the Uruguay Round of Negotiations), the WTO, under the Council for TRIPS,
has been discussing traditional knowledge issues. Article 68 of the TRIPS Agree-
ment outlines the following responsibilities held by the Council for TRIPS: to mon-
itor the operation of the TRIPS Agreement, and in particular ensuring that members
comply; to afford members an opportunity to consult on trade-related intellectual
property issues; to assist members in dispute settlement; and to carry out any other
duties that its members may assign.49

The Council for TRIPS is involved in traditional knowledge protection issues
following instructions by the Doha Declaration to examine, inter alia, the pro-
tection of traditional knowledge and folklore.50 In November 2001, the Doha
Declaration recognized the need for synchronizing provisions in international
agreements, a need that prompted the review of TRIPS Article 27 on patentable
and unpatentable inventions. Article 27.3(b) allows signatory governments to ex-
clude some kinds of inventions from patenting. The review of TRIPS Article
27.3(b) began in 1999, and one of the issues under discussion relates to the in-
clusion of traditional knowledge in the list of unpatentable inventions.51 Al-
though there is no direct acknowledgment of traditional knowledge in the TRIPS
Agreement, a major issue in the discussions on the review of Article 27.3(b) has
been to include traditional knowledge in the list of exempted inventions in order
to curb its commercial use by those other than either communities or countries
where traditional knowledge-based inventions originate. Member submissions to
the Council for TRIPS and policy documents regarding Article 27.3(b) of the
TRIPS Agreement are analyzed for this study.

FINDINGS

Categories of Stakeholders in the Debate

There are three main categories of stakeholders in the traditional knowledge pro-
tection debate: indigenous communities worldwide, member states, and industry.
Indigenous communities are stakeholders in the debate by virtue of being the tra-

154

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

ditional knowledge holders. At the three analyzed multilateral forums, indigenous
stakeholders include both specific communities and local, national, and inter-
national organizations that represent indigenous communities in the international
forums. Member states stakeholders include countries that are either members of
organizations such as the WTO or signatories to an international instrument that
deals with traditional knowledge issues. Member states stakeholders are either in-
dividual countries or regional blocks such as the African Union or the European
Community (EC). Unless noted otherwise, the study interprets submissions by
regional blocks to be the views of all the countries in the submitting block.52 In-
dustry stakeholders include organizations that have some direct or indirect com-
mercial interests in traditional knowledge and are involved in the debate at the
international level.

The three categories of stakeholders express divergent views on the issues under
debate. In this article, I focus only on the power relations among these stakehold-
ers and how the structures in the three forums could lead to divergent proposals
and thus skewed policy outcomes. My discussion of the power structures starts
with an overview of a member states driven discussion about the appropriate forum
that should deal with traditional knowledge issues. I then discuss the current fo-
rums’ decision-making processes and, finally, how indigenous peoples, whose lives
are affected by the issues under debate and by its outcome, are positioned in this
power structure.

Why (Not) the Three Forums?

Stakeholders in the traditional knowledge debate are not oblivious to the limita-
tions that a forum has when it comes to traditional knowledge issues. It is impor-
tant to pay attention to the forums that are debating traditional knowledge issues
because as Boyle observes, forums advance assumptions and ideologies as well as
foreclose various possibilities.53 Analyses of the debate reveal that various stake-
holders have divergent views on which forum should address traditional knowl-
edge protection issues. While the debate about an appropriate forum is rife among
state stakeholders, the same cannot be said about indigenous stakeholders, prob-
ably because they are sure of where the debate either should or should not be
taking place. The following discussion illustrates the lack of consensus, even among
member states, as to a specific forum that should debate traditional knowledge
issues.

Some state stakeholders are convinced that WIPO is the appropriate forum that
should deal with traditional knowledge issues. According to the United States and
the EC, WIPO is already working on traditional knowledge protection issues and
therefore, its continued work would minimize duplication of effort. The United
States argues that WIPO is already, through the IGC, far ahead in addressing many
of the indigenous peoples’ concerns on traditional knowledge protection.54 Ac-
cording to the EC, being the specialized UN agency that deals with intellectual

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

155

property protection worldwide makes WIPO, from a technical point of view, the
most appropriate forum, especially if the purpose of the debate was to create an
intellectual-property-like system to protect traditional knowledge.55 The EC sug-
gests the WTO as an alternative forum if the purpose of the debate was to create
a system that is outside of intellectual property. The EC, however, neither suggests
what this system would be nor justifies the WTO as the best suited to debate such
a system.

Objections to WIPO handling traditional knowledge issues are based on the
argument that these issues are not intellectual property related and therefore should
not be discussed at WIPO. Brazil, noting the connection between WIPO’s man-
date and possible policy outcomes, argues that when WIPO discusses traditional
knowledge protection issues, those discussions are bound to be on examining
possible positive measures to ensure protection under existing categories of in-
tellectual property.56 With WIPO’s mandate and objectives such as to administer
international intellectual-property-related treaties, to provide members with as-
sistance in intellectual property laws, and to seek harmonization of national laws
in order to promote intellectual property protection internationally, any WIPO-
associated forum will steer the traditional knowledge protection debate in an
intellectual property direction. Indeed, WIPO confirms this by stating that since
“its description of the subject matter reflects its intellectual property focus, WI-
PO’s activities are concerned with the possible protection of traditional knowl-
edge that is intellectual property”.57 This interconnectedness of a forum’s mandate
with objectives for protection is also noted by Latvia, who observes that intellec-
tual property’s objective of protecting economic rights defines discussions at
WIPO.58

In their objection to WIPO as a forum that should be dealing with traditional
knowledge issues, Brazil, India, Australia, and Norway argue that many of the is-
sues under discussion arose from other forums. According to these countries, the
Council for TRIPS, for example, would be the best forum to deal with issues about
reviewing Article 27.3 of the TRIPS Agreement. Consequently, Brazil, India, Aus-
tralia, and Norway support the Council for TRIPS to deal with issues of whether
or not traditional knowledge protection is patentable subject matter or any other
issues on patents and traditional knowledge.59 However, these countries’ argu-
ment overlooks the fact that just as WIPO is pushing an agenda that advances its
mandate, so would any other nonindigenous forum such as the proposed WTO’s
Council for TRIPS, which is likely to push a trade-related agenda.

Suggestions that the WTO should deal with traditional knowledge protection
issues are also very divergent. For example, the EC is convinced that if the debate
was about creating a system that is outside of intellectual property, then the WTO
would be best suited to debate such a system. Japan and Korea also argue that the
WTO would be an appropriate forum to take over the issue of traditional knowl-
edge protection, but only after the conceptual issues and possible options had been
sufficiently defined and clarified in other forums that are already debating tradi-

156

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

tional knowledge issues.60 Japan and Korea, however, do not specify what these
other forums are and what issues the forums would discuss that would make the
WTO an appropriate final forum. Canada and Venezuela make the connection
between the forum and the likely agenda that would dominate a debate in a spe-
cific forum. Consequently, Canada and Venezuela oppose the WTO as an appro-
priate forum to address traditional knowledge issues because as Canada argues,
these issues are not trade related and therefore have no place in the WTO.61

Other states such as Brazil, Mauritius (on behalf of the African Group), and
Venezuela suggest a coordination of efforts between all the organizations that are
involved in traditional knowledge issues.62 According to these stakeholders, it is
important for forums to follow the traditional knowledge debate going on else-
where in order to minimize duplication of efforts and a basis for cooperative work
among the TRIPS Council, WIPO, and CBD to ensure a systematic solution. The
assumption that is made in the proposition, opposition, or coordination of the
forums that are currently debating traditional knowledge issues is that the debate
will continue in these forums. Consequently, the likelihood of removing the de-
bate from the three multilateral forums does not feature in the debate.

POWER STRUCTURES IN THE MULTILATERAL FORUMS

Power Structures: A North–South Divide?

Using a structural power dimensions framework, the study examines whether pro-
posals to use existing intellectual property mechanisms to protect traditional knowl-
edge exhibit a North–South division among stakeholders. This examination aims
at exploring whether or not power structures in the traditional knowledge debate
are similar to those in past negotiations such as the Uruguay Round of Negotia-
tions that exhibited a North–South divide characterized by disagreements be-
tween developing and developed countries and by threats of trade sanctions.63
Although it is apparent that intellectual property is the dominant theme in the
debate, the North–South views of intellectual property are not monolithic. In-
stead, as this study found, the North–South divide has closed up in the traditional
knowledge debate as countries that would be considered the North have aligned
themselves with the South. This closing up of the North–South divide in the tra-
ditional knowledge debate can be attributed to two things. First, many of the coun-
tries of the North have, within their boundaries, a social, political, and economic
“South” where indigenous communities are usually relegated. Consequently, ob-
ligations to their indigenous communities make some countries in the North align
themselves with the South. Second, there is a lot of pressure on developed coun-
tries to recognize and protect other forms of intellectual activities, including tra-
ditional knowledge and practices. Although it could be argued that traditional
practices and activities are more abundant in the South, there are many countries

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

157

in the North that still have indigenous communities that have unique traditions
and cultures, a fact that adds to the blurring of the North–South divide in the
traditional knowledge debate.

Another explanation for some countries that are considered North taking the
South’s side on several traditional knowledge protection issues is that these North
states have to honor obligations to their indigenous peoples and to international
agreements to which they are signatories. However, this study’s analysis of the power
structures among stakeholders shows that not all states are striking a balance be-
tween their interests in indigenous rights and their obligations to their indigenous
peoples and to the international community. Evidence has shown that indigenous
peoples’ voices at the international forums are not gaining traction because many
states are not fully engaging their indigenous peoples in the debate.

The potential of intellectual property tools to protect traditional knowledge is
the dominant theme in the analyzed multilateral forums. Evidence from docu-
mentary analyses and from interviews reveals that indigenous stakeholders are very
suspicious of the existing intellectual property mechanisms and oppose these mech-
anisms’ application to traditional knowledge. Although intellectual property rights
are traditionally a subject of disagreement between the North and the South, this
study could not definitively conclude whether or not stakeholders’ views on intel-
lectual property mechanisms’ application to traditional knowledge exhibit a North–
South divide. It is impossible to definitively draw this conclusion because, as
discussed above, documentary evidence indicates that some countries that are con-
sidered North take the South’s side on several traditional knowledge protection
issues.

Stakeholders’ Power in the Three Multilateral Forums

My analyses of the international debate have convinced me that the current fo-
rums that are debating traditional knowledge issues are inappropriate to deal with
such issues because none of these forums is indigenous specific. Furthermore, these
forums are member driven, and as observers, indigenous peoples cannot vote on
the decisions that are made in these forums; even when these decisions have im-
plications on indigenous cultures and practices. These forums also either advance
assumptions that emanate from their mandates, try to fit the issues into these man-
dates, or politicize these issues in order to either garner opposition or exclude
them from the agenda.

Using a covert dimensions framework of power to analyze the three multilat-
eral international forums, the study, not surprisingly, found that stakeholders wield
varying levels of power in the debate and decision-making processes. What is sur-
prising is the choice of sides that member states who are the most powerful stake-
holders have often taken in this debate. Most countries have neither fully engaged
indigenous peoples who live within their boundaries nor solicited their views on
the issues under debate. This has resulted in the omission of indigenous views

158

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

from these countries’ submissions to the international forums. By not involving
their indigenous peoples, these countries have forsaken their obligations to these
communities and have decided to support the international agreements.

The analyzed forums either administer or are associated with internationally
binding agreements, some of which have requirements that ignore and threaten
the cultures of indigenous peoples that are constituents of member states. For ex-
ample, the WTO’s TRIPS Agreement requires member states to meet set levels of
protection as well as define what is protectable under the agreements. Some of
these requirements and standards could be at odds with indigenous and tradi-
tional practices. WIPO administers several binding international treaties, and the
CBD is also a binding treaty. Some of the requirements for these binding inter-
national agreements impose conditions and standards that could impinge on in-
digenous communities’ abilities, as constituents of member states, to preserve their
culture and practices. For example, states have to meet standard levels and forms
of intellectual goods protection in order to become WTO members. The WTO’s
TRIPS Agreement could make the traditional knowledge protection situation worse
because of the politics and structures of the forum and a possible conflict between
member states’ obligations to the agreement and to their indigenous peoples.

Insufficient and inauthentic indigenous representation in the international fo-
rums means that their voices are not gaining any traction in these forums. These
voices would be best represented through state positions that are submitted to the
international forums. The absence of indigenous voices in state positions is illus-
trated by my interviews with Canadian First Nations elders, who are clearly un-
aware of the international discussions about traditional knowledge protection and
are appalled that their communities are not consulted about community concerns
and views on issues affecting them. To show the extent of the lack of consultation,
out of all the First Nations elders whom I interviewed, only one was aware of the
ongoing international debate on protecting traditional knowledge. Furthermore,
this elder had neither participated in any international meetings nor had she been
consulted about the issues discussed at the international forums. This lack of con-
sultation means that knowledge holders’ voices do not reach the international fo-
rums because their views are not included in the official statements that member
states submit to these forums.

To fill the gap caused by the lack of consultation and therefore elders’ lack of
knowledge of the ongoing international debate, I also interviewed First Nations
discussants who have attended international meetings on traditional knowledge.
These discussants’ views on the power dynamics in the international meetings are
outlined in the next paragraphs. Although these discussants’ observations are from
a Canadian perspective and may not be generalizable to other countries, they sup-
port my findings from analyses of international forums’ decision-making proce-
dures and from documents submitted to, and emanating from, these forums.

Two discussants who have attended the CBD and WIPO meetings confirm the
above noted First Nations communities’ lack of awareness of the international dis-

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

159

cussions about traditional knowledge. According to one of the discussants, com-
munities in Canada are, almost all of the time, unaware of the issues raised either
at the CBD, WIPO, or WTO. As was also evident from interviewing elders, and as
the discussants concur, talking to knowledge holders about the debate sometimes
surprises and shocks them. Communities are also appalled that they have not been
asked to send their representatives to these meetings. According to one discussant:

People are, and rightly so, annoyed that the government is sending in-
dividuals from whatever, the Department of Foreign Affairs or Environ-
ment Canada, to go and speak on a topic that they have no knowledge
of. Along the line of representation issues, of all the people that I know
that have participated in this process, very few, even the Indigenous Peo-
ple[s], would be what you would consider traditional knowledge hold-
ers. I have never seen somebody from Canada, like a healer or an elder
at these meetings. People who go, and again it is representation based
on expertise, tend to be those with expertise on intellectual property rights
or biodiversity and it is not to denigrate the individuals that are attend-
ing but it is that, in the majority of the cases, nobody formally sent them.64

The two discussants indicated that the composition of delegates to these forums
does not always include a representative of an indigenous community. According
to one discussant, even countries that could afford to send indigenous represen-
tatives do not make efforts to ensure authentic representation.65 Citing an exam-
ple of Canada, the discussant observed:

The Canadian government generally tends to provide a space or a few
spaces in their delegation for indigenous participation although not gen-
erally planned. . . . [However,] this is not an ongoing thing and it is just
a point of contention domestically within Canada in that there is no
reason as to when or why or how many indigenous participants get to
go from Canada. But in Canada we have been very lucky . . . there are a
lot of other nations in the world that are having trouble getting their
own delegates to the meeting and they are not even considering involv-
ing indigenous groups in that process.66

As for their presence in some of the international meetings, the two discussants
made it clear that their participation in the meetings was not because they were
either First Nations representatives or members of a First Nations community.
Instead, these two discussants attended these meetings because they held govern-
ment positions that were somehow relevant to certain traditional knowledge is-
sues at the time.

In the international forums, indigenous peoples’ low representation disadvan-
tages them. Furthermore, even in cases where indigenous peoples are part of na-
tional delegations, they cannot speak beyond the positions that are formally taken
by their countries. As one of the discussants observed:

The people who get [to these meetings] are those who either know how
to use the system or whose names have been put forward to attend. It is
not a formal or political representation of an individual or specific group
. . . [g]enerally what happens is that there is so little indigenous partici-

160

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

pation that whoever shows up and happens to be indigenous ends up
becoming de facto representative.67

The debate process, in listening only to member states’ official statements, also
silences indigenous voices even if they are present in a delegation. As one discus-
sant observes, even if there is an independent voice from an indigenous organi-
zation, the process of making interventions on agenda items is that:

all the parties get their chances to speak or make an intervention . . .
then after [parties] are the international organizations . . . and then after
that will be either the indigenous interventions or the NGOs [nongov-
ernmental organizations]. At the end of the day, even if an issue may
have a significant or important impact on indigenous peoples, their in-
tervention is thirty seconds at the end of all other interventions.68

Analyses of indigenous peoples’ submissions and declarations indicate great em-
phasis on active indigenous participation in the policymaking processes and the
recognition of their right to self-determination, land rights, and customary law as
a beginning of the solutions to many of the traditional knowledge issues under
debate. However, such complex issues, which are not within the limited mandates
of the forums that are debating traditional knowledge issues, could create tensions
between the indigenous (including First Nations) and other stakeholders. Two dis-
cussants, making a similar observation, note that member states representatives
and indigenous peoples do not share the same views and national tensions are
sometimes evident at international meetings. In its statement to WIPO’s IGC, the
American Folklore Society observes the incongruence between traditional knowl-
edge holders’ interests and those of powerful voting stakeholders whose power
structures even among states, according to one discussant, is evident in coalitions
that they form and through the agendas that stakeholders push. This discussant
observes that one

can see generally along the lines or the coalitions of the groups that they
form. There are the mega diverse countries, the group of the Latin Amer-
ica and the Caribbean. Generally the US, Australia, and New Zealand
tend to not necessarily form alliances, but tend to agree and push cer-
tain points across in the negotiations. Part of developing the expertise to
participate in the process is to learn those intricacies; the positions that
will tend to follow out of particular countries and the alliances they form.
You can easily pick those out once you get immersed in the process.69

This observation leads one to wonder whether the absence of indigenous peoples
in the national delegations, at least in the Canadian delegation noted by the dis-
cussants, is an intentional move to sustain the coalitions that stakeholders form
and an effort not to familiarize indigenous peoples with the intricacies of the power
structures—intricacies that would tilt existing power balances. In this article, I sug-
gest that to be the case.

Using covert dimensions of power, the study found that the current forums’
power structures are skewing policy formation processes in traditional knowledge

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

161

protection. These power structures allow powerful stakeholders to steer the debate
in certain directions by setting the agenda, setting priorities in the policy process,
and by excluding various policy options and possibilities from the discussions.
The study found that indigenous communities and knowledge holders are disad-
vantaged in the debate partly because of their inauthentic and insufficient partici-
pation and also due to the multilateral forums’ power structures that confer voting
and final decision making powers to selective stakeholders.

In WIPO, for example, the General Rules of Procedures disadvantage indigenous
peoples in that they hinder their full participation by allowing only member states
to make final decisions on its activities. Although nonmember stakeholders and
interest groups can be accredited to be observers in any of WIPO’s meetings, ob-
servers cannot vote on issues. Furthermore, the accreditation decisions that are based
on subjective information that WIPO requires from applicants can be used to
exclude indigenous organizations that WIPO may view as undesirable. Such infor-
mation includes a description of the organization, its main objectives, and the re-
lationship of the organization with intellectual property matters.70 This required
information already shuts out organizations that are either against or have no in-
terests in intellectual property. Although WIPO prides itself on the 150 nongovern-
mental organizations and intergovernmental organizations accredited as observers
at its meetings, these observer groups can only participate at the consultation pro-
cesses about the issue at hand but have no voting powers, which are granted to mem-
ber states only.71 As Rule 24 of WIPO’s General Rules of Procedures makes clear,
although observers“may take part in debates at the invitation of the Chairman, [they]
may not submit proposals, amendments or motions.”72

As in WIPO, the fact that observers cannot vote on final decisions is not overtly
clear in the rhetoric of indigenous participation in the meetings of the COP, which
is the CBD forum that discusses traditional knowledge issues. The COP meetings
are open to all parties to the CBD, observers from nonparties, and intergovern-
mental and nongovernmental organizations. The CBD prides itself as the only
forum, among the three analyzed multilateral forums, that has mechanisms for
the participation of indigenous and local communities in its meetings. The mech-
anisms developed within the CBD include financial support through a voluntary
fund to enable indigenous communities to attend CBD’s meetings. Other mech-
anisms include logistical support and participation in formal and informal groups.
Such mechanisms exist in the ad hoc open-ended Working Group on Article 8(j),
which is open to both parties and representatives of indigenous peoples. However,
there is a caveat to this participation; representatives of indigenous communities
participate in the work of the Working Group only as observers. According to rules
6(2) and 7(2) of the CBD’s rules of procedure, “observers may, upon invitation of
the President, participate without the right to vote [emphasis added] in the pro-
ceedings of any meeting.”73 As in WIPO, participation of observers is not guar-
anteed and can be refused at any of the three stages of accreditation: the application
stage, the evaluation stage where the CBD evaluates the applicants’ qualifications

162

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

in fields relating to biodiversity, and the final stage where at least a third of the
parties present at a specific meeting can object to an observer’s participation.

In contrast to the CBD and WIPO, indigenous representatives cannot partici-
pate in the WTO meetings. In the WTO, only state and international intergovern-
mental organizations observers can follow discussions therein on matters of direct
interest to them. Observers in the WTO’s Council for TRIPS are the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the In-
ternational Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV), the Or-
ganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the UN, the
UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the World Bank, the World
Customs Organization (WCO), and the WIPO. Again in contrast to the CBD and
WIPO, indigenous communities and interest groups cannot participate as observ-
ers in the WTO.

Given the above power structures of the three analyzed multilateral forums, the
debate is likely to be skewed in ways that advance the power wielding stakehold-
ers’ interests. As long as indigenous peoples’ organizations participate as nonvot-
ing observers whose views can be quashed at any stage in the debate process, the
decisions that are made in these multilateral forums will always disadvantage them.
Similarly, the policy outcomes from the debate will not serve indigenous peoples’
interests.

Indigenous Peoples’ Voices in the Debate

This study establishes that it is consistently unclear how the international forums
are seeking and representing indigenous peoples’ voices. As Table 1 shows, indig-
enous peoples views that are expressed through several declarations mainly con-
verge with those expressed by First Nations elders. However, these views in most
cases diverge from state and industry stakeholders’ concerns, needs, and strategies
for protecting traditional knowledge. This finding reinforces the conclusion that
indigenous peoples’ voices are not being listened to in these self-interested forums
and therefore not gaining any traction. As Table 1 shows, state stakeholders’ po-
sitions are consistently incongruent with those of indigenous (including First Na-
tions) stakeholders.74 This incongruence would be avoided if indigenous voices
were listened to and incorporated in the debate.

From Table 1, it is evident that several views and proposals that emerge from
declarations by indigenous peoples and from interviews with a sample of First
Nations elders are absent in the analyzed international forums’ agendas and in the
policy documents that emanate from these forums. Indigenous stakeholders’ views
do not get nonindigenous stakeholders’ support in the examined multilateral fo-
rums, whose power relations, as discussed earlier, disadvantage indigenous peo-
ples. For example, while the use of intellectual property tools is the dominant theme
that states and industry advance in the three examined multilateral forums, evi-
dence from First Nations elders and from declarations and submissions by indig-

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

163

Stakeholders’ conceptual concerns and proposed protection strategies.75

Table 1

First

Nations
Elders

Indigenous

Peoples

States

Industry

Concerns
Unauthorized use

• Biopiracy
• Misuse (use out of context)
Granting of intellectual property
Negative effects of knowledge sharing
Representation or misrepresentation
Preservation of communities’ ways of life
Loss of land
Communities’ loss of control

• Access to knowledge and resources
• Self-determination

Knowledge transmission
Holders’ and owners’ rights protection
Misappropriation for economic gains
Economic development
Proposed positive tools
Intellectual property tools

• Patents
• Copyright
• Trade secrets
• Geographical indications
• Trade-marks/brand names
Nonintellectual property tools

• Sui generis systems
• Customary law
• Model laws
• National laws
• Aboriginal rights and treaties
• Secrets

Proposed defensive tools76
Intellectual property tools
Nonintellectual property practices

• Documentation
• Customary laws and practices

⻬
x
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

⻬
⻬
x
x
⻬
⻬

x

⻬
⻬

⻬
⻬
x
⻬
x
x
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
x
⻬
x
⻬
x

x
x
x
⻬
⻬

⻬
⻬
x
x
⻬
x

x

x
⻬

⻬
⻬
x
⻬
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
⻬
⻬
⻬

⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬

⻬
x
⻬
⻬
x
x

⻬

x
x

⻬
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
⻬
x
⻬

⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬
⻬

x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x

enous peoples show that indigenous stakeholders are against the use of these tools
to protect their knowledge. Table 1 also shows that indigenous peoples’ prevalent
concerns on loss of land as the source of traditional knowledge, empowerment,
and self-determination to control their knowledge, and on the preservation of tra-
ditional knowledge as a way of life are themes that do not feature in proposals
that are made by states and industry stakeholders.

164

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

By using covert power, which allows actors to set priorities for policymaking,
powerful stakeholders are able to either conveniently exclude some items from
the agenda or politicize these items in ways that garner opposition. The politi-
cization of indigenous-driven initiatives and other initiatives that could resolve
traditional knowledge issues but are considered outside the purview and inter-
ests of powerful stakeholders has continued to meet unrelenting opposition from
nonindigenous stakeholders who push their own interests. An example of the
lack of support of indigenous-specific initiatives is the lack of recognition of
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Model Law and Convention on Commu-
nity Rights and Access to Biological Resources as a useful model that could form
a basis for a nonintellectual property protection system and that would amelio-
rate many of the conventional intellectual property shortcomings. Opposition to
the OAU Model Law is well summarized in the observation by Genetic Re-
sources Action International (GRAIN) that intellectual property interests pre-
vailed in a meeting held in Addis Ababa among the OAU, WIPO, and UPOV to
comment on the OAU Model Law.77 Both WIPO and UPOV resisted the model
law although it was meant to help African countries meet the required standards
that had been set by the CBD and the TRIPS Agreement.

In their submission at this Addis Ababa meeting, WIPO resisted the OAU Model
Law’s principle that holds that patenting life is immoral and against the basic val-
ues of Africans and should therefore be outlawed.78 WIPO was also very critical of
the Model Law’s scope of community rights. As GRAIN notes, although most Af-
rican countries were struggling with making community rights work for African
countries, instead of helping “to make these [community] rights really work WI-
PO’s solution is to make them fit into global [intellectual property rights] con-
ventions.”79 GRAIN concludes that “if WIPO’s contribution to the “furtherance”
of the OAU process was misdirected and counterproductive, UPOV’s input con-
sisted of an iron-fisted bash on the whole initiative. UPOV officials even reworked
more than 30 articles of the Model Law to suit the standards of their own Con-
vention!”80 Such opposition is not unimaginable in the traditional knowledge
debate.

As Table 1 shows, one of the indigenous peoples’ concerns that is conspicuously
absent from the agenda relates to self-determination. Indigenous stakeholders are
convinced that the heart of the solutions to traditional knowledge and other is-
sues is self-determination, which would allow indigenous peoples to preserve their
knowledge, control how it is used, and ensure that the communities and their ways
of life are authentically represented in the knowledge. Such empowerment of in-
digenous peoples is only achievable through internal self-determination. How-
ever, Table 1 shows that in WIPO, the CBD, and the WTO, member states and
industry stakeholders do not address issues of self-determination which are miss-
ing in these forums’ agendas. From analyses of discussions in the three multilat-
eral forums, one can infer that member states are cautious about discussing self-
determination issues. This may be due to the too common past politicization of

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

165

self-determination, for example, during the long process that led to the adoption
of the DRIP in 2007.81

As in the forums that are debating traditional knowledge, the unwillingness to
discuss self-determination was very evident throughout the DRIP adoption pro-
cess where countries that voted against the declaration expressed concerns about
provisions on self-determination as one of the reasons for opposing the DRIP.
Canada’s representative, for example, noted that “unfortunately, the provisions in
the Declaration on lands, territories and resources were overly broad, unclear, and
capable of a wide variety of interpretations, discounting the need to recognize a
range of rights over land and possibly putting into question matters that have
been settled by treaty.”82 Similarly, Australia’s representative said that Australia was
dissatisfied with the text’s references to self-determination, which “applied to sit-
uations of decolonization and the break-up of States into smaller states with clearly
defined population groups [and] where a particular group with a defined terri-
tory was disenfranchised and was denied political or civil rights.”83

If the current forums would listen to the voices of indigenous peoples and con-
sider their concerns and needs, some of which are listed in Table 1, some of the
fears that usually lead to politicization of indigenous issues would be allied. In-
digenous stakeholders emphasize the need for their empowerment through fully
involving them in the policymaking forums and processes. In the Mataatua Dec-
laration, the Kari-Oca Declaration, and the Voices of the Earth, indigenous peo-
ples note their insufficient participation in policymaking processes, in research,
and in all other aspects that involve their knowledge as a major concern that needs
redress. In Article 3.1, the Mataatua delegates ask the UN to ensure “the process of
participation of Indigenous Peoples in United Nations [forums] is strengthened
so their views are fairly represented.”84 In a call for defensive protection, the
Mataatua delegates also urge indigenous peoples to be proactive and develop their
own forum that would “preserve and monitor the commercialism or otherwise of
indigenous cultural properties in the public domain; generally advise and encour-
age indigenous peoples to take steps to protect their cultural heritage; [and] allow
a mandatory consultative process with respect to any new legislation affecting In-
digenous Peoples cultural and intellectual property rights.”85

Delegates to the Voices of the Earth also urged governments to work toward
“facilitating open access and full participation for indigenous peoples in the entire
process of debate . . . and in all other forums discussing indigenous issues” and
recommended the formation of an indigenous peoples’ forum that would

develop educational materials on intellectual, cultural, and scientific
property rights; develop mechanisms for protection and compensation;
advise indigenous and traditional communities on legal and political
actions; monitor unethical activities by individuals, institutions, and
governments that are misusing intellectual, scientific, and cultural
property; develop mechanisms for enforcement of rules, regulations,
and laws for protection and compensation, including legal advice and
counsel; and establish a network to exchange information about suc-

166

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

cessful and unsuccessful attempts by local communities to secure their
rights.86

Participants at the UNDP-Asia Consultation also recommend the strengthening
of

Indigenous Peoples’ organizations and communities to be able to col-
lectively address local concerns related to indigenous knowledge and in-
tellectual property rights, [and] raise the awareness of Indigenous Peoples’
organizations and communities on the global trends and developments
in intellectual property rights systems, especially as they apply to life forms
and indigenous knowledge.87

Indigenous stakeholders continue to urge states and the international commu-
nity to support international human rights treaties, conventions, and indigenous
forums. In the Voices of the Earth and in the Kari-Oca Declaration, indigenous
peoples call on nation-states to support international initiatives such as the DRIP
and the ILO Convention 169 and note that supporting binding agreements “would
guarantee an international legal instrument for Indigenous Peoples.”88 However,
the power structures in the various forums, the insufficient and inauthentic rep-
resentation of Indigenous stakeholders, and the politicization of indigenous pro-
posals have ensured that indigenous initiatives remain as just calls—really faint
and distant calls. It is perceptible that indigenous peoples’ association of their pur-
suit of traditional knowledge protection with self-determination and ownership
of their cultural heritage and resources emanates from this situation where the
status quo is not working and the international efforts being made are misguided
and self-interested.

CONCLUSION

The loss of traditional knowledge and the need to protect it are not new issues,
and several international efforts have been previously made to address the chal-
lenges that current practices pose to the preservation and propagation of tradi-
tional knowledge and cultures. However, it is clear that none of the international
efforts has had much impact on the status quo. From my analyses of the ongoing
debate, it is evident that stakeholders diverge on the key issues on traditional knowl-
edge protection, the objectives and methods of protection, and the forum that
should be debating these issues. The underlying motivations for seeking protec-
tion of traditional knowledge also vary from forum to forum. Regardless of the
underlying rationales and interests, it is definite that traditional knowledge pro-
tection is an issue of international significance. I am, however, convinced that the
international forums that are currently debating traditional knowledge are not only
inappropriate but that the proposals being made in these forums are driven by self
interests that are at odds with the needs of indigenous peoples. Analyses of the
forums also indicate that international efforts have so far been premised on the

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

167

assumption that traditional knowledge holders’ needs are intellectual property re-
lated. This premise and the politicization of indigenous initiatives and proposals
have plagued most international efforts to change the status quo, vis-à-vis loss of
traditional knowledge.

In this study, I examined only the forums where the debate is taking place, and
therefore it may not be possible to recommend where the conversation should be
taking place. However, I have clearly shown that the traditional knowledge pro-
tection debate is taking place in forums that disadvantage indigenous peoples, have
limited mandates, and ignore indigenous worldviews. It is evident that the multi-
lateral forums that I analyzed do not always reflect indigenous communities’ views
because these institutional forums are member state driven, and therefore the in-
terests that dominate the debate are those of the member states. The evidence that
I gathered for this study shows a problem because there is a clear difference be-
tween state and indigenous stakeholders’ propositions. These differences prove that
states are not balancing their obligations to their indigenous peoples with those to
international agreements. I am convinced that a way to strike this balance would
be to have sufficient and authentic indigenous representation in national delega-
tions to international meetings.

I have also established that even when the institutional forums have taken ini-
tiatives to encourage the participation of indigenous peoples and communities,
the bureaucracy and structures in these institutions still keep indigenous partici-
pation very low. Even though traditional knowledge holders in the analyzed fo-
rums may be encouraged to participate, voting member states make the final
decisions. With the current voting structures in these forums, indigenous pro-
posals and participation as observers is futile, because at the end of the day,
voting members can decide to quash proposals by indigenous and other nonvot-
ing stakeholders.

While the discussed international forums are essential in setting the norm, there
must be a forum that is rooted in, and takes into account, indigenous worldviews
and interests. The current forums not only disadvantage indigenous peoples but
are at odds with their interests, concerns, and needs. Evidence from interviews
with a sample of First Nations elders and discussants has convinced me that the
debate should be in a wider forum that would take into account the indigenous
peoples’ worldviews that are wider than the intellectual property-based worldview
that is currently dominating the debate. From a practical point of view, I therefore
recommend that the debate be removed from the three multilateral forums ex-
amined here. Discussions in these three forums should be halted until an appro-
priate forum that would include indigenous peoples’ worldviews is found. Until
such a forum is in place, policy outcomes from these discussions will disadvantage
indigenous peoples.

The formation of an indigenous peoples specific forum calls for indigenous peo-
ples’ internal self-determination that would allow them to freely determine their
own ways to deal with the traditional knowledge issues; after all, it is their knowl-

168

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

edge. Internal self-determination would allow indigenous peoples to define for
themselves their intellectual property; identify their needs for protecting that knowl-
edge; develop their mechanisms that would control how their knowledge is used
and represented; sanction its protection, preservation, and revitalization; and es-
tablish a new system or adopt a customary system that is based on indigenous
worldviews. The formation of an indigenous forum must be left to indigenous
peoples so that the forum’s structure and decision-making processes take into ac-
count indigenous worldviews, practices, and cultures.

Unfortunately, an indigenous forum is unlikely to come to fruition when states
intentionally politicize self-determination issues and frame them as secession is-
sues. With such politicization, there is likely to be opposition to an indigenous
specific forum that would empower and enable indigenous peoples to control their
own cultural development. If an indigenous forum is slow to come by and the
debate must continue in the current forums, which is more likely than not, the
study has established that there is room for including, and procedures to include,
indigenous voices in states’ official positions that are submitted to these forums. I
recommend state consultations with indigenous peoples as the most effective av-
enue to get indigenous voices to national official positions and, thus, to the inter-
national processes.89 In order to bring local initiatives to an international process,
there is a need to directly elicit the views of indigenous peoples. As it is now, a lot
of policy options are not included in national positions on protecting traditional
knowledge because knowledge holders are not consulted. It is absolutely necessary
to solicit knowledge holders’ views and, if they so wish, make sure that their ex-
tensive knowledge is made available to policymakers for inclusion in official po-
sitions that will be submitted to the international forums. This would not only
ensure that indigenous stakeholders’ views are reaching the international forums,
but also that national positions are in concordance with those of their indigenous
peoples. As long as there is no such consultation, there will always be too many
voices, most of which are not authentic indigenous voices, that will only clog the
debate, steer it away from indigenous peoples’ concerns, and make it harder for
stakeholders to reach a consensus.

ENDNOTES

1. Blakeney, “Intellectual Property in the Dreamtime.”
2. Alikhan and Mashelkar, in Intellectual Property and Competitive Strategy, discuss the place of
traditional knowledge in modern science. According to Alikhan and Mashelkar, traditional knowl-
edge is being recognized in various ways such as its important role in environmental impact assess-
ment, and environmental and biodiversity conservation and sustainability. For further discussion of
traditional knowledge in modern science, see also Bicker, Sillitoe, and Pottier, Development and Local
Knowledge; and Bowie, “Traditional Knowledge and Environmental Assessment.”

The important role of traditional knowledge in natural resources management has also been dis-
cussed by Failing, Gregory, and Harstone, who examine ways of integrating local and scientific knowl-
edge into environmental decision making in “Integrating Science.” Several successful projects in Canada
have incorporated traditional knowledge. Parlee and colleagues show that common property arrange-

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

169

ments governing berry harvesting in the Teetl’it Gwich’in region of the Northwest Territories have re-
sulted in sustainable use of resources (“Indigenous Knowledge of Ecological Variability,” 515).

In an examination of wildlife management in northern Canada, Kendrick and Manseau note that
incorporating traditional knowledge into wildlife management provides an opportunity for resource
managers to understand how the local people manage their natural resources (“Representing Tradi-
tional Knowledge,” 404). Similarly, in their examination of ways to address environmental problems,
Ransom and Ettenger emphasize that incorporating traditional concepts into policymaking allows for
respect of cultural identity, values, and knowledge while creating good relationships between com-
munities and outside agencies and researchers (“Polishing the Kaswentha,” 219). In an evaluative study
of Northwest Atlantic cod fishery, Milich demonstrates the detrimental effects that excluding tradi-
tional knowledge from resources management can have on resource sustainability (“Resource Mis-
management,” 625).

3. The term biopiracy (bioprospecting) is used in this article to refer to the appropriation of the
knowledge and genetic resources of farming and indigenous communities by either individuals or
institution seeking exclusive monopolistic control over these resources and knowledge.

4. For a detailed discussion on which issues stakeholders either converge or diverge, see Maina,

“The Traditional Knowledge Protection Debate.”

5. For a detailed discussion of stakeholders’ definition and characterization of traditional knowl-
edge, concerns and proposals, protection objectives and needs, and whether or not stakeholders con-
verge or diverge on the issues under debate, see Maina, “The Traditional Knowledge Protection
Debate.”

6. Boyatzis defines a theme as “a pattern found in the information that at minimum describes
and organizes the possible observations and at maximum interprets aspects of the phenomenon”
(Transforming Qualitative Information, 4).

7. Boyatzis, Transforming Qualitative Information, 4.
8. Boyatzis, Transforming Qualitative Information, 3.
9. Boyatzis, Transforming Qualitative Information, 4–5.
10. In this study, I use the term First Nations to refer to the aboriginal (indigenous) peoples in
Canada. First Nations has come to be generally used for the indigenous peoples of Canada, exclud-
ing the Arctic-situated Inuit, and Métis who are peoples of mixed European–First Nations ancestry.
In the literature, there are other terms such as native peoples, indigenous peoples, natives, and ab-
original peoples that are used to refer to the aboriginal peoples in Canada.

11. Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, Report of the Royal Commission, 109.
12. Kulchyski, McCaskill, and Newhouse, In the Words, xix. Indeed, the extensive knowledge that
elders hold on various topics is illustrated by the wide range of studies that have been done in dif-
ferent disciplines using interviews with First Nations elders to collect data. As in my study, several
researchers from different disciplines have interviewed elders because they are considered the knowl-
edgeable community members. See, for example, Hjartarson, “Epistemological Foundations,” writ-
ing in the discipline of education. Hjartarson interviewed elders to get an understanding of traditional
Native education from a First Nations’ perspective. In environmental science, forestry, botany, ge-
ography, and cultural anthropology, Kenny (“Ojibway Plant Taxonomy”), M’Lot (“Ka Isinakwak
Askiy”), and Wall (“Porcupines”) collected their data through interviews with First Nations elders.
Writing from the discipline of sociology, Keewatin (“An Indigenous Perspective”), Hart-
Wasekeesikaw (“First Nations Peoples”), and Brass (“Empowerment and Wellness”) also interviewed
First Nations elders to gather their data. See also Ross-Leitenberger (“Aboriginal Midwifery”) who,
writing from a women’s studies perspective, also interviewed First Nations elders in her exploration
of whether traditional midwifery and birthing practices are applicable to contemporary birthing.

13. Kulchyski, McCaskill, and Newhouse, In the Words, xix.
14. Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, Report of the Royal Commission, 110.
15. Singleton and Straits, Approaches to Social Research, 132.
16. First Nations communities confer elder status to their respected members. Elder status is not
political, and therefore only community members know who their elders are. Furthermore, many of
these elders will not identify themselves as thus, a point that is succinctly made by Ojibway Elder AC

170

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

when asked to describe his role as an elder. According to Ojibway Elder AC, “You do not brag about
this. You do not stand up and say; here, I am over here to people. They would have to come on their
own. I do not go advertising. Even the Indian People have to understand the protocol” (Personal
interview with Ojibway Elder AC, 21 December 2006). Many other elders in concurring with the
Ojibway elder emphasized that it is the community members who recognize their knowledge and
identify them as elders. Kulchyski, McCaskill, and Newhouse concur with the above elder in their
observation that “few Elders call themselves Elders, and there is no institutional process that recog-
nizes or validates them as such. The Aboriginal community to which an individual belongs is likely
the only genuine source of recognition of that individual’s status as an Elder” (Kulchyski, McCaskill,
and Newhouse, In the Words, xix).

17. Singleton and Straits, Approaches to Social Research, 132–33.
18. Mosco, The Political Economy, 25.
19. Mosco defines control as “the internal organization of individual and group members, while
survival [economic] takes up the means by which they produce what is needed to reproduce them-
selves” (The Political Economy, 26).

20. Gill and Law, The Global Political Economy, 74
21. Bachrach and Baratz, “Decisions and Nondecisions,” 632.
22. Gill and Law, The Global Political Economy, 74.
23. For a discussion of the role that intellectual property plays in development, see Maskus in The
Role and Intellectual Property Rights; Naghavi in “Strategic Intellectual Property”; Braga, Fink, and
Sepulveda in Intellectual Property Rights; and Gould and Gruben in “The Role of Intellectual Property.”
However, Shiva, in Protect or Plunder posits that intellectual property systems’ justifications that
they promote investment research and technology transfer, stimulate creativity, and allow knowl-
edge generation are nothing but myths.

24. See Shiva, in Biopiracy: The Plunder, who classifies patents’ historical use as a way to conquer
territories with their modern use to conquer economies. Similarly, delegates at the Coordinator of the
Indigenous Organizations of the Amazon Basin (COICA)/UNDP Regional Meeting on Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights and Biodiversity (hereinafter, the COICA/UNDP Meeting) characterize the prevailing in-
tellectual property system as one that reflects a conception and practice that is colonialist.

25. In “Strategic Intellectual Property,” Naghavi argues that in order for the South to catch up,
stringent intellectual property is always optimal because it would trigger technology transfer. How-
ever, Maina in “What Patents Tell” argues that the social cost of expanding intellectual property
protection could outweigh the benefits in intellectual property importing economies, which are gen-
erally developing countries. As Scotchmer notes in “The Political Economy,” there is interplay be-
tween power forms and intellectual property protection in that the more innovative economies are
the keener they are on expanding intellectual property protection. These power structures have led
developed countries to pressure developing countries, sometimes under threats such as trade sanc-
tions, to meet intellectual property protection standards. Conversely, the benefits are positive for
intellectual property exporting economies, which tend to be developed countries. Lai and Qiu (“The
Northern Intellectual”) also support such justifications by noting that both the North and the South
would gain if the South harmonized its intellectual property standards with those of the North. But
Shiva, in Protect or Plunder, characterizes as myth intellectual property justifications that it pro-
motes investment research, technology transfer, and stimulates creativity and thus development.

26. Examples on international treaties and conventions that are relevant to cultural rights include
the 1950 Florence Agreement on the Importation of Educational, Scientific and Cultural Materials;
the 2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage; and the 2005 Con-
vention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions.

27. Walker, Oxford Companion, 1128.
28. United Nations, “United Nations Declaration,” Article 3.
29. United Nations, “United Nations Declaration,” Article 31.
30. United Nations, “United Nations Declaration,” para. 11.
31. United Nations, “United Nations Declaration,” para. 8.
32. International Labour Organization, “C169 Convention,” Article 7.1.

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

171

33. International Labour Organization, “C169 Convention,” Article 6.1.
34. WIPO, “The Protection of Traditional Knowledge,” WIPO/GRTKF/IC/11/5a Annex: 4.
35. WIPO, “The Protection of Traditional Knowledge,” WIPO/GRTKF/IC/11/5/a.
36. WIPO, “Intellectual Property Needs.”
37. According to WIPO, the missions to 28 countries were carried out “in order to identify in-
tellectual property needs and expectations of traditional knowledge holders” (“Intellectual Property
Needs,” 16). These missions were in various regions. In the South Pacific region, WIPO carried out
fact-finding missions in Australia, New Zealand, Fiji, and Papua New Guinea. In South Asia, WIPO
visited Bangladesh, India, and Sri Lanka while in Southern and Eastern Africa, WIPO carried out
missions in Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Namibia, and South Africa. Other regions that
WIPO visited are North America (United States of America and Canada), West Africa (Nigeria, Ghana,
Mali, and Senegal), the Arab countries (Oman, Qatar, Egypt, and Tunisia), South America (Peru and
Bolivia), Central America (Guatemala and Panama), and the Caribbean (Trinidad and Tobago, Guy-
ana, and Jamaica). In consultation with UNESCO, WIPO also held four regional consultations on
the protection of expressions of folklore. A consultation for African countries was held in Pretoria
(March 1999); for countries in Asia and the Pacific region in Hanoi (April 1999); for Arab countries
in Tunis (May 1999); and for Latin America and the Caribbean in Quito (June 1999).

38. WIPO, “Matters Concerning Intellectual Property.”
39. WIPO, “Draft Provisions.”
40. WIPO, “Draft Provisions.”
41. Convention on Biological Diversity, Handbook of the Convention, xvii.
42. Convention on Biological Diversity, Handbook of the Convention, 5.
43. Convention on Biological Diversity, Handbook of the Convention, 5–6.
44. The other two CBD institutions are the Subsidiary Body on Scientific, Technical and Tech-
nological Advice (SBSTTA), and the Secretariat. Established under Article 25 of the CBD, the SB-
STTA provides the COP with advice relating to the Convention’s implementation. Article 24 of the
CBD also establishes the Secretariat as the institution responsible for the preparation and servicing
of all the meetings held under the Convention, including meetings of the COP (Convention on
Biological Diversity, Handbook of the Convention, 16–17).

45. Convention on Biological Diversity, Handbook of the Convention, xxiii.
46. Convention on Biological Diversity, “Multilateral Convention.”
47. Convention on Biological Diversity: Working Group, para. 4.
48. WIPO, Intellectual Property Needs, 55.
49. WTO, Final Act.
50. See UPOV, “Doha WTO Ministerial 2001,”WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1) par. 19. The Doha WTO

Ministerial Declaration was adopted on November, 14, 2001.

51. WTO, Final Act.
52. Voting procedures of the analyzed forums attest to this interpretation. In rule 39 of its pro-
cedure, the CBD, for example, considers a regional block’s vote as equal to the total number of votes
of the block’s member states which are parties to the convention. According to the CBD’s rule 39 of
procedure, only parties to the Convention can vote (one vote per party). Rule 39(2) of the CBD
adds, “regional economic integration organizations, in matters within their competence, shall exer-
cise their right to vote with a number of votes equal to the number of their member states which are
Parties. Such organizations shall not exercise their right to vote if their members exercise theirs, and
vice versa” (Handbook of the Convention, 62).

Decision-making within WIPO and the WTO is different. Both WIPO and the WTO reach their
decisions not by voting but by consensus. In cases where consensus cannot be reached, voting is
possible with a vote being won with a majority and on a “one country, one vote” basis.

53. Boyle, Shamans, 12.
54. World Trade Organization (WTO) Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights, “Minutes of Meeting 5–7 March 2002,” IP/C/M/35 paras. 241–242.
55. WTO, “Minutes of Meeting 5–7 March 2002,” IP/C/M/35 para. 239.
56. WIPO, “The Protection of Traditional Knowledge,” WIPO/GRTKF/IC/11/5(a), Annex.

172

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

GRTKF/IC/11/5(a), Annex.

57. WIPO, Intellectual Property Needs, 24.
58. WIPO Intergovernmental Committee, “The Protection of Traditional Knowledge,” WIPO/
59. For Brazil’s views, see WTO “Minutes of Meeting 21–22 Sept. 2000,” IP/C/M/28 para. 168. See
paras. 167 and 151 for India and Australia respectively. For Norway’s views, see WTO, “Minutes of
Meeting 26–29 June 2000,” IP/C/M/27 para. 133.
60. For proposals by the EC, see WIPO, “Minutes of Meeting 5–7 March 2002,” IP/C/M/35 paras.
238–239 and WTO, “Communication from the EC,” IP/C/W/254. For Japan’s views, see WTO, “Min-
utes of Meeting 20–21 Oct. 1999,” IP/C/M/25 para. 93 and WTO, “Minutes of Meeting 21–22 Sept.
2000,” IP/C/M/28 para. 164 for Korea’s views.
61. For Canada’s position, see WTO, “Minutes of Meeting 20–21 Oct. 1999,” IP/C/M/25 para.
91). Canada has not made clear what an appropriate forum would be. For Venezuela, see WTO,
“Minutes of Meeting,” IP/C/M/26 para. 73.
62. For Brazil, see WTO, “Minutes of Meeting 21 Mar. 2000,” IP/C/M/26. For views by Mauritius,
see WTO, “Communication from Mauritius,” IP/C/W/206 paras. 62 and 64. For Venezuela’s views,
see WTO, “Minutes of Meeting 21 Mar. 2000,” IP/C/M/26 par. 28.

63. For a more detailed examination of power structures in the Uruguay Round of Negotiations,
see Drahos and Braithwaite (Information Feudalism), Matthews (Globalising Intellectual Property
Rights), and Shiva (Protect or Plunder).

64. Personal interview, 13 October 2006.
65. This is the discussant’s observation about Canada. It would be impossible for the discussant
to tell whether delegations from other countries had authentic representation of Indigenous Peo-
ples. Therefore, I cannot make conclusions on the composition of delegates from other countries
based on this discussant’s observation.

66. Personal interview, 13 October 2006.
67. Personal interview, 13 October 2006.
68. Personal interview, 13 October 2006.
69. Personal interview, 13 October 2006.
70. WIPO, “Intergovernmental Committee.”
71. For a more detailed account of the various decision-making bodies and processes, for the cri-
teria for admission as an observer, and a list of current observers, see WIPO,“Members and Observers.”

72. WIPO, “General Rules of Procedures.”
73. CBD, Handbook of the Convention, 54.
74. The three categories of stakeholders’ incongruent concerns, needs, and protection strategies

are further discussed in Maina, The Traditional Knowledge Protection Debate.

75. In Table 1, a checkmark (⻬) indicates that a great preponderance of the evidence indicates
the views of the stakeholders in a column. Conversely, an X indicates that a given category of stake-
holders, on this evidence, rarely or never expressed this view. These marks are drawn from the more
detailed analysis in Maina, The Traditional Knowledge Protection Debate. The table is used here only
as a graphical summary of the evidence presented in the text. The table is used here to summarize
the divergences and convergences among the three categories of stakeholders in the debate.

76. The term defensive protection “refers to measures aimed at preventing the acquisition of in-
tellectual property rights over [traditional knowledge] or genetic resources by parties other than the
customary custodians of the knowledge” (WIPO, “Defensive Protection Measures,” WIPO/GRTKF/
IC/6/8). Defensive protection does not entail acquisition of rights but only prevents others from
gaining intellectual property rights. Positive protection refers to protection through the recognition
and exercise of rights such as intellectual property rights.

77. GRAIN is an international nonprofit organization that supports small farmers and social move-
ments and in their efforts and initiatives that are aimed at ensuring community-controlled and
biodiversity-based food systems.

78. In its argument against the OAU Model Law, WIPO cites TRIPS Agreement Article 27.3(b)
which allows patenting of at least micro-organisms. WIPO argued that the OAU Model Law prohi-
bition of patenting of life forms is against the TRIPS Agreement. This opposition by a powerful

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

173

stakeholder is clearly based on, and is meant to serve self-interests that are at odds both with indig-
enous interests and the general conservation of biodiversity.

79. GRAIN, “IPR Agents,” para. 10
80. GRAIN, “IPR Agents,” para. 11.
81. The UN Commission on Human Rights received the Draft Declaration of the Rights of In-
digenous Peoples in 1995. The commission assigned a working group to review the declaration. In
2006, the group submitted a final document to the Human Rights Council and on September 13,
2007, the General Assembly Resolution 61/295 adopted the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (DRIP). Member states adopted the DRIP but four countries namely Australia, Canada,
New Zealand, and the United States voted against the declaration. These countries cited, as reasons
for opposing the declaration, provisions on self-determination, land and resources rights and pro-
visions that gave Indigenous Peoples a right of veto over national legislation. The following 11 coun-
tries abstained from voting: Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burundi, Colombia, Georgia, Kenya,
Nigeria, Russian Federation, Samoa, and Ukraine. Although the DRIP is not legally binding and
would therefore be difficult to enforce, its drafting and adoption process demonstrates the lack of
international support for Indigenous Peoples’ initiatives and forums. It is because of lack of support
that it took about 12 years for member states to adopt the DRIP although the UN Commission on
Human Rights received the DRIP in 1995 and assigned a working group to review it.

82. United Nations General Assembly, “General Assembly,” para. 9.
83. United Nations General Assembly, “General Assembly,” para. 11.
84. Anonymous, “The Mataatua Declaration,” 208.
85. Anonymous, “The Mataatua Declaration,” 206.
86. Anonymous, “Recommendations from the Voices,” 212.
87. Anonymous, “UNDP Consultation,” 221.
88. Anonymous, “Kari-Oca Declaration,” 190.
89. Indeed, the ILO Convention 169 acknowledges that the starting point for any considerations
to legislative or administrative measures that may affect indigenous peoples should be consultations
with “the peoples concerned, through appropriate procedures and in particular through their rep-
resentative institutions” (International Labour Organization. “C169 Convention,” Article 6.1).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

African Union. African Model Legislation for the Protection of the Rights of Local Communities, Farm-
ers and Breeders, and for the Regulation of Access to Biological Resources. 具http://www.cbd.int/doc/
measures/abs/msr-abs-oau-en.pdf典 (2000), accessed 3 December 2010.

Alikhan, S., and R. Mashelkar. Intellectual Property and Competitive Strategies in the 21st Century.
The Hague: Kluwer Law International, 2004.

American Folklore Society. “American Folklore Society Recommendations to the WIPO Intergov-
ernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge, and
Folklore.” Journal of American Folklore 117, no. 465 (2004): 296–99.

Anonymous. “Kari-Oca Declaration and Indigenous Peoples Earth Charter.” In Beyond Intellectual
Property: Toward Traditional Resource Rights for Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities, 189–98.
Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, 1996.

———. “The Mataatua Declaration on Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights of Indigenous Peo-
ples.” In Beyond Intellectual Property: Toward Traditional Resource Rights for Indigenous Peoples and
Local Communities, 205–08. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, 1996.

———. “Recommendations from the Voices of the Earth Congress.” In Beyond Intellectual Property:
Toward Traditional Resource Rights for Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities, 209–14. Ottawa:
International Development Research Centre, 1996.

174

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

———. United Nations Development Programme. “UNDP Consultation on Indigenous Peoples’
Knowledge and Intellectual Property Rights.” In Beyond Intellectual Property: Toward Traditional Re-
source Rights for Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities, 219–22. Ottawa: International Develop-
ment Research Centre, 1996.

———. United Nations Development Programme. “UNDP Consultation on the Protection and Con-
servation of Indigenous Knowledge.” In Beyond Intellectual Property: Toward Traditional Resource
Rights for Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities, 223–25. Ottawa: International Development
Research Centre, 1996.

Bachrach, P., and M. S. Baratz. “Decisions and Nondecisions: An Analytical Framework.” The Amer-
ican Political Science Review 57, no. 3 (1963): 632–42.

Bicker, A., P. Sillitoe, and J. Pottier. Development and Local Knowledge: New Approaches to Issues in
Natural Resources Management, Conservation and Agriculture. London: Routledge, 2004.

Blakeney, M. “Intellectual Property in the Dreamtime: Protecting the Cultural Creativity of Indig-
enous Peoples.” Oxford Intellectual Property Research Centre Seminar 9 具http://www.oiprc.ox.ac.uk/
paperyearindex.php典 (2002), accessed 3 May 2010.

Bowie, R. “Traditional Knowledge and Environmental Assessment: A Case Study of the Victor Dia-
mond Project” (M.A. Thesis., Trent University, Canada, 2008) ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
(PQDT) MR 31703, accessed 2 August 2010.

Boyatzis, R. E. Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and Code Development. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998.

Boyle, J. Shamans, Software, and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information Society. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.

Braga, C. A. P., C. Fink, and C. Sepulveda. Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Development.
Washington, DC: World Bank, 2000.

Brass, E. R. “Empowerment and Wellness of Aboriginal Elders.” (M.A. Thesis. The University of Re-
gina, Canada. 2004) ProQuest Dissertations & Theses (PQDT) MQ96081, accessed 20 May 2010.

Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal
Peoples: Vol. 4: Perspectives and Realities. Ottawa: Canada Communication Group, 1996.

Convention on Biological Diversity. “Multilateral Convention on Biological Diversity: With An-
nexes,” 具http://untreaty.un.org/English/UNEP/biological_english.pdf典 (5 June 1992), accessed 21 July
2010.

———. Handbook of the Convention on Biological Diversity. London: Earthscan, 2001.
———. Convention on Biological Diversity: Working Group on Article 8(j), 具http://www.cbd.int/
convention/wg8j.shtml典 (2007), accessed 3 August 2010.

Drahos, P., and J. Braithwaite. Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge Economy? London:
Earthscan, 2002.

Failing, L., R. Gregory, and M. Harstone. “Integrating Science and Local Knowledge in Environmen-
tal Risk Management: A Decision-Focused Approach.” Ecological Economics 64, no. 1 (2007): 47–60.

Gill, S., and D. Law. The Global Political Economy: Perspectives, Problems, and Policies. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University, 1988.

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

175

Gould, D. M., and W. C. Gruben. “The Role of Intellectual Property Rights in Economic Growth.”
Journal of Development Economics 48, no. 2 (1996): 323–50.

GRAIN (Genetic Resources Action International). “IPR Agents Try to Derail OAU Process: UPOV
and WIPO attack Africa’s Model Law on Community Rights to Biodiversity,” 具http://www.grain.org/
article/entries/89-ipr-agents-try-to-derail-oau-process典 (2001), accessed 30 December 2010.

Hart-Wasekeesikaw, F. “First Nations Peoples’ Perspectives and Experiences with Cancer” (M.N. The-
sis, The University of Manitoba, Canada, 1996) ProQuest Dissertations & Theses (PPQDT) MM16153,
accessed 21 June 2010.

Hjartarson, F. A. “Epistemological Foundations of Traditional Native Education According to Algon-
quian Elders” (PhD Thesis, University of Ottawa, Canada, 1995) ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
(PQDT) NN15725, accessed 21 June 2010.
International Labour Organization. “C169 Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989,” 具http://
www.ilo.org/ilolex/cgi-lex/convde.pl?C169典 (1989), accessed 13 June 2010.

Keewatin, D. “An Indigenous Perspective on Custom Adoption” (M.S.W. Thesis, University of Man-
itoba, Canada, 2004), ProQuest Dissertations & Theses (PQDT) MQ97091, accessed 17 June 2010.

Kendrick, A., and M. Manseau. “Representing Traditional Knowledge: Resource Management and
Inuit Knowledge of Bairren-Ground Cairlbou.” Society & Natural Resources 21, no. 5 (2008): 404–
18.

Kenny, M. B. “Ojibway Plant Taxonomy at Lac Seul First Nation, Ontario, Canada” (M.Sc.F. Thesis,
Lakehead University, Canada, 2000), ProQuest Dissertations & Theses (PQDT) MQ60853, accessed
21 June 2010.

Kulchyski, P. K, D. N. McCaskill, and D. Newhouse. In the Words of Elders: Aboriginal Cultures in
Transition. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999.

Lai, E. L-C., and L. D. Qiu. “The Northern Intellectual Property Rights Standard for the South?”
Journal of International Economics 59, no. 1 (2003): 183–209.

Maina, C. K. “What Patents Tell: Limitations of Patent-Based Indicators of Innovation.” Journal of
Law, Ethics, and Intellectual Property 1, no. 1, 具http://www.scientificjournals.org/journals2007/articles/
1254.pdf典, (2007), accessed May 3 2010.

———. “The Traditional Knowledge Protection Debate: Identifying and Listening to the Voices of
Traditional Knowledge Holders” (PhD Thesis, University of Western Ontario, Canada, 2009) Pro-
Quest Dissertations & Theses (PQDT) NR54313, accessed 23 Mar. 2010.

Maskus, K. E. “The Role of Intellectual Property Rights in Encouraging Foreign Direct Investment
and Technology Transfer.” Duke Journal of Comparative and International Law 9 (1998): 109–61.

———. Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy. Washington, DC: Institute for Inter-
national Economics, 2000.

Matthews, G. Globalising Intellectual Property Rights: The TRIPS Agreement. London: Routledge, 2002.

Milich, L. “Resource Mismanagement versus Sustainable Livelihoods: The Collapse of the Newfound-
land Cod Fishery.” Society & Natural Resources 12, no. 7 (1999): 625–42.

M’Lot, M. A. “Ka Isinakwak Askiy: Using Cree Knowledge to Perceive and Describe the Landscape of
the Wapusk National Park Area” (M.N.R.M. Thesis, The University of Manitoba, Canada, 2002) Pro-
Quest Dissertations & Theses (PQDT) MQ76814, accessed 21 July 2010.

176

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

Mosco, V. The Political Economy of Communication: Rethinking and Renewal. London: Sage, 1996.

Naghavi, A. “Strategic Intellectual Property Rights Policy and North-South Technology Transfer.”
Review of World Economics 143, no. 1 (2007): 55–78.

Parlee, B., F. Berkes, and Teetl’it Gwich’in Renewable Resource Council. Indigenous Knowledge of
Ecological Variability and Commons Management: A Case Study on Berry Harvesting From North-
ern Canada. Human Ecology 34, no. 4 (2006): 515–28.

Ransom, J. W., and K. T. Ettenger. “‘Polishing the Kaswentha’: A Haudenosaunee View of Environ-
mental Cooperation.” Environmental Science and Policy 4, no. 4–5 (2001): 219–28.

Ross-Leitenberger, K. A. “Aboriginal Midwifery and Traditional Birthing Systems Revisited and Re-
vitalized: Interviews with First Nations Elders in the Northwest Region of British Columbia” (M.A.
Thesis, University of Northern British Columbia, Canada 1999) ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
(PQDT) MQ62495, accessed 12 July 2010.

Scotchmer, S. “The Political Economy of Intellectual Property Treaties.” The Journal of Law, Econom-
ics, and Organization 20, no. 2 (2004): 415–437.

Shiva, V. Biopiracy: The Plunder of Nature and Knowledge. Boston: South End Press, 1997.

———. Protect or plunder? Understanding Intellectual Property Rights. London: Zed Books, 2001.

Singleton, R. A., and B. C. Straits. Approaches to Social Research, 4th ed. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2005.

Stone, P. J. “Thematic Text Analysis: New Agendas for Analyzing Text Content.” In Text Analysis for
the Social Sciences: Methods for Drawing Statistical Inferences from Texts and Transcripts, edited by
C. W. Roberts, 35–54. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1997.

UNESCO. “Florence Agreement on the Importation of Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Material,” 具http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID⫽12074&URL_DO⫽DO_TOPIC&URL_
SECTION⫽201.html典 (1950), accessed 3 May 2010.

———. “Convention for the Safeguarding of
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001325/132540e.pdf典 (2003), accessed 3 May 2010.

the Intangible Cultural Heritage,” 具http://

———. “Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions,”
具http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID⫽31038&URL_DO⫽DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION⫽201.
html典 (2005), accessed 3 May 2010.

UNESCO and WIPO. “Model Provisions for National Laws on the Protection of Expressions of Folk-
lore Against Illicit Exploitation and Other Prejudicial Actions (1982),” 具http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/
en/text.jsp?file_id⫽184668典 (1982), accessed 14 June 2010.
United Nations. “United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,” 具http://
www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/en/drip.html典 (2008), accessed 3 Aug. 2010.

United Nations General Assembly. “General Assembly Adopts Declaration on Rights of Indigenous
Peoples: Sixty-first General Assembly Plenary 107th & 108th Meetings, GA/10612,” 具http://www.un.org/
News/Press/docs/2007/ga10612.doc.htm典 (2007), accessed 30 Apr. 2010.

United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. “Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,” 具http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/
independence.htm典 (1960), accessed 2 July 2010.

POWER RELATIONS IN THE TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DEBATE

177

United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. “Study of the Problem of Discrimination
Against Indigenous Populations: Final report submitted by the Special Rapporteur, Mr. Jose Mar-
tinez Cobo, UN Doc. E/CN. 4/Sub. 2/1 983/2I/Add. 8,” 具http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/en/
spdaip.html典 (1983), accessed 3 May 2010.

United Nations Working Council of Indigenous Peoples. “Declaration of Principles of the World
Council of Indigenous Peoples.” In Beyond Intellectual Property: Toward Traditional Resource Rights
for Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities, edited by D. A. Posey and G. Dutfield, 179–80. Ot-
tawa: International Development Research Centre, 1996.

United States Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. World Trade Organization (WTO). Final Act
Embodying the Results of the Final Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations. Washington,
DC: Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, 1994.

UPOV (International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants). “Doha WTO Ministerial
2001: Ministerial Declaration (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1),” 具http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/
minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_e.htm典 (2001), accessed 20 Dec. 2010.

Wall, M. “Porcupines (Erethizon Dorsatum, Ojibway: Gaag) in the First Nations Communities of
Black River and Hollow Water: Using Traditional Knowledge of Wildlife in Sustainable Forest Man-
agement” (M.Env. Thesis, University of Manitoba, Canada, 2008) ProQuest Dissertations & Theses
(PQDT) MR36401, accessed 19 Mar. 2010.

Walker, D. M. Oxford Companion to Law. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980.
WIPO. “Members and Observers,” 具http://www.wipo.int/members/en/典 (n.d.), accessed Dec. 12 2010.
———. “General Rules of Procedure,” 具http://www.wipo.int/freepublications/en/general/399/
wipo_pub_399.html典 (1970), accessed 23 Apr. 2010.

———. “Matters Concerning Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources Traditional Knowledge
and Folklore, WO/GA/26,” 具http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/govbody/en/wo_ga_26/wo_ga_
26_6.pdf典 (2000), accessed 12 June 2010.

———. “Intellectual Property Needs and Expectations of Traditional Knowledge Holders: WIPO
Report on Fact-Finding Missions on Intellectual Property and Traditional Knowledge (1998–1999).”
Geneva: WIPO, 2001.
———. “Draft Provisions on Traditional Cultural Expressions/Folklore and Traditional Knowl-
edge,” 具http://www.wipo.int/tk/en/igc/index.html典 (2008), accessed 23 April 2009.

WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional
Knowledge and Folklore. “Defensive Protection Measures Relating to Intellectual Property, Genetic
Resources and Traditional Knowledge: An Update, WIPO/GRTKF/IC/6/8,” 具http://www.wipo.int/
edocs/mdocs/tk/en/wipo_grtkf_ic_6/wipo_grtkf_ic_6_8.pdf典 (2003), accessed 12 Apr. 2010.

———. “The Protection of Traditional Knowledge: Collation of Written Comments on the List of
Issues, 11th Session WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5(a),” 具http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/tk/en/wipo_grtkf_
ic_11/wipo_grtkf_ic_11_5_a.pdf典 (2007), accessed 21 Aug. 2010.

World Trade Organization (WTO) Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.
“Minutes of Meeting Held in the Centre William Rappard on 20–21 October 1999, IP/C/M/25,”
(http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/gi1_docs_e.htm典 (1999), accessed 21 June 2010.

178

CHARLES KAMAU MAINA

———. “Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights: Review of the Provi-
sions of Article 27.3(b). Communication from Mauritius on behalf of the African Group, IP/C/W/
206,” 2000. WTO Documents Online. Web accessed 2 Apr. 2010.
———. “Minutes of Meeting Held in the Centre William Rappard on 21 March 2000, IP/C/M/26,”
具http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/gi1_docs_e.htm典 (2000), accessed 21 June 2010.
———. “Minutes of Meeting Held in the Centre William Rappard on 26–29 June 2000, IP/C/M/27”,
(http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/gi1_docs_e.htm典 (2000), accessed 21 June 2010.

———. “Minutes of Meeting Held in the Centre William Rappard on 21 and 22 September 2000,
IP/C/M/28,” 具http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/gi1_docs_e.htm典 (2000), accessed 21 June
2010.

———. “Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights: Review of the Provi-
sions of Article 27.3(b) of the TRIPS Agreement. Communication from the European Communities
and their Member States, IP/C/W/254,” 2001. accessed 12 March 2010.
———. “Minutes of Meeting Held in the Centre William Rappard on 5–7 March 2002, IP/C/M/35,”
2002 WTO Documents Online. Web accessed 21 June 2010.


