    (2016)   23:  33– 70 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2016                        

    Strategies to Support the Interests of 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
Peoples in the Commercial Development 
of Gourmet Bush Food Products 
       Kylie     Lingard   *  

   Paul     Martin   *   

   

         Abstract:     Indigenous groups and individuals may have different needs and 
aspirations in relation to their local plant foods (“bush foods”). Interests may 
reflect totemic relationships, customary rights and duties, social positions, 
political and economic motivations, and personal capacities. This article uses a 
systems method to identify strategies to support the diverse interests of Australia’s 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the commercial development 
of gourmet bush food products. The aim is to identify possibilities for further 
consideration by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.      

   INTRODUCTION 

 There are more than 700,000 Indigenous Australian citizens (“Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait  Islander  peoples”),  1    and  approximately  250  different  language  groups 
(see  Figure 1 ).  2   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have used native 

  *  Australian Centre for Agriculture and Law ,  University of New England ,  Australia ; 
Email:  klingar2@une.edu.au  

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:     The authors gratefully acknowledge the expertise and practical wisdom of 
Rayleen Brown, Pat Torres, Max Emery, Juleigh Robins, Andrew Fielke, and Slade Lee. The work 
reported in this publication was supported by funding from the Australian Government Cooperative 
Research Centres Program through the Cooperative Research Centre for Remote Economic Participa-
tion (CRC-REP). The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the views of the CRC-REP, 
its managing entity Ninti One Limited, or its participants. Errors or omissions are those of the authors. 

33

 34   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

 
 F IGURE  1.  
    The AIATSIS Map of Indigenous Australia. This map attempts to represent 
the language, social or nation groups of Aboriginal Australia. It shows only the general 
locations of larger groupings of people which may include clans, dialects or individual 
languages in a group. It used published resources from 1988–1994 and is not intended to 
be exact, nor the boundaries fixed. It is not suitable for native title or other land claims. 
David R Horton (creator), © Aboriginal Studies Press, AIATSIS, and Auslig/Sinclair, 
Knight, Merz, 1996. No reproduction without permission. To purchase a print version 
visit:  www.aiatsis.ashop.com.au/ .    

 

plants as a food source for millennia.  3   A local species may also be a family totem 
used to help organize social relationships  4   and be the subject matter of traditional 
songs, stories, and ceremonies.  5   The wild harvesting of bush foods provides people 
with an opportunity to pass on and refine knowledge, socialize, exercise, earn 
money, and carry out land and resource management activities.  6   Customary law 
may vest certain members of a group with rights and duties in relation to partic-
ular species or knowledge.  7   These can include rights to make decisions about 
species and species knowledge and responsibilities to ensure such use accords with 
customary law.  8       

 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander knowledge has contributed to the com-
mercial development of over 15 bush food species,  9   including macadamia, lemon 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  35 

myrtle, wattle seeds, bush tomatoes, Kakadu plums, muntries, and Quandong.  10   
Knowledge contributions include:
   
    
   

  •       land management techniques to boost plant growth;  
  •       processing  and  cooking  methods  to  remove  toxins  and  promote  health 

benefits;  

   

  •       the selection of superior plants and harvesting and storage methods to maximize 

plant quality;  

  •       species identity, distinctions, and characteristics; and  
  •       growing habits, seasonal availability, and flavour combinations.  11     

   
   
   

  Recent  estimates  place  the  sale  of  raw  bush  food  ingredients  at  over  AUS 
$18 million a year (excluding macadamia),  12   with product development poten-
tially increasing this figure “by up to 500%.”  13   Macadamia sales account for a 
further AUS $200 million a year.  14   Tangible products include processed ingredi-
ents, restaurant and catering meals, and gourmet sauces, jams, and pies.  15   There 
is emerging interest in new bush food varieties  16   as well as in the legal rights 
to exploit these new varieties (see  Figure 2 ).  17   This article refers to “bush food 
commercialization” as the transformation of native plants into these marketable 
products and their sale.  18   The process differs according to the type of product 
under development. For example, the process of transforming raw ingredients 
into  gourmet  food  products  differs  from  the  process  of  developing  new  plant 
varieties.     

 

 

 F IGURE  2.  

    New bush tomato seedlings ready for field tests.    

 36   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

 Although Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples share a heritage as 
the original inhabitants of Australia,  19   they are an eclectic society with different 
languages and distinct legal systems (see  Figure 1 ).  20   Different groups, as well 
as the individuals within these groups, have different worldviews, social struc-
tures,  political  and  economic  motivations,  personalities  and  capacities,  and, 
hence, different needs and aspirations in relation to the commercialization of 
their  local  plant  foods.  21    This  article  focuses  on  four  categories  of  interests, 
identified in the literature and through consultation:
   
    
   
   
   

  •       the control of plants and knowledge in accordance with customary law;  
  •       the fair sharing of benefits from plant and knowledge use;  
  •       the development of enterprises and partnerships; and  
  •       the transfer and maintenance of knowledge in cultural practices.  22     

These  interests  may  complement  or  conflict  with  government  and  commer-
cial  interests.  Australia’s  endorsement  of  the  United  Nations  Declaration  on 
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in 2012 demonstrates government support in 
principle for each of the aforementioned interests.  23   Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander peoples and government have an interest in conserving native plants 
and fostering economic opportunities for Indigenous Australians.  24   Australian 
governments are committed to facilitating access to plant materials for research 
and development purposes  25   and to sharing in the benefits of resource use.  26   
Gourmet food producers may support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander eco-
nomic development.  27   They are also likely to want efficient regulatory processes 
and reliable suppliers.  28   

 This article reviews the research on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander inter-
ests in bush food commercialization. It then outlines a novel method for identi-
fying legal and institutional strategies to support the interests of Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander peoples. The final section identifies possible strategies to 
achieve this goal. The article synthesizes international and domestic law, policy, 
and literature. The discussion is informed by stakeholder consultations, meetings, 
and field trips over a three-year period as well as prior research by the authors on 
the legal protection of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander heritage sites, knowledge, 
secrets, and stories.  29     

 CURRENT ACADEMIC APPROACHES TO ABORIGINAL AND TORRES 
STRAIT ISLANDER INTERESTS IN BUSH FOOD COMMERCIALIZATION 

 This section reviews the academic approaches to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
interests in bush food commercialization. Research prior to 2000 focused on tra-
ditional food uses and properties.  30   Some of these papers document Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander bush food knowledge,  31   while others trace the health 
benefits of bush foods for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.  32   At the 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  37 

turn of this century, researchers began to look at the role of Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander peoples in bush food commercialization.  33   For example, Geoff Miers 
explored  the  potential  for  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  landowners 
to  grow bush foods on their lands;  34   Tony Cunningham and colleagues, Rosie 
Cooney and Melanie Edwards, and Jock Morse considered the capacity of remote 
peoples to establish bush food businesses;  35   Julian Gorman and colleagues analyzed the 
commercial use of plant products by remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
peoples;  36   Sarah Holcombe and colleagues and Jen Cleary considered the involvement 
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander wild harvesters in product supply chains;  37   
Peter Whitehead and colleagues examined the feasibility of commercial wild harvests 
by remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples;  38   and Louis Evans and 
colleagues considered the capacity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 
to preserve and exploit their bush food knowledge.  39   

 This research highlighted issues in relation to specific, narrow interests. For example, 
Cunningham and colleagues, Miers, and Morse found that wild harvest enterprises 
were constrained by unpredictable yields.  40   Cunningham and colleagues, Holcombe 
and colleagues, Cooney and Edwards, and Cleary identified the practical barriers to 
the development of remote businesses, including access to technology, transport, 
buyers, and business services.  41   Cooney and Edwards noted the legal barriers posed 
by restricted access to lands and resources.  42   Evans and colleagues identified the 
limited legal support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to maintain and 
exploit their bush food knowledge.  43   Overall, these studies concluded that there is little 
support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander interests in bush food commerciali-
zation.  44   Consequently, Jock Morse has suggested that Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander peoples must rely on the goodwill of governments and developers, which is a 
very weak hook upon which to hang the expectations of many people.  45   

 A better approach possibly is to combine strategies that address specific interests 
or problems into a more comprehensive whole. Some possible components of such 
a composite have been identified in the literature. Evans and colleagues examined 
the  use  of  knowledge  databases,  access  protocols,  and  contract  law  to  help  Ab-
original and Torres Strait Islander peoples preserve and exploit their knowledge.  46   
Altyerre-ipenhe Merne and colleagues proposed a set of ethical guidelines to fos-
ter commercial respect for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and their 
needs.  47   Jeremy Morse and Terri Janke outlined how Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander  peoples  can  use  commercial  partnerships,  confidentiality  agreements, 
and trademarks to improve exploitation opportunities.  48   Miers identified a suite of 
marketing, education, and regulatory measures to support Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander landowners to develop horticultural enterprises.  49   Cunningham 
and colleagues proposed a set of measures to improve participation opportunities for 
remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in bush food development.  50   
These measures included wild harvest research, business skills development, improved 
telecommunications, knowledge registers, independent certification schemes, and 
statutory protections against commercial competition.  51     

 38   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

 OTHER SCHOLARSHIP AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS 

 There is a substantial international interest in strengthening the capacity of biodiver-
sity and intellectual property regimes to protect Indigenous interests in traditional 
resources and knowledge.  52   The international biodiversity regime comprises the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and other instruments endorsed by the 
Conference of the Parties to this Convention.  53   Most countries support the CBD,  54   
an instrument partially motivated by the concern that corporations were becoming 
the sole beneficiaries of plant-based inventions based on Indigenous biodiversity 
knowledge.  55   The convention addresses this concern in the following ways:
   
    
   

  •       Article 3 affirms “the sovereign rights of States over their natural resources”;  
  •       Article 15 obliges member states to facilitate access to their genetic resources and 
implement measures to ensure access providers receive an equitable share of 
benefits arising from use; and  

   

  •       Article 8(j) encourages member states to implement similar access and benefit-
sharing provisions with regard to Indigenous and local people’s biodiversity 
knowledge.   

   
These articles underpin the global access and benefit-sharing regime (ABS) encap-
sulated in the 2010 Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair 
and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization (Nagoya Protocol). 
The Nagoya Protocol provides a framework for national ABS regimes that ensure 
genetic resource users share the benefits of use with the country providing the 
resource.  56   It also requires countries to ensure genetic resource users obtain con-
sent to access Indigenous resources and knowledge from the Indigenous peoples 
who have the right to consent under national law  57   and to share the benefits of 
use with those Indigenous peoples.  58   The protocol responds to power imbalances 
affecting the fairness of negotiation processes and outcomes by calling on member 
states to help Indigenous communities develop engagement protocols that address 
their needs and expectations.  59   

 Australia  signed  the  Nagoya  Protocol  in  2012.  60    Ten  years  before  this,  all 
Australian governments endorsed the Nationally Consistent Approach for Access 
to and the Utilisation of Australia’s Native Genetic and Biochemical Resources.  61   
This policy calls on Australian governments to implement ABS regimes that are 
consistent with the provisions of the CBD.  62   Four of the nine Australian juris-
dictions have ABS laws.  63   The laws support at best Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander interests in two situations. First, the regimes may trigger negotiations 
with legally recognized Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander landowners when 
researchers seek access to wild plant material from their land for the purposes of 
genetic research.  64   Legally recognized landowners include groups who own land  65   
or groups with native title rights to exclude others from the land.  66   This does not 
include all people with cultural rights and responsibilities in native plants, but it is 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  39 

a starting point. Second, the regimes may trigger ABS negotiations with Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander peoples who contribute knowledge to research on plants 
accessed under these regimes.  67   This does not include the full range of people who 
may have contributed knowledge, particularly where this knowledge has already 
entered the public domain,  68   but it is another starting point. Negotiations may 
lead to agreements that support the diverse interests of landowners and knowl-
edge providers. 

 In  practice,  these  negotiations  are  likely  to  be  rare  in  bush  food  commer-
cialization. Genetic research is infrequent in this context, and researchers can 
access plant specimens from sources that do not require negotiations with Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander peoples, such as herbariums and seed banks (‘ ex situ  
collections’).  69    There  is  a  great  deal  of  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander 
knowledge that is freely available in books and articles.  70   These practicalities 
may  explain  the  lack  of  benefit  sharing  in  the  bush  food  sector.  71    The  three 
main examples of benefit sharing in Australia have arisen in the essential oil 
and pharmaceutical industries because of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
peoples  or  corporate  social  responsibility  policies,  not  because  of  any  legal 
requirements.  72   

 A related treaty to which Australia is a party is the 2004 International Treaty 
on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA).  73   The ITPGRFA 
complements the CBD by obliging member states to provide researchers with 
access to genetic material from a list of 64 globally important food crops  74   and 
to equitably share the benefits of use.  75   These obligations are unlikely to support 
the interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples since the list of crops 
does not include any Australian bush food species.  76   Although the treaty calls on 
national governments to protect Indigenous knowledge “relevant to plant genetic 
resources for food and agriculture,”  77   it does not outline a framework for protection. 
A recent report on Australia’s obligations under the ITPGRFA links protection to 
the CBD’s ABS regime.  78   

 There is a lot of research on the inadequacy of intellectual property laws to pro-
tect the moral and material interests of Indigenous peoples in their traditional 
plants and knowledge.  79   The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) 
is the UN agency responsible for coordinating the global intellectual property 
regime.  80   The regime includes the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intel-
lectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement),  81   which establishes the international 
standard for intellectual property protection, and subject-specific treaties covering 
literary and artistic works, inventions, trademarks, and industrial designs.  82   The 
regime encourages national measures that vest authors, artists, and inventors with 
rights to control and exploit their creations for a limited time, after which the cre-
ation enters the public domain.  83   The aim of the intellectual property regime 
is  to promote innovation and the transfer and dissemination of technology, not 
to protect culture or deliver social justice outcomes.  84   Time-limited rights to con-
trol  and  exploit  intellectual  creations  partially  reflect  the  universal  human  right 

 40   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

to safeguard moral and material interests in “scientific, literary or artistic produc-
tions.”  85   Examples of Indigenous creations that may qualify for intellectual prop-
erty protection under national law include:
   
    
   
   

  •       food production, harvesting, processing, and storage methods;  
  •       recipes, stories, artworks, symbols, words, and songs; and  
  •       land and resource management techniques.   

  The  standards  in  the  TRIPS  Agreement  allow  domestic  laws  to  exclude 
Indigenous creations from the ambit of protection and from free trade require-
ments.  86   The standards envisage intellectual property rights that depend upon 
there  being  an  individual  or  corporate  creator.  87    This  does  not  encompass 
creations  collectively  developed  by  living  and  deceased  peoples.  88    The  stan-
dards  require  that  intellectual  property  rights  depend  upon  subject  matter 
that “substantially differs” from pre-existing work.  89   This excludes Indigenous 
creations that others have published (including without consent),  90   creations 
that “by their very nature [are] not innovative, but rather derived from pre-
existing  works  in  a  slow  process  of  creative  development,”  91    and  creations 
“that first existed in material form thousands of years ago.”  92   Time limits to 
protection ignore the ongoing nature of customary rights and duties, and the 
requirements for tangible form may exclude creations passed from generation 
to generation in oral form.  93   In addition, “the material form requirement dis-
favours Indigenous cultural practices of keeping certain information sacred or 
secret, and may undermine Aboriginal customary law’s ability to use knowl-
edge as a rite of passage.”  94   Copyright standards only require national measures 
that prohibit the unauthorised reproduction of protected works. They do not 
require measures that prohibit the commercial use of ideas or the knowledge 
contained therein.  95   These inconsistencies between legal and cultural standards 
make  intellectual  property  laws  ill  suited  to  govern  non-public  Indigenous 
creations, which leaves Indigenous knowledge “vulnerable to exploitation and 
misuse.”  96   

 In  2000,  WIPO  responded  to  these  concerns  by  establishing  the  Intergovern-
mental  Committee  on  Intellectual  Property  and  Genetic  Resources,  Traditional 
Knowledge and Folklore.  97   In 2009, the committee commenced negotiations on 
new international instruments to protect Indigenous people’s rights to control and 
exploit their intellectual creations and to clarify the relationship between intellec-
tual property and the CBD.  98   

 In 2013, the committee published draft articles on traditional knowledge and 
expressions  99   as well as a consolidated document on genetic resources and associ-
ated knowledge.  100   The draft articles on knowledge and expressions cover tangible 
and intangible knowhow, skills, innovations, practices, artworks, stories, music 
and sounds generated, shared and transmitted “in a collective context” for not less 
than 50 years.  101   The articles encourage national governments to vest Indigenous 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  41 

peoples who create, maintain, use, and develop knowledge and expressions with 
“exclusive and collective” rights:
   
    

  •       to maintain, control, and develop secret knowledge and expressions for as long 

as they remain unknown to others outside the collective;  

   
   
   

  •       to prevent unauthorized uses of secret knowledge and expressions;  
  •       to deny access to and use of secret knowledge and expressions; and  
  •       to protect against false, misleading, offensive, or derogatory uses of knowledge 

and expressions.  102     

   
The articles support the rights of Indigenous peoples to attribution and remuner-
ation for the use of knowledge and expressions that are publicly available but not 
widely known.  103   Alternatively, the articles allow national governments to limit 
the scope of protection to secret knowledge and expressions whose use poses a 
“reasonable apprehension of irreparable harm.”  104   

 The perpetual protection of secret knowledge and expressions is a shift away 
from time-limited intellectual property rights with subject matter entering the 
public  domain  at  the  expiration  of  protection.  The  domestic  implementation 
of these draft articles may help trigger negotiations with Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander peoples when others seek access to their secret knowledge. However, 
the availability of bush food knowledge from published sources may make such 
negotiations rare in bush food commercialization.  105   Negotiations will also not 
arise when developers do not seek Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander knowledge. 
 The third instrument drafted by the intergovernmental committee aims to stop 
non-Indigenous people from securing patent rights in Indigenous innovations and to 
promote compliance with the CBD’s ABS regime.  106   The Consolidated Document 
Relating to Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources calls on national governments 
to require intellectual property applicants to:
   
    

  •       disclose identifiable sources of genetic resources and Indigenous knowledge related 

to the subject matter of the application and  

   

  •       provide evidence of ABS arrangements with the nationally authorized providers 

of genetic resources or secret knowledge.  107     

   
The limited reach of ABS regimes limits the protection available. However, the use 
of intellectual property laws to promote compliance with ABS regimes does affirm 
the need for strategies to support Indigenous peoples’ interests. Paul Martin and 
Michael Jeffery propose an innovative combination of four existing arrangements 
as an alternative to intellectual property reform. They argue:

  [T]he combination of four existing areas of law: confidential information, 
equitable estoppel, statutory prohibitions against misleading or deceptive con-
duct, and unjust enrichment may in effect provide a comprehensive protec-
tion to Indigenous peoples against the misuse of [their secret] knowledge.  108    

 42   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

  This argument indicates the potential of innovative combinations to advance 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander interests to overcome the absence of specific 
statutory protection. There is no documented method for generating such combined 
strategies. The next section outlines a method to achieve this goal.   

 FORMULATING STRATEGIES IN THE COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT OF 

GOURMET BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS 

 As Michael Sedlockoa explains, “[i]n the area of natural resource management, 
research has incorporated notions of systems thinking since at least the early 
1940s.”  109   System thinking “recognises that the … impact of a single product, 
process or practice can only be understood through an appreciation of the wider 
system of which it is part.”  110   For example, a law that works in one context may not 
work in another.  111   A holistic understanding of context can lead to solutions that 
respond to context-specific needs, goals, interactions, and transactions.  112   

 Systems mapping involves “visually mapping the system of interest” and identifying 
parts to change.  113   Environmental law scholars have used systems mapping to under-
stand complex policy problems and to identify workable interventions in the area of 
sustainable consumption,  114   natural resource policy,  115   and biofuel production.  116   The 
approach we have used maps the transactions involved in the commercialization of 
gourmet bush food products. By understanding these transactions, it is possible to con-
sider how to systematically adjust the legal and institutional arrangements supporting 
them to better reflect the interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.  117   
The approach aims to help identify possibilities through four steps:
   
    
   
   

  1.       identify the commercialization stages and actions;  
  2.       identify the legal arrangements influencing each action;  
  3.       assess the capacity of each arrangement to support Aboriginal and Torres Strait 

Islander interests; and  

  4.       identify the possible strategies to improve support for these interests.   

   
   
We applied the approach to the development process for gourmet bush food products 
such as sauces, jams, pies, and chutneys.  

 Step 1: Identify Key Commercialization Stages and Actions 

 The first step is to understand the commercialization stages and actions a developer 
may undertake at each stage, based on a review of the commercialization literature 
and gourmet product development pathways and informed by discussions with 
pathway actors. The commercialization stages include:
   
    
   

  •       samples and supply;  
  •       research and development;  

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  43 

  •       finances and business licenses;  
  •       manufacturing;  
  •       marketing; and  
  •       distribution and sales.  118     

   
   
   
   
   
These stages do not always occur in the order listed, and not every stage may 
be necessary. For example, a developer may create marketing material before 
manufacturing a product and have no need to secure financing. 

 The sample and supply stage is about securing ingredients. Possible actions 
include the sourcing of processed raw ingredients from wild harvesters  119   or traders 
who collect wild produce from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.  120   
Other actions include applying for permits to harvest wild ingredients  121   or con-
tracting for wild harvest.  122   A common action is the purchase of ingredients from 
people who cultivate bush foods on private land (“commercial growers”).  123   The 
research and development stage is where products are created. This might involve 
using knowledge from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, books, articles, 
or websites.  124   It might also involve developing product prototypes and strategies 
to safeguard recipes.  125   The finance and licensing stage, undertaken in preparation 
for manufacture, might involve applying for public or private funding and obtain-
ing any necessary licenses to produce or market the products.  126   Preparation 
for manufacturing might require acquiring and setting up premises or outsourcing 
manufacturing. The marketing stage may involve designing trademarks, pack-
aging, and labels  127   and registering trademarks.  128   Some developers rely on trade-
mark schemes that permit the use of existing marks on products that comply with 
conditions, such as the use of “certified organic ingredients.”  129   Other marketing 
actions include developing brochures, flyers, and advertisements for radio, televi-
sion, the Internet, magazines, and newspapers. The sales and distribution stage can 
sometimes involve securing permission to export products or transport products. 
It might also involve contracting distributors or agents and direct retail sales to 
international or domestic consumers.  Figure 3  represents these stages.       

 Step 2: Identify Legal Arrangements Influencing Each Action 

 The second step is to identify the laws influencing each action. Relevant laws include 
those governing:
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
 Figure 4  summarizes the regulatory framework.       

  •       wild harvest and commercial growing of native plants;  
  •       interstate and international transport of plant products;  
  •       contracts, confidential information, and trade secrets;  
  •       food manufacturing businesses; and  
  •       the use of trademarks and published information.   

 44   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

 

 

 F IGURE  3.  

    The gourmet bush food product development system.    

 Steps 3 and 4: Identify Avenues to Support Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander Interests 

 This section identifies legal and commercial possibilities to support Aboriginal 
and  Torres  Strait  Islander  interests  at  each  stage  and  proposes  measures  to 
strengthen possible support. These possibilities have not been fully developed 
nor tested for feasibility or acceptability. They form a menu of possible directions 
rather than evaluated recommendations for implementation.  

 Samples and Supply 
 A developer may seek wild food samples or supply from commercial growers, the 
wild, or wild harvesters. This may require the interstate transport of plant material, 
to which biosecurity or conservation laws can apply. 

 Some laws require people to obtain a license to grow and sell native plants.  130   
These do not require licensees or licensors to consider Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander interests. Biosecurity laws regulating interstate trade help to prevent the 
spread of plant diseases and pests.  131   They do not aim to protect the cultural and 
economic interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and impose no 
obligation to consider these interests.  132   

 A federal, state, or territory flora law may require a person to obtain a per-
mit to commercially harvest wild plants on public land.  133   These laws do not 
require  permit  grantors  or  holders  to  consider  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait 
Islander interests. Property rights require consent to access land from the person 
who holds the right to exclude people from it.  134   Rights holders may include 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples with freehold title  135   and Indig-
enous custodians with native title rights to exclude others from land.  136   Property 
rights can trigger the need for those who want to collect or harvest plants to 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  45 

 

 

 F IGURE  4.  

    The regulatory environment for gourmet bush food product development.    

have land access agreements with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 
who exercise control over nearly 30 percent of Australian land.  137   In practice, 
gourmet  bush  food  developers  are  mostly  small  businesses  that  may  prefer 
simple contracts of sale with commercial growers to complex negotiations with 
Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  land  authorities.  138    The  availability  of 

 46   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

raw materials from horticultural producers reduces the demand for wild harvest 
produce.  139   

 Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  people  may  harvest,  grow,  and  sell 
bush foods on land they control, subject to any law or agreement to the con-
trary.  140    Contrary  rules  include  prohibitions  on  the  harvesting  of  threatened 
species and leaseholds or licenses that limit the rights of Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander landowners to carry out specified activities. Practical constraints 
include:
   
    
   

  •       lack of transport to access lands in remote areas;  141    
  •       the need for commercial harvesters without legal interests to secure landowner 

consent;  142    

   

  •       the  need  for  all  people  to  comply  with  permit  requirements,  143    with  the 
possibility of being required to pay royalties on harvested material or fees 
for land access;  144    

   

  •       limited access of some Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to buyers, 

online markets, technology, information, and business expertise; and  145    

  •       the unpredictability of wild harvest yields.  146     

   
   
The  analysis  suggests  two  strategies  to  improve  support  for  Aboriginal  and 
Torres Strait Islander interests at the samples and supply stage. The first aims 
to support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander interests when developers har-
vest or grow bush foods on non-Indigenous land. The second aims to improve 
the practical ability of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to supply 
bush food produce.  

 Supporting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Interests When Developers Harvest 

or Grow Plants on Non-Indigenous Land 
 This  strategy  proposes  three  integrated  measures  to  increase  Aboriginal  and 
Torres Strait Islander control over traditional plants and the sharing of devel-
opment benefits. The first concept is the creation of a traditional land custo-
dian register. Public botanic gardens and herbariums have data on the natural 
locations  of  many  plant  species;  147    the  National  Native  Title  Tribunal  has 
data on traditional custodians claiming or holding legal rights in land;  148   and 
the  Australian  Institute  of  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  Studies  has 
information on the locations of different Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
language  groups.  149    Combining  this  data  would  provide  a  starting  point  for 
a register of traditional custodians of areas linked to the natural locations of 
plant species. Any group could register contact details for a nominated repre-
sentative  body.  Registration  would  not  create  new  rights  to  control  lands  or 
resources, but it would acknowledge the collective interests of particular groups 
in traditional species. This register would be the foundation for a number of 
proposed strategies. 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  47 

 The second measure would reform laws to require that non-Indigenous harvesters 
respect the relationships between traditional land custodians and the resources on 
their lands. Possible reforms include:
   
    

  •       requiring any non-Indigenous person harvesting native flora on public land to 

obtain a permit;  

   

   

  •       requiring permit applicants to obtain consent from registered custodians, 

in accordance with custodian protocols; and  

  •       requiring a royalty on the value of harvested materials to be wholly or partly 

allocated to the registered custodians.   

   
Requirements to pay royalties and comply with cultural protocols would underpin 
negotiations. This could be supported by assistance to traditional groups to develop 
engagement protocols and template agreements.  150   

 The third measure aims to ensure that traditional custodians with cultural links 
to species share in the commercial benefits of horticultural production. It proposes 
the following reforms:
   
    

  •       requiring commercial bush food growers to obtain a license to grow native plants 

and pay a royalty (probably to a government agency) and  

   

  •       requiring that royalties be distributed to registered traditional custodians with 

cultural links to the species.   

   
Royalties could be administered through an existing agency to reduce transaction 
costs and maximize returns to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.  151   
Recent estimates place the sale of raw bush food material at over AUS $215 million 
dollars annually, including macadamias.  152   A 2 percent production royalty could 
return more than AUS $430,000 to traditional owner groups each year. An alter-
native is for bush food businesses to pay royalties at the retail level. Retail royalties 
could generate greater returns than royalties collected at the production level, but 
the transaction costs may outweigh the financial benefits.   

 Building the Economic Capacity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples 

 This strategy involves two measures to improve the capacity of Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander peoples to sustain wild harvest businesses. The first requires 
reforms to threatened species laws to ensure Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
representation on threatened species committees. These committees decide whether 
to list a species as threatened. A threatened species listing can have an effect on 
the capacity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to wild harvest. 
For example, it has been unlawful to commercially harvest Davidson plums in 
New South Wales since their listing in 2001.  153   Even though Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander peoples have an interest in these decisions, and some Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander peoples are involved in the management of threatened 

 48   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

populations,  154   there is no requirement to ensure their involvement in such deter-
minations.  155   This involvement would reflect the recognized value of Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander knowledge to the pursuit of conservation goals.  156   

 A second measure would involve regional Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
land councils representing the interests of multiple traditional custodian groups to 
coordinate commercial harvesting.  157   Regional bodies could help secure fund-
ing, map plant habitats, predict yields, and help develop strategies to improve 
supply (see  Figure 5 ).  158   To maximize market position, regional authorities might 
focus on supplying undeveloped species, undersupplied species, and species with 
export potential, such as lemon myrtle, Quandong, and finger limes.  159   A regional 
authority might:
   
    

  •       develop a register of harvesters with approval from traditional custodians to 

harvest species on their lands;  

   
   
   
   

  •       contract approved harvesters to collect produce;  
  •       organize logistics, including transport to and from growing locations;  
  •       promote Indigenous-harvested produce in online marketplaces;  
  •       create incentives for non-Indigenous developers to purchase this produce, such 
as by offering rights to use cultural endorsements, marks, or stories in product 
advertising; and  

   

  •       distribute harvested material (see  Figure 6 ).   

 

 F IGURE  5.  

    Mapping plant growing locations.    

 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  49 

 

 F IGURE  6.  

    Linking with buyers.    

 

This type of support might help Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 
compete against non-Indigenous commercial bush food growers and encourage 
younger people to participate in wild harvest.  160   This could contribute to a broader 
social objective to help increase Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander well-being 
and employment “on country.”  161              

 Research and Development 
 During  this  stage,  a  developer  may  collect  species  knowledge,  develop  prod-
uct prototypes, and devise strategies to safeguard his or her technical or mar-
ket information. The use and protection of non-public Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander knowledge is affected by the law. In broad terms, contract and 
equity  can  oblige  users  of  knowledge  received  in  confidence  to  comply  with 
any express or implied use agreement.  162   However, the general availability of 
bush food knowledge and the difficulties of civil litigation limit the likely use 
of  such  strategies.  163    Copyright  law  can  protect  images  or  sets  of  words  that 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples might use to promote their bush 
food  products.  Copyright  law  only  prohibits  the  reproduction  of  images  or 
words, not the use of knowledge.  164   For instance, controlling the reproduction 
of  the  words  of  a  recipe  does  not  stop  the  recipe  being  used  to  make  a  food 
product.  165   

 In theory, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples may obtain patents over 
secret harvesting, cooking, and production methods that meet the requirements of 
patent law.  166   As mentioned earlier, the requirement for personal “inventiveness” 
severely limits this potential. Further, patent rights allow the rights holder to exclu-
sively exploit their invention for only 20 years.  167   The rights holder must disclose 

 50   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

the invention at the outset of protection, making it freely available at the expiration 
of protection.  168   In practice, few Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are 
likely to have the scientific, legal, and financial resources to use patent rights unless 
they have a strong commercial partner.  169   

 Another rule affecting knowledge collection is the obligation on some researchers 
to obtain informed consent and to have an agreement to share the benefits of use 
with knowledge providers.  170   The rule only applies to plant genetic researchers 
under limited conditions. Genetic research does not include harvesting for pro-
duction.  171   In the uncommon situation where a food product developer carries 
out genetic research, they can access plant samples from sources that do not require 
Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  consent  or  benefit  sharing  (for  example, 
nurseries and plant material collections), which reduces the usefulness of this 
mechanism.  172   

 Institutional policies may require publicly funded researchers to comply with 
ethical  standards,  including  the  Guidelines  for  Ethical  Research  in  Australian 
Indigenous Studies.  173   These guidelines transform the UN Declaration on the 
Rights  of  Indigenous  Peoples  into  principles  relevant  to  academic  research. 
Principle 10 states that Indigenous communities and individuals have a right 
to be involved in any research project focused upon them and their culture.  174   
Research institutions have generally translated these requirements into internal 
requirements for ethical research, which are made binding through the employ-
ment contract. In theory, this could give Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
peoples  the  opportunity  to  negotiate  research  agreements  that  support  their 
unique interests.  175   In practice, these policies are of little consequence in bush 
food development because most developers are private enterprises that are not 
legally subject to ethical research conditions.  176   

 Federal food laws permit the commercial use of a food ingredient with a history 
of safe use in Australia.  177   This allows people generally to exploit the traditional 
foods and published knowledge of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. 
The laws regulating trade secrets offer little assistance:

  Broadly speaking, any confidential business information which provides 
an enterprise a competitive edge may be considered a trade secret. … The 
unauthorised use of such information by persons other than the holder is 
regarded as an unfair practice and a violation of the trade secret. … While 
a final determination of what information constitutes a trade secret will 
depend on the circumstances of each individual case, clearly unfair prac-
tices in respect of secret information include industrial or commercial 
espionage, breach of contract and breach of confidence.  178    

  It would be difficult for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to prove 
this type of unfair treatment if they have never met the developer or if there is no 
clear link between a secret communicated by an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
person and the product. Even if a personal relationship can be found, the legal 
technicalities are daunting. 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  51 

 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples could develop a gourmet food 
product using non-public knowledge or relatively unknown bush food ingredients.  179   
However, patent, copyright and trade secret law cannot prevent others from making 
a similar product (perhaps at a cheaper price). This risk is exacerbated by the fact that 
Australian food laws require developers to disclose ingredients on product labels. 
Federal laws allow developers to apply for an exclusive right to exploit an ingredient 
under a particular brand for 15 months.  180   This does not prevent another person 
from exploiting the ingredient under a different brand.  181   

 Overall legal support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to secure 
an economic interest or respect for their non-public bush food information is weak. 
A more robust support system will require either an innovative use of established 
rules and institutions or  sui generis  laws. We propose three possible strategies for 
the research and development stage of commercialization.  

 Control over Knowledge 

 This strategy proposes that Australian governments create two legal duties. The first 
would require researchers and commercial users of non-public Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander knowledge to obtain informed consent from the Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander knowledge provider or their representative. The second 
would require users of knowledge from publications that identify Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander contributors to obtain consent to use the knowledge. 

 The first duty sits easily with the laws regarding the use of confidential informa-
tion and existing legal obligations.  182   The second duty does not fit neatly within 
current law, but it is consistent with the moral rights legislation that allows authors 
to protect the integrity and ownership of their work.  183   It may be difficult to prove 
that someone has used the knowledge,  184   and the duty could create a false sense 
of security for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples who publish knowl-
edge without effective safeguards.  185   Potential liability for unauthorized use may, 
however, encourage bush food developers to exercise caution in negotiating and 
acknowledging Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander interests.  186   The most pow-
erful effect of such an instrument is likely to be through requirements imposed on 
suppliers by buyers determined to ensure ethical practices and full legal compliance, 
rather than legal action. 

 A limit on the proposed duties is that contract law requires agreements to be 
between legal persons (individuals or corporations). Non-specific “ownership” by 
an unincorporated group of people is not actionable. A problem may also arise 
with vesting consent rights in individuals when knowledge interests are collective 
and because some groups share similar knowledge. Vicky Tauli-Corpuz contends:

  [Individual rights] will push unscrupulous Indigenous individuals to 
claim ownership over potentially profitable Indigenous knowledge which 
will cause the further disintegration of communal values and practices. It 
can also cause infighting between Indigenous communities over who has 
ownership over a particular knowledge or innovation.  187    

 52   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

  The presence of individual rights does not prevent Indigenous groups from reg-
ulating individuals within the collective by social or informal means. However, 
as with each strategy we propose for consideration, the risk of perverse effects and 
abuse needs careful consideration.   

 Notification of Cultural Interests 

 The fact that many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural traditions are unwrit-
ten limits the ability of groups to specify what knowledge is theirs and to take control of 
its use. Cultural secrecy requirements further restrict a group’s ability to claim interests in 
their knowledge. These factors mean that users of cultural knowledge or materials may 
claim not to be aware of the sensitivities or claimed interests. A broadly descriptive data-
base under Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander control that identifies the existence of 
cultural claims in knowledge and cultural assets could notify these interests. The aim of 
the database would not be to document the content of knowledge but, rather, to provide 
notice of interests in claimed knowledge and restrictions on use. Such a service might:
   
    

  •       broadly describe the cultural claims of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
peoples in specific species and indicate the types of knowledge a group may 
hold as well as any cultural restrictions on that knowledge;  

   

   

   

   

  •       provide for the registration of claims in publically available material, where 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples claim ongoing interests or sensitivities 
(the specificity of claims or descriptions would be a matter for Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander peoples to determine);  

  •       indicate how people can legitimately access these cultural resources, including 
the identification of the proper custodians (if there is disagreement about 
custodianship, this would be identified);  

  •       provide model policies, agreements, and protocols to help protect cultural 
resources and cultural sensitivities (heading towards a “cultural best practice” 
framework)—use of the database and best practices could be encouraged, 
perhaps by a certification mark; and  

  •       connect the database to intellectual property right agencies to help prevent the 
grant of rights in creations derived from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
knowledge that has not been ethically obtained.  188     

   
These services might be considered in the development of a national cultural authority.  189   
Challenges include transaction costs and the potential for knowledge to become detached 
from people and place.  190   Databases could also prioritize registered interests over the 
interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait peoples who hold similar knowledge.  191     

 A Window of Opportunity for New Products 

 The transformation of bush foods into gourmet products requires access to money, pre-
mises, technology, and buyers that many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 
generally do not have.  192   The need to overcome structural disadvantages is especially 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  53 

important in remote Australia where bush food businesses are one of the few prospects 
for economic growth.  193   A possible strategy to address these issues is a statutory right for 
registered traditional custodians to have a privileged legal “window” to exploit commer-
cially undeveloped foods for a specified period, such as 10 years from the time when its 
commercial potential is first identified. The right to exploit a commercially undeveloped 
species could attach to any group with a registered cultural link to the species. 

 As with any of the other possibilities we have discussed, there are risks that need 
to be identified and managed. For example, if a number of groups with cultural 
links to the species held the right to license its commercial use, developers might 
“license shop” between groups. Another possible objection is the reduction of mar-
ket competition.  194   However, competition law does allow limiting competition in 
the public interest or where this is authorized by statute.  195   The Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development supports competition laws that “foster 
competition, innovation, economic growth  and important social objectives .”  196      

 Business Licensing 
 The  interests  of  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  peoples  are  not  consider-
ations in licenses to operate food manufactures or businesses. There are a number 
of ways through which this type of obligation could be extended to the business 
sector, including amendments to existing laws (for example, business licensing 
laws or corporations law) or by  sui generis  laws to specifically address the moral 
rights of traditional custodians and knowledge holders. For example, it may be 
possible to amend food business license conditions to require bush food devel-
opers to demonstrate compliance with ethical development guidelines, such as the 
Guidelines for Ethical Research in Australian Indigenous Studies.   

 Manufacturing 
 Food manufacturing laws are concerned with the safety and hygiene of premises and 
products. There are no special conditions that require consideration of Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander interests or the demonstration of good practices in dealing 
with bush foods. Nor are there support services to address the unique challenges 
facing aspiring Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander bush food developers.  197   The 
challenges include complex permit and licensing regimes and access to transport, 
markets, and start-up capital.  198   The role of Indigenous Business Australia is to help 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples establish and grow businesses,  199   but its 
focus is mainly on helping established businesses grow.  200   New enterprise develop-
ment in the bush food sector is likely to require specialized skills and support. 

 It would be possible to establish a support unit with qualified staff (ideally Aborig-
inal and Torres Strait Islander peoples) to provide business and capacity development 
support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. Case managers could work 
with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander entrepreneurs to develop their enterprises. 
Advisors could help them access training, expertise, permits, finance, technology, 
transport, and markets. Suitably qualified Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander case 

 54   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

managers may be hard to find. Another barrier is the feasibility of servicing a small 
number of enterprises, particularly in the short term. These are among the issues that 
require detailed investigation.   

 Marketing 
 Marketing may involve developing product trademarks, packaging, labels, and pro-
motional  material  and  negotiating  the  use  of  existing  marks  and  advertising.  The 
use of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander words and symbols to market bush food 
products is relevant in this commercial context as it allows the marketer to claim 
cultural associations that may help to sell the product. Copyright law prohibits the 
unauthorized use of artwork in marketing material, where the artist is still alive or 
has been dead for less than 70 years.  201   Trademark and consumer laws allow people 
to object to the “scandalous” or confusing use of words in marketing material.  202   For 
example, “a group of Aboriginal artists successfully opposed an attempt to trademark 
the slogan ‘Utopia Batik’ … arguing that the word ‘Utopia’ should be available to all 
artists of the region.”  203   A similar argument could prevent the unauthorized use of 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander language words in bush food marketing. 

 There are some legal arrangements that might help Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander peoples distinguish their bush food products in the marketplace. Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander peoples might promote their products as being from a 
particular geographical or cultural region, using a certification of origin trademark to 
prevent others from outside the region from making the same claim.  204   It may also 
be possible to distinguish products using names or symbols that have specific cul-
tural connections.  205   For example, one Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander woman 
sought permission from her clan to use their billy goat plum name on her plum 
chutney products.  206   A number of strategies could help strengthen these interests.  

 Control of Cultural Words and Symbols 

 This  strategy  involves  three  measures.  The  first  would  be  to  amend  trademark 
and  consumer  laws  to  prohibit  the  unauthorized  commercial  use  of  Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander words or symbols. This shifts the onus from Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander peoples to protect their own words and symbols from 
misuse and could help Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples distinguish 
their products in the marketplace. The second measure would exempt Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander organizations from trademark registration and renewal 
fees, should they wish to legally protect cultural words or symbols. Under the third 
measure, Intellectual Property Australia would:
   
    

  •       maintain a contact list of registered Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 

organizations (currently around 5000 organisations)  207   and  

   

  •       notify this list if a person submits an intellectual property application that 
involves native plants or animals or words or symbols that may be associated 
with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.   

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  55 

A requirement that applicants for trademarks disclose any negotiated arrange-
ment for the use of cultural symbols or words, or any potential cultural associ-
ation, would strengthen the protection of cultural associations. An additional 
measure  could  be  an  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  expert  panel  to 
advise Intellectual Property Australia on the merits of any cultural objection.  208      

 Sales and/or Distribution 
 There is some limited sales and distribution support for Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander enterprises through Supply Nation, a national network that con-
nects Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses with people committed 
to buying Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander products.  209   This section pro-
poses a strategy to strengthen support for the interests of Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander peoples in the commercialization of bush food products.  

 Increasing Support 

 The strategy comprises three measures. Under the first measure, new rules would 
require exporters of bush food products to certify that they share development 
benefits with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. This could involve 
extending the role of export biosecurity agencies to include cultural protection, 
but this is consistent with international proposals that exporters of plant genetic 
material certify that they have government or Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
consent to export native plant specimens. 

 The second measure involves peak bush food industry bodies (for example, 
the  Australian  Native  Food  Industry  and  the  Australian  Macadamia  Society) 
implementing  reconciliation  action  plans  (RAPs).  The  Australian  govern-
ment  funds  Reconciliation  Australia  to  assist  entities  to  implement  plans.  210   
The plans have been effective in furthering social justice initiatives and long-
term  partnerships  with  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  peoples.  211   
Industry-wide plans may help foster “ethical and socially responsible” devel-
opment.  212   This approach is consistent with private sector voluntary regulation 
or co-regulation. 

 Industry bodies would encourage members to implement RAPs, potentially 
offering the use of a certification mark on products that comply with ethical 
standards.  Plans  could  address  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  inter-
ests, including commitments to use Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander sup-
pliers and to integrate ethical principles “into everyday business practices.”  213   
The recent establishment of an Indigenous Advisory Committee at Australian 
Native Food Industry Limited,  214   and the finding that many bush food devel-
opers  appreciate  the  “authenticity  and  integrity”  that  Aboriginal  and  Torres 
Strait Islander peoples bring to the industry,  215   suggest potential industry recep-
tiveness to this proposal. A challenge may be securing support from commer-
cial entities who “feel the status quo is not so bad.”  216    Table 1  summarizes the 
concepts that have been discussed.          

 56   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

 Table 1.      Summary of current and potential support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander interests at key development states  

Stage  

Potential legal support Legal/practical issues

Options  

 Samples and 
supply   

 

 Research and 
development  

•  Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander 
peoples who own or 
control access to 
land may negotiate 
land access 
agreements with 
harvesters

•  Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander 
peoples may develop 
wild harvest or 
horticultural 
enterprises
•  Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander 
knowledge holders 
may negotiate 
knowledge use 
agreements

 

 Finance and 
licensing  

•  Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander peoples 
may develop products 
from secret foods
•  Publicly funded 
entities may have to 
comply with ethical 
guidelines

 Manufacturing   •  Indigenous Business 

Australia supports 
existing businesses

•  Create a traditional custodian 
register 
 •  Require non-Indigenous harvesters 
to obtain prior informed consent 
from traditional custodians 
 •  Collect royalties from harvesters, 
growers, or retailers 
 •  Distribute royalties to traditional 
custodians 
•  Require Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander representation on 
threatened species boards 
 •  Coordinate supply at the 
regional level 

•  Prohibit the unauthorized use of 
non-public knowledge 
 •  Prohibit the unauthorized use 
of knowledge in publications by 
identifiable Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander authors 
 •  Offer a central database 
support service 

•  Create a right for 
traditional custodians 
to exploit their undeveloped 
species 
•  Require business licensees to 
comply with ethical guidelines 
 • Collect royalties from licensees 
 •  Distribute royalties to traditional 
custodians 
• Create a business support unit 

•  Most Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait 
Islander land is in 
remote areas 
 •  Negotiations can 
take over a year 
 •  Most developed 

species are available 
from other sources
•  Difficult to access 
lands and resources 
 •  Difficult for remote 

peoples to compete 
with commercial 
growers

•  A lot of knowledge 
is publicly available 
 •  Agreements are 
expensive to enforce 
 •  Copyright does not 
stop someone using 
knowledge 
 •  Patents are expensive 
and difficult to obtain 
and enforce 
 •  Genetic research is 
rare in bush food 
commercialization
•  Use risks revealing 
secret to others

•  Most bush food 
developers operate 
in the private sector

•  Little support for 
new businesses 
 •  No service specifically 
to support bush food 
businesses

Continued

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  57 

Table 1. continued

Stage  

Potential legal support Legal/practical issues

Options  

 Marketing  

 

 Distribution/
sales  

•  Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait 
Islander peoples 
can challenge the 
use of artwork, 
cultural words 
or symbols

•  Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait 
Islander peoples 
may exploit product 
using mark
•  Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait 
Islander producers 
may connect with 
buyers through 
Supply Nation

•  Court proceedings 
to challenge the 
use of artwork are 
expensive 
 •  Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander 
peoples must be aware 
of use of art, words, 
or symbols to object
•  Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander 
peoples must have 
the capacity to make 
a product to exploit
•  Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander 
peoples must have 
the capacity to make 
product

•  Prohibit the use of cultural 
words and symbols 
 •  Facilitate Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander objections to 
the unauthorized registration 
of rights 

• Waive trademark registration fees 

•  Amend export rules to require 
proof of benefit sharing 
 •  Encourage peak industry 
bodies and members to use 
reconciliation action plans  

 WHERE TO FROM HERE? 

 This article has used a systems mapping approach to identify possible new strat-
egies to support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander interests in the commercial 
development of gourmet food products. Some options will inevitably prove more 
aspirational than feasible, and options that appear straightforward may, in prac-
tice, require complicated policy changes, new institutional structures, and lengthy 
negotiations with diverse stakeholders. However, it is clear that there are alterna-
tives that might, separately or in combination, improve the likelihood that Aborig-
inal and Torres Strait Islander peoples can achieve their aspirations in bush food 
commercialization. While a comprehensive  sui generis  law might be preferred to a 
complex cocktail, the lack of such a law does not mean that better outcomes cannot 
be achieved. 

 This article is a first step toward systemic support for the diverse interests 
of  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  peoples  in  their  traditional  foods. 
The  proposals  are  possibilities.  Progress  will  require  far  deeper  engagement 
with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, government, and industry to 
identify approaches that will advance Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander social 
justice and economic development through the commercialization of bush foods, 
with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander justice arguably being the most impor-
tant social problem that Australians face.   

 58   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

 SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

 A large-scale version of the map in  Figure 1  is available as supplementary material 
for this article at  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0940739116000023 .     

  ENDNOTES 

 3  .     Merne Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh 

 4  .     Ibid., 17, 19, 26.  
 5  .     Ibid., 16.  
 6  .     Ibid.; Holcombe, Yates, and Walsh  2011 ; Cleary  2012 .  
 7  .     Merne Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh 

 8  .     Ibid., 19–20.  
 9  .     Ibid., 14; Miers  2004 , iii; Morse  2005 , 3, 8; Cleary  2009 , 1; Clark  2012 , 1.  
 10  .     Clark  2012 , 59–60.  
 11  .     Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner  2008 , 212–13; Merne Altyerre-

 1  .     Australian Bureau of Statistics  2011 .  
  
  
 2  .     Creative Spirits, “Aboriginal Languages,” 2013,  http://www.creativespirits.info/aboriginalculture/
language  (accessed 22 May 2015). For an excellent map of language groups recorded to date, see 
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, “Aboriginal Australia Map,” 
1996,  http://aiatsis.gov.au/explore/articles/aboriginal-australia-map  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
  
 2011 , 12.  
  
  
  
  
 2011 , 19.  
  
  
  
  
ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh  2011 , 18.  
 12  .     Clark  2012 , vii.  
  
 13  .     Ibid.  
  
  
 14  .     Australian Macadamia Society, “The Macadamia Industry,” 2015,  http://www.australian-
macadamias.org/industry/about-aussie-macadamias/the-macadamia-industry  (accessed 22 December 
2015).  
  
 15  .     Morse  2005 , 27; Clark  2012 , vii–viii. See, e.g., Outback Spirit, “Shop,” 2013,  http://outbackspirit.
com.au/shop/   (accessed  20  May  2015);  Outback  Pride,  “Retail  Products,”  2015,   http://www.
outbackpride.com.au/retail-products   (accessed  22  December  2015);  Tuckeroo,  “Food  Service 
Products,” 2015,  http://www.andrewfielke.com/andrew-fielke-tuckeroo-food-service-products/
tuckeroo-food-service-products  (accessed 20 May 2015).  
  
 http://crc-rep.com/research/enterprise-development/plant-business  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
  
 17  .     See, e.g., Intellectual Property Australia, “Hybrid Finger Lime (Citrus Hybrid),” 2004,  http://
www.ipaustralia.gov.au  (accessed 20 May 2015).  
  
 2006 .  
  
  
  
Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh  2011 , 7.  
  
 22  .     See generally Janke  1998 ; Cooney and Edwards  2009 ; Evans et al.  2009 ; Holcombe, Yates, and Walsh 
 2011 ; Merne Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh  2011 .  
  
 23  .     Macklin  2009 ; United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, GA Res 61/295, 
UN GAOR, UN Doc A/RES/61/295 (13 September 2007).  
  
 24  .     See e.g., Council of Australian Governments  2009 ; Department of the Environment, “About 
Indigenous Protected Areas,” 2012,  http://www.environment.gov.au/indigenous/ipa/background.html  
(accessed 22 December 2015).  

 19  .     See generally Mabo v Queensland (No 2) (1992) 175 CLR 1.  
 20  .     Calma  2006 .  
 21  .     Smallacombe, Davis, and Quiggin  2007 , 9; Holcombe, Yates, and Walsh  2011 , 255; Merne 

 18  .     See Department of Industry and Resources  2004 ; Standing Committee on Science and Innovation 

 16  .     See, e.g., Cooperative Research Centre for Remote Economic Participation, “Plant Business,” 2014, 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  59 

 25  .     Natural Resource Management Ministerial Council  2002 .  
 26  .     Ibid.  
 27  .     See, e.g., Outback Spirit, “Outback Spirit Foundation,” 2013,  http://outbackspirit.com.au/

 28  .     Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation  2009 .  
 29  .     See, e.g., Martin and Jeffrey  2007 ; Lingard  2012 ,  2015 .  
 30  .     See e.g., Maiden  1889 ; Rae  1982 ; Winfield  1982 ; Cherikoff and Isaacs  1991 ; Maggiore  1993 ; 

 31  .     See, e.g., West  1985 ; Stewart and Percival  1997 .  
 32  .     See, e.g., Rae  1982 ; Maggiore  1993 .  
 33  .     See generally Merne Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, 

 42  .     Cooney and Edwards  2009 , 1.  
 43  .     Evans et al.  2009 , 391.  
 44  .     Merne Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh 

 34  .     Miers  2004 .  
 35  .     Morse  2005 ; Cooney and Edwards  2009 ; Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 .  
 36  .     Gorman, Griffiths, and Whitehead  2006 .  
 37  .     Holcombe, Yates, and Walsh  2011 ; Cleary  2012 .  
 38  .     Whitehead et al.  2006 .  
 39  .     Evans et al.  2009 .  
 40  .     Miers  2004 , 2; Morse  2005 , 9, 22; Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 434.  
 41  .     Cooney and Edwards  2009 , 10–12; Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 32–35; Cleary 

  
  
  
outback-spirit-foundation  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
  
  
  
Stewart and Percival  1997 .  
  
  
  
and Walsh  2011 , 12–13, 20–24; Lee  2012 .  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 2012 , 3.  
  
  
  
 2011 , 7.  
  
  
  
 2011 , 3.  
 48  .     Morse, Janke, and Company  2010 .  
  
 49  .     Miers  2004 , 2.  
  
 50  .     Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 434.  
  
 51  .     Ibid., 434–38.  
  
  
 52  .     See,  e.g.,  Shiva   2001 ;  Gupta   2004 ;  Laird  and  Wynberg   2009 ;  Munzer  and  Austiala   2009 ; 
Stoianoff  2009 ; Anderson  2010 ; Drahos  2011 ; Drahos and Frankel  2012 ; Joshi and Chelliah  2013 .  
  
 53  .     Convention on Biological Diversity, 5 June 1992, 1760 UNTS 79 (CBD); Convention on Biological 
Diversity, Conference of the Parties, Decision VI/24 A (2002); Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic 
Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the CBD, 
12 October 2014, UNEP/CBD/COP/DEC/X/1 (Nagoya Protocol).  
  
parties.shtml  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
 55  .     Posey and Dutfield  1996 , 32–33; UN Conference on Trade and Development  2014 , 1.  
  
 56  .     Nagoya Protocol, Arts. 1, 5(1).  
  
 57  .     Ibid., Arts. 6(2), 7.  
  
 58  .     Ibid., Arts. 5(2)–(3).  
  
 59  .     Ibid., Art. 12.  
  
 60  .     Director of National Parks  2012 .  
  
 61  .     Natural Resource Management Ministerial Council  2002 .  
  
 62  .     Ibid., 5.  
  
  
 63  .     Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Regulations 2000 (Cth) Part 8A (EPBC 
Regulations); Biodiscovery Act 2004 (Qld); Biological Resources Act 2006 (NT); Nature Conservation 
Act 2014 (ACT), Part 8.5.  

 45  .     Morse  2005 , 15; see also Smallacombe, Davis, and Quiggin  2007 , 40.  
 46  .     Evans et al.  2009 , 391.  
 47  .     Merne Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh 

 54  .     Convention on Biological Diversity, “List of Parties,” 2014,  http://www.cbd.int/information/

 60   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

 65  .     See,  e.g.,  Environment  Protection  and  Biodiversity  Conservation  Act  1999  (Cth),  s.  525 

 64  .     EPBC Regulations 8A, 8A.03(1), 8A.10, 12, 17.03A(6)(a); Biological Resources Act 2006, 

  
ss. 5(1), 6, 19; Nature Conservation Act 2014, s. 206.  
  
(EPBC Act).  
 66  .     See, e.g., Nature Conservation Act 2014, s. 206.  
  
 67  .     See, e.g., EPBC Regulations 8A.08(h)–(j); Biological Resources Act 2006, s. 29.  
  
  
 68  .     Although there is no formal legal definition of “public domain,” the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO) notes the following: “The public domain, in intellectual property law, is generally 
said to consist of intangible materials that are not subject to exclusive IP rights and which are, therefore, 
freely available to be used or exploited by any person.” Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual 
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore  2010 , 1. Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander knowledge may have entered the public domain without consent, for example, through 
the sharing of knowledge and its subsequent unauthorized publication in a book or article. In this case, 
the concept of the public domain may support further misappropriation of the knowledge.  
  
 69  .     See, e.g., Council of Heads of Australian Botanic Gardens, “Australian Seedbank Partner-
ship,” 2014,  http://www.seedpartnership.org.au  (accessed 22 December 2015); Australian National 
Botanic Gardens, “Permits for Release of Specimens from the Botanic Gardens,” 2015,  http://
www.anbg.gov.au/gardens/living/permits/index.html  (accessed 22 December 2015); Australian 
National Herbarium, “Specimen Loan and Exchange Services,” 2015,  https://www.anbg.gov.au/cpbr/
program/hc/hc-loans-exchange.html  (accessed 22 December 2015); Australian Tropical Herbarium, 
“Public Reference Collection: Conditions of Use,” 2015,  http://www.ath.org.au/JCUPRD_041996.
html  (accessed 22 December 2015); see also Voumard  2000 , 1.43–1.45.  
  
 70  .     Morse  2005 , 13, 39, 80–81; Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 432; Merne Altyerre-
ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh  2011 , 19; Australian 
National Herbarium, “Traditional Uses of Australian Native Plants,”  https://www.anbg.gov.au/
bibliography/bushfood.html  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
  
Walsh  2011 , 23.  
  
  
2400 UNTS 303 (ITPGRFA).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Anderson  2010 ; Drahos and Frankel  2012 ; Janke and Dawson  2012 .  
  
22 December 2015).  
  
UNTS 299 (TRIPS Agreement).  
  
 82  .     See, e.g., Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 9 September 
1886, 1161 UNTS 30 (Berne Convention); Patent Cooperation Treaty, 19 June 1970, 1160 UNTS 231; 
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 20 March 1883, 828 UNTS 303; Trademark 
Law Treaty, 27 October 1994, 2037 UNTS 35.  
  
  
  
(10 December 1948), Art 27(2).  
  
 86  .     See, e.g., Munzer and Austiala  2009 , 38; Jones  2004 . See Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, “TRIPS and 
Its Potential Impacts on Indigenous Peoples,”  http://www.wcc-coe.org/wcc/what/jpc/trips2.html  

 74  .     Ibid., Arts. 1, 12, Annex 1.  
 75  .     Ibid., Arts. 1, 9.2(b), 13.  
 76  .     Stoutjesdijk  2013 , 37.  
 77  .     ITPGRFA, Art. 9.2(a).  
 78  .     See Stoutjesdijk  2013 , 39–40.  
 79  .     See, e.g., Davis  1996 ; Shiva  2001 ; Rimmer  2003 ; Carpenter  2004 ; Munzer and Austiala  2009 ; 

 83  .     See, e.g., TRIPS Agreement, Arts. 16(1), 26(1), 28.  
 84  .     Ibid., Art. 7.  
 85  .     Universal Declaration of Human Rights, GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, UN Doc A/810 

 72  .     See generally Voumard  2000 , 7.21–7.25; Marinova and Raven  2006 ; Simpson et al.  2013 .  
 73  .     International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, 3 November 2001, 

 71  .     See Merne Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and 

 80  .     WIPO,  “Inside  WIPO,”  2015,   http://www.wipo.int/about-wipo/en/index.html   (accessed 

 81  .     Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, 15 April 1994, 1869 

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  61 

 89  .     Carpenter  2004 , 69; WIPO, “What Is Intellectual Property,” 2014,  http://www.wipo.int/about-

 99  .     Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014a ; Inter-

 97  .     Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2012 , 1–2.  
 98  .     See generally Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources 

 94  .     Janke and Dawson  2012 , 10.  
 95  .     Ibid., 11.  
 96  .     Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2012 ; Robinson 

 90  .     Smallacombe, Davis, and Quiggin  2007 , 42–43.  
 91  .     Carpenter  2004 , 70; see also Janke and Dawson  2012 , 9.  
 92  .     Janke and Dawson  2012 , 10.  
 93  .     Carpenter  2004 , 72–73; Merne Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, 

(accessed 22 December 2015); WIPO, “Traditional Knowledge,” 2015,  http://www.wipo.int/tk/en/  
(accessed 22 December 2015).  
 87  .     See, e.g., Berne Convention, Art. 2(2); TRIPS Agreement, Arts. 15(1), 25(1), 27(1).  
  
 88  .     See generally Howden  2001 , 62–63; WIPO  2001 , 152–53; Carpenter  2004 , 61–62; Merne Altyerre-
  
ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh  2011 , 19; see also, 
e.g., Patents Act 1990 (Cth), s. 7.  
  
ip/en  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
  
  
  
  
Douglas, and Walsh  2011 , 19; Janke and Dawson  2012 , 10.  
  
  
  
 2012 , 77, 91; Stoianoff  2012 , 25–26.  
  
  
 2012 , 1–2; Vivas-Eugui  2012 , 22–23.  
  
governmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014b .  
    100  .     Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014c .  
    101  .     Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014a , Art. 1; 
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014b , Art. 1.  
    102  .     Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014a , Art. 7; 
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014b , Art. 6; Inter-
governmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014a , Arts. 2, 3; Intergov-
ernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014b , Arts. 2, 3.  
    103  .     Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014a , Art. 2; 
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014b , Art. 2.  
    104  .     Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014a , Art. 6.2; 
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014b , Art. 5.2.  
    105  .     See generally Morse  2005 , 13, 39, 80–81; Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 432; Merne 
Altyerre-ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh  2011 , 19; see, 
e.g., Australian National Herbarium, “Traditional Uses of Australian Native Plants.”  
    106  .     See generally Secretariat for the Third Intersessional Working Group  2011 , 1–2.  
    107  .     Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014c , Arts. 3, 4; see 
also Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources  2014a , Art. 4bis.1.  
    108  .     Martin and Jeffrey  2007 , 1; see also Marinova and Raven  2006 , 589.  
    109  .     Sedlackoa et al.  2014 , 34.  
    110  .     Geels et al.  2008 , I.  
    111  .     Martin and Craig  2015 .  
    112  .     Ibid.  
    113  .     Andy Stamp and Julia Coffman, “Spotlight: System Mapping for Advocacy Planning and Evaluation,” 
2015,  http://www.innonet.org/index.php?section_id=6&content_id=744  (accessed 22 May 2015).  
    114  .     Sedlackoa et al.  2014 .  
    115  .     Martin and Verbeek  2006 .  
    116  .     Martin and le Gal  2010 .  
    117  .     See Martin and Verbeek  2006 ; Martin and le Gal  2010 , 5–6.  
    118  .     Bryceson  2008 , 4; Cleary  2012 , 6.  
    119  .     Cleary  2012 .  

 62   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

    120  .     Ibid.  
    121  .     See, e.g., National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 (NSW), s. 131.  
    122  .     See, e.g., Wild Harvest, “Aboriginal Economic Development and the Kakadu Plum,”  http://www.
kakaduplum.com.au/index.php/indigenous-economic-development  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
    123  .     See Clark  2012 , 59–60.  
    124  .     See, e.g., Australian National Herbarium, “Traditional Uses of Australian Native Plants”; 
Andrew Fielke, “Andrew to Head Bush in Search of New Indigenous Ingredients,” 2013,  http://
www.andrewfielke.com/2013/05/andrew-to-head-bush-in-search-of-new-indigenous-ingredients/  
(accessed 22 November 2015).  
    125  .     See generally Australian Copyright Council  2012 ; Intellectual Property Iustitia, “Can You Own 
a Recipe? When Food Meets Intellectual Property Law,” 2014,  http://www.ipiustitia.com/2014/09/
can-you-own-recipe-when-food-meets.html  (accessed 20 May 2015).  
    126  .     See, e.g., Food Act 2006 (QLD), ch. 3.  
    127  .     See, e.g., Outback Spirit, “About Us,” 2012,  http://outbackspirit.com.au/about-us  (accessed 
20 May 2015).  
    128  .     See, e.g., Intellectual Property Australia, “Trade Mark 1023636: Mallee Australian Bush Food,” 
2004,  http://www.ipaustralia.gov.au  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
    129  .     See,  e.g.,  Barbushco,  “Australian  Bush  Food  Grower,”  2014,   http://barbushco.com.au  
(accessed 22 December 2015).  
    130  .     See, e.g., National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974, s. 132; Wildlife Conservation Act 1950 (WA), s. 23D.  
    131  .     See, e.g., Biosecurity and Agriculture Management Act 2007 (WA); Biological Control Act 
1986 (Vic); Biological Control Act 1986 (Tas); Biological Control Act 1986 (SA).  
    132  .     See generally Quarantine Domestic  2014 .  
    133  .     See, e.g., Wildlife Conservation Act 1950, s. 23C; National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974, s. 117; 
National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972 (SA), s. 47.  
    134  .     See generally Australian Law Reform Commission  2014 ; see, e.g., National Parks and Wildlife 
Act 1974, s. 136.  
    135  .     See, e.g., Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 (NT); Aboriginal Land Rights 
Act 1983 (NSW).  
    136  .     National Native Title Tribunal, “Native Title: An Overview,” 2009,  http://www.dmp.wa.gov.
au/documents/NATIVE_TITLE_AN_OVERVIEW(5).pdf  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
    137  .     See generally National Native Title Tribunal, “Determination of Native Title,” 2014,  http://
www.nntt.gov.au/Maps/Determinations_map.pdf  (accessed 22 December 2015); National Native 
Title Tribunal, “Registered Indigenous Land Use Agreements,” 2015,  http://www.nntt.gov.au/Maps/
ILUAs_map.pdf  (accessed 22 December 2015); Steering Committee for the Review of Government 
Service Provision  2014 , 56.  
    138  .     Cleary et al.  2008 , 1; Cooney and Edwards  2009 , 10.  
    139  .     Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 435–36; Holcombe, Yates, and Walsh  2011 , 258.  
    140  .     Department of Aboriginal Affairs  2005 , 235–36, 248–49; Altman and Larson  2006 , 2; Gilligan 
 2006 , 82; Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 429.  
    141  .     Steering Committee for the Review of Government Service Provision  2014 , 56; see, e.g., National 
Native Title Tribunal, “Determination of Native Title”; National Native Title Tribunal, “Registered 
Indigenous Land Use Agreements.”  
    142  .     Cleary  2009 , 1; Cooney and Edwards  2009 , 10.  
    143  .     Cooney and Edwards  2009 , 39–40.  
    144  .     Ibid., 41; see, e.g., Wildlife Conservation Act 1950, s. 23C(4).  
    145  .     Cleary  2009 , 1–2.  
    146  .     Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 435–36.  
    147  .     See generally Altas of Living Australia, “Atlas Data,”  http://www.ala.org.au/about-the-atlas/atlas-data  
(accessed 22 December 2015); see, e.g., Atlas of Living Australia, “Babel Island,” 2014,  http://regions.ala.
org.au/ipa_7aug13/Babel%20Island  (accessed 22 December 2015); Atlas of Living Australia, “Balanggarra,” 
2014,  http://regions.ala.org.au/ipa_7aug13/Balanggarra#to=1959  (accessed 22 December 2015).  

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  63 

    148  .     National Native Title Tribunal  2009 .  
    149  .     See Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies 1996.  
    150  .     Support is available for incorporated groups under the Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander) Act 2006 (Cth), s. 658.1(d); the Nagoya Protocol, Art. 12 calls on members states to 
offer this support.  
    151  .     See generally Cooney and Edwards  2009 , 9, 41; see, e.g., Department of Parks and Wildlife, 
“Flora Licensing Information Sheet: Whole Plants,”  http://www.dpaw.wa.gov.au/images/documents/
plants-animals/licences-permits/Flora/infosheets/Information_Sheet_-_Whole_Plants.pdf  (accessed 
22 December 2015).  
    152  .     Clark  2012 , vii; Australian Macadamia Society, “The Macadamia Industry.”  
    153  .     Clark  2012 , 21.  
    154  .     See, e.g., Central Land Council, “Managing Biodiversity: Threatened Species,” 2011,  http://www.
clc.org.au/articles/info/managing-biodiversity-threatened-species/  (accessed 22 December 2015).  
    155  .     See, e.g., Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995 (NSW), s. 129; EPBC Act, s. 502.  
    156  .     See, e.g., EPBC Act, s. 3(1)(g).  
    157  .     See generally Smyth  2011 , 5.  
    158  .     See generally Kimberly Page, “Jarlmadangah: Scientific Vegetation Survey: Mangala-Nyikina Rangers 
Are Conducting Scientific Vegetation Surveys along the Fitzroy River,” 2013,  http://www.kimberleypage.
com.au/2013/06/jarlmadangah-scientific-vegetation-survey   (accessed  22  December  2015);  Australian 
Government, “Working on Country: Guide for Applicants,” 2012,  http://www.environment.gov.au/
indigenous/workingoncountry/about/pubs/woc-nt-applicant-guidelines.pdf   (accessed  22  May  2015), 
4–5, 6, 7. See, e.g., Department of the Environment, “Working on Country Funded Projects,” 2013,  http://
www.environment.gov.au/indigenous/workingoncountry/projects/qld  (accessed 22 May 2015).  
    159  .     See generally Clark  2012 , 59–60.  
    160  .     See Holcombe, Yates, and Walsh  2011 , 260.  
    161  .     See Natural Resource Management Ministerial Council  2010 . Other measures might also assist. 
For example, law reforms that allow Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander groups who control land to 
authorize their members to carry out small-scale commercial harvests of non-threatened species can 
avoid a “cumbersome consultation process through a centralised Indigenous representative agency” 
(Cooney and Edwards  2009 , 57). It may also be possible to help Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
peoples who do not control land to negotiate agreements with landowners to carry out small-scale 
harvests or horticulture. See generally Wayne Bergmann, “COAG Investigation into Indigenous Land 
Administration and Use,” 2015,  http://aiatsis.gov.au/publications/presentations/coag-investigation-
indigenous-land-administration-and-use  (accessed 22 December 2015); Office of Environment 
and Heritage, “Indigenous Land Use Agreements,” 2014,  http://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/
jointmanagement/indigenouslanduseagreement.htm  (accessed 22 May 2015); see also Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner  2005 .  
    162  .     Coco v A.N. Clark (Engineers) Ltd [1969] RPC 41, 47 (Megarry J); see generally Martin and Jeffrey 
 2007 , 4–6; Australian Law Reform Commission  2008 . However, state courts can only prevent unautho-
rized uses of the knowledge within their jurisdiction. For example, a Northern Territory court can only stop 
unauthorized uses in the Northern Territory. Foster v Mountford and Rigby Limited (1976) 14 ALR 71.  
    163  .     Morse  2005 , 13, 39, 80–81; Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 432; Merne Altyerre-
ipenhe (Food from the Creation Time) Reference Group, Douglas, and Walsh  2011 , 19; see, e.g., 
Australian National Herbarium, “Traditional Uses of Australian Native Plants.”  
    164  .     Copyright Act 1968 (Cth), s. 31.  
    165  .     See generally Australian Copyright Council  2012 ; Intellectual Property Iustitia, “Can You Own 
a Recipe?”  
    166  .     Patents Act 1990, s. 18; Morse, Janke, and Company  2010 , 17.  
    167  .     Patents Act 1990, s. 13.  
    168  .     Ibid.  
    169  .     See generally Githaiga  1998 ; Morse, Janke, and Company  2010 ; see Simpson et al.  2013 .  
    170  .     EPBC Regulations 8A.08; Biological Resources Act 2006, s. 29; Nature Conservation Act 2014, s. 211.  

 64   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

    171  .     EPBC Regulations, Part 8A.03; Biological Resources Act 2006, s. 5.  
    172  .     See,  e.g.,  Clean  Grow,  “Clean  Grow,”   http://cleangrow.com.au   (accessed  22  May  2015); 
SARDI,  “Australian  Pastures  Genebank,”   http://www.sardi.sa.gov.au/pastures/australian_pastures_
genebank  (accessed 22 May 2015).  
    173  .     See  National  Health  and  Medical  Research,  Australian  Research  Council,  and  Universities 
Australia  2007 , 1.12; Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies  2012 .  
    174  .     Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies  2012 , 14.  
    175  .     Ibid., 4.  
    176  .     See, e.g., Outback Spirit, “Outback Spirit Foundation”; Barbushco, “Australian Bush Food 
Grower.”  
    177  .     See Food Standards Australia New Zealand  2013 .  
    178  .     TRIPS Agreement, Arts. 1, 39. WIPO, “What Is a Trade Secret?,”  http://www.wipo.int/sme/en/
ip_business/trade_secrets/trade_secrets.htm  (accessed 20 May 2015).  
    179  .     See Food Standards Australia New Zealand  2013 .  
    180  .     Australia New Zealand Food Authority Standard 1.5.1 Novel Foods 2000 (Cth).  
    181  .     Food Standards Australia New Zealand, “Regulation of Novel Foods,” 2013,  http://www.
foodstandards.gov.au/industry/novel/Pages/default.aspx  (accessed 22 May 2015).  
    182  .     Martin and Jeffrey  2007 .  
    183  .     Copyright Act 1968, ss. 193, 195AC, 195AI.  
    184  .     See generally Robinson  2012 .  
    185  .     See Tauli-Corpuz, “TRIPS and Its Potential Impacts on Indigenous Peoples.”  
    186  .     See, e.g., Natural Resource Management Ministerial Council  2010 , 33, 40, 55.  
    187  .     Tauli-Corpuz, “TRIPS and Its Potential Impacts on Indigenous Peoples.”  
    188  .     WIPO  2012 , 6.  
    189  .     See, e.g., Janke  2008 .  
    190  .     Smallacombe, Davis, and Quiggin  2007 , 16; see also WIPO  2012 , 15.  
    191  .     See generally Anderson  2010 , 31.  
    192  .     Cleary  2012 , 1–2.  
    193  .     Cunningham, Garnett, and Gorman  2009 , 429.  
    194  .     Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (Cth), s. 51.  
    195  .     Ibid., s. 51A.  
    196  .     Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development  2010 , 3 (emphasis added).  
    197  .     Cooney and Edwards  2009 , 56.  
    198  .     See generally Morse  2005 , 3; see also Cleary  2012 , 2.  
    199  .     Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005 (Cth), s. 146.  
    200  .     Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs  2008 , 42–43; Cooney and 
Edwards  2009 , 56.  
    201  .     Copyright Act 1968, s. 14.  
    202  .     Trade Marks Act 1995 (Cth), ss. 39–44; Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (Cth), sch. 2 pts 
2.1–2.2.  
    203  .     Janke and Dawson  2012 , 16.  
    204  .     Trade Marks Act 1995, ss. 42, 43, 61; Competition and Consumer Act 2010, sch. 2 pts 2.1–2.2.  
    205  .     Janke  2009 , 57–58.  
    206  .     Ibid., 151; but see Janke  2003 , 33–34.  
    207  .     Office of the Registrar of Indigneous Corporations, “CATSI FAQ,” 2014,  http://www.oric.gov.
au/catsi-act/catsi-faq#1A  (accessed 22 May 2015).  
    208  .     See Waitangi Tribunal  2011 , 52–54.  
    209  .     Supply Nation, “Certification Overview,” 2013,  http://www.supplynation.org.au/indigenous_
businesses/Certification   (accessed  22  May  2015);  Supply  Nation,  “FAQS,”  2013,   http://www.
supplynation.org.au/resources/FAQs   (accessed  22  May  2015);  Australian  Indigenous  Minority 
Supplier Office Ltd Trading As Supply Nation  2009 .  
    210  .     Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet  2014 , 12.  

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  65 

    211  .     See generally Reconciliation Australia  2013 .  
    212  .     Merne  Altyerre-ipenhe  (Food  from  the  Creation  Time)  Reference  Group,  Douglas,  and 
Walsh  2011 , 10.  
    213  .     Innes  2009 .  
    214  .     Jude  Mayall,  “2013  ANFIL  Meeting,”  2013,   http://www.anfil.org.au/2013-anfil-meeting  
(accessed 22 May 2015).  
    215  .     Clark  2012 , viii.  
    216  .     Hart  2011 , 203.   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

   Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  Social  Justice  Commissioner .   2005 .   Native  Title  Report . 
 Canberra, Australia :  Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) .  

    ——— .  2008 .  Native Title Report .  Canberra, Australia :  HREOC .  

    Altman  ,    Jon  ,  and    Libby      Larson  .   2006 .   Indigenous  Protected  Areas  Programme  Review:  Submission . 
 Canberra, Australia :  Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research .  

    Anderson  ,   Jane  .  2010 .  Indigenous/Traditional Knowledge and Intellectual Property .  Durham, NC : 
 Center for the Study of the Public Domain .  

   Australian Bureau of Statistics .  2011 .  Estimates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians . 
 Canberra, Australia :  Australian Bureau of Statistics .  

   Australian Copyright Council .  2012 .  Recipes: Legal Protection .  Redfern, Australia :  Australian Copyright 
Council .  

   Australian Indigenous Minority Supplier Office Ltd Trading As Supply Nation .  2009 .  Certification 
Rules for the Supply Nation Certified Label .  Canberra, Australia :  Supply Nation .  

   Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies .  1996 .  “Aboriginal Australia 
Map,”   http://aiatsis.gov.au/explore/articles/aboriginal-australia-map   (accessed 22 December 2015) .  

   Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS) .  2012 .  Guidelines for 
Ethical Research in Australian Indigenous Studies .  Canberra, Australia :  AIATSIS .  

   Australian Law Reform Commission .  2008 .  For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice . 
 Canberra, Australia :  Australian Law Reform Commission .  

    ——— .  2014 .  Serious Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era .  Canberra, Australia :  Australian Law Reform 
Commission .  

    Bryceson  ,   K  .  2008 .  Value Chain Analysis of Bush Tomato and Wattle Seed Products .  Alice Springs, 
Australia :  Desert Knowledge Cooperative Research Centre (DKCRC) .  

    Calma  ,   Tom  .  2006 . “The Integration of Customary Law into the Australian Legal System.” Paper 
presented at the National Indigenous Legal Conference, Sydney, Australia, 23 September.  

    Carpenter  ,   Megan  .  2004 .  “Intellectual Property Laws and Indigenous Peoples: Adapting Copyright 
Laws to the Needs of a Global Community.”   Yale Human Rights and Development Law Journal   7 :  51 – 78 .  

    Cherikoff  ,   Vic  , and   Jennifer     Isaacs  .  1991 .  The Bush Food Handbook: How to Gather, Grow, Process and 
Cook Australian Wild Foods .  Sydney :  Ti Tree Press .  

 66   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

    Clark  ,   Michael  .  2012 .  Australian Native Food Industry Stocktake .  Canberra, Australia :  Rural Industries 
Research and Development Corporation .  

    Cleary  ,   Jen  .  2009 .  Perspectives on Developing New Cooperative Arrangements for Bush-Harvested Bush 
Tomatoes from Desert Australia .  Alice Springs, Australia :  DKCRC .  

    ——— .  2012 .  “Business Exchanges in the Australian Desert: It’s About More Than the Money.”  
 Journal of Rural and Community Development   7 , no.  1 :  1 – 15 .  

    Cleary  ,   Jen  ,   Murray     Mcgregor  ,   K.     Bryceson  , and   C. D.     James  .  2008 . “Development of a Value-Driven 
Bush Foods Industry Chain That Rewards Aboriginal People.” Paper presented at the 21st International 
Grassland Congress and 8 th  International Rangeland Congress, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia Autonomous 
Region, China, 28 June.  

    Cooney  ,   Rosie  , and   Melanie     Edwards  .  2009 .  Indigenous Wildlife Enterprise Development: The Regula-
tion and Policy Context and Challenges .  Darwin, Australia :  North Australian Indigenous Land and 
Sea Management Alliance .  

   Council of Australian Governments .  2009 .  National Indigenous Reform Agreement (Closing The Gap) . 
 Canberra, Australia :  Commonwealth .  

    Cunningham  ,   A. B.  ,   S. T.     Garnett  , and   J.     Gorman  .  2009 .  “Policy Lessons from Practice: Australian 
Bush Products for Commercial Markets.”   Geojournal   74 , no.  5 :  429 –40.  

    Davis  ,   Michael  .  1996 .  Indigenous Peoples and Intellectual Property Rights .  Canberra, Australia :  Australian 
Government .  

   Department of Aboriginal Affairs .  2005 .  Overcoming Indigenous Disadvantage in Western Australia . 
 Perth, Australia :  Government of Western Australian   

   Department of Industry and Resources .  2004 .  The Path to Commercialisation: A Guide for Planning an 
Early Stage Innovation Project .  Perth, Australia :  Government of Western Australia .  

   Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) .  2014 .  Indigenous Capability and Development 
Programme Guidelines .  Canberra, Australia :  DPMC .  

   Director of National Parks .  2012 .  Nagoya Protocol: A Win for the Environment and Business .  Canberra, 
Australia :  Australian Government .  

    Drahos  ,   Peter  .  2011 .  “When Cosmology Meets Property: Indigenous People’s Innovation and Intellectual 
Property.”   Prometheus   29 , no.  3 :  233 –52.  

    Drahos  ,   Peter  , and   Susy     Frankel   (eds).  2012 .  Indigenous Peoples’ Innovation: Intellectual Property 
Pathways to Development .  Canberra, Australia :  Australia National University ePress .  

    Evans  ,   Louis  ,   Harry     Scott  ,   Kado     Muir  , and   John     Briscoe  .  2009 .  “Effective Intellectual Property Pro-
tection of Traditional Knowledge of Plants and Their Uses: An Example from Australia.”   Geojournal  
 74 :  391 – 401 .  

   Food Standards Australia New Zealand .  2013 .  Guidance Tool for Determining Whether a Food Is Novel 
or Not .  Canberra, Australia :  Food Standards Australia New Zealand .  

    Geels  ,   F. W.  ,   A.     Monaghan  ,   M.     Eames  , and   F.     Steward  .  2008 .  The Feasibility of Systems Thinking in 
Sustainable Consumption and Production Policy: A Report for the Department for Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs .  London :  Brunel University .  

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  67 

    Gilligan  ,   Brian  .  2006 .  The Indigenous Protected Areas Programme Evaluation .  Canberra, Australia : 
 Australian Government .  

    Githaiga  ,   Joseph  .  1998 .  “Intellectual Property Law and the Protection of Indigenous Folklore and 
Knowledge.”   Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law   5 , no.  2 ,  http://www5.austlii.edu.au/au/
journals/MurUEJL/1998/13.html .  

    Gorman  ,   Julian  ,   Anthony     Griffiths  , and   Peter     Whitehead  .  2006 .  “An Analysis of the Use of Plant Products for 
Commerce in Remote Aboriginal Communities of Northern Australia.”   Economic Botany   60 , no.  4 :  362 –73.  

    Gupta  ,   Anil  .  2004 .  WIPO-UNEP Study on the Role of Intellectual Property Rights in the Sharing 
of Benefits Arising from the Use of Biological Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge .  Geneva : 
 World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and UN Environment Programme .  

    Hart  ,   Paul T  .  2011 .  “Rules for Reformers.”  In  Delivering Policy Reform Anchoring Significant Reforms 
in Turbulent Times , edited by   Evert     Lindquist  ,   Sam     Vincent  , and   John     Wann  ,  201 .  Canberra, Australia : 
 Australia National University ePress .  

    Holcombe  ,    Sarah  ,    Peter      Yates  ,  and    Fiona      Walsh  .   2011 .   “Reinforcing  Alternative  Economies: 
Self-Motivated Work By Central Anmatyerr People to Sell Katyerr (Desert Raisin, Bush Tomato) 
in Central Australia.”   Rangeland Journal   33 :  255 –65.  

    Howden  ,   Kristen  .  2001 .  “Indigenous Traditional Knowledge and Native Title.”   University of New 
South Wales Law Journal   24 , no.  1 :  60 – 84 .  

    Innes  ,   Graeme  .  2009 . “Human Rights and Corporate Social Responsibility.” Paper presented at the 
Everyday People, Everyday Rights Human Rights Conference, Melbourne, Australia, 16 March.  

   Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge 
and Folklore .  2010 .  Note on the Meanings of the Term “Public Domain” in the Intellectual Property 
System with Special Reference to the Protection of Traditional Knowledge and Traditional Cultural 
Expressions/Expressions of Folklore .  Geneva :  WIPO .  

    ——— .  2012 .  Background Brief No. 2 .  Geneva :  WIPO .  

    ——— .  2014 a.  The Protection of Traditional Knowledge: Draft Articles .  Geneva :  WIPO .  

    ——— .  2014 b.  The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions: Draft Articles .  Geneva :  WIPO .  

    ——— .  2014 c.  Consolidated Document Relating to Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources .  Geneva :  WIPO .  

    Janke  ,   Terri  .  1998 .  Our Culture Our Future: A Report on Australian Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual 
Property Rights .  Canberra, Australia :  AIATSIS .  

    ——— .  2003 .  Minding Culture: Case Studies on Intellectual Property and Traditional Cultural Expressions . 
 Geneva :  WIPO .  

    ——— .  2008 . “Guarding Ground: A Vision for a National Indigenous Cultural Authority.” Paper 
presented at the Wentworth Lecture, Canberra, Australia, 22 August.  

    ——— .  2009 .  Indigenous Ecological Knowledge and Natural Resources in the Northern Territory: Report on the 
Current Status of Indigenous Intellectual Property .  Darwin, Australia :  Natural Resources Management Board .  

    Janke  ,   Terri  , and   Peter     Dawson  .  2012 .  New Tracks: Indigenous Knowledge and Cultural Expression 
and the Australian Intellectual Property System .  Canberra, Australia :  Intellectual Property Australia .  

 68   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

    Jones  ,   Jill  .  2004 .  “Protecting Indigenous Heritage in the Face of Globalisation.”   Indigenous Law Bulletin  
 6 , no.  4 :  4 – 6 .  

    Joshi  ,   Rajul  , and   John     Chelliah  .  2013 .  “Sharing the Benefits of Commercialisation of Traditional 
Knowledge: What Are the Key Success Factors?”   Intellectual Property Forum   93 :  60 – 66 .  

    Laird  ,   Sarah  , and   Rachel     Wynberg  .  2009 .  Access and Benefit-Sharing in Practice: Trends in Partnerships 
across Sectors .  Geneva :  Convention on Biological Diversity .  

    Lee  ,   Slade  .  2012 .  “Horticultural Development of Bush Food Plants and Rights of Indigenous Traditional 
Custodians: The Australian Bush Tomato (Solanum Centrale) Case Study.”   Rangeland Journal   34 , no.  4 : 
 359 –73.  

    Lingard  ,   Kylie  .  2012 .  “The Impact of the Law on Consultation Practices and Purposes: A Case Study 
of Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Consultation in NSW.”  Occasional Paper Series.  International Journal 
of Rural Law and Policy   2012 , no.  1 :  1 – 25 .  

    ——— .  2015 .  “Legal Support for the Interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples in 
the Commercial Development of New Native Plant Varieties: Current Status and Future Options.”  
 Australian Intellectual Property Journal   26 :  39 – 57 .  

    Macklin  ,    Jenny  .   2009 .    Statement  on  the  United  Nations  Declaration  on  the  Rights  of  Indigenous 
Peoples  .  Canberra, Australia :  Australian Government .  

    Maggiore  ,   Pat  .  1993 .  “Analysis of Australian Aboriginal Bush Foods.”   Australian Aboriginal Studies  
 1 :  55 – 58 .  

    Maiden  ,    Joseph  Henry  .   1889 .   The  Useful  Native  Plants  of  Australia  (Including  Tasmania) .   Sydney : 
 Technological Museum of New South Wales .  

    Marinova  ,   Dora  , and   Margaret     Raven  .  2006 .  “Indigenous Knowledge and Intellectual Property: 
A Sustainability Agenda.”   Journal of Economic Surveys   20 , no.  4 :  587 – 605 .  

    Martin  ,   Paul  , and   Donna     Craig  .  2015 .  “Accelerating the Evolution of Environmental Law through 
Continuous Learning from Applied Experience.”  In  Implementing Environmental Law , edited by 
  Paul     Martin  ,   and   Amanda     Kennedy  ,  27 – 49 .  London :  Edward Elgar .  

    Martin  ,   Paul  , and   Elodie     Le Gal  .  2010 .  “Concepts for Industry Co-Regulation of Bio-Fuel Weeds.”  
 IUCN Academy of Environmental Law E-journal   1 :  1 – 13 .  

    Martin  ,   Paul  , and   Michael     Jeffrey  .  2007 .  “Using a Legally Enforceable Knowledge Trust Doctrine to Fulfil 
the Moral Obligation to Protect Indigenous Secrets.”   New Zealand Journal of Environmental Law   11 :  1 – 31 .  

    Martin  ,   Paul  , and   Miriam     Verbeek  .  2006 .  Sustainability Strategy .  Sydney :  Federation Press .  

    Merne  ,    Altyerre-Ipenhe    (Food  from  the  Creation  Time)  Reference  Group,    Josie      Douglas  ,  and 
  Fiona     Walsh  .  2011 .  Aboriginal People, Bush Foods Knowledge and Products from Central Australia: Ethical 
Guidelines for Commercial Bush Food Research, Industry and Enterprises .  Alice Springs, Australia :  DKCRC .  

    Miers  ,   Geoff  .  2004 .  Cultivation and Sustainable Wild Harvest of Bushfoods by Aboriginal Communities 
in Central Australia .  Barton, Australia :  Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation .  

    Morse  ,   Jeremy  ,   Terri     Janke  , and  Company .  2010 .  Know Your Rights to Your Aboriginal Plant Knowledge: 
A Guide for Aboriginal Knowledge Holders on Recording and Commercialising Aboriginal Plant Knowledge . 
 Darwin, Australia :  Aboriginal Bush Traders .  

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND BUSH FOOD PRODUCTS  

  69 

    Morse  ,   Jock  .  2005 .  Bush Resources: Opportunities for Aboriginal Enterprise in Central Australia .  Alice 
Springs, Australia :  DKCRC and Central Land Council .  

    Munzer  ,   Stephen  , and   Kal     Austiala  .  2009 .  “The Uneasy Case for Intellectual Property Rights in 
Traditional Knowledge.”   Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal   27 :  37 – 97 .  

   National Health and Medical Research, Australian Research Council, and Universities Australia .  2007 . 
 Australian Code for the Responsible Conduct of Research .  Canberra, Australia :  Australian Government .  

   National Native Title Tribunal (NNTT) .  2009 .  About the National Native Title Tribunal’s Registers . 
 Sydney :  NNTT .  

   Natural Resource Management Ministerial Council .  2002 .  Nationally Consistent Approach for Access to and 
the Utilisation of Australia’s Native Genetic and Biochemical Resources .  Canberra :  Australian Government .  

    ——— .   2010 .   Australia’s  Biodiversity  Conservation  Strategy  2010–2030 .   Canberra,  Australia : 
 Commonwealth .  

   Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development .  2010 .  Competition Policy in Australia . 
 Geneva :  Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development .  

    Posey  ,   Darrell  , and   Graham     Dutfield  .  1996 .  Beyond Intellectual Property: Toward Traditional Resource 
Rights for Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities .  Ottawa :  International Development Research Centre .  

   Quarantine Domestic .  2014 .  Australian Interstate Quarantine: A Traveller’s Guide .  Canberra, Australia : 
 Australian Government .  

    Rae  ,   C. J  .  1982 .  “The Role of Bush Foods in Contemporary Aboriginal Diets.”   Proceedings of the 
Nutrition Society Of Australia   7 :  45 – 49 .  

   Reconciliation Australia .  2013 .   United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples  . 
 Canberra, Australia :  Reconciliation Australia .  

    Rimmer  ,   Matthew  .  2003 .  “Blame It on Rio: Biodiscovery, Native Title, and Traditional Knowledge.”  
 Southern Cross University Law Review   7 :  1 – 49 .  

    Robinson  ,   Daniel  .  2012 .  “Biopiracy and the Innovations of Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities.”  
In  Indigenous Peoples’ Innovation , edited by   Peter     Drahos  ,   and   Susy     Frankel  ,  77 – 94 .  Canberra, Australia : 
 Australia National University ePress .  

   Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation .  2009 .  The New Crop Industries Handbook: 
Native Foods .  Canberra, Australia :  Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation .  

   Secretariat for the Third Intersessional Working Group .  2011 .  WIPO Technical Study on Disclosure 
Requirements Concerning Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge .  Geneva :  WIPO .  

    Sedlackoa  ,   Michal  ,   Andre     Martinuzzia  ,   Inge     Røpkeb  ,   Nuno     Videirac  , and   Paula     Antunes  .  2014 . 
 “Participatory Systems Mapping for Sustainable Consumption: Discussion of a Method Promoting 
Systemic Insights.”   Ecological Economics   106 :  33 – 43 .  

    Shiva  ,   Vandana  .  2001 .  Protect or Plunder: Understanding Intellectual Property Rights .  London :  Zed Books .  

    Simpson  ,    Bradley  ,    David      Claudie  ,    Nicholas      Smith  ,    Ross      Mckinnon  ,  and    Susan      Semple  .   2013 . 
 “Learning from Both Sides: Experiences and Opportunities in the Investigation of Australian Aboriginal 
Medicinal Plants.”   Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences   16 , no.  2 :  259 –71.  

 70   

 KYLIE LINGARD AND PAUL MARTIN

    Smallacombe  ,   Sonia  ,   Michael     Davis  , and   Robynne     Quiggin  .  2007 .  Scoping Project on Aboriginal 
Traditional Knowledge .  Alice Springs, Australia :  DKCRC .  

    Smyth  ,   Dermot  .  2011 .  Indigenous Land and Sea Management: A Case Study .  Canberra, Australia : 
 Australian Government .  

   Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs .  2008 .  Open for Business: Developing 
Indigenous Enterprises in Australia .  Canberra, Australia :  Commonwealth .  

   Standing Committee on Science and Innovation .  2006 .  Inquiry into Pathways to Technological Innova-
tion .  Canberra, Australia :  Australian Government .  

   Steering Committee for the Review of Government Service Provision .  2014 .  Overcoming Indigenous 
Disadvantage: Key Indicators 2014 .  Canberra, Australia :  Productivity Commission .  

    Stewart  ,   Kathy  , and   Bob     Percival  .  1997 .  Bush Foods of New South Wales: A Botanic Record and an 
Aboriginal Oral History .  Sydney :  Royal Botanic Gardens .  

    Stoianoff  ,   Natalie  .  2009 .  “The Recognition of Traditional Knowledge under Australian Biodiscovery 
Regimes: Why Bother with Intellectual Property Rights?”  In  Traditional Knowledge, Traditional Cultural 
Expressions and Intellectual Property Law in the Asia-Pacific Region , edited by   Christoph     Antons  ,  293 – 311 . 
 Zuidpoolsingel, Netherlands :  Kluwer Law International .  

    ——— .  2012 .  “Navigating the Landscape of Indigenous Knowledge: A Legal Perspective.”   Intellectual 
Property Forum   90 :  23 – 40 .  

    Stoutjesdijk  ,    Peter  .   2013 .   Plant  Genetic  Resources  for  Food  and  Agriculture  Second  National  Report: 
Australia .  Canberra :  Australian Government .  

   UN Conference on Trade and Development .  2014 .  The Convention on Biological Diversity and the 
Nagoya Protocol: Intellectual Property Implications .  Geneva :  United Nations .  

    Vivas-Eugui  ,   David  .  2012 .  Bridging the Gap on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources in WIPO’s 
Intergovernmental  Committee  (IGC) .   Geneva :   International  Centre  for  Trade  and  Sustainable 
Development .  

    Voumard  ,    John  .   2000 .   Access  to  Biological  Resources  in  Commonwealth  Areas .   Canberra,  Australia : 
 Australian Government .  

   Waitangi Tribunal .  2011 .  Ko Aotearoa T ē nei: A Report into Claims Concerning New Zealand Law 
and Policy Affecting M ā ori Culture and Identity .  Wellington, New Zealand :  Ministry of Justice .  

    West  ,   Ida  .  1985 .  “Bush Food.”   Aboriginal and Islander Health Worker Journal   9 , no.  4 :  20 – 23 .  

    Whitehead  ,   P. J.  ,   J.     Gorman  ,   A. D.     Griffiths  ,   G.     Wightman  ,   H.     Massarella  , And   J.     Altman  .  2006 . 
  Feasibility of Small Scale Commercial Native Plant Harvests by Indigenous Communities  .  Canberra, 
Australia :  Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation .  

    Winfield  ,   Cathy  .  1982 .  Bush Tucker: A Guide to, and Resources on, Traditional Aboriginal Foods of the 
North West of SA and Central Australia .  Adelaide, Australia :  Wattle Park Teachers Centre .  

   WIPO .  2001 .  Intellectual Property Needs and Expectations of Traditional Knowledge Holders: WIPO Report 
on Fact-Finding Missions on Intellectual Property and Traditional Knowledge (1998–99) .  Geneva :  WIPO .  

    ——— .   2012 .   The  World  Intellectual  Property  Organization  Traditional  Knowledge  Documentation 
Toolkit  (Draft).  Geneva :  WIPO .      


