International Journal of Cultural Property (2009) 16:1–23. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2009 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739109090043

Building Destruction: The Consequences
of Rising Urbanization on Cultural
Heritage in the Ramallah Province
Salah H. al-Houdalieh* and Robert R. Sauders**

Abstract: Urbanization, particularly in terms of private housing construction,
constitutes a mounting threat to cultural heritage sites in Palestine. At risk are
not only archaeological sites, but traditional architecture and other locations of
cultural heritage. The Ramallah province serves as a practical case study by
which to examine how this process of urbanization affects the cultural heritage
of the region, because of the increased rate of development the province has
experienced over the past decade. This urbanization has proceeded with
relatively little governmental oversight and administration by the Palestinian
National Authority (PNA) and is typified by an absence of planning, which
often places sites of cultural, historical, and archaeological significance in severe
jeopardy. This article considers both the internal and external factors affecting
the urbanization of Ramallah and proposes solutions to mitigate the dangers to
cultural heritage posed by unchecked urban growth.

Urbanization, particularly in terms of private housing construction, constitutes a
mounting threat to cultural heritage sites in Palestine. At risk are not only archae-
ological sites, but traditional architecture and other locations of cultural heritage.
The Ramallah governorate serves as a practical case study by which to examine
how this process of urbanization affects the cultural heritage of the region, be-
cause of the increased rate of development the governorate has experienced over
the past decade. Since the establishment of limited Palestinian administration of
the West Bank and Gaza Strip through the Oslo Accords of 1993 and 1995, the

*Institute of Archaeology, Al-Quds University, Palestine. Email: shoudalieh@art.alquds.edu

* *Department of Geography & Anthropology, Department of History, Eastern Washington Univer-
sity. Email: rsauders@ewu.edu

1

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

2

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

population of the Ramallah governorate has rapidly increased and witnessed a
corresponding construction boom because of the city of Ramallah’s role as the de
facto Palestinian administrative seat (Figure 1). The establishment of Palestinian
National Authority’s administrative/political institutions and international aid or-
ganizations in Ramallah spawned an economic boom that was coupled with the
return of members of the American diaspora and the internal migration of West
Bank Palestinians to the city. Consequently, Ramallah has experienced a signifi-
cant population increase that must be accommodated with a concomitant inten-
sification of urban development, particularly in the area of housing construction.
The urbanization of Ramallah, as throughout the entirety of the Palestinian-
controlled areas of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, has proceeded with relatively
little governmental oversight and administration by the PNA. The result is a largely
unregulated urban development that is typified by an absence of planning, which
often places sites of cultural, historical, and archaeological significance in severe
jeopardy. This article considers both the internal and external factors affecting the
urbanization of Ramallah and proposes solutions to mitigate the dangers to cul-
tural heritage posed by unchecked urban growth.

URBANIZATION AND CULTURAL HERITAGE PRESERVATION

Locations of cultural heritage—in the form of archaeological sites, monuments,
historic buildings, and landscapes—are often at risk from social, political, legal,
and economic forces that alter the long-term stability, viability, and protection of
cultural properties. Often, these threats are bound within a context of premedi-
tated violence—vandalism, looting, and destruction through warfare—and are
roundly condemned as acts of cultural and historical ruination.1 However, these
same forces endanger cultural in a manner that receives considerably less atten-
tion within the archaeological discourse. Aspects of human development deemed
positive and progressive—construction, cultivation, and expansion—equally
threaten the longevity and security of cultural heritage, yet often fail to generate
the same widespread condemnation. The formidable forces of unplanned devel-
opment, incessant productivity, rampant innovation, and heedless technical ad-
vance can dramatically alter the artifactual and natural environment, which
magnifies the scale of their destructive potential—whether the target is a rare
species, a prehistoric site, or a historic building.2

Indeed, urban restructuring and development actually involves a level of dev-
astation, ruination, and forced resettlement that often matches that which occurs
in all-out war.3 Much like the process of archaeological excavation, urban devel-
opment entails planned, purposeful destruction that alters the cityscape as well as
the associated landscape, ethnoscape, and heritagescape. In urban environments
with a deep history, development that is left largely unabated and unregulated poses
a particularly troublesome dilemma for both the urban planner and the cultural

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

3

heritage professional. Often, high concentrations of cultural heritage sites are sit-
uated in the areas of highest population density; a phenomenon that seemingly
pits the desires of modernity, innovation, and progress in contradiction to the
desires of historical preservation and protection.

Left unchecked, intense urban development without consideration of archaeo-
logical and cultural heritage preservation can result in instances of urbicide, where
both the built environment itself and the specific existential quality embodied
within the built environment are destroyed.4 For many urban centers of the Mid-
dle East, archaeological and cultural heritage sites constitute a fundamental ele-
ment of their existential quality; and, as such, their preservation and protection
must factor into decisions regarding urban restructuring and development. How-
ever, despite the significance of cultural heritage in forging and maintaining mod-
ern identities, there is always the risk of hyperbole when discussing the crimes of
archaeological and cultural heritage destruction. The loss of cultural heritage can
affect multiple generations by permanently erasing their cultural memories and
severing established links with the past. Yet it is dangerous to couch these acts in
a language reserved for the destruction of human life, such as genocide, because
they do not inhabit the same order of existence.5 A balanced approach to cultural
heritage and urban development recognizes the detriment of heritage destruction,
while acknowledging that societies, particularly in urban environments, are bound
to expand and develop in such a manner that threatens cultural heritage. To min-
imize the inescapable effects of urbanization to locations of cultural, historical,
and national significance, cultural heritage considerations, particularly archaeo-
logical concerns, must be better integrated into general urban development and
restructuring as well as specific, individual construction projects.

URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN PALESTINE

Historically, the development of Palestinian urban areas has been characterized by
localism and similarity of purpose with each city functioning as an administrative
and commercial center for its district.6 The major urban areas of Palestine—
Hebron, Bethlehem, Jerusalem, Jericho, Ramallah, Nablus, Qalqiliya, Tulkarm, and
Jenin—all developed to their present size and stature because of their position as
the administrative, economic, religious, and cultural centers of their respective hin-
terlands. Prior to the establishment of the British Mandate, urban planning au-
thorities in Palestine resided almost entirely within the local municipal councils.
The introduction of British rule in 1917 marks a fundamental transformation of
urban planning in Palestine. No longer were local municipal councils empowered
to make decisions regarding urban development; rather, the British enacted the
first Palestinian Town Planning Ordinance in 1921, based off the 1909 English
Town Planning Act, as a means of “social control.”7 During the 1949 to 1967
Jordanian rule of the West Bank, urban planning decisions effectively reverted back

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

4

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

to the local municipal councils; however, the introduction of the Israeli occupa-
tion in 1967 would again wrest control over urban development away from local
jurisdictions. From 1967 until 1993, municipal and village committees were ren-
dered effectively powerless in planning decisions because Israeli military author-
ities, under Military Order 418, established the Higher Planning Committee, which
maintained complete control over land use policies and planning in the West Bank.8
Throughout the Israeli civil administration, urban planning was accomplished
through a nonobjective master plan that systematically disregarded the needs of
Palestinian residents and resulted in urban development that was, at times, spon-
taneous, random, and inconsiderate of the environmental and cultural heritage
ramifications of construction.9

With the conclusion of the Oslo Accords in 1993 and the advent of limited Pal-
estinian sovereignty, a new era of urban development was ushered into Palestine.
Although the Oslo Accords enabled the fledgling Palestinian Authority to assert
only a limited degree of sovereignty, it did provide for Palestinian control over
development and planning in the largest urban centers: initially, Gaza City and
Jericho and later Nablus, Ramallah, Bethlehem, Jenin, Qalqilia, and Tulkarm. The
failure of fully implementing the Oslo Accords created a static situation where
temporary division of the West Bank into different zones of Israeli and Palestinian
security and civil control became entrenched realities on the ground. The result is
that West Bank remains divided the same three cantons it did at the conclusion of
the Oslo negotiations in 1993 (Table 1). Therefore, rather than exerting sover-
eignty over the entirety of the West Bank, which was the goal of the Oslo process,
the Palestinian Authority has the ability to enact urban planning decision only in
Area A and marginally in Area B.

Although the political negotiations may have stalled, urban development in
the Palestinian-controlled areas rapidly accelerated. The removal of restrictive Is-
raeli land control policies in Area A resulted in dramatically elevated levels of
construction, development, and alteration in the major Palestinian cities. With
the establishment of Palestinian semiautonomy in Area A, modern concrete high-
rise buildings began to dot the skylines of Palestinian cities and change the tra-
ditional local architectural character and style of the urban environment. The
rapid urbanization of Palestinian cities initially threatened only the urban cores;
however, the need for more and more buildings eventually caused developers to

Table 1

Olso I Civil and Security Zones, 200310

Civil Control

Security Control

Area (km2)

Percent of West Bank

Zone A
Zone B
Zone C

Palestinian
Palestinian
Israeli

Palestinian
Israeli
Israeli

1026.48
1229.52
3384.00

18.2
21.8
60.0

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

5

look toward the periphery and open hinterlands of the cities as potential loca-
tions for expansion.11 With Palestinian development in the West Bank effectively
limited to the 18.2% of the total West Bank land that is included in Area A, the
strain of residential and commercial construction will become increasingly acute
as the Palestinian population continues to grow. This trend can be seen in the
number of illegal Israeli settlement and Palestinian cities and villages located along
the Ramallah-Jerusalem-Bethlehem axis (Figure 2).

According to 2006 United Nations projections, the Palestinian population has
experienced a dramatic increase from slightly more than 1 million in 1950 to 3.8

FIGURE 1. Regional map.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

6

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

FIGURE 2. Urban development in the Ramallah-Bethlehem corridor.

million in 2005 and will have a projected population of 10.3 million by 2050. Fur-
thermore, the 2006 United Nations projections trace the rise in the portion of the
Palestinian population located within urban environments from 37.3% in 1950 to
71.6% in 2005 and is projected to reach 83% by 2050.12 The advent of a rapidly
increasing population settling into urban environments has, and will continue to,
place tremendous pressures on the urban centers throughout Palestine and offer
challenges to the urban planners responsible for their development. Compound-
ing these demographic factors of increased urbanization and rapid population
growth are the political problems of the ongoing Israeli occupation, the absence
of full Palestinian sovereignty throughout the West Bank and the lack of proper
institutional and legal infrastructure, all of which promotes rabid urbanization

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

7

that endangers the environmental, archaeological, and cultural landscapes of the
region. Perhaps nowhere in the West Bank are these crosscutting factors more prom-
inent than in the Ramallah governorate.

CASE STUDY: RAMALLAH GOVERNORATE

Throughout history, the Ramallah governorate has served as an important eco-
nomic, commercial, and strategic crossroad for the region; and, resultantly, it has
a wide and diverse assemblage of archaeological and cultural heritage sites that
date from the Paleolithic Era (1.5 million to 18,000 bc) to the Ottoman Era. These
include archaeological sites from numerous prehistoric and historic eras; tradi-
tional buildings of various styles; and agricultural structures such as wells, presses,
cisterns, and terraces. Within the city of Ramallah itself, human occupation dates
to the Crusader era when a small military encampment was established by and
subsequently abandoned as Crusader authority in Palestine waned. After aban-
donment by the Crusaders, Ramallah remained a small agrarian community with
a predominantly Christian character that would slowly develop into an urban cen-
ter. By the end of the nineteenth century, the stature of Ramallah had dramatically
increased: In 1902 Ramallah was declared an administrative center for the region
and in 1910 the Ottoman Empire established the Ramallah municipality.13

With the political turmoil that plagued the region starting in the 1930s, Ramal-
lah experienced a significant shift in population. Many residents with long family
lineages established in Ramallah sought refuge from the strife by emigrating, often
to North America.14 The loss of these residents was offset by the influx of Pales-
tinian families fleeing from the coast and plains towns (e.g., Jaffa, Lydda, Ramleh)
during the 1948 war. Ramallah’s population continued to steadily grow through-
out the early years of the Israeli occupation. However, with the establishment of
limited Palestinian administration of the West Bank and Gaza Strip through the
Oslo Accords of 1993 and 1995, Ramallah experienced a more rapid population
increase and corresponding construction boom because of the city’s de facto role
as the Palestinian administrative seat. The establishment of PNA’s administrative/
political institutions and international aid organizations in Ramallah spawned an
economic boom that was coupled with the return of members of the American
Diaspora and the internal migration of West Bank Palestinians to the city.15

Presently, the Ramallah governorate covers 855 km2 and, based on a 2007 cen-
sus, has a population of more than 290,000 that is distributed across 80 residential
communities of various form and size.16 The villages, towns, cities, and refugee
camps of the Ramallah governorate account for 11.3% of the total number of com-
munities in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.17 Within the governorate, the sister cit-
ies of Ramallah and Al-Bireh effectively form a singular metropolitan area that is
epicenter of urbanization in the West Bank. The 2007 Palestinian Central Bureau of
Statistics census also revealed that nearly 93,000 (or 32% of the total governorate

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

8

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

population) reside in Ramallah Al-Bireh, the neighboring community of Al-Tira, and
the adjacent refugee camps of Al-Amari and Qaddura.18 These population pres-
sures often compel developers and entrepreneurs to provide more residential hous-
ing and commercial space to meet the demands of a rapidly increasing population
in the city and its immediate hinterlands. However, like throughout the Palestinian-
controlled areas of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the urbanization of the Ramallah
governorate has proceeded with relatively little governmental oversight and admin-
istration by the PNA. A chief consequence of this unregulated urban development
is that locations of cultural, historical, and archaeological significance are often in
severe jeopardy for the sake of residential and commercial construction.

Although the Ramallah governorate covers a relatively small area—15% of the
total West Bank—it has an incredibly rich assemblage of cultural heritage prop-
erties. This corpus of properties in the Ramallah governorate consists of more
than 7500 historic buildings19 and 347 known archaeological sites and features,
including the prominent archaeological sites of Shuqba Cave, Tell et-Tel (Ai), and
Tell en-Nasbah.20 The density of archaeological and cultural heritage sites poses
the promise of economic prosperity for the Ramallah governorate, particularly in
terms of tourism development; however, they also present serious preservation,
protection, and management difficulties in light of the rapid and largely unregu-
lated urban development at work in the governorate. Although the PNA has pub-
licly recognized the threats facing cultural heritage properties throughout Palestine,
the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) has only recently enacted laws to protect
historic buildings and has yet to pass an antiquities protection law.21 The sites of
Khirbat Shuwayka, Khirbat Raddana, Khirbet el-Tirah and Ain Arik will serve as
specific case studies to demonstrate how the lack of regulation and enforcement
coupled with rapid urbanization jeopardizes the archaeological and cultural her-
itage of the Ramallah governorate (Figure 3).

Khirbat Shuwayka

The site of Khirbat Shuwayka, located to the south of modern-day Ramallah Al-
Bireh along the historic Nablus to Jerusalem road, was first surveyed by Conder
and colleagues in the 1880s, by Bagatti in the 1950s, and then by Israeli Staff Of-
ficer for Archaeology Yitzhak Magen in the 1980s.22 The Institute of Archaeology
at Al-Quds University has conducted nine seasons of excavation at the site be-
tween 1996 and 2006. These excavations have exposed many archaeological fea-
tures and stratified layers, revealing a fortification system, residential complexes, a
church, and a wine processing installation.23

The residential complexes at Khirbat Shuwayka are composed of rectangular or
squared rooms divided by thick walls with entrances. Archaeological evidence—
particularly ceramic sherds—dates the use of these residential complexes from the
Byzantine era through the Abbasid era. The church is a three-aisled basilica with
a chapel located on its northern side. Archaeological data indicates that the church

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

9

FIGURE 3. Urban development in the greater Ramallah Al-Bireh metropolitan area.

has three distinct phases of construction and renovation: two initial phases of con-
struction in the Byzantine period (ad 324–638) and a later phase of reuse and
rehabilitation in the early Islamic period (ad 638–1099). Along the eastern slope
of Khirbat Shuwayka is a Byzantine era wine press consisting of a series of cham-
bers and channels that facilitated a sizeable wine producing industry. Like the church
and residential complexes, the wine press facilities indicate two distinct phases of
use, with modifications and technological advances incorporated into the second
phase. A fortification wall that encircles the site was constructed during the Byz-
antine and early Islamic periods. The remains of the walls, measuring up to 2.5 m
in height, reveal that they were constructed of different sized stones and mud in
irregular horizontal courses.

Historically, the area surrounding Khirbat Shuwayka was agricultural land; a
trend that persisted from the Byzantine period through the late twentieth cen-
tury. However, the 1970s would mark a transition in the region as urban sprawl
from Ramallah city would begin to slowly alter the landscape. Initially, the con-
struction of modern residential and commercial structures by local residents was
limited to the Umm esh-Sharayet basin, but within a few short years private in-
vestors from outside the area would accelerate the pace of development in the
region. As the city of Ramallah has rapidly expanded since 1995, Khirbat Shu-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

10

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

wayka has become virtually encircled by the construction of new buildings that
are increasingly encroaching on the boundaries of the archeological site. The in-
creased construction in the Umm esh-Sharayet basin has been welcomed as an
economic boon by the municipal council; however, development poses a signif-
icant risk not only to the archaeological site but to traditional buildings and the
environment as well.

In February 2007, an impact assessment in the vicinity of Khirbat Shuwayka
was initiated by al-Houdalieh. This assessment surveyed the development of res-
idential and commercial buildings within a 250 m radius of Khirbat Shuwayka’s
centroid and identified 20 structures either completed or under construction. Fur-
thermore, four sizeable parcels have been cleared and prepared for future con-
struction. From a site preservation perspective, the most threatening development
at Khirbat Shuwayka is a 160-m2 residential compound located near the crest of
the Khirbat Shuwayka (Figure 4). The danger of this new housing construction is
that it sits a mere 50 cm from the walls of the fortification system and approxi-
mately 2 m from an unearthed Byzantine/Early Islamic residential complex. The
construction of the modern residential unit began in 2004 when an area of 1000 m2
was cleared with bulldozers and deep trenches were cut for the cement founda-
tion. As a result, the land was excavated to a depth of 1.5 m without an archaeo-

FIGURE 4. View of Khirbat Shywayka with the Fatah-related building on the right and
new residential constructions in the background.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

11

logical impact assessment conducted by Al-Quds University or the Palestinian
Department of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage (DACH). The protection of Khir-
bat Shuwayka from this construction was further complicated by the fact that the
building was financed by the Fatah political party and is used for its social and
political gatherings in the Umm esh-Sharayet region. Despite the potential polit-
ical friction, DACH filed a civil case against the building owners in 2004 and de-
manded that the structure be removed from the premises. A 2005 ruling by a
Palestinian court sided with the DACH and an order was issued for the structure’s
removal. However, because of the political fragmentation within Palestine and given
the inability of the Palestinian executive to enforce legislative and judicial deci-
sions, the building has not been removed.

It is impossible to reconstruct the exact extent of the damage done to Khirbat
Shuwayka by this clearing and subsequent construction. Moreover, the materials
accumulated through the clearing process were initially amassed along the edge of
the construction site; however, as the building process began, these materials were
reused as backfill to stabilize the residential complex. Any archaeological evidence
contained within these soils is now completely decontextualized, rendering them
entirely useless in any archaeological reconstruction of Khirbat Shuwayka’s his-
tory. Several other structures that threaten the integrity of Khirbat Shuwayka were
surveyed by an Al-Quds University team in 2003. As with the previous structure
at Khirbat Shuwayka, the ongoing construction process for these structures began
with clearing and grading the land; however, the construction area was bulldozed
to the bedrock in many areas. Again, these structures were built without an ar-
chaeological impact assessment to determine what, if any, effects the construction
process would have on the archaeological site.

Based on the 2003 Al-Quds survey and subsequent monitoring visits to the site,
the overall effect of these buildings to Khirbat Shuwayka has proven to be sub-
stantial both in scope and magnitude. Specifically, the following encroachments
on the site of Khirbat Shuwayka were observed during the Al-Quds surveys:

• Two concrete residential structures have threatened the stability and integrity

of the Byzantine fortification walls located to their immediate south.

• A cement fence for a residential structure has been partially built atop the

exposed remains of the fortification wall.

• Another residential structure infringes on exposed sections of the Byzantine
wine processing facilities. Based on extrapolations of the archaeological data,
it is probable that the wine processing facilities extend beneath the new
construction.

• A series of residential buildings were built atop or immediately adjacent to
Roman-Byzantine tombs. The occupants of these buildings have begun to use
the rock-hewn tombs as a dumping ground for their household refuse.

• Parcels of land were bulldozed down to the bedrock in preparation for future

construction in the area.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

12

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

Approximately 3000 m2 of land surrounding Khirbat Shuwayka have been bull-
dozed, often to the bedrock. Examinations of the balks created by the clearing
process indicated that the construction has indeed damaged archaeological re-
mains outside of the Khirbat Shuwayka fortification walls. In the eastern section,
the balks reveal traces of walls, surfaces, and column bases. Similarly, along the
western section, two plaster-lined wine processing vats were located within the
exposed balks.

Khirbat Raddana

Located atop a hill on the northern side of Ramallah, the archaeological site of
Khirbat Raddana was excavated throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s by Cal-
laway and Cooley.24 Although the archaeological evidence indicates that Khirbat
Raddana was occupied from the Early Bronze Age through the Byzantine era, the
excavations of Callaway and Cooley helped to clarified the Iron Age I (1200–1100
bc) occupation of the site, particularly regarding residential architecture and do-
mestic activities.25 The hinterlands of Khirbat Raddana have been used for agri-
cultural production since the Early Bronze Age through modern times; and as a
result, cultivators throughout the ages have engaged in a constant effort of build-
ing, expanding, and repairing stone terraces in these fields to combat soil erosion.
However, because of the encroachment of modern construction in Ramallah, the
southern and eastern sections Khirbat Raddana and its system of terraces are at
risk of being damaged or destroyed.

As the housing demand in Ramallah has increased, residential and commercial
buildings have been built within close proximity of Khirbat Raddana. During the
process of construction, bulldozers were used to excavate foundations and grade
the land for the new homes and businesses. Unfortunately, this was often done
without archaeological impact assessments. The commercial construction along
the eastern edge of Khirbat Raddana posed the most severe threat to the site, re-
sulting in approximately 1000 m2 of Khirbat Raddana being damaged by con-
struction. A contemporary business building located along the eastern edge of the
site threatens to cause further devastation to the site in the near future. Although
the building has only moderately affected Khirbat Raddana, during the construc-
tion process the workmen used the site as a staging ground for construction ma-
terials and a dumping ground for debris and waste, including several piles of
hardened cement that now litter the site and obscure the view of the site from the
east. Furthermore, the location of this building invites further construction and
development that will increasingly jeopardize the integrity of the site.

Khirbat el-Tireh

Approximately 1.5 km to the west of the Old City of Ramallah is the site of Khir-
bat el-Tireh. Field surveys conducted in the 1990s by Finkelstein and Lederman26

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

13

indicated that the site was inhabited throughout the Hellenistic, Roman, Byzan-
tine, and Ottoman eras. The architectural remains of Khirbat el-Tireh include a
rock-cut olive press, a rock-cut cistern, a Byzantine era church, several burial caves
and a fortification system presently made up of several wall sections of differing
heights scattered across the site. Khirbat el-Tireh has suffered from the develop-
ment of residential and commercial properties along its perimeter since the con-
clusion of the British Mandate. The Ramallah Women Training Centre, a United
Nations Relief and Works Agency facility, was built along the southern and east-
ern edge of Khirbat el-Tireh in 1962. This construction resulted in severe damage
to the site, specifically the fortification walls and smaller archaeological features
located in close proximity to the site. Along the southern boundary, a modern
cement wall was constructed atop a section of the fortification walls. In addition,
cement was applied to sections of the fortification walls to reinforce and stabilize
the modern cement wall, which further damaged the original fortification wall.
Finally, in the area adjacent to this cement wall a thick layer of red soil has been
applied and different species of trees have been planted. This has effectively en-
cased portions of the site, which may now suffer damage caused by the intrusion
of the trees’ roots systems.

Along the north-eastern side of Khirbat el-Tireh, the St. George School was con-
structed in 1999 (Figure 5). The DACH initially excavated several test pits in an iso-
lated corner of the site to determine the potential threat the construction posed to

FIGURE 5. View of Khirbat el-Tira with a new residential building on the right, St. George’s
School in the center, and gas station on the left.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

14

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

Khirbat el-Tireh; however, without further archaeological investigation, the site was
bulldozed down to bedrock. It is likely that this resulted in the destruction of a long
section of fortification wall and, quite possibly, associated archaeological objects and
features. In addition, residential buildings have been constructed along the north,
east and west of the St. George School, further encroaching on Khirbat el-Tireh and
its immediate hinterlands. The building posing the greatest threat to the site is a mod-
ern residential compound built along the western fortification walls of Khirbat el-
Tireh. This building was constructed in 2006 and 2007 on a parcel of 600 m2, which
were bulldozed down to bedrock prior to construction. As with the St. George School,
this residential compound damaged the fortification walls and likely destroyed all
associated artifacts and features located nearby. More recently, crews have com-
menced construction of a gas station just to the west of the St. George’s School. The
landowner received a permit from DACH, which provided him legal license to start
construction; however, the permit also specified that he avoid damaging the Byz-
antine reservoir pool located just 2 m from the new building antiquities located on
the site. Immediately after receiving his permit, the landowner bulldozed the plot
to 5 m below the bedrock, which instantly destroyed all the cultural deposits lo-
cated within the bounds of the construction site.

Ain Arik

Located approximately 7 km west of Ramallah city, the village of Ain Arik covers
6000 dunums of hilltops and has a population of more than 1700.27 Settlement of
the modern village dates back to the Crusader era (ad 1099–1187) and, because of
its position as an historical secondary crossroads connecting Haifa and Jerusalem,
it has been continuously occupied to the present. As of 1922 the population of the
village numbered 365 residents28; however, after the Nakbah of 1948, the popu-
lation steadily increased to its current number. The historical and cultural rich-
ness of Ain Arik is evident in the historical sites surrounding the village, such as
Khirbet el-Hafi, Khirbet Robin; Khirbet Kafr Sheiyan and Loza; and the numer-
ous churches, shrines, burial caves, and winepresses situated within the village and
its adjacent hinterland.

Many traditional buildings in Ain Arik, typically one-level structures with in-
ternal divisions, were constructed between the eighteenth century and the first
quarter of the twentieth century; however, a few buildings have been dated to the
thirteenth to sixteenth centuries. A 1997 field survey conducted by Riwaq indi-
cated that the village includes 132 traditional buildings, of which 111 (84%) were
assessed to be in satisfactory structural condition, and nearly 54% percent of these
traditional buildings were still in use by the community.29 In the subsequent de-
cade, many traditional buildings in Ain Arik have fallen into disrepair and a sig-
nificant number were in a state of abandonment. Based on a field survey conducted
by al-Houdalieh in April 2007, approximately 70% of the traditional buildings are
now abandoned; an increase of 16% in 10 years.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

15

By the end of the British mandate, the built environment of Ain Arik covered
about 13 dunums. Urbanization in Ain Arik began in 1950s as housing and com-
mercial demands increased because of the improved economic conditions and
the establishment of a refugee camp in 1948. Initially, this wave of development
was centered in the village core where new residential structures and a few com-
mercial buildings were constructed, effectively leaving the abandoned historic struc-
tures intact. However, over the next few decades, the historic structures of Ain
Arik suffered from deterioration and damage, principally because of neglect. By
the mid 1970s, the development of Ain Arik shifted from the periphery to the
village center and posed a serious threat to the historic structures located in the
core. The continued population increases in the village and the refugee camp,
coupled with the absence of a codified master plan for land development, dra-
matically affected the historic structures of Ain Arik. The advent of modern con-
struction in the village center resulted in the razing of numerous traditional
buildings, rock-cut caves, cemeteries, olive presses, wine presses, and agricultural
terraces. Starting in the middle of the 1970s, the unfettered development of Ain
Arik has constantly threatened the heritagescape of the village. By 1988 more
than 30 dunums of the village were developed with residential and commercial
structures, and by 1997 this had increased to more than 150 dunums.30 This
process of unplanned urbanization over the past three decades has dramatically
altered the historic character of the village and resulted in the complete destruc-
tion of 31 traditional buildings without any documentation or mitigation by the
Palestinian Department of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage. During a March
2008 inspection of the site by the authors, a new construction project for a pri-
vate residence was causing extensive damage to the local Muslim cemetery and
nearby maqam (Figure 6).

Conclusions

Throughout the Ramallah governorate, the rapid urbanization and unfettered new
construction projects are endangering cultural heritage sites within the Ramallah Al-
Bireh metropolitan area as well as the surrounding villages, which will ultimately be-
come absorbed within the ever-encroaching urban sprawl. From a cultural heritage
perspective, the combination of urban expansion and new construction projects is
effectively guaranteeing the destruction of the archaeological, cultural, and histor-
ical record of the governorate, particularly in the traditional urban centers. This is
the point where the theoretical discussion of urbicide and its effect on the existen-
tial quality bound within the built environment becomes reality; a reality is more
severe with each newly constructed building. The current construction techniques
used by Palestinian developers, specifically the bulldozing of land down to bedrock
without any archaeological impact assessment, ensures the building process as a de-
structive act perpetrated against the heritage of the land. Although destruction is an
unavoidable consequence of all archaeological research, the destruction involved with

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

16

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

FIGURE 6. New residential construction at Ain Arik with Muslim cemetery in the fore-
ground and maqam in the background.

construction that fails to rigorously examine or properly preserve cultural heritage
elevates the process to the level of urbicide.

Across the Ramallah governorate, there are several common underlying fac-
tors that contribute to the deteriorating condition of cultural heritage sites. Aban-
donment of historic structures in favor of modern, newly constructed buildings
has resulted in a widespread use of these historic structures as local dumping
grounds. The continued, long-term economic instability throughout Palestine pro-
hibits many landowners from investing financial resources in the maintenance
and upkeep of historic properties. Because historic structures prevent vertical
development, real estate developers often view them as obstacles to eliminate.
These factors are compounded by the rapid population increase in the Ramallah
governorate; a general lack of awareness about the value and importance of cul-
tural heritage in Palestinian society; and the inability of the Palestinian govern-
ment, academic, and cultural heritage professionals to agree upon and enact
policies, procedures, and programs that adequately safeguard the cultural heri-
tage of Palestine.

To remedy these risk factors, the authors propose the following series of re-
forms intended to increase the preservation and protection of cultural heritage in
Palestine while enabling urban development to continue in a reasonable and
planned manner. The specific policy recommendations advocated by the authors
are centered on the areas of oversight, legislation/enforcement, education, and
coordination.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

17

IMPROVING OVERSIGHT

Since the signing of the Oslo II accords in 1995, the legal responsibility for the
protection, preservation, and promotion of cultural heritage in Palestine has re-
sided with DACH. However, the persistent civil and military occupation of Pales-
tinian territories by the Israeli military has effectively diminished the capability of
this department to execute its legal obligations to protect and manage Palestinian
cultural heritage resources. The restrictions on free movement imposed on West
Bank Palestinians by the Israeli military (such as the Separation Wall, permanent
checkpoint, flying checkpoints, unmanned roadblocks, closed military zones, clo-
sures, and curfews) has severely restricted the ability of Palestinian DACH officials
to carry out their cultural heritage preservation and protection duties. This prob-
lem is exacerbated by the financial difficulties of the Palestinian National Author-
ity, which limits the number of DACH employees. At present, DACH employs
approximately 295 Palestinians in its various offices in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip; this number of employees has not significantly increased since 1995. With a
limited budget and staff, it has been nearly impossible for the DACH to contend
with the rapid rate of urbanization and widespread looting that threatens cultural
heritage sites throughout Palestine. Despite the obstacles facing DACH, however,
an improved regime of site monitoring and impact assessment is necessary.

Although it is undoubtedly difficult for DACH employees to monitor every site
located within the entirety of Areas A & B of the West Bank, numerous sites within
the Ramallah Al-Bireh metropolitan area—where the DACH is headquartered—
have suffered from inadequate preservation and protection. Furthermore, it is here,
within the confines of the Ramallah Al-Bireh vicinity, that our case studies have
demonstrated the ineffective protections afforded archaeological and cultural her-
itage sites threatened by commercial and residential construction projects. To mit-
igate the threat, the authors propose a systematic monitoring regime to be initially
implemented in the Ramallah Al-Bireh metropolitan area and subsequently ex-
panded throughout Area A and later to Area B. This monitoring regime would be
conducted by DACH employees based in the department’s Ramallah headquarters
and would involve monthly inspections of the major archaeological sites in the
region to ensure site integrity and site visits to newly approved commercial and
residential construction projects to assess the archaeological effect. By instituting
such a program of monitoring and assessment, DACH could guarantee the min-
imal preservation and protection of cultural heritage sites from the onslaught of
unregulated urban development.

ENACTING LEGISLATION

To date, the PLC has only generated draft legislation for the protection of natural,
cultural, and archaeological heritage in Palestine. The PLC draft legislation for her-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

18

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

itage management is currently in its fourth iteration; and therefore the applicable
law for the protection of cultural heritage in Palestine is the 1929 Law of Pales-
tinian Archaeology (Antiquities Ordinance),31 which was enacted by the British
high commissioner in Palestine and defines protected antiquities as objects pre-
dating ad 1700. Although this law has been modified and expanded during both
the Jordanian and Israeli occupations, it remains the principle legal framework
for cultural heritage preservation in Palestine. Thus many archaeological and cul-
tural properties that may have significance or value to local communities are left
without defined legal protection.

A 2006 assessment of the Palestinian cultural heritage sector conducted by the
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency affirmed that the major
challenges facing heritage management in Palestine were outdated laws and par-
ticular classes of cultural property that were neglected by previous laws.32 In re-
sponse, the unofficial drafts of the proposed Palestinian cultural heritage legislation
provide legal protection for cultural heritage property neglected in the various
forms of the 1929 Antiquities Ordinance. In particular, the proposed legislation
replaces the concept of antiquities and its associated definitions with a more broadly
construed concept of cultural heritage that is defined as heritage objects greater
than 50 years old. The immediate benefit from this redefinition of Palestinian cul-
tural heritage is that objects and properties historically without legal safeguards
would now be afforded full legal protections. Beyond the legislative revisions re-
garding the definitions of antiquities and the protections afforded to them, the
PLC must act immediately to ratify the current iteration of the cultural heritage
law. The potential shortcomings of the draft legislation would be minor in com-
parison to the added protections that the law would provide to cultural heritage
sites. Furthermore, any necessary revisions that the law may require could be added
through subsequent legislation; however, in the meantime the cultural heritage
sites of Palestine, particularly those in the Ramallah governorate, would have more
legal protection against the rapid urban development facing the Palestinian urban
centers.

RAISING AWARENESS AND EDUCATION

A commonly recognized problem within the Palestinian cultural heritage man-
agement system is the lack of awareness within the Palestinian community con-
cerning the dangers facing archaeological, historical, and cultural heritage.33 Often
these awareness campaigns focus on the communities living within the immedi-
ate vicinity of cultural heritage sites. By providing educational programs in the
local schools and outreach programs geared toward local residents, Palestinian
cultural heritage professionals have realized dramatically improved preservation
and protection of the cultural heritage sites in these communities. When cou-
pled with better cultural heritage legislation and law enforcement, public aware-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

19

ness activities serve as powerful tools to reinforce the protection of cultural heritage
sites.34 The authors strongly advocate for additional outreach programs designed
to improve public awareness of culture heritage preservation and, in addition,
recommend the implementation of education programs specifically targeting urban
planners. Currently in Palestine, An-Najah National University and Birzeit Uni-
versity offer degrees in urban planning; however, neither program requires its
students to take courses in cultural heritage preservation. Given the wealth of
archaeological and historical sites located in the Palestinian urban centers and
the predicted acceleration of development within these centers, the authors be-
lieve it is imperative that urban planning programs in these institutions require
their students to take a course in urban heritage preservation.

ENHANCING COORDINATION

In this era of continued occupation and political instability, the preservation and
protection of archaeological and cultural heritage in Palestine severely suffers. Yet
despite the often crippling effect of Israeli military policies and internal Palestin-
ian political struggles, the core components—executive agencies, trained scholars,
legal protections—of a vibrant and effective historical preservation system exist
within Palestine. Although the effectiveness of these components may be ques-
tionable, their capacity to effectively manage and protect the cultural heritage of
Palestine from the destructive potential of unplanned urban development is not
in doubt. The most serious obstacle to the realization of this potential within the
Palestinian preservation community is internal tensions, fragmentation, and a gen-
eral lack of coordination among the various stakeholders. The DACH, academic
institutions, scholars and nongovernmental organizations have frequently pre-
ferred to work independently or in opposition to each other. This friction and
infighting has resulted in further deterioration and destruction of cultural heri-
tage sites and structures. To remedy this, Palestinian politicians, academics, cul-
tural heritage professionals, and local communities must work together to generate
a united, comprehensive plan for the immediate defense of cultural heritage in
Palestine.

To facilitate the coordination of the various cultural heritage stakeholders and
better engage developers and builders, the authors recommend the establishment
of a national development and planning committee. The purpose of this national
committee would be to fully represent the disparate interests of the government,
cultural preservation specialists, scholars, developers, entrepreneurs, and local com-
munities to ensure that the urban development necessary for the advancement of
Palestinian society is undertaken in such a manner that cultural and historical
sites are afforded adequate protection and preservation. Specifically, the national
development and planning committee recommends urban planning policies for
developers and entrepreneurs to ensure that cultural heritage sites and structures
are protected during urban development projects.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

20

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

Although this is an obviously difficult task to accomplish, models for successful
navigation of the potential pitfalls involved in reconciling the often competing pri-
orities of cultural heritage professional and urban developers can be found cur-
rently at work in Palestine. Both RIWAQ Centre for Architectural Conservation and
the Hebron Rehabilitation Committee (HRC) have completed projects in the old cit-
ies of Ramallah, Bethlehem, and Hebron where historic building have been reha-
bilitated to serve the needs of a modern urban population.35 By marrying both urban
development and cultural heritage in their projects, RIWAQ and HRC have man-
aged to effectively increase the residential and commercial capacity of the urban cores
while simultaneously assuring the proper preservation of cultural heritage sites. Al-
though the successes of RIWAQ and HRC are laudable, keep in mind that these
projects are largely limited to development within the traditional urban cores of the
cities or, in common parlance, the old cities. In an era of increased urban sprawl that
threatens not only the tradition cores but also their hinterlands, preservation and
rehabilitation programs must extend beyond the old city boundaries. Therefore, the
successful processes and methods used by RIWAQ and HRC in the urban cores of
Ramallah, Bethlehem, and Hebron should be used as a template on which the na-
tional urban planning policies are modeled to successfully bridge the often com-
peting interests of cultural heritage management and land development.

ENDNOTES

1. This topic has been covered extensively by Brodie and Tubb, Illicit Antiquities; Vandkilde, “Com-
memorative Tales”; Spennemann, “Cultural Heritage Conservation”; Reyman, “Vandalism and Site
Destruction”; Reinhold, “Theft and Vandalism”; McAlister, “Looting and Vandalism of Archaeolog-
ical Resources”; and Brodie and Colin, “Looting and the World’s Archaeological Heritage.”

2. Lowenthal, “Natural and Cultural Heritage,” 86.
3. Graham, “Postmortem City,” 171.
4. Coward, “Against Anthropocentrism,” 427–28.
5. Meskell, “Negative Heritage and Past Mastering,” 564.
6. Khamaisi, “Planning and Developing a New Palestinian Urban Core,” 12.
7. El-Eini, Mandated Landscape, 44–45.
8. Shehadeh, Occupier’s Law, 51.
9. Shaheen, “Urbanization Impact on Palestinian Landscape,” 18.
10. Amnesty International, “Israel and the Occupied Territories,” 12.
11. Shaheen, “Urbanization Impact on Palestinian Landscape,” 18.
12. United Nations, World Population Prospects.
13. Naerouz, Ramallah: Geography, History & Civilization, 24.
14. Tsimhoni, “Israel & the Territories,” 32.
15. Tsimhoni, “Israel & the Territories,” 41.
16. Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, “Projected Mid-Year Population for Ramallah,” 237.
17. Riwaq, Registry of Historic Buildings, 273.
18. Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, 2006
19. Riwaq, Registry of Historic Buildings.
20. PECDAR, Registry of Archaeological Sites, 93. A 2001 survey of the Palestinian territories iden-

tified 117 major archaeological sites and 230 partially destroyed sites.

21. Kershner, “The Changing Face of Ramallah.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

21

22. Conder, Kitchener, Palmer, and Besant, Survey of Western Palestine. Bagatti, Ancient Christian

Villages.

23. Abu Khalaf, Abu A’mar, al-Houdalieh, and Hoyland, “Byzantine & Early Islamic Settlements

of Shuwayka.”

24. See further Callaway and Cooley, “Salvage Excavation at Raddana” and Cooley, “Four Seasons

at Raddana.”

25. See Callaway “Raddana, Khirbet,” 1253–54.
26. Finkelstein and Lederman, Highlands of Many Cultures, 352.
27. Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, Projected Mid-Year Population for Ramallah.
28. Abu Hajar, The Encyclopedia of Palestinian Cities, 415.
29. RIWAQ, Registry of Historic Buildings, 344.
30. RIWAQ, Registry of Historic Buildings, 344. al-Dabagh, Palestine, Our Home, 360.
31. The ordinance, based on definitions proposed by the 1922 British-led Archaeological Joint
Committee for the Middle East, was subsequently amended in 1930, 1932, 1934, 1935, 1937, 1943,
1946, and finally in 1973.

32. Bengt & Kampe, “Review of the Cultural Heritage Sector.”
33. Yahya, “Archaeology and Nationalism.” al-Houdalieh, “Destruction of Palestinian Archaeolog-

ical Heritage.”

34. Miller and Pitaluga, “Cultural Marketing and Archaeology,” 65.
35. See www.riwaq.org/index.php?lang⫽en&page⫽about&color⫽bgc4 and www.hebronrc.org/

english/english.aspx for more information.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abu Hajar, A. The Encyclopedia of the Palestinian Cities and Villages. Amman, 2003.

Abu Khalaf, Marwan, Ibrahim Abu A’mar, Salah al-Houdalieh, and Robert Hoyland. “The Byzantine
and Early Islamic Settlement of Khirbat Shuwayka.” Web Journal of Cultural Patrimony 2 (2006):
47–76.

al-Dabagh, Mustafa Murad. Palestine, Our Home. Beirut: Tali’a, 1966.

al-Houdalieh, Salah. “The Destruction of Palestinian Archaeolgoical Heritage: Saffa Village as a Model.”
Near Eastern Archaeology 69, no. 2 (2006): 102–12.

Amnesty International. “Israel and the Occupied Territories Surviving under Siege: The Impact of
Movement Restrictions on the Right to Work (MDE 15/001/2003).” London, 2003.

Bagatti, Bellarmino. Ancient Christian Villages of Samaria. Jerusalem: Franciscan Printing Press, 2002.

Brodie, Neil, and Renfrew Colin. “Looting and the World’s Archaeological Heritage: The Inadequate
Response.” Annual Review of Anthropology 35 (2005): 343–61.

Brodie, Neil, and Kathryn Walker Tubb. Illicit Antiquities: The Theft of Culture and the Extinction of
Archaeology. One World Archaeology, 42. London: Routledge, 2002.

Callaway, Joseph A. “Raddana, Khirbet.” In New Encyclopedia of Archaeological Excavation in the Holy
Land, edited by Ephraim Stern, 1253–54. Jerusalem: Carta, 1993.

Callaway, Joseph A., and Robert E. Cooley. “A Salvage Excavation at Raddana, in Bireh.” Bulletin of
the American Schools of Oriental Research 201 (1971): 9–19.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

22

SALAH AL-HOUDALIEH AND ROBERT R. SAUDERS

Conder, C.R., Horatio Herbert Kitchener, Edward Henry Palmer, and Walter Besant. The Survey of
Western Palestine. Memoirs of the Topography, Orography, Hydrography, and Archaeology. London:
Committee of the Palestine Exploration Fund, 1881.

Cooley, Robert E. “Four Seasons of Excavation at Khirbet Raddana.” Near Eastern Archaeological
Society Bulletin 5 (1975): 5–20.

Coward, Martin. “Against Anthropocentrism: The Destruction of the Built Environment as a Dis-
tinct Form of Political Violence.” Review of International Studies 32, no. 3 (2006): 419–37.

El-Eini, Roza. Mandated Landscape : British Imperial Rule in Palestine, 1929–1948. London: Rout-
ledge, 2006.

Finkelstein, Israel, and Zvi Lederman, eds. Highlands of Many Cultures: The Southern Samaria Sur-
vey. Vol. 14, Monograph Series of the Sonia and Marco Nadler Institute of Archaeology. Tel Aviv: Tel
Aviv University, 1997.

Graham, Stephen. “Postmortem City.” City 8, no. 2 (2004): 165–96.

Johansson, Bengt O.H., and Ann Kämpe. “Review of the Cultural Heritage Sector in the Palestinian
Areas—the Built Environment and Cultural Landscapes: Final Report.” Swedish International De-
velopment Cooperation Agency, 2006.

Kershner, Isabel. “The Changing Face of Ramallah.” The Jerusalem Report (1999): 28.

Khamaisi, Rassem. “Planning and Developing a New Palestinian Urban Core under Conditional Is-
raeli Occupation: Ramallah City.” In Cities between Integration and Disintegration: Opportunities and
Challenges—International Society of City and Regional Planners Congress. Istanbul, Turkey, 2006.

Lowenthal, David. “Natural and Cultural Heritage.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 11, no.
1 (2005): 81–92.

McAlister, Martin E. “Looting and Vandalism of Archaeological Resources on Federal and Indian
Lands in the United States.” In Protecting the Past, 93–99: Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1991.

Meskell, Lynn. “Negative Heritage and Past Mastering in Archaeology.” Anthropological Quarterly 75,
no. 3 (2002): 557–74.

Miller, Joseph C., and Patricia Pitaluga. “Cultural Marketing and Archaeology: The Case of Brazil.”
Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing 8, no. 4 (2001): 63–74.

Naerouz, Ibrahim. Ramallah: Geography, History and Civilization. Ramallah, 2004.

Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics. “Projected Mid-Year Population for Ramallah & Al Bireh
Governorate by Locality 2004–2006.” http://www.pcbs.gov.ps/Portals/_pcbs/populati/pop07.aspx (Ac-
cessed November 17, 2007).

Reinhold, R. “Theft and Vandalism: An Archaeological Disaster.” Expedition 15, no. 4 (1973): 2–6.

Reyman, Jonathan Eric. “Vandalism and Site Destruction at Some National Parks and Monuments:
A Call for Action.” Newsletter—American Society for Conservation Archaeology 6, no. 3 (1979): 4–9.

Riwaq. Registry of Historic Buildings in Palestine, Vol. 2. Ramallah: Riwaq, 2006.

Shaheen, Lubna. “The Urbanization Impact on the Palestinian Landscape.” Paper presented at the
International Conference on Conservation and Management of Landscape in Conflict Regions, Birzeit
University, 2007.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043

BUILDING DESTRUCTION

23

Shehadeh, Raja. Occupier’s Law: Israel and the West Bank, rev. ed. Washington, DC: Institute for Pal-
estine Studies, 1988.

Spennemann, Dirk H.R. “Cultural Heritage Conservation During Emergency Management: Luxury
or Necessity?” International Journal of Public Administration 22, no. 5 (1999): 745–804.

Tsimhoni, Daphne. “Israel and the Territories—Disappearance.” Middle East Quarterly 8, no. 1 (2001):
31.

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. World Population
Prospects: The 2006 Revision. New York: United Nations Publications, 2006.

Vandkilde, Helle. “Commemorative Tales: Archaeological Responses to Modern Myth, Politics, and
War.” World Archaeology 35, no. 1 (2003): 126–44.

Yahya, Adel. “Archaeology and Nationalism in the Holy Land.” In Archaeologies of the Middle East:
Critical Perspectives, edited by Susan Pollock and Reinhard Bernbeck. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2005.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:59:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739109090043


