Contemporary  Legal  Problems
of Return  of  Cultural  Property
to  its  Country  of  Origin  in  Russia
and the  Confederation  of
Independent  States
M. M. Boguslavskij*

The  cultural  heritage  of  the  past  should  be  preserved  not  only  for
ourselves  but  also  for  future  generations.  Achieving  this  objective
may  be  supported  both  by  a  country's  internal  legislation  and  by
the  international  legislative  system  arising  from  the  conclusion, of
international  agreements. Naturally, such a system of regulations re-
quires particularly careful  consideration and should serve, the interest
of preservation  of both a nation's own cultural heritage and the cul-
tural heritage, of the whole of humanity. The aim of the present arti-
cle is to  review and analyse the international  legal practice  related
solely to the problem  of possible  return  of the  cultural  and  historic
property from the country where it is located to its country of origin.

1  International  Legal  Regulations

The  main  problems  of  the  return  of  cultural  property  from  one
country to anbther have been regulated by a number  of multilateral
conventions elaborated within UNESCO. Those of which Russia and
other  members  of  trie  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States  (CIS)
are members  are  of  particular  interest  to  us.  One  of  the  first  inter-
national documents of this kind to be signed was the Hague Conven-
tion of May  14, 1954, for the Protection of Cultural Property in Time
of  a  Military  Conflict  and  the  Protocol  of  May  14,  1954,  on  the
Protection  of Cultural-Property  in Time of  a Military  Conflict.  The
Russian  Republic,  the  Byelorussian  Republic  and  the  Republic  of
Ukraine  are  signatories  of  both  the  Convention  and  the  Protocol

*  Chief  of the  Academic  Staff  of the  Institute  of  State  and  Law  of the  Russian
Academy  of Sciences; Professor  of Law. Translated from the original  Russian
by  Przemyslaw  R.  Siuda.

243

M. M.  Boguslavskij

(which  were ratified  in  1957). The Russian Republic, the Byelorus-
sian Republic  and  the Republic of Ukraine  are also members of the
Convention  for  Protection  of  the  World  Cultural  and Natural  Heri-
tage of November  16, 1972 (ratified  in  1988).1 Other member count-
ries  of  the  CIS  being,  according  to  multilateral  agreements,  legal
successors  of the USSR, have a right of participation  in all of these
conventions.

In the conventions and recommendations  of UNESCO  as well as
in  bilateral  agreements,  a number  of  provisions  are  included  refer-
ring directly to the problems of return of cultural property. The first
group of regulations includes those which concern the definitions  of
the notions  of cultural heritage  and cultural property.

In  the  recommendations  of  UNESCO  and  in  the  Convention  for
the  Protection  of  World  Cultural  and Natural  Heritage  any  cultural
heritage  present  in the territory of any state  is regarded  as a part of
the  world  heritage  of  all  humanity,  as  the  significance  of  such  a
heritage  is  universal.  In  the  Convention  of  1972  the  principle  of
sovereignty  is  applied;  the  full  recognition  of  the  sovereignty  of a
state  on the territory of which  the cultural  heritage  is located  being
stressed.2  In  this  way,  the  starting  point  for  determining  what  is
included  in the cultural heritage, is its location  in a given territory.
From the point of view of the subject  of the present article, it has
to be pointed out that the cultural property located in the territory of
any  state  may  include  property  originating  from  other  countries.
Thus, in the Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of Cultural
Property  in  Time  of  a  Military  Conflict,  cultural  property  is  con-
sidered to comprise all cultural property "...  irrespective of its place
of  origin  and  the present  owner  ...".3  According to the  Convention
of  1970 on Measures Undertaken to Prohibit and Prevent the Illegal
Importing,  Exporting and  Passing  the  Ownership  Right  to  Cultural
Property,  the cultural heritage of every country  includes, in particu-
lar, the cultural property:

— "of  a  particular  importance  to  a  given  state  and  brought  on  its
territory by either foreign  citizens or persons with no citizenship,
living on the territory of this state";

— manufactured  on the territory of a given state,
— acquired  by any expedition  held "with the  consent  of competent

authorities  in the country of origin of the acquired  property",

— acquired as an effect  of voluntary  exchanges,
— received  as  donations  or  legally  purchased  with  the  consent  of

competent  authorities  in its country of origin.4

From  what  has  been  said  one  should  conclude  that  as  the  inter-
national  law  assigns  full  moral  responsibility  for  cultural  property
of any origin to every state, this does not imply that national cultural
property cannot include some cultural property (heritage) of another
state, i. e. its country of origin. It may only be a question of legality
and  lawfulness  of the fact  of it remaining  in a particular  country  or

244

Return  of Cultural  Property  in  Russia

of the lawfulness  of its acquisition by a museum or other  institution
or person.

In this way, it is the principle  of territoriality, or the location  of a
particular  item  of  cultural  property,  that  is  of  a  great  importance
for  determining  what  comprises  a  national  heritage.  This  approach
corresponds to the internationally accepted practice of acquisition of
objects  by museums and  collectors.

In international  legal practice, the principle of preservation  of the
entirety  of  a  collection  (even  more  —  the  superiority  of  this  prin-
ciple), has been confirmed  when the fate of the heritage of the Habs-
burg empire.had to be decided after the splitting of Austria-Hungary.
The principle was included  in some of the agreements of the Treaty
of. Versailles5  and  in  mutual  conventions  of  1919  between  Austria
and  Czechoslovakia,  Austria and Italy, and Austria and  Hungary.

A  second  group  of  regulations  concern  the  formulation  of  a cri-
terion  (with the  exclusion  of special  cases, which  will be  discussed
separately)  which  affords  a  basis  for  a  request  for  the  return  of  a
cultural  object  from  one  country  to  another.  The  key  is  the1 law-
fulness  of  the  particular  cultural  objects'  being  kept  in  a  given
counniy, and in particular the lawfulness  of the act of its acquisition.
In  other  words,  international  law  documents  stipulate  the  return  to
the original  country of the  cultural  object  which  has been  imported
illegally to.the original country. Unfortunately, under present circum-
stances the cases of theft  and illegal export of cultural property have
become  far  too common. The wave of art thefts  has  finally-reached
Russia  as well.  For example,  in  1990,  1441  churches,  18 museums
and numerous private collections reported burglaries and most of the
stolen works of art were taken  abroad.

According  to the Convention  of  1970, any  importation  or  expor-
tation  of  cultural  property,  or  passing  the  right  of  ownership  to  it,
not  conforming  to the  rules  stated  in the  Convention,  is  considered
unlawful.  The Convention  assists the enforcement  of a strict ban on
taking the property  out of a country without  a proper  licence.

In this way, whenkny item of cultural property is stolen and taken
abroad  with  the  infringement  of  the  law  on  exportation  of  cultural
property, the property  is subject  to return. (It has to be stressed that
in  most  countries  either  a  strict  ban  or  certain  restrictions  are  im-
posed on exportation of cultural property). The said Convention also
gives  a  definition  of  cultural  property  for  this  purpose:  the  list  is
long and  includes works  of art (paintings, drawings,  sculptures, en-
gravings),  rare  manuscripts,  archives,  antiquities  older  than  100
years, furniture,  rare collections, historic relics, etc. Any exportation
of so defined  cultural property  or passing of the right of ownership,
breaching  the  rules  agreed  by  the  signatories  in  the  Convention,  is
considered illegal. This means that the item of cultural property may
be taken out of a country only with the consent of appropriate  auth-
orities  in  this  country.  The  state  to  which  the  objects  are  exported

245

M. M.  Boguslavskij

should  — if  it  is  a party  in  the  Convention  — take  measures  to
prevent  any  illegal  entry  of  the  property.  A  special  clause  in  the
Convention  bans  the  importation  of  cultural  property  "stolen  from
museums,  religious or historic  sites". If any case  of importing  such
an  item  into  any  country  occurring  after  1970  despite  the  ban  is
disclosed,  then  "the victim  state  issues  a request  demanding  the re-
turn of the stolen goods". The requests of this kind are sent by diplo-
matic channels. In this way the Convention  not only assists the pre-
vention  of  importing  stolen  cultural  property  but  also  defines  the
measures  for  their return.

The main problems that are encountered  in practice  are related to
the  application  of  the principle  of  acquisition  in  good  faith,  which
is  the  main  principle  of  the  internal  legislation.  The  essence  of  the
problem  is that  some countries allow  application  of the principle of
acquisition  of goods, including cultural property, in good faith.  This
means that if the object  was stolen and then passed to a dealer,  from
whom  in  turn  it  was  acquired  by  a  collector,  who  knew  nothing
about  the origin  of the object,  then the  latter  person  is considered a
transferee  in good faith. If the unawareness of the fact of theft  can be
proved then, according to the law of the state applying the discussed
principle,  the  object  cannot  be  returned  to  its  legal  owner.  Some
countries,  though,  apply  a stricter  approach:  if the  object  is proven
to be stolen  from  any place at any time, it should be returned to the
original  owner.

It has  to be  said that  recently  a tendency  to return  cultural  prop-
erty, regardless of the principle of acquisition in good faith, has been
observed.  Further,  the  Convention  of  1970  stipulates  the  right  of
every state "to proclaim some of the cultural property  untransferable
and hence  to prohibit its  exportation".6

The  provisions  of the  Convention  of  1970 concerning  the  return
of  cultural  property  taken  illegally  from  one  country  into  another
come  into  force  only  after  a  country  enters  the  Convention  as  a
member. This is why, in the case of the USSR, of which the Russian
Republic,  the  Byelorussian  Republic  and  the  Republic  of  Ukraine
are legal successors, and which entered the Convention  in  1988, the
provisions  apply  only  to  that  property  which  was  exported  after
1988.  Hence,  the  Convention  does  not  have  a  reverse  effect.  This
circumstance  does not, however, prevent Russia  from  entering other
mutual  agreements with other member states of the CIS. Section  15
of  the  Convention  of  1970  says  that  "entering  any  special  mutual
agreements  on  the  return  of  cultural  property  taken  out  of  the
country of origin by no means interferes with the Convention's com-
ing into force  in the participating  countries".

With  the coming into force  of the Convention of  1970, the Inter-
national  Legislative  Committee  for  the  Assistance  of the  Return  of
Cultural  Property  to its  Country  of  Origin  or Its  Recovery  in  Case
of Illegal  Appropriation  has been  created. The Committee  members

246

Return  of  Cultural  Property  in  Russia

are the representatives of the member states of UNESCO. The Com-
mittee became active  in  1980. In the elections held on the 24th and
25th  sessions  of  the  General  Conference  of  UNESCO,  representa-
tives of  19 countries  including  the USSR were  appointed.

The  principles  discussed  above  do  not  apply  in  specific  cases
when  a  principle  of  full  restitution  is  in  force,  meaning  that  the
return  of  all cultural  property  is obligatory,  irrespective  of the  law-
fulness  of its acquisition.

2  Consequences  of War and the Problems  of Return of

Cultural  Property

It is necessary to concentrate also on some specific cases concerning
the  return  of  cultural  property,  especially' that  which  is  found  in  a
territory  of  another  state  as  a  result  of  war.  In  the  past,  a  right  of
the victorious  side to capture cultural property  as trophies had been
generally  recognized.  'Gradually,  provisions  of  international  law
started  to  be  formulated,  forbidding  such  cases.  This  process  was
started  during  the  Congress  of  Vienna  in11815,  when  it  had  been
decided to return the treasures  captured  by Napoleon  to their count-
ries  of  origin.  The  most  striking  example  of  this  was  the  return  to
San  Marco  Square  in  Venice  of the  horse  statues taken  to  Paris  on
Napoleo'n's  orders.  Similarly,  a number  of  other  trophies  were  re-
turned-to'their countries of origin. After  World War I, regulations on
the'return of cultural treasures were included in the system of treaties
of Versailles, but it was the Convention  of  1954 and its supplemen-
tary Protocol  that established  a strict rule: no iteirTof  cultural prop-
erty  may  become  a  trophy  or  an  object  of  capture,  and  any  such
object  must be returned to the country of origin. During World War
II particularly  high 'losses were  suffered  by the USSR,  Poland, Yu-
goslavia and other European countries. All the cultural property cap-
tured  by  Nazi  Germany  had  to  be  returned  but,  as  is  weir known,
far too little of it was actually recovered. For example, the treasures
of the Petscherskoy Monastery have been returned but lots of others
—  including  libraries  and  archives  —  have  not.  Several  cases  are
known of captured property being found  in the territory  of the USA
or  other  countries,  sold  at  auctions  and  being  bought  for  private
collections. The  problems  of their  return  to our  country,  as well  as
the problems of return-of German, Dutch and other countries' treas-
ures  which  after  the  war  appeared  to be  on  Soviet  territory,  cannot
be considered solved to a satisfactory  degree.7 In the Treaty on Good
Neighbourhood,  Partnership  and  Collaboration  between  the  Federal
Republic  of  Germany  and  the  USSR  it  has  been  written  that  both
sides  agree  that  "...  lost  or  illegally  exported  cultural  property  lo-
cated  on their territories  should be returned  to their owners or their
descendants".8

247

M. M.  Boguslavskij

Still  before  the  breakup  of  the  USSR  (October  9,  1991)  M. S.
Gorbachev  issued  an instruction  to  form  a commission  responsible
for the problems of cultural property taken from  the USSR to Germ-
any  and  from  Germany  to  the  USSR  during  and  after  World  War
II. The commission was actually established  in Russia  following  the
instruction  by B. N Yeltsyn in  1992.

In  this  way,  the  provisions  of  international  law  concerning  the
return  of  cultural  property  to  a  country  from  which  it  was  taken
during  a  military  conflict,  or  as  a  result  of  an  occupation  by  an
external power, are included in the Hague Convention and its Proto-
col  of  1954, as  well  as  in the  Convention  of  1970. From  the  point
of view of international  law, the provisions cannot be applied to the
member states of the CIS, but they can apply in the mutual relations
of the Russian Republic, the Byelorussian Republic and the Republic
of  Ukraine  with  the Federal  Republic  of  Germany  (on  the  basis  of
the above mentioned Section  16 of the Treaty between FRG and the
USSR).  Obviously, exactly  the  same  problems  (relations  with  third
countries  with  respect  to  the  return  of  cultural  property)  may  be  a
subject  of an agreement between the member states of the CIS.

A  real  existing  problem  is  that  concerning  the  return  of  cultural
property  acquired  by the  USSR  as  a  part  of  post-war  reparations.
The most typical example concerns cultural property captured by the
German  army  in  the  occupied  countries  and  then  acquired  by  the
USSR  as  a part  of reparations.  For  example,  the  collections  of  the
All-Russian Library of Foreign Literature in Moscow include a num-
ber  of  books  with  labels  of  Dutch  libraries.  The  objects  of  such
origin are subject  to return under the condition, expressed in Section
3,  p. 1 of  the  Protocol  of  1954, that  each  party  takes  an  obligation
to  return  cultural  property  found  on  its  territory  to  the  "competent
authorities  of  the  previously  occupied  territory"  if  the  objects  had
been captured during a military conflict.  As the Protocol  says, "such
property  must never be considered  a part of the war reparations".

The  Protocol  to  the  Hague  Convention  stipulates  certain  other
cases when the property has to be returned. This concerns the prop-
erty taken  abroad  in order to provide its protection during a military
conflict.  A  special  section  of the  Protocol  of  1954 states  this prop-
erty should be returned to the country where it had belonged before.
A  classic  example  of this  case  in  international  legal  practice  is the
case  of  arrases  from  the Wawel  royal  castle  in Cracow.  Before  the
war,  they  had  been  transported  to  Canada;  afterwards  Poland
struggled  for  a long time to achieve their return. Finally, the arrases
were returned.  A similar case  is that of the Hungarian royal crown.
The  presented  discussion  suggests  that  separate  cases  of  claims
for  return  of  cultural property  sent  into  one  or another  republic  for
the purpose  of  protection  may be  a  subject  of  bilateral  agreements
between  Russia  and other member  states of  the  CIS  as  well  as the
Baltic  States.

248

Return  of Cultural  Property  in  Russia

Hence,  when  regarding  the  problems  of  returning  cultural  prop-
erty which was taken abroad as an effect  of World War II, the follow-
ing provisions  of international  law should  be taken  into account:
1.  Adequate  legal  relations  apply  to  the  states  and  not  to  separate

2.  No negative prescriptions  may be applied  in such cases;
3.  The  principle  of  full  restitution  should  be  applied  to  these  re-

persons;

lations.

3  Decolonization  and the Return  of Cultural  Property

The provisions of international  law concerning the return of cultural
property include also those which arise from special regulations and
measures  taken  for  the  elimination  of  the  consequences  of  col-
onialism  and  neocolonialism.  Since  1972  the  General  Assembly  of
the  UN has passed  a number  of resolutions  concerning  these prob-
lems. Particular attention should be paid to Resolution 3187 on "Re-
turn  of  the  Works  of  Art  to  the  Countries  —  Victims. ,of  Expropri-
ation",  which  hastan  explicit  anti-colonial  character, f.asr,well  as  to
the Resolution^ 1/40  of November  30,  197^6 on "The protection and
Return of the Works of Art as a Part of-the General Preservation and
Further Development of Cultural Treasures", submitted by Zaire and
other  countries.9  It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  Director  General
of UNESCO, Mr. M. Boy, called in  1978 for the return of irreplace-
able  items  of  cultural  heritage  of  the  nations  of  Asia,  Africa  and
Southern  America  and  appealed,to,the  governments  of the  member
states of UNESCO for  signing bilateral agreements on the return of
cultural  property  to the  countries  of  origin  and  for  support  of suit-
able sale and exchange transactions  as well  as donations ,to respect-
ive institutions. The appeal was aimed  at providing  favourable  con-
ditions for a fairer international  exchange of the cultural treasures.10
Numerous  resolutions  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  UN  and
UNESCO  concerning  the  full  return  of  cultural  property  to  its
country of origin, and hence referring  to the relations in this domain
between the, former colonies and their metropolies, cannot be applied
to  the  mutual  relations  of  the  former  republics  of  former  USSR,
which later became member  states  of the CIS.

4  Legal  Succession  of  States and the Problems  of the

Return of Cultural  Property

In  international  law the notion  of  legal  succession  is understood  as
the  transfer  of  rights  and  duties  of  one  subject  of  law  (state)  to
another subject(s)  of law (state(s)). At the instant the CIS came into
being, the  existence  of the  USSR  ceded  and  several  states  became

249

M. M.  Boguslavskij

its  legal  successors.11  This  is  why  the  provisions  of  international
law,  and  its  practice  have  particular  significance  for  solving  the
problems  of  cultural  and historic treasures that  arise  in the member
states  of the CIS.

The  main  problems  of  succession  have  been  regulated  by  two
multilateral conventions: the Vienna Convention of 1983 on the Suc-
cession  of  States  to International  Agreements  and  the  Vienna  Con-
vention  of  1983 on the  Succession  of  States to State Property, State
Archives  and  State  Debts.12  Both  Conventions  never  came  into
force; but despite that fact, a point of view exists according to which
they  merely  state  explicitly  the  already  existing  rules  of  customary
international  law.  Even  accepting  this  point  of  view,  which  is  not
only considered questionable but even opposed in the Western count-
ries, one has to admit that the states concerned may agree on  differ-
ent terms than those defined in the Conventions, as it is clearly stated
in a number  of their sections.

As far  as the subject  of the present article is considered, the Con-
vention  of  1983  on  State  Archives  includes  three  provisions  un-
doubtedly  of  interest  to us. This is because  the  archives, as well as
separate  documents  they  include,  are  part  of  a  cultural,  and  even
more certainly historic, heritage. The first  important task is to deter-
mine what is included in the notion of an archive in this context. As
the Conventions  say, "the state archives of a ceding state" mean "the
entirety  of documents of any age and any origin, issued or acquired
by the ceding state during its existence which belonged to the ceding
state  by  its  internal  law  at the  instance  of  succession  and  were di-
rectly  protected  or  controlled  by  the  state  as  archives  for  different
purposes".13  Secondly,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  proviso  on
the protection  of entirety of state archival collections.14  Thirdly, the
rules  referring  to  the  succession  in  case  of  the  dismembering  of  a
state are important in this case.15  In particular, a provision has been
made that  "unless  the cessionary  states agree  otherwise" the ceding
state  passes  that  part  of  the  archives  which  is  in  direct  relation  to
the  territory  of  a  given  cessionary  state  (the  so-called  historical  ar-
chives) to this state.

In relation  to those archives which should be kept on the territory
of  the  successor  state  in order  to provide  its normal  functioning  or
functioning  of its related territories, the Convention makes provision
for either direct passing of such an archive to the cessionary state or
for an exchange  of copies (or, as written in the Convention, "appro-
priate  reproductions  of  the archives",  essential  to  the  affairs  of the
cessionary  state).

The  Convention  of  1983  does  not  provide  any  universal  regu-
lations of a common nature referring  to other kinds of cultural prop-
erty. The main rule concerning the movable property can be summar-
ized as follows: when a state is dismembered and its existence cedes,
while two or more cessionary states are formed  on its territory, then
unless the cessionary  states agreed otherwise, all the movable prop-

250

Return  of Cultural  Property  in  Russia

erty of the ceding state related  to the activities  concerning  the terri-
tory of the ceding  state becomes  subject  to the legal  succession  and
is passed to the respective successor state. Any movable property of
the ceding state other than that falling  into the foregoing  category is
passed  to the cessionary  states as just  shares.16

The uniqueness  of the Vienna  Convention  of  1983 is revealed in
the fact  that it was an attempt to create  special regulations  concern-
ing new  independent  states  created  as a result of  decolonisation,  or
liberation  from  colonial oppression. In such cases the concept of the
share  of  the  dependent  territory  (i. e.  former  colony)  in  the  total
amount  of  movable property  belonging  to the  ceding  state  is intro-
duced. In particular,  it is assumed  that the inhabitants  of the colony
participated  in manufacturing  of the property of the ceding  state and
hence the property  should be passed  to  the cessionary  state  in such
proportion as corresponds to the share of the former dependent terri-
tory  in  the  manufacturing  effort  and  expenditure.17  These  regu-
lations  may  be  of  great  importance  for  the  protection  and  consoli-
dation of the  historical  and cultural  heritage  of the  nation  of a new
independent  state that was formerly  a colony. According to the com-
mentaries  of  the  Commission  on  International  Law,  this  particular
regulation  has been formulated  on the grounds  of particular  signifi-
cance  ofihe  cultural  heritage.  The  regulation  applies  to,all  objects
originating  from  the  territory  of  the  former  colony,  regardless  of
their  significance,  time  factor  or  the  circumstances  of  their  expor-
tation.  In other words, the restitution  is  full.18

As the discussed  Convention  has not  been  put  in  force,, attention
should  be  paid  to.the  historical  precedents  concerning  legal  suc-
cession  to cultural  property. There  are several  known precedents  of
this  kind,  but  each  of  them  should,  in  my  opinion,  be  considered
very cautiously, as every such case of return of cultural property was
being considered under specific  political, historic  and other circum-
stances.  Knowledge  of  these  cases  is  nevertheless  useful  and,  to
some degree, allows some  interesting tendencies  to be  observed.

An  example  may  be  the  Vienna  agreement  of  October  3, v 1866
between Austria and Italy concerning the transference  of Venice and
Lombardyito  Italy  (The .Peace  Treaty  of  Vienna  of  1866), some  of
the documents  of the Treaty of Versailles (Treaty  of  Saint-Germain,
Austrian-Czechoslovak  Convention,  Austrian-Italian  Convention,
Austrian-Hungarian  Convention) and the Peace Treaty with Hungary
of February  10, 1947.

Particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  agreements  entered'by
the Russian  Federal  Socialist  Soviet Republic, the Ukrainian  Soviet
Socialist Republic and the Byelorussian  Soviet Socialist Republic in
1920 with the Baltic states and Poland. The Russian Federal  Socialist
Soviet Republic signed the peace treaties with Lithuania, Latvia and
Estonia (treaty with Estonia on February  2,  1920, treaty with Lithu-
ania on July  12,  1920, treaty  with  Latvia on August  11, 1920). The
Ukraine  signed  the  treaties  with  Lithuania  (February  14,  1921  and

251

M. M. Boguslavskij

April  5,  1922), Latvia (August  3,  1921) and Estonia  (November 25,
1921). All the treaties included two separate provisions: on the return
of the archives, libraries, museums and similar treasures transported
from  Baltic  states  to  Russia  and/or  Ukraine  during  the  war  (years
1914-1917),  and on  return of the treasures acquired before the war
"unless  their  return causes a significant  impoverishment  of Russian
(Ukrainian) archives, libraries, museums, galleries, in which the said
treasures  are  at  present  kept".  The  controversies  were  settled  by
mixed  commissions.

In the treaty of February  14, 1921 between the Ukraine and Lithu-
ania  it  was  agreed that  cultural  property  would  be  subject  to return
"unless  their  return  causes  a  significant  impoverishment  of  the  ar-
chives, libraries, museums, and art galleries, in which the said treas-
ures  are  at present  kept".19 According  to the  Supplementary  Agree-
ment of April  5,  1922 the above rule cannot be applied  if the art or
scientific  collections  of  interest  are  the  legal  property  of  Ukrainian
citizens,  or  if  the  said collections,  even  if taken  from  Lithuania  by
orders  of  high  imperial  (Tsarist)  officials,  became  parts  of  genuine
Ukrainian  collections  and  if  their  return  could  cause  a  significant
detriment  to the  entirety of such a collection.20

On March  18, 1921 a Peace Treaty was signed between Byelorus-
sia,  Russia  and  Ukraine  on one  side, and  Poland  on  the  other. The
Treaty included regulations concerning the fate of the Polish historic
treasures taken to the Far East of Russia during World War I, as well
as of the war trophies captured by Russia  since January  1, 1772 and
other property captured since 1792 i. e. during the years of the strug-
gle  of Polish  nation  for  independence  against  Tsarist  Russia.  These
included  libraries, works of art and other objects  of a particular his-
torical,  artistic,  archaeological,  scientific  or  generally  cultural  sig-
nificance. As Section 7, Clause XI says: "both sides agree that those
collections  which  are  an object  of continuing  research,  or  of syste-
matising activities, or which constituting a complete entirety, should
not be partitioned...".  It was also agreed that obligatory return does
not apply to objects which appeared  on the territory of either Russia
or Ukraine as a result of legal transactions or inheritance, or because
their owners brought the property into the said territories themselves.
On the subject  of the treaties of the  1920s, one must bear in mind
the  political  considerations  of  that  time;  the  struggle  of  the  young
Soviet diplomacy  to open a gap in the blockade of the Soviet repub-
lics. Nevertheless, as it may be seen, the case was not one of uncon-
ditional,  full  restitution.

In practice, during talks held among different  states and concern-
ing  in  particular  the  putting  into  practice  of  the  above  mentioned
international agreements, an argument has often been raised and evi-
dence given that  the discussed  cultural property has become, owing
to its long period of presence in a given country, an inseparable part
of the cultural  heritage  of that  country, and hence that the principle
of preservation  of the entirety  of the collections  should  be applied.

252

Return  of Cultural  Property  in  Russia

Based  on  the  analysis  of  international  legal  regulations  and  the
practice  of  international  agreements,  the  provisions  of  the  Agree-
ment  on  the  Return  of  Cultural  and  Historic  Treasures  to  Their
Country of Origin signed by the member states of the CIS on Febru-
ary  14,  1992  may  be  discussed  and  evaluated.  The  discussion
follows.

5  The Relations Between the Member  States of the CIS
Referring  to the Problems  of the Transfer  of  Cultural
Property

In  the  preamble  of  the  Agreement  of  January  14,  1992,  the  great
significance  is1 stressed "attached by the agreeing states to the return
of  the  cultural  property,  being  an  inseparable  part  of  their  historic,
cultural  and  spiritual  heritage".  It  has  also  been  agreed  to  "accept
the regulations included in the Resolutions of the General  Assembly
of  the  UN  concerning  the  return, of  the  cultural  property  to  its
country of origin". As declared in Section  1, "the participating  states
will cooperate in-returning the cultural and historic treasures to their
countries  of  origin".  In  this  way  the  principle  of  the  return  of  the
treasures to the country of origin has became one of the  foundations
of the Agreement.

As it may  be  easily  noticed,  a  framework  of  the  Agreement  had
been formed  by the Resolutions of the General Assembly  of the UN
as well as other documents concerning the problems of the return of
cultural  property  to  former  colonies,  which  later  became  indepen-
dent countries.

Although  in some cases the country of origin of cultural  property
can be identified  fairly  easily (as for example was in the case of the
Greek  claim  to the  Parthenon  statues),  in  cases  of  legal  succession
occurring after  a state splits this becomes impossible. In my opinion
we cannot  ignore the circumstance  of the member  states of the CIS
hot  having  previously  any  international  personality  as  sovereign
states or, even if it was the case, the fact that the former  state bound-
aries  were  basically  different  from  the  present  ones.  Hence,  the
country  of origin  can  hardly  be defined  from  historical  premises  (a
dramatic example  being the case of the  Scythian gold).

Let us assume that the country of origin was defined  based on the
principle of the nationality or citizenship of the creator of the object
in question.  In  such case, what would  be a country  of origin  of the
masterpieces  of the great marine painter Atvazovskij, who was born
Armenian, was  the  subject  of  a Russian  emperor  and  whose  works
are kept in the Theodosian  Museum in Crimea?

The Institute for International  Law, which is a competent organis-
ation  with  no judicial  powers, included  a definition  of a country  of
origin  of  a  work  of  art  in  its  Resolution  on  International  Trade  of
Works  of  Art  in  Relation  to  the  Protection  of  Cultural  Heritage,

253

M. M. Boguslavskij

voted  on a  session  in  1991. According  to this  definition,  a country
of  origin  is  the  country  with  which  a  given  work  of  art  is  most
closely  linked  in cultural  and historical  sense.21

Differently  from the Convention of 1970, the Agreement of Febru-
ary  14,  1992,  which  makes  a reference  to  the  Convention  in  its
preamble,  does  not set  up  any criteria  for  presenting  a demand  for
return of an object of cultural property. The most important criterion,
as  stated  by  the  Convention  of  1970  and  a  number  of  other  inter-
national  agreements,  are  the  lawfulness  and  legality  of  the  acqui-
sition  of  the  property.  The  Agreement  of  the  member  states  of  the
CIS lacks this criterion but it is stipulated that the International Legal
Commission to be established22 will determine "the categories of the
cultural  and historic treasures that  are  subject  to return".  Therefore,
the possibility exists for  a full  restitution with no conditions or tem-
porary  limitations  applied.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  in  inter-
national  legal  practice  a  similar approach  is applied  only  in case of
a liquidation  or consequences of war or  colonialism.

International  law does  not  stipulate  the  redistribution  of  the cul-
tural  heritage  of  single  multi-national  states.  The  articles  of  inter-
national  law  assume  the  territorial  principle  and  agree  that  the cul-
tural  heritage  of every  country, such as the museum  collections, in-
clude a variety of objects, no matter what their country  of origin is.
This  implies  that 
international  law  does  not  stipulate  an  uncon-
ditional  return  of  any  historical  or  cultural  property  to  its  country
of  origin.  For  this  reason,  the Agreement  of  February  14,  1992  is
unprecedented  in international law and putting it into practice might
have far-reaching  consequences, bringing about serious losses to the
whole  of  the  cultural  heritage  of  the  nations  of  the  CIS. This  does
not,  however,  restrain  the  member  states  of  the  CIS  from  holding
bilateral  talks on the problems of the return  of particular  objects.

As it was  mentioned  before, in  Section  2 of the  Agreement  pro-
vision  is  made  for  setting  up, on  equal  terms  for  all  the  member
states,  an  international  legal  commission  for  creating  the  mechan-
isms  and  practical  actions  for  return  of  the  historical  and  cultural
property  of the member  states of the CIS. In my  opinion, given the
existence  of  the  International  Legal  Committee  of  UNESCO,  of
which  all  the  signatories  of  the  Convention  of  February  14,  1992
will  presumably  become  members, the  expediency  of creating  such
a commission  is highly  doubtful.

It  may  be  advisable  to  appeal  to  international  legal  practice  and
take  advantage  of  the  experience  of  the  International  Legal  Com-
mittee  of UNESCO in the  domain of supporting  international  bilat-
eral  talks.  There  are  known  precedents  of  such  agreements,  as  for
example  the  agreement  between  Holland  and  Indonesia,  following
which  a  number  of masterpieces  sent  to  Holland  from  its  colonies
were returned. The agreement specified  the objects  that were subject
to  return  and  those  which  were  not  (it  also  listed  the  copies  and
duplicates  to  be  exhibited  in  museums  of  the  country  of  origin).

254

Return  of Cultural  Property  in  Russia

Similar agreements were signed by France and Algeria, Belgium and
Zaire,  Australia  and  New  Guinea,  New  Zealand  and  the  Solomon
Islands,  Denmark  and  Iceland,  France  and  Iraq,  and  others.  There
are enough examples  in international  practice.

After the signing of the Agreement of February  14, 1992, the ques-
tion  has  arisen  of  its  conformity  to  the  legislation  of  the  Russian
Federation.  As  an  objective  analysis  shows,  the  purview  of  the
Agreement  differs  from  the provisions of law of the Russian  Social-
ist Federal Soviet Republic (RSFSR) on the protection and utilisation
of historic and cultural property.23  According to that law, any expor-
tation  of  an  object  of  historic  or  cultural  value  outside  the  borders
of the  USSR is forbidden  aiid any exclusion  from  this rule  requires
obtaining a permit,  separate  for  every object  exported,  from  the' ap-
propriate  authorities.  According  to  the  bill  "On  Urgent  Measures
for  the Protection  of National, Cultural  and Natural  Heritage  of the
Nations  of  RSFSR"  voted  by  the  Supreme  Council .of the  RSFSR
on December  25,  1990, taking  any cultural  or historic  treasures be-
longing  to  RSFSR  or  any  of  its  republics,  state,  social  or  religious
organisations, outside- the boundaries of the RSFSR had been strictly
forbidden.

On  May  20,  1992  both  houses  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Russian  Federation  voted  an  "Opinion  on  the  Agreement  of  the
Member  States  of  the  CIS  On  the return of  Cultural and Historic
Treasures  to  their  Countries  of  Origin".  Clause  1 of  the  Opinion
states that the agreement "does not conform  to the legislation  of the
Russian Federation and the International Law concerning the cultural
and  natural  heritage  of  the  world".  The Agreement  itself,  however,
did  not  make  its  ratification  necessary.  For  this  reason  Clause  2 of
the Opinion was formulated,  stating that "it has to be recommended
to the Constitutional Commission of the Congress of People's Depu-
ties  of  the  Russian  Federation  that  the  draft  of  the  Bill  On Inter-
national  Agreements  of  the  Russian  Federation  should  include  a
clause  requiring  an obligatory  ratification  of all  international  agree-
ments  concerning  the  protection  of  national,  cultural  and  natural
heritage of the nations of  Russia".

The  significance  of  such  a  statement  cannot  be  overestimated.
The  Russian  parliament  expressed  in this  way  its  strong  will  to  act
for  the protection  of the nation's cultural  heritage.

6  Conclusion

Our analysis of the international  legal regulations and  legal  practice
leads  to the  conclusion  that  there  is a need  to  sign  multilateral  and
bilateral  agreements  on  cultural  cooperation  between  the  member
states  of the  CIS. In  particular,  it  seems  necessary  to  include  regu-
lations  on  the  protection  and  restoration  of  objects  being  a  part  of
the cultural and historic heritage, on free  access to such objects, and

255

M. M.  Boguslavskij

on solving the problems  of theft  and  smuggling of cultural  and his-
toric  treasures.  The  basis  for  holding  mutual  talks  as  well  as  for
the cooperation  of the law-keeping  institutions  and Customs  offices
should  also be  created.

Notes

1  The texts of the conventions  and  the corresponding  recommendations  passed
by  UNESCO  can  be  found  in:  Collected  Normative Acts  of  UNESCO:  Con-
ventions,  Agreements,  Recommendations,  Declarations,  Moscow  1991,
pp. 258—403;  The  UNESCO  Conventions  and  Recommendations  on  the
Problems  of Protection  of the  Cultural  Heritage,  Moscow  1990 (in Russian).

2  Section  1, par.  6.
3  Section  1.
4  Section  4.
5  Section  196 of the Peace  Treaty  of Saint-Germain,  Section  177 of the  Peace

Treaty  of  Trianon.

6  Section  13.
7  Cf.  A. Sherel  Wandering  Muses,  Rossiya,  1991, October  2,  9,  16,  1991  (in

Russian).

8  Section  16.
9  Resolutions:  3026A  (XXVII)  of  December  18,  1972; 3148 (XXVIII)  of De-
cember  14,  1983;  3187  (XXVIII)  of  December  18,  1973;  3391  (XXX)  of
November  19  1975;  31/40  of  November  30,  1976;  32/18  of  November  11,
1977;  33/50  of  December  14,  1978;  34/64  of  November  29,  1979;  35/127
and  35/128  of  December  11,  1980;  36/64  of  November  27,  1981; 38/34  of
November  25,  1983; 40/19  of  November  21,  1985  and  42/7  of October  22,
1987.

10  Cf.  UNESCO  Courier,  August  1978, pp. 4 - 5.
11  Cf.  The  Course  in  International  Law  Vol.  3.,  Moscow  1990  pp. 119  and
following;  International  Law  Ed.  N. T.  Blatova,  Moscow  1987  pp. 81  and
following;  The Legal  Succession  of the States  Gaining Independence,  M. M.
Avakov,  Moscow  1983  (in  Russian).

12  For  the  text  of  the  Convention  see:  Soviet  Journal  of  International  Law,

1985, pp.  350-360

13  Section  20.
14  Section  25.
15  Section 31.
16  Section  18.
17  p.  15.
18  Cf.  Lectures  of  the  Commission  on International  Law,  1981, p. 97
19  Collected  Existing  Agreements,  v. l-II,  Moscow  1928,  pp. 70-71 

(in

Russian).

20  Ibid.,  pp.  73-74.
21  See:  IPPax  1991, N° 6,  S. 432.
22  Section  2.
23  Bill  of  December  5,  1978.

256


