    (2014)   21: 79– 93 .  Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2014                Ardelia Hall: From Museum of Fine Arts to 
Monuments Woman 

       Victoria     Reed    *            

 Abstract: Ardelia Ripley Hall (1899–1979) served from 1946 until 1962 as the Fine 
Arts and Monuments Adviser to the U.S. Department of State. In this role she 
oversaw the recovery and restitution of movable cultural property that had been 
displaced during the Second World War. In spite of her vast accomplishments, 
almost nothing has been written on Ardelia Hall, and little is known about 
her life. She began her career at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, but personal 
circumstances led to her resignation in 1941. During the war, she was employed 
by the Office of Strategic Services. The expertise she established as an art historian 
working with the Roberts Commission at this time led to her appointment at the 
State Department in 1946. This essay traces for the first time Hall’s remarkable 
journey from curatorial researcher to adviser on international art restitution.      

    Every possible means should be weighed and considered, in 
view  of  the  devastation  of  modern  warfare,  to  preserve  the 
historic  and  artistic  monuments,  which  are  the  heritage  of 
mankind held in admiration and affection by all the world. 

 — Ardelia Ripley Hall,  1949   1    

  Since the Washington Conference on Holocaust-Era Assets in 1998, there has 
been a push to uncover and utilize archival documentation dealing with the confis-
cation, theft, and coercive transfer of cultural assets during World War II and the 

   *   Sadler Curator for Provenance ,  Museum of Fine Arts ,  Boston . Email:  vreed@mfa.org . 

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: An earlier version of this article was presented at  From Plunder to Pres-
ervation: The Untold Story of Cultural Heritage, World War II, and the Pacific , Lawyers’ Committee 
for Cultural Heritage Preservation Annual Conference, 8 November 2012. I would like to thank 
Julio Alves, Frederick Ilchman, Thomas Kline, Marc Masurovsky, and Maureen Melton for their 
assistance in preparing this article, and I extend a special thanks to Dick West and Anne West for 
sharing their memories of Ardelia Hall. 

79

 80   

 VICTORIA REED

Nazi occupation of Europe.  2   Arguably, the most important resource in the United 
States for this work is the National Archives and Records Administration in College 
Park, Maryland, which houses the Ardelia Hall Collection, some 30 boxes of 
material dealing with the identification and return of looted artwork after the 
Second World War.  3   The collection is named for Ardelia Ripley Hall (1899–1979), 
whose  papers  it  comprises;  she  served  from  1946  until  1962  as  the  Fine  Arts 
and Monuments Adviser to the U.S. Department of State. The Monuments, Fine 
Arts, and Archives (MFAA) Section of the military assisted in the protection and 
restitution of cultural property during and after World War II. Those who served 
in this program are more colloquially known as the Monuments Men. Long-
overdue efforts have been made in recent years to recognize the accomplishments 
of the Monuments Men; however, comparatively little has been written about the 
women  affiliated  with  the  MFAA,  including  Eve  Tucker,  Edith  Standen,  and 
in particular Ardelia Hall, of whose biography very little is known.  4   Given that 
the records she left behind constitute such a significant body of documentation, 
which is being actively utilized and cited today, an examination of her life and 
career is opportune. 

 Ardelia Hall’s work for the State Department was extraordinary, and for this 
reason, her career path can be erroneously perceived, in retrospect, as preordained. 
It has been written, for example, that she was “destined to become a superb public 
servant” who had “made a bold move to Washington” to work for the government.  5   
In fact, that Ardelia Hall should have worked for the State Department at all is 
surprising given her background. She was trained as an art historian and had spent 
most of her life in Massachusetts, including 11 years at the Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston (MFA). Like most women of her era, she began a fairly traditional (which is 
not to say unsuccessful) professional trajectory—working as an assistant in a 
museum that was run entirely by men—and looked forward to marrying and raising 
a family someday. That instead she ended up in a position of such preeminence in 
Washington, DC, is not only unexpected, but in hindsight it appears nothing less 
than fortuitous. Drawing upon material housed at the museum’s Archives, which 
span the years 1936 to 1946, leading up to her appointment at the State Department, 
this essay traces for the first time Ardelia Hall’s remarkable journey from curatorial 
researcher to adviser on international art restitution.  6   

 Ardelia Ripley Hall was descended, in good New England fashion, from May-
flower Pilgrims. She was born in Weymouth, Massachusetts, on 4 December 1899, 
to Willard Francis Hall (b. 1863) and Lura Sawin Hall (1874–1959), and was 
named for her maternal grandmother, Ardelia E. Ripley Hall of Duxbury, who 
had died earlier that year. She grew up in Cohasset, MA, with her parents and 
her younger sister Frances, known as Fannie. Fannie completed her education at 
Northfield Seminary (now Northfield Mount Hermon), and Ardelia enrolled at 
Smith ( Figure 1 ).  7   The 1920 U.S. Census lists her mother Lura as a widow, though 
it is unclear when or where Willard Hall passed away.  8   During the 1920s Mrs. Hall 
maintained a summer home in Montague, in western Massachusetts, which would 

Ardelia Hall  

 

  81 

 

 

  FIGURE  1.   

   Ardelia Hall, Smith College Yearbook Photograph, 1922.  (Copyrighted   and 

Courtesy of Smith College Archives.)     

later pass to Ardelia; she spent time in New Haven during the winter months. Fan-
nie married in 1928; she and her husband first made their home in Connecticut, and 
then settled in New Jersey.  9       

 In contrast, Ardelia remained unmarried, and with her mother to support, 
employment was not just an option for her, but a necessity. Between 1922 and 
1928, while she was earning her master’s degree in Chinese at Columbia University 
(her  thesis  was  on  the  13th-century  Chinese  landscape  painter  Hsia  Kuei    10  ) 
and  taking  classes  at  New  York  University  in  Chinese  history  and  language, 
Ardelia worked at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. There, she served as first 
assistant  for  research  in  “all  branches  of  art.”  11    She  began  full-time  work  at 
the MFA in Boston on 30 June 1930. She moved into the city, and her mother 
continued to occupy the home in Montague. At the museum, Ardelia worked 
as an assistant in what was then called the Asiatic Art Department (presently the 
Art  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  Oceania).  The  department  was,  at  the  time  she  was 
hired, under the direction of curator John Ellerton Lodge (1878–1942); unsurpris-
ingly, curatorial leadership of the museum was at that time entrusted almost 
exclusively to men.  12   Ardelia’s responsibilities included researching and cata-
loguing the permanent collection of Chinese and Japanese art for Kojiro Tomita 
(1890–1976), Keeper of Japanese Art. 

 82   

 VICTORIA REED

 The Asiatic Art Department was especially busy during the 1930s; hundreds of 
objects were added to the collection each year. Every calendar year also saw over a 
thousand visitors to the department—in 1936 alone, there were 2,274 visitors—
always including several hundred who brought in objects for examination by 
the staff.  13   Throughout this intense schedule, Ardelia remained a prolific scholar, 
publishing articles on objects from the MFA collection in the museum’s  Bulletin , 
and on her area of specialty, Chinese art, in peer-reviewed journals.  14   She also gave 
frequent talks and public lectures.  15   

 If the daily workflow remained constant, there were nevertheless a number 
of personnel changes during her time in Boston. In 1931, John Ellerton Lodge 
retired, and Kojiro Tomita was promoted to curator, assuming leadership of the 
department. Ananda Coomaraswamy (1877–1947), Keeper of Indian, Persian, 
and Muhammadan Art, was promoted to Research Fellow, and he, not Tomita, 
became Ardelia’s immediate supervisor. In 1934, MFA director Edward Jackson 
Holmes resigned to become president of the museum, and George Harold Edgell, 
who had served as curator of paintings, became the new director. By the mid-1930s, 
Ardelia was already working for a different director, a different department head, 
and a different supervisor than she had when she was hired just a few years earlier. 
The initial duties she was hired to perform—cataloguing the Japanese and Chinese 
collections—shifted  too,  since  she  was  now  reporting  to  Coomaraswamy,  a 
renowned scholar of the art of India. By 1936, she appears to have been frustrated 
with this structure and was struggling financially. On 22 January 1936, she wrote to 
her colleague Mortimer Graves that she could not stay at the MFA any longer 
because of the

  small salary which the Museum pays.… I have the full support of my 
Mother and the upkeep of my property, which she cared for.… I am 
today working for the same salary which I received when I was in the 
Metropolitan Museum in 1923, and … I actually hold a position of lower 
rank, in fact the lowest round of the Boston Museum ladder. 

 The other half of the picture shows I think that the Museum has steadily 
added to the load of work which I carry. I was employed to do research 
and catalogue the Chinese and Japanese collections. Four years ago when 
Dr. Coomaraswamy was relieved of departmental work to devote himself 
to research, the full care of the Indian and Persian Collections, cataloguing, 
installation in galleries, etc. fell [to] my lot…. To my great regret I have 
less and less opportunity to work with Chinese art except outside the 
museum. 

 I brought the quite obvious extension of my duties, as well as my added 
financial needs to the attention of Mr. Tomita and Dr. Coomaraswamy 
last March, without any result.  16    

  So while “opportunities are splendid here,” she concluded, “I must seriously 
look elsewhere for another position.” 

 In spite of this dissatisfaction, Ardelia remained at the museum until 1941, when, 
at  the  age  of  41,  she  announced  that  she  was  resigning  to  be  married.  That 
she should resign was not unusual; particularly during the years leading up to 

Ardelia Hall  

 

  83 

World War II, married middle- and upper-class women in America generally 
did not work, and many women stopped working to become wives.  17   With her 
impending marriage, Ardelia would leave the museum, and perhaps the field of 
art history, once and for all. In October 1941, however, she wrote to a colleague 
that while “I resigned in September to be married … [n]ow the wedding has 
been indefinitely postponed, [and] I shall settle down in Montague for a rest 
and vacation.”  18   

 Correspondence in the MFA archives skirts the issue of Ardelia’s broken engage-
ment, which was bound to be deeply personal and very painful. That autumn, she 
notified friends and colleagues of her changed circumstances, but the details were 
not committed to paper, and the responses she received were elusive. One cryptic 
letter she received in the fall of 1941 was from Kojiro Tomita, who wrote: “Your 
account of the ‘lady’ in the West seems to confirm our suspicions. Too bad, but 
in this world and life things are often spoiled by a third party.”  19   Myron Bement 
Smith, a scholar of Iranian art and a dear friend of Ardelia’s, counseled her at 
greater length in a letter of 5 December 1941:

  I have every sympathy for him, … because I went through many years of 
mother-domination and escaped only by announcing my wedding after it 
was over and to a girl mother had never met…. On the one hand, you have 
been treated shamefully. He is not a youth, he has … years of discretion, he 
knew his mind before he asked you, his children and mother were  his  prob-
lems, problems to be solved before he proposed. What does he propose to 
do about the way he has treated you? Despite his mother and children, there 
are few things he can do—he can marry you and then make a settlement, 
or he can make a settlement on account of his breach of promise.… I hope 
you will not let any New England prissyness prevent you from getting a fair 
settlement—it is done, you know; such things are, naturally, not advertised. 
 If you still love him and believe he still cares for you, let me talk with 
him. Mother-domination is a mental disease—I escaped from it only 
with the greatest difficulty.… Because I have been through as much agony 
myself and have observed it in my brother I think I could help him. Will he 
be East soon? Or I shall be glad to [go to] Idaho and see him.  20    

  What goes unexplained is that Ardelia was engaged to a wealthy man by the name 
of Dewey Brown (almost certainly short for Dewitt Clinton Brown) from Emmett, 
Idaho.  21   It is not known how they met. He had children from a previous marriage. 
The wedding was to take place in October 1941 at Ardelia’s home in Montague, 
which is also where the guests would stay. On the day before the ceremony, at the 
instigation of his mother, Brown presented Ardelia with a prenuptial agreement 
to sign stating that they would not have children. Evidently, his family (and his 
mother in particular—that is, “the ‘lady’ in the West”) did not want any of their 
wealth diverted to Ardelia’s future offspring. Given the choice between a childless 
marriage and no marriage at all, Ardelia chose the latter. She walked into the south 
parlor of her home the day before her wedding and announced to all of her guests 
that the ceremony was off. It is not known what happened to Dewey Brown, or to 
what extent Ardelia was in touch with him after the wedding was cancelled. 

 84   

 VICTORIA REED

 Ardelia needed to find employment again, since she had given up her job at the 
MFA. She sought to get her position at the museum back; however, another blow 
was struck. On 7 December 1941, Japanese forces bombed Pearl Harbor, and the 
United States entered immediately into World War II. Less than a week later, 
on 13 December, Kojiro Tomita wrote to Ardelia that “the committee voted that 
it could not at the moment take back Miss Hall. The budget has gone in and there 
are no funds available.”  22   Any earlier disappointment and frustration with the 
administration grew to anger. After 11 years of dedicated work for the museum, 
she took it as a personal insult that the MFA did not reinstate her. Letters from 
early 1942 reveal the extent of her distress. She wrote to Myron Bement Smith in 
the spring:

  I was rather surprised by the complimentary remarks that Mr. Edgell 
made about me in the Annual Report. He states that the galleries are now 
among the most attractive in the MFA, and that I am a “scholar of parts 
and a person of exquisite taste.” Especially since there has always been 
a reluctance on the part of Mr. Tomita to recognize either that I was a 
scholar or had any taste whatever.  23   

 You know I haven’t shed any tears about not remaining at the MFA, 
for I seem to have acquired the aspiration of being in a position where 
no one can say we are sorry but we don’t need your services any longer. 
Earning my bread and butter is more pressing than a career. I am afraid 
that after working under the indifference of museum trustees, the flippancy 
of Edgell, and the opposition of Tomita, I have been bitten by the bug of 
independence.  24    

  Ardelia did return briefly for about a month in 1942, to assist the museum as it 
evacuated its more important works of Asian art as a wartime precaution; however, 
she did not remain. 

 Finding a new job proved difficult for Ardelia, particularly given her specialty 
in the art of East Asia; Japan was generally feared and hated following the infamous 
attack on Pearl Harbor. Ardelia pursued museum and teaching positions, but soon 
realized there were few opportunities for her; she concurrently looked for a job, 
as so many others did once the war began, with the government. After all, she had 
written, “earning my bread and butter is more pressing than a career.” In 1942 
she sent out applications for clerical positions in the State Department and the U.S. 
Civil Service Commission.  25   

 Ardelia also turned to her academic connections for advice. Through the American 
Oriental Institute, whose membership committee she chaired, she had a network 
of scholarly colleagues in Asian studies, a few of whom had joined the Office of 
Strategic Services, or OSS, the government’s wartime intelligence agency (and 
predecessor to the Central Intelligence Agency [CIA]). John Wilson from the 
University of Chicago conducted research for the Near East Division of the OSS, 
and suggested she apply for a position in the Far East Division, where her knowledge 
of China could prove useful.  26   In March 1943, after a year of job hunting, Ardelia 
learned that she had finally secured an appointment with the OSS. She worked in 

Ardelia Hall  

 

  85 

the Reference Section of the Far East Division for the duration of the war, beginning 
in 1943 as a research analyst, and was transferred in 1945 to radio intercepts.  27   

 While at the OSS, Ardelia grew interested in contributing to the efforts that were 
underway to help protect monuments and works of art made vulnerable by the 
war. She almost certainly learned of these efforts from her colleagues at the American 
Oriental Institute, which belonged to the larger, umbrella humanities organization the 
American Council of Learned Societies (ACLS). Many members of the ACLS were 
concerned about the preservation of monuments and artwork during the war, and 
in January 1943 the executive committee formed the Committee for the Protection 
of Cultural Treasures in War Areas under the leadership of William Dinsmoor, 
professor of art and archaeology at Columbia University.  28   Using grants from 
the Rockefeller Foundation, and working out of the Frick Art Reference Library 
in New York, members of the committee prepared maps and lists of the cultural 
institutions in Europe to be safeguarded; these were sent to the War Department 
for use by the military. In 1943, Paul Sachs of the Fogg Art Museum formed another 
organization, which likewise prepared lists of monuments and institutions worthy 
of protection in addition to manuals on conservation. Sachs’s organization became 
part of the American Defense—Harvard Group, which provided expertise on cultural 
matters during the war.  29   The two committees, led by Dinsmoor and Sachs, offered 
invaluable services to the U.S. military, but were privately run organizations. 

 On 20 August 1943, the U.S. government officially responded to growing concerns 
about the wartime preservation of art, archives, and monuments, concerns that by 
then had reached the federal level. The State Department established the American 
Commission for the Protection and Salvage of Artistic and Historic Monuments in 
Europe (which would later change its name to include all “War Areas”), which worked 
closely with both Dinsmoor’s committee and the Harvard Group.  30   No doubt 
because of its unwieldy title, the group became known as the Roberts Commission, 
after its chairman, Supreme Court associate justice Owen J. Roberts. The purpose 
of the commission was to protect local archives, civil and ecclesiastical historic 
monuments, libraries, and works of art in war areas. Another goal was the restitution 
of cultural property, known to be subject to looting by Axis powers from both 
public and private collections.  31   To help execute this work, the War Department 
established the MFAA Section of the military within the Civil Affairs Division. 

 Initially the work of the ACLS Committee, the Harvard Group, and the Roberts 
Commission focused on areas of Europe affected by the war. By the end of 1943, 
however, it was clear that the scope of their work would need to be extended to Asia 
as well. At around this time, Ardelia expressed an interest in working with these 
groups. On 3 December 1943, she wrote to Paul Sachs:

  I have been much interested in learning of the formation of the Committee 
for the Protection of Cultural Treasures in the War Areas under the 
American Council of Learned Societies, of what is being done for the 
European Areas … and especially that a similar undertaking is projected 
at Harvard University for the Pacific Area.  32    

 86   

 VICTORIA REED

  Later that day, she inquired with her colleague Langdon Warner, also of the Fogg 
Art Museum and a fellow scholar of Chinese art, who served on the Roberts 
Commission,

  about the possibility of working for the Committee for the Protection 
of Cultural Treasures in the War Areas … for projected work in Asia.… 
it  seemed  that  my  special  experience  and  the  advantages  I  enjoyed  in 
working  at  the  Boston  Museum  might  make  me  useful  for  the  Pacific 
Area.  More  useful,  perhaps  than  in  the  work  I  am  now  doing  here  in 
Washington at the Office of Strategic Services, even though I am in the 
Far Eastern Division, for it naturally has no connection with art.  33    

  Although  she  needed  to  “earn  her  bread  and  butter,”  her  letter  reveals  an 
underlying dissatisfaction with her work with the OSS; Ardelia wished to use her 
knowledge of art and Chinese culture and return to her field of specialty in whatever 
way possible. 

 Ardelia’s initial inquiries succeeded insofar as she was asked, and indeed tried, 
to leave the OSS to work with William Dinsmoor’s committee as it expanded its 
scope to Asia. In November 1944, Dinsmoor wrote to William Langer, Director of 
Research and Analysis at the OSS. He explained that his committee was about to 
undertake, “as a sudden emergency, the preparation of lists and cultural maps for 
China” and needed a specialist in Chinese art.

  I have just talked with Miss Ardelia R. Hall, now passing through New 
York  on  her  return  to  Washington.  She  has  been  very  highly  recom-
mended by the various specialists whom we have consulted, and would, it 
seems, be the ideal person to have attached to our staff during the present 
emergency. Would it be too much to ask, therefore, if you could have her 
detached from OSS before she becomes deeply immersed in some other 
assignment, and to send her up to work here in New York with the staff 
at the Frick Art Reference Library for a period of one month beginning at 
the earliest possible date, preferably the middle of next week.  34    

  While she awaited an answer, Ardelia maintained correspondence with Dinsmoor 
and consulted with his committee regarding maps and areas worthy of protection in 
China. That December, she warned Dinsmoor of the greater difficulties he would 
face researching sites in Asia than in Europe:

  By and large, I am quite certain that the work of the Committee will have 
far greater and more serious problems in dealing with China than it had 
for Europe. For an adequate listing of the monuments the same won-
derful cooperation that you obtained for Europe is necessary but there 
are relatively so few to help.… As for the location of the monuments, it 
would seem to me that you will be handicapped by a lack of adequate 
maps, city and town plans, photographs from ground and air without the 
full resources of Washington, including classified material.  35    

  In reply, he expressed his thanks for the information and the suggestions Ardelia 
had provided, noting that in the future they would continue to “take the liberty of 
asking you for advice.” There is no evidence that the OSS ever spared Ardelia to 

Ardelia Hall  

 

  87 

conduct research in New York. She had already been granted a temporary leave 
from her job in Washington in October 1944 to reinstall the evacuated works of 
Asian art at the MFA. While there, she again expressed her hope to return to museum 
work, but was advised by director George Edgell to “hold your position in Washington 
and not count on returning to us.”  36   

 Through  the  fall  of  1945,  from  her  office  at  the  OSS  (which  disbanded  in 
September of that year), Ardelia appears to have served as a de facto consultant to 
the Roberts Commission, advising on the identification of important monuments 
in East Asia, assisting with the drafting of maps, and passing along news like the 
establishment of the Chinese Commission for the Preservation of Cultural Objects 
in War Areas in Chungking. She also drew up a report on objects stolen from 
Chinese collections.  37   In so doing, she made herself indispensable to the commis-
sion. In December 1945, in recognition of the work she had already accomplished, 
she was appointed a consultant for Japan and Korea in the Division of Cultural 
Cooperation, later called the Office of International Information and Affairs, 
in  the  State  Department.  In  this  capacity,  she  served  as  a  liaison  among  the 
Roberts Commission, the MFAA branch of the military, and the Department of 
State. Working on the displacement of art by Japanese troops, she translated into 
English relevant Japanese and Korean laws and information on Japanese art personnel 
for the MFAA; for the Roberts Commission she drafted the Principles of Restitution 
in Japan, which were based on the Principles of Restitution in Germany.  38   

 Ardelia Hall was formally transferred to the State Department in 1946. On 
November 8 of that year (chronologically the latest correspondence in the MFA 
Archives), Ardelia informed several acquaintances that the Roberts Commission 
had gone out of existence on June 30, and that her office at the State Department 
had since taken over all of its files and postwar functions, pertaining not just to 
Asia, but Europe as well.  39   It was a colossal task. In her new position, Ardelia 
helped oversee the rehabilitation of monuments and cultural institutions, as well as 
the recovery and restitution of movable cultural property that had been displaced 
during the war. The extensive records she maintained from 1946 until 1962 reveal, 
in particular, the extent of art looting in Europe and Asia, the recovery and return 
of cultural objects in the postwar period, and the programs put in place to return 
looted and missing artifacts to their countries of origin. It is for this role that Ardelia 
Hall is today best remembered, as the “indefatigable” MFAA adviser. 

 Between 1949 and 1954, Ardelia Hall published reports on the progress of the 
U.S. government in fulfilling its commitment to return cultural property that 
had been displaced. She publicized important works of art that were still missing, 
noting that “the circulation of the publications on missing works of art helps pro-
tect American interests against the danger of purchasing stolen property without 
a clear title.” In 1954, for example, she wrote about the return of one-half of the 
two-page  Hildebrandslied , a ninth-century manuscript, to the Landesbibliothek in 
Kassel, illustrating in full the missing second page, along with the lost Willehalm 
Codex from the same library. The missing items were recovered in the United 

 88   

 VICTORIA REED

States some 20 years later.  40   In particular, Ardelia focused on carrying out the 
State Department’s objective of returning looted artwork that had found its way to 
American soil.  41   By 1954, 66 cases had come under her purview, comprising nearly 
1600 items.  42   Works of art recovered in the United States were, as a result of her efforts, 
returned to public institutions in West Germany, Austria, Italy, and Poland, as well 
as to private collections, such as that of the Rothschild family in Paris ( Figure 2 ).     

 In  her  work  on  identifying  and  restituting  stolen  cultural  objects  that  had 
entered  the  United  States,  Ardelia  wrote  to  MFA  director  George  Edgell  in 
1953.  The  museum  had  acquired  two  medieval  enamels  that—unbeknownst 
to the staff—had been looted from the Czartoryski collection in Poland during 
the war. The matter remained unresolved in 1955, prompting her to contact 
the  MFA  a  second  time,  writing  to  Edgell’s  successor,  Perry  Rathbone:  “The 
Museum  is  formally  requested  to  surrender  the  two  enamels  and  to  forward 
them … for restitution.” This was in keeping with the policy she had elucidated 
in print just a few years earlier: “[i]f the Department [of State] is informed that 
the holder of such a [looted] object is willing to surrender it, the Department 
will request its transfer to Washington for return to the claimant government”.  43   
The MFA had purchased the objects from the dealer Wildenstein in Paris in the 

 

 

  FIGURE 2.    
   Bernhard von Tischowitz, Ardelia Hall, and Franz Wolff Metternich, Bonn, 
1952. Return by the U.S. State Department of a Painting by Peter Paul Rubens to the 

Federal Republic of Germany, for Restitution to the City of 

Düsseldorf.  (Copyrighted   and Courtesy of Smith College Archives.)     

Ardelia Hall  

 

  89 

early 1950s, and ultimately reached a financial settlement with the dealer and the 
Prince Czartoryski. In 1955 full legal title passed to the museum, and the enamels 
are still on view in the MFA’s Catalonian Chapel gallery. 

 Though she is primarily remembered for her work on World War II restitution, 
Ardelia conducted similar work during and after the Korean War (1950–1953) as 
well. In this endeavor, she was once again able to draw on her expertise in Asian 
art. During the Korean War, the United States assisted South Korea in protecting 
and evacuating important cultural property. Following the war, in 1954, Ardelia 
traveled to Korea under the auspices of the Department of State and the Army 
to survey museums, palaces, temple monasteries, and ancient sites; these monu-
ments were photographed by U.S. officials, and the photographs were exhibited at 
venues in both Korea and the United States. The survey and the photographs were 
published in 1959. Ardelia also oversaw restitution matters, and during her trip 
to Korea was charged with personally returning to the royal household in Seoul a 
10th -century sword that had been brought into the United States by an American 
soldier.  44   

 Ardelia retired from the State Department in 1962. As several boxes of privately 
held material show, during the period of her retirement, she maintained her homes 
in Montague and Georgetown, visited with friends, and traveled for pleasure.  45   But 
she did not rest completely; her concern over the destruction and looting of art 
during wartime continued. In 1971, at the age of 71, she was at work on an article 
about Cambodia, which she evidently never finished. Completely disillusioned with 
the Vietnam War and the broader conflict in Southeast Asia, she wrote to a friend:

  I am going down to Boston and on to Washington this week on both 
official and personal business, like dentist, eye doctor, and lawyer; and 
in an effort to get an embargo put on the importation into the U.S.A. of 
Cambodian antiquities that are being smuggled across the Cambodian 
border into Thailand.  46    

  After the career she had led, and in the face of the widespread fighting in Cambodia, 
enacting import legislation may well have seemed to Ardelia Hall to be a routine 
precaution. Nevertheless, it would not be until 1999, long after her death, that the 
United States restricted the importation of Cambodian antiquities. Ardelia would 
probably be gratified, in fact, to see that today the Cambodian government has 
successfully recovered sculptures that it claims were looted from the temple site at 
Koh Ker during precisely this period of unrest.  47   

 Ardelia Hall passed away in Greenfield, Massachusetts, on 4 September 1979, 
from complications of a stroke, and is buried in her family plot at the Mayflower 
Cemetery in Duxbury.  48   Her achievements have been unanimously acknowledged 
by those who knew her; in 1997, Ely Maurer of the State Department remembered 
Ardelia as “a persistent, zealous person, passionate in her attempts to recover stolen 
cultural property.”  49   Her professional choices, while extraordinary, were neverthe-
less shaped by the vicissitudes of her personal life. She had a rich and exceptional 
career in the government at a time when such a thing was rare for women, but in 

 90   

 VICTORIA REED

retrospect her path can be considered neither direct nor predestined. In fact, she 
was once just one day away from never fulfilling the important role for which she 
is remembered. The art world is indeed fortunate that Ardelia Hall had the intelli-
gence and perseverance to face the challenges she encountered, ultimately leaving 
behind a legacy, and a vast body of documentation, that allows a new generation 
of historians, art historians, and researchers to continue the work that she began.   

   ENDNOTES 

 1  .         Hall, “International Protection,” 821.  
  
  
 2  .      Washington  Conference  Principles  on  Nazi-Looted  Art,  released  in  connection  with  the 
Washington Conference on Holocaust Era Assets, Washington, DC, 3 December 1998,  http://www.
state.gov/p/eur/rt/hlcst/122038.htm , accessed 25 July 2013.  
 3  .         Bradsher,  Holocaust-Era Assets,  654–61: records maintained by the Fine Arts and Monuments 
  
Adviser, 1945–1961 (“Ardelia Hall Collection”), National Archives and Records Administration, 
RG 250/52/9/01–05.  
  
 4  .              Resources, such as the documentary film “The Rape of Europa” (2008), Edsel,  Rescuing 
Da Vinci , and Edsel and Witter,  The Monuments Men , have drawn attention to the achievements of 
the men of the MFAA, but have allocated space to only one woman, Rose Valland. On Eve Tucker, 
see Rothfeld, “Evelyn Tucker,” 279–87. Edith A. Standen wrote a brief essay about the MFAA 
(“Introduction,” 122–23) and her papers are at the Archives of the National Gallery of Art in 
Washington, DC. Ardelia Hall has been mentioned by Ely Maurer, “Role of the State Department,” 
142–44, and her work for the Department of State has been discussed by Popa, “Ardelia,” 128–46.  
 5  .         Popa, “Ardelia,” 131.  
  
  
 6  .         Ardelia Hall papers, Archives, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (hereafter “Ardelia Hall papers”). 
This material was transferred from the Smith College Archives to the Museum of Fine Arts in 2000.  
  
 7  .         Interview with Anne West, 26 April 2012.  
  
 8  .      1920  United  States  Federal  Census   [database  online].  Provo,  UT,  USA:   Ancestry.com  
Operations Inc., 2010. Year:  1920 ; Census Place:  New Haven Ward 8, New Haven, Connecticut ; Roll: 
 T625_193 ; Page:  6A ; Enumeration District:  353 ; Image:  170 . Original data: Fourteenth Census of the 
United States, 1920. (NARA microfilm publication T625, 2076 rolls). Records of the Bureau of the 
Census, Record Group 29. National Archives, Washington, DC.  
  
 9  .              “Montague,”   The  Greenfield  Recorder ,  28  September  1921,  p.  13,  and  31  May  1922,  p.  B2; 
“Hall-West Wedding,”  The Greenfield Recorder , 27 June 1928, p. 11. Fanny Hall began work in retail, 
and later became a school librarian.  
  
ings As Described by Chinese Writers.”  
 11  .         As provided in her application for federal employment (1 March 1943), Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
  
 12  .        The notable exception being Gertrude Townsend (1893–1979), who was Curator of Textiles 
at the MFA from 1930 until 1959. She had joined the staff in 1919 as Assistant in Charge of Textiles, 
and became Keeper of Textiles in 1926.  
 13  .         Museum of Fine Arts, Boston,  Annual Report  for 1936, 29.  
  
  
 14  .          Between 1930 and 1942, her publications included: “The Psychological Basis of the Philosophy 
of Meng Tzu,”  The Open Court  48, no. 928 (January 1934), 16–25; “The Chinese Idyl” (Translations 
from the Chinese, in collaboration with John Hefter),  The China Journal  20 (May 1934): 220–23; 
“The Wu Ti Mirrors,”  Ostasiatische Zeitschrift,  n. F., X, vol. 1-2 (1934): 16–23; “A New Collection 
of Islamic Pottery,”  Museum of Fine Arts Bulletin  32, no. 192 (August 1934): 58–67; “The Persian 
Expedition, 1934,”  Museum of Fine Arts Bulletin  33, no. 198 (August 1935): 55–59; “The Ancient Near 
East: A New Gallery,”  Museum of Fine Arts Bulletin  34, no. 201 (February 1936): 8–11; “The Early 

 10  .         Her master’s thesis at Columbia University in 1928 was titled “Hsia Kuei, His Life and Paint-

Ardelia Hall  

 

  91 

Significance of Chinese Mirrors,”  Journal of the American Oriental Society  55, no. 2 (1935): 182–89; 
“La Collection Indienne du Musée de Boston,”  La Revue Mouseion  43–44 (1938): 111–30; sections on 
“The Art of the Ancient Near East,” “The Art of India,” and “Muhammadan Art,”  Handbook of the 
MFA , 1937 and 1940 editions; “The Cube Weights in the Boston Museum,”  Report of the Excavations 
at Chanhudaro, India ; and 18 articles in the  Christian Science Monitor  between 1941 and 1942.  
  
 15  .       She  gave  lectures  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  1934;  American  Oriental  Society  and 
University of Michigan, 1935; American Oriental Society and Yale University, 1936; American 
Oriental Society and University of Pennsylvania, 1938; and the Baltimore Museum of Art, 1939. She 
also gave 23 lectures at the MFA between 1935 and 1941. See  Society of Woman Geographers Bulletin  
August 1946, 32–33.  
 16  .          22 January 1936, Ardelia Ripley Hall to Mortimer Graves, Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
  
 17  .          See, in particular, Collins,  America’s Women , 362–64. Not only was it perceived as frivolous for 
a married woman to work, a federal law passed during the Depression prohibited the hiring of anyone 
who was married to a government employee; and legislators in 26 states attempted (unsuccessfully) 
to introduce laws banning the employment of married women.  
 18  .          Ardelia Hall to Professor [Ferris J.] Stephens, 28 October 1941, Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
 19  .          Kojiro Tomita to Ardelia Hall, 1 December 1941, Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
 20  .          Myron Bement Smith to Ardelia Hall 5 December 1941, Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
  
 21  .             Information about Ardelia Hall’s engagement was provided by Dick West (interview, 26 April 2012, 
and email, 10 January 2013). The wedding announcement ran in the  Boston Globe  (19 October 1941), 
B52. This is the only known written source with her fiancé’s name. There was a Dewitt Clinton Brown of 
Emmett, Idaho, who was born in 1856 and died in 1933; because of his life dates, he could not have been 
Ardelia’s fiancé. An inquiry to the Gem County Historical Society did not yield any results or further 
information (Meg Davis, Director, Gem County Historical Society, correspondence of 27 July 2012).  
 22  .          Kojiro Tomita to Ardelia Hall, 13 December 1941, Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
 23  .          Ardelia Hall to Myron Bement Smith, 16 April 1942, Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
 24  .          Ardelia Hall to Myron Bement Smith, 27 April 1942, Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
  
 25  .     Ardelia began applying for new positions as early as January 1942, to institutions including 
Columbia University and the Nelson Gallery and Atkins Museum (now the Nelson-Atkins Museum), 
as well as the U.S. Civil Service Commission and the U.S. State Department.  
  
 26  .         On 11 April 1942, Ardelia wrote to Charles Remer, Far East Section, Coordinator of Information, 
OSS, and enclosed an application for employment by the Coordinator of Information in the Far East 
Section. On 27 April 1942, she wrote to John Wilson: “I have sent off the application to Dr. Charles R. 
Remer, on the 11th of April. I am very grateful to you for giving me his name,” Ardelia Hall papers.  
 27  .          Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
 28  .          Kurtz,  America and the Return of Nazi Contraband,  51; Smyth,  Repatriation , 18.  
  
 29  .          Kurtz,  America and the Return of Nazi Contraband , 51; Smyth,  Repatriation , 19.  
  
 30  .          Kurtz,  America and the Return of Nazi Contraband , 53.  
  
 31  .          Kurtz,  America and the Return of Nazi Contraband , 54.  
  
 32  .          Ardelia R. Hall to Paul J. Sachs, 3 December 1943, Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
 33  .          Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
 34  .          Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
 35  .          Ardelia Hall papers.  
  
 36  .         George Harold Edgell to Ardelia Ripley Hall, 13 November 1944, Ardelia Hall papers. As late 
  
as July 1945, it was noted that Ardelia Hall had come “to talk with us further regarding the possibility 
of work with the Commission on the Far East.” C[harles] H. S[awyer], Memorandum for the Files, 
27 July 1945. National Archives and Records Administration, Microfilm Publication M1944 (Record 
Group 239), Records of the American Commission for the Protection and Salvage of Historic Mon-
uments in War Areas, 1943–1946, Roll 12, Correspondence: Far East—Personnel, 104.  
  
 37  .      See Ardelia Ripley Hall to John H. Scarff, 5 June 1945 and his response of 8 June 1945, as well as 
Charles H. Sawyer to Horace H. F. Jayne, 8 November 1945. National Archives and Records Admin-
istration, Microfilm Publication M1944 (Record Group 239), Records of the American Commission 

 92   

 VICTORIA REED

 39  .      Letters of 8 November 1946, Ardelia Hall papers.  
 40  .          Hall, “U.S. Program for Return of Historic Objects,” 493; Sutterlin, “Diplomatic Cooperation,” 

for the Protection and Salvage of Historic Monuments in War Areas, 1943–1946, Roll 12, Correspon-
dence: Far East—Chinese Commission, 2–4; and Roll 14, Correspondence: Jayne, Horace—Special 
Advisor, Chungking, 64.  
 38  .       Report of Lamont Moore and Ardelia R. Hall, 22 March 1946 and Roberts Commission Report, 
  
National Archives and Records Administration, Microfilm Publication M1944 (Record Group 239), 
Records of the American Commission for the Protection and Salvage of Artistic and Historic Mon-
uments in War Areas, 1943–1946, Roll 12, Correspondence: Far East—Maps and Lists, 6 and Roll 6, 
Minutes of Meetings—Final Meeting, 20 June 1946, 41; Roll 38, Galleys and Page Proofs: [Dummy of 
Commission Report, 1 of 5], 31.  
  
  
432–33; Popa, “Ardelia,”  passim .  
 41  .      Hall, “Recovery of Cultural Objects,” 337–44.  
  
 42  .      Hall, “U.S. Program for Return of Historic Objects,” 493–98.  
  
  
 43  .     Ardelia R. Hall to George Harold Edgell, 10 March 1953; Ardelia R. Hall to the Director, Museum 
of Fine Arts, Boston, 9 May 1955, Curatorial Object Files, Art of Europe Department, accession nos. 
50.858 and 51.7. For the quotation, see Hall, “Recovery of Cultural Objects,” 339. It may have come 
as some surprise to Ardelia that the MFA did not respond more swiftly, as the Museum had alerted 
her just a few years earlier to a stolen Egyptian ring that was offered to curator Dows Dunham in 
1951. Dunham recognized the ring and immediately contacted Ardelia, who facilitated its return to 
Berlin in 1952. On the incident, see Alford,  Allied Looting , 149-152 and Dunham,  Recollections of an 
Egyptologist , 51-52; on the return, see “Cultural Articles Returned,” 18.  
  
 44  .     “Exhibition of Photographs of Korean National Treasures,” 917; “Department Exhibits Pho-
tographs of Korean Monuments and Temples,” 609; “Art Advisor to Return ROK Sword,”  Pacific 
Stars and Stripes , 17 October 1954, 6. Ardelia wrote to MFA curator Dows Dunham in 1955 that she 
had traveled to Korea on 19 October 1954, spent Christmas in Seoul and the New Year in Kyoto, and 
returned to Washington in January. Archives, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, EGP 1 3/4: Hall, Ardelia 
(n.d.). According to her nephew, Dick West (email of 10 January 2013), in addition to restituting the 
sword, Ardelia was also charged with returning an animal skin to Korea.  
  
  
Ardelia Hall.  
  
 47  .      In 2013, the Metropolitan Museum of Art returned two sculptures from the temple complex at 
Koh Ker to the Kingdom of Cambodia. See Tom Mashberg and Ralph Blumenthal, “Cambodia Says 
It Seeks Return of Met Statues,”  New York Times , 1 June 2012,  http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/02/
arts/design/cambodia-to-ask-met-to-return-10th-century-statues.html?pagewanted=all , accessed 25 
July 2013; and Tom Mashberg, “Statues Long Held by the Metropolitan to Return to Cambodia,” 
 New York Times,  11 June 2013,  http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/06/11/statues-long-held-by-
the-metropolitan-museum-return-to-cambodia/ , accessed 25 July 2013.  
 48  .    Certificate  of  Death  from  the  Records  of  Death  in  the  Town  of  Greenfield  (Death  Record 
  
Number 1979-0219), 4 September 1979. I have been unable to find an obituary for Ardelia Hall in 
any major newspaper.  
  

 45  .      I am grateful to Julio Alves for allowing me access to these files.  
 46  .      Letter from Ardelia Hall to Arthur [no last name given], 5 July 1971, Julio Alves Collection on 

 49  .     Maurer, “Role of the State Department,” 143.   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Alford  ,   Kenneth D  .  Allied Looting During World War II: Thefts of Art, Manuscripts, Stamps and Jewelry 
in Europe .  Jefferson, NC :  McFarland ,  2011 .  

    Bradsher  ,   Greg  .  Holocaust-Era Assets: A Finding Aid to the Records at the National Archives at College 
Park .  Washington, DC :  National Archives and Records Administration ,  1999 .  

Ardelia Hall  

 

  93 

    Collins  ,    Gail  .   America’s  Women:  400  Years  of  Dolls,  Drudges,  Helpmates  and  Heroines .   New  York : 
 Harper Perennial ,  2007 .  

   “Cultural Articles Returned.”  Information Bulletin  (Office of the U.S. High Commissioner for Germany, 
Office of Public Affairs, Information Division), July 1952: 18 .  

   “Department Exhibits Photographs of Korean Monuments and Temples.”  Department of State Bulletin  
41 (6 October 1959): 609 .  

    Dunham  ,   Dows  .  Recollections of an Egyptologist .  Boston :  Museum of Fine Arts ,  1972 .  

    Edsel  ,   Robert M  .  Rescuing Da Vinci: Hitler and the Nazis Stole Europe’s Greatest Art—America and Her 
Allies Recovered It .  Dallas :  Laurel ,  2006 .  

    Edsel  ,   Robert M.  , and   Bret     Witter  .  The Monuments Men: Allied Heroes, Nazi Thieves, and the Greatest 
Treasure Hunt in History .  New York :  Center Street ,  2009 .  

   “Exhibition  of  Photographs  of  Korean  National  Treasures.”   Department  of  State  Bulletin   33 
(5 December 1955): 917 .  

    Hall  ,   Ardelia R  . “ International Protection of Works of Art and Historic Monuments .”  Documents and 
State Papers   1  , no. 15 (June  1949 ):  821 .  

    ——— . “ The Recovery of Cultural Objects Dispersed During World War II .”  Department of State 
Bulletin   25  (27 August  1951 ):  337 –44.  

    ——— . “ U.S. Program for Return of Historic Objects to Countries of Origin, 1944–1954 .” 

 Department of State Bulletin   31  (4 October  1954 ):  493 .  

    Kurtz  ,   Michael J  .  America and the Return of Nazi Contraband: The Recovery of Europe’s Cultural 
Treasures .  New York :  Cambridge University Press ,  2006 .  

    Maurer  ,   Ely  . “ The Role of the State Department Regarding National and Private Claims for the 
Restitution of Stolen Cultural Property .” In  Spoils of War , edited by   Elizabeth     Simpson  ,  142 –44. 
 New York :  Abrams ,  1997 .  

    Popa  ,   Opritsa D  . “ Ardelia .” Chapter 12 in  Bibliophiles and Bibliothieves: The Search for the Hildeb-
randslied and the Willehalm Codex .  Berlin :  Walter de Gruyter ,  2003 .  

    Rothfeld  ,   Anne  . “ Evelyn Tucker: An Enforcer of Restitution Policy in U. S. Occupied Austria .” 
In  Kunst sammeln, Kunst handeln. Beiträge des Internationalen Symoposiums in Wien , edited by   Eva   
  Blimlinger   and   Monika     Mayer  ,  279 –87.  Vienna :  Böhlau ,  2012 .  

    Smyth  ,   Craig Hugh  .  Repatriation of Art from the Collecting Point in Munich after World War II  
 Maarssen :  Gary Schwartz ,  1988 .  

    Society of Women Geographers Bulletin , August 1946 .  

    Standen  ,   Edith A  . “ Introduction .” In  Spoils of War , edited by   Elizabeth     Simpson  ,  122 –23.  New York : 
 1997 .  

    Sutterlin  ,   James S  . “ Diplomatic Cooperation Recovers Historic German Manuscript .”  Department of 
State Bulletin   68  (9 April  1973 ):  432 – 33 .    


