Cultural Property on the Move—

Legally, Illegally
 *

In 1999 a load of about sixty kilograms of ancient coins, looted from illegal excavations in Bul-
garia and falsely declared, were stopped by German customs at the Frankfurt Airport, on its way
to the United States. Notwithstanding any rights of ownership or administrative rights to conﬁscate
the smuggled goods, in the end the coins were returned to the dealer. The main weakness proved to be
the lack of interest in an “exotic” case like this and a lack of communication among all administra-
tive agencies concerned.

1   
  

On the morning of March 23, 1999, the Hessian Ministry for Science and Art re-
ceived a call from customs clearance station number 8 of the Chief Customs
Ofﬁce at the Frankfurt am Main airport. An attentive customs ofﬁcial reported
that an application for export for two parcels of Roman and Greek corroded
bronze coins, weighing sixty kilograms, had been intercepted. The coins were to
have been exported to the United States. The name of the sender and receiver were
identical: a Mr. “B.,” who was later identiﬁed as a Bulgarian national. The export
address was a simple post ofﬁce box in New Jersey.

Preliminary customs inquiries revealed that the Hessian Ministry for Science
and Art was responsible for authorizing the export of cultural property from the
Frankfurt airport, to the extent that authorization is required.1 It was suspected
that illegally excavated archaeological material, most likely of Mediterranean ori-
gin, was at issue. 

Professors Hans-Markus v. Kaenel, Maria R.-Alföldi, and Gerhard Brey, three
archaeological and numismatic specialists of the Johann Wolfgang Goethe Uni-
versität, Frankfurt, examined the Frankfurt ﬁnd at the airport customs clearance
station on March 29, 1999. The experts used random sampling to examine the
composition of the shipment and prepared a brief appraisal. 

*Hessisches Ministerium für Wissenschaft und Kunst (Hessian Ministry of Science and Art),
Wiesbaden, Germany. Translation by Kelly Kuglitsch.

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 11, No. 2, 2002, pp. 294– 304
© 2002 International Cultural Property Society

294

     295

     

The shipment was packaged in two bulky cardboard boxes, which were wrapped in
large quantities of packing tape. Inside the boxes lay various nylon traveling bags.
Inside the nylon bags, in turn, were small packages containing the goods. The
packages consisted of both plastic bags and of empty Tetra Paks that were en-
veloped, like the outer boxes, in multiple layers of duct tape.2 The contents of the
packages were roughly sorted according to type. 

The used Tetra Paks, juice and milk bags, carried Bulgarian writing. The very
unprofessional manner of the packaging and the incorporation of the reused bev-
erage packages implied that the ﬁnd had been packaged in its country of origin.
In addition, it must be assumed that Bulgarian milk cannot be legally imported
under any circumstances into the European Community. Furthermore, since no-
body carries empty milk packages around for an extended time, it was unlikely that
they had been transported and packed in another country. Some enclosed pack-
ing notes were written in Cyrillic, moreover, and could be identiﬁed as Bulgarian.
Thus, with a probability bordering on certainty, the ﬁnd was determined to have
originated in Bulgaria. 

The coins—except for those in one package—were not clean and appeared
to have come straight from the ground. They were covered with patina and with
remnants of soil. Despite all the dirt, it was clear that the original surfaces were
well preserved in many places and that the affected pieces would likely be declared
in good condition after the appropriate cleaning and conservation. Thus, it was
clear these coins were not an “old collection” but, rather, relatively recent ﬁnds.

Because they were not clean, the details of the coins could not be fully ascer-
tained. It could be generally established, however, that most of the small coins
dated to the fourth and ﬁfth centuries A.D.3 There also appeared to be Byzantine
coins—in pieces denominated 10, 20, and 40 Nummiae—from the sixth and sev-
enth centuries. Partially broken Skyphatoi from the eleventh century occurred in
the greatest quantity. Evidently, the late Roman and Byzantine coins came pre-
dominantly from coin sites in Thessalonika, Cyzicus, Constantinople, and Nico-
media. Somewhat better preserved was the series of Greek-empire medium and
large bronze pieces from the lower Danube and from the Thracian area—sites that
include Maroneia, Anchialos, and Mesambria, among others—from the second to
third centuries. Three drachma pieces from Istros on the Black Sea were also in
good condition. 

The assemblage appeared to represent unassociated and previously unrecorded
material. The coins could have been located and excavated arbitrarily with a metal
detector. Also, the compilation of the coins points with great certainty to discov-
ery sites in the lower Danube, in Thrace, in Macedonia, and up to the Black Sea.

296  

Sporadically occurring Ottoman-Turkish and small, modern Bulgarian coins con-
ﬁrmed this provenience, as did the Bulgarian packing materials. The origin of the
ﬁnds from the middle Balkans was also supported by other small items that were
in the shipment and obviously looted from burial sites. The shipment also con-
tained packages with rings spanning from the Roman to the nineteenth-century
periods. 

An attempt at cleaning the contents of one package had already been under-
taken by the senders. The coins from this package obviously had been considered
particularly good and as exceptional ﬁnds. These coins were Antoninian of the late
third century A.D. and some selected bronze coins from the mid-fourth century.
Similar specimens were offered by the dealership, Harlan J. Berk, Chicago, for be-
tween $100 and $150. From the forty-ﬁve best pieces in the grouping here at $80
per piece, a sum of $3,600 results. 

In order to get an overall conception of the current commercial value of the
coins, in view of the destination address in the eastern half of the United States,
the most recent sales catalogs of Berk, Chicago, and valuation schedules of the
renowned English coin trading ﬁrm, Seaby, were consulted. Because the preserva-
tion status is only in the rarest of cases announced without objection, the esti-
mated coin value is based upon the lower level of the auction appraisal prices. It
could be that the commercial value is actually higher, however.4 This lowest pos-
sible valuation of just one portion of the total group of 19,860 coins makes clear
that, even before the necessary cleaning and conservation, all the specimens of the
shipment together possess a value of far more than €100,000, a value exponentially
higher than that declared by the sender. 

The most ominous aspect of this discovery is that here considerable quanti-
ties of ancient coins were taken out of the soil. Based upon subsequent research
undertaking by German customs, this sixty-kilogram shipment comprised only
one of several that, all together, came to about one ton. The others had already
passed through Frankfurt customs without being discovered, because the airport
customs station must limit itself to random checks on exports, and because rec-
ognizing such suspicious packages is very difﬁcult, in practice. A contraband ship-
ment of almost identical composition was discovered in 1999 by Austrian customs
in Suben on the Austrian-German border.5 The General Customs Ofﬁce in Linz
processed the case. At the request of customs the ﬁnds were roughly categorized
by numismatists, who were able to determine the coins’ origin and economic value
by referring to the antiquities collection of the Kunsthistorisches Museum of Vi-
enna. Since then the objects have been auctioned through the Dorotheum in order
to raise cash for the depleted Austrian treasury.6 The Suben incident is by no
means an isolated occurrence. In Nickelsdorf, on the Austrian-Hungarian border,
4,600 coins and 800 other ancient objects were discovered in a Bulgarian truck, as
in the Suben case, and conﬁscated in July 2000.7

     297

Because such assemblages of excavation ﬁnds in this quantity are not normally
to be found in a single “treasure trove” location, it is easy to estimate the great
number of sites that must have been searched in order to compile shipments of
this magnitude. In removing so many coins from the earth, someone must have
looted and destroyed thousands of archaeological ﬁndings. The damage to the
buried monuments of Bulgaria cannot be overestimated. In my opinion, this situ-
ation, notwithstanding the fact that now more coins have disappeared out of Bul-
garia into the international coin trade, is the true catastrophe resulting from this
entire series of events.8

  
  

The representative of the forwarding agent for the intercepted Frankfurt shipment
reported that the sender and recipient, “Mr. B.,” had delivered the packages to him,
and had paid the freight charges in cash. Among the documents enclosed with the
shipment was an alleged invoice from the Lennox Gallery, London, that certiﬁed
that the pieces had been acquired on March 6 in Munich. The prices listed on the
invoice, and on the voucher for customs clearance, were far below the commercial
value of the goods, however. It also appeared improbable that the country of ori-
gin, the packaging, and the seller could be all Bulgarian and that the coins never-
theless could have been somehow purchased in Munich. 

On March 30, 1999, the responsible section chief in the Hessian Ministry for
Science and Art received a call from a “Mr. I.” from Munich. “Mr. I.” indicated
that he was acting on behalf of the sender and receiver of the shipment, “Mr. B.”
The caller assured the ofﬁcial that everything had proceeded in full accordance
with the law. The objects were alleged to have been acquired at an antique exhibi-
tion and trade show in March 1999. In addition, the caller claimed that “Mr. B.”
was the brother of the Bulgarian Attorney General. This strengthened the suspi-
cion that the antiquities were of Bulgarian origin and had been smuggled from
there into Germany, in order to be freighted to the United States. 

Following the call, the investigative arm of the Frankfurt Customs Ofﬁce,
which led the criminal inquiry, endeavored for over a year and a half to pursue
clariﬁcation of the circumstances. This did not succeed, however, since leads for
further investigation were situated exclusively outside of Germany and attempts to
obtain usable information from Bulgarian and United States authorities, in the
context of international administrative assistance, fell through. Despite repeated
demands, requests went unanswered. 

Attempts by the Hessian Ministry for Science and Art to establish contact
with the Bulgarian Cultural Ministry remained similarly unsuccessful at ﬁrst. In

298  

light of this, the customs investigators assumed that the coins could ultimately be
conﬁscated as contraband by the Germans. In accordance with section 370 of the
General Tax Code, both smuggling and attempted smuggling constitute avoidance
of the import tax. In accordance with section 375, paragraph 2 of the General Tax
Code, any objects related to the act of smuggling may be conﬁscated. Because of
this legal situation, other measures to secure the loot did not at ﬁrst appear urgent.
On December 14, 2000, the Hessian Ministry for Science and Art received a
call, now from the criminal division of the Chief Customs Ofﬁce in Frankfurt, in-
forming them that the ﬁnal criminal evaluation was underway.9 They were in-
formed that the criminal tax procedure would be ofﬁcially dropped in the coming
days and that the goods should be released to the exporter upon the payment of
the duty. After review of the legal circumstances, the articles were not to be re-
tained any longer, as the investigation produced no evidence of a crime-related im-
portation into the European Union (EU). Conﬁscation would not be an option.
At this time, the loot was still stored at the General Customs Ofﬁce in Frankfurt. 
The Hessian Ministry for Science and Arts held another view. Independent of
ownership or knowledge of the act of smuggling, a protective seizure is possible
if a concrete danger exists that the illegally introduced cultural objects are items re-
lated to another criminal offence.10 The regulation contained in section 375, para-
graph 2, number 1 of the General Tax Code, permits smuggled property, by which
the act of smuggling was committed, to be conﬁscated.11 In all other respects under
section 369, paragraph 2, and in keeping with section 74, paragraph 4, of the Penal
Code, the general conﬁscation regulations of section 74 of the Penal Code apply,
respectively. 

Almost simultaneously, the ﬁrst successful contact with the Bulgarian author-
ities occurred between the Hessisches Ministerium für Wissenschaft und Kunst
and both the Bulgarian Vice Consul, Kassimir Kaltschew, and the Bulgarian ar-
chaeologist Lyudmil Vagalinski of the Archaeological Institute in Soﬁa, who was
in Frankfurt for an exhibition opening. Thereupon, the undersecretary of state in
the Hessian Ministry for Science and Art, Frank E. Portz, was able to appeal di-
rectly to his colleagues in Soﬁa to again bring the incident to the attention of the
Bulgarian authorities. A prompt response followed. The relevant regulations of the
European Union, which limit the export of cultural property, were consulted.12
These regulations are, however, applicable only if the concerned item is the cul-
tural property of an EU country and will leave the EU region or move between
EU states. These were prerequisites that Bulgaria did not meet. The Bulgarian au-
thorities disclosed, in addition, that under a rule governing treasure in Bulgaria, all
archaeological ﬁnds are state property. Accordingly, the incident created the pos-
sibility of a matter of theft to the detriment of the Bulgarian state. 

Therefore, on December 14, 2000, the Hessian Ministry for Science and Art
ﬁled a charge with the public prosecutor’s ofﬁce in Frankfurt. The charge was

     299

transferred on jurisdictional grounds to the public prosecutor’s ofﬁce in Munich.
While this was transacted by the public prosecutor’s administration, customs re-
leased the coins, on December 28, 2000, for evidence appraisal in accordance with
the criminal proceedings it had initiated.

It can thus be inferred that the coins are now located in the United States.
This allowed the Public Prosecutor’s Ofﬁce of Munich to halt the proceeding
under the following rationale:

[W]hether and to what extent the “B.” named in your notice, acting through
the Munich resident coin dealer “I.,” or through further unknown persons,
violated Bulgarian laws, which forbid either the excavations of art items or
the removing of the same from the country, and which would also be
honored in Germany, can no longer be determined due to the lack of an
appropriate impoundment of the coins.

 :   

Meanwhile, information about the intercepted shipment of antique coins at the
Frankfurt airport had also reached the Bulgarian press. In January 2001 various
Bulgarian  newspapers—ﬁrst  Dnevnik,  but  probably  also  Kapital and  Novinar—
reported on the event. Bulgarian media researchers conﬁrmed that the sender and
recipient of the shipment was the brother of the Bulgarian Prosecutor General: 

The incident involves . . . the brother of the Bulgarian Prosecutor General,
Nikola Filchev, explained an employee of the National Authority for the
Fighting of Organized Crime, who wishes to remain anonymous. For nearly
a year and a half, the illegal export of antiquities and coins has been kept a
secret because the brother of an active Bulgarian politician is involved in it. 
. . . He adds that “B.” had already been linked to earlier treasure indictments.
In 1998, he was arrested at the Soﬁa airport upon his return from the United
States with antiquities in the value of 3,136,000 Lev. He was charged with
illegal import of forbidden goods. But by May 19 he had already been
released by Kiril Ivanov, the public prosecutor for the Soﬁa district.13

As a result of this report, the Bulgarian Prosecutor General initiated preliminary
investigations for alleged revenue offenses against the involved editors and ordered
their ofﬁces to be searched. Further, the former Military Prosecutor Nikolay Kolev
acknowledged in an interview that the activity of the Prosecutor General’s brother
in the antiquity trade is well known.14

300  

      

As a rule, authorities are granted a broad range of discretion for their decisions
and judgments. This discretion can be applied either to the beneﬁt or detriment of
the international protection of cultural property. Circumstances like those de-
scribed here are a rather rare occurrence in the authorities’ day-to-day operations.
Even given the context of the many functions they perform, the customs admin-
istrators are rarely involved with such an incident. International drug smuggling
and organized cigarette and endangered species rings are routine. In the ﬁeld of an-
tiquities smuggling, however, there exists very little practical experience and com-
plicated jurisdictional issues. Inquiries and criminal procedures for the ofﬁce relate
not only to the Customs Investigation Unit, but also to the Public Prosecutor’s
Ofﬁces and the Criminal Matters Unit of the General Customs Ofﬁce. These
agents routinely adhere to and execute the same procedural speciﬁcations: those in
the Tax Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Law Governing International
Cooperation in Criminal Matters, and the international treaties concerning ad-
ministrative and legal cooperation. The necessary determination of whether an im-
poundment of goods will be rescinded is carried out according to the basic prin-
ciples of proof of evidence in the inquiries. 

In the case at hand, all involved parties—the customs agents, the ofﬁcials in
the cultural sector, and even third parties—invested a disproportionate share of
their work time toward the goal of protecting cultural treasures. Although I do not
assert the observation as an absolute fact, it must be realized that there is evidence
that, from a work-psychology perspective, such a disproportional investment of
energy on the job is the exception and not the rule. In the context of a heavy and
generalized workload, duties tend to be administered in such a way as to sidestep
the problems of an unusual or apparently extra labor-intensive case from the out-
set. This can be achieved by using the grant of decisional discretion to declare that
leads on difﬁcult cases cannot be pursued or that the necessary evidence is lack-
ing. Since illegal transfers of cultural property of this exotic type will remain an
unusual occurrence, as compared to the daily routine of the authorities’ opera-
tions, the chances for sustained pursuit and for better protection of cultural ob-
jects are not the best. 

Despite the unique state of affairs described above, the Federal Ministry of
Finance worked under the assumption, as stated in a memo dated May 11, 2001, to
authorized agents of the Federal Government for Cultural and Media Affairs, that
“‘ B.’ . . . purchased the coins from the British Lennox Gallery Ltd., London, at a
trade show in Munich.” If that were so, everything would be ﬁne. It would have
been proper that no one intervened. The fact, however, that such a conclusion is
completely improbable in view of the extreme deviation of the invoice amounts
from the market value was not given proper deference. 

  

     301

Even the two Public Prosecutors’ Ofﬁces concerned with the matter tended toward
an interpretation of the particular circumstances that allowed them to distance
themselves from the proceedings. I have already quoted from the Munich ofﬁce’s
announcement regarding the termination of the inquiry. The public Prosecutor’s
Ofﬁce at the Court in Frankfurt (Staatsanwaltschaft am Landgericht) evaluated
the circumstances and legal situation as follows: 

There is no apparent jurisdiction over this proceeding in the Ofﬁce of Public
Prosecutor of the Court of Frankfurt. The charge alleged that the accused
claims to have acquired the coins in good faith in Munich . . . and that at the
site of the alleged crime was a (possible) receipt of stolen goods. . . . The cir-
cumstances as disclosed do not permit an application to be made to the
responsible Munich Public Prosecutor’s Ofﬁce for a conﬁscation decision, ei-
ther by way of an expedited action or administrative assistance, because the
necessary legal prerequisites for such an application have not been shown:

a) the identity of the suspect “B.” is not certain, although the name sug-

gests the possibility that a person of foreign citizenship is concerned. As
such he could be pursued as a (possible) perpetrator of receipt of stolen
goods within the country. Whether he could likewise be pursued within this
country as a (possible) perpetrator of the underlying act—which the
offense of receipt of stolen goods would exclude—appears more than
doubtful (sections 6 and 7 Penal Code);

b) whether, in fact, the illegal excavation of an archaeological ﬁnd is at

issue, and whether this, if true, actually took place within the national
territory of Bulgaria and not Macedonia, appears uncertain despite several
indications. Any claims for the return of the material on behalf of the
Republic of Bulgaria appear just as uncertain;15

c) the disclosed circumstances suggest overwhelmingly that prosecution
in Germany would be opposed by an insurmountable procedural obstacle, in
that a conﬁscation meeting the evidentiary standard of section 94 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure could not be considered. Additionally, an
impoundment and conﬁscation under sections 111b ff of the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure could not be considered, since a forfeiture or foreclosure
order is not to be obtained in a court procedure.16

Here, however, the Public Prosecutor’s Ofﬁce erred. According to German inter-
national private law, the customary law of the state of origin applies to the law of
property. If the item later appears in a different legal jurisdiction, this jurisdiction
adopts the property law valuation from the state of origin. The article thus main-
tains its previous status.17

302  

Before the criticism of the German authorities becomes overemphasized, how-
ever, it must be unequivocally pointed out that the Republic of Bulgaria and its au-
thorities in the instant case behaved in a manner opposite to what would have been
expected on the part of those concerned with the protection of cultural property.
Neither the Bulgarian customs nor cultural authorities responded to German in-
quiries for a period of almost two years. The contact with the responsible ministry
in Soﬁa could only be established very late and on only a semiofﬁcial level, just
days before German customs released the coins. Yet deﬁcits existing in the Bulgar-
ian administration are easier to explain in terms of basic social and economic con-
ditions then they are on the German side. 

   . . .

In the daily practice of the Hessian Ministry of Science and Art, this was an iso-
lated case. Yet the Frankfurt Airport, one of Europe’s largest, is situated within its
jurisdiction. The fact that only a small number of the applications for export au-
thorizations are ever ﬁled suggests that those items of cultural property that can
be exported legally only with authorization may be in practice actually leaving Ger-
many and Europe frequently without any such authorization and, thus, without
any oversight. 

Despite, or even because of, the discouraging picture that I describe here, this
article should sharpen awareness concerning the problems addressed for the re-
spective authorities. In addition, the authorities should be encouraged to proceed
seriously, despite the apparently substantial work expended on the pursuit of such
offenses against the cultural heritage of neighboring and also of far distant na-
tions. This is a requirement of being a fair neighbor, particularly with respect to
the countries that, because of difﬁcult economic and social conditions, need the
protection of their own cultural heritage with particular urgency. Another factor
to be reckoned with, to be sure, is renewed reﬂection on Germany’s accession to
the 1970 UNESCO Convention on Means to Prohibit and Prevent the Illegal Im-
port, Export, and Transfer of Cultural Property.18

On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany, I am active in a constant di-
alogue between ofﬁcers of the responsible authorities concerning measures for
ﬁghting a focused battle against the smuggling of cultural properties. One basis
for broadening the dialogue could be a debate on a cooperation agreement (Mem-
orandum of Understanding, MoU) between the World Customs Organization
(Brussels) and UNESCO, an agreement which the two international organizations
reached in March 2000.19

This debate should take notice of the fact that the information ﬂow between
the experts in the cultural sphere and those in the customs administrations must

     303

be intensiﬁed. The goal should be to enable the customs, border controls, and
criminal prosecutors to act more purposefully. This is possible without impairing
the liberality of trade that is so determinative for our European market. 



1. The Hessian Ministry for Science and Art was designated by the Hessian state as the “re-
sponsible agency” within its jurisdiction as required by art. 2, para. 2.1, Subsection of the Reg-
ulations for Export of Cultural Properties of 9 December 1992, 3911/92/EWG, to the Federal
Ministry of the Interior. Meanwhile responsibilities within the federal government have moved
to the Commissioner for Affairs of the Culture and Media, who is part of the chancellor’s
ofﬁce.
2. Tetra Pak is the brand name of a Swedish-based global company providing a line of pack-
aging, as well as distribution and processing, for recyclable containers of liquid food products.
English language information about the company and its products can be accessed at <http://
www.tetrapak.ca/index1.html>. [Translator’s note]
3. These and the following accounts of the coins were kindly made available to me by Profes-
sor Dr. Maria R.-Alföldi and Professor Dr. Hans-Markus v. Kaenel, Universität Frankfurt. 
4. The three well-preserved Drachma pieces from Istros would easily bring €450 per piece
(Seaby); the Greek-empire bronzes of Maroneia, Mesambria, and Anchialos would sell for at
least €250 per piece (Seaby); the well-preserved Byzantine Skyphatoi are selling currently in the
United States for $100 and $200 (Berk); the Byzantine medium and large bronzes bring about
$300 in good condition, per piece.
5. See Hubert Szemethy, Frischer Erdgeruch, garantiert zwei Jahrtausende an Alter . . . [The
Smell of Fresh Earth Guarantees an Age of Two Thousand Years . . .], in Bewahren als Problem;
Schutz archäologischer Kulturgüter 141, 146 (Martin Flashar ed. 2000). See also Schatz geschmuggelt.
Archäologisch wertvolle Münzen in bulgarischem Lkw [Smuggled Treasure: Archaeologically
Valuable Coins in Bulgarian Truck], Salzburger Nachrichten, May 6, 1999, 4; Proﬁs mit Metall-
sonden. Sichergestellte Münzen stammen aus Raubgrabungen [Experts with Metal Probes; Im-
pounded Coins Determined to have come from Illegal Excavations], Salzburger Nachrichten, May
14, 1999, 4.
6. For providing details on this and the following case, I am grateful to Hubert D. Szemethy,
Universitätsassistent, Magister Dr., Institut für Klassische Archäologie der Universität Wien.
7. Schmuggel mit Römer-Schatz! [Contraband with Roman Treasure!], Neue Kronen-Zeitung, July
19, 2000, 10.
8. See, e.g., Britta Rabold, Raubgräberei: Zerstörung kulturellen Erbes. Die UNESCO-Konven-
tion von 1970 aus Sicht der Archäologen [Illegal Excavations: Destruction of the Cultural Her-
itage; The 1970 UNESCO Convention from the Perspective of Archaeologists], in UNESCO
heute. Zeitschrift der Deutschen UNESCO-Kommission, Mar. 2001, 124 et seq. 
9. According to §§ 386 and 399 of the General Tax Code, the General Customs Ofﬁce assumes
the rights and obligations of the Public Prosecutor’s Ofﬁce in such procedures. 

304  

10. See also Schmidt-Bremme, Kunst und Recht, Neue Juristische Wochenschrift 574 (2002).
11. Supreme Federal Civil and Criminal Court (BGH) wistra 95, 30 (to the extent that the reg-
ulation supersedes sec. 74, para. 1, of the Penal Code, which only allows the conﬁscation of
both the poisonous fruit and the instruments enabling the deed). See also Tröndle/Fischer, 50th
ed., §74 Rdnr. 19.
12. See the regulations cited supra note 1. See also Procedural Regulations (Verordnung zur Durch-
führung der Verordnung) 3911/92 on the Export of Cultural Properties 752/93/EEC, 1993.
13. For the translations I thank Krassimir Kalchev, Director of the Consular Division of the
Embassy of the Republic of Bulgaria, Branch Ofﬁce, Bonn.
14. Interview available at <http://www.mediapool.bg>.
15. In light of the known circumstances, this appears to be a very idiosyncratic interpretation
of the facts.
16. In light of the background, this prognosis appears to aspire to the goals of the Public Pros-
ecutor’s Ofﬁce. Nonetheless, the reader should be inclined to ask upon what basis this prog-
nosis rests.
17. OLG Schleswig, 2 Oct. 1989, Neue Juristische Wochenschrift 3105.
18. See German House of Representatives, Printed Materials 6/3511, 26 May 1973; of 26.05.1973;
Rudolf Strich,  Numbers  610– 61  of the  two-volume  set  of collected  information  sheets,
Denkmalrecht der Länder und des Bundes, p. 1983, et seq.; Conventions and Recommendations of 
UNESCO Concerning the Protection of the Cultural Heritage 57 (2d ed., 1985); Texte zum Denkmalschutz
und zur Denkmalpﬂege [Texts on the Protection and Care of Monuments] 74 (Deutsches Nationalkomitee
Denkmalschutz ed., 1996).
19. Agreement available at <http://www.wcoomd.org/ie/En/Topics_Issues/Cross_border-
Crime/Cites/mou/MOUICOM.htm>.


