International Journal of Cultural Property (2012) 19:197–216. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2012 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739112000161

Protecting Culture and Marine
Ecosystems Under the Law
in Micronesia
Sam Edwards*

Abstract: Traditional culture and marine ecosystems are two important re-
sources that are disappearing at alarming rates worldwide. Islands are places
where culture and the marine environment are intertwined and offer the
best locales to address this threat. Disasters such as shipwrecks and oil spills
damage both culture and the environment, yet the legal system does not per-
mit full recovery. This research advances a new tort theory of cultural and
ecosystem damage to compensate victims in marine damage cases. Specifically
this research investigates theories of recovery in the Federated States of Micro-
nesia since Micronesia is in an ideal position to recognize this new damage
theory. Micronesia can help establish precedents that other jurisdictions can
follow to help preserve the culture and the marine ecosystems upon which
they rely.

On 18 March 1994 the Oceanus, a Greek cargo vessel, ran aground on a ceremo-
nial fishing reef in Yap State, Federated States of Micronesia (FSM).1 The case was
litigated, and the primary dispute was over valuation of damages. The dispute was
eventually settled for $2,000,000.2 Eight years later, on 26 December 2002, another
vessel, the Kyowa Violet, struck another reef on a different island within the waters
of Yap State.3 The vessel spilled oil, damaged the reef, and impacted 60,000 square
meters of mangroves.4 The case went to trial, and the plaintiffs were awarded
$2,950,638 for damage to the reef, mangroves, and loss of fisheries.5 No award was
given for cultural losses.6

*Environmental Studies Program, Green Mountain College. Email: Sam.Edwards.3@gramil.com

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: I would like to thank my three undergraduate research assistants, Amanda
Blank, Karrah Johnston, and Melody Baumhover, for all their help on this project. I would also like
to thank my colleagues in Micronesia for all of their advice and input.

197

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

198

SAM EDWARDS

This article presents the following question: Does the law, as applied in these
cases, adequately compensate victims of marine ecosystem damage in Yap State,
FSM? If not, how can the legal system provide full recovery for damages to the
ecosystem and culture? Since Micronesia has a legal system similar to and based
on that in the United States, legal theories from the United States are persuasive
but not binding. US law does not adequately compensate the plaintiffs in ecosys-
tem damage cases, so this is an area where Micronesia should follow a different
path from the United States and recognize the full extent of damages in these ma-
rine ecosystem damage cases. Specifically, Micronesia should recognize that cul-
ture is inextricably tied to marine ecosystems and warrants compensation when
damaged.

Jurisprudence in the United States stresses individual rights. Individual rights
are at the heart of the US Constitution and legal system. Micronesia, on the other
hand, has taken a more collectivist approach in its jurisprudence. Micronesian law
values culture and traditional rights in contrast to the United States. Because of
the differing jurisprudence, marine ecosystem damage cases present entirely dif-
ferent legal situations in Micronesia and the United States. This is an area of law
where Micronesia can and should depart from the United States and recognize
and compensate for damage to culture and tradition, whereas the United States
has refused to extend protections in these areas.

Micronesia has given special legal protections for culture and, because of its
island geography, highly values its marine ecosystem. It is therefore appropriate to
extend these protections to marine ecosystem damage cases. If Micronesia extends
protections to these areas, it can act as a leader for other jurisdictions who equally
value culture and tradition. These other jurisdictions could then look to the new
protections as a model for protecting their own cultural resources.

Marine ecosystem damage cases present two types of damage. First, the ecosys-
tem is impacted, for example, through damage to the coral reefs and mangroves.
Second, separate but related to the ecosystem impacts are the cultural impacts. In
Micronesia this second type of damage is especially salient because of the close
relationship between culture and the marine environment. While the ecosystem
damages are well-defined in law, the second area is ripe for judicial intervention.
To make the plaintiffs whole in these cases, a new area of damages, one that ac-
knowledges the relationship between marine ecosystems and culture, must be
recognized.

To explore this new area of ecosystem damage theory, this article is divided into
four sections. Section I examines the unique legal, environmental, and cultural
background of Micronesia, showing the special nature of the injuries in these cases.
Section II analyzes the specific injuries in two marine ecosystem damage cases
and shows how the plaintiffs in both cases were undercompensated. Section III
discusses various methods of recovery available under current law and shows why
each of these is inadequate to fully compensate the plaintiffs. Section IV offers
options that the government of Yap may take to avoid the problems and facilitate

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

PROTECTING CULTURE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS UNDER THE LAW IN MICRONESIA 199

future recoveries. Section V demonstrates how a decision in Micronesia to protect
culture and tradition can have far-reaching effects in other jurisdictions.

I. DUE TO THE UNIQUE ENVIRONMENTAL, LEGAL,

AND CULTURAL SITUATION IN MICRONESIA,
MARINE ECOSYSTEMS ARE HIGHLY VALUED

Islands are special places. Due to their size, isolation from other lands, and unique
environments and cultures, islands are not like other jurisdictions. Moreover, cul-
ture and marine ecosystems are inherently linked on islands. The law recognizes
how island ecosystems are unique and Micronesia is in a position to extend ad-
ditional protections to its important marine ecosystems.

The importance of reefs cannot be understated. Not only do they provide pro-
tection from natural disasters such as typhoons and tsunamis, but they are also a
primary source of food, recreation, and cultural traditions for islanders. Reefs are
some of the most important reserves of biodiversity, offer the potential for future
pharmaceuticals, and remain some of the most beautiful places on Earth. Man-
groves play a similar role in the life of islands. Despite their importance, reefs and
mangroves are disappearing at an alarming rate worldwide.7 The law must help
defend these integral, important parts of islands.

A. Land in Micronesia Has Special Value

The Federated States of Micronesia (FSM or Micronesia) is an island nation lo-
cated in the western Pacific. The FSM comprises 607 islands in an area of approx-
imately one million square miles.8 There are four states: Yap, Chuuk, Pohnpei, and
Kosrae. This article primarily focuses on Yap State, though the laws of the four
other states is highly persuasive. Yap has a land area of 46 square miles with a
lagoon area of 405 square miles.9 Lagoons and their associated reefs are essential
elements of property, and the law recognizes “land” ownership extending to the
lagoon and submerged reefs.10

In Micronesia land is a precious resource: The population of 107,008 resides on
a total land mass of 271 square miles.11 “Division of land ownership is such that
individuals may own a single tree.”12 On some islands land ownership has been
even divided even further: “even branches of some large breadfruit trees were in-
dividually owned.”13

Within Yap there are two main island groups, Yap Proper and the Outer Is-
lands. Yap Proper has the largest population and landmass. It is also the center of
government and economy for Yap State. The Outer Islands, by contrast, are much
smaller in size and are “either raised coral islands or atolls . . . vegetation on the
Outer Islands is sparse because of porous, poor soil and high salinity both in the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

200

SAM EDWARDS

ground water and from ocean spray.”14 Furthermore, the people of the Outer
Islands are “distinct culturally and speak a different language from Yap Proper.”15
Land and reefs are therefore even more important to the people of the Outer
Islands.

Thus, because of the small land size and limited resources, land and submerged
lands, including lagoons and reefs, are especially valued in Micronesia. Micro-
nesian law has long recognized the importance of culture and already offers sig-
nificant protections. These protections offer hope to extend protections in marine
ecosystem damage cases.

B. Micronesian Law Offers Specific Recognition and Protections
for Tradition and Culture

Unlike jurisdictions in the United States, Micronesia has given strong legal pro-
tections to tradition and culture, which shows that the FSM values culture and
tradition differently than other jurisdictions such as the United States. At the out-
set, the FSM Constitution specifically recognized the importance of culture. Arti-
cle V of the Constitution, “Traditional Rights,” provides that “[t]he traditions of
the people of the Federated States of Micronesia may be protected by statute. If
challenged as violative of Article IV, protection of Micronesian tradition shall be
considered a compelling social purpose warranting such governmental action.”16
In Micronesia, traditional rights are fundamental rights—equally if not more valu-
able than individual rights. Section 1 adds, “[n]othing in this Constitution takes
away a role or function of a traditional leader as recognized by custom and tra-
dition, or prevents a traditional leader from being recognized, honored, and given
formal or functional roles at any level of government as may be prescribed by this
Constitution or by statute.”17 Further, the Constitution directs, “[c]ourt decisions
shall be consistent with this Constitution, Micronesian customs and traditions,
and the social and geographical configuration of Micronesia.”18

Court decisions have followed the constitutional protections of culture and tra-
dition. For example, in a reef damage case, Pohnpei v. KSVI No. 3, the court rec-
ognized that its decisions must be consistent with Micronesian customs and
traditions, and that the legislature has the power to enact statutes to protect the
traditions of the people.19 The court went further, “It is incumbent upon Pohnpei
State to preserve and respect the traditionally recognized fishing rights of the peo-
ple of Pohnpei State.”20 In Pohnpei v. KSVI No. 3, the court found that the Con-
stitution and former Trust Territory law “clearly was intended to protect customary
and traditional fishing rights of the people of the FSM in marine areas below the
normal high tide.”21

In Rosokow v. Bob, the court recognized that customary and traditional use rights
are a form of property right.22 Rosokow v. Bob and Pohnpei v. KSVI No. 3, read
together, mean that traditional and customary fishing rights are property rights

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

PROTECTING CULTURE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS UNDER THE LAW IN MICRONESIA 201

that the law is intended to protect. With property rights come legal remedies for
their violation.

Since these issues straddle legal and traditional systems, it is important to ex-
amine the interaction of these two systems in Micronesia. Fishing rights are not
the first time the court has had to interpret the interaction of tradition and law. In
FSM v. Mudong, the court ruled that the traditional criminal dispute resolution
system existed in parallel with the constitutional legal system.23

The two systems [traditional and legal], then, can be seen as supplemen-
tary and complementary, not contradictory. Each has a valuable role to
perform, independent of the other. There may often be opportunities
for coordination or mutual support, but there appears no reason why
one system should control the other.24

The rule from FSM v. Mudong is especially applicable to marine ecosystem dam-
age cases involving harm to traditional fishing rights. In those cases there is a tra-
ditional system that recognizes the right to fish that exists in parallel to the legal
system of property rights. The state has an obligation to protect those traditional
property rights and has the tools to do so. The Constitution and judicial decisions
provide for the specific recognition and protection of culture and tradition in Mi-
cronesia. These protections distinguish Micronesia from the United States.

As will be shown below, US law does not adequately compensate plaintiffs in
marine ecosystem damage cases due to its unwillingness to recognize the value of
culture. The importance of culture and tradition as reflected in the law in Micro-
nesia permits the FSM to depart from US legal traditions involving issues of cul-
ture and tradition.

II. MARINE ECOSYSTEM DAMAGE CASES

PRESENT SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES

In order to assess the proper legal remedies in marine ecosystem damage cases in
Micronesia, it is important to examine the types of harm suffered in reef damage
cases. The facts of the Oceanus and the Kyowa Violet cases provide examples of the
extent of harm. There are two main types of damage: ecosystem and cultural. The
law has tools to assess ecosystem damages, but it lacks the ability to assess and
compensate for cultural damages. Even in the case of ecosystem damages, the pro-
cess for evaluating the extent of damage is cumbersome, time consuming, and
cost prohibitive in many instances. For these reasons the law needs to be changed
to achieve justice.

A. The Grounding of the Oceanus25

On 18 March 1994 the 225-meter Greek cargo vessel, the Oceanus, ran aground
on the fringing reef of Satawal Island in Yap State, FSM. Satawal is an Outer Island

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

202

SAM EDWARDS

of Yap State and is located about 600 miles from Yap’s main island. The island had
three traditional chiefs at the time of the grounding.26 The people of Satawal,
through their chiefs, sought compensation for “reef damage, pollution, a height-
ened threat of ciguatera, and other damages.”27

Ecosystem Damages

As an initial step in the case, experts came in and conducted a preliminary envi-
ronmental assessment.28 The survey indicated that the ship’s damage to the coral
reef was 5 feet deep, 20–40 feet wide, and 300 feet long.29 A variety of species of
coral were damaged and destroyed.30 The impact of the hull created sand and
gravel that further abraded the coral surrounding the initial impact site.31 Based
on this extensive damage to the reef, the experts warned that ciguatera32 fish poi-
soning could result from the grounding.33 Ciguatera poisoning occurs in dam-
aged reef areas when certain dinoflagellates increase in number and bioaccumulate
in fish.34 These dinoflagellates produce toxins, which, when consumed by hu-
mans, cause illness.35

Although the Oceanus struck just a section of the coral reef, the entire ecosys-
tem was impacted. Given that coral can take many years to grow, these damages
are not short term. The environment assessment, a comprehensive examination of
ecosystem damage in accordance with legal procedures, was logistically difficult
given the remote location. The result was that the assessment took a significant
amount of time to produce and was quite expensive. The funds used for the as-
sessment could have been better spent on remediation of the damage.

Cultural Damages

In addition to the well-documented ecosystem damages, the Satawalese people also
suffered damage to their culture. The marine ecosystem plays an important role in
any island culture. The ocean, lagoons, and reefs are a primary source of food,
religious beliefs, and entertainment. In the case of Satawal, due to the remote na-
ture of the island location, the marine ecosystem was even more important to
culture than on other islands.

At the time of the grounding, the primary means of transportation to the is-
land was by way of a “field trip boat” that ran a circuitous route from Yap’s main
island to many of the Outer Islands. The boat took about a month to run the
route.

Since Satawal is so remote from the main island of Yap, the Satawalese primar-
ily rely on subsistence fishing. In addition, they practice traditional conservation
of their marine resources.36 On many Outer Islands, including Satawal, the chief
of the island is the ultimate owner of the lands, and the chief is responsible for
looking after and protecting the resources for the people of the island.37 This is
akin to the public trust doctrine and is another example of the traditional system
existing in parallel to the legal.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

PROTECTING CULTURE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS UNDER THE LAW IN MICRONESIA 203

Tragically, the reef where the Oceanus impacted was a ceremonial fishing reef
managed exclusively by the chief. This type of traditional conservation is com-
mon in many island communities and often involves beliefs in spirits, gods, and
taboos.38 The damage by the Oceanus presented several different cultural damages:

1. Direct attack on the culture. The destruction of the reef and its fishing grounds

was a direct “attack” on the spirits that inhabit the reef and fish.

2. Effects on the subsistence fishing culture. Because of the damage to the reef
and risk of ciguatera poisoning of the fish, the people of Satawal might not have
been able to subsist through fishing; they might have had to rely on outside sources
for food.39 Thus, the entire lifestyle of the people of Satawal could have been
changed. They would no longer be engaged in hunting for and preserving fish for
food. Should the ciguatera poisoning have lasted 20 years, as some experts pre-
dicted,40 there would have been profound changes to the Satawalese culture.

3. Loss of face for the chief.

Since the chief is responsible for providing for the
people of the island, the fact that the people of the Satawal may have had to rely
on outside sources for food was a major failure for the chief. This “loss of face” for
the chief will have profound effects on both the chief and the people.

4. Other cultural damages.

It is possible that expert analysis by anthropologists
could have shown further cultural damages. Since the case was settled without
going to trial, this information was not obtained. The specific impacts to the
Satawalese culture identified here are merely examples of the types of injuries they
have suffered. These examples are designed to facilitate the discussions later in
this article and are only superficial overviews of complex cultural issues.

Thus, the grounding of the Oceanus on the ceremonial fishing reef caused both
environmental and cultural damage. Both parts of the injury would need to be
compensated in order to make the people of Satawal whole. As shown in the fol-
lowing section, only ecosystem damages are currently compensated for under the
law. Although the Oceanus struck a section of a ceremonial fishing reef, its im-
pacts were felt across the island and through time. The law was not in a position
to address the full extent of these damages. Fortunately the case was settled before
the courts had to address these important issues.

B. The Grounding of the Kyowa Violet

The Oceanus grounding was not unique. Islands and shipwrecks are old compan-
ions. The Kyowa Violet case is important to review because it is the first case where
a court was forced to consider the wider scope of damages including those to cul-
ture and tradition.

The Kyowa Violet incident has much in common with the Oceanus. In both
cases there were ecosystem and cultural impacts. Unlike the Oceanus case, how-
ever, the Kyowa Violet ran aground on Yap’s main island and damaged the coral

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

204

SAM EDWARDS

reef and spilled oil that damaged mangroves.41 Further, the Kyowa Violet case went
to trial and the court was forced to rule on the damage issues of ecosystem im-
pacts and cultural harm.42

On 26 December 2002 the Kyowa Violet, a Panamanian-registered, 120-meter
cargo ship struck a reef near the entrance of Tomil Channel near the main harbor
on Yap Proper.43 “The reefs were well-marked on the ship’s navigational charts.”44
The ship proceeded into the inner harbor while oil was spilling from a gash in the
hull. The ship then headed out to open sea beyond the territorial waters of Yap
State.45 The ship was inside the reef for around 30–45 minutes and spilled a sig-
nificant quantity of intermediate grade bunker fuel oil (IFO 180).46

The oil spread through the lagoon and eventually affected an area of shoreline
that includes 60,000 square meters of mangroves.47 The cleanup effort continued
for more than a year until it was ended on 3 February 2004.48

Governor Vincent Figir declared a State of Emergency on 2 January 2003, and
the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) had to ban “swimming, fishing, shell-
ing, and other open water activities.”49 The court accepted an estimate that 2,258
people were affected by the ban.50 The ban continued for almost a year and a half
until the EPA lifted the ban on 26 May 2004.51

Experts studied the extent of the oil’s damage and determined that mangroves
were affected along 8,000 meters of coastline and between 5 and 10 feet deep into
the mangroves, due to the tidal action.52 Further, there was stress to the ecosystem
of the inner harbor.53 The experts noted that it would take up to 30 years for the
mangroves to recover from the spill.54 Evidence shows that even after the ban was
lifted, “the average fish catch was lower by 40–50%. Crab catch declined by 50–
80% and clams were not found.”55

Thus, the damage from the Kyowa Violet affected both the ecosystem and the

culture of those on the island.
Ecosystem Damages

When the Kyowa Violet struck the reef and spilled oil, it damaged the coral reef,
the lagoon ecosystem, and the mangrove ecosystem. As is common in many ju-
risdictions, ecosystem valuation is the method by which the court assesses dam-
ages. This required significant time and expense, resources that could have been
better used toward remedying the injury and compensating the plaintiffs. This
method of ecosystem valuation also does not always adequately calculate the true
value of damage. How much is a healthy lagoon ecosystem worth?56 The value of
the lost catch is only one element of the damage, yet it is the primary element the
court considered.
Cultural Damages

In addition to the harm to the ecosystem, the court must consider the cultural
harm done to the people who own, use, and rely upon the damaged ecosystem. In
this case, the ban on water activities meant that traditional practices such as sub-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

PROTECTING CULTURE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS UNDER THE LAW IN MICRONESIA 205

sistence fishing, teaching of fishing, teaching of swimming, and enjoyment of the
water were curtailed. These types of injuries are not typically part of an ecosystem
valuation but are still part of the harm caused by the grounding and oil spill. These
are damages to the culture as distinct as damage to the environment, though the
two are intertwined.

The plaintiffs in Kyowa Violet put forward a claim for $419,000 for “the loss of
the ability to swim in the Lagoon. . . . They calculate this amount by estimat-
ing how much it would have cost to build a swimming pool.”57 Included
within this claim was damage to culture because “fathers and grandfathers were
unable to teach their children how to swim and other water skills.”58 The court
rejected the claim because the ban on swimming only lasted 17 months and “there-
fore [the court] cannot conclude that there was any cultural damage by a delay
in the transfer of intergenerational knowledge of swimming and other water
skills.”59

The court went further and appeared to reject a cultural damage claim. “So,
even if it were possible to obtain money for damages for ‘cultural’ damages, which
the court does not so hold, there was no cultural injury for which recovery might
be sought. If Yapese custom and tradition was resilient enough to survive German
and Japanese imperial rule, World War II, and the Trust Territory, it will survive
the Kyowa Violet grounding unscathed.”60 This apparent rejection of a cultural
damage theory on the basis of the resilience of the Yapese custom sets a dangerous
precedent. Here the court is following the precedent used in the United States in
cases such as the Exxon Valdez. Does Micronesia wish to treat traditional rights in
the same manner as the courts in the Valdez case?

In a society that so clearly values culture and tradition, it is wrong to abandon
projections through judicial precedent. Most legal theories of recovery came out
of necessity as they were crafted by courts. This is one of those cases where the
courts of Micronesia should recognize a claim for cultural damages.

III. TRADITIONAL THEORIES OF RECOVERY FAIL

TO ADEQUATELY COMPENSATE FOR

ECOSYSTEM AND CULTURAL DAMAGES

The courts in Micronesia are in a unique position to recognize a new area of
legal protections for ecosystem and cultural damage. Given the importance of
land, the ecosystem upon which its citizens rely, and culture, Micronesia should
break from the legal doctrines of the United States regarding theories of damage
in these cases.

The purpose of damages in tort cases is to make the victim whole for injuries
sustained by the wrongful conduct of another.61 How, in the cases involving eco-
system and cultural injury, can a court do this? This section will examine the com-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

206

SAM EDWARDS

mon law theories that the courts could follow in these cases to attempt to make
the victims whole. In the end, however, all of these theories will prove inadequate
to fully compensate for the loss.

At the outset, the law is there to provide redress for those who suffer damages
at the hands of others. “Compensatory damages are compensation to make the
victim whole again.”62 In other words, the purpose of compensatory damages is
to put plaintiffs in the same position they would have been in had the injuries not
occurred.63

In order to restore a plaintiff to his or her rightful position, courts may award
both pecuniary and nonpecuniary damages.64 Courts are therefore able to award
damages for quantifiable injuries such as restoration expenses and other harms
such as pain and suffering.

Courts do require that plaintiffs prove their damages with reasonable certainty,
and “the amount of damages need only be shown with as much certainty as the
tort’s nature and the case’s circumstances permit.”65 Thus, a court may award both
pecuniary and nonpecuniary damages proximately relating to the tortious con-
duct. Unfortunately for plaintiffs in Micronesia who suffer marine ecosystem dam-
ages, the traditional law fails to do its duty.

A. Traditional Measures of Damages Fail to Make the Plaintiffs
Whole

This is not the first case where a court has had to consider the wider impacts of
ecosystem damages in cases. There are current theories of recovery that offer some
compensation, but none fully address the extent of harm to culture. The tradi-
tional inquiry for compensation in property damage cases starts with diminished
market value.66 In a typical property damage case, the plaintiffs compare the value
of the property before the injury to the value after. The difference is the measure
of damages.

In Micronesian marine ecosystem damage cases, it is not possible to ade-
quately show the loss of value through the market approach. Frequently there is
no market for the damaged property. Setting aside the issue of submerged lagoon/
reef property, the market for property in Micronesia is extremely limited. Non-
citizens are prohibited from owning land, so the “market” is artificially small.
Moreover, because of the importance of land, there are virtually no traditional
sales of land. “Chuway [Yapese for “sale”] as applied to land is considered some-
how distasteful, and such transfers are extremely small in size and few in
number.”67

Thus, here there is essentially no market for land by which the court could cal-
culate damages. This lack of a market ironically comes from the high value placed
on land by the Micronesians. Courts therefore can reject this traditional measure
of damages.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

PROTECTING CULTURE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS UNDER THE LAW IN MICRONESIA 207

Courts have been faced with cases where no markets exist for property damage.
In those cases, courts have employed various legal constructs to calculate dam-
ages. Courts begin by asking what would a willing buyer pay a willing seller.68
This approach suffers from the same problem as the market approach in Micro-
nesia. What is a reef worth in a community where no one is likely ever to sell their
ancestor’s traditional fishing grounds? In other cases lacking markets, courts have
employed a variety of methods to estimate market value. None of those methods
work in this unique environment.

B. The Cost-to-Restore Method in Special Property Cases Fails
to Make the Plaintiff Whole

Courts have deviated from the diminished market value approach in cases such as
those involving “special property uses.” Such cases involve lands that have special
uses such as churches. Rather than try and create an artificial market value for a
church, the court instead relies on the cost to restore as a measure of damages.69
For example, in Trinity Church v. John Hancock,70 Trinity Church was damaged
by the construction of the John Hancock Building in Boston.71 There the court
noted “market value does not in all cases afford a correct measure of indemnity,
and is not therefore ‘a universal test.’”72 The court went on to define special-
purpose property to include “nonprofit, charitable, or religious organizations.”73
The court noted that when the traditional method of calculating damages falls
short, “[i]n such cases, this court has been cognizant of the need for greater flex-
ibility in the presentation of evidence relating to damages.”74 The court then al-
lowed the cost to replace to serve as the measure of damages.

Trinity Church is important because it represents the ability for a court to per-
mit other measures of damages when traditional methods fail. The facts of Trinity
Church do parallel some of the religious attachment to the reefs but is not com-
pletely analogous to ecosystem damage cases in Micronesia.

A more analogous case is Commonwealth of Puerto Rico v. SS Zoe Colocotroni.75
There, an oil tanker ran aground on a remote beach of Puerto Rico, spilling oil
and damaging the marine environment including an area of mangroves.76 The
beach, due to its location, had little value compared to the harm suffered. The
value was no more than $5,000 per acre.77 The court, rather than limit recovery to
diminished value employed the cost-to-restore measure:

Many unspoiled natural areas of considerable ecological value have little
or no commercial or market value. Indeed, to the extent such areas have
a commercial value, it is logical to assume they will not long remain
unspoiled. . . . A strict application of the diminution in value rule would
deny the state any right to recover meaningful damages for harm to such
areas.78

The court concluded that “the appropriate primary standard for determining
damages in a case such as this is the cost reasonably to be incurred by the sover-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

208

SAM EDWARDS

eign or its designated agency to restore or rehabilitate the environment in the af-
fected area to its pre-existing condition, or as close thereto as is feasible without
grossly disproportionate expenditures.”79 The court did not elaborate on the grossly
disproportionate limitation. This does stand for the proposition that in ecosystem
damage cases the court may employ the cost to restore measure as did the court in
Trinity Church.

However, the cost to restore would not fully compensate the plaintiffs of either
the Oceanus or the Kyowa Violet. In both of those cases, ecosystem damages are
not as readily repaired as a church wall. Moreover, even if the ecosystem was fully
restored, the damage to the culture would remain uncompensated. The court could,
however, use the cost to restore as part of the damage calculation in Micronesian
ecosystem damage cases. It would need to add something to this special recovery
in order to make the plaintiffs whole, however.

C. Ecosystem Valuation Does Not Adequately Compensate the
Plaintiffs

In ecosystem damage cases, courts have employed another measure—ecosystem
valuation. In those cases, experts will be called in to calculate the value of the
ecosystem before and after the injury. Economic measures such as replacement
cost valuation, benefit transfer, and contingent valuation, among others, are ways
to calculate damages.80 These methods, while perhaps useful in the United States,
are of significantly less value in Micronesia. As discussed earlier, markets are not
well-established in Micronesia. Should this lack of markets mean that a Micro-
nesian reef is less valuable than one in Florida?

In addition to the inherent market problems, the costs to calculate these values
are prohibitive in Micronesia in many cases. Rather than hire experts, those funds
could be better put to work actually remedying the harm. It is a poor use of lim-
ited resources to bring in outside experts for the sole purpose of estimating the
value of the environment.

Moreover, even when the ecosystem is adequately valued by these experts,
the cultural loss remains out of the damage calculation. This method, like the
other traditional methods used in the United States, fails to remedy the harms
suffered.

IV. A NEW APPROACH FOR MICRONESIA

Following the traditional rules from the United States will not help protect Mi-
cronesian victims of ecosystem damage. Due to the special environmental and cul-
tural situation in Micronesia, the courts should adopt a new approach in these
important cases.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

PROTECTING CULTURE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS UNDER THE LAW IN MICRONESIA 209

A. The Legal History of Micronesia Permits Departure from US
Legal Principles

The FSM has had a long history of being ruled over by other nations. In fact,
“prior to July 12, 1978, when the Trust Territory districts of Truk (now Chuuk),
Ponape (now Pohnpei), Kusaie (now Kosrae), and Yap voted in a plebiscite
to join under the new FSM Constitution, the people of the FSM never directly
experienced constitutional government and self-government in any form as a
unit.”81
Before becoming an independent nation in 1986, Micronesia had been under
Spanish, German, Japanese, and United Nations/US control. It was during this
last period, following WWII, that much of the FSM’s current legal traditions
were created. Following the end of WWII, many of the formerly occupied Japa-
nese islands were placed into a UN Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.82 The
United States administered the Trust Territory and helped create the current legal
system.

On 14 January 1986 US President Reagan recognized the end of the Trust Ter-
ritory and the creation of the FSM as an independent country.83 Although the
FSM was, for the first time in its history, not under the control of an outside au-
thority, it did enter into a “Compact of Free Association” with the United States.84
Since 1986, the FSM has been free to follow its own legal path, though its legal
traditions are still strongly influenced by those in the United States.

The FSM Supreme Court, in Nix v. Ehmes, summarized the legal influence of

US legal decisions:

this court is not bound by the decisions of courts in the United States.
Nevertheless, we do agree . . . that we should give careful consideration
to the thinking of courts in the United States in determining our own
policy.85

Thus, Micronesian courts will look to the United States for persuasive prec-
edent but are free to develop their own common law. The area of cultural protec-
tion is one of those areas where the FSM should depart from US law and perhaps
become a source of persuasive precedent for other jurisdictions that value culture
and traditions.

B. The Courts Should Recognize a New Damage Theory of
“Ecosystem Harm” That Includes Both Environmental and
Cultural Damage

Ecosystems are infinitely complex. They are difficult to value, yet we must assign
value to calculate compensation when they are injured. In addition to the natural
ecosystem, there is the human ecosystem. This human ecosystem depends upon
the natural system. When the natural system is disturbed, so is the human one.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

210

SAM EDWARDS

The legal institution must recognize the importance of marine ecosystems in order
to protect them.

One method a court could employ to reach the true extent of damage in these

cases it to expand the ecosystem valuation method to include other aspects.

The Coral Reefs Initiatives for the Pacific produced a good summary of total

economic value of an ecosystem such as a Pacific reef. It includes:

• Bequest or Heritage Value
• Existence Value

䡩 Indirect

▪ Economic services
▪ Environment services

䡩 Direct

▪ Commercial consumer goods
▪ Non-commercial consumer goods86

• Option value

This approach blends both the traditional ecosystem approach with a “social-
economical value” method.87 This approach still suffers from some of the same
problems as ecosystem valuation, such as the costs to produce the studies. It does,
however, permit socioeconomic value such as the importance of culture. When a
ceremonial fishing reef is damaged, the social fabric of the adjacent island is dam-
aged. By allowing socioeconomic value into the equation, the law can then make
plaintiffs whole. The courts could go further; in addition to a more expansive eco-
system valuation, the courts in Micronesia could also permit recovery for mental
anguish.

C. Damages Could Include Mental Anguish

Given that the goal of damages is to make the plaintiff whole, courts have recog-
nized that damages may include both quantifiable pecuniary harms and nonpecu-
niary but legally recognizable harms.88 Such recovery may be for pain and suffering
in personal injury cases or for infringements of constitutional rights.89 Courts, how-
ever, have been reluctant to award pain and suffering damages in property cases. In
Micronesia, the courts have followed the common law rules from the United States
and require evidence of physical injury to the plaintiff or physical manifestation of
emotional distress before they will award damage for mental anguish.90

Because cultural injury can exist without either of these two factors, most cases
will not permit the courts to award damages for mental anguish. In the Kyowa
Violet case, the court refused to consider mental anguish in its award because the
plaintiffs did not show either of these two points.91

Courts in Micronesia could open a new exception in cultural damage cases. For
example, where there is evidence that a community has been significantly im-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

PROTECTING CULTURE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS UNDER THE LAW IN MICRONESIA 211

pacted by a marine catastrophe, similar to the injuries in the Oceanus and Kyowa
Violet cases, the court could permit recovery for mental anguish.

Courts have permitted recovery for mental anguish in environmental cases in
the United States. For example, in Sterling v. Velsicol Chemical Corp., plaintiffs suf-
fered contamination of their drinking water wells from a chemical company’s neg-
ligence.92 There the plaintiffs sought recovery because they suffered “physical injury,
bodily harm, mental and emotional anguish, property damage, and loss and de-
struction of an entire community and a way of life.”93 The facts there were ex-
treme, however. The plaintiffs had been exposed to hazardous waste in their
drinking water for nearly 10 years, and many suffered physical ailments and had
increased risks of cancer.94 Under those extreme circumstances, the court permit-
ted recovery for emotional distress.95

The situation in the marine ecosystem damage cases in Micronesia is not com-
pletely analogous. First and most important, the plaintiffs have not suffered direct
injury. There is the risk of ciguatera poisoning and other ailments from eating
contaminated fish and shellfish. These risks are not the same as unknowingly drink-
ing contaminated water for 10 years, however. It is unlikely that the court in Ster-
ling v. Velsicol would have awarded emotional damages had the facts been those of
the Oceanus or Kyowa Violet. This does not mean that a Micronesian court is pro-
hibited from doing so.

D. The Court Could Permit Recovery for Hedonic Damages in
Marine Ecosystem Damage Cases

A relatively new area of compensatory damages involves recognition that loss of
enjoyment of life is not fully represented in a pain and suffering award. This new
area, hedonic damages, originates with Chicago economist Stan Smith in his tes-
timony in Sherrod v. Berry.96 Hedonic damages “represent recovery for loss of en-
joyment of life beyond that of traditional awards for bodily injury and pain and
suffering.”97

Courts have permitted hedonic damages in a variety of cases including 1983
civil rights claims, claims by wrongfully incarcerated plaintiffs, wrongful death cases,
and personal injury cases. Just as with pain and suffering, it can be difficult but
not impossible for a jury (or judge) to assess the value of these damages.

In marine ecosystem damage cases in Micronesia, the court could recognize
hedonic damages and permit plaintiffs to recover for the extent of the damage to
their enjoyment of life. Cultural losses could be part of the value of life, espe-
cially when lives revolve around subsistence fishing. Forcing the entire popula-
tion of an outer island to switch from subsistence fishing to reliance on imported
food is a situation in which enjoyment of life is most certainly affected. By rec-
ognizing hedonic damages in these cases, the plaintiffs could be made partially
whole again.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

212

SAM EDWARDS

E. Legislative Approaches Offer an Alternative to Common Law
Theories

In the case of first impression in Yap, Kyowa Violet, the court seemed especially
disinclined to open up new theories of damages. It is understandable that courts
are reluctant to extend the law into new areas. Despite this reluctance, virtually all
damage theories were created by the courts. Common law remains a fertile ground
for adjusting the law to provide justice in societies. Courts in Micronesia have the
legal authority and capacity to remedy the injustice suffered by plaintiffs in ma-
rine ecosystem damage cases. The most viable alternative to relying on judicial
activism lies with the legislative branch. The legislature could create laws in Mi-
cronesia that specifically protect marine ecosystems and the related cultural values.
For example, the legislature in Australia has crafted specific protections for the
Great Barrier Reef. As a World Heritage Site, it was appropriate to protect it through
legislation rather than to rely on the courts. Australia law also specifically works to
protect the cultural rights of indigenous people.98

Micronesia could use Australia’s legislation on coral reefs and cultural rights as
a model upon which to adapt a system for Micronesia. The EPA could promulgate
regulations to value marine resources including coral reefs, mangroves, and la-
goons. The cultural aspects could be delegated to the FSM Institute for Micro-
nesian History since it has the power to “protect and preserve the diverse cultural
heritages of the peoples of Micronesia.”99 Moreover, the FSM Institute has the
power to “to prepare and promulgate rules, regulations, and guidelines necessary
to the effective implementation of this section.”100 Thus the EPA and FSM Insti-
tute could establish, as a matter of law, the value of these important resources.
Establishing values through regulation would help address the concerns about val-
uation in individual cases and would put people on notice as to the value of cul-
ture. Courts would then apply these values in cases and would be relieved from
the burden of judicial activism.

V. CONCLUSIONS

Marine ecosystems and culture are two of the highest valued resources in Micro-
nesia, yet the law does not adequately protect them. Worldwide, both of these im-
portant resources are disappearing at alarming rates. Other jurisdictions such as
the United States have done a poor job at protecting these resources. There is ram-
pant criticism of the outcome of the Exxon Valdez case101 and the BP Deepwater
Horizon case seems to offer little hope that the US legal system will take the steps
necessary to put plaintiffs in their rightful position. Micronesia is in a unique po-
sition to defend its islands from the real assaults to its resources and should not
feel obligated to follow in the unfortunate path of the United States. This is a time
when Micronesia should break from US legal tradition and move forward to pro-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

PROTECTING CULTURE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS UNDER THE LAW IN MICRONESIA 213

tect its resources. Either the courts or the legislature must move forward and pro-
tect Micronesia. Waiting is not an option as this is a real and continuing threat.
This is where the law must impose its power and protect victims of marine eco-
system damage.

Future research should focus on legislative and regulatory solutions. Using
models from other jurisdictions, Micronesia could fashion a system that is ap-
propriate for its specific situation. In addition to legislative drafting, the political
situation of national, state, and Outer Islands should be considered. Finding a
system that is appropriate for the variety of islands in Micronesia may prove
challenging.

ENDNOTES

1. Lloyds List, Lloyds Information Casualty.
2. Settlement agreement between The People of Satawal and The M/V Oceanus, 2 (21 October

1997) (on file with the author and the Yap State Office of the Attorney General).

3. The People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 14 FSM Intrm. 403, 409 (Yap 2006).
4. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet.
5. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 424.
6. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 422.
7. Côté et al., “Measuring Coral Reef Decline,” 2005.
8. Federated States of Micronesia 2000 Population and Housing Census Report.
9. Federated States of Micronesia 2000 Population and Housing Census Report.
10. Zorn, “Federated States of Micronesia,” 503.
11. Federated States of Micronesia 2000 Population and Housing Census Report.
12. Edwards, “Damage to Ceremonial Property.”
13. Fischer, Native Land Tenure in the Truk District, 166.
14. Yap State Census Report 2000 FSM Census of Population and Housing, 1 December 2002.
15. Yap State Census Report 2000 FSM Census of Population and Housing, 1 December 2002.
16. Constitution of the Federated States of Micronesia, Article 5, Section 2.
17. Constitution of the Federated States of Micronesia, Article 5, Section 1.
18. Constitution of the Federated States of Micronesia, Article 11, Section 11.
19. Pohnpei v. KSVI No. 3, 10 FSM Intrm. 53, 66 (Pon. 2001).
20. Pohnpei v. KSVI No. 3.
21. Pohnpei v. KSVI No. 3, 66.
22. Rosokow v. Bob, 11 FSM Intrm. 210, 217 (Chk. S. Ct. App. 2002).
23. FSM v. Mudong, 1 FSM Intrm. 135, 145 (Kos. 1982).
24. FSM v. Mudong.
25. This section is primarily a summary of work previously published by Edwards, “Damage to
26. Settlement agreement between The People of Satawal and The M/V Oceanus, 2 (21 October
27. Settlement agreement between The People of Satawal and The M/V Oceanus, 2 (21 October

1997) (on file with the author and the Yap State Office of the Attorney General).

Ceremonial Property.”

1997) (on file with the author and the Yap State Office of the Attorney General).

28. Richmond, Preliminary Environmental Assessment.
29. Richmond, Preliminary Environmental Assessment.
30. Richmond, Preliminary Environmental Assessment.
31. Richmond, Preliminary Environmental Assessment.
32. Ciguatera fish poisoning occurs when the dinoflagellate Gambierdiscus significantly increases
in population density. Gambierdiscus produces compounds that are toxic to humans. Through bio-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

214

SAM EDWARDS

accumulation these compounds may reach toxic levels in certain species of fish such as barracuda
and grouper.

33. Richmond, Preliminary Environmental Assessment, note 28.
34. Van Egmond, Van Apeldoorn, and Speijers, Food and Nutrition Paper, §7.3.1
35. Van Egmond, Van Apeldoorn, and Speijers, Food and Nutrition Paper, §7.3.1
36. Eaton, Land Tenure and Conservation.
37. Eaton, Land Tenure and Conservation, 14, note 34.
38. Eaton, Land Tenure and Conservation, 15.
39. Telephone interview with Margie Flanruw, Ph.D., Director, Yap Institute of Natural Science,

October 1994.

40. Telephone interview with Margie Flanruw.
41. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet.
42. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet.
43. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 409–10.
44. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 410.
45. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet.
46. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet.
47. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 413.
48. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 411.
49. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 412.
50. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet.
51. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 412.
52. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 413.
53. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 413.
54. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 413.
55. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet.
56. For a discussion of the methods of ecosystem valuation, see Holcombe, “Protecting Ecosys-

tems and Natural Resources.”

57. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 421.
58. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 422.
59. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 422.
60. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 422.
61. See Phillip v. Marianas Ins. Col., 12 FSM Intrm, 464, 469 (Pon. 2004); Bank of Guam v. Nukuto,

6 FSM Intrm. 615, 617–18 (Chk. 1994).

62. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 420.
63. See, for example, Carey v. Piphus, 435 U.S. 247, 254–55 (1978).
64. Dobbs, Law of Remedies, §3.1 at 211.
65. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 420.
66. Restatement (Second) of Torts §929(2) (1993).
67. Mahoney, Land Tenure Patterns on Yap Island.
68. See, for example, Peterson v. Continental Boiler Works, 783 S.W. 2d., 900 (Mo. 1990).
69. Dobbs, Law of Remedies 2d, §3.1 at 211.
70. Trinity Church v. John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company, 502 N.E.2d 532 (Mass. 1987).
71. Trinity Church v. John Hancock Mutual Life.
72. Trinity Church v. John Hancock Mutual Life, 536, citing Wall v. Platt, 169 Mass. 398, 405–406

(1897).

73. Trinity Church v. John Hancock Mutual Life, 535.
74. Trinity Church v. John Hancock Mutual Life, 536.
75. Commonwealth of Puerto Rico v. SS Zoe Colocotroni, 628 F.2d 652 (1st Cir. 1980), cert. denied,

450 U.S. 912 (1981).

76. Commonwealth of Puerto Rico v. SS Zoe Colocotroni, 657.
77. Commonwealth of Puerto Rico v. SS Zoe Colocotroni, 673.
78. Commonwealth of Puerto Rico v. SS Zoe Colocotroni.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

PROTECTING CULTURE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS UNDER THE LAW IN MICRONESIA 215

79. Commonwealth of Puerto Rico v. SS Zoe Colocotroni, 675 (emphasis added).
80. Holcombe, “Protecting Ecosystems and Natural Resources,” 85–89.
81. King, “Custom and Constitutionalism.”
82. Trusteeship Agreement for the Former Japanese Mandated Islands, 18 July 1947, 61 Stat. 3301.
83. Proclamation 5564—Placing into full force and effect the Covenant With the Common-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Compacts of Free Association With the Federated
States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands, 51 Fed. Reg. 40,399.

84. Compact of Free Association Act of 1985, Pub. L. No. 99–239, 99 Stat. 1771 (1986).
85. Nix v. Ehmes, 1 FSM Intrm. 114, 119 (Pon. 1982).
86. David, Herrenschmidt, and Mirault, Social and Economic Values of Pacific Coral Reefs, 12.
87. David, Herrenschmidt, and Mirault, Social and Economic Values of Pacific Coral Reefs, 4.
88. Dobbs, Law of Remedies 2d, §3.1 at 211.
89. Dobbs, Law of Remedies 2d, §3.1 at 211.
90. Narruhn v. Aisek, 13 FSM Intrm. 97, 99 (Chk. S. Ct. App. 2004).
91. People of Rull ex rel. Ruepong v. M/V Kyowa Violet, 421.
92. Sterling v. Velsicol Chemical Corp., 647 F. Supp. 303 (W.D. Tenn. 1986).
93. Sterling v. Velsicol Chemical Corp., 308.
94. Sterling v. Velsicol Chemical Corp., 306.
95. Sterling v. Velsicol Chemical Corp., 319.
96. Sherrod v. Berry, 827 F.2d 195 (7th Cir. 1987).
97. Valentine, “Hedonic Damages,” 544.
98. See, for example, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act 1984.
99. 26 FSM Code Sec. 101.
100. 126 FSM Code Sec. 202(9).
101. 1See Shaw and Bader, “Environmental Science in a Legal Context”; Wildermuth, “Legacy of

Exxon Valdez”; Partlett and Weaver, “BP Oil Spill.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Côté, I. M., J. A. Gill, T. A. Gardener, and A. R. Watkinson. “Measuring Coral Reef Decline Through
Meta-Analyses.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society London Britain Biological Sciences 360
(28 February 2005): 385–95.

David, G., J. B. Herrenschmidt, and E. Mirault. Social and Economic Values of Pacific Coral Reefs 12
(2007) 具http://www.crisponline.net/portals/1/pdf/c1a4_socioeco_value_coral_reefs.pdf典.

Dobbs, Dan B. Law of Remedies, 2nd ed. St. Paul, MN: West, 1993.

Eaton, Peter. Land Tenure and Conservation: Protected Areas of the South Pacific, Topic Review No. 17.
The South Pacific Regional Environment Programme, January 1985.

Edwards, Sam B. “Damage to Ceremonial Property in the State of Yap: Theories of Recovery.” Inter-
national Legal Perspectives 7 (1995): 2–38.
Federated States of Micronesia 2000 Population and Housing Census Report. May 2002 具http://
www.spc.int/prism/country/fm/stats/Publications/Census_Survey/2000_Census/FSM/
Analytical%20Report/00NatlCenRept.pdf典 accessed June 13, 2012.

Fischer, John L. Native Land Tenure in the Truk District. Land Tenure Patterns, Office of the High
Commissioner, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, 1958.

Holcombe, Justin K. “Protecting Ecosystems and Natural Resources by Revising Conceptions of Own-
ership, Rights, and Valuation.” Journal of Land Resources & Environmental Law 42 (2005): 83–105.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161

216

SAM EDWARDS

King, Edward C. “Custom and Constitutionalism in the Federated States of Micronesia.” Asian-
Pacific Law & Policy Journal 3 (2002): 249–81.

Lloyds List, Lloyds Information Casualty. Report, 19 March 1994, available in LEXIS, World Library,
Txtlne File.

Mahoney, Francis. Land Tenure Patterns on Yap Island. Land Tenure Patterns, Office of the High
Commissioner, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, 1958.

Partlett, David F., and Russell L. Weaver. “BP Oil Spill: Compensation, Agency Costs, and Restitu-
tion.” Wash. & Lee Law Review 68 (2011): 1341, 1347.

Richmond, Robert H. Preliminary Environmental Assessment Grounding of the M/V Oceanus Satawal
Island, Yap State, FSM, 1994 (on file with the author).

Shaw, David G., and Harry R. Bader. “Environmental Science in a Legal Context: The Exxon Valdez
Experience.” Ambio A Journal of the Human Environment 25 (1996): 430.

Valentine, Gretchen L. “Hedonic Damages: Emerging Issue in Personal Injury and Wrongful Death
Claims.” Northern Illinois University Law Review 10 (1990): 543–57.

Van Egmond, H. P., M. E. Van Apeldoorn, and G. J. A. Speijers. Marine Biotoxins. Food and Agri-
culture Organization of the United Nations; Research by the National Institute for Public Health
and the Environment in the Netherlands, 2004.

Wildermuth, Amy J. “The Legacy of Exxon Valdez: How do we Stop the Crisis?” University of Saint
Thomas Law Journal 7 (2009): 130.

Zorn, Jean G. “The Federated States of Micronesia.” In South Pacific Islands Legal Systems, edited by
Michael A. Ntumy. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1993.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:18:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739112000161


