 

Will the God Win?: The Case of the 
Buddhist Mummy
Zuozhen Liu*

 

Abstract: This article concerns the case of a stolen 1,000-year-old Buddhist 
mummy, known as the statue of Zhanggong-zushi, which caught the attention of 
the international community. The statue of Zhanggong-zushi is the embodiment 
of God in the eyes of the locals, and the treatment of human remains is 
controversial and sensitive. This case opens a discussion as to how Western 
courts should consider religious interests in the disputes of stolen cultural 
property. It is very important for the art world to understand how locals feel 
about the loss of their culture or religion.

INTRODUCTION

It seems as if virtually overnight the “Zhanggong-zushi,” “Yangchun village,” and 
“mummified sitting Buddha” are on the lips of many Chinese people. Countless 
Chinese cultural items have been looted, stolen, or illegally exported from China 
during the modern Chinese era, and many have been smuggled out of the coun-
try since the inception of China’s open-door policy. How has the case of the 
Zhanggong-zushi statue gained instant, international notoriety? What is driving 
the Yangchun villagers to spare no effort in recovering the statue? With these questions 
in mind, in December 2015, I paid a two-day visit to Yangchun village and inter-
viewed the villagers, which helped me to understand the persistence of the locals in 
seeking the return of the statue. My original motivation for writing this article for 
an international audience is to explore the locals’ attachment to this statue and to 
bridge the gap of understanding between these to groups of people.

*Jinan University, Guangzhou, People’s Republic of China; Email: llzz118@163.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The author is grateful for the comments and criticisms of Inge van der 
Vlies and Bill Fearnow.

221

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

International Journal of Cultural Property (2017) 24:221–238. Printed in the USA.Copyright © 2017 International Cultural Property Societydoi:10.1017/S094073911700008X222 

ZUOZHEN LIU

This case may remind people of the Chinese claims for the restitution of cultural 
relics looted from the Old Summer Palace. In 2009, a group of lawyers filed a suit in 
Paris seeking to enjoin the auction of various bronze statues of the Chinese Zodiac  
symbols, which had been looted from the Old Summer Palace in 1860. The request 
for the injunction was denied by the court. Although almost all of the Chinese  
people knew about the looting of the Old Summer Palace, before it was widely 
reported in March 2015, very few of them knew of the Zhanggong-zushi statue 
except for the Yangchun villagers. But how does the case of the Zhanggong-zushi 
statue differ from the case of the bronze Zodiac statues stolen or looted from the Old 
Summer Palace? Both cases reflect the legal obstacles to restitution of stolen or looted 
cultural objects through civil litigation. But what makes the claim for the restitution 
of the Zhanggong-zushi statue different from the case of the bronze Zodiac statues 
is the cultural meanings of the objects. Viewed as reminders of national humilia-
tion, the auctions of the bronze Zodiac statues stirred up Chinese nationalism. For 
most Chinese, the destruction of the Old Summer Palace represented a heavy blow  
leveled upon traditional Chinese high culture by imperialists, tantamount to 
a national tragedy. The restitution of cultural relics looted from the Old Summer 
Palace was, to a great extent, a matter of Chinese national dignity. However, the case 
of the Zhanggong-zushi statue concerns the folk religion of a rural community 
and the issue of the treatment of human remains. In essence, the claim for the 
Zhanggong-zushi statue is a religious or spiritual matter for the locals.

This  article  consists  of  three  parts.  The  first  part  discusses  the  cultural  and 
religious meaning of the statue of Zhanggong-zushi in order to explain the per-
sistence of the locals in seeking the return of the statue. In the second part, the 
legal  nature  of  human  remains  is  investigated  since  the  statue  of  Zhanggong-
zushi contains a mummified body. In the third part, it looks into civil law rules 
concerning restitution of stolen property in both Chinese and Dutch law systems 
and  also  discusses  how  a  court  considers  religious  elements  in  disputes  over 
cultural objects.

BACKGROUND

Oscar Van Overeem, a Dutch collector, purchased a Buddhist statue for 40,000 
Dutch guilders (US $20,500) in 1996 in Amsterdam from a collector who had 
acquired it in Hong Kong. The statue was displayed as part of the “Mummies: Life 
beyond  Death”  exhibition  mounted  by  the  Drents  Museum  in  the  Netherlands  
in  2014.  While  the  statue  was  on  display  at  the  Hungarian  Natural  History  
Museum in the spring of 2015, it was recognized as the statue of Zhanggong-zushi 
by Yangchun villagers from Fujian Province. “Zhang” is the last name of the 
Buddhist monk, and “gong” is a grandfatherly honorific title; “Zushi” is an honorific 
title in southeast Chinese culture. The statue of Zhanggong-zushi was stolen in 
1995 from Puzhao Temple in the village of Yangchun. Since the spring of 2015, the 
villagers of Yangchun have been engaged in the difficult task of recovering the statue.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

WILL THE GOD WIN? 

223

Responding to pressure brought on by international attention, Van Overeem stated 
through a social network in May 2015 that he was willing to return the statue to the 
village. However, in late 2015, Van Overeem attached three conditions to his return 
of the statue. First, he demanded the statue be enshrined at a grand temple such as 
Nanputuo Temple in Xiamen. Second, he demanded the Chinese government provide 
him assistance in research on a subject completely unrelated to the statue. Third, Van 
Overeem insisted the statue be included with other items of Chinese cultural heritage 
so that if someone were to buy all of the items for China, no one could determine the 
price paid for the statue. While agreeing to the second condition of research assistance, 
the Chinese authorities refused the first and third conditions. Following the collapse of 
diplomatic efforts at the end of 2015, fearing their case might be barred by a statute of 
limitation, the Yangchun villagers hired lawyers to sue Van Overeem for the restitution 
of the statue at the Sanming Intermediate People’s Court in Fujian Province. And, in 
June 2016, a lawsuit was also filed in the Netherlands for the restitution of the statue.1 
The Dutch Court will hold a first hearing for the dispute in July of 2017.

WHY THE LOCALS CARE ABOUT THE STATUE

Statue of Zhanggong-zushi: Embodiment of God

Today it seems to be a truism that cultural objects are instruments of people’s 
cultural identity, and cultural heritage, as an element of cultural identity, has been 
reiterated in many legal instruments on cultural heritage.2 In China, cultural relics 
are often linked to two concepts: history and culture. The statue of Zhanggong-
zushi, in the eyes of the Yangchun villagers, represents the 1,000-year-old history 
of the village and symbolizes the culture of “zushi gong” in Fujian Province.3 However, 
first and foremost, the Zhanggong-zushi has been shen (神) for the villagers—that 
is, the village’s “god,” “spirit,” or “deity”—for more than a thousand years.

1See Liu Fang and Zindziwe Janse, “Spotlight: Lawsuit to Repatriate Chinese Buddhist Mummy Starts 
in the Netherlands,” New China, http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-06/15/c_135439900.htm 
(accessed 1 September 2016).
 2In the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization’s introduction of the 
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, 14 May 1954, 249 
UNTS 240 and its two protocols, it provides: “The cultural heritage reflects the life of the community, its 
history, and identity. Its preservation helps to rebuild broken communities, re-establish their identities, 
and link their past with their present and future.” The Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and 
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, 14 November 
1970, 823 UNTS 231 (UNESCO Convention), states in the preamble that “cultural property constitutes 
one of the basic elements of civilization and national culture, and that its true value can be appreciated 
only in relation to the fullest possible information regarding its origin, history and traditional setting.”
 3The culture of zushi gong, a mixture of Buddhist culture and folk religion in southeast China has had 
profound influence in Fujian and Taiwan. The best well-known zushi are Qingshui Zushi Gong from 
the city of Quanzhou and Sanping Zushi Gong from the city of Zhangzhou. See Kuah-Pearce Klun 
Eng 2006, 125–26.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

224 

ZUOZHEN LIU

With a population of approximately 2,000 inhabitants, the Yangchun village is 
150 kilometers from the nearest Quanzhou railway station. The landscape is dom-
inated by high and low mountain ranges on which locals grow tea. Due to the 
village’s relative isolation, most of the village’s young seek opportunities in big 
cities. Those who stay home rely on tea planting. The villagers’ income averages 
approximately €1,000 per year. All of the Yangchun natives return to the village for 
the traditional Chinese Spring Festival and again on 5 October of the Chinese lunar 
calendar to commemorate the birth of the village’s Zhanggong-zushi. The villagers 
consider the celebration of their Zhanggong-zushi’s birthday their most significant 
annual event because their Zhanggong has been honored as their village’s holy god 
for more than 1,000 years.

For the Yangchun villagers, 5 October of the Chinese lunar calendar is compa-
rable to 25 December for Christians. On that day, all of the village families place 
vegetarian  dishes  as  offerings  for  the  presumably  vegetarian  Buddhist  monk 
Zhanggong-zushi  on  long  tables.  Because  Zhanggong-zushi  is  also  believed  to 
have been an opera fan, the villagers stage operas in front of the Puzhao Temple 
to  entertain  him  on  his  birthday.  These  traditions  are  part  of  the  Yangchun 
villagers’  collective  memory.  During  the  dark  ages  of  the  Cultural  Revolution, 
the  villagers  risked  their  lives  to  protect  the  Zhanggong-zushi  and  performed 
their annual observances of his birthday secretly at midnight. Today, the villagers 
believe that even though his body is no longer there the spirit of Zhanggong-zushi 
is still in the Puzhao Temple.

Lin Wenqing, a member of the restitution group organized by the village, explained 
that Zhanggong-zushi is their village’s most sacred god. Zhanggong-zushi knows 
all. He not only protects the villagers, but he also makes the villagers’ wishes come 
true. No one dares to lie to Zhanggong-zushi. When they have done something 
wrong, people confess to Zhanggong-zushi and ask for his forgiveness. Zhanggong-
zushi is also like a gentle and beloved grandfather. He smiles all the time and listens. 
Some  villagers  call  Zhanggong-zushi  “Grandpa.”  Zhanggong-zushi  embodies 
the idea that the village of Yangchun is a homeland for all of its villagers. Villagers 
who  no  longer  live  in  the  village  take  ashes  of  joss  sticks  from  the  Puzhao 
Temple as a means to enshrine Zhanggong-zushi, and, therefore, their homeland, 
in their homes.

To a person, the villagers display a strong determination to pursue the restitution 
to completion. Although aware of the challenges presented by the restitution, all 
the villagers view the re-emergence of the statue of Zhanggong-zushi as a spiritual 
manifestation and a sign that Zhanggong-zushi wants to come home. No matter 
how long it takes, or how difficult the restitution becomes, all of the villagers say 
they will never give up hope of bringing Zhanggong-zushi back home. One villager 
told me: “If our generation cannot bring Zhanggong-zushi home, our children 
and our children’s children will continue our work. We hope through our insistent 
efforts the collector will understand our deep feelings towards Zhanggong-zushi 
and change his attitude.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

WILL THE GOD WIN? 

225

According to Lin Lemiao, a retired teacher, when the statue of Zhanggong-zushi 
was stolen, all of the villagers were shocked and frustrated, and it was the most 
momentous event in the village’s history. The statue of Zhanggong-zushi had sur-
vived several storms in the prior millennium, but he was lost during their watch. 
The villagers felt both guilty and angry: “We tried every possible means to find 
the statue, but we had no clue until March 2015. We have no idea how to beg our 
ancestors’ pardon if Zhanggong-zushi is lost forever. We feel deeply guilty.” Lin 
Lemiao also spoke of Lin Juren, whose father was in charge of the renovation of the 
statue in 1944. Lin Juren had passed away a few days before my visit. He insisted 
upon being wheeled to the Puzhao Temple to light joss sticks to Zhanggong-zushi 
and said his greatest regret was not being able to see the authentic Zhanggong-
zushi back in the temple.

Lin Lemiao’s son, Lin Jianfei, a high school teacher in Datian county, says the 
villagers have complex feelings toward Van Overeem, a mixture of gratitude and 
anger. On the one hand, they are grateful to Van Overeem for preserving their 
Zhanggong-zushi: “Mr. Van Overeem has taken good care of Zhanggong-zushi. We 
really appreciate that. If Zhanggong-zushi was not on exhibition in the museum, 
we would have never known his whereabouts.” On the other hand, he expressed 
deep resignation and anger:

Although at first we thought Mr. Van Overeem would be willing to 
return Zhanggong-zushi to us, gradually he gave us the cold shoulder. 
Mr. Van Overeem evidently wants twenty million euros for the statue, 
which,  obviously,  particularly  for  our  village,  is  an  enormous  figure. 
We could sell all the property in our village and still not raise such a 
large amount.

Lin Yongtuan, who used to work as a doorman at the Puzhao Temple and 
is the person who first recognized that the Buddhist mummy on display at the 
Hungarian National Museum was the statue of Zhanggong-zushi, expressed his 
gratitude to Van Overeem for preserving the statue but cannot understand why he 
has refused to let the villagers see their god. In 2015, the villagers had planned to 
send some delegates to the Netherlands to celebrate Zhanggong-zushi’s birthday, 
but they failed to obtain the necessary visas: “Zhanggong-zushi should be enshrined 
with offerings, joss sticks and candles. Every time I think of that Zhanggong-zushi 
has not been enshrined for twenty years while in a foreign country, I grieve.”

UNDERSTANDING FOLK RELIGIOUS RELICS IN CHINESE CULTURE

In order to understand why the statue of Zhanggong-zushi commands such unpar-
alleled devotion among Yangchun villagers, one must first understand the nature 
of folk religious relics in Chinese culture. Folk religion, popular beliefs, or shenism, 
is not regulated in Chinese law, but folk religious relics are subject to the laws pro-
tecting cultural relics. Folk religion has existed widely for a long history in China 
and is presumed to be the most predominant religion among Chinese. Chinese folk 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

226 

ZUOZHEN LIU

religion has combined with institutional religions such as Taoism and Buddhism 
to constitute the Chinese religious system. Although practices such as the worship 
of ancestors and local deities predate history, Chinese folk religion has over time 
incorporated elements of institutional religions. Similarly, Confucianism and Taoism 
have assimilated elements of Chinese folk religion. Elements of Buddhism, Taoism, 
ancient divination, and witchcraft are apparent in Chinese folk religion’s practices  
and rituals.4 The Yangchun village has also deified and enshrined a second god, known 
as Chenggong Zushi, but the original statue of Chenggong Zushi was destroyed 
during the Cultural Revolution in order to protect the statue of Zhanggong-zushi 
as a substitute. The fact that Zhanggong-zushi has survived so many campaigns to 
destroy diffused religion during the past millennium is regarded as a miracle.

Although, to a certain extent, Chinese religious practices and beliefs are pragmatic 
and practical to the point of sometimes being materialistic, worshiping Zhanggong-
zushi is an integral part of the religious and cultural life of the Yangchun villagers. 
They recall the miracles of Zhanggong-zushi. Traditional rituals remain vital. 
During the Spring Festival, a celebrating deity parade is held so that all the villagers 
can welcome Zhanggong-zushi and other deities into their houses; each summer, 
villagers hold a ceremony at the Puzhao Temple to pray for a good harvest; and all 
Yangchun villagers return home each year to celebrate Zhanggong-zushi’s birthday 
at the temple. Typical of this process, Zhanggong-zushi was a Buddhist monk in his life, 
and the statue containing his mummified body is in the shape of a Buddha. However, 
unlike other Buddhist statues in other places in China, the statue of Zhanggong-
zushi, when he was enshrined at the Puzhao Temple, features hair on the top of his 
head and he is fully clothed and wears a golden crown.

The  worship  of  Zhanggong-zushi  also  typifies  the  worship  of  flesh  body  
bodhisattvas in Chinese Buddhist culture. Chinese Buddhists worship two types 
of “sariras” (the remains from cremation of Buddha’s or a saint’s body). The first 
are pearl or crystal-like bead-shaped objects that are purportedly found among 
the cremated ashes of Buddhists; the second are called flesh-body bodhisattvas, 
Buddhist mummies, whole-body sariras, or living Buddhas, which are the corpses 
of Buddhist monks and nuns that have not decomposed. Although this peculiarly 
Chinese Buddhist worship of flesh-body bodhisattvas contradicts the fundamen-
tal Buddhist concept of impermanence, Buddhism has undergone a long process 
of  localization  in  China  since  its  arrival  there  from  India.  Traditional  Buddhist 
teachings and practices have mixed with local Chinese culture to create a distinct 
Chinese Buddhist tradition.

The worship of flesh-body bodhisattvas is a distinctive feature of Buddhism’s 
localization in China. Although strongly advocated in traditional Buddhism, cre-
mation runs counter to ancient Chinese funeral rituals and the early Taoist belief 
in the immortality of life and body. Cremation also runs counter to the Confucian 

4See Yang and Hu 2012, 505–21; Chen and Xiaolong 2009, 115–23. For a general account of Chinese 
folk religion in English, see de Groot 1897–1910.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

WILL THE GOD WIN? 

227

doctrine of filial piety since it is held that the body, hair, and skin have all been 
received from the parents, and the idea that everyone shall take good care of his 
own body is the foundation of filial piety. The intactness of the body was regarded 
as sacred in pre-Qin Confucianism. Upon being introduced into China during the 
Han Dynasty, Buddhism gradually recognized and adopted such local Chinese 
ideas and elements. The worship of flesh-body bodhisattvas began in the Six 
Dynasties (222–589) and prevailed in the Tang Dynasty (618–907).5

Chinese flesh-body bodhisattva worship serves a number of purposes. Such wor-
ship commemorates eminent monks and heroes whose flesh bodies are considered 
emblematic of their superior spiritual achievement. The worship of flesh-body 
bodhisattvas goes beyond the adoration of sacred relics in Western religions in so 
far as it embodies Chinese ancestral veneration. Showing respect to one’s ancestors 
is a well-known aspect of filial piety and is deeply rooted in Chinese culture.  
Worshiping flesh-body bodhisattvas also involves praying for blessings. The principle 
of dukkha, meaning suffering or unsatisfactoriness, is one of the most important 
Buddhist concepts. The Buddha is reputed to have said: “I have taught one thing and 
one  thing  only,  dukkha  and  the  cessation  of  dukkha.”  Flesh-body  bodhisattvas  are 
believed to have extraordinary powers that can bring blessings to devotees, which will 
allow them to transcend the dukkha of painful experience. In addition, flesh-body 
bodhisattvas are sacred relics in Chinese Buddhism, embodying and attesting to the 
transmission of the teachings of the Buddha from one generation to the next. Finally, 
the souls of flesh-body bodhisattvas are believed to persist inside the mummy, and 
they are worshiped as fully conscious agents capable of bestowing favors and pro-
viding guidance as they communicate and interact with their devotees.6

Acknowledging and giving thanks for people’s good deeds is highly praised in 
Fujian culture. It is said that Zhanggong-zushi was a skilled doctor who healed 
many patients and saved the villagers from an outbreak of the plague. Due to 
the village’s remoteness, it was difficult to get medical assistance, and doctors were 
highly esteemed by the villagers. Because he saved their ancestors, generations 
of the Yangchun villagers have revered Zhanggong-zushi. Because the villagers con-
sider Zhanggong-zushi to be their benefactor, they consider themselves obligated 
to return the favor that Zhanggong-zushi conferred upon their ancestors. And the 
worship of Zhanggong-zushi is more than ordinary ancestor worship in so far as 
Zhanggong-zushi’s body’s resistance to decay has been deemed a miracle. As a 
result, Zhanggong-zushi is worshiped by the villagers as their god.

TREATMENT OF HUMAN REMAINS

Since the statue of Zhanggong-zushi contains a mummified human body, the 
claim for the restitution of the statue is reminiscent of claims for the return of the 

5See Huang 2009, 142–46; Shen 2011, 100–1.
 6See Huang 2009, 142–46; Shen 2011, 102–3.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

228 

ZUOZHEN LIU

Mokomokai, the preserved heads of the Maori, the Indigenous people of New 
Zealand, because both cases concern the treatment of human remains. Since the 
1980s, New Zealand has officially requested the return of the Maori heads that are 
held in museums and private collections around the world. Among these cases of 
Maori heads, the case of the return of a Maori head from the collection of the Rouen 
Museum to New Zealand is worthy of attention, as it has signaled a sea change in 
the attitudes to the repatriation of human remains held in French museums.7

In this case, the Maori head entered into the city of Rouen’s museum collection 
in 1875 and was displayed as an exotic curiosity. For Europeans, the head exempli-
fied an ethnographic interest, even an artistic one, while Maori Aboriginals believe 
their ancestors’ remains should be respected in their home area without being 
disturbed. On 19 October 2007, the municipality of Rouen voted to adopt a res-
olution authorizing the return of the head to New Zealand.8 However, the French 
minister of culture was publicly opposed to the return, and a petition was filed to 
the administrative tribunal of the city of Rouen for summary judgment to halt the 
execution of the city council’s resolution. The opposition referred to two sections 
of the French Heritage Code, which provides that “the collections of the museums 
of France are inviolable (Article L 451-3)” and that “goods constituting collec-
tions of the museums of France, and belonging to a legal person, are in the public 
domain and are hence inalienable. Any decision to declassify such goods cannot be 
made without the assent of a scientific body (Article L 451-5).” Thus, they argued 
that the head was a chattel in the public domain and needed to be declassified by 
the National Scientific Commission before its return.9 However, according to the 
city of Rouen, the declassification proceedings were unnecessary because the head 
was not a part of the museum collection or public domain. The municipal council’s 
resolution specified that “regarding human remains, Article 16-1 of the Civil Code, 
enacted pursuant to the Bioethics Bill of July 29, 1994, as modified, stipulates that 
they cannot be objects of proprietary rights: so the principle of inalienability 
of public collections cannot be applied to them.”10 However, the resolution was 
overruled by the summary court. In the decision, the judge stated that the human 
remains that constitute the Maori head were not within the scope of application of 
the foregoing sections of Article 16-1 of the Civil Code, subject to provisions of the 
Heritage Code; instead it was subject to the provisions of the Heritage Code. The 
return of the head required a declassification following the assent of the National 
Scientific Commission of Museum Collections of France.11

From the foregoing debate on the applicable law of the Maori head, we can see that 
the legal nature of human remains is a controversial issue. On the one hand, whether 

7See Amiel 2008.
 8Amiel 2008, 371.
 9Amiel 2008, 372.
 10Amiel 2008, 372.
 11Amiel 2008, 374.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

WILL THE GOD WIN? 

229

human remains can be of property interest is an issue provided in civil law. According 
to Jie Huang, in both the common law and civil law systems, the law on dead human 
bodies generally outlaws the sale of dead corpses and a person cannot own somebody 
else’s corpse even if he or she is a bona fide purchaser.12 On the other hand, some 
human remains are treated as cultural objects, which are subject to laws on cultural 
property. In addition, the legal trade of cultural property is allowed in almost all coun-
tries. In the concurrence of civil law and cultural property law in this particular case, the 
French judge deemed that the Maori head was subject to French cultural property law.
In Dutch civil law, the question whether or not human remains can be an asset is 
also difficult to answer. It has been written by the Dutch lawyer L.P.W. van Vliet that

it  is  highly  controversial  whether  a  dead  body  is  an  asset  or  not.   
A mummy, on the other hand, is more easily seen as an asset. The fact 
that a mummy is an archaeological find seems to overshadow the fact 
that these are dead persons. Objects made from human remains them-
selves can be seen as assets more easily than human remains themselves, 
e.g. a beaker made from a scull, or ashes of a cremated corps which have 
been used to make a diamond.13

So under Dutch law, the Zhanggong-zushi statue, which is a mummy, can be seen 
as an asset more easily than human remains themselves, and the trade of the statue, 
as a result, has been treated probably as the trade of a chattel.

In China, a dead body shall not be disposed as a commodity for profit. In spe-
cial situations, a state may take appropriate measures to dispose of a dead body, 
but such disposition shall consider the decedent’s will and the heirs’ feelings and 
should comply with public interests and humanitarianism.14 Nevertheless, historic 
human  remains  discovered  in  ancient  tombs  or  enshrined  in  religious  sites  are 
protected as cultural relics, while the Cultural Relics Protection Law of China does 
not distinguish human remains from other kinds of cultural relics.15

In the last two decades, some laws have been developed to regulate the treatment 
of human remains. In France, in order to expedite the many red tape issues around 
the repatriation of human remains, two Rouen senators proposed a new bill that 
would allow the repatriation of the Maori heads from France, and it was passed 
by the French government on 5 May 2010. It signals a sea change in the attitude 
toward the repatriation of human remains in French museums. On 9 May 2011, 
the Maori head from the Rouen Museum was handed back to New Zealand, which 
was the first repatriation of Maori human remains from France.16

12Huang 2015, 723.
 13Van Vliet 2006, 112.
 14Huang 2015, 724.
 15Law on the Protection of Cultural Relics of the People’s Republic of China, No. 76, 1982. It was 
recently amended on 29 June 2013.
 16See “First Repatriation of Maori remains from Rouen Museum, France,” https://www.tepapa.govt.
nz/about/press-and-media/press-releases/2011-news-and-media-releases/first-repatriation-maori-
remains (accessed 2 September 2016).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

230 

ZUOZHEN LIU

The  International  Council  on  Museums’s  2006  Code  of  Ethics  for  Museums 
defines human remains and sacred significance as “sensitive materials,” and it requires 
that the acquisition, research on, and exhibition of such sensitive materials shall 
be “accomplished in a manner consistent with professional standards and take into 
account the interests and beliefs of the community, ethnic or religious groups from 
whom the objects originated.”17 In the United States, the Native American Graves Pro-
tection and Repatriation Act was adopted in 1990, which requires federal agencies and 
institutions that receive federal funding to return Native American “cultural items” to 
lineal descendants and culturally affiliated Indian tribes and Native Hawaiian organiza-
tions.18 In the United Kingdom, the Department for Media, Culture and Sport has pro-
duced non-statutory guidance on the implementation of the provisions of the Human 
Tissue Act 2001 relating to the return of human remains. The aim of the guidance is to

ensure that the future treatment of indigenous remains in museums 
balances the need to respect the culture and wishes of indigenous com-
munities with the need for scientific research, and that decisions in 
response to requests for return are made equitably and transparently.19

In the Netherlands, the Dutch government has not yet developed any legislation 
concerning the collection, exhibition, or repatriation of human remains.20 In 2005, 
the Ethnographic Museum of Leiden returned a Maori head to New Zealand, 
which signals the first official restitution of human remains in the Netherlands.21 
Since museums have been increasingly confronted with these complex issues, the 
Ethical Committee of the Netherlands Museums Association adopted the Code of 
Ethics on Collecting and Exhibiting Human Remains, a guideline for all associated 
Dutch museums in 2007.22 In principle, human remains may only be exhibited 
for educational, scientific, or research purposes. In 2009, a restitution claim of six 
human skulls of Urk from the collection of the University Museum of Utrecht was 
presented to the Ethical Committee of the Netherlands Museums Association. In 
the verdict, the Ethical Committee advised the University Museum to return the 
skulls to the people of Urk, thereby acknowledging the important role of humans 
as the performative embodiment of local culture and religion. On 5 June 2010, 
the Urker skulls were officially returned to the people of Urk.23 The return of the 
Urker skulls reflects that the Dutch museum’s adherence to the Code of Ethics and 

17Code of Ethics for Museums, 2006, http://icom.museum/fileadmin/user_upload/pdf/Codes/code_
ethics2013_eng.pdf (accessed 16 May 2017), ss 2.5, 3.7, 4.3.
 18See Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, 16 November 1990, 104 Stat. 3048 Public 
Law 101-601, https://www.nps.gov/nagpra/mandates/25usc3001etseq.htm (accessed 2 September 2016).
 19Department for Culture, Media and Sport, Guidance for the Care of Human Remains in Museums, 
2005, http://www.culture.gov.uk/images/publications/GuidanceHumanRemains11Oct.pdf (accessed 
2 September 2016).
 20Van der Maas 2016, 143.
 21Van der Maas 2016, 144.
 22Code of Ethics on Collecting and Exhibiting Human Remains, 2007. Van der Maas 2016, 141.
 23Van der Maas 2016, 149.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

WILL THE GOD WIN? 

231

demonstrates that it is in favor of the restitution of human remains if such human 
remains are of cultural or religious importance for a cultural group.

In the case of the Zhanggong-zushi statue, Van Overeem is a private person, not 
a museum, and the Code of Ethics for associated Dutch museums is not binding on 
him. In addition, to the extent that no international convention respecting cultural 
property applies to this case, the dispute has been characterized simply as being 
a dispute over the ownership of an object by a Dutch court.24

THE GOD’S DIFFICULT JOURNEY BACK TO THE VILLAGERS

If the claim for the return of Zhanggong-zushi is characterized as simply being a 
dispute over the ownership of an asset, the rules regarding good faith acquisition 
and statutes of limitation will come into play. Chinese civil law has not yet estab-
lished a rule whether stolen goods are subject to good faith acquisition.25 In China, 
the original owners of stolen goods mainly recover their goods from the judicial 
organs. For example, if an object is stolen from an original owner and then sold to a 
third person, the police or courts will restore the object to the original owner when 
the case is solved, even if the third person has acted in good faith. If the original 
owner cannot be found, the goods will be delivered to the national coffers.26 Even 
though this practice has been criticized, there is no rule protecting the interest of 
the bona fide purchaser of stolen goods in China. In addition, cultural relics are 

24The Netherlands and China are contracting parties to the UNESCO Convention. China acceded to 
the convention on 28 November 1989, but the Netherlands acceded to this convention on 17 July 2009, 
and the convention is of no retroactive effect. The Netherlands signed the Convention on Stolen or 
Illegally Exported Cultural Objects, 24 June 1995, 2421 UNTS 457, in 1996, but it has not ratified it. 
This means that this convention is not legally binding on the Netherlands.
 25Article 89 of the Opinion (for Trial Use) of the Supreme People’s Court on Questions Concerning 
the Implementation of the General Principles of the Civil Law of the People’s Republic of China, 
1988, is also deemed a provision on good faith. But it is only dealing with the situation of joint 
ownership. Article 106 of the Property Law of the People’s Republic of China, No. 62, 2007, provides 
that, “[i]n case a person unauthorized to dispose a realty or chattel alienates the realty or chattel to an 
assignee, the owner is entitled to recover the realty or chattel. The assignee shall obtain the ownership 
of the realty or chattel if meeting all of the following conditions, unless it is otherwise prescribed by 
law: (a) to accept the realty or chattel in good faith; (b) to purchase the realty or chattel at a reason-
able price; and (c) in case registration is required by law, the alienated realty or chattel shall have 
been registered, while in case registration is not required, the delivery thereof shall have been accom-
plished. In case, according to the preceding paragraph, an assignee obtains the ownership of a realty 
or chattel, the original owner may require the person unauthorized to dispose of the realty or chattel 
to compensate for his losses. In case a related party obtains any other form of real right in good faith, 
the preceding two paragraphs shall apply by reference.” And Article 107 provides an exception to the 
good faith acquisition. If it is a lost property, the original owner can reclaim it within two years from 
the date when he knows, or should know, who the assignee is. If the assignee purchases the lost prop-
erty through auction or from a qualified shop, the original owner shall pay the assignee the amount 
purchasing the property.
 26This general rule does not apply to some cases that concern fraudulence governed by the law of bills. 
See Bingwan 2008.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

232 

ZUOZHEN LIU

limited merchantable goods provided by Chinese law, the circulation of which is 
subject to administrative law.27 The flow of cultural relics is subject to the Law on 
the Protection of Cultural Relics and other administrative regulations.28 As a general 
rule, only privately owned cultural relics are subject to trade, and the exportation 
of all cultural relics has to be authorized by the Chinese custom authority. If Van 
Overeem were a Chinese citizen and the statue of Zhanggong-zushi was situated in 
China, it is clear that the villagers would get the statue back to the temple by resort-
ing to the Chinese police. However, this case involves foreign elements since the 
defendant is a Dutch citizen and the subject matter is situated in the Netherlands. 
In accord with Chinese conflict of law, this is a foreign-related civil case.

Property rights are protected in the law of torts and property law in China. 
Article 2 of the Tort Law provides that infringement upon the rights to ownership 
is  subject  to  tort  liability,  and  Article  15  specifies  the  methods  of  assuming  tort 
liability, include the return of property.29 Meanwhile, Article 34 of the Property  
Law stipulates: “As for the untitled possession of a real property or movable prop-
erty, the right holder may petition for returning the original object.”30 In view of 
the lack of a unified Civil Code when the lawsuit was filed, claims for the restitution 

27In  contemporary  Chinese  civil  law,  goods  are  categorized  into  merchantable  goods  and  limited 
merchantable goods. Merchantable goods can be freely circulated between different civil persons; but 
the circulation of limited merchantable goods are prohibited or limited by law. These limited mer-
chantable goods at least include two categories: (1) property exclusively owned by the state, such as 
mineral deposits, waters, and sea areas; (2) goods that are not exclusively owned by the state but their 
circulation  is  prohibited  or  limited,  such  as  military  explosives,  firearms,  ammunition,  narcotics, 
drugs, gold, cultural relics, pornographic publications and audio-visual products, and so on. Goods 
that are deemed to be merchantable unless it is otherwise prescribed by law. In China, the circulation 
of goods between equal civil persons is subject to civil law (including contract law and property law), 
and properties exclusively owned by the state are prohibited to be circulated, which is specified in 
Article 81 of the General Principles of the Civil Law of the People’s Republic of China. Citizens can be 
the owner of limited merchantable goods in the second category, and the circulation of such limited 
merchantable goods are subject to administrative law. Legislation on limited merchantable goods are 
dispersed in various administrative regulations in order to protect the public interest, state owner-
ship, and the right of the weak parties. See Zhenying 2006, 125.
 28The Law on the Protection of Cultural Relics of the People’s Republic of China provides that 
citizens, legal persons, and other organizations, except institutions for the collection of cultural 
relics, may collect cultural relics obtained through the following channels: (1) lawfully inheriting or 
accepting as gifts; (2) purchasing from cultural relics stores; (3) purchasing from auction enterprises 
engaged in the auction of cultural relics; (4) mutually exchanging or transferring in accordance with 
the law of cultural relics lawfully owned by individual citizens; or (5) other lawful channels prescribed 
by the state. Cultural relics, as specified in the preceding paragraph, which are in the collection of 
citizens, legal persons, and other organizations, except the institutions for the collection of cultural 
relics, may be circulated according to the law (Article 50). And Article 51 reiterates the inalienability 
of state-owned cultural relics, stating: “[N]o citizens, legal persons or other organizations may 
purchase or sell the state-owned cultural relics, except ones with the approval of the State.” Due to 
the special feature of limited merchantable goods, it is generally accepted in Chinese judicial practice 
that limited merchantable goods including cultural relics are not subject to good faith acquisition.
 29Tort Law of the People’s Republic of China, No. 21, 2009.
 30Property Law of the People’s Republic of China, No. 62, 2007.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

WILL THE GOD WIN? 

233

of stolen property can be based on tort liability or rights in rem in China, and the 
claimant who is aiming to recover property can choose to file a lawsuit pursuant 
to the law of torts or property law. If the claimant chooses to sue the defendant 
pursuant to tort liability, he has to demonstrate that the loss was caused by the 
negligence of the defendant according the Chinese laws of tort, while there is no such 
requirement in property law.31

Tort liability is governed by the law of the place of tortious act. In this case, the 
lawyers opted to sue the defendant pursuant to the law of torts for the restitution 
of the statue of Zhanggong-zushi, which has been accepted by the Sanming Inter-
mediate People’s Court. It is not known why the lawyers filed the suit under tort 
law, but it has been reported that the lawsuit in China was meant to interrupt the 
limitation of action. The last day that the Chinese court can protect the rights to 
restitution of the statue of Zhanggong-zushi is 16 December 2015; otherwise, the 
claim will have lapsed the maximum 20-year limitation period in Chinese law.32

Even  though  the  Chinese  court,  in  all  probablity,  will  rule  in  favor  of  the 
claimant, according to Chinese law, it is highly likely that the judgment as such will 
not be enforced in the Netherlands due to the jurisdictional issue. Under Chinese 
law, a court has jurisdiction if the tortious act occurs in the place where the court is 
located. However, under Article 431 of the Dutch Code of Civil Procedure (CCP), 
a foreign judgment shall not be enforced within the territory of the Netherlands 
in the absence of a treaty or a statutory provision.33 Thus, if no treaty applies, the 
enforcement of a foreign judgment is not possible in the Netherlands, and the case 
will have to be adjudicated again by the competent Dutch court.34 As explained 
by Dutch lawyers, according to judgments in 1993 and 1995, the Supreme Court 
considerably narrowed the scope of Article 431 of the CCP. At present, in cases 
in which no treaty applies, the Dutch courts in general do not recognize a foreign 
forum as the  forum non  conveniens,  the  procedural  rights  of  the  defendant  are 
safeguarded in the procedure, and the judgment does not violate public order.35 

31See Hongliang 2014.
 32There are three types of limitation in Chinese civil law: general limitation, special limitation, and 
maximum limitation. The general limitation of actions is two years as of the date that the claimant 
knows, or should have known, that his rights have been infringed upon. Exceptions are made for 
disputes over contracts of international trade and the import/export of technology, for which the 
limitation of action is four years; and for claims for personal injuries, claims for the sale of substan-
dard goods, rent-related claims, and claims for the loss of, or damage to, property left in the care 
of another person, all of which expire after one year. See General Principles of the Civil Law of the 
People’s Republic of China.
 33Dutch Code of Civil Procedure (CCP), 2011. See Van Mierlo and Hoebeke 2010.
 34According to Van Mierlo and Hoebeke, in the Netherlands, the most important statutory rules with 
respect to recognition and enforcement of foreign money judgment are to be found in Articles 431 
and 985, para. 1, of the CCP. Article 431 of the CCP provides: “1. Except as provided for in Article 985 
through 994, foreign judgments and foreign authentic deeds shall not be enforced in The Netherlands. 
2. Disputes may be litigated again in the Dutch courts.” See Van Mierlo and Hoebeke 2010, 5.
 35Van Mierlo and Hoebeke 2010, 6.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

234 

ZUOZHEN LIU

In this case, neither bilateral nor multilateral treaties concerning the enforcement 
of foreign civil judgments exist between China and the Netherlands. With respect 
to  foreign  judgments  that  are  not  subject  to  a  treaty  in  the  Netherlands,  one  of 
the conditions that must be met is that the judgment is rendered by a convenient 
forum. Whether the Chinese court will be accepted in the Netherlands as a conve-
nient court is one of the issues since the plaintiff has sued in a Chinese court.

Under Dutch law, a foreign court can be considered a convenient forum accord-
ing to internationally acceptable standards. Generally acceptable are the forum 
contractually agreed to by the parties, the forum of rei sitae (in matters relative to 
real estate), the forum loci delicti (in matters relative to tort), and the forum of a 
subsidiary or branch.36 As discussed above, Chinese courts have jurisdiction to tort 
claims if the tortious act takes place in China and if the stolen property is based 
on tort liability pursuant to Chinese law. In the case of the statue of Zhanggong-
zushi, the Sanming Intermediate Court is deemed the forum of loci delicti under 
Chinese law. It appears that the Sanming Intermediate Court would be accepted 
as a convenient court since the forum loci delicti is an internationally acceptable 
standard in consideration of convenient forum in the Netherlands. If so, the judg-
ment rendered by the Chinese court will be enforced in the Netherlands if the other 
conditions are also met.

Indeed, excluding an owner from his property constitutes an infringement upon 
his property rights. When a person seeks to recover an asset held by another, the 
matter is prima facie within either the law of torts or the law of property. In clas-
sical Roman law, a claimant could go into court and simply assert his ownership 
of the goods in question: “That cow, Buttercup, is mine!” Such an assertion was 
called vindicatio, a purely proprietary claim.37 Dutch law protects property rights 
pursuant to property law, and revindication is the principal action for the owner 
and other title holders against infringement.38 Alternatively, there is no equivalent 
of vindicatio in English common law, and English law protects property rights pur-
suant to the law of torts rather than property law.39 Nevertheless, the fact that a 
restitution claim can be based on property law and tort law in China overshadows 
the jurisdiction and the application of law in this case. If the Dutch court character-
izes the dispute over the ownership of the statue of Zhanggong-zushi as a property 
dispute, the Chinese court may not be accepted as a convenient court because 
the plaintiff is normally expected to sue the defendant in the country where the 
defendant is domiciled.

36Van Mierlo and Hoebeke 2010, 33, 34.
 37See Frisby and Jones 2011, 12.
 38Salomons 2011, 24, 25.
 39Common law is used here in its most narrow sense—that is, as opposed to equity where an action 
akin to vindicatio does exist. Although English law also recognizes vindication of property rights with 
which the defendant has interfered, there is most likely only one principle on which the law of resti-
tution is dependent, namely the principle of unjust enrichment. As Virgo claims, the body of law that 
exists to secure the reversal of unjust enrichment is the law of restitution. See Virgo 2006.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

WILL THE GOD WIN? 

235

If so, the decision made by the Chinese court would not be enforced in the 
Netherlands. That is probably why the lawyers have also filed a lawsuit in the 
Netherlands  for  the  restitution  of  the  statue.  In  general,  civil  law  systems  favor 
good faith possessors insofar as a bona fide purchaser may obtain valid title even 
from a thief. If the villagers sue him in the Dutch court, whether Van Overeem 
acquired the statue in good faith and whether the case has been barred by a statute of 
limitation would be examined. If Van Overeem can establish that he had acquired 
the statue in good faith or as a result of the application of a statute of limitation, the 
Dutch court will rule against the villagers.

CONSIDERATION OF RELIGIOUS VALUE IN A PROPERTY DISPUTE

This  case  also  brings  into  stark  relief  the  now  decades  long  controversy  sur-
rounding the question of the ownership of cultural objects. “Culture” embodies 
group-oriented notions of value, while “property” focuses on the individual’s right 
to possess objects. If a judge rules that Van Overeem acquired the good title to the 
statue through a good faith acquisition or as a result of the application of a statute 
of limitation, the villagers will lose their god forever. Instead, their god will likely 
continue to be placed on display in museums, labeled as “a mummy from Fujian.” 
Their god will be stared at by museum visitors rather than worshiped on the altar at 
the Puzhao Temple, his holy home. According to the villagers of Yangchun, sacri-
fices should be made to worship Zhanggong-zushi rather than an admission being 
charged. Staring directly at Zhanggong-zushi should be prohibited as a sacrilege. 
However, such cultural or religious concerns are not regarded as being germane to 
a civil dispute over the ownership of objects. Such disputes are litigated over the 
manner the object was acquired, the passage of time, and the choice and applica-
tion of law. Positive law frowns upon the restitution of cultural objects that were 
removed long ago.

Although no civil court has ever treated a dispute concerning the allocation of 
cultural objects as raising issues surrounding an infringement of religious rights, 
consideration has been shown to the cultural/religious significance by the courts. 
The case Bumper Development Corporation, Ltd. v. Commissioner of Police for the 
Metrolopis, et al., which concerns how to treat cultural significance in disputes over 
cultural property merits attention. In this case, a twelfth-century bronze Nataraja 
(a  sculpture  of  Shiva  dancing)  was  ordered  returned  to  its  Indian  claimants.40 
In 1976, this object was found by a landless Indian laborer at the site of a ruined 
Hindu temple. The temple in the state of Tamil Nadu had lain in a ruinous state, 
and no one had worshipped there for centuries, but one of its surviving relics was 
recognized to be an object of religious worship known as a sivalingam. The bronze 

40Bumper  Development  Corporation,  Ltd.  v.  Commissioner  of  Police  for  the  Metrolopis,  et  al., 
[1991] 1 WLR 1362, [1991] 4 All ER 638. Ghandhi and James had an excellent discussion of this case 
in the article “The God That Won.” See Ghandhi and James 1992, 369–81.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

236 

ZUOZHEN LIU

Nataraja  was  eventually  acquired  by  the  Bumper  Development  Corporation  in 
good faith in 1982. The title of Nataraja was one of the main issues tried by the 
judge—that is, whether any of the “claimants” had a superior title to the Nataraja 
than Bumper. There were five claimants in this case: the union of India, the state of 
Tamil Nadu, the Thiru Sadagapan who claimed to be the fit person of the temple 
on his behalf, the temple itself suing through Sadagapan, and Sivalingam, who was 
added as the fifth claimant at a late stage of the trial.

In the judgment, the judge decided that the temple, who was suing as its “fit 
person,” had a valid title and superior title to the Nataraja compared to that 
enjoyed by Bumper. Bumper appealed the findings of the judge, and the Court 
of Appeal upheld the judge’s decision. The court held that, in accordance with 
the demands of justice, the ruined temple was accepted as a party to the pro-
ceedings and, as such, was entitled to sue for the recovery of the Nataraja in the 
English court. In using the principles of comity, justice, and public policy, the 
court ruled in favor of the claimants. Public policy played a significant role in 
the decision:

The public policy of promoting the return of stolen artifacts and treasures 
(or  those  exported  in  breach  of  regulations)  to  the  country  of  origin—at 
least where the country concerned is both a friendly state and a mem-
ber of the Commonwealth—is to be applauded and will ensure that our 
courts make a significant contribution to the international protection of 
cultural property.41

As Sandy Ghandhi and Jennifer James note, the reasoning behind the decision and 
resort to the principles of comity and the criterion of public policy will ensure a 
wider application of this decision, and, thus, it is a most welcome development for 
the international protection of cultural property.42

Even if the court rules in favor of the villagers, if Van Overeem fails to establish 
that he acquired the statue as a bona fide purchaser for value and if the villagers’ 
claim has not been barred by the passage of time, this case highlights the need for 
the courts to consider religious and cultural elements in disputes involving cul-
tural objects. For anyone other than the Yangchun villagers, it makes no difference 
whether the statue is reverently ensconced in the Puzhao Temple or owned and 
loaned out for display from time to time by a Dutch collector. Some non-Yangchun 
would even argue that a collector such as Van Overeem may be better able to better 
preserve  and  study  the  statue.  Many  view  folk  religious  beliefs  as  nothing  more 
than quaint superstition and question its very legitimacy. The terrifically unafford-
able sales price requested by Van Overeem is the polar opposite of the religiously 
motivated Yangchun villagers’ plea for the return of their god. For Van Overeem, 
the controversy simply involves money. For the villagers, the controversy involves 
the most deeply felt religiosity.

41Ghandhi and James 1992, 378.
 42Ghandhi and James 1992, 379.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

WILL THE GOD WIN? 

237

As John Lagerwey, a scholar of Chinese religion, points out, regardless of whether 
it is scientific, Chinese folk religion provides psychological benefits of worship and 
systematically preserves and transmits accumulated wisdom. In fact, in the Chinese 
folk region, the faithful must locate themselves within a specific spatial system; they 
must be modest and prudent because the gods are watching. In a sense, fear of the 
gods becomes a kind of wisdom. For example, some villagers have explained they 
do not dare lie to Zhanggong-zushi. Unless we understand the religious meaning 
of the statue of Zhanggong-zushi as it functions within its cultural and religious 
surroundings, we cannot begin to comprehend the under-funded villagers’ perse-
verance in pursuing their unlikely claim against Van Overeem. However, although 
it is highly valued by groups such as the Yangchun villagers and has been the key 
motivation in some instances where restitution has been accomplished, the impor-
tance to date of “culture” or “religion” has not been recognized as an independent, 
persuasive theory in cases concerning the restitution of cultural objects. Thus, the 
difficulties confronting the Yangchun villagers in their attempts to bring the statue 
of Zhanggong-zushi back to its altar in their village demonstrates the insufficient 
legal protection afforded to cultural groups and their spiritual and religious beliefs. 
In the real world, the power of a Chinese folk religion’s god is minimal when con-
fronted by the power of the laws and judiciaries of foreign nations. If their case 
goes against the Yangchun villagers, the statue of Zhanggong-zushi will remain 
under  the  control  of  Van  Overeem,  and  Zhanggong-zushi’s  religious  function 
will continue to be frustrated. Being separated from their god Zhanggong-zushi 
is  spiritual torture for the Yangchun villagers. Will a court of law in a modern, 
Western nation ever display any meaningful deference for the spiritual beliefs and 
cultural traditions of a small group of people living in a remote part of a faraway, 
foreign, Eastern country? Will the god win this time?

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Amiel, Olivier. 2008. “A Māori Head: Public Domain?” Translated by Marine Bel and Michael Berger. 
International Journal of Cultural Property 15, no. 3: 371–75.

Bingwan,  Xiong.  2008.  “On  the  Good  Faith  Acquisition  of  Stolen  Property  and  Its  Repossessing 
Right.” Falv Kexue 2: 135–37. [in Chinese]

Chen, Qinjian, and Yi Xiaolong. 2009. “On the Current Research Situation and Prospect of Folk 
Belief.” Northwest Ethno-National Studies 2: 115–23. [in Chinese]

Frisby, Sandra, and Michael Jones. 2011. “National Report on the Transfer of Movables in England and 
Wales.” In National Reports on the Transfer of Movables in Europe, vol. 2, edited by Wolfgang Faber and 
Brigitta Lurger, 1–154. Munich: Sellier.

Ghandhi, Sandy, and Jennifer James. 1992. “The God That Won.” International Journal of Cultural 
Property 1, no. 2: 369–81.

De Groot, Jan Jakob Maria. 1897–1910. The Religious System of China, Its Ancient Forms, Evolution, History 
and Present Aspect, Manners, Customs and Social Institutions Connected Therewith, 6 vols. Leiden: Brill.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X

238 

ZUOZHEN LIU

Hongliang, Wang. 2014. “Claim for Return of Original Object: Claim on Property Right or Form of 
Tort Liability.” Faxuejia 1: 91–101. [in Chinese]

Huang, Jie. 2015. “Protecting Non-indigenous Human Remains under Cultural Heritage Law.” 
Chinese Journal of International Law 14: 709–33.

Huang, Shi-fu. 2009. “A Religious Interpretation of Worship Flesh-body Bodhisattva: The Case of Jiu 
Hua Shan.” Social Sciences in Yunnan 5: 142–46. [in Chinese]

Kuah-Pearce, Klun Eng. 2006. “The Worship of Qingshui Zuzhi and Religious Revivalism in South 
China.” In Southern Fujian: Reproduction of Tradition in Post-Mao China, edited by Chee Beng Tan, 
125–26. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press.

Salomons, Arthur. 2011. “National Report on the Transfer of Ownership in The Netherlands.” 
In National Reports on the Transfer of Movables in Europe, vol. 2, edited by Wolfgang Faber & 
Brigitta Lurger, 24–25. Munich: Sellier.

Shen, Hai-yan. 2011. “An Analysis of the Flesh-body Bodhisattva in Chinese Buddhism.” Journal of 
China East Normal University: Philosophy and Social Science 3: 98–103. [in Chinese]

Van der Maas, Demelza. 2016. “Debating the Restitution of Human Remains from Dutch Museum 
Collections: The Case of the Skulls from Urk.” In Museums and Restitution: New Practices, New 
Approaches, edited by Louise Yythacott and Kostas Arvantis, 139–50. New York: Routledge.

Van Mierlo, Antoius I. M., and Bo Ra D. Hoebeke. 2010. “The Netherlands,” https://www.nautadutilh.
com/siteassets/documents/2012-05-04-enforcement-money-judgments-tvm.pdf (accessed 16 May 
2017).

Van Vliet, Lars Peter Wunibald. 2006. “The Boundaries of Property Rights: Netherlands National 
Report 2006.” In Netherlands Reports to the Seventeenth International Congress of Comparative Law, 
edited by J. H. M. van Erp and Lars Peter Wunibald Van Vliet. Cambridge: Intersentia.

Virgo, G. J. 2006. The Principles of the Law of Restitution, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Wei, Zhenying, ed. 2006. Civil Law. Beijing: Beijing University Press and Higher Education Press. 
[in Chinese]

Yang, Fenggang, and Anning Hu. 2012. “Mapping Chinese Folk Religion in Mainland China and 
Taiwan.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 51, no. 3: 505–21.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:37:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073911700008X


