Cicero’s Prosecution of Gaius Verres:

A Roman View of the Ethics of

Acquisition of Art

 . *

Cicero’s speeches and essays—especially the Verrines—were widely read in France and England
during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, when they were used in public debates about
the fate of art in wartime. The early development of the concept of “cultural property” owed much
to careful readings and citations of Cicero’s views. The main charge brought against Verres in 70
B.C. was extortion during his term as governor of Sicily, but in the course of his prosecution Cic-
ero depicts Verres as a rapacious collector of art who even took cult statues from temples for his pri-
vate collection. This portrait of a “collector” who felt entitled to anything he could get and who abused
his ofﬁcial authority to acquire works of art was recalled and used in debates about “collecting” many
centuries later. This paper examines how Ciceronian views contributed to the development of the con-
cept of art as cultural property.

While our thinking today about cultural property is the product of legal theory
developed during the Enlightenment and the last two centuries, in its early devel-
opment it owed much to careful readings of Cicero’s speeches and essays. The
speeches Cicero published on the case of Gaius Verres (the Verrines) have especially
inﬂuenced discussions about the acquisition and ownership of art. Although the
main charge against Verres was extortion, Cicero devotes much space to a vivid de-
piction of Verres as a merciless, insatiable, and rapacious collector of art, a portrait
that was recalled and used in debates about “collecting” many centuries later. In his
prosecution of Verres, Cicero also sets up for conquering generals an ideal of be-
havior whose immediate purpose was probably rhetorical, but the ideal itself had
a profound impact in France and England during the late eighteenth century and
early nineteenth century. The speeches became a rallying point in public debates
about appropriate ownership of art and the fate of art in wartime. In this article
I will examine this neglected aspect of Cicero’s speeches against Verres: their con-
tribution to the development of the concept of art as cultural property.1

*Associate Professor of Art History (Greek and Roman art and architecture) at the University of Cali-
fornia, Irvine.

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 11, No. 1, 2002, pp. 28– 49
© 2002 International Cultural Property Society

28

’     29

1     

On August 5, 70 B.C. Cicero began his prosecution of Gaius Verres for extortion
in the Roman Forum. Crowds were attracted by the spectacular nature of the ac-
cusations against Verres, who had already become notorious for theft and murder
during his three-year stint as propraetor (governor) of Sicily, and also because of
an ongoing political issue concerning the composition of the jury. Earlier in the
ﬁrst century B.C. under Sulla, the Senate had regained its former privilege of hear-
ing extortion cases rather than the equites, but class rivalry and a history of abuses
now had brought the matter to a crisis. Verres had bragged, Cicero claims, that the
proceeds from his ﬁrst year as governor were for himself, from the second year for
his lawyer, and from the third year for the jury. In his opening speech, Cicero pre-
sents the case against Verres as an opportunity for the Senate to redeem itself. But
beyond the immediate political controversy over who should sit on the jury, and
beyond even the speciﬁc need to redress the grievances of the Sicilians, according
to Cicero the larger issues at stake were the reputation of the government of Rome,
her relationships with allies and subjects, and the responsibility of rulers to the
ruled.

Cicero had already won the role of prosecutor earlier in January, and in the
preserved preliminary speech he describes how delegations of Sicilians had begged
him to take the case, because they knew him from his own term in Sicily as quaestor
(subgovernor) at Lilybaeum and felt they could trust him. Cicero was still a young
man and this was to be his ﬁrst major case. We may surmise that Cicero was at-
tracted to the case for its political implications, and the opportunity to face the fa-
mous Quintus Hortensius, then the premier orator in Rome and the consul-elect,
who was to present the defense. Because of Cicero’s use of unorthodox tactics, his
prosecution was so successful that Verres left for voluntary exile in Marseilles
shortly after Cicero’s opening speech.2

In late January Cicero had made a hurried fact-ﬁnding trip to Sicily and re-
turned to ﬁnd that other trials had been instigated as a part of the defendant’s de-
laying tactics. The calendar of festivals and celebrations left little time for a typi-
cal trial, which usually opened with lengthy prosecutorial speeches followed by
further lengthy speeches for the defense, followed by the presentation of witnesses
and cross-examination. Cicero circumvented all this by giving a very short speech
outlining the circumstances of the case, then calling witnesses. Their testimony
proved to be so damning that Verres left Rome, and it is debatable whether the op-
posing lawyer Hortensius even spoke.3 Cicero did not want all of his research and
preparation to go without an audience, however, so he published both the brief
speech he actually gave, and ﬁve longer speeches, written dramatically as though
they had been actually delivered in the Forum.

30  . 
2      

The speeches against Verres are literary texts addressing a set of historical circum-
stances, and they provide a vivid picture of how a Roman ofﬁcial could abuse his
position, in Rome and abroad. With this publication Cicero made available to his
reading public the ﬁrst extended oratory in Latin, and the speeches won a reader-
ship that endured through the medieval period to the present day.4 Because of the
excellent rhetoric, these speeches and others by Cicero were eagerly read in the
schools of rhetoric that were the principal avenue to a public career throughout 
the Mediterranean.5 In the Roman imperial period the speeches were especially 
admired as models of rhetoric: Quintilian alone in Institio oratoria, his textbook on
training in rhetoric, quotes the Verrines ﬁfty-nine times. This case on extortion is
important for the history of art because the speeches include the ﬁrst extended
commentary from antiquity on the social uses and purposes of art, through the
lens of Cicero’s rhetorical characterization of Verres as a rapacious collector. 

3    

By Roman law there is the implicit and explicit right of the conqueror to the spoils
of war, a part of which then becomes public property to be distributed or dis-
played appropriately.6 The triumphal processions and elaborate display of captives
and captured plunder of all sorts are described in detail by many ancient histori-
ans and serve as dramatic punctuation in the accounts of Polybius, Livy, Josephus
Flavius, Suetonius, and Plutarch. The general who was awarded the triumph gained
glory and reputation from this public display, and it was also his privilege to de-
cide which spoils to dedicate in temples, and to oversee the distribution of money
and other rewards among the troops, although the precise nature of customary dis-
tributions is not certain.7 The most famous depiction of Roman spolia is on the
Arch of Titus in the Roman Forum, dedicated ca. A.C. 81 in honor of the emperor
Titus’s victory over Judea and the capture of Jerusalem. The relief shows sacred
implements from the Temple in Jerusalem carried in triumphal procession by Roman
soldiers through the Forum in Rome. 

As early as the second century B.C., however, the historian Polybius questions
excessive plundering (speciﬁcally mentioning art) in his account of Rome’s rise to
power throughout the Mediterranean. After describing the siege of Syracuse (211
B.C.), Polybius comments:

The Romans, then, decided for this reason to transfer all these objects to
their own city and leave nothing behind. As to whether in doing so they
acted rightly and in their own interest or the reverse, there is much to be said
on both sides, but the more weighty arguments are in favor of their conduct

’     31

having been wrong then and still being wrong. . . . [He argues that observers
seeing works of art now in Rome will not admire the Romans, but be
moved to pity for the former owners and to envy of Rome; while there is
good reason to take gold and silver, the city should be adorned with dignity
and magnanimity, not paintings and reliefs.] At any rate these remarks will
serve to teach all those who succeed to empire, that they should not strip
cities under the idea that the misfortunes of others are an ornament to their
own country. The Romans on the present occasion, after transferring all
these objects to Rome, used such as came from private houses to embellish
their own homes, and those that were state property for their public
buildings.8

These views were expanded by Cicero in the Verrines, where he makes a care-
ful distinction between spolia (war booty of any kind, seized from enemies) and
spoliatio (denudement, or illegal removal of art and architectural decoration).9 Cic-
ero distinguishes between ordinary booty and “religious” images or objects, which
should not be seized: those depicting gods, or dedicated to gods, or belonging to
a sanctuary, temple or shrine. Later authors took up this theme and expanded it:
Livy’s history of Rome includes several exempla of greedy generals whose excessive
plundering of sanctuaries led to their eventual decline or death. Pausanias, in his
travelers’ commentary on Greek sanctuaries written in the later second century
A.C., includes a brief history of the plunder of votive offerings and images of
gods (going back to the Trojan War), as an apologia for the emperor Augustus,
who took away the cult image of Athena Alea, and relics such as the tusks of the
Calydonian boar from her temple at Tegea (8.46.1– 5).10

Despite Cicero’s complaints about Verres and Livy’s admonitions, the right of
the conqueror to booty of all sorts was in practice unquestioned and continued
to be unquestioned for a long time: the Hebrew, Greek, and Roman precedents
were reiterated by the Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius in the early seventeenth century
in his treatises, which became the foundation of modern international law. But 
Cicero’s accusation against Verres is that he despoiled Sicily not as a conqueror but
acting as a governor sent by Rome as her representative, and that, furthermore, a
morally upright conqueror might respect what today we would call cultural prop-
erty: religious and historical items of especial importance to their owners. 

4    

Although the main charge is that Verres extorted forty million sesterces from Si-
cilians, Cicero opens his case with a review of Verres’ career before he became gov-
ernor of Sicily, including theft of gold from the Parthenon, cult images from tem-
ples along the coast of Asia Minor, and statues from the sanctuary of Apollo at

32  . 

Delos. In effect this establishes a “pattern of behavior,” as it might be called today.
Cicero then builds his case by using conventional categories of maladministration:
he shows how Verres at every opportunity acts against current law and contrary to
the precepts of “good” government. Cicero contrasts his behavior with that ex-
pected during wartime of successful generals, especially Marcus Claudius Marcel-
lus (hero of the wars against Hannibal and conqueror of Syracuse) and Scipio
Africanus (conqueror of Carthage). In order to make the case seem urgent to Ro-
mans, Cicero ampliﬁes Verres’ actions as an individual to the level of a threat against
the state itself by his manipulation of the grain supply and its likely diminution,
by his sacrilegious actions, and by the enmity toward Rome brought on by Verres’
personal transgressions. 

With these examples Cicero sets up the major arguments of his case: Verres
trampled on private property rights by manipulating inheritances, which he did on
a large scale in Sicily. Cicero details how Verres manipulated civic property rights
in Sicily by distorting the system of taxes, paid in the form of a tithe of wheat
since the time of King Hieron II in the third century. Besides these forms of ex-
tortion, Verres violated all custom and propriety in religious affairs by despoiling
temples, the main subject of the fourth speech, and in the ﬁnal speech Cicero ar-
gues that Verres violated criminal law and procedure by collusion with pirates, as
well as ﬂogging, beheading, and cruciﬁxion of innocent Roman citizens. This last
set of charges concerning “law and order” was especially signiﬁcant because of the
turbulence of the slave wars during Verres’ term of ofﬁce; he had been governor
in Sicily for three years instead of the usual term of one year, because his succes-
sors were preoccupied with putting down the revolts of Spartacus and Crixus. Cic-
ero wanted to preempt the assertion that Verres had been effective against poten-
tial slave revolts in Sicily. 

5    

What may seem surprising at ﬁrst in these speeches is the attention devoted to the
theft of statues, paintings, and other art, a theme that runs throughout all ﬁve
texts. Cicero certainly advanced sufﬁcient evidence to ﬁnd Verres guilty on the
other charges: even allowing for rhetorical exaggeration, modern commentators ex-
press little doubt about their essential truth. Furthermore Verres’ departure from
Rome should be seen as a concession of guilt, since if Verres had hope of refut-
ing the charges through his advocate, the famed Hortensius, he would have stayed
to face the full trial. The facts and circumstances surrounding the case would have
been well known to contemporaries, so presumably there was limited scope for in-
vention when Cicero published the speeches. The theft of statues, paintings, and
other artwork is apparently included in the catalog of crimes because many of the
statues were visual representations of the gods—some had been consecrated and

’     33

worshipped in temples—and “art” in general was associated with tradition and
piety, issues Cicero knew could move his audience, with suitable rhetoric to frame
them. Since many of the items taken by Verres had had a religious context, either
by what they represented or how they were used, the irreligious acts of Verres
could be depicted not just as a private moral transgression but as invitations to di-
vine disfavor. Cicero implies that Verres is an elected ofﬁcial who is out of har-
mony with the gods and who therefore poses a threat to the state. These themes
were probably conventional ones in the rhetoric of the time, since they could
arouse indignation in the audience and amplify the particulars of the case to issues
of public concern. But it would seem that Verres’ sacrilegious theft of consecrated
images gave Cicero especially wide scope for developing the theme of religious vi-
olations, and he did this, presumably, because he knew it would be effective on his
audience. Thus Cicero’s readership was presumed to regard statuary and art as hav-
ing a religious context and to feel strong indignation at Verres’ plundering. As Cic-
ero was well aware, a captured work of art potentially had both cultural and po-
litical authority, but a stolen work of art was stolen property.

One further challenge Cicero faced was to make Verres’ deeds in Sicily seem
relevant and important to his audience in Rome, and he does this by constant ref-
erence to buildings and monuments in Rome. He dwells at length on one episode
concerning a gold, jeweled candelabrum owned by the elder son of Antiochus Eu-
sebes of Syria, who had stopped in Sicily on his way home from Rome, had been
entertained by Verres, and had invited him to dinner in return. After that occasion
Verres “borrowed” all the prince’s gold plate, which of course he never returned.
When Verres found out about the candelabrum, he demanded it. Antiochus, how-
ever, intended the piece as a dedication to Jupiter in the new Temple of Jupiter
Optimus Maximus, then under reconstruction by Quintus Lutatius Catulus, a
member of the present jury. The prince even had to appeal to Roman citizens in
Syracuse for their assistance, declaring that the candelabrum was dedicated to
Jupiter. Here is a sample of Cicero’s presentation (Verrines 2.4.32):

But I would ask all the members of this court if they can conceive any
action more outrageous and more intolerable than this one. Shall Verres
include in his furniture this lamp-stand, wrought in gold and precious
stones, that belongs to Jupiter himself ? Its resplendent brightness should
have illuminated Almighty Jupiter’s temple: shall it stand in Verres’ private
house, amid the orgies already alight with the ﬂames of his debaucheries and
wickedness? In the home of that foul proﬂigate, shall the adornments of the
Capitol be set among all those others that came to him from Chelidon
[“Swallow,”Verres’s mistress]?11

In this case, the violation was a private appropriation of a public, consecrated
(or soon to be consecrated) precious votive offering, but Cicero says Verres also 
requisitioned private, consecrated images, such as those owned by Gaius Heius, a

34  . 

wealthy businessman in Messina. Heius had a private shrine room in his house with
well-known statuary said to be by Praxiteles, Myron, and Polykleitos. One of them
was a famous Eros by Polykleitos that had been borrowed by Gaius Claudius Pul-
cher, a guest-friend of Heius and aedile in Rome in 99 B.C., as a temporary deco-
ration for the Forum on the occasion of games he put on, but of course he then
returned it to Messina. In contrast, Verres carried off nearly all the images belong-
ing to Heius for his private collection, including the consecrated ones.

Just as Verres plundered a private shrine, so too he plundered public temples
and statuary. At Segesta, said to have been founded by Aeneas, says Cicero, there
was an ancient bronze image of Artemis that had been taken to Carthage in an ear-
lier sack of Sicily, but returned to Segesta by Scipio Africanus, who had also re-
stored statues looted by Carthaginians to several other cities in Sicily. In contrast
to the beneﬁcent general who returned previously looted statues to the cities that
cherished them, Verres eventually forced the people of Segesta to relinquish it, and
they did so under great protest and with much lamentation. Workmen had to be
hired from Lilybaeum for the actual removal, since the Segestans refused the sac-
rilege: their contract was read aloud as part of the evidence against Verres. (Ver-
rines 2.4.34)

In his description of Verres’ activities at Syracuse, Cicero constantly makes ref-
erence to the more generous actions of Marcellus, the Roman conqueror of Syra-
cuse, thereby setting up an ideal portrait of the humane conqueror.12 The Temple
of Athena, built after the Syracusan victory over Carthaginians at Himera in 479
B.C. and now the Duomo, had folding chryselephantine doors, with scenes in re-
lief made of ivory with nails covered in gold, left untouched by Marcellus. Cicero
says they were the most beautiful doors in existence, and they had been eloquently
described by many Greek writers. Verres wrenched the panels off the doors and
also stripped the interior of the temple of twenty-eight old historical paintings
representing kings of Sicily and dedicated to Athena, which left the walls bare and
unsightly. Verres took so much from all the sanctuaries in Syracuse, says Cicero,
that now the guides had to reverse their normal procedure, and tell not about what
is there but about what was taken away. Cicero continues: 

This temple, which Marcellus did not touch, which he left full of precious
things, has been so thoroughly stripped and plundered by Verres that it
looks as if it had been ravaged not by an enemy in war-time, who would
after all have kept some respect for religion and for established custom, but
by a set of piratical savages. . . . [Marcellus] would not have one god robbed
even to enrich another: [Verres] transferred the treasures of the pure virgin
Minerva to a house presided over by harlots. (Verrines, 2.4.55)

The  fourth  of the  ﬁve  speeches  is  devoted  to Verres’ preoccupation  with
works of art and his despoliation of temples, agoras, and even private homes in his

’     35

search for whatever art existed in Sicily. By publishing the speeches with forceful
and much-admired prose, Cicero gave authority and weight to the various ideas
about art he articulates. Verres’ activities and Cicero’s characterizations of them
comprise a case history through which we can discern contemporary Roman atti-
tudes about art and the ownership of art. Cicero organized his material according
to appropriate rhetorical categories, and he must have used preexisting ideas about
art and its purposes that would have been understood and appreciated by his au-
dience. When he wrote it was still standard to think of statuary within a religious
context because of the content and purpose of the image; the statue or painting
then could be further evaluated by its age, its artist, and other pedigrees, such as its
history of ownership: this was the beginning of an age of collecting. By far the
most telling aspect of Cicero’s use of art as a topos is that he could deal with it at
such length and could assume his audience was interested in the subject. The
speeches as a whole assume Roman readers who have a ﬁrm, well-developed con-
cept of the purposes of art, who care about it, and who are knowledgeable about
it. While avid appreciation of Greek art among educated Romans was well under-
way as a cultural force in both public and private life, Cicero presents a traditional,
idealistic view of art suitable for public oration.

6     

Here as in other accounts of the despoliation of temples dedicated to the god-
desses Minerva, Diana, or Ceres, Cicero elaborated the theme of Verres’ sexual
transgressions with descriptive language of rape and violation, as Ann Vasaly has
pointed out.13 Verres’ sexual adventures are developed further in the ﬁfth speech, in
which Verres is pictured in a sort of summer camp he set up by the Arethusa foun-
tain, with a good view of the harbor. There in tents he caroused day and night with
the wives of the townsmen of Syracuse, having requisitioned the best food and the
best dishes on the island. Except for his young son, he was the only man at these
parties, according to Cicero. These passages were also very much admired by Quin-
tilian for their rhetorical color and vividness. 

Interwoven with the accounts of major thefts of statuary, paintings, and tem-
ple furnishings are numerous episodes concerning smaller-scale objects with artis-
tic value, including gold and silver vessels, tapestries, bronze furniture, marble fur-
niture, small statuettes, gems, and seal-stones: what used to be called the minor
arts. When it is convenient to his argument, Cicero views such objects as consum-
ables, as the furnishings for private indulgence. He wonders why Verres would
need thirty bronze couches. According to Cicero, once Verres arrived in Sicily it
was standard procedure for him to round up all gold and silver plate from every-
one who owned any. People who tried to hide what they owned would be tracked

36  . 

down by two men from Cibyra in Phrygia, a sculptor and a painter, whom Verres
had hired as his advisors, or “hunting dogs,” as Cicero describes them. In some
cases Verres returned the vessels, but stripped of their decoration. Verres set up a
workshop in the former palace of Hieron II and personally supervised the crafts-
men for eight months (so Cicero alleges) while wearing workman’s clothing. The
details suggest that Verres may have had a genuine interest in craftsmanship, but
Cicero presents this interest, and the description of the clothes, with disdain and
mockery.14

If Verres had a genuine interest in art and a love for ﬁne craftsmanship, we
might wonder, how did he learn about metalwork and statuary? Simply through
experience? Through hired dealers, like the two Cibyratans? We know little about
Verres’ family, other than that his father was a senator who sent his son warnings
about the complaints in Rome about his activities as governor, and that the fam-
ily liked to call attention to a connection with the Metelli and the Cornelii. After
Verres left for exile, we hear nothing of him except the stories about his death.15
Cicero mentions Verres’ house in Rome and cites speciﬁc items there: sacred
statues taken from the Temple of Hera on Samos framed the atrium, and the
house was packed with other items, while many others were loaned out to friends
or given as gifts. The most cited gift is a small sphinx Verres gave to his advocate
Hortensius. The sphinx is mentioned by Pliny, by Quintilian, and twice by Plutarch
and is described as either bronze, ivory, or silver. Hortensius, they say, liked the lit-
tle sphinx so much he carried it around with him. Many centuries later Edmund
Burke would allude rhetorically to a sphinx he imagines in the possession of War-
ren Hastings, whom he was prosecuting for corruption in a trial with speeches
modeled on the trial of Verres.

7    

The vivid stories of Verres’ misdeeds, of which I have mentioned just a few, have
had a considerable impact on modern perceptions of Roman attitudes toward
Greek art. Cicero’s account, together with moralizing commentary after the civil
wars, especially that of Livy, and the much later biographies of Plutarch, have con-
tributed to the modern view of Romans as military conquerors greedy for booty,
who brought home shiploads of statuary, paintings, and tableware from abroad,
little knowing what they had. Recent reevaluations of the evidence for this view
of Roman cultural history point to a much earlier and much smoother Roman re-
ceptivity to Greek culture, a reception that ﬁnds new uses and new purposes for
the potential inherent in Greek artistic expression.16 Moreover recent studies indi-
cate a more complex relationship than simple looting and redecorating: in her
study of Roman copies of Greek statuary, Brunhilde Ridgway states that in the

’     37

Roman period copies were not usually made of consecrated images in major sanc-
tuaries in Greece, and that the repertoire of types represented in copies and vari-
ations of the Roman period is fairly limited, perhaps because of restrictions on ac-
cess to the originals. She also notes that Romans set up as many statues as they
took—or more.17

8      ’  
     

A major issue for Cicero was the question of how art should be used. He plays
upon the implicit dichotomy between public uses for art versus private uses in his
many contrasts between the generosity of generals like Africanus, who restored
statues to Sicily, and Verres, who takes public statues for his own use. The rhetor-
ical theme of good uses of art (public, commemorative, and religious) and bad
uses of art (private, consumptive, and decadent) is more explicit in the Verrines than
anywhere else, until Pliny’s chapters on art in his Natural History. Pliny, a great ad-
mirer of Cicero, refers to Verres speciﬁcally and the Verrines three times, in addition
to borrowing Cicero’s moral themes. 

Cicero’s continual play on the dichotomy between the public and private uses
of art must have been greatly to Pliny’s liking, since the same theme is prominent
in his own work. As recent reassessments of Pliny by Isager and Beagon have
shown, the moralizing tone in Pliny’s writing and the emphasis on luxus and lux-
uria as a major theme should be read within the context of Pliny’s time.18 His book
was dedicated to the emperor Titus, and in an effort to impress the Flavians he set
up a new dichotomy, one between Augustus and Vespasian as good emperors, de-
voted to public welfare, and Marc Antony and Nero as their evil antitheses. Build-
ing on Cicero’s views but taking them even further, Pliny poses further questions,
for now art is to be judged on its purpose: is it merely decorative, valued only for
its rarity or preciousness? Or does it serve some larger didactic purpose or beneﬁt
in accordance with nature? Pliny’s classicizing tendencies arise from his reliance on
earlier written treatises, his choice of well-known examples to illustrate his larger
themes, and his respect for Augustus. The Plinyesque approach had wide author-
ity in the Renaissance, and that authority still continues, since the information in
his account of art, together with its paradigms and assumptions, are still embed-
ded in our present histories of art.

The theme of restoration of statuary by conquering generals is another issue
from the Verrines taken up by later Roman authors. Both Strabo and Pliny point
out several instances when Augustus restored statues, in most cases those said to
have been taken by Marc Antony. Plutarch in his Lives also mentions compassion-
ate returns, some of them quoted from Cicero. Perhaps the most famous restitu-

38  . 

tion in antiquity had been the return to Athens of the famous Tyrannicides, Har-
modius and Aristogeiton, by Alexander the Great after he defeated Darius III. The
pair of statues had been taken by Xerxes during his sack of Athens and had been
put in the Persian palace at Ecbatana. So important for the ﬂedgling democracy
in Athens were the statues that a second pair had been commissioned to replace
the looted pair, and after Alexander returned the ﬁrst pair, visitors to the Athenian
Agora could see both pairs side by side. The return of a signiﬁcant statue became
a shrewd political gesture calculated to soften and ﬂatter the conquered Greeks, at
little cost to Alexander or to Romans. Pausanias, writing in the second century
A.C., includes this earlier example of restitution in his apologia for the plundering
of the temple at Tegea by Augustus. 

A preserved inscription from Athens profusely thanks the emperor Claudius
for returning seven statues that had been taken by Caligula.19 Caligula is said to
have sent agents to Olympia to seize the famous chryselephantine Zeus—long re-
garded as one of the seven wonders of the world—but when the men approached
the statue in the Temple, the statue roared with laughter and the men ﬂed, terriﬁed.
The statue was left intact for several more centuries. Nero too is said to have taken
six hundred statues from Delphi and many others from Olympia, yet there was still
an enormous number left for Pausanias to describe a century later. With the ex-
ceptions of Caligula and Nero, most Roman emperors desisted from further gath-
ering up of originals, perhaps because the true center of art had naturally moved
to Rome, and some, like Hadrian, made great donations and building projects
throughout the empire. Not until Constantine is spoliation of ancient statuary
carried out again on a large scale: Constantine was eager to make his new city Con-
stantinople the peer of Rome in its decoration and embellishment. The acquisition
of military booty (land, people as chattel, money, and bullion, etc.) continued
apace.

9 ’ VERRINES     

In the postantique periods Cicero’s speeches against Verres were never lost, but
they were not widely available until the sixteenth century, when copies were ea-
gerly circulated because once again they were especially admired for the superb
rhetoric.20 School texts at least as early as the eleventh century included tracts from
Cicero, but they were from essays such as De ofﬁciis, De senectute, or De amicitia, not
the speeches. The ﬁrst explicitly art-historical use of the Verrines was made by a
Dominican friar from Palermo, Tomaso Fazello, who wrote the ﬁrst topographical
commentary on Sicily (De rebus siculis, Palermo, 1558). Fazello had walked the whole
island four times, and his work relies on Cicero for many identiﬁcations and his-
torical facts. Fazello’s publication was followed by P. Cluverius’s magisterial work

’     39

of topography, Sicilia antiqua (1619), which also heavily uses Cicero’s Verrines and
many other ancient authors. These two authoritative texts guaranteed that subse-
quent accounts of travels in Sicily made by French, German, and British travelers
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries would rely not only on them but
also on Cicero.21 The travelers’ accounts in turn won wide popularity, and hence
Cicero’s account of Verres’s misdeeds again acquired a speciﬁc, now familiar con-
text—Sicily—and a large readership.

The juicy rhetoric, the colorful characters, the details about Sicily, and the dis-
cussion of Greek art have made the speeches against Verres a pleasure to read for
audiences throughout many centuries. In the early modern period, however, they
began to take on a new political importance because of the theme of ownership of
art, and emerging ideas about articulating and adjudicating ownership. In the 1620s
Hugo Grotius was hired by a shipping company to compose a treatise on the legal
right to prizes. A Mennonite member of the company had questioned its ethical
and legal right to seize a ship in the Indian Ocean that had belonged to Portugal.
Grotius was extraordinarily well read in Hebrew, Greek, and Roman authors and
wrote the treatise defending the right to seize the ship and articulating the right of
the conqueror to portable goods. Many of Cicero’s essays and speeches are quoted
in support of Grotius’s arguments, including the Verrines. The treatise on ships as
prizes, not published separately until 1868 when it was discovered by a book dealer
in Amsterdam, was used by Grotius as the centerpiece for his more famous work
on international rights on the sea and in time of war (De iure belli ac pacis [1625]).22
While Grotius was establishing himself as a lawyer, the ﬁrst of two especially
egregious instances of war conducted solely for acquiring artistic and cultural
property was being carried out. In 1623 the famous Palatine library of Heidelberg
was packed up into 196 cases and carried by mules to Italy, where it became part
of the papal collection under Pope Gregory XV. Each mule wore a silver label that
read fero bibliothecam Principis Palatini.23 Not long thereafter, the daughter and succes-
sor of Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, Queen Christina, was responsible for the
sack of Prague just months before the Peace of Westphalia was to be signed in
1648. She wrote to her cousin, the Swedish commander Charles (X) Gustavus,
about “the archives, library and art chamber, earnestly recommending that they be
got down to the sea and carried here, the sooner the better,” and she added in
French, “you know that these are the only things I truly esteem.”24 She was refer-
ring to the great collection of Rudolf II, which he had taken to Prague where it
had been left even after his death in 1612 because it was regarded as safer from the
Turks  than Vienna. This  extraordinary  collection  included  paintings,  statuary,
gems and medallions, an enormous library of manuscripts and books, and a live
lion. After a life remarkable for its independence of character and disregard for
prevailing norms of behavior, Queen Christina (nickednamed the Hyberborean
Minerva) ended up being buried with the popes under the altar in St. Peter’s in

40  . 

Rome. She and Pope Gregory XV were the last to carry out deliberate, premedi-
tated looting of books, art, and cultural property on a vast scale, and to actually
get away with it.

H. Trevor-Roper comments in his Neurath lecture that in the ﬁrst half of the
seventeenth century, art had a prestige and aura so strong that enemy cities or dy-
nasties sought to “destroy the aura by appropriating it, just like cannibals who by
eating parts of their enemies think they are acquiring their mana, the intangible
source of their strength.”25 Throughout most of the next century, however, there
were no major, deliberate instances of the looting of art as a part of warfare, until
Napoleon went to Italy. 

In the mid-eighteenth century the idea of treating art, religious, and cultural
property in a separate category during time of war emerges in the writings of Em-
merich de Vattel, the Swiss jurist whose treatises of 1758 were to become the es-
sential foundation for the concept of cultural property. The concept of cultural
property itself is inherently nationalistic, especially as it is used today, and na-
tionalism is intrinsic to the current debate about how historic claims, such as the
location of the Parthenon marbles, ought to be resolved.26 What de Vattel con-
tributed was a new recognition of cultural property as something separate from
land, ships, bullion, commodities, arms, or other portable possessions.27 Against
the background of the Enlightenment and the new views on international law pro-
mulgated by Emmerich de Vattel, Cicero’s ideal portrait of the humane general
whose grand gestures contrasted with an evil greedy collector now took on added
contemporary relevance.

10 ’ VERRINES  
-- 

In England the Verrines were brought to constant public attention during the years
1788– 1793. During the prosecution for extortion of Warren Hastings, the ﬁrst
governor-general of India, Edmund Burke based his rhetoric on Cicero’s in the
Verrines, making use of rhetorical tropes and ﬂourishes, as well as speciﬁc and con-
stant comparisons between Verres as governor of Sicily and Hastings as governor
of India.28 On June 16, 1794, he said as follows:

We have all in our early education read the Verronean [sic] orations. We read
them not merely to instruct us, as they ought to do, in the principles of
eloquence, to instruct us in the manners, customs and Laws of the ancient
Romans, of which they are an abundant repository, but we read them for
another motive for which the great Author published them, namely that he
should leave to the world and the latest posterity a monument by which it
should be shewn what course a great public Accuser in a great cause ought

’     41

to follow, and as connected with it, is what course Judges ought to pursue in
such a cause. In these orations you see almost every instance of rapacity and
peculation which we charge upon Mr. Hastings.29

It may be argued that for this tactic to be effective the audience must have al-
ready had great familiarity with the texts of Cicero. In fact, the Verrines were once
again widely read in England as models of rhetoric, just as the speeches of Burke
himself would be read by coming generations, whether their interest was in law, or-
atory, or India. A newspaper in London carried a series of articles dissecting Cic-
ero’s case against Verres.30

With these recent events as background Lord Byron could campaign through
poetry and commentary in the early 1800s against the despoliation of the Parthenon
by Lord Elgin. Lord Byron refers to Lusieri, Elgin’s agent in Athens, as his “Finder,”
an allusion to the Cibyratan  “hunting dogs” hired by Verres. Again and again,
through multiple editions of his poetry and commentary, Byron slams Elgin for
raping Athens of the Parthenon sculptures, while pointing to his ofﬁcial role as am-
bassador to Constantinople as a mark of shameful British misadministration. The
parallel with Verres was telling, and Byron succeeded so well in stirring public
opinion that Parliament and the British Museum very nearly refused to buy the
sculptures from Lord Elgin.31

11  ,   ()
  

This familiar story is worth summarizing here, since those bravely opposed to
Napoleon’s actions relied in part on Cicero’s Verrines for their argumentation. On
May 18, 1796, Napoleon announced a treaty with the Duke of Parma that included
stipulations that twenty paintings should be handed over. This was the start of the
extensive, systematic looting of the Italian peninsula, under a thin guise of a se-
ries of unequal treaties.32 Napoleon planned to build a national museum in Paris
that he would ﬁll with the best art of Europe and that would make Paris the cen-
ter of art. (In this plan he anticipated Hitler’s and Stalin’s similar plans for muse-
ums in Austria and Russia.) Napoleon’s soldiers went into towns and ripped paint-
ings out of churches, emptied private collections, and shipped what they did not
destroy back to Paris. Napoleon wanted to take Trajan’s Column from Rome, but
his engineers advised him that it could not be moved without destroying it. The
papal  collection  was  the  next  favored  target,  and  when  those  items  arrived  in
France it was decided that they should be carried into Paris in a triumphal pro-
cession, modeled on those described by Roman authors. The bronze horses of San
Marco taken from Venice were prominently featured. They had been taken by
Constantine to Constantinople, perhaps from Delphi, and from there in the pos-

42  . 

session of the Turks by Venetians to Venice, and now by Napoleon to Paris. Paris
was now to be the new Rome, where cultural and political authority would join
again.33 There were triumphal chariots, and banners around the crates that read,
“Greece relinquished them, Rome lost them, their fate has changed twice, it will
never change again.”34

Napoleon’s systematic despoliation of Italy was severely criticized by the artist
and architectural theorist Quatremère de Quincy, who branded Napoleon as a Ver-
res in numerous essays published in France. In his open letters (published 1796)
to General Miranda, a revolutionary ﬁgure from South America, Quatremère em-
phasizes the contrast with those Roman generals, noted by Cicero, who repatriated
statuary, using Ciceronian rhetoric as well as several quotations from the Verrines.35
Quatremère believed that the best art had a universal quality and therefore could
not be possessed but ought to be held in the original context in which it was nur-
tured.36 The rhetoric and discussion of ethics did stir some public opinion against
Napoleon’s actions, and a petition was signed by ﬁfty artists calling for the looting
to stop, but Napoleon’s looting continued nonetheless, throughout the Italian
peninsula. From Rome, the Laocoön, the Apollo Belvedere, the Dying Gaul, and
a very large portion of the papal collection of statuary, paintings, and manuscripts
were carried off to Paris. 

The pivotal event that overturned Roman legal precedents and moved the is-
sues beyond even Ciceronian idealism was the restitution of Napoleon’s stolen loot
after Waterloo, under the aegis of the Duke of Wellington. With the specter of the
Roman collector Verres raised and hovering, after Waterloo the Duke and Lord
Castlereagh resisted hints from the Prince Regent that the Laocoön would make
a ﬁne addition to the British royal collections, and they eventually persuaded him
that the higher course would be to pay for the restitution of the papal collection
to Rome. Pius VII had sent Antonio Canova to Paris to negotiate for the return
of Italian art to Italy, and Canova’s role in this was a signiﬁcant one, as Christopher
Johns has noted in his recent book evaluating Canova’s political and artistic ca-
reer.37 The Prussians simply took back their stolen possessions by force, and the
Belgians did much the same, with the Duke’s support. The issue of Italian posses-
sions was more delicate, since the Italians were not among the allies who defeated
Napoleon at Waterloo. The Duke took the view that the looted art might serve as
a focal point for French military spirit yet again, and in any case it was obvious to
all that art belonged in its proper context. That had been Quatremère’s primary ar-
gument (and Polybius’s long before him). The Duke wrote a now famous letter on
this topic to Lord Castlereagh, from which I quote these paragraphs:

The feeling of the people of France upon this subject must be one of
national vanity only. It must be a desire to retain these specimens of the arts,
not because Paris is the ﬁttest depository for them, as, upon that subject,
artists, connoisseurs, and all who have written upon it, agree that the whole

’     43

ought to be removed to their ancient seat, but because they were obtained by
military concessions, of which they are the trophies. 

The same feelings which induce the people of France to wish to retain

the pictures and statues of other nations would naturally induce other
nations to wish, now that success is on their side, that the property should
be returned to their rightful owners, and the Allied Sovereigns must feel a
desire to gratify them. 

It is, besides, on many accounts, desirable, as well for their own

happiness as for that of the world, that the people of France, if they do not
already feel that Europe is too strong for them, should be made sensible of
it; and that, whatever may be the extent, at any time, of their momentary
and partial success against any one, or any number of individual powers in
Europe, the day of retribution must come.38

The bronze horses of San Marco had to be removed under guard, so ferocious
was the opposition of the local French people. Troops also had to accompany
Canova when he went to the Louvre to oversee the packing of the Pope’s collec-
tion. Newspaper and eyewitness accounts describe the histrionic display of grief
they felt over the loss of certain items, including ladies weeping over the Apollo
Belvedere. French complaints in French newspapers were answered by British re-
torts that if the Duke were to behave like Napoleon, the British and their allies
would be scouring not just Paris but the whole of France, city and village, to seize
whatever art they might ﬁnd.39

This was the ﬁrst instance of major, large-scale repatriation of art. The return
of art to Italy rested almost entirely on the authority of the Duke, an authority
won not only in the Peninsular campaigns and at Waterloo, but also in diplomatic
and political circles. The repatriation after Waterloo, of course, is a historic prece-
dent, but it was enacted under a combination of diplomacy and force. Much
archival work has been done to account for the losses and repatriation, although
apparently there are still many documents unpublished and unstudied. The latest
tallies, however, show that about 55 percent of what was taken from Italy was re-
turned, while the rest had been sent out earlier to provincial towns in France where
they could not be easily gathered by the victorious allies.40

It should be noted, too, that the Duke’s personal behavior was consistent with
his public stance: much of the trove of art in Apsley House today was found by
British soldiers abandoned on the battleﬁeld of Vittoria in Spain, from which
Napoleon’s brother Joseph, designated King of Spain, had run away, leaving be-
hind his own Spanish loot, including over two hundred paintings from Spanish
royal collections, a huge number of carriages, and a large party of his courtesans.
When Ferdinand was restored to the Spanish throne, the Duke offered to return
all the art in his personal possession, but the grateful Ferdinand insisted that he
keep it.41

44  . 

Had the Duke actually ever read Cicero’s Verrines in his youth or later? It seems
likely that he would have read extracts at Eton, even as an indifferent student. Cer-
tainly he would have been familiar with the story from the extensive discussion of
the case in British politics, the trial of Hastings, Byron’s poetry and commentary,
and current events in France. What we do have preserved is a bill of purchase for
the future Duke’s library that he took with him on the long voyage to India in the
late 1790s. Besides many volumes on military history and tactics, he had bought
numerous books on India, the history of India, and the recent trial of Warren
Hastings. Among ancient authors he had Caesar’s Gallic Wars, which we know he
read, because in later life he spoke several times about how valuable it had been to
him in the Peninsula, not only for tactics but also for crossing rivers and building
bridges in Portugal. He also had twelve volumes of Plutarch’s Lives, which would
have included the lives of Marcellus and Cicero, where the case of Verres is de-
scribed brieﬂy.42 But I very much doubt that Cicero or any other author was in the
Duke’s mind in the autumn of 1815—he had an enormous amount to settle, he
had to make decisions quickly, and on the issue of repatriation of art he surely fol-
lowed his own instincts as a well-read eighteenth century “gentleman.”

12   

Among those who survived the Waterloo campaign was a brilliant, idealistic young
Prussian, Francis Lieber, who eventually emigrated to the United States. After
earning several higher degrees in Classics and a visit to Greece to help in the Greek
War of Independence, he then studied Roman history in Rome with the dis-
tinguished historian Ronald Niebuhr when Niebuhr was the Prussian ambassador
to Rome.43 In the United States, Lieber became a historian and prominent legal
scholar and was asked by President Lincoln to write a legal code for use by Union
soldiers in 1863. This Lieber Code, as it is now known, ﬁrst recognized cultural
property as a special protected category in war.44 It has been the basis for all sub-
sequent international agreements on the topic, including the Hague Convention of
1954. Rather than Roman legal precedents, the idealized view of Roman ethics
about the acquisition of art as presented by Cicero had become a part of the foun-
dation for our present views on cultural property. By delineating the dichotomy
between public and private art, by evoking sentiment about the restoration of stat-
uary by conquering generals, and by exhorting his readers on the moral implica-
tions of the use of art, Cicero was responsible for setting the terms of our ongo-
ing discussion about the ownership of art.

’     45



1. For a convenient collection of essays on the development of views and legislation about cul-
tural property, see John Henry Merryman and Albert E. Elsen, Law, Ethics, and the Visual Arts (3d
ed., Kluwer Law International, London and Boston 1998); John Henry Merryman, Thinking
About the Elgin Marbles: Critical Essays on Cultural Property, Art and Law (Kluwer Law International,
the Hague and London 2000); Jeanette Greenﬁeld, The Spoils of War, in The Spoils of War. World
War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property 34, 34– 38 (Elizabeth
Simpson ed., Harry N. Abrams, New York 1997).
2. The most complete discussion of the trial and speeches is still that of F. Cowles, Gaius Ver-
res; an Historical Study (Cornell Studies in Classical Philology, Ithaca, 1917). Various historical as-
pects of the speeches have been discussed more recently, e.g., P. A. Brunt, Patronage and Politics
in the ‘Verrines,’ 10 Chiron 273, 273– 89 (1980); A. Leen, Cicero and the Rhetoric of Art, 112
American Journal of Philology 229, 229– 45 (1991); Ann Vasaly, Representation, Images of the World in Cic-
eronian Oratory (University of California, Berkeley and Los Angeles 1993). A book-length study
of the Verrines and their inﬂuence is in preparation by the author.
3. M. Alexander argues that Hortensius did in fact give and publish a speech in defense of Ver-
res: Michael Alexander, Hortensius’ Speech in Defense of Verres, 30 Phoenix 46, 46– 53 (1976). 
4. The topics of “publication,” readership, and literacy have been intensely studied; for a gen-
eral account, see E. J. Kenney and W. V. Clausen eds., 2 Cambridge History of Classical Literature,
Latin Literature (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1982); for more recent views, Thomas
Habinek, The Politics of Latin Literature: Writing, Identity and Empire in Ancient Rome (Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton 1998); J. P. Small, Wax Tablets of the Mind, Cognitive Studies of Memory and Lit-
eracy in Classical Antiquity (Routledge, London and New York 1997).
5. One of the earliest fragments of literary papyrus found in Egypt is a section from the Ver-
rines, II.2, 3– 4, dated to 20 B.C.: Robert Cavenaile, Corpus Papyrorum Latinarum 70– 71, no. 20 (O.
Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden 1958). Cavenaile notes that studious youth in Egypt demanded mod-
els for oratory; some later papyrus fragments of the Verrines have interlinear translations in
Greek.
6. For antecedents and customs in the Greek world, W. Kendrick Pritchett, 1 The Greek State at
War 53– 100 (University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles 1971); 5 The Greek State at
War 68– 541 (University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles 1991).
7. On spolia and the legal status of booty, see J. Bradford Churchill, Ex qua quod vellent fac-
erent: Roman Magistrates’ Authority over Praeda and Manubiae, 129 Transactions of the American
Philological Association 85, 85– 116 (1999); E.M. Orlin, Temples, Religion and Politics in the Roman Repub-
lic (E. J. Brill, Leiden and New York 1997); I. Shatzman, The Roman General’s Authority Over
Booty, 21 Historia 177, 177– 205 (1972); Adam Ziolkowski, Urbs direpta, or How the Romans
Sacked Cities, in War and Society in the Roman World 69, 69– 91 (J. Rich and G. Shipley eds., Rout-
ledge, London 1993). 
8. Polybius, The Histories (9.10) 25– 29 (W. R. Paton trans., Loeb ed., Harvard University Press,
London and New York 1927). The passage preceding the one quoted, with reasons for plun-
dering Syracuse, does not survive in the manuscript.
9. This point is discussed thoroughly by Dale Kinney in an essay about art historians’ use of
the term “spolia” to designate the later reuse of earlier art in monuments such as the Arch of

46  . 

Constantine: Dale Kinney, Rape or Restitution of the Past? Interpreting Spolia, The Art of In-
terpreting 53, 53– 67, 9 Papers in Art History from the Pennsylvania State University (Susan C. Scott ed.,
Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park, 1995). Cicero also expands on Polybius’s
dichotomy between public and private display, discussed further below. In the Republican pe-
riod there was a longstanding tradition of actual spolia (in the sense of arms and armor taken
from the enemy) being put on display in the house of the victorious general: Elizabeth Raw-
son, The Antiquarian Tradition: Spoils and Representations of Foreign Armour, Staat und
Staatlichkeit in der früen römischen Republik, Akten eines Symposiums 12.–15. Juli 1988, Frei Universität Berlin
157, 157– 73 (Walter Eder ed., Steiner, Stuttgart 1990); reprinted in Roman Culture and Society
582– 98 (Oxford University Press, Oxford, U.K. 1991).
10. For Augustus’s conﬁscations and restitutions, see G.W. Bowersock, Augustus and the Greek
World 86– 87 (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1965). Augustus himself states in the Res Gestae
(24), “After my victory, I replaced in the temples of all the cities of the province of Asia the
ornaments which my late adversary [Marc Antony], after despoiling the temples, had taken
into his private possession.” P. A. Brunt and J. M. Moore trans., Res Gestae Divi Augusti, The
Achievements of the Divine Augustus 31 (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1967). 
11. This and other quotations from the Verrines herein from L. H. G. Greenwood trans., Cicero,
The Verrine Orations 2 vols. (Loeb ed., Harvard University Press, Cambridge and London 1959).
12. Cicero states elsewhere (De re pub. 1.21f.) that the only item Marcellus kept for himself was
the planetarium formerly owned by Archimedes.
13. Vasaly, supra note 2, at 122– 24.
14. Cicero comments as follows: “[Verres assembled his craftsmen] and gave them enough work
to keep them busy for eight months without a break, though every vessel they produced was
made of gold. The ornamental work that he had torn from dishes and censers he now pro-
ceeded to attach so ingeniously to the outside of the golden cups, and so cleverly to the inside
of the golden basins, that anyone would have supposed them designed for the purpose; while
our governor himself, who tells us that it was his own watchful attention that kept Sicily at
peace, used to sit in this workshop for most of the day, wearing a gray tunic and a Greek man-
tle.” (Verrines, 2.4.24) 
15. Pliny, NH 34.6: “Of the bronze which was renowned in early days, the Corinthian is the
most highly praised. This is a compound that was produced by accident, when Corinth was
burned at the time of its capture; and there has been a wonderful mania among many people
for possessing this metal—in fact it is recorded that Verres, whose conviction Marcus Cicero
had procured, was, together with Cicero, proscribed by Antony for no other reason than be-
cause he had refused to give up to Antony some pieces of Corinthian ware. To me the major-
ity of these collectors seem only to make a pretense of being connoisseurs, so as to separate
themselves from the multitude, and this I will brieﬂy show” (H. Rackam trans., Loeb ed., Har-
vard University Press, Cambridge and London 1952). Verres’s death is also noted by Seneca
(Suas. 6.24). 
16. Recent work includes literary, historical, and art-historical revisions: e.g., Dennis Feeny, Lit-
erature and Religion at Rome: Cultures, Contexts, and Beliefs (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
1998); Erich Gruen, Culture and National Identity in Republican Rome (Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, 1992), and Studies in Greek Culture and Roman Policy (University of California Press, Berke-
ley and Los Angeles 1990); Miranda Marvin, Roman Sculptural Reproductions or Polykleitos:

’     47

The Sequel, Sculpture and Its Reproductions 7, 7– 28 (A. Hughes and E. Ranfft eds., Reaktion
Books, London 1997), and Copying in Roman Sculpture: the Replica Series, Retaining the Orig-
inal. Multiple Originals, Copies, and Reproductions, 20 Studies in the History of Art 29, 29– 45 (Washing-
ton D.C., 1989), reprinted in Roman Art in Context 161, 161– 88 (E. D’Ambra, ed., Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 1993); B. S. Ridgway, Roman Copies of Greek Sculpture: The Problem of the Orig-
inals (University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 1984).
17. Ridgway, supra note 16, at 10– 11.
18. J. Isager, Pliny on Art and Society (Routledge, London and New York 1991); Mary Beagon,
Roman Nature, the Thought of Pliny the Elder (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1992); Andrew Wal-
lace-Hadrill, Pliny the Elder and Man’s Unnatural History, 37 Greece & Rome 80, 80– 96 (1990). 
19. I.G. II2 5173– 79, discussed by Michael Hoff, The So-called Agoranomion and the Imperial
Cult in Julio-Claudian Athens, Archaeologischer Anzeiger 93, 116 (1994), with references to addi-
tional fragments of the same inscriptions in note 126 on p. 116; Pausanias (9.27.3) and Dio Cas-
sius (60.6.8) also mention that Claudius returned to Greek cities statues that had been taken by
Caligula, only to have them taken away again by Nero.
20. L. D. Reynolds, Texts and Transmission 68– 73 (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1983).
21. For discussion of these early authors and travelers’ accounts, see Arnaldo Momigliano, La
riscoperta della Sicilia antica da T. Fazello a P. Orsi, 1, 3 La Sicilia Antica 767, 767– 777 (Emilio
Gabba and Georges Vallet eds., Naples 1980); Edward Chaney, The Evolution of the Grand Tour,
Anglo-Italian Cultural Relations since the Renaissance 1– 40 (Frank Cass, London and Portland 1998).
22. Hugo Grotius, De iure praedae commentarius [1604], Classics of International Law (James. B. Scott
ed., Gwladys L. Williams trans., Oceana, New York 1964); Edward Dumbauld, The Life and Legal
Writings of Hugo Grotius (University of Oklahoma Press, Norman 1969); Hedley Bull et al. eds.,
Hugo Grotius and International Relations (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1990); Stephen Buckle,
Natural Law and the Theory of Property: Grotius to Hume (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1991).
23. Brief accounts by Hugh Trevor-Roper, The Plunder of the Arts in the Seventeenth Century 22– 27
(Thames and Hudson, London 1970); preface to an exhibition catalogue, Walter Berschin, Die
Palatina in der Vaticana. Eine deutsche Bibilothek in Rom 7– 14 (Belser, Stuttgart and Zürich 1992), with
superb illustrations.
24. Quoted in Christina, Queen of Sweden; a Personality in European Civilisation, the Council of Eu-
rope’s eleventh exhibition [June 29–Oct. 16, 1966] 424– 25 (Per Bjurström comp. and Patrick
Hort and Reger Tanner trans., Egnellska Boktryckeriet, Stockholm 1966); summary in H.
Trevor-Roper, supra note 23, at 40– 50; useful discussion in Marie-Louise Rodén, ed., Politics and
Culture in the Age of Christina, Suecoromana 4 (Svenska institutet i Rom, Stockholm 1997).
25. Trevor-Roper, supra note 23, at 7.
26. This point is discussed in detail by Merryman, supra note 1, at 66– 91.
27. Emmerich de Vattel, The Law of Nations (Joseph Chitty trans., T. and J.W. Johnson, Philadel-
phia 1852); Frank S. Ruddy, International Law in the Enlightenment: The Background of Emmerich de Vat-
tel’s Le Droit des Gens (Oceana, Dobbs Ferry 1975).
28. P. J. Marshall ed. The Writings and Speeches of Edmund Burke, Vol. 6: India: The Launching of the Has-
tings Impeachment 28– 30 (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1991); H. V. Cantor, Impeachments of
Verres and Hastings: Cicero and Burke, 9 Classical Journal 199, 199– 211 (1914).

48  . 

29. P. J. Marshall ed., The Writings and Speeches of Edmund Burke, Vol. 7: India: The Hastings Trial
1789 –1794 662– 63 (W. B. Todd textual ed. for writings, Oxford University Press, Oxford
2000).
30. Public Advertiser, 6, 7, 11, 13, 15 February 1788, a ﬁve-part series entitled “View of the Charac-
ter and Conduct of C. Verres, Praetor of Sicily, and Warren Hastings Esq., late Governor Gen-
eral of Bengal, with a parallel between M. Tullius Cicero and the Right Hon. Edmund Burke,”
signed Amicus Curiae: cited in Marshall, supra note 28, at 29.
31. These episodes and the heated debate preliminary to the purchase of the Parthenon marbles
by the British Museum are thoroughly discussed in William St. Clair, Lord Elgin & the Marbles
180– 200, 245– 60 (3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford 1998).
32. The classic account is that of Cecil Gould, Trophy of Conquest, The Musée Napoléon and the Cre-
ation of the Louvre (Faber and Faber, London 1965). For the most recent discussions of the Treaty
of Tolentino  and  its  repercussions:  Ideologie  e  patrimonio  storico-culturale  nell’età  rivoluzionaria  e
napoleonica: a proposito del Trattato di Tolentino. Atti del convengo Tolentino 18 –21 Sept., 1997, Pubblicazioni
degli archivi di Stato 55 (Ufﬁcio centrale per i beni archivistici, Rome 2000). 
33. On the deliberate emulation of antiquity, see Harold T. Parker, The Cult of Antiquity and the
French Revolutionaries, A Study in the Development of the Revolutionary Spirit (1937; reprinted Octagon
Books, New York 1965).
34. Patricia Mainardi, Assuring the Empire of the Future: the 1798 “Fête de la Liberté,” 48 Art Jour-
nal 155, 155– 63 (1989); Dorothy Mackay Quynn, The Art Conﬁscations of the Napoleonic
Wars, 50 American Historical Review 437, 437– 60 (1945).
35. Quatremère de Quincy, Lettres à Miranda sur le Déplacement des Monuments de l’Art del’Italie (1796;
È. Pommier ed., Éditions Macula, Paris 1989), quotes the Verrines or mentions Verres at 99, 116,
123, 132, in addition to general rhetorical echoes. This edition also includes the petition against
plundering of art, August 16, 1796, with ﬁfty signatories, including sculptors, painters, archi-
tects, and other artists (at 141– 42).
36. Sylvia Lavin, Quatremère de Quincy and the Invention of a Modern Language of Architecture 150– 57
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge 1992).
37. Christopher Johns, Antonio Canova and the Politics of Patronage in Revolutionary and Napoleonic Eu-
rope (University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles 1998); Franca Zuccoli, Le riper-
cussioni del trattato di Tolentino sull’attività diplomatica di Antonio Canova nel 1815 per il re-
cupero delle opere d’arte, Ideologie e patrimonio storico-culturale, supra note 32, at 611– 32.
38. Letter dated September 23, 1815: Lieut. Colonel Gurwood, 12 The Dispatches of Field Marshall
the Duke of Wellington 645– 46 (John Murray, Albemarle Street, London 1838).
39. The reactions are discussed in Quynn, supra note 34, at 451– 58.
40. The most recent research is reported in Ideologie e patrimonio storico-culturale, supra note 32; es-
pecially  useful  is  Donato Tamblé,  Il  ritorno  dei  beni  culturali  dalla  Francia  nello  Stato
pontiﬁcio e l’inizio della politica culturale della Restaurazione nei documenti camerali del-
l’Archivio di Stato di Roma, at 457– 514; and Edouard Pommier, Réﬂexions sur le problème des
restitutions d’oeuvres d’art en 1814– 1815, Dominique-Vivant Denon, L’oeil de Napoléon 254– 57 (Ré-
union des musées nationaux, Paris 1999). The issue of contemporary repatriation has been much
discussed in recent publications. In addition to the books cited supra note 1, a number of per-
spectives are given in (e.g.) as follows: Helen and Albert Borowitz, Pawnshop and Palaces. The Fall

’     49

and Rise of the Campana Art Museum (Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington and London
1991); Jeanette Greenﬁeld, The Return of Cultural Treasures (2nd ed., Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge 1995); David Lowenthal, The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, U.K. 1998); Susan M. Pearce, On Collecting. An investigation into Collect-
ing in the European Tradition (Routledge, London and New York 1995); Colin Renfrew, Loot, Legit-
imacy and Ownership: The Ethical Crisis in Archaeology (Duckworth, London 2000); Joseph L. Sax,
Playing Darts with a Rembrandt: Public and Private Rights in Cultural Treasures (University of Michi-
gan Press, Ann Arbor 1999). 
41. Elizabeth Longford, Wellington, the Years of the Sword 334 (Harper and Row, New York and
Evanston 1969); the circumstances are discussed in detail, with quotations from the corre-
spondence of the Duke and from Spanish ministers in C. M. Kauffmann, Catalogue of Paintings
in the Wellington Museum 5– 15 (Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce, London 1982).
42. Arthur Wellesley’s library for his voyage to India is discussed by Philip Guedalla, The Duke
54– 65 (1931; reprinted Wordsworth Editions, Hertfordshire 1997). 
43. Biographical details in Frank Freidel, Francis Lieber, Nineteenth-Century Liberal (1947; reprinted
P. Smith, Glouster, Mass. 1968).
44. Instructions for the Government of Armies of the United States in the Field, prepared by
Francis Lieber, promulgated as General Order No. 100 by President Lincoln, April 24, 1863.
The relevant sections of the text are printed in Simpson, supra note 1, at 272– 73, from Leon
Friedman ed., 1 The Law of War: A Documentary History 158 (Random House, New York 1972).


