 (2012) 19:97–118. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2012 Protection of Cultural Goods—
Economics of Identity
Marianna Bicskei*

Kilian Bizer

Zulia Gubaydullina

Abstract: This article addresses the current international debate on the
protection of cultural goods. Whereas some groups (such as indigenous
peoples) are arguing for the creation of cultural property rights analogous to
classic intellectual property rights such as patent and copyright, most
industrialized countries advocate to keep cultural goods within the public
domain. In this article, we develop an economic perspective based on identity
and clarify the question of which cultural goods should be protected, regulated,
or left in the public domain. We conclude that protection based on the concept
of identity is required for a very limited scope of cultural goods.

INTRODUCTION

In the Intergovernmental Committee on Traditional Knowledge, Genetic Re-
sources and Traditional Cultural Expressions of the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO-IGC), nations from all parts of the world are discussing

*University of Göttingen, Economic Policy and SME Research, Platz der Göttinger Sieben 3, 37073
Göttingen, Germany. Email: Marianna.Bicskei@wiwi.uni-goettingen.de

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This research is part of the Interdisciplinary Research Group on Cultural
Property funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). We gratefully acknowledge the con-
structive comments by two anonymous referees, the editor Alexander Bauer, participants at the 2010
ACEI conference in Copenhagen, the Società conference at the University of Vienna, and the Inter-
national Symposium on Cultural Property in Göttingen. We are also grateful for many helpful dis-
cussions and comments by Regina Bendix, Ejan Mackaay, Dorothy Noyes, Rosemary J. Coombe, and
the Interdisciplinary Cultural Property Research Group.

97

98

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

whether to provide more protection for cultural goods. In the Convention
on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, the
United Nations undertook “to protect and promote the diversity of cultural
expressions, . . . and to give recognition to the distinctive nature of cultural ac-
tivities, goods and services as vehicles of identity, values and meaning.”1 More-
over, the protection of culture is part of the international agenda in different
aspects and constellations. How can this be interpreted from an economic point
of view?

Many cultural expressions, such as sacred rituals or sand paintings, play an im-
portant role in the identity of certain groups and should be protected from mis-
appropriation and misuse. Such cultural practices might require specific protection
measures.

While some countries would like cultural goods to receive more protection, other
countries argue that cultural goods belong to the public domain. The latter argue
that most, if not all, cultural goods should be available for everybody as long as
standard intellectual property rights are not infringed upon. Take, for example,
yoga as a meditation practice used around the world despite the fact that it orig-
inates in India. Should yoga be reserved for the Indian population only? Should
everybody else be required to apply for a yoga permit or even pay a “yoga dime”
for practicing it?2 As another example, take any language: Should someone willing
to learn to speak it pay an additional charge or ask for permission because the
language “belongs” to another culture?

Of course, many doubt that cultural expressions should be commodified at all.
But in the contemporary world temples as well as their rituals, villages, or tribes
and their celebrations, dances, theatre, or sacred drawings come to the attention
of tourists, designers, and other outsiders and in practice are turned into com-
modities. In the process of commodification certain aspects of the culture may
very well get lost. This loss may form the difference between the original cultural
expression and the commodified one, and can be relevant for the identity of mem-
bers of a specific group. Such loss can take the form of identity loss and thus serve
as a source of justification for protecting cultural goods. We use the phrase cul-
tural goods in what follows to direct our attention toward goods and services de-
rived from culture in the broadest sense. In order to avoid misunderstanding, we
do not use the term goods in any other sense.

In this article we analyze from an economic perspective whether cultural goods
require further protection if we take effects on identity into account. We develop
a framework allowing us to assess different effects on three of the most relevant
groups affected by cultural goods. We distinguish these groups as culture carri-
ers, outsider consumers, and culture reproducers, which are not the same as pro-
ducers of classic goods and services. Such an assessment provides insights into
the regulatory choice problem faced by national legislators as well as the inter-
national community, who intend to identify how much protection of cultural
goods should be targeted in general. According to our analysis of the utility

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

99

of cultural carriers, only cultural goods that are essential to identity and dignity
require additional protection. This is due to the fact that culture reproducers
and outsider consumers negatively affect the identity and thus the dignity of
the culture carriers. In these cases, rights are required to exclude these actors
from consumption and restrict the commodification of these particular cultural
goods.

To investigate this topic, the rest of the article proceeds as follows: The second
section discusses identity as an economic variable, which is said to determine the
valuation of the protection of cultural goods. The third section deals with the util-
ity derived from consuming and reproducing cultural goods. In the fourth and
fifth sections, we address different protection issues regarding cultural goods while
classifying cultural goods according to their direct and indirect effects. In the final
section we arrive at several conclusions.

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS—LITERATURE REVIEW

In drawing on the concept of identity to develop an economic argument about
the protection of cultural goods, we feel it is necessary to analyze identity in an
economic context and incorporate identity into the economic (utility) function.
This is necessary because identity is of high importance in a cultural context. To
understand the behavior of individuals or groups, the impact of others on their
identity must be scrutinized more deeply.

The descriptive literature on identity and its utility relies on the theses of Ak-
erlof and Kranton,3 the most widely accepted account of the relationship between
identity and economic outcomes. These authors suggest that identity might be
recognized as a determinant factor in utility functions. In their model, the utility
function (Uj) consists of three variables.4 The first, identity or self-image (Ij), is
determined by social categories such as gender or occupation as well as their fea-
tures and typical characteristics since members of a given social category or group
are often expected to exhibit specific physical or cultural characteristics and atti-
tudes. The second variable refers to a person’s actions (aj) undertaken to maxi-
mize the person’s own utility while complying with the prescriptions of his social
category. The third identifies the actions of others (a−j), which, combined with
the second variable, have an impact on a person’s consumption of goods and ser-
vices. It is assumed that a particular social category has an impact on a person’s
identity, thereby affecting the person’s so-called identity-related behavior.5 Con-
sequently, identity plays an important role in the utility function because a person’s
own actions affect the person’s utility, which is to some extent based on the ac-
tions’ impact on identity. According to the model of Akerlof and Kranton, identity-
based payoffs can arise from a person’s own actions as well as from those of others.
The result is that the actions of others can affect a person’s utility and identity at
the same time, a finding that needs further investigation.

100

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

In our article, we focus on the changes in utility caused by (other) third parties
not belonging to the particular social category. According to the literature men-
tioned in the preceding paragraph, “those who try to change social categories and
prescriptions may face similar derision because the change may devalue others’
identity.”6 In the model of Akerlof and Kranton there is the possibility for a per-
son to have a limited choice over his or her identity. They argue that without dis-
tinctive characteristics, it is possible to join other social categories, but also that
this possibility is limited with respect to physical appearance or accent. We as-
sume that different cultures, as a kind of social category not only sharing com-
mon characteristics but also constituting a social group,7 comprise individuals
whose common features form a basis for their interaction with one other, and
that these are fundamentally based on cultural goods. The consumption and pro-
duction of cultural goods within a particular culture are based on the choices and
actions of individuals or a group of individuals, which induce changes in their
utility function and thus in their identity. According to this argument, the impact
of cultural-goods-related actions by an outsider to the group on another person’s
group identity deserves further attention. In this context Akerlof and Kranton iden-
tify a loss of identity if somebody violates a person’s internalized values (“pre-
scriptions”). Therefore, these actions of others produce “externalities,” against which
there is no protection. Activities of persons related to cultural goods who are not
members of the particular culture are the basis of our analysis. In our view, these
actions may need to be regulated by institutions such as the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO).

The literature on cultural goods shows a broad scale of approaches mostly
based on international trade. Francois and van Ypersele8 approach the issue of
protecting cultural goods and their impact on welfare from a different perspec-
tive. Their work is based on the different valuation of cultural goods by insiders
(home country) and outsiders (abroad), produced under economies of scale, and
is exemplified by trade in movies. In their example, Hollywood films, which can
unintentionally disturb traditional or indigenous cultures, are valued the same
by both sides (local and foreign people). This means, for instance, that consum-
ers in both the United States and France are willing to pay for consumption of
Hollywood films. In contrast, the valuation of domestically produced films is not
homogeneous between consumers at home and abroad. According to that exam-
ple, not all French consumers prefer French auteur films or are willing to pay a
premium for them.9 In their two-country (United States, France)/three-cultural-
goods (mainstream Hollywood films, French auteur films, U.S. auteur films) model,
they explore whether protection of cultural goods (in this case, auteur films)
could increase welfare for all parties and whether it can be Pareto improving for
all parties if countries introduce a cultural tariff on Hollywood films. If a tariff
or quota is introduced, traditional film production, in which fixed costs are
very high, would not be crowded out by blockbuster producers, whose market
share takes up most of the world. From the perspective of domestic groups in

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

101

both countries, the restriction would imply that the local auteur cinema would
still be available for the local population, which values this good highly. More-
over, consuming locally produced goods is required in order to keep domestic
culture alive. At the same time, export potential is provided, which increases the
well-being of the population. In this article, great importance is attributed to
the valuation of cultural goods. This valuation is fundamental to the different
social groups and must be reflected when investigating the protection of cultural
goods.

Another important contribution to the issue of protecting cultural goods is pro-
vided by Janeba,10 who analyzes the impact of free trade of cultural goods on cul-
tural identity. In his article, cultural goods are defined as goods that interconnect
individual consumption decisions and thus contribute to the formation of a cul-
tural identity. For example, consuming a cultural good could make consumption
more attractive for other consumers. Identity is built if all individuals within the
society consume the same cultural good (a culturally homogeneous good). The
identity function could be described as a network externality. For instance, Ger-
mans drink beer, which is identified as a common tradition in Germany. If every-
body in the society consumes the same good, the loss in identity is zero, but
consumption is influenced by the factors of price and social punishment. This
consumption may change in the case of trade liberalization leading to changes in
the homogeneous consumption behavior of a specific society, therefore causing a
loss of identity. Janeba favors a protectionist approach toward cultural goods based
on welfare analysis both in closed and open economies. Considering one model of
international trade and assuming different technologies and economies of scale,
he deducts inter alia that in the case of cultural homogeneity (homogeneous taste
and consumption of cultural goods), trade cannot have a Pareto-improving effect
on closed economies (autarky). In sum, the model demonstrates that while social
consumption behavior changes due to the imported cultural goods, individuals
consuming the exported good lose out on trade liberalization. Janeba argues that
consumers of cultural goods produced and consumed locally are those that op-
pose trade liberalization the most. He further concludes that globalization has a
negative impact on national culture and individual identities. In order to preserve
a culture, the consumption of locally produced goods must be supported.

The public debate concerns the preservation of culture and cultural identity
through the protection of cultural goods. The economic discussion takes this up
while seeking the utility-providing effect of cultural goods. Against this back-
ground, we focus on the central question: What exactly is it that requires protec-
tion? We answer this question by introducing an economic approach to cultural
goods and their protection. We suggest a set of criteria that help to determine
whether a cultural good should be protected or not. These criteria include con-
siderations of direct effects as well as indirect effects of cultural goods’ consump-
tion. We also distinguish between certain groups affected by the consumption and
reproduction of cultural goods.

102

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

UTILITY FROM CULTURAL GOODS

Culture is a phenomenon that is not easy to define. The United Nations define
culture as “diverse forms across time and space; this diversity is embodied in the
uniqueness and plurality of the identities and cultural expressions of the people
and societies making up humanity.”11 We define culture within the scope of this
article as a phenomenon consisting of different goods (cultural goods) that “are
considered to consist of tangible and intangible items of cultural significance.”12
The specific feature of cultural goods lies above all in the fact that they must be
treated as vectors of identity and not as mere commodities or consumer goods.13
Of course, immaterial cultural goods are more problematic, as most material goods
are already protected by classic property rights, but both intangible and tangible
parts of cultural goods are the subjects of our examination.

For our analysis, we introduce the notions of culture carriers, culture reproduc-
ers and outsider consumers (consumers others than culture carriers). Culture
carriers are defined as the groups or individuals from whom the cultural good
originates. They could also be called insiders, as they belong to the group or
society14 in which a certain cultural good emerges. As they are the holders and
custodians of particular cultural goods, they consequently consist of both pro-
ducers and consumers. They produce cultural goods that they sell as a private
good and/or provide for the public domain. For simplicity of argumentation we
refer to these insider actors as “culture carriers.” As part of the group of outsid-
ers, the so-called outsider consumers and the culture reproducer (reproducer of
cultural goods) are defined as societies, groups, or individuals using the cultural
good but who are entirely disconnected from its emergence. Both groups, insid-
ers and outsiders (see figure 1), draw utility from cultural goods, and both groups
value the cultural good in question positively.

Let us first take a closer look at the utility of culture carriers. To address this we
introduce a “cultural utility function” of culture carriers who share the same cul-
tural identity based on particular cultural goods. We assume that cultural goods

FIGURE 1. Classification of the actors in the categories of insider and outsider.

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

103

provide both direct and indirect utility to culture carriers. The direct part of the
utility includes monetary benefits from cultural goods. These arise when any out-
sider consumer is willing to pay for using a cultural good such as dancing lessons,
a copy of a traditional pattern, music, or a picture of some historical monument
produced by culture carriers. This utility can also be described as “direct consump-
tion benefit” or “direct market benefit.”15 Arguing in this manner, it is clear that if
outsider consumers use a cultural good without paying for it, such as illegally up-
loading copyrighted cultural songs, it has a negative impact on the (direct) utility
of the culture carrier who intended to sell it. In cases in which no income or rev-
enue is generated, culture carriers might face the problem of not being able to
recover the costs invested in the production of that cultural good. In the long run,
this could have a negative effect on the incentives to create cultural goods.16 As a
result, this can imply an overall economic loss. Moreover, if other individuals or
groups other than culture carriers (defined as reproducers of cultural goods) begin
to reproduce the same cultural goods without permission and seize benefits from
them (copying a cultural song and selling it), it reduces the direct part of the util-
ity of the culture carriers even more.17 These factors play a role above all when,
for instance, immaterial property rights are infringed.

In our analysis from the regulatory perspective, the utility of outsider consum-
ers and reproducers also plays an important role and must be considered within
the direct component of the cultural utility function.18 Thus, if the culture carri-
ers’ direct utility decreases but is in turn overcompensated by the utility increase
of the outsiders, it can be overall economically reasonable to allow for outside
consumption. In other words, if the social costs19 restricting the outside consump-
tion of the particular cultural good are greater than the social benefits, the eco-
nomic reasoning is the same as in the case of monopoly regulation: Even if the
monopolist loses his revenues, it makes sense to restrict his actions.

Let us turn our focus to the crucial part of the cultural utility function: the
indirect component. Indirect utility is constituted of different effects, which,
in sum, provide identity for the culture carriers.20 These effects include intrin-
sic values such as option, existence, bequest, prestige and education values.
These are so-called nonmarket, nonuser benefits.21 The utility drawn from iden-
tity defined in this way enters the cultural utility function of the culture carriers.
Identity as part of the utility function was already discussed by Akerlof and
Kranton22 in the labor market context and can also be applied to the cultural
utility function. However, according to Throsby23 it is quite difficult to deter-
mine the value of identity in monetary terms because identity cannot be ex-
changed for other goods. This part of the cultural utility function is the most
complicated one, as it consists of different effects. On the one hand, identity
affects the consumption decisions of individuals and can therefore be seen as a
consumption externality, similar to network externalities.24 Accordingly, it might
simply mean the motivation to engage in and perform common practices or
consume particular cultural goods. Moreover, on the other hand, some cultural

104

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

goods could fundamentally affect the existential identity of a person, his dignity.
Thus, destroying or misusing this kind of cultural good would imply a negative
effect on the person’s identity, thus causing a loss in utility. According to Harri-
son,25 identity-providing symbols (like cultural goods), which refer to all objects
or customs used as signs or representatives of the social (cultural) identity, are
validly authentic if maintained by the owners.26 The same actions by outsiders,
however, are seen as imitations or as misappropriations of characteristics and
qualities of the owner’s group, which can be interpreted as a depreciation or
devaluation of the identity. Consequently, the impact of outsiders, both on direct
and indirect utility of the culture carriers, needs further investigation.

CLASSIFICATION OF CULTURAL GOODS

From an economic point of view, cultural goods can be classified according to the
extent to which outsiders make use of them and in doing so affect the culture
carriers’ utility. Once the cultural utility functions are clearly stated, the question
of protecting cultural goods can now be analyzed with the help of these as well as
their relationships. Based on the described utility effects of cultural goods in sec-
tion 3, it is possible to divide them into different groups depending on the cul-
tural outsiders’ effect on the culture carriers’ utility.

Thus, first with focus on direct utility, it can increase, decrease or remain un-
changed as outsider consumers use cultural goods. Speaking of the indirect part
of the cultural goods’ utility-providing impact, the so-called identity-providing
part, we scrutinize the effect of the cultural consumption by outsiders on indirect
utility. According to that, cultural goods can be divided into three different types:

1. Cultural consumption by outsiders has a positive effect on the utility of cul-
ture carriers: The indirect utility of cultural goods rises with the number of
other users. This type of cultural goods can be identified for example if the
group “owning” this cultural good (culture carrier) is willing to disseminate
it to other individuals, groups, or societies (to outsiders). For example, a lan-
guage spoken by other groups produces network externalities;27 the adop-
tion of a religion by another community ensures comparable values and
norms, and the like. Christianity, which was and is disseminated actively by
missionaries, is an example of such a cultural good from a Christian point of
view.28

2. The utility of cultural goods could also be independent of usage by outsid-
ers. These kinds of cultural goods are rarely found. For example, Buddhism
as a religion or spiritual philosophy is very peaceful. According to the doc-
trine of Buddhists, it is important to find the middle path in themselves and
escape from negative feelings. The aim is to attain nirvana, but this path must
be reached alone. Therefore, the fact that this religion is used by other than

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

105

insider consumers does not have any effect whatsoever on Buddhists’ indi-
rect or direct utility.

3. The utility of cultural goods can diminish as outsider consumers use them.
For example, if sacred rituals are performed by outsiders, they may lose their
meaning for the culture carriers. According to de Beus,29 who investigated
the impact of national identity, it can even influence their feeling of belong-
ing, dignity, and identity. The question of what kinds of cultural goods have
this strong identity or dignity-providing effect cannot be answered without
analyzing particular cases. The secrecy of cultural goods can serve as an in-
dication for this effect: Culture carriers trying to restrict the access of others
(outsider consumers, or groups willing to produce the same cultural good)
to their cultural good (and by no means aiming to sell this good themselves)
could be seen as evidence in favor of protection.30 As “individuals are the
best judges of their own welfare,”31 the effort to keep a cultural good secret
indicates that it must have a large influence on their identity. An example for
such a kind of cultural good is the turtle as a religious symbol of Ganalbingu
people. This was misappropriated by an outsider textile producer which neg-
atively affected the identity of that group.32 Mike Tyson or Robbie Williams
wearing a Maori tattoo33 (moko) exemplify other cases in which outsider
consumption of a particular cultural good negatively affects the indirect util-
ity of culture carriers since ta moko illustrates identity and serves particular
meaning such as recognition of difference by the Maori people.34 Accord-
ingly, outsider consumption or production in the new context change “the
meaning and significance” of these goods.

If we further differentiate between the direct and indirect utility of culture carri-
ers, which can be positively or negatively affected by outsider consumption, we
arrive at the classification presented in figure 2.

The matrix in figure 2 combines the effects of outsiders’ consumption and re-
production on the direct and indirect utility of culture carriers. The effect of cul-
tural consumption or production by outsiders on the direct utility of culture carriers
is shown on the x-axis, while the effects on indirect utility are depicted on the
y-axis.

In the first quadrant (I) there is no need for any regulation, as both direct and
indirect utility of culture carriers are positively affected by cultural outsider con-
sumption. Additional cultural production has the same effect, as it generates ad-
ditional cultural consumption, which again is positive.

An example is language as a part of culture. The culture carriers of a certain
language could be interested in its dissemination and usage, as it facilitates trade
between cultures and offers a possibility of reducing the costs of engaging third
parties.35 A common language is necessary for international/domestic communi-
cation and trade,36 and the importance of it grows with time, so the effects in the
long run as well as in the short run are positive.

106

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

FIGURE 2. Utility effects on the culture carriers’ utility caused by outsiders and the pro-
tection area for cultural goods (shaded).

In the second quadrant (II) the indirect utility is positive, while the direct utility
of culture carriers is negatively affected by cultural outsider consumption. There-
fore, the culture carriers’ direct utility should be considered in comparison to the
utility of outsider consumers and culture reproducers. Furthermore, the long-run
welfare effects of consumption and additional production must be analyzed. In this
part of the analysis, a detailed consideration of the culture carriers’ direct utility, the
outsider consumers’ utility, and the culture reproducers’ utility is necessary. If the
only motivation of the culture carriers seeking protection of cultural goods is to
maintain their monopolistic position regarding the production of cultural goods, it
could be rational to allow other culture reproducers to enter the market and gen-
erate additional benefits for society. However, additional culture reproducers may
increase the supply of cultural goods and achieve a sustained price reduction or may
even destroy the good’s cultural content, thus not implying any additional benefits
for society in the long run. Or, in contrast, additional (re-)production of cultural
goods by outsiders may act as a marketing tool to advertise and increase the value
of the original cultural goods (made by culture carriers), thus creating or broaden-
ing the market for cultural products on the long run.37

Another possibility is that if the utility of outsider consumers exists only if cul-
ture carriers are the producers of a certain cultural good, then there is no need for
regulation, as this feature of the utility function serves as an entry barrier for ad-
ditional culture reproducers. However, the distinguishing character between an orig-
inal or authentic (made by culture carriers) and a perfect copy (produced by an

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

107

outsider) of a cultural good is questionable according to Mas-Colell.38 He argues
that a perfect description of the object is infeasible and, accordingly, that the unique
characteristics of an original are hard to identify. Valuations of the goods are de-
pendent on the intrinsic motivation of both culture carriers and outsiders, but he
argues that the owners are not always interested in preventing the property from
being copied because the spreading of copies can still raise the value of the orig-
inal (as already mentioned here).

In this quadrant, existing legal tools can be useful in solving the problem. For ex-
ample, the system of fair trade ensures that goods from a particular part of the world
that were produced according to the legality of fair trade cannot be produced and
sold by another person who is not involved.39 Moral rights in, for instance, Austra-
lia or the United Kingdom give opportunities to creators to protect their integrity
right and their work’s underlying knowledge and content from infringement.40 This
means that reproduction and alteration of the work is only allowed under the su-
pervision of the author, which arguably prevents misuse and misrepresentation.

The history of origin of the Quileute in America can provide an example for this
quadrant. Due to Stephenie Meyer’s vampire chronicles, this group of people has be-
come very well-known and famous.41 The Twilight story, which is based on the cre-
ation saga of the Quileute, has generated enormous revenues from books, movies,
and other products.42 The Quileute have not profited from these activities as yet, al-
though the core of these products is based on their cultural property. The fame of
the Quileute has encouraged other producers (reproducers) to begin to use the name
Quileute as a symbol for other products such as jewelry or hoodies without the per-
mission of the Quileute. The Quileute are ready to share parts of their culture with
outsiders with the exception of burial grounds and religious ceremonies, according
to their tribal law, which are “sacred and not to be entered.”43 The situation, in which
the Quileute wish to make their certain cultural goods publicly accessible and com-
mercialize it to earn money, means that the influence of outsiders has no identity-
destroying effect. The interest of these people lies above all in benefiting from the
profit earned through their culture. From an identity-economic point of view, ad-
ditional preventive measures are not necessary at this point.

The third quadrant (III) represents the most complicated cases in the analysis.
The consumption and production of cultural goods by outsiders have negative
effect on both direct and indirect utility of culture carriers.

It is very important to distinguish among different effects on indirect utility,
because not every attack on identity immediately equals an attack on the dignity
of a person. In other words, not every kind of cultural consumption and repro-
duction by outsiders that has a negative impact on indirect utility is at the same
time a violation of dignity. For this reason, we separate the effects on indirect util-
ity into two parts, which are divided by the acceptability-line (see figure 2). This
acceptability-line varies from nation to nation (or culture to culture) according to
their respective constitutional norms and the accompanying administration of jus-
tice. This line is a flexible concept; the definition of the exact position and mean-

108

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

ing of this line reflects existing norms in society and could vary in different societies.
It is therefore subject to discussions and judgments of courts of justice in a par-
ticular country. In short, “dignity does not depend on personal favours and occa-
sional balances of power, but on social openness guaranteed by the rule of law,
vigilant public debate, the plurality of associations, and social rights.”44

The self-determination of a cultural group’s own identity in accordance with their
tradition and customs was recognized in the Declaration on the Rights of Indig-
enous Peoples of the United Nations.45 Furthermore, the connection between the
culture and the dignity of the culture carriers was considered. According to this dec-
laration, these groups “have the right on the dignity and diversity of their cultures,
traditions, histories and aspirations.”46 Dignity is a person’s fundamental right. Other
fundamental rights such as privacy or religion are based on the concept of dignity.
In the case when a cultural good is an inseparable component of a culture and the
fundamental identity of the culture carriers is thereby influenced, the protection-
worthiness of that cultural good would be corroborated. The position of the line re-
flecting these identity- and dignity-essential characteristics of the cultural goods is
defined by an acceptance of those involved. Therefore, this line will take other po-
sitions within different cultures and cultural groups. This approach is supported by
the following UN directive concerning Human Rights:“recognizing, respecting, valu-
ing their customs, rules is essential to their identity, dignity.”47 This effect becomes
disastrous below the acceptability-line on the basis of identity in figure 2.

The gray shaded area below the acceptability-line contains those cultural goods
that need protection on the basis of identity. Here, the effect of outsiders on the
identity and the dignity of the culture carriers is so strong that the losses of the
culture carriers cannot be tolerated any more. Therefore, protection is justified, as
in these cases the dignity of a person is endangered.

Let us exemplify this by the original Hopi or Navajo tradition of sweat lodges,
in which a cleansing of body and spirit takes place. According to the traditional
tribal law, it was forbidden to charge any fees for this holy and intimate cere-
mony.48 The mere fact of outsiders consuming and even reproducing this sacral
ritual resulted in an outcry by the indigenous people. Because it concerns a ritual,
the Navajos are offended49 and suffer a loss in their identity if an outsider carries
out the same ritual as a measure of well-being. From the point of view of indig-
enous leaders, “most hallowed ideas and rituals” constitute goods “which cannot
diffuse to others without suffering harm.”50 Therefore, it seems obvious that cul-
tural goods below the acceptability-line in this quadrant are in need of protection.
In cases above the acceptability-line, where the dignity, that is, the fundamental
identity of a person or group, is not affected, an economic analysis can help to
find an optimal solution. Therefore, there are three groups relevant to economic
consideration51—culture carriers, culture reproducers, and outsider consumers.
However, in connection with the direct, economic benefit, the United Nations stress
that the cultural groups should be the beneficiaries of a commercial use of their
cultural goods.52

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

109

The problem could consist in a positive correlation of the outsider consumers’
utility with the importance of the cultural goods for the culture carriers, so that
cultural goods with potential identity-destroying effects could be especially valu-
able to outsider consumers.53 Therefore, it is crucial to distinguish these different
aspects of the cultural utility function of culture carriers. The analysis of our sec-
ond quadrant applies in cases where there is no indication of cultural consump-
tion or additional cultural reproduction by outsiders with an identity-destroying
effect (cases above the acceptability-line). As an example, take the noble stratum
of the Toraja society, marapuan, who are identified by owning a tongkonan, a tra-
ditional Toraja house. The tongkonan is an impressive and complex structure; the
creation of such a building requires skill and vast resources.54 The noble mara-
puan enjoy the privileges of decorating their houses in a special way (with paint-
ings and carvings) and pursuing funeral rituals. The size of the tongkonan and
the quality of its decorations, carvings and paintings displays rank, honor, and
social prestige.55 Large-scale emigration in the 1970s and the resultant remit-
tances sent home changed the social landscape—Toraja families of low status were
now able to build large tongkonans and organize expensive, imposing funeral cer-
emonies (thus acting as additional culture reproducers). These in turn attracted a
growing number of foreign tourists (as outsider consumer). The noble marapuan
are critical of this development and would like to protect their traditional social
position,56 which is closely related to the rights to build tongkonans and organize
imposing funeral rituals. Nevertheless, previous research does not reveal the ex-
tent to which the nobility seeks protection of its privileges.57 The identity-providing
effect is in fact clear, but seems to be rising with the number of outsider consum-
ers. Thus, there is no clear reason to believe that the fundamental part of the group’s
identity or dignity is affected. Therefore, the overall economic effect for the whole
region is higher, if additional culture reproducers enter the market and attract
more tourists. Its distributional consequences for society and the reinvigorating
effect on tradition are additional positive effects of no protection.

In the fourth quadrant (IV) are cases in which outsiders cause positive effects
on the direct part of utility and at the same time induce losses in indirect utility.
Above the acceptability-line as in the third quadrant are cases for which the analy-
sis of the second quadrant should be applied. Below the line an example could be
the case of “selling one’s soul to the devil,”58 which in spite of causing identity-
destroying effects still has some positive effects with respect to payment. In the
story of Timm Thaler or the Sold Laughter59 the youthful protagonist sells his laugh-
ter to an impersonation of the devil and consequentially wins every bet, but soon
discovers the value of his laughter and wants to cancel the transaction. At least as
long as transactions are completely voluntary and do not exploit the situation (the
devil entices a youngster to sell his laughter), such cases in the fourth quadrant
might remain an exception because cultural carriers will weigh the positive direct
effects against the negative identity effects and can decide for themselves. Further
regulation is required only if representation within groups is problematic. Apart

110

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

from that, another example for a good containing a strong identity or dignity char-
acter attached to its culture carriers is to be considered. For example, the peak of
the Kailas Mountain has not been climbed because of its sacredness.60 Neverthe-
less, outsider tourisms would generate revenues for both the culture carriers and
the whole region. On the other hand, climbers or other persons on the top would
destroy the soul and dignity of the culture carriers. In such a scenario a protection-
worthy good exists and requires additional protection measures justified by the
negative impacts on the identity and dignity of the culture carriers.

This classification based on direct and indirect utility effects shows that only
cultural goods of the third and fourth quadrants need protection. Within these
quadrants we have distinguished between cultural goods that influence the fun-
damental identity and thereby dignity of a person or a group, consequently re-
quiring protection, and cultural goods for which a cost-benefit analysis can help
to find an optimal solution (regarding whether consumption or production for
outsiders can be allowed). In these latter cases additional regulation may be nec-
essary to adequately represent the interests of the groups involved.

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

Within the debate around the protection of cultural goods, the most important
arguments are those that analyze, primarily, trade with cultural goods and the
overall economic effects, not the protection worthiness of the cultural goods per
se. However, our approach focuses on the characteristic of cultural goods to
also provide indirect utility based on identity and dignity. Consequently, we as-
certain a protective need first of all only for those cultural goods that are essen-
tial to identity and dignity. We come to this result because we recognize a
connection between the dignity of the person and certain cultural goods. In-
deed, by no means do all cultural goods have a direct influence on the identity
and with it the dignity of individuals. Therefore, only few goods are located below
the acceptability-line of figure 2 for which additional preventive measures are to
be introduced.

Since only a minority of cultural goods require protection, those affecting the

fundamental identity and dignity of persons and groups, some questions arise:

1) How can we determine whether a cultural good possesses a fundamental
identity- or dignity-providing effect, which would justify protection by law?

As far as different cultural goods belonging to different societies or groups are
concerned, no general rule can be applied. The decision of whether a cultural good
has this characteristic or not can only be made in a single case analysis by a court
of law, in which the interests of culture carriers should be combined with opin-
ions of independent experts and other interested groups.

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

111

The definition of what cultural goods are identity-critical can be determined by
the groups themselves. According to the United Nations, cultural groups have the
right to take part in the decision-making processes concerning their rights.61 Ba-
sically, this entails that culture carriers or their representatives must become the
most important actors in the process of assessing and recognizing these cultural
goods. Culture carriers should have “a legitimate interest in exercising a duty of
care or ‘stewardship’ over resources”62 that represents their collective cultural iden-
tity or “peoplehood.” The sacred goods and spiritual elements, which presumably
form the majority of the protection-worthy goods below the acceptability-line,
should stand in the center of these investigations. Examining particular cases for
such protection must take central stage within the decision process. To take the
interest of other parties (outsiders) into account and not to threaten the public
domain unnecessarily by granting additional protection for all cultural goods, the
secrecy and the connected strong values of these goods to the cultural community
must be clearly identifiable. As Carpenter et al.63 suggest, in some cases tribal cus-
tomary law clearly identifies “certain resources as critical to the community and
thereby necessitating human care.” Of course, this is just one possibility for ob-
taining evidence of the need for protection of these particular goods.

Summing up, as stated by Brown,64 there is a need to separate the claims re-
garding economic justice and those regarding respectful treatment of cultural ele-
ments. Therefore, in cases where the objections of culture carriers against outsider
consumption and reproduction of particular goods are not of an economic na-
ture, this could serve as evidence for further investigation of protection-worthiness.

2) If a cultural good does not have any fundamental identity- or dignity-

providing effect, how should the market be regulated?

Cultural goods show quite a few similarities to intellectual property, mostly be-
cause of their immaterial character. However, protecting cultural goods with the
same instruments as intellectual property rights cannot be a suitable mecha-
nism, as criteria of novelty (patents) or individual authorship (copyright) are
not met. Some cultural goods like paintings, sculptures, buildings or monuments
are safeguarded by the instrument of the UNESCO World Heritage Site. How-
ever, while this does not always imply optimal protection, it rather offers com-
mercialization opportunities.65 In cases of the first and second quadrants, and
above the acceptability-line of the third and fourth quadrants for immaterial cul-
tural goods, where the privacy of the culture carriers is not at stake, the UNESCO
Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage66 provides an
adequate instrument. On the international level, it aims “at ensuring the viability
of the intangible cultural heritage” and “to ensure recognition of, respect for, and
enhancement of the intangible cultural heritage . . . of the communities groups
or individuals concerned.” However, these legislations are not sufficient for cases
located below the acceptability-line.

112

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

3) What role does the international community play within the regulation pro-

cess for cultural goods under the acceptability-line?

The international community should feel responsible for creating a legal environ-
ment, in which particular cases can be scrutinized and enforced. This in turn would
facilitate communicating the importance and the role of culture and cultural goods
in the respective societies.

Additionally, the market for cultural goods is not limited to a specific country.
The actors such as consumers and producers can be situated abroad, thus making
multilateral and bilateral international consultations necessary. Brown67 argues that
a global market also requires a global controlling regime going beyond mere bi-
lateral solutions.

Another challenge consists in the fact that not all societies or indigenous groups
are recognized by their own country. The international level could provide a venue
for particular cases which require mediation. Particular societies should take the ini-
tiative (as a private initiative) in the case of disagreement with their own govern-
ment. Otherwise, the state level is entitled to solve the problem. The Indigenous
Caucus of the WIPO provides a stage with which international attention can be at-
tracted, in which NGOs (nongovernmental organizations) and indigenous groups
from the whole world point to the problem of insufficient protection of cultural
goods.

4) What kind of rights can be granted for culture carriers’ cultural goods that

are worthy of protection?

Speaking only about cultural goods under the acceptability-line, negative effects on
identity and dignity need to be avoided. For this, culture carriers are required to be
able to control and supervise the consumption of their cultural goods by outsiders
and restrict access to their holy or spiritual cultural goods, which are strongly con-
nected to their identity or dignity. Because of the special nature of these cultural
goods, general property rights are not a sufficient tool to prevent the commercial-
ization of cultural goods. However, property rights are required to exclude others
from consuming and producing these cultural goods. Thus, to some extent, search-
ing for such “defensive” legal instruments as sui generis rights seems to support these
goals. The international regime has already turned its focus on these special prop-
erty rights granting moral rights to culture carriers while recognizing group own-
ership and ensuring protection lasting in perpetuity.68 Under the auspices of
WIPO, the elaboration of a draft proposal for sui generis rights for the protection of
traditional cultural expressions (TCEs)69 (defined as of material or immaterial na-
ture, or a combination of these) is currently on the agenda. Article 3 (alternative 3)
of this preliminary version addresses to some extent the mentioned cultural goods
proposing a provision of “adequate and effective [legal or practical] measures . . . to
prevent the [unauthorized fixation, disclosure, use or other exploitation] disclo-
sure of secret traditional cultural expressions,” while as overall objectives recogniz-

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

113

ing that these “cultural communities consider their cultural heritage to have intrinsic
value, including social, cultural, spiritual . . . values” and promoting “respect . . .
for the dignity, cultural integrity” of these traditional cultures and communities.70
Rights to and authority over cultural goods providing identity and dignity (such
as secret and sacred cultural goods) is a necessary requirement to keep outsiders
out, which thus avoids a consumption and commercialization of these cultural
goods by the latter. Granting perpetual rights, as sui generis model laws do, how-
ever, is not a preferable solution given the dynamical nature of culture. It requires
that people will always ascribe sacredness to certain cultural goods or declare cul-
tural goods as providing identity and dignity. However, culture carriers and their
identity are dynamic as well. Some cultural goods lose their meaning to culture
carriers over time and the group of culture carriers who value a particular culture
good need not be stable. These time limits and community limits (the changing
character of groups valuing such goods) are important and should be incorpo-
rated in the legislation to avoid the additional social costs caused by unnecessary
curtailing of the public domain.

CONCLUSION

The international debate on the protection of cultural goods is in need of an an-
swer to the question of what exactly is required to provide specific protection in
addition to existing property rights. The international debate focuses on so-called
sui generis property rights.71 However, in this article we suggest an a priori dis-
tinction between direct and indirect effects of cultural goods. Direct effects can be
quantified as the monetary value arising from marketing a cultural good. Even
though in many cases it is not easy to determine such values, there is a broad
literature on values of cultural goods.72 Indirect effects occur as negative or pos-
itive effects on identity. Indirect effects also include option values, prestige values,
and so forth,73 which are much more difficult to express in monetary terms.

If only direct effects exist, positive and negative effects should be weighed against
each other. Protection should be implemented if net benefits outweigh net costs
and if this net gain is higher than in a situation with no protection of cultural
goods including the consideration of the utility of all stakeholders. Such an eval-
uation of net benefits must take place on a case by case basis and cannot be solved
by introducing international standards.

If indirect effects do exist, the priority is to check their impact on identity. If
identity is affected, it is crucial to determine whether the impacts on identity go as
far as seriously impairing the personal fundamental identity or dignity of culture
carriers. If and only if this is the case, international norms for cultural protection
should be implemented in the form of sui generis rights. We suggest that a serious
impact on dignity can be assumed if the culture carriers show, for example, seri-
ous efforts to keep a certain cultural good a secret. The respective acceptability-

114

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

line must be established by the particular states and groups based on cultural
borders and local specifics.

All in all, we conclude that in very limited cases, cultural goods may require
additional protection in the form of sui generis rights. However, the introduction
of sui generis cultural property rights on an international level should be re-
stricted only to cases where the dignity of culture carriers is seriously endangered.
This has the advantage of not threatening the public domain and thus upholding
the valuable dissemination of cultural knowledge and innovation. Beyond this cat-
egory, however, there is a wide field in which regulatory interventions can facili-
tate the arrival of market actors at sensible decisions.

ENDNOTES

1. UNESCO Convention (2005), Article 1(a) and (g).
2. See the resent achievements on the yoga dispute at WIPO: WIPO, “WIPO and India Partner

or WIPO, “About the Traditional Knowledge Digital Library.”

3. Akerlof and Kranton, “Economics and Identity.”
4. The utility function is described as Uj ⫽ Uj (aj, a−j, Ij).
5. Akerlof and Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” 721.
6. Akerlof and Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” 725.
7. The difference between social category and social group is explained in Davis, Theory of the
Individual in Economics. There exist internalist and externalist types of definition of the individual
(p. 17). “Defining individuals as socially embedded explains them in terms of their external relations
to one another”: the difference between social categories and social groups is of importance to signal
this embeddedness.

8. Francois and van Ypersele, “On the Protection of Cultural Goods.”
9. See also Francois and van Ypersele, “On the Protection of Cultural Goods.”
10. Janeba, “International Trade and Cultural Identity.”
11. UNESCO Convention (2005), 1.
12. Cheng, “Cultural Goods Creation,” 264.
13. UNESCO, Universal Declaration (2001), Article 8.
14. This article does not address the question of who belongs to such a cultural group, it rather
assumes that a group is homogeneous and values a particular cultural good homogeneously. Devi-
ating behaviour and its impacts within the group is not part of this analysis.

15. Frey, “What Values Should Count in the Arts?” 265.
16. See Koppel, “Patente—Unverzichtbarer Schutz Geistigen Eigentums”; Liebig, “Geistige Eigen-

tumsrechte aus der Perspektive der Entwicklungsländer.”

17. To judge whether a particular cultural good (such as a story or a song) belongs to one par-
ticular culture and whether this culture (cultural group) is the only beneficiary to commercialize it,
is not a subject of this article. See discussion about this topic in Young, Cultural Appropriation and
the Arts; Brown, Who Owns Native Culture?

18. Further classification of the utility of outsiders into direct and indirect utility is not necessary
since in the case of outsiders the acceptance of identity in regard with a particular cultural good
emerging from insiders is not of relevance.

19. In this case, social costs should be understood as loss of utility by exclusion from consump-
tion and the follow-up costs such as limitation of public domain, and thus the restriction of cre-
ativity and innovation. See Lechner et al., “The Allocation of Property Rights.”

20. As the individuals of the particular cultural group value a specific cultural good similarly, the

culture carriers share the same cultural identity.

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

115

21. Frey and Meier, “The Economics of Museums,” 1022.
22. Akerlof and Kranton, “Economics and Identity”; Akerlof and Kranton, “Identity and the Eco-

nomics of Organizations.”

23. Throsby, “Determining the Value of Cultural Goods.”
24. See Janeba, “International Trade and Cultural Identity.”
25. Harrison, “Identity as a Scarce Resource.” 240.
26. Also, we are aware of the fact that the conceptual definitions serve as a tool for operational-
ization. However, the ethnographically documentable social environment is provided with far less
clear border drawings.

27. See Janeba, “International Trade and Cultural Identity.”
28. At this point, we neglect the negative effects, because as a rule the “new Christians” earlier

belonged to another religion, with which they then caused a suitable utility loss.

29. de Beus, “The Value of National Identity.”
30. Harrison, “Identity as a Scarce Resource”; Brown, “Heritage Trouble.”
31. Throsby, “Determining the Value of Cultural Goods,” 276.
32. See Janke, Minding Culture: Case Studies, case study 3.
33. See Meijl, “Maori Intellectual Property Rights”; or further discussion “Tyson’s Moko Draws
Fire From Maori,” New Zealand Herald. 具http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_
id⫽1&objectid⫽10727836典 (25 May 2011) accessed on 2 August 2011.

34. See Pritchard, Culture, Knowledge, Property, 51–84.
35. Lazear, “Culture and Language.”
36. Ridler, “Cultural Identity and Public Policy.”
37. See the investigation of this issue in Young, Cultural Appropriation and the Arts; Carpenter

et al., “Clarifying Cultural Property.”

38. Mas-Colell, “Should Cultural Goods Be Treated Differently?”
39. WFTO, IFAT Standards (2007).
40. Janke, Minding Culture: Case Studies, 20ff.
41. Riley, A. R., “Sucking the Quileute Dry,” New York Times, February 8 2010.
42. See Carpenter et al., “Clarifying Cultural Property.”
43. See Riley, “Sucking the Quileute Dry.”
44. de Beus, “The Value of National Identity,” 177.
45. United Nations Declaration (2007), Article 33.
46. United Nations Declaration (2007), Article 15.
47. United Nations Report (2000), Principle 4.
48. Rehfeld, “Tod in der Heiler-Welt,” Financial Times Deutschland, 22 October 2009.
49. See Brown, Who Owns Native Culture? 6.
50. See Brown, Who Owns Native Culture?
51. Further differentiation of outsider consumers (such as on the national or international level)

is also possible and adds more parameters to the maximization task.

52. United Nations Report (2000).
53. Harrison, “Identity as a Scarce Resource”
54. Scarduelli, “Dynamics of Cultural Change,” 390ff.
55. Scarduelli, “Dynamics of Cultural Change,” 392.
56. Adams, “Constructing and Contesting Chiefly Authority.”
57. Oral communication from field studies in Indonesia by Beate Engelbrecht (2009).
58. Ejan Mackaay pointed this out at a conference held near Göttingen, Germany, on 12–15 No-

vember 2009.

59. Krüss, Timm Thaler oder Das Verkaufte Lachen.
60. For some ideas about the Kailas Mountain, see Hamsa, The Holy Mountain.
61. United Nations Declaration (2007), Articles 2 and 18.
62. See in Carpenter et al., “Clarifying Cultural Property,” 582, referring to Carpenter et al., “In

Defense of Property.”

63. See Carpenter et al., “Clarifying Cultural Property,” 587.

116

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

64. See Brown, Who Owns Native Culture? 234.
65. See discussions in Berger, Erb.Gut?
66. UNESCO Convention (2003), Art. 1(a), (b), and 14(a).
67. Brown, “Heritage Trouble.”
68. See discussion in Bizer et al., “Sui Generis Rights.”
69. WIPO, The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions: Draft Articles (2011).
70. See WIPO (2011), The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions: Draft Articles, Objectives

(i) and (ii).

71. Brown, “Heritage Trouble.”
72. See, for instance, Throsby, “Determining the Value of Cultural Goods”; Frey, “What Values

Should Count in the Arts?”

73. See Frey and Meier, “The Economics of Museums.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Adams, Kathleen M. “Constructing and Contesting Chiefly Authority in Contemporary Tana Toraja,
Indonesia.” In Chiefs Today, edited by Geoffrey Miles White and Lamont Lindstrom, 264–75. Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997.

Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton. “Economics and Identity.” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 115, no. 3 (2000): 715–53.

———. “Identity and the Economics of Organizations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, no. 1
(2005): 9–32.

Berger, Karl C. Erb.Gut? Kulturelles Erbe in Wissenschaft Und Gesellschaft; Referate Der 25. O¨ sterre-
ichischen Volkskundetagung Vom 14–17.11.2007 in Innsbruck. Edited by Karl C. Berger, Margot Schin-
dler and Ingo Schneider. Vol. 23, Buchreihe Der O¨ sterreichischen Zeitschrift Für Volkskunde; N.S.,
23. Wien: Selbstverl. des Vereins für Volkskunde, 2009.

Bizer, Kilian, Matthias Lankau, Gerald Spindler, and Philipp Zimbehl. “Sui Generis Rights for the
Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions Policy Implications.” jipitec 2 (2011).

Brown, Michael F. Who Owns Native Culture? Harvard University Press, 2003.

———. “Heritage Trouble: Recent Work on the Protection of Intangible Cultural Property.” Inter-
national Journal of Cultural Property 12, no. 01 (2005): 40–61.

Carpenter, Kristen A., Sonia K. Katyal, and Angela R. Riley. “In Defense of Property.” The Yale Law
Journal 118, no. 6 (2009): 1022–125.

———. “Clarifying Cultural Property.”  17, (2010): 581–98.

Cheng, Sao-Wen. “Cultural Goods Creation, Cultural Capital Formation, Provision of Cultural Ser-
vices and Cultural Atmosphere accumulation.” Journal of Cultural Economics 30, (2006): 263–86.

Davis, John B. The Theory of the Individual in Economics: Identity and Value. London: Routledge,
2003.

de Beus, Jos. “The Value of National Identity.” In The Value of Culture, edited by Arjo Klamer, 166–
86. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1996.

Francois, Patrick, and Tanguy van Ypersele. “On the Protection of Cultural Goods.” Journal of Inter-
national Economics 56, no. 2 (2002): 359–69.

PROTECTION OF CULTURAL GOODS

117

Frey, Bruno S. “What Values Should Count in the Arts? The Tension Between Economic Effects and
Cultural Value.” In Beyond Price, edited by Michael Hutter and David Throsby, 261–69. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2008.

Frey, Bruno S., and Stephan Meier. “The Economics of Museums.” In Handbook of the Economics of
Art and Culture, edited by Victor A. Ginsburgh and David Throsby, 1017–47. Amsterdam: Elsevier,
2006.

Hamsa, Bhagwa¯n Shri. The Holy Mountain: Being the Story of a Pilgrimage to Lake Ma¯nas and of
Initiation on Mount Kaila¯s in Tibet. With an Introduction by W. B. Yeats. Delhi: Pilgrims Book, 1997.

Harrison, Simon. “Identity as a Scarce Resource.” Social Anthropology 7, no. 3 (1999): 239–51.

Janeba, Eckhard. “International Trade and Cultural Identity.” NBER Working Paper Series. Cam-
bridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2004.

Janke, T. Minding Culture: Case Studies on Intellectual Property and Traditional Cultural Expressions:
World Intellectual Property Organization, 2003.

Koppel, Oliver. “Patente—Unverzichtbarer Schutz Geistigen Eigentums.” Wirtschaftsdienst 88, no. 12
(2008): 775–80.

Krüss, James. Timm Thaler Oder Das Verkaufte Lachen [Timm Thaler or the Sold Laughter]. Ham-
burg: Oetinger, 1962.

Lazear, Edward P. “Culture and Language.” Journal of Political Economy 107, no. 6 (1999): S95.

Lechner, Sebastian, Zulia Gubaydullina, and Kilian Bizer. “The Allocation of Property Rights to In-
tangible Cultural Assets.” In Discussion Paper Series, 1–16. Göttingen: Universität Göttingen, 2008.

Liebig, Klaus. “Geistige Eigentumsrechte Aus Der Perspektive Der Entwicklungsländer: Ein
Zwiespältiges Instrument.” Wirtschaftsdienst 88, no. 12 (2008): 780–83.

Mas-Colell, Andreu. “Should Cultural Goods Be Treated Differently?” Journal of Cultural Economics
23, (1999): 87–93.

Meijl, Toon von. “Maori Intellectual Property Rights and the Formation of Ethnik Boundaries.” In-
ternational Journal of Cultural Property 16, (2009): 341–55.

Pritchard, Stephen. Culture, Knowledge, Property. North Melbourne, Victoria: Australian Scholarly
Publishing, 2008.

Ridler, Neil B. “Cultural Identity and Public Policy: An Economic Analysis.” Journal of Cultural Eco-
nomics 10, no. 2 (1986): 45–56.

Scarduelli, Pietro. “Dynamics of Cultural Change among the Toraja of Sulawesi.” Anthropos (2005):
389–400.

Throsby, David. “Determining the Value of Cultural Goods: How Much (or How Little) Does Con-
tingent valuation Tell Us?” Journal of Cultural Economics 27, (2003): 275–85.

UNESCO. Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity. Paris: UNESCO, 2001.

———. Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. Paris: UNESCO, 2003.

———. Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. Paris:
UNESCO, 2005.

118

MARIANNA BICSKEI, KILIAN BIZER, AND ZULIA GUBAYDULLINA

United Nations. Commission on Human Rights, Human Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Report of the
Seminar on the Draft Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of the Heritage of Indigenous People.
Geneva: UN, 2007.

———. United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Resolution adopted by the
General Assembly 61/295. New York: UN, 2007.

World Fair Trade Organization. IFAT Standards for Fair Trade Organizations. Belgium: World Fair
Trade Organization, 2007.
———. “WIPO and India Partner to Protect Traditional Knowledge from Misappropriation.” Geneva/
New Delhi, 2011. 具http://www.wipo.int//pressroom/en/articles/2011/article_0008.html典 accessed 18
July 2011

World Intellectual Property Organization. “About the Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (Infor-
mation Courtesy of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research).” 具http://www.wipo.int/
meetings/en/2011/wipo_tkdl_del_11/about_tkdl.html典 accessed 18 July 2011.

———. Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional
Knowledge and Folklore. The Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions: Draft Articles. Document
prepared by the Secretariat. Geneva, 2011.

Young, James O. Cultural Appropriation and the Arts. Wiley-Blackwell 2010.


