    (2014)   21:  251– 265 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2014                Thinking about Antiquities: Museums 
and Internationalism 
       Claire L.     Lyons   *   

         Abstract:     John Henry Merryman’s seminal writings established the twin poles of 
nationalism and internationalism, which have framed debates over cultural patrimony for 
three decades. He has long advocated a cosmopolitan ideal of sharing the world’s artistic 
heritage as the best course for preservation, knowledge, and public access. Although the 
tensions between national ownership and universal circulation frequently put countries 
and museums at odds, above all when it comes to ancient art and archaeological objects, 
a middle ground has been found that can bridge the gap. This article reviews several 
recent MOUs that U.S. museums and cultural ministries in Italy, Greece, and Turkey have 
established for exhibition loans and research collaborations. The J. Paul Getty Museum’s 
experiences in implementing four international cultural agreements illuminate how 
sharing works in practice, and the benefits (and costs) of an object-oriented approach to 
cultural diplomacy.      

  In a series of widely cited articles exploring cultural nationalism and cultural 
internationalism, John Henry Merryman consistently championed approaches 
that favor a cosmopolitan ideal of circulating works of art. Among his most influ-
ential works was the seminal 1986 article, “Two Ways of Thinking about Cultural 
Property,” which has been a point of reference for nearly all subsequent discus-
sions. In “Thinking about the Elgin Marbles” (2009) and “Thinking about the 
Sevso Treasure” (2008), he addressed questions surrounding the rightful ownership 
of art, the advantages of a licit market for antiquities, and restitution—positions 
that  aimed  to  balance  competing  demands  on  cultural  heritage  by  favoring 
the widest possible distribution.  1   For Merryman, it is the conflict between the 
“two ways”—the nationalist and internationalist—that is most interesting. Yet he 
also acknowledged that both have a legitimate role to play, especially when national 

  * J. Paul Getty Museum, 1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 1000v, Los Angeles, CA 90049-1745. 
Email:  clyons@getty.edu  

251

 252   

 CLAIRE L. LYONS

and international interests reinforce one another’s values. Those, he wrote, were the 
easy cases.  2   One early instance of such approach, crafted with Merryman’s advice, 
involved a joint custody strategy for a group of pre-Columbian murals from the site 
of Teotihuacán, which was negotiated over six years between the De Young Museum 
in San Francisco and the Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia in Mexico 
City.  3   In the period since that precedent-setting 1984 “negotiated restitution,” which 
led to a division of the wall paintings and mutual responsibilities for their conserva-
tion, the ideal of sharing by one means or another has become a key goal of museum 
ethics and practice, especially among institutions with collections of antiquities. 

 Although  the  laws  of  national  ownership  and  the  principals  of  universal 
circulation are usually seen as mutually exclusive, a middle path can achieve 
many of the cosmopolitan goals called for in Merryman’s “Thinking” articles, 
which emphasized the preservation and integrity of a world heritage that is a birth-
right  to  be  enjoyed  by  all.  Long-term  cultural  agreements  have  been  developed 
by a number of U.S. museums in concert with ministries of culture in countries 
rich in ancient art and archaeological sites. This article, offered to recognize the 
impact of a dialogue that John Merryman instigated nearly three decades ago, con-
siders the spate of memoranda of understanding that have been drawn up over 
the past seven years, focusing just on the realm of ancient art in Italy, Greece, and 
Turkey, and then in particular, on recent experiences at the J. Paul Getty Museum. 
What has the ideal of sharing accomplished in practice, and what benefits or draw-
backs come through this form of cultural diplomacy? Answers to these questions 
are mainly anecdotal, since most of the arrangements are just now gaining traction, 
but an informal survey of curatorial colleagues who have been responsible for the 
initial results suggests that agreements can work, but not without costs. 

 Since calls for the return of antiquities and ethnographic objects have become 
more frequent, cultural agreements have been adopted both to define the terms 
of a reciprocal exchange and to lay the groundwork for a mutually beneficial 
relationship.  4   Following the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s landmark 2006 mem-
orandum of understanding (MOU) with Italy, museums in Boston, Cleveland, San 
Francisco, Dallas, and Los Angeles, as well as the museums at Princeton University 
and the University of Pennsylvania, have entered into international agreements. 
Though they may differ in the details, these documents share the goals of sup-
port for exhibitions, long-term loans, and research. The Metropolitan Museum 
of  Art’s  40-year  agreement  with  Italy  concerned  restitution  of  five  ancient 
Greek  vases  (including  the  Euphronios  krater)  and  a  set  of  15  Hellenistic  silver 
symposion  vessels  and  votive  objects,  believed  to  have  been  discovered  in  a 
residential  quarter  at  the  ancient  site  of  Morgantina  (Sicily).  The  intention 
was to share the hoard by transferring the objects between New York and the 
Museo Archeologico of Aidone every four years. At the Cleveland Museum of 
Art,  which  signed  a  25-year  renewable  agreement  in  2008,  loans—discretely 
installed amidst the permanent collection—were made in return for the trans-
fer of 14 objects to Italy. Similarly, the Boston Museum of Fine Arts’ agreement 

THINKING ABOUT ANTIQUITIES  

  253 

grew out of a transfer of objects, and additionally stipulates that Rome’s Ministry 
of Culture review all proposed acquisitions of classical antiquities in advance. 
Though this approval adds a cumbersome extra step to regular acquisition pro-
cedures, and may discourage purchases at auction when there is little lead time, 
the  system  apparently  goes  forward  with  reasonable  efficiency.  Managed  by 
the Deputy Director for Collections, the new relationship has brought a size-
able number of important works to Boston, including the iconic sculpture of 
a  Sleeping Hermaphrodite  from Palazzo Massimo in Rome—the centerpiece of 
the 2011  Aphrodite and the Gods of Love  exhibition—as well as works by Piero della 
Francesca and Michelangelo. 

 In October 2013, the Dallas Museum of Art placed on view a fifth-century tomb 
group from Spina that was loaned for four years by the Museo Archeologico in 
Ferrara, an exchange that also came about after a return of half a dozen objects 
linked to the antiquities dealer Edoardo Almagià. Under the auspices of a program 
dubbed DMX (Dallas Museum of Art Exchange) announced in December 2012 by 
director Maxwell Anderson, the spirit of collaboration represents “a new model 
of cultural exchange designed to foster international collaboration and commu-
nication… [and] share expertise in conservation, exhibitions, education and new 
media in exchange for loaned works of art from other museums and cultural 
agencies worldwide.”  5   Anderson began a proactive provenance review of the Dallas 
Museum of Art (DMA)’s collection, and when photographic evidence proved that 
the museum’s Roman mosaic with Orpheus had been removed from the site 
of  Ş anliurfa (Turkey), it was deaccessioned and returned in 2012. An MOU with 
Turkey was signed immediately afterward and launched the DMX initiative, which 
is expected to generate a series of one-year loans from leading Turkish museums 
as well as a future exhibition. DMA anticipates similar agreements with African 
nations, India, China, and Russia. 

 At the center of a dispute between the University of Pennsylvania and the Republic 
of Turkey, a group of 24 pieces of Early Bronze Age jewelry known as the  Trojan 
Gold  became the focal point of a second U.S. accord with the Turkish Ministry 
of Culture and Tourism. Dating to circa 2400  bce , the group had been acquired 
in good faith in 1966, well before the 1970 UNESCO Convention benchmark on 
which museums rely, but long after the 1906 Ottoman law that Turkish officials are 
increasingly disposed to apply. Several proposals for a long-term loan of the gold 
artifacts to Ankara were made in order to retain the university’s ownership, but 
terms for anything less than a full transfer of title were initially rejected. Because 
the gold’s likely archaeological find spot could not be pinpointed more precisely 
than the northeast Aegean, curator Brian Rose participated in discussions with 
both the Turkish General Director of Antiquities and the Greek Director General 
of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage. Turkey subsequently acceded to an indefinite 
loan (a transfer that will effectively be permanent). Officials pledged support for the 
university’s 62-year excavation at Gordion, a traveling exhibition of tomb objects 
from the site’s Midas Mound scheduled for February 2016, as well as selections 

 254   

 CLAIRE L. LYONS

from the so-called Lydian Treasure, repatriated by the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art in the 1990s.  6   This case has been cited as a win–win, but with the authorization 
of Penn’s long-standing excavation permit hanging in the balance, skeptics criti-
cized the element of duress that surrounded the settlement, much as in the case of 
another well-publicized Turkish repatriation claim for the Bo ğ azköy Sphinx held 
by the Pergamon Museum in Berlin.  7   

 As in New York and Boston, following a return of objects, Princeton University 
received four significant loans from Italy, which art museum staff selected from 
a list drawn up by the Ministry. Not all MOUs hinge on a quid pro quo for repa-
triated objects. Princeton’s recent cooperative agreement with the Benaki Museum 
in Athens formalized a long-standing relationship with the university’s Center for 
Hellenic Studies by developing “an international network that advances each insti-
tution’s mission through the common goals and collective resources…encompass-
ing six primary areas of potential collaboration: exchange of exhibitions; long-term 
loans of works of art; exchange of artists in residence; exchange visits by curators; 
summer internships and other student/young scholar exchanges; and information 
exchange and mutual promotion.” Planning for a 2017 exhibition on Cairo in the 
Fatimid period is underway and promises to fulfill many of these goals.  8   

 At the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City, an MOU with the Capi-
toline Superintendency of Rome emerged from a project known as the Dream 
of Rome, a public-private partnership that funded a U.S. tour of art masterpieces 
from the Musei Capitolini between 2011 and 2013, thanks to private support from 
the Knights of Columbus. Because the Capitoline is one of the civic museums of the 
city and belongs to a separate administrative structure from the national Ministry 
of Culture, director Claudio Parisi Presicce has been able to negotiate agreements 
more flexibly than is par for the course. The Dream of Rome financed extraordi-
nary loans: Bernini’s Medusa went to San Francisco; Boston featured the bronze 
portrait bust of Lucius Junius Brutus, historic founder of the Roman Republic; the 
monumental  Lion Attacking a Horse  was shown at the Getty; and the  Capitoline 
Venus  was sent to Washington, DC, where a second great treasure of the Musei 
Capitolini, the  Dying Gaul , was installed late in 2013. In exchange, the National 
Gallery sent an Impressionist exhibition to the Ara Pacis gallery in Rome. Debut-
ing with a special loan of the  Fauno Rosso , a striking red marble sculpture of a satyr 
commissioned by the emperor Hadrian for his villa at Tivoli, the relationship with 
the Nelson-Atkins Museum led to an unusual form of collaboration with univer-
sity colleagues. With new funding from Enel Green Power, unpublished artifacts 
from the vast storerooms of the Antiquarium Comunale will be made available for 
study by the students and faculty of the University of Missouri, Columbia. Having 
access to excavated objects for extended periods has long been a goal, especially 
considering the backlog of underpublished archaeological artifacts that languish in 
storage, but recently it has taken wing under the Hidden Treasures of Rome project. 
This ambitious program will reach out to various U.S. universities, creating pack-
ages of objects and research themes tailored to the strengths of each institution. 

THINKING ABOUT ANTIQUITIES  

  255 

 For American art lovers, the last two years have seen an unparalleled influx of 
remarkable works on public display around the country. Generous loans that came 
about under specific agreements with Rome multiplied during the 2013 “Year of 
Italian Culture in the United States.” Sponsored by the Foreign Ministry, nation-
wide celebrations involved an array of exhibitions, conferences, and performances.  9   
From  the  compelling  bronze  figure  of  a  weary  boxer  that  was  shown  at  the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, to drawings by Michelangelo on view in Williamsburg, 
paintings by Giotto at the Getty, Piero della Francesca’s  Senigallia Madonna  in 
Boston,  and  Piranesi  etchings  in  San  Diego,  the  calendar  was  filled  with  star 
attractions. Ironically, Italy’s national ambition to showcase the best of its artistic 
heritage did not always override the reluctance of some regions to part with their 
masterpieces, many of which are felt to be the “family jewels” of local museums. 
Sicily’s Assessorato dei Beni Culturali e dell’Identità Siciliana, for example, with-
drew promised loans of several paintings by Caravaggio, and despite explicit prior 
understandings, hesitated to extend an exhibition on ancient Sicily to Cleveland 
after its display in Los Angeles. Press worldwide covered the ensuing controversy, 
which appeared to cast doubt on the reliability of formal cultural agreements. As a 
semiautonomous region wielding wide latitude when it comes of cultural heritage 
policy, Sicily was not swayed by the national imperative, and intervention by 
Foreign Affairs officials in Rome proved futile. I will return to that particular 
situation later, but it underscores one obvious conclusion: Cultural diplomacy 
is neither easy nor predictable when the agendas of national and regional officials, 
and foreign and cultural ministries are not in tune.  

 INTERNATIONAL CULTURAL AGREEMENTS 

 Cultural MOUs are by no means a novelty. In the international sphere, cooperative 
relationships between countries and their cultural ministries have been formed with 
great regularity, especially in the period after World War II. In essence, the main goals 
have been cosmopolitan ones: to promote culture outside the nation’s borders, and to 
cultivate within an interest in the artistic and intellectual achievements of others. Such 
agreements have been the norm among countries in Europe, Asia, Latin America, and 
parts of Africa. Public diplomacy in the United States, by contrast, has historically sub-
ordinated cultural agreements and instead promoted the American values of education 
and economic development overseas. Museum and artistic exchanges were less of a 
priority and had to depend more on private sources than on governmental initiatives.  10   
 A dramatic shift, however, came in the wake of the 1970 UNESCO Convention on 
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of 
Ownership of Cultural Property. In an effort to preserve endangered cultural heri-
tage, the U.S. included in the 1983 Cultural Property Implementation Act (CPIA) a 
mechanism for creating bilateral agreements under carefully defined circumstances. 
Sixteen such agreements have been signed to date. In entering into MOUs with 
requesting nations, the Cultural Property Advisory Committee must determine that 

 256   

 CLAIRE L. LYONS

the cultural patrimony is in jeopardy from archaeological pillaging; steps have been 
taken by the requesting nation to protect cultural patrimony; U.S. import restrictions 
would assist substantially in deterring pillage; and such restrictions would promote 
the interchange of cultural objects for scientific, cultural, and educational purposes. 
Loans and traveling exhibitions help to fulfill the expectation of interchange, insuring 
that the American public derives tangible benefits from limiting importation on 
certain categories of archaeological and ethnological objects. 

 After a decade, Article II is starting to address this expectation more emphatically. 
Early  agreements  with  several  Latin  American  countries  acknowledged  in  general 
terms the desirability of an “interchange of knowledge.” New and renewed bilateral 
agreements underscore this point in more forceful language, requiring that the coun-
try make best efforts regarding loans and exchanges of cultural property (e.g., Belize 
2013, Bulgaria  2014,  Bolivia  2006,  Cambodia  2013,  Colombia  2011,  El  Salvador 
2010,  Guatemala 2012, Honduras 2009, Nicaragua 2010, and Peru 2012).  11   In sev-
eral  cases,  the  language  remains  noticeably  elliptical.  Mali  (2012),  for  example,  will 
make “best efforts to encourage further interchange through consideration of accom-
modating requests for extended international loans,” while Cyprus (2012) “will 
promote ongoing discussion about loans of objects of archaeological interest….” 
The MOU with Greece (2011) does not address short-term loans for museum display, 
but allows for “consideration, as appropriate, of accommodating requests for extended 
loans beyond the five-year period to United States museums…” and “consideration, as 
appropriate, of broadening permissions to academicians and museum curators from 
abroad to photograph material in Greek museums....” While these points have prac-
tical merit, they are limited in scope and have been criticized as not meeting the higher 
expectations defined by the CPIA. At a minimum, pressure to expand and simplify 
bureaucratic loan procedures will likely be felt when these MOUs come up for renewal. 
 Two countries of paramount importance to the U.S. museum community—Italy 
and China—made the goal of sharing artistic heritage explicit. Italy (2011) agreed 
to develop “increased and extended loans of archaeological cultural property” and 
China (2009, 2014) will “promote long-term loans…of significant interest to a 
broad cross-section of American museums,” including recently excavated objects. 
Whether the exchange requirements of Article II will result in a greater circulation 
of Chinese art and ethnographic objects still remains to be seen. From the recent 
experiences  with  Italy  and  Greece,  one  can  conclude  that  international  bilateral 
agreements  are  creating  an  overarching  framework  and  incentives  for  generous 
loans. Defining concrete objectives and then carrying them out is in the hands of 
museums and universities, and is beginning to show concrete results.   

 CULTURAL AGREEMENTS IN ACTION 

 Turning next to the experiences of the J. Paul Getty Museum, I would like to 
review the four cultural agreements that have been put into place, three of them 
consequent to the return of antiquities to the countries of origin—what transpired, 

THINKING ABOUT ANTIQUITIES  

  257 

the benefits and obstacles, and what was learned. Do institutional agreements 
help to achieve the goals of the bilateral MOUs the United States has signed? In 
an era of burgeoning blockbuster exhibitions assembled by for-profit enterprises, 
expositions, and art fairs, are they even needed? Some question the necessity of 
contracting for cooperation, given the quantity and quality of art from Mediterra-
nean countries that has been displayed in North American institutions. Yet despite 
ubiquitous traveling exhibitions, antiquities remain a category that has been more 
problematic than post-antique works. Have collaborative projects managed to 
breach the impasse that the museums faced over the issue of restitution? 

 The Getty’s antiquities collection began with J. Paul Getty’s first purchase in 
1939 and expanded from 1976—the year he acquired his final work of ancient 
art—to the early 2000s to comprise about 45,000 objects. More than 1400 art-
works are on display in a neoclassical-style building designed as a reproduction 
of the Villa dei Papiri in Herculaneum. As in the case of several other museums 
mentioned earlier, the first accord, signed in 2007 with the Ministry of Culture in 
Rome, included an agreement to transfer about 40 objects to Italy. The document 
confirmed Italy’s willingness to lend 50 objects of a quality similar to those that 
had been returned, to authorize new excavation permits, and to consult in advance 
on any future recovery proceedings. In practice, the outcomes have gone beyond 
a quid pro quo exchange of objects of equivalent beauty and artistic or historical 
significance, in the language of the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s contract. Laying 
the groundwork for a positive relationship, the document blossomed into a col-
laboration with the Archaeological Museum in Florence, formalized separately in 
2009 and revolving around three major exhibitions. Later that year, an exhibition 
featuring the  Chimaera of Arezzo  brought Florence’s signature work—a master-
piece of Etruscan bronze sculpture—to U.S. audiences for the first time. Scientific 
analysis of its manufacture and patina was conducted in Florence. In the course of 
its stay in Malibu, a jointly organized conference on the Chimaera, from its roots 
in early Greek art to its use as a political symbol of Renaissance Florence, brought 
together specialists in art, archaeology, and science. Publications in Italian and 
English traced the myth of the monster-slaying hero Bellerophon in Near Eastern, 
Greek, Etruscan, Roman, and Medieval Christian contexts.  12   

 Currently in development is a second exhibition,  Monumental Bronzes of the 
Hellenistic World , which will premier in Florence in 2015 before traveling to Los 
Angeles, Washington, DC, and Athens. Centering on four great bronze sculp-
tures from the Florentine collection, the display will feature major loans from 
10 Italian and Greek museums, as well as institutions in Europe, North Africa, 
and the U.S. Bilingual editions of the catalog and a congress on ancient bronze 
sculpture will convene international experts for a unique opportunity to exam-
ine  and  reconsider  Hellenistic  sculptures  in  juxtaposition  with  one  another. 
Part of the reciprocal exchange will involve treatment of a Roman bronze putto 
from  the  Medici  collection  that  will  be  conducted  in  the  Getty’s  Antiquities 
Conservation studio. For the future, a third exhibition on the Etruscans is in 

 258   

 CLAIRE L. LYONS

the conceptual stage. A steady succession of ministers of culture has held office, 
but the 2007 agreement has weathered political changes well and has not been 
adversely affected by the ongoing court proceedings concerning the statue of 
a  Victorious Youth  (known as the  Getty Bronze  or the  Athlete of Fano ).  13   These 
initial projects, in fact, continue to spawn regular proposals for collaborative 
projects and two additional Italian MOUs. 

 Alongside numerous loans of short duration, a Roman bronze ephebe holding 
a candelabrum was made available for four years by the Museo Archeologico 
Nazionale in Naples. To date, this is the only instance of a long-term loan made 
in return for repatriations, though 50 such objects were to be exchanged under 
the 2007 agreement. Most loans that fall under the long-term category are born 
from conservation projects paid for by the Getty, which established a separate 
budget line to implement the principles of the agreement. Although not an official 
partner in the way that Florence is, Naples formed close ties to the Getty thanks to 
our mutual interest in the history of the Vesuvian excavations and their preserva-
tion.  14   Here a special affinity with the Pompeian-style Getty Villa led to a program 
of research that unfolded around conservation and technological analysis of two 
major works of Roman bronze sculpture: the  Apollo Saettante  from Pompeii and 
the portrait statue of Tiberius found in Herculaneum. Long kept in storage, both 
sculptures underwent treatment for stability, as well as a battery of tests to clarify 
manufacturing techniques and earlier restorations. Research proceeded collabo-
ratively and was presented in symposia, publications, and exhibitions that gave 
visitors a behind-the-scenes encounter with these singular works. Our collaboration 
advances under its own momentum, largely due to the close working relations 
between an international group of archaeologists, curators, and scientists who share 
common interests in bronze sculpture and the history of restoration.  15   

 Projects like these can represent a win-win outcome. Much new knowledge was 
developed on classical bronze sculpture and original data emerged that benefits 
the wider research community. Interesting results were shared with the public 
in Los Angeles, and the sculptures return to their home museums for display in 
stable condition. Research projects can ramify in unexpected directions, as in the 
instance of a project to study a group of Apulian vases found in the 19th century 
in Ceglie del Campo and now in the Antikensammlung in Berlin. Investigations 
into the history of conservation revealed the techniques used to reassemble vases, 
a topic that intertwined with the  Apollo Saettante  of Pompeii, filling in our picture 
of restoration practices in 18th- and 19th-century Naples. Colleagues in Germany, 
France, and Italy joined in and brought to bear the archival records that eventually 
will help piece back together the biographies of these objects. Unquestionably, 
one key to success is the Getty’s capacity to provide expertise in conservation and 
preventive care, but the reality remains that research projects require time and 
investment of substantial resources. 

 When the Cult Statue of a Goddess, now understood to represent a monumental 
image of Demeter, was returned to the Museo Archeologico in Aidone in 2010, 

THINKING ABOUT ANTIQUITIES  

  259 

it did so under a separate accord reached with the Regional Assessorato dei Beni 
Culturali e dell’Identità Siciliana.  16   Sicily is a semiautonomous region of Italy and 
in many matters lies outside the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Culture in Rome. 
In what was designed to be a reciprocal exchange for a sculpture determined to 
originate in eastern Sicily, but whose likely find spot in Morgantina could not 
be verified with certainty, the document confirmed that the Sicilian region would 
support several projects with the Getty: two exhibitions, the first to survey clas-
sical and Hellenistic Sicily, and a second on the site of Selinunte; organization 
of a conference in Palermo on seismic stabilization; and a project to remount the 
celebrated statue of a charioteer from the island of Mozia. Two objects initially 
came to Malibu to be equipped with seismic isolation bases, displayed for a time, 
and sent back with new mounts and cases—the monumental red-figure volute 
krater by the Niobid Painter and a marble sculpture of an Ephebe, both from the 
Museo  Archeologico  Regionale  in  Agrigento.  17    Planning  for  the  first  exhibition, 
 Sicily: Art and Invention between Greece and Rome , commenced soon after and 
at the outset, found good support among lenders at the local level. Pivoting on the 
presentation of the  Mozia Charioteer , newly freed from its risky external mount, 
the display of 150 objects, more than 60 from Sicilian museums, was intended 
to  travel to Los Angeles and the Cleveland Museum of Art, and conclude at the 
Palazzo Ajutamicristo in Palermo. 

 Frequent elections, shifting cultural policies, nominations of new regional coun-
selors and superintendents, and the rotation of museum directors presented serious 
stumbling blocks. In the three years following the 2011 signing of the agreement, five 
cultural commissioners held office, each with different agendas and attitudes about 
how international exchanges should be used to promote Sicily’s artistic heritage, its 
identity, and its potential as a travel destination. For U.S. museums, where exhibi-
tions take years of advance planning, dealing with last-minute bureaucratic delays 
and changes of direction is not easy. For the Sicilian cultural administration, long-
term plans that cannot be realized within a single term of office, or agreements that 
might bind the hands of incoming officials, are equally unwelcome. Elections in 2012 
brought to power a government that took a tougher stance on loans outside of Sicily, 
in part due to pressure from local constituents after many important pieces had trav-
eled to shows in Shanghai and London. The legislature enacted a decree establishing 
a list of 23 masterpieces (21 objects and two ensembles of the metopes from 
Selinunte and the Morgantina silver treasure) that would henceforth be “immov-
able”  except  under  special  circumstances,  in  an  effort  to  limit  extended  absences, 
protect local museums, and attract tourism to the island.  18   Fees calculated on 0.5% 
of the insurance value of the works or other commensurate exchanges became a 
requirement for major loans. With reciprocity as the cornerstone of the new policy, 
the  regional  administration  of  President  Rosario  Crocetta  revisited  its  prior 
agreements, not only those with museums but also those sought for the Italian Foreign 
Ministry’s celebration of 2013 as the Year of Italian Culture in the United States. 
Anticipated loans were cancelled in a move to keep Sicilian treasures at home.  19   

 260   

 CLAIRE L. LYONS

 In Los Angeles, the Getty’s  Sicily  exhibition was caught up in the shifting polit-
ical terrain in two ways: Even though it had been explicit in all prior discussions, 
our  partnership  with  Cleveland,  formalized  only  after  the  signing  of  the  2011 
agreement,  was  not  recognized.  Moving  forward  would  take  a  new  agreement 
and  a  significant  reciprocal  promise  beyond  the  costly  multiyear  conservation 
of the Mozia Charioteer and half a dozen other Sicilian objects. Nine months of 
proposals, counterproposals, and a belated demand for several hundred thousand 
dollars in loan fees finally saw daylight, when Cleveland resurrected an earlier 
offer to lend Old Master paintings for a future show in Palermo on Caravaggio 
and  his  followers,  including  its  most  important  work,  the   Crucifixion  of  Saint 
Andrew . Illustrating the quid pro quo, a map posted on the web site of cultural 
commissioner Mariarita Sgarlata set out the terms in graphic simplicity, under 
the  banner  “the  show  is  back  on”:  crossing  the  Atlantic,  the   Charioteer   and  a 
gold phiale from Himera change places with nine paintings from the Cleveland 
Museum of Art.  20   

 Among the original goals of the 2010 agreement, all but one (a future exhibi-
tion on Selinunte that was not defined before the three-year agreement lapsed) 
were accomplished, and by most measures the exhibition was a success.  Sicily  
opened  on  schedule,  though  determined  efforts  to  present  the  exhibition  in 
Palermo failed due to lack of funding. In the United States, more than 140,000 
people  took  part  in  the  celebrations  of  Sicilian  artistic  heritage,  objects  were 
safeguarded for the future, and research stimulated a reappraisal of ancient Sicily’s 
contributions to classical culture.  21   What shape any future renewal of the cultural 
agreement might assume depends to a large degree on how to address the political 
cycle and how to formulate rewarding approaches that function effectively for 
both parties. 

 Greece became the J. Paul Getty Museum’s third international partner in 2011. 
Here the emphasis of a “Framework for Cultural Cooperation” is on addressing 
the trade in illicit artifacts and “encouraging the exchange of scientists and scholars 
in the fields of archaeology, art history, conservation, cultural information tech-
nology and other fields of common interest in research and training.”  22   Unlike ear-
lier MOUs, blueprints for specific loans and traveling exhibitions were not drawn 
up, but the rapprochement achieved after a years-long standoff allowed the parties 
to begin planning for a major exhibition of Byzantine art.  Heaven and Earth: Art of 
Byzantium from Greek Collections  opened in 2013 in Washington, D.C., and trav-
eled to Los Angeles and Chicago; financial responsibility for international shipping 
costs and the catalog was shouldered by Greece. Conservation projects, which have 
been critical in our Italian partnerships, are not so much a desideratum for the 
Ministry of Culture and Sports in Athens, where there is a strong tradition of object 
and architectural conservation. Transferring antiquities back to Greece, however, 
has occurred twice during the short tenure of the agreement. Two objects origi-
nally found in Attica and well known through scholarly publications were returned 
as a symbolic gesture of good will, in exchange for which, a three-year loan of an 

THINKING ABOUT ANTIQUITIES  

  261 

Athenian decree relief was arranged.  23   Though this first step was a modest one, 
 Heaven and Earth  eventually brought to the United States some 170 objects, many 
of them spiritual and artistic treasures of their respective museums and towns, 
in a conscious effort to promote an important but less familiar aspect of the 
national  heritage.  Greece’s  Central  Archaeological  Council,  however,  can  be 
reluctant to grant loan requests for exhibitions developed by foreign curators; long 
delays and denials show that signing a cultural agreement is no guarantee of a 
positive response when it comes to securing key works. The framework is still 
very much a work in progress, but Greece’s recent agreement to participate in 
the  Monumental Bronzes of the Hellenistic World  is a hopeful sign that it will 
advance us toward a regular collaboration. 

 As mentioned earlier, the Dream of Rome provided the impulse and needed 
funding toward major loans from the Capitoline Museums, and the Getty’s most 
recent cultural agreement with the Capitoline Superintendency was a logical out-
growth of that initiative. Separate from the agreements with the national Ministry 
of Culture and the regional Ministry of Cultural Assets and Sicilian Identity, 
the accord with the civic archaeological superintendency in Rome brought one of 
the great but nearly forgotten works of classical sculpture to Los Angeles for nine 
months. For more than a century, the  Lion Attacking a Horse  had languished as 
a  fountain  ornament  in  the  Giardino  Caffarelli  behind  the  Capitoline  Museum. 
Newly restored with a grant from the Knights of Columbus, the monumental group 
came into the spotlight once again in the 2012–2013 Malibu installation, which 
recalled its role as a symbol of the city of Rome and inspiration for Renaissance 
artists. Scientific analysis of its marbles and lead dowels was spearheaded by the 
Getty Antiquities Conservation department, and upon its return to Rome, the Lion 
assumed its rightful place in the rotunda gallery where the earliest donations to the 
Capitoline collection, including the  Capitoline Wolf  and the equestrian statue of 
Marcus Aurelius, are showcased.  24   The formal agreement that enabled this display, 
which was seen by more than 200,000 visitors, focused again on conservation col-
laborations. Identifying a subject that meets the needs and expectations of both 
institutions is our present goal. Because it was supported by the office of Mayor 
Giovanni Alemanno with entrepreneurial savoir faire and curatorial judgment on 
the part of the Capitoline leadership, forming a productive working relationship 
has been straightforward. Built on past positive experiences of exchanging loans 
between Rome and the Getty, and not hinging on restitution as a quid pro quo for 
cooperation, the agreement that evolved out of the Dream of Rome offers great 
promise for the future.   

 CHALLENGES OF CULTURAL DIPLOMACY 

 In the museum world, international and national interests are complementary when 
they intersect to create a cultural commons—a place to engage in the stewardship 
of  art,  collaborate  on  its  study  and  preservation,  and  disseminate  it  broadly. 

 262   

 CLAIRE L. LYONS

Cultural agreements constitute the very charter for internationalism that John 
Merryman envisioned. Although he has long urged that many expressions of the 
world’s archaeological and ethnological heritage should circulate on the com-
mercial art market, he also acknowledged that works of art could be “traded to 
foreign museums for works that would enrich the ability of each nation to ex-
pose its own citizens to works from other cultures…or deposited on long-term 
loan in foreign institutions.”  25   Debates have swirled endlessly around his firm 
insistence on the benefits of a licit market for antiquities, and whether private 
ownership  confers  an  economic  value  that  would  in  the  end  help  to  preserve 
important objects. Most archaeologists reject this hypothesis, which is at odds 
with  laws,  in  some  cases  centuries  old,  in  the  countries  of  origin  that  I  have 
focused on here. 

 Instead,  stewardship  as  a  form  of  “sharing”  with  added  benefits  has  been 
advanced  as  an  alternative  to  ownership,  above  all  in  the  case  of  antiquities. 
For museums where acquisitions may be limited and ancient art is not a strength, 
loans can bring objects to audiences that might not otherwise enjoy access to them. 
Where there are regular acquisitions, short- and long-term loans can enhance 
the depth of the permanent collection, allowing visitors to experience works of 
art from fresh perspectives. Both lender and borrower profit, and the different 
exchange arrangements are in step with evolving mission of museums. In an era of 
global movements of art, new paradigms are expanding the core goals of collecting, 
display,  and  education.  They  involve  networks  of  cooperating  institutions,  a 
strong emphasis on preservation, and a commitment to diversifying public access. 
Dialogue and transparency help redefine an ethic of sharing that takes objects as a 
point of departure, but which is fundamentally about collaboration between insti-
tutions and colleagues. 

 Cultural cooperation between institutions has been fruitful. Yet following a long 
period of tension over pillaged art and “who owns the past,” parity is now a pivotal 
element of negotiations. With four signed agreements, the foundations are in 
place for cementing a special affinity with two countries that are essential for the 
Getty Villa, the only public museum outside Europe devoted to the arts of ancient 
Greece, Rome, and Etruria. Since 2007, about 193 loans from 76 Italian lenders and 
more than 170 objects from Greece have come to Los Angeles. Countless benefits 
to scholarship, preservation, and visitors’ enjoyment are the result. Despite appoint-
ments of six ministers of culture under five successive governments in Rome, 
backing  for  exhibitions  and  conservation  collaborations  has  been  steady,  in 
part thanks to the support of two general directors (Stefano De Caro and Luigi 
Malnati) whose tenures endured the political cycles. Agreements with the Capito-
line Superintendency and the Hellenic Republic Ministry of Culture have started to 
accomplish what they set out to do, and next steps are in progress. Sicily’s Ministry 
of Cultural Assets and Sicilian Identity, conversely, revolves its political appoin-
tees and personnel frequently, changing directions and making planning a tough 
challenge. While nearly all the expectations of the 2010 agreement with the Getty 

THINKING ABOUT ANTIQUITIES  

  263 

were met, the unexpected imposition of loan fees or other forms of reciprocity is 
an insurmountable barrier for many museums. Challenges to the idea of MOUs 
still remain. Early in 2014, Sicilian officials reneged on the original 2006 agreement 
with  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art  to  share  the  Morgantina  silver  hoard 
every four years. Because the set of 15 silver vessels had come to be listed among 
the  immovable  works  of  Sicilian  artistic  heritage  in  the  recent  legislation, 
a  “rebalanced”  exchange  is  being  sought  that  does  not  result  in  an  extended 
absence of a treasure of the local museum in Aidone.  26   

 This turn of events is a reminder that although cultural agreements can lay 
the groundwork for a partnership, they offer no absolute guarantees beyond a 
willingness to consider joint ventures in a spirit of cooperation. As several of 
the situations described above make plain, there are drawbacks that need to be 
taken into account, including:
   
       •       Meshing  administrative  procedures  and  scheduling  between  the  different 

bureaucracies that govern private museums and state ministries.  

      •       Coping with cross-cultural communication, a time-consuming endeavor that calls 
for manageable goals, and a better equilibrium of interests and contributions.  
      •       Maintaining  continuity  across  election  cycles  and  political  appointments. 
Relationships cultivated with one group of officials, who do not remain in office 
long enough to implement an agreement, may have to be rebuilt with their 
successors. Memoranda of understanding and restitutions notwithstanding, 
arrangements may be suddenly redefined if new policies and legislation on 
cultural patrimony are introduced.  

      •       Negotiating claims. In the aftermath of repatriations, cultural agreements 
aimed to put relationships with museums on a new footing. Agencies outside 
of cultural ministries, however, can still pursue restitutions, which may affect 
projects that are under way.  

      •       Allocating  funding  and  resources.  International  loans  and  exhibitions  are 
expensive  even  under  normal  circumstances,  and  additional  costs  of 
conservation, loan fees, training, and other aspects of collaborative projects 
are  substantial.  Time,  staffing,  and  institutional  will  on  both  sides  are 
prerequisites.   

   
  Cultural agreements may not work equally for every museum, especially smaller ones, 
but their usefulness can be extended by creating consortia of cooperating mu-
seums to share resources. As the recent cases have shown, they can help to lay the 
groundwork for improved relationships, which in turn opens opportunities beyond 
the fine print of formal  documents.  Partnerships  engendered  by  object-oriented 
agreements go a long way toward realizing several principles of cultural cosmopoli-
tanism that John Merryman called for—preservation, knowledge, and access—and 
bridge the gaps between local and cosmopolitan, and national and international 
perspectives.    

 264   

  ENDNOTES 

 CLAIRE L. LYONS

 1  .    Merryman,  “Thinking  about  the  Sevso  Treasure,”  and  Merryman,  “Thinking  about  the 

 2  .   Merryman, “Two Ways of Thinking,” 852. Comments on the philosophical underpinnings of 

 3  .   Seligman, “The Murals of Teotihuacán.” The text of the agreement is reproduced in Merryman 

 9  .    http://www.italyinus2013.org/en .  
 10  .   Arndt,  The First Resort of Kings .  
 11  .   Texts of bilateral agreements are available at  http://eca.state.gov/cultural-heritage-center/

  
Elgin Marbles,” 24–63.  
  
this influential paradigm are offered by Gillman,  The Idea of Cultural Heritage , 27–41.  
  
et al.,  Law, Ethics, and the Visual Arts,  368.  
  
 4  .   For a list of international agreements with illustrations of returned objects, see the web site 
of the Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Tourism:  http://www.archeologia.beniculturali.it/index.
php?it/226/accordi-con-musei-statunitensi .  
  
 5  .    http://www.dma.org/art/dallas-museum-art-exchange-program-dmx .  
  
 6  .   Rose, “The Case of the Troy Gold”; Velioglu et al., “Case Troy Gold.” The text of the MOU 
is  available  at   https://plone.unige.ch/art-adr/cases-affaires/orpheus-mosaic-2013-turkey-and-
dallas-museum-of-art/memorandum-of-understanding-between-turkey-and-dallas-museum-of-
art/view .  
 7  .   For a summary of Germany’s transfer of the Bo ğ azköy Sphinx in a “voluntary gesture of friend-
  
ship,” see  https://plone.unige.ch/art-adr/cases-affaires/bogazkoy-sphinx-2013-turkey-and-germany . 
See also “Turkey’s Cultural Ambitions: Of Marbles and Men,”  The Economist , 19 May 2012.  
  
 8  .   Four works of art were loaned by the archaeological museums in Naples and Vibo Valentia in 
2013, including the important red-figured stamnos by the Dinos Painter depicting a scene from the 
Lenaia festival:  http://artmuseum.princeton.edu/about/press-room/press-release/new-loans-italy-
now-view-princeton-university-art-museum . On the MOU with the Benaki Museum:  http://artmuseum.
princeton.edu/story/museum-expands-international-partnerships .  
  
  
  
cultural-property-protection/bilateral-agreements .  
 12  .   Cianferoni et al.,  Myth, Allegory, Emblem .  
  
  
 13  .   Lynda Alberston, “OpEd: Italy’s Corte Suprema di Cassazione and the Getty Bronze: What 
Will Be the Fate of the Fano Athlete?” 26 February 2014,  http://art-crime.blogspot.com/2014/02/
italys-corte-suprema-di-cassazione-and.html .  
  
 14  .    A  scientific  and  field  project  of  the  Getty  Conservation  Institute  has  been  ongoing  at 
Herculaneum  since  2008:   http://www.getty.edu/conservation/our_projects/science/herculaneum/
index.html .  
  
  
at  http://www.regione.sicilia.it/beniculturali/deadimorgantina/index.html .  
  
exhibitions/gela/ .  
  
 18  .   See Decree DA-1771 issued on 27 June 2013, prohibiting the export from the territory of the 
Region of Sicily of assets that constitute the principal holdings of museums, galleries, libraries and 
collections:  http://www.regione.sicilia.it/beniculturali/dirbenicult/Trasparenza/DecretiVisibili_view.
asp?editid1=366 .  
  
 19  .   Laura Anello, “La Sicilia blinda i suoi tesori. All’estero solo a pagamento,”  La Stampa , 13 July 
2013. Reconsideration of agreements did not only affect the cultural sector. A U.S. Department of 
Defense program to deploy a satellite communications system at Niscemi was also temporarily halted.  
 20  .    http://www.mariaritasgarlata.it/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/theshowisbackon1.jpg .  
  
 21  .    http://www.getty.edu/art/exhibitions/sicily/ .  
  
  
 22  .    The  agreement  was  signed  by  James  Cuno,  President  of  the  Getty  Trust,  and  Pavlos 
Yeroulanos, Minister of Culture and Tourism of the Hellenic Republic:  http://news.getty.edu/
press_materials.cfm#2-3-5590 .  

 15  .   Risser and Saunders,  Restoration of Ancient Bronzes .  
 16  .   The Italian text of the agreement and description of the circumstances of the return is available 

 17  .   See  http://www.getty.edu/art/exhibitions/agrigento_youth/  and  http://www.getty.edu/art/

THINKING ABOUT ANTIQUITIES  

  265 

  
 23  .   The objects repatriated were a fragment of a funerary relief that joined one in the Kanellopoulos 
Museum, and a Greek inscribed stele (the Thorikos Calendar), which had been known to scholars 
since the 1960s. Long awaited, the 2012 Framework finally created a relationship that had failed to 
materialize even after a deal was brokered to return four objects in 2006. Despite announcements of 
a new beginning by the former Minister of Culture George Volgarakis, a lack of political will blocked 
progress on this front for six years.  
  
  
  
254, 6 February 2014.   

 24  .   For an overview see  http://www.getty.edu/art/exhibitions/lion_attacking_horse/ .  
 25  .   Merryman, “Two Ways of Thinking,” 849.  
 26  .   Ermanno Rivetti and Javier Pes, “Morgantina Loan Deal Loses its Sheen,”  Art Newspaper , Issue 

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Arndt  ,   Richard T  .  The First Resort of Kinds: American Cultural Diplomacy in the Twentieth Century . 
 Washington, DC :  Potomac Books ,  2005 .  

    Cianferoni  ,   Carlotta  ,   Mario     Iozzo  , and   Elisabetta     Setari  .  Myth, Allegory, Emblem. The Many Lives of 
the Chimaera of Arezzo .  Proceedings of the International Colloquium, Malibu, J. Paul Getty Museum, 
4–5 December 2009 .  Rome :  Aracne Editrice ,  2012 .  

    Gillman  ,   Derek  .  The Idea of Cultural Heritage .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press ,  2010 .  

    Merryman  ,   John Henry  . “ Thinking about the Elgin Marbles .” In   John Henry     Merryman  ,  Thinking 
about the Elgin Marbles. Critical Essays on Cultural Property, Art and Law ,  2  nd  ed.,  24 – 63 .  Alphen aan 
den Rijn, Netherlands :  Wolters Kluwer Law & Business ,  2009 .  

    ——— . “ Thinking about the Sevso Treasure .” In  The Futures of Our Pasts , edited by   Michael A.   
  Adler   and   Susan Benton     Bruning  ,  51 – 66 .  Santa Fe, NM :  School for Advanced Research Press ,  2012 .  

    ——— . “ Two Ways of Thinking about Cultural Property .”  American Journal of International Law , 
 80  ( 1986 ):  831 –53.  

    Merryman  ,   John Henry  ,   Albert     Elsen  , and   Stephen K.     Urice  .  Law Ethics and the Visual Arts ,  5th ed.  
 The Netherlands :  Kluwer Law ,  2007 .  

    Risser  ,   Erik  , and   David     Saunders  .  The Restoration of Ancient Bronzes: Naples and Beyond .  Los Angeles : 
 J.  Paul  Getty  Museum .   http://www.getty.edu/museum/symposia/restoring_bronzes/index.html  
( 2013 ; accessed 16 July 2014).  

    Rose  ,   C. Brian  .  “Beyond the UNESCO Convention: the Case of the Troy Gold in the Penn Museum.” 
Unpublished  paper  delivered  at  Restitution  and  Repatriation:  The  Return  of  Cultural  Objects 
symposium, DePaul University, Chicago, 14 November   2013 .  

    Seligman  ,   Thomas K  . “ The Murals of Teotihuacán: A Case Study of Negotiated Restitution .” In  The 
Ethics of Collecting: Whose Culture? Whose Property? ,  2nd ed. , edited by   Phyllis Mauch     Messenger  , 
 73 – 84 .  Albuquerque :  University of New Mexico Press ,  1999 .  

    Velioglu  ,   Ece  ,   Anne Laure     Bandle  , and   Marc-André     Renold  .  “Case Troy Gold—Turkey and the 
University  of  Pennsylvania  Museum  of  Archaeology  and  Anthropology,”  Platform  ArThemis  
( http://unige.ch/art-adr ), Art-Law Center, University of Geneva.    


