The Protection  of Cultural Property
in the Arab World
Christine  Irsheid*

Abstract: This  article  presents  a comparative  description  of the  na-
tional  legislation  concerning  the  protection  of  cultural  property  in
the  various  Arab nations  and  the  influence  of regional  and  interna-
tional  agreements.  These  different  legislative  schemes  are  also dis-
cussed  in the  context  of  attempts  to unify  the treatment  of cultural
property  among these nations which  face  similar problems.

1  Introduction

"Herrlich  ist der Orient
Ubers Mittelmeer  gedrungen;
Nur wer Hafis  liebt und kennt,
WeiB, was Calderon  gesungen."
Goethe, West-ostlicher  Diwan

Arab  culture  derives  from  a  very  old  tradition.  Poetry  devoted  to
love, glory, natural  phenomena,  animals and botany  had already  at-
tained  a very  high  level  in the  sixth  century.'  Because  of  the  local
character of the poems, describing a wide range of subjects  such as
riding through  the  desert,  califs,  emirs,  wars,  settlements,  gardens,
and palaces,2 poetry  became  an  important  witness to  contemporary
history.

Beginning in 622 A. D., Islam spread throughout the world, carry-
ing with it Arab culture and the Arabic language. With its 700 million
believers3  dispersed  from  Spain  to  the  northern  part  of  Africa  and
the equator  and  from  Morocco eastward  over great parts of Asia as
far  as  the  Philippines,  Islam  had  a strong  impact  on  literature,  sci-
ence,  technology,  architecture,  art  and  agriculture4  in  nearly  every
country.

The Koran inspired numerous religious, theological, philosophical
and juridical  essays. Geographical  studies, travel  reports  and  ency-
clopedias  followed.5  Of  great  significance  were  the  social  analysis
of history by Ibn Chaldun, which was unequaled in mediaeval times
in both the Orient and Occident, and the dissemination  by the Arabs
of  the  so-called  Arabic  numerals  —  of  Indian  origin  —  which  are

11

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

now  used  throughout  most  of  the  world.6  The translation  of  books
concerning  medicine,  astronomy,  astrology,  logic  and  agriculture
since  750 A. D. was very important  in preserving  scientific  knowl-
edge and  making  it available to the public.7

It is not possible  to present  a detailed  discussion  of the  technical
aspects  of  the  legislation  concerned  with  the  protection  of  cultural
property  of  every  country within the Arab world. Thus the scope of
the  present  article  is confined  to  a comparison  of  the  regional  and
international  conventions and summaries focussing  on particular as-
pects of the different  countries' national  legislation. The reader may
thereby  gain  an  understanding  of  how  the  Arab  nations  cope  with
the  responsibility  of caring for  their national  heritage.

2  International  Involvement  for  the Protection  of

Cultural  Property

If one compares the involvement  in international  conventions of the
member states of the Arab League with the involvement of the mem-
ber  states  of  the  Council  of  Europe,  it  is  noticeable  that  the  Arab
countries together with the Eastern European countries have  ratified
the UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting  and Prevent-
ing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer  of Ownership  of Cultural
Property  of  1970 and the UNESCO Convention  of  1972 concerning
the Protection of the Cultural and Natural Heritage more quickly and
in  greater  numbers  than the  West  European  countries.  Only  Italy,
Greece,  Turkey  and  Cyprus  seem  to be  interested  in  these  interna-
tional  conventions.  One reason  for  the  failure  of  European  nations
to ratify  these  international  conventions may be the European Com-
munity  conventions  in this  field.

However,  Arab  interest  in  the  protection  of  cultural  heritage
through international conventions goes back to colonial times, when
the  colonial  rulers  transferred  a  considerable  quantity  of  cultural
property to European countries. To this day, the restitution  of many
of these cultural objects remains a problem  because their ownership
is still  in dispute.

3  Role  of the Arab League

The  Arab  League  was established  as  an  international  confederation
of  sovereign  states  to  encourage  cooperation  among  the  Arab
nations. The Pact  of the Arab League was signed  in  1945 by  Syria,
Transjordan,  Iraq,  Saudi  Arabia,  Egypt,  and,  later,  Yemen,  and  it
entered into force  on  11  May  1945 after  ratification  by these states.8
An  additional  13 states later joined  the Arab League.9 The  purpose
of  the  League  was  to  mediate  in  the  event  of  conflict  among  the

12

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the Arab  World

member  states and to achieve close cooperation  in economic  devel-
opment, financial  affairs,  customs, traffic,  consular, cultural, health,
and  social  affairs.  To implement  this  cooperation,  the Arab  League
created  several  departments called  organizations.

The organization responsible for cultural affairs  is the Arab Organ-
ization  for  Culture,  Education  and  Science.  It  has  sponsored  more
than ten conferences  on the subject of Antiquities in the Arab Coun-
tries,  at  one of  which  a draft  bill  was  submitted  for  a  standardized
Law  on  Antiquities.  This  draft  was  discussed  at  an  extraordinary
meeting of the education ministers, who recommended  that this bill
be adopted by individual  states so as to standardize national  legisla-
tion  in the Arab countries  for  the protection  of cultural  property. In
addition, the ministers presented  a draft  of a model  law on the pro-
tection  of writings, which  was  formulated  at a conference  in  1976.
With  the  draft  of  the  Law  on  Antiquities,  the  idea  of  a register  of
experts  and  a  membership  for  registered  experts  was  born,  which
will be described  later.

3.1  The  Standardized  Law on Antiquities10
The  Standardized  Law  on  Antiquities  is  only  a  proposal  and  not
a  law  to  be  adopted  directly  into  national  law.  According  to  the
Organization,  it is intended to provide  extensive protection  of mov-
able and immovable cultural property, but it also must be adapted to
the  individual  requirements  of each  country. Because  it  is very  de-
tailed,  only a brief  summary  is presented.

The  first  chapter  deals  with  the  definition  of  antiquities,  regula-
tions  concerning  the  rights  and  obligations  of  the responsible  gov-
ernment  authority,  and  the  ownership  rights  of  the  State  within
whose  territory  the antiquity  is situated.  According to the  draft,  an-
tiquities  are  all  objects  that  are  left  from  former  civilizations  and
everything  discovered  which  has  value  for  art,  science,  literature,
religion,  or  daily  life  and  is  older  than  one  hundred  years.  Those
antiquities  which  are  considered  very  significant  include  manu-
scripts  and  other  writings,  as  well  as  human,  animal  and  botanic
remains. The government  authorities  are required to protect,  restore
and register antiquities and to spread education about the archaeolog-
ical heritage to the public.

The second  chapter deals with  excavations. It sets out the  defini-
tion of excavation, the obligations of the authorities, and the require-
ments for obtaining an excavation  licence, including regulations  for
the  rights  and  duties  of  participants  in  an  excavation.  This  chapter
also  encourages  the  organizing  of  exhibitions  and  the  founding  of
museums to present newly discovered objects to the public. In addi-
tion, it promotes traveling and international  exhibitions. Methods for
documentation, scheduling and registration  of discoveries on special
maps are also proposed.

13

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

The  third  chapter  sets  out  conditions  for  trade  in  antiquities  and
addresses the issues of export and return. It also includes provisions
to  control  donation  of antiquities  to  other  countries.  It  is  forbidden
to  trade  in  antiquities  for  the  purpose  of  export  without  a  licence
from  the Department of Antiquities. Without such a licence, all con-
tracts  for  export  of antiquities  are void.

The  fourth  chapter deals with the  exchange  of antiquities  among
Arab countries, lists an extensive catalogue of specific crimes against
cultural  property but suggests  only general  penalties. The catalogue
of  crimes  includes  excavation  without  a  licence;  failure  to  register
discoveries; theft  and robbery  of antiquities; theft  of discovered an-
tiquities;  hiding  of  antiquities;  failure  to  inform  the  Department  of
Antiquities  of  antiquities  privately  owned  by  a  natural  or juridical
person;  damage to antiquities  or archaeological  sites; destruction  of
antiquities; attempted smuggling; injury  to a monument or antiquity;
trade in antiquities without informing  the Department  of Antiquities
or without obtaining a licence; modification  of an antiquity; restora-
tion  of an antiquity  without a licence or in a manner  different  from
that  specified  in a licence; and smuggling inside the country.

3.2  The Model  Law for the Protection  of Writings11
The  introduction  to  this  law  emphasizes  the  special  interest  in  the
protection  of  writings  which  are  an  important  part  of  the  Islamic
Arab tradition.  The Model Law is a draft  bill  as well. It is  intended
to  promote  the  protection  of  cultural  property  specifically  in  this
field. As before,  the following  is only a summary.

Article  1  defines the word writing to include all handwritten docu-
ments,  regardless  of their  language,  which  are  more  than  50  years
old;  original  contracts,  papyrus  scrolls,  drawings,  paintings,  tables
and maps which  are older than 50 years, and originals of any intel-
lectual  product  regardless  of  age. The  writings  in  these  three  cate-
gories  must  be  of  intellectual,  national  or historical  importance  for
the Arab tradition.

Article  2 concerns the creation  of a government  authority  and  its
obligations, including scheduling  of protected writings,  establishing
special measures  for protection  in case of specific  threat to a manu-
script,  and  exchanging  of  copies  among  the  authorities  of the Arab
countries.  If  a  country  does  not  designate  a  special  authority,  the
National  Library  is responsible.

Other provisions  of the draft  law deal with the rights and obliga-
tions of the owner or finder of a manuscript including the obligation
of safekeeping  (Article 3); the issue of compensation (Article 4); and
the government's right of confiscation  (Article 5). Article 6 regulates
penalties.  First-time  offenders  acting  deliberately  are  liable  to  im-
prisonment  for  up to three years and a fine  of not more than  $3000
(in the national  currency). In case of subsequent violations, the pen-
alties are  doubled.

14

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the  Arab World

3.3  The Registration  of Experts
In addition to the two model laws, the Arab League drew up a cata-
logue of criteria  for  registration  of experts. Those who are admitted
include  archaeologists,  university  professors,  and  professionals
working  in  museums,  government  authorities  and  other  institutions
in the Arab countries, as well as those with personal capabilities and
extensive  practical  experience.  The  register  contains  a  curriculum
vitae, qualifications,  specializations, academic work, linguistic capa-
bilities,  practice,  experience  in  excavations,  extended  vocational
training, and membership in academic associations and special com-
mittees. This register  is thus intended  to ensure  optimal  care  of ex-
cavations  and to support  academic exchange.

4  National  Legislation

The protection of cultural property is well codified  in the legislation
of  most  of  the  countries  to be  discussed.  To give  an  impression  of
the national legislation of the various Arab countries, four topics will
be  considered:
— the definition  of cultural  property;
— the  responsible  government  authorities,  including  discussion  of

their rights and obligations;

— the trade  in antiquities,  including  import  and  export  regulations,

and

— penalties and sanctions in case of violation of the various regula-
tions and in case of deliberate destruction, defacement  or damage
to cultural  property.

4.1  Algeria
In Algeria, the protection of cultural property  is settled in Ordinance
No. 67—281 of 20 December  1967 on Excavations  and the Protec-
tion  of  Historic  and  Natural  Sites  and  Monuments.12  According  to
this  Ordinance,  the  authority  responsible  for  protection  is  the  Na-
tional  Commission  for Monuments  and  Sites. It is established  under
the Minister Responsible, for the Arts (Article  128) and has its head-
quarters in this  Ministry.

The National  Commission  may  be convened  by the  Minister Re-
sponsible  for  the  Arts or  at the  request  of  another  ministry  (Article
129).  The  Commission  makes  decisions  concerning  the  scheduling
and  registration  on  the  supplementary  inventory  of  all  historical
monuments  and  any other  matters  concerning  monuments  and  sites
(Article  133).  Within  each  department,  a  Commission  for  Monu-
ments  and  Sites  is established  (Article  134 and  135). These  depart-
mental commissions must be notified,  by right, of all changes in, on
or in view of historical  monuments.

15

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

Historical monuments include  any object, whether movable or at-
tached  to  immovable  property  (Article  57),  that  forms  an  integral
part  of  the  national  heritage  (Article  19).  It  encompasses  all  sites,
monuments and movable objects belonging to any period  in the his-
tory  of the country from  prehistoric  times to the present  day  which
are of national  historic, artistic or archaeological  interest.

The State has the right to cause all servitudes to be exercised. The
State  may  place  any  scheduled  object  in the national  collection  for
the  purpose  of  preserving  the  nation's  cultural  heritage  (Article  3).
Individuals having possession  or control of such objects  may  retain
the use  of the object.  However,  ownership of these objects  may not
be  transferred  or  acquired  by  prescription.  If  any  such  object  is in-
corporated  into  a  national  collection,  compensation  determined  on
the basis of an expert  opinion  shall be paid by the  State (Article 3).
Anyone who without prior authorization from  the Minister of Arts
(Article  1) deliberately  destroys,  defaces  or  damages  all  or part  of
an  historic  site  or  monument,  whether  movable  or  immovable,  that
is  scheduled  or  registered  on  the  supplementary  inventory  is  liable
to  imprisonment  for  a  term  of  between  two  months  and  five  years
and  a fine between 500 DA and 2,000 DA. Any attempt  to commit
such  an offence  is treated  as  if the offence  has been committed  and
is  punishable  with  the  same  penalties.  In  the  case  of  repetition  of
an  offence,  the  minimum  and  maximum  amounts  of the  prescribed
penalties  are  doubled  (Article  124).  A  keeper  or  custodian  of  an
historic  site or monument,  who through gross negligence  allows all
or  part  of  the  building  or  objects  placed  under  his  safekeeping  to
be destroyed,  defaced,  damaged  or unlawfully  removed, is liable to
imprisonment  for  a term of between one week and three months, or
a fine between  100 DA and 4,000 DA, or both of these penalties. In
the  case  of  repetition  of  the  offence,  the  prescribed  penalties  are
cumulative (Article 125).

The selling or receiving and concealing of movable historic monu-
ments  that are  scheduled  or registered  on the  supplementary  inven-
tory  or  of  objects  resulting  from  the dismemberment  or  division  of
such  an  historic  monument  is  punishable  with  imprisonment  for  a
term  of  between  one  month  and  six  months,  or  a  fine  of  between
500 DA and 2,000 DA or an amount equal to twice the selling price,
or  both,  without  prejudice  to  additional  penalties  for  damages  and
confiscation.  Any  person  acquiring  such  an  object  is  considered  to
be  an  accomplice  in  the  offence.  In  the  case  of  repetition  of  an
offence,  the fines  and the terms of imprisonment provided are cumu-
lative (Article  121).

The  export  of  any  scheduled  property  is  prohibited.  In  case  of
violation,  the  fine  is  between  500  DA  and  10,000  DA. In  case  of
repetition  of an  offence,  the  penalty  may  include  imprisonment  for
a term between one month and six months (Article  122). In the event
of an attempt to export any such object  without the authorization  of
the  State,  the  object  in  question  may be  seized  and  confiscated  for
the benefit  of the  State (Article 4).

16

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the  Arab World

4.2  Bahrain
The protection  of cultural  property  in Bahrain  and  its  dependencies
is  settled  in the  Bahrain  Antiquities  Ordinance  of  1 March  1970.13
According to this Ordinance, the authority responsible for Protection
in  Bahrain  is the Rais,14  who  makes  those  determinations  required
by the Ordinance, including the granting of licences and compensa-
tions.  The  decisions  of  the  Rais  are  final  and  binding,  but  those
involving  any object,  site or building  which  is considered  an antiq-
uity  are  made  in  consultation  with  the  Directorate  of  Archaeology
and Museums (Article 3 Subsection 2).

The Ordinance  differentiates  among three  kinds of antiquities:

1.  any object  whether movable  or immovable  which  has been  con-
structed,  shaped,  inscribed,  erected,  excavated  or otherwise pro-
duced  or modified  by human  agency before  the year A. D.  1780
together  with  any  part  thereof  which  has  at  a  later  date  been
added or reconstructed,  and

2.  human  and animal  remains older than the year A. D. 600, and
3.  any  object  whether  movable  or  immovable  of  a  date  later  than
A. D.  1780  which  the  Rais  in  consultation  with  the  Directorate
of Archaeology and Museums declares to be an antiquity (Article
3 Subsection 2).
An  owner  who  desires  to  transfer  an  antiquity  must  offer  it  first
to  the Rais. Within  one month,  the Rais must  either  acquire  it  at a
price that is not less than the material  value of the antiquity  (Article
11  Subsection  1)  or  grant  the  owner  a  permit  to  transfer  it.  The
owner  is then  free  to  transfer  or to  export  the  antiquity  (Article 21
Subsection  1). In  case  of  a  violation,  the  sanction  is  imprisonment
up to one month, or a fine  not exceeding BD 25, or both (Article 23
lit. c and  24 lit. a).

A licence  from  the Rais (Article  19) is required  for  the export of
any antiquity from  Bahrain and its dependencies. However, the Rais
may prohibit the exportation when such action is in the public inter-
est  (Article  20). If a foreign  country  maintains  adequate  provisions
in its laws to prevent  the illicit  importation of antiquities  from  Bah-
rain,  the Rais may  issue  orders  forbidding  the  import  of  antiquities
from  that country  into Bahrain, unless  the export  from  that  country
was under a licence granted by the Department of Antiquities in that
country.  In  case  of  contravention  of  such  an  order,  the  antiquity  is
seized and returned to the government of the country of origin (Arti-
cle 23 lit. d).

In  case  of  any  other  violation,  including  illicit  export  or  import,
willful  injury, destruction, obliteration, removal, or concealment (Ar-
ticle 23 lit. b) of an antiquity, the perpetrator  is liable  for  imprison-
ment of up to six months, or a fine not exceeding BD  100, or both.
In  addition,  the  court  may  order  the  forfeiture  of  any  antiquity  in-
volved in the offence  (Article 25 lit. a) or the offender  may be liable
to  pay  the  cost  of  any  damages  caused  to  the  antiquity  (Article  25
lit. c).

17

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

4.3  Egypt
In Egypt,  the protection  of cultural  property is fixed in the Antiqui-
ties'  Protection  Law.15 In  accord  with the  statute, the Egyptian An-
tiquities  Authority  is responsible  for  the  supervision  of  all  matters
related  to  antiquities (Article 5).

Antiquity  means  any  movable  or  immovable  property  that  is  a
product of any of the various civilizations or is representative  of any
of the arts, sciences, literatures and religions which existed in Egypt.
An  antiquity  may  date  from  prehistoric  times  up  to  one  hundred
years before  the  present  and  must  have archaeological  or  historical
value  or  significance  as  a  relic  of  one  of  the  various  civilizations
that were established in the land of Egypt or were historically  related
to  it,  as  well  as  human  and  animal  remains  from  any  such  period
(Article  1). An  antiquity  is considered  to be public  property  unless
it is owned  by a waqf*6  (Article 6).

The  Egyptian  Antiquities  Authority  has  the  right  of  preemption
and  may  appropriate  any  antiquity  at  its discretion.  It  may  also re-
cover any antiquity that has been detached from an immovable struc-
ture  and  is  in  the  possession  of  a  trader  or  other  person,  in  return
for  fair  compensation  (Article  9 Subsection 3).

All  trade  in  antiquities  is  prohibited  from  the  effective  date  of
this  law  (Article  6 and  7).  Any  person  who  unlawfully  exports  or
participates  in  the  exporting  of  an  antiquity  from  the  Republic  is
liable to a prison term at hard labor and a fine of not less than 5,000
and  not  more  than  15,000  pounds  (Article  41).  By  decision  of  the
President  of  the  Republic,  the  Antiquities  Authority  may  exchange
movable  antiquities  of which  there  are several  examples  with Arab
and  foreign  countries, museums  and  scientific  institutes.  It may ex-
hibit  antiquities  abroad  for  limited  periods,  except  those  which  are
classified  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of the  Authority  as  unique  or
particularly  liable to damage  (Article  10).

In  case  of  willful  destruction,  damage,  defacement,  or  alteration
of  features  or detachment  of part of an antiquity  or historical  build-
ing, or participation  in  such  an  act, and in case of theft  or conceal-
ment of a publicly owned antiquity or a part thereof, or participation
in  theft  or  concealment,  the  offence  is punishable  by  a prison  term
between  five  and  seven years and  a fine between  3,000  and  50,000
pounds  (Article 42). The antiquity  in question  as well  as any equip-
ment,  tools,  machinery  and  vehicles  used  in the  commission  of  an
offence  may  be  confiscated  and  turned over to  the  Authority  (Arti-
cles 41  and 42).

The removal  or detachment of a publicly owned or registered an-
tiquity  from  its place without  the written authorization  of the Antiq-
uities Authority, appropriation of an antiquity and unlawful  disposal
of  it, and  counterfeiting  of  an antiquity with  fraudulent  or  deceitful
intent  are  punishable by  imprisonment  between  one and  two years,
a fine between  100 and 500 pounds, or both (Article 43). Accidental

18

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the Arab World

defacement  of  or  damage  to  a  movable  or  immovable  antiquity  or
detachment of a part of such an antiquity is punishable by imprison-
ment  between  three  months  and one  year  or to  a fine  between  100
and  500 pounds or both(Article 45).

4.4  Iraq
The protection of cultural property in Iraq is settled in the Antiquities
Law No. 59 of  1936, as amended by Law No.  120 of  1974 and Law
No.  164 of  1975, and Law No. 40 of  1926 prohibiting  trafficking  in
antiquities. The Minister  of Information  and Justice  is charged with
the  execution  of  the  Law  (Article  73).  The  Minister  may  delegate
some or all of the powers vested in him under this Law to the Direc-
tor  of  the  Department  of  Antiquities.  The  Minister  may  amend  or
cancel the delegation  at any time (Article 69).

The Directorate  must register  antiquities  and ancient  manuscripts
in the official  register  and  should  supply the owner with  an  official
registration certificate  (Article  16 Paragraph 4). Law No.  120 is unu-
sual in that it mentions manuscripts along with antiquities. This fact
strengthens  the  role  of  manuscripts  in  the  view  of  the  Iraqi  gov-
ernment.17

Antiquities  include any movable or immovable  object  which was
erected, made, produced, sculptured, written, drawn or photographed
by  humans  and  which  is  at  least  two  hundred  years  old  (Article  1
Paragraph  le).  Movable  antiquities  include  all  antiquities  detached
from the soil or from  buildings  and easily removed and  transported
to  any  other  place  (Article  2).  The  Directorate  may  classify  as  an
antiquity  any movable or immovable  object,  which  is less than  two
hundred  years  old,  if the public  interest  requires  its protection,  due
to its historical, national, religious  or artistic value. This is done by
a  decision  of  the  Minister,  published  in  the  Government  Gazette
(Article  1 Paragraph 2).

The  inspector  of  antiquities  has  investigative  powers  as  far  as
violations  of the  provisions  of  the  Law  are  concerned  (Article 65).
Guards and attendants  of antiquities have the same powers as those
granted  to policemen  to prevent  illicit digging and trafficking  (Arti-
cle 66).

Movable antiquities  may be sold  if there  are many  similar  exam-
ples  in Iraqi  museums  and  their  loss would  not  impair  the value of
Iraqi museum collections; however, the quantity and quality of such
antiquities  must be specified  by a special  regulation  (Article 24). A
possessor of antiquities and manuscripts must obtain the approval of
the Directorate  before  acquiring or transferring  ownership. The per-
son  who  is  granted  possession  of  antiquities  must  be  Iraqi  and  a
resident  of  Iraq  and  must  submit  to  the  Directorate  a  guarantee  to
fulfill  all  the  necessary  obligations  of  the  previous  possessor.  This
requirement applies to sale, donation, lending and depositing, as well

19

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

as all other means of transferring possession or permanent or tempo-
rary acquisition  (Article  16 Paragraph  3c).

The export of any antiquity is prohibited. Nevertheless, the Direc-
torate may permit temporary export for scientific studies, exchanges,
and  exhibitions  (Article  26).  The  Department  of  Antiquities  may,
upon the approval  of the Ministry, exchange certain antiquities  in its
possession for antiquities possessed by other museums and  scientific
institutions,  provided  that  such  an  exchange  tends  to  increase  the
value of  Iraqi  museum collections  (Article 25). Any confiscated  an-
tiquity  is  delivered  to  the  Department  of  Antiquities  (Article  68).
The Government  may confiscate  any  archaeological  object  brought
into Iraq without the authorization  of the government of the country
of  origin  and  may  return  it  if  there  is  an  agreement  for  reciprocal
action between  the governments  of the two countries.18

Any  person  who  smuggles,  assists  in  smuggling  or  attempts  to
smuggle antiquities may be sentenced to imprisonment for up to five
years.  The  antiquities  involved  in  the  crime,  as  well  as  any  other
antiquities  in  that  person's  possession  even  if  they  are  registered,
are  subject  to confiscation.  The theft  of antiquities  which  are  in the
Directorate's  possession  is punishable by imprisonment  for  a period
of not  less  than  six years and  a fine  equal to six times the  value of
the  stolen  antiquity.  An  attempt  or  intent  to  commit  such  a  crime
is  considered  the  complete  action.  An  accomplice  or  instigator  is
considered  the  same as the  perpetrator.  The  punishment  is  doubled
if the crime is committed by an individual entrusted with.the admin-
istration, keeping, preserving or guarding of antiquities (Article 60).
It  is  forbidden  to break,  mutilate,  destroy  or  damage  antiquities,
whether movable or immovable (Article 5). An offence  is punishable
with imprisonment for a period up to one year, with a fine up to two
hundred  dinars,  or  with  both  (Article  55).  It  is  also  prohibited  to
counterfeit  or  forge  antiquities.  Any  scientist  or  artist  wishing  to
make  molds  and  models  of certain  antiquities  must  obtain  the  per-
mission  of  the  Department  of  Antiquities  for  each  individual  case;
the  conditions  and  methods  prescribed  by  the  Directorate  must  be
satisfied  in order to avoid any possibility of fraud  or forgery  (Article
22).  A  violation  of this  provision  is punishable  with  imprisonment
up to  six months, a fine up to one hundred  dinars, or both, and the
counterfeit  or imitation  article  is confiscated  (Article 59).

4.5  Jordan
The protection of cultural property in Jordan is settled in the Antiqui-
ties Law No.  12 of 5 March  1988.19 For enforcement  of this law, the
Director,  his  deputies, the  district  chiefs,  the  antiquities  inspectors,
and the keepers of those museums under the authority of the Depart-
ment  of  Antiquities are invested  with  the powers  of officials  of the
criminal  investigation bureau  (Article 29).

20

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the  Arab  World

Antiquity  means  any  item  of  movable  or  immovable  property
made or produced, painted, engraved, built, discovered or altered  by
human agency before A. D. 1700, including caves, sculptures, coins,
pottery,  manuscripts  and  other  kinds  of  articles  which  provide  evi-
dence about the traditions of past civilizations, or any part  added  to
such property  or rebuilt  after  this date. Antiquities  also  include  any
movable  or  immovable  property  which  is  attributed  to  a  date  later
than A. D.  1700 but which is designated by the Minister as an antiq-
uity in the Official  Gazette. Movable antiquities are antiquities which
are not  attached  to the  ground  or  immovable  antiquities  which  can
be removed without being damaged or causing damage to any  antiq-
uities to which they  are attached or to the place in which they were
discovered  (Article 2).

The Department of Antiquities has extensive  duties and responsi-
bilities. The Department  is required,  for  example, to  implement  the
policy of the State concerning  antiquities; to compile  a schedule  of
antiquities  and historic sites and to determine the  importance  of  ev-
ery  antiquity;  to  administer  the  antiquities  in  the  kingdom  and  to
assume responsibility  for their supervision, protection,  safeguarding,
preservation  and  registration;  to  improve  their  surroundings  and  to
exhibit  them;  to disseminate  knowledge  of archaeological  treasures
and to  establish  archaeological  institutes  and  museums;  to  promote
the establishment of museums in furtherance  of governmental  activi-
ties in the kingdom, particularly history museums, art museums  and
folk museums; to cooperate with local, Arab and foreign  archaeolog-
ical  institutions  with  a  view  to  fostering  the  safeguarding  of  the
archaeological  heritage and the recognition  of its importance,  in ac-
cordance  with  the  laws  and  regulations  in  force;  to  supervise  the
possession  of  antiquities  and  their  disposal  in  accordance  with  the
provisions  of the law and related regulations, decisions and  instruc-
tions (Article 3).

Trade  in antiquities  in  the kingdom  is prohibited  (Article 23),  as
well  as  the  export  of  movable  archaeological  property  without  the
authorization  of  the  Department  and  the  approval  of  the  Minister
(Article 24). However, the Department is empowered to purchase  all
or part of any antiquities  in the possession  of an owner and to  set  a
price  with  the  agreement  of  the  Minister.  In  the  event  that  the  De-
partment  decides  not  to  purchase  the  antiquities,  their  owner  may
transfer  ownership  to  another  party.  The  Department  must  be  in-
formed  of  such  transactions  and  exercises  supervision  with  regard
thereto  (Article  25).  The  Antiquities  Law  requires  all  owners  and
possessors  of antiquities  to  submit  a register  of these  antiquities  to
the  Department;  this  provision  includes  those  antiquities  owned  or
possessed  at  the  time  the  Law  entered  into  force.  The  Council  of
Ministers  may  lend,  exchange  or  make  a  gift  of  any  antiquities  if
the  Department has copies, provided that the  loan, exchange or  gift
is made for the benefit  of official  bodies, scientific  or archaeological
institutions,  or  museums  (Article  10). Any  person  who  trafflcks  in

21

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

antiquities  is  liable  to  imprisonment  for  a  term  between  one  and
three years  and to a fine of two hundred  dinars  (Article 26).

The Law forbids  any person to deface, destroy or mutilate antiqui-
ties, particularly  by changing their  appearance, dismembering them,
modifying  them or affixing  to them advertising panels, signs or other
objects  of  any  kind; to  forge  or counterfeit  any  antiquity; to manu-
facture  or  circulate  one  or  more  copies  of  an  antiquity  without  the
authorization of the Department; to manufacture  or to use molds and
specimens  of  antiquities  without  the  authorization  of  the  Depart-
ment;  to  fail  to  inform  the  authorities  of  discoveries  of  antiquities
or to withhold  information  of  such  discoveries  from  the authorities;
to  furnish  false  data  or  information  or  submit  false  documents  in
order  to  obtain  such permits  or  authorizations  as  are granted  under
the present  Law; to refuse  or fail  to turn  over discovered  antiquities
to  the  Department,  whether  or  not  the  antiquities  were  discovered
under  an authorization  to excavate;  and  to  export  antiquities or dis-
pose of antiquities  in violation  of the provisions  of the present law,
particularly  through concealment  or smuggling. Any person who vi-
olates these provisions  is liable to imprisonment  for  a term  between
two months and two years or to a fine between fifty and two hundred
dinars (Article 27).

Any  antiquity  in  question  may  be  confiscated  and  becomes  the
property of the Department  (Article 28). An appropriate cash reward
may be paid to any person who assists or  provides information  con-
cerning  violation  of  this  law  or  which  leads  to  the  confiscation  of
any  antiquity  discovered  or  exchanged  in  contravention  of  the pro-
visions  of  this  law  or  the  regulations,  instructions,  and  decisions
published  in connection  with  this  law  (Article 31).

4.6  Kuwait
In Kuwait, the Ministry  of Information  is  responsible for the protec-
tion  of  cultural  property. The  applicable  law  is codified  in  Princely
Decree  No.  11 of  1960 concerning  Antiquities,  amended  by Ameer
Decree  No.  Ill  of  1976. 20  Anything  made,  produced  or  built  by
humans  more than  forty  years  ago  is considered  an antiquity  which
should  be  studied,  recorded  and  preserved  (Article  3).  Antiquities
are  classified  as  movable  or  immovable.  Movable  antiquities  are
those which  are detached  from  the ground, regardless of their mate-
rial,  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  made,  and  the  use  to  which
they were put (Article 4).

Individuals  are  allowed  to  acquire  movable  antiquities,  provided
that  the  antiquities  are  presented  to  the  Ministry  of  Information
which  must  record  significant  antiquities  and  issue  the  appropriate
official  documents. The owner is free to dispose of antiquities which
are not considered to be significant  (Article  18). However, the Minis-
ter  of  Information  has  the  right  to  acquire  any  movable  antiquities
situated in or on the territory of Kuwait in  accordance with the estab-

22

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in  the  Arab World

lished  procedure  (Article  7).  The  ownership  of  recorded  movable
antiquities  may  be  transferred.  Anyone  wishing  to  sell  a  movable
antiquity  must present  it to the Ministry of Information,  which may
exercise  a right  of preemption. The seller must  inform  the  Ministry
of Information of the name and domicile of the purchaser (Article 20).
No one is allowed  to trade in antiquities  without  a licence  issued
by the Ministry of Information.  This licence  is personal;  it is issued
for  one year and  is renewable. The antiquities  in which the  licensee
is  trading  must  either  be  recorded  or  be  free  from  control.  If  it  is
discovered  that  a  trader  has  antiquities  other  than  those  described
above, the antiquities are confiscated  and the trader prosecuted (Arti-
cle  36). The  authorized  officer  of the  Ministry  of  Information  may
enter and inspect  the shops of traders (Article 37).

It  is  forbidden  to  export  any  antiquity  from  Kuwait  without  a
licence issued by the Ministry of Information.  Before  issuing such a
licence, the  Ministry  must  ascertain  that the  export  of the  antiquity
will not impoverish the Kuwaiti cultural heritage, that  similar antiq-
uities are held in Kuwaiti museums, and that the objects are therefore
not indispensable  (Article 38).

The Ministry of Information  may allow or refuse  to allow exporta-
tion.  Furthermore,  it  may  purchase  any  of  the  antiquities  intended
for  export at the price given  in the export  application.  The Ministry
may  issue  an  export  licence  for  antiquities  which  are  to  be  ex-
changed  for  other  antiquities  from  museums  and  scientific  associa-
tions outside of Kuwait, for antiquities that have been allocated to a
scientific  expedition after  official  archaeological excavation, and for
antiquities that are temporarily sent abroad to be studied (Article 39).
Officers  of the customs, post and security authorities  are allowed to
confiscate  any antiquity and deliver it to the Ministry of Information,
if the owner  of the  antiquity  has not obtained  an  export  licence  for
it (Article 41). Anyone who imports  an  antiquity  into Kuwait  is re-
quired  to  inform  the  Ministry  of  Information.  The  importer  is  not
obliged  to  relinquish  ownership  of  the  antiquity,  if  it  was  not  ac-
quired for  purposes of trade (Article 22).

Anyone, including the owner or possessor, who intentionally dam-
ages a recorded movable antiquity, destroys an historical building or
a discovered site containing antiquities, or trespasses on an historical
building  or  a  site  containing  antiquities  is  subject  to  imprisonment
for a term between  one year and five years, to a fine between  1,000
rupees and  10,000 rupees, or to both of these penalties  (Article 42).
Anyone who counterfeits an antiquity, defaces an historic building or
a site containing antiquities by carving, writing or painting, acquires
unrecorded antiquities, exhibits or sells recorded antiquities, imports
antiquities  from  outside  Kuwait  without  informing  the  Ministry  of
Information,  moves  any  antiquities  from  one  place  to  another,  or
enters  museums  and  sites containing  antiquities  in deliberate  viola-
tion  of  proclamations  and  public  orders  is  liable  to  imprisonment
from  one  week  to  one  month,  a  fine  between  100  rupees  and  500
rupees, or both of these penalties (Article 44).

23

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

4.7  Lebanon
In  Lebanon,  the  Antiquities  Service  and  the  High  Commission  are
concerned  with  the  protection  of  cultural  property.  The  applicable
law is codified  in the Regulations on Antiquities, Order No. 166 LR
of  7  November  1933  Prescribing  Regulations  on  Antiquities,  and
Order  No.  225  LR  of  28  September  1934  Prescribing  Regulations
on the  Suppression  of Offences  Relating  to Legislation  on Antiqui-
ties and  Historic  Monuments.21

Antiquity  means any  product  of  human  activity,  dating  from  be-
fore  1700  (1107  of  the  Hegira),  regardless  of  the  civilization  to
which  it belongs (Article  1). There are two categories of antiquities:
immovable  and  movable antiquities. Movable  antiquities  are all ob-
jects  or  remains  of  objects  made,  worked  or  altered  by  human
agency  that  are not permanently  attached to land or buildings (Arti-
cle 2).

Without  charge  or  exchange  for  another  object,  the  State  may
dispose  of any movable  antiquity  which  is of no significance  to the
national  collection, when authorized by the head of the  State, at the
instance of the curators of the museums, and after  consultation with
the  Director  of  the Antiquities  Service.  If the  object  is  a  scheduled
movable  antiquity, it must be removed from  the schedule  of historic
monuments  (Article 77  lit. b and 46).

With  respect  to the trade  in antiquities,  the law  distinguishes  be-
tween  those  who  regularly  trade  in  antiquities,  including  dealers,
brokers and middlemen  (Article 80), and private persons who do not
normally  trade in such objects, such as finders  of movable property,
individuals  who owned  the antiquities  on the date of publication  of
the present order, and bona fide  possessors (Article 78). The general
provisions  apply  to both  categories  of  individuals,  while  more spe-
cific  provisions apply only to traders (Article 73). To ensure that the
State  is  able  to  exercise  its  right  of  preemption,  every  owner  of
scheduled  movable antiquities who wishes to dispose of an antiquity
must  submit by registered  letter the required  documents. If the state
does  not  take  any action  within  two months  of the notification,  the
owner  is authorized to proceed  with the  sale. The vendor must then
submit within eight days of the sale all relevant information  concern-
ing  the  purchaser  to  the  Minister  of  Education  and  the  Director  of
the  Antiquities  Service.  In  case  of  a failure  to do  so, the  vendor  is
liable to a fine of between  S£ 50 and  S£ 500 (Article 44).

Any  person  who  wishes  to  trade  as  an  antiquities  dealer  must
obtain written authorization from  the Director of Antiquities and pay
an  annual  fee  of  S£  25  upon  receipt  of  a  revenued  order  (Article
81).  A  dealer  or  several  dealers  forming  a  partnership  may  only
trade  in  antiquities  at  a  single  place  of  business  (Article  83).  The
Antiquities  Service  must  be  notified  by  registered  letter  of  all
changes  concerning  the person  who is dealing  or the place  of busi-
ness before  the change occurs (Article 84 and 85). Every  authorized

24

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the  Arab World

antiquities  dealer  must  keep  a  register  containing  a  systematic  list
and complete description22 of the antiquities in his possession worth
S£ 5 or more (Article 88 and 89). Every transaction must be recorded
in  the  register.  Any  failure  to  record  in  the  register  the  sale  of  an
object  worth  more  than  S£ 5 is punishable  with  a fine  between  S£
50 and S£ 500 (Article 96 No. 2). All sold objects must be accompa-
nied by a notification  or authorization of the competent service (Arti-
cle 91).

There  are  detailed  regulations  concerning  the  form  and  the
contents of the register to prevent  fraud  (Article  90). To control the
register, officials  of the Antiquities Service of the High Commission
and  the curators  of the  national  museums  may  visit  any  authorized
antiquities  dealer  at  his place  of  business.  Any  dealer  who  refuses
to produce his register to the officials  of the High Commission  or to
the  curators  of  the  national  museum  is  liable  to  a  fine  of  between
S£ 5 and S£ 50 (Article 92).

Any  form  of  trade  in  antiquities  conducted  by  an  unauthorized
person, the possession of antiquities by an unauthorized dealer at his
place  of business,  or the possession  of  antiquities  by  an  authorized
dealer  in a place  other  than that  specified  in his application  for  au-
thorization  is considered  to be  an  act of  illicit trade. Any  such  sale
or attempted  sale is punishable with a fine of between  S£ 50 and S£
500  (Article  96  No.  3,  4,  5).  The  owners  of  businesses  where  the
illicit trade has been  carried  on are civilly  liable for fines and costs
for the  acts of their agents, employees  or servants (Article  93). The
antiquity  in  question  is  confiscated  and  handed  over  to  the  State
Museum  (Article 96). In case of a violation  of these provisions, the
authorization  of the  antiquities  dealer  is withdrawn  by  the  Director
of  the  Antiquities  Service  (Article  87).  There  are  also  regulations
related to the death  of an authorized  antiquities dealer (Article 86).
Every authorized antiquities dealer is required to display conspic-
uously  in his place of business  a notice printed  and  stamped  by the
High Commission and containing the sections of the Antiquities Or-
der concerning the ownership of,  trade in and exportation of antiqui-
ties.  The  dealer  must  likewise  keep  the  complete  text  of  this  order
to  give  to  any  purchaser  on  request.  Furthermore,  the  dealer  must
inform  every purchaser that antiquities may not be exported  without
a permit issued by the Director of the Antiquities Service (Article 94).
It  is  unlawful  to  export  any  antiquity  without  a  licence  issued
by  the  Director  of  the  Antiquities  Service  on  behalf  of  the  High
Commissioner  (Article  97).  This  licence  is  granted  for  antiquities
disposed of or exchanged by a national  museum and antiquities im-
ported  from  abroad  (Article  98),  if  the  imported  objects  were  de-
clared to the customs authorities. The receipt issued to the holder by
the customs authorities is conclusive evidence and must be produced
in the event of re-export or disposal  within  Lebanon  (Article 99).

In  all  other  cases,  the  State  reserves  the  right  to  acquire  these
antiquities  in  the  event  that  an  export  licence  is  requested.  The

25

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

purchase  price  is  equal  to  the  value  assigned  to  the  object  by  the
applicant  in his declaration. The Director of the Antiquities  Service
or  the  curator  of  the national  museum  concerned,  acting  at  the  in-
stance  of  or  after  consultation  with  the  Director  of  the  Antiquities
Service,  is  authorized  to  exercise  this  right  of  preemption.  If  the
State  does  not  exercise  it,  the  export  licence  may  not  be  withheld
after  the applicant has paid the export licence fee, which  is between
5 and 20 percent of the value of the object as stated in the declaration
(Article  104). Any person  wishing to export antiquities must submit
to the  High  Commissioner  an application  stating his name, address,
a  detailed  description  of  the  exported  antiquity,  and  the  place  and
manner of export.23  The packing for  export is examined by  officials
of the Antiquities  Service (Article  101). Objects  sent abroad by post
are  subject  to  the  same  formalities  and  the  same  fees.  Before  the
package  is made  available to the sender,  a printed  permit  signed by
the representative  of the appropriate  service is glued to the package
(Article  106).

Any person who exports or attempts to export movable antiquities
without  a  licence  is liable  to  a  fine  of between  S£  50 and  S£ 500.
Furthermore,  the  antiquity  in  question  is  confiscated  and  handed
over  to  the  national  museums.  Damages  may  be  claimed  if  these
objects  are  not recovered  (Article  107).

Scheduled  objects may  only be  altered,  repaired  or restored  with
the  authorization  and under  the  supervision  of  the  Antiquities  Ser-
vice.  Any  person  who violates  this  provision  is  liable  for  a fine  of
between  S£  50  and  S£ 4,000  (Article  43). Any  owner  or person  in
possession  or control of a  scheduled movable antiquity  who  intends
to  transport  it  must  notify  the  Antiquities  Service  before  doing  so.
The  object  may  only be  removed  after  the  Antiquities  Service  has
acknowledged  receipt of the notification.  In case of a violation, the
person  is liable for  a fine of between  S£ 25 and S£  100 (Article 45).
The  export  of  a  scheduled  movable  antiquity  is  prohibited  (Article
42 No. 4).

Fifty  percent  of  each  fine  collected  under  Order  No.  166  LR
prescribing  regulation of antiquities  is set aside and distributed one-
half to any  informers  and one-half to the officials  who recorded the
offence.  If there  are no informers,  the official  receives  the full  fifty
percent  of  the  collected  fine.24  Rewards  made  to  informers  and  to
officials  who  have  recorded  offences  or  confiscated  antiquities  are
shared  equally  among  those  concerned  without  regard  to  rank  or
function.25

4.8  Libya
The protection of cultural property  in Libya is settled in the Antiqui-
ties Law No. 40 of  1968.26 The Minister of Tourism and Antiquities
is responsible  for  the enforcement  of this law and the promulgation
of any regulations and decisions required for this purpose (Article 59).

26

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the  Arab  World

The  officials  of  the  Department  of  Antiquities  are  appointed  by
order of the Minister who also determines their duties; they are  in-
vested with judicial  power in matters relating to the enforcement  of
the  provisions  of  this  law  and  any  orders  made  for  the  purpose  of
putting  it  into effect  (Article  57). The competent  authorities  are re-
quired to take any measures necessary to protect antiquities in times
of peace  and  of war  in agreement  with  other  competent  authorities
and  in  accordance  with  international  conventions  (Article  11). All
legal  authorities  are  expected  to  cooperate  with  the  Department  of
Antiquities  with  a view  to  ensuring  the  protection  and  safekeeping
of antiquities  and the prevention  of smuggling  (Article  12).

Antiquity  is defined  to include any construction  of an  immovable
nature, any other product of human activity, whether manual or intel-
lectual,  or  any  remains,  which  have  been  discovered  or  found  in
Libya relating  to Libyan  history  or civilization  and which  are more
than  100 years old. This term also refers  to human, animal  and bo-
tanic  remains  discovered  or found  in  Libya  and  dating  earlier  than
A. D. 600. Immovable  and movable property  of a later date may be
designated  an  antiquity  by ministerial  order  if  its maintenance  and
preservation are useful  to the enhancement of the nation's historical
or cultural heritage.

Antiquities  may be either  immovable or movable. Movable  antiq-
uities are objects  which  are by design  separate from immovable an-
tiquities  and may be removed  without  being  damaged.  By  decision
of the Director General of the competent authorities, movable antiq-
uities  may be  considered  immovable  if they  are placed  in  or on an
immovable antiquity as an integral or complementary part thereof or
as  ornament  (Article  3).  Documents  and  archives  are  specifically
mentioned  and  include  all  printed  matter,  agreements,  firmans,  or-
ders,  political  and  administrative  documents,  title  deeds, maps  and
all  other  documents  or papers  which  are  more  than  fifty  years  old
or which  are  less  than  fifty  years  old  but  have  been  designated  as
antiquities by ministerial  order.

The competent authorities are responsible for the study of all mov-
able antiquities, for the recording in the register of appropriate antiq-
uities,  and  for  the  exhibition  of  movable  antiquities  registered  as
State  property  (Article  27).  With  the  approval  of  the  minister,  the
competent  authorities  may  exchange  duplicates, copies and casts of
movable  antiquities  for  foreign  antiquities  or  for  copies  or casts  of
equal  value (Article  37) and may organize temporary  exhibitions of
registered movable antiquities both in the country and abroad with a
view to fostering  an appreciation  of Libyan history and  civilization,
while ensuring the safekeeping  of these antiquities (Article 36).

It  is  unlawful  for  individuals  or  private  organizations  to  dispose
of  registered  movable  antiquities  without  the  prior  authorization  of
the  competent  authorities.  The  State  has  a right  of  preemption  and
the  owners  of  antiquities  must  inform  the  competent  authorities  of
the names and addresses of the purchasers and purchase price of any

27

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

transferred  antiquities (Article 30). Trade in any movable  antiquities
without  authorization  is  prohibited.  All  movable  antiquities  which
were  in  the  possession  of  dealers  on  the  effective  date  of  this  law
either  became  the  property  of  the  State,  in  which  case  the  owners
were  paid  an  appropriate  compensation,  or remained  in the posses-
sion  of  their  owners  and  their  successors,  provided  that  they  were
registered  in the name of those individuals  in a special register kept
by the competent  authorities along with photographs and a descrip-
tion  of  the  antiquities.  These  antiquities  may  only  be  disposed  of,
moved  from  one  place  to  another,  or  restored  with  the  consent  of
the  competent  authorities.  These  antiquities  may  from  time  to time
be  inspected  with  a view to ascertaining  that they  are maintained in
a good state of repair and that they have not been transferred  (Article
38). Movable  antiquities registered in the name of a third party may
not  be  transported  from  one district  to  another  without  the  consent
of  the  competent  authorities  who  may  set  requirements  relating  to
their transport  (Article 33).

It is unlawful  to export any antiquities other than movable antiqui-
ties  discovered  by  holders  of  excavation  permits.  The  holder  must
submit  an  application  for  an  export  permit,  containing  information
about  the  holder  of  the  excavation  permit,  the  antiquity,  and  the
manner  and place of export. (Article 55). In the event of illicit trade
or illicit export, the antiquities in question are seized and confiscated
(Article  56).

It is unlawful  to mar or damage immovable or movable antiquities,
to  deface  them  with  inscriptions  or  incisions,  to  alter  their  appear-
ance,  to detach  any part, or to affix  notices or bills (Article  5). It is
forbidden  to  make  casts,  copies  or  models  of  registered  movable
antiquities  without  a permit  from  the competent  authorities  in each
specific  case. This permit is issued only after  the competent authori-
ties have satisfied  themselves that such casts, copies or models were
not made for  fraudulent  purposes, and it must specify  the conditions
governing  the  making  of  such  reproductions  (Article  34). It  is also
forbidden  to photograph antiquities for commercial  purposes or with
a view to publication  without  the consent  of the competent  authori-
ties (Article 9).

Any  person  who  contravenes  any  of  the  provisions  of  this  law
may be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month,
a  fine  not  exceeding  100  pounds,  or  both  of  these  penalties.  The
offender  is  obliged  to  restore  the  object  in  question  to  its  original
condition, under the supervision of the competent authorities, within
an  appropriate  period  of  time;  if  the  offender  fails  to  do  so  within
this  period, the  competent  authorities  may do so at his expense  and
recover  the cost thereof  by distraint.

4.9  Mauritania
In  Mauritania,  the  Minister  responsible  for  Cultural  Affairs  and the
Commission  for  the  Safeguarding  and  Presentation  of  the  Natural

28

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the Arab World

Cultural  Heritage (Article 34, 52, 87) are responsible for the protec-
tion  and  scheduling  of  cultural  property,  which  is  codified  in  Law
No.  72—160  concerning  the  Safeguarding  and  Presentation  of  the
National  Prehistorical, Historical  and Archaeological  Heritage.27

All  sites,  monuments,  and  objects,  whether  movable  or  attached
to  immovable  property,  which  belong  to  any period  of  the  country
from  prehistoric  times to the present  day  and which  are of  national
interest  from  the  point  of  view  of  prehistory,  pre-Islamic  history,
Islamic  history,  thought,  art  or  archaeology,  particularly  any  object
discovered during or as a result of excavations, as well as all ancient
manuscripts,  are  regarded  as  historic  monuments  (Articles  24, 58).
These monuments form  an integral part of the national cultural heri-
tage and are placed  under the protection  of the State.

Historical  monuments found  in or on land belonging to the State,
self-governing  areas, or private institutions  are considered  the prop-
erty of the State and may not be transferred  or destroyed without the
prior  authorization  of  the Minister  Responsible  for  Cultural  Affairs
(Article  1). Those historical  monuments  found  in or on  land  owned
by private  individuals  or corporate  bodies  remain  in the  ownership
and  use  of  the  owner.  Nevertheless,  the  State  reserves  the  right  to
establish  easements  and  servitudes  in  the  public  interest,  including
those which  result  from  the  listing  of the property  on the  schedule;
the right of the competent authorities to visit and examine the prop-
erty; the right of the public, if appropriate, to visit the property; and
the right to impose appropriate maintenance obligations when linked
with  State  assistance  for  major  repairs  or restoration  work.  For the
purpose  of  preserving  the national  cultural  heritage,  any  scheduled
object  may be placed  in a national  collection  (Article 71).

The destruction  of such property  without  the authorization  of the
Minister Responsible for Cultural Affairs  is prohibited. Every owner
or person in possession or control of an historical monument (Article
72),  as  well  as  the  different  services  of  the  State  and  of  the  self-
governing  areas,  is  obliged  to  protect  and  preserve  the  monument.
Any  keeper  or  custodian  of  a  scheduled  historic  site or  monument,
whether  movable or immovable, who, through  gross negligence, al-
lows all or part of the buildings or objects placed under his safekeep-
ing to be  destroyed,  defaced,  damaged  or unlawfully  removed  may
be  subject  to  imprisonment  for  a  term  of  between  eight  days  and
three  months, to  a fine  of between  5,000 and  200,000  CFA  francs,
or to both of these penalties  (Article 85).

Any person  who deliberately  destroys, defaces  or damages all or
part  of  a scheduled  historic  site or monument,  whether  movable  or
immovable,  or who  attempts  to commit  any  of  these  offences  may
be  liable  to  imprisonment  for  a  term  of  between  two  months  and
five years and to a fine of between  25,000 and  100,000 CFA  francs.
In the event of a repetition  of the offence,  the  minimum  and maxi-
mum  amounts  of the  prescribed  penalties  are  doubled  (Article  84).
It is also unlawful  to break up or dismember any scheduled movable

29

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

historic  monument  or  to  sell,  donate  or  exchange  any  scheduled
movable historic monument that has been broken up or dismembered
(Article 68).

In  the  event  that  an  owner  decides  to  dispose  of  the  property,
whether for a valuable consideration or without any charge, the State
may  exercise  a  right  of  preemption.  For  the  purpose  of  preserving
the national cultural heritage, the State may implement, with respect
to  such  property,  any  procedures  that  may  be  appropriate,  such  as
recovery,  scheduling, acquisition  by agreement, or expropriation  for
public purposes  (Article 2).

No scheduled movable object may be sold, donated or exchanged
without the prior  authorization  of the Minister  Responsible  for Cul-
tural  Affairs.  Without  such  authorization,  it  is  an  offence  for  the
owner of a scheduled movable object to transfer  its ownership or for
a  person  who  is  aware  of  the  unlawfulness  of  the  transaction  to
acquire  such  an  object  (Article  67).  Violations  of  these  provisions
are punishable with imprisonment for a term of between one and six
months,  with  a  fine  of  between  25,000  and  100,000  CFA  francs,
which may be raised to twice the selling price, or with both of these
penalties, without prejudice to any damages and compensation (Arti-
cle 81).

In  the  event  of  the  theft,  loss,  or  accidental  destruction  of  the
object,  the owner  is required  to report the occurrence  to the nearest
administrative  authority within  fifteen  days (Article 69). An  offence
is punishable  with  a fine  of between  5,000 and  50,000  CFA  francs;
if  the  offence  is repeated,  the  minimum  and  maximum  amounts  of
this penalty  will  be doubled  (Article  83). In case of any failure,  the
State  may  also, without  prejudice  to criminal  proceedings,  exercise
a  right  of preemption,  provided  that  it pays  a fair  price  determined
by mutual  agreement  or by reference  to expert opinion  (Article 70).
The  export  of  any  scheduled  property  whether  movable  or  at-
tached  to  immovable  property  is  prohibited.  In  the  event  of  an  at-
tempt to take a scheduled object  out of the territory of the Republic,
the object  is seized and confiscated  for the benefit  of the State. Prior
authorization  of  the  competent  administrative  authority  is  required
for the export of objects  which have not been entered  on the  sched-
ule of protected objects because their existence or the identity of the
person  in possession  or  control  of them  was  unknown,  but  the ob-
jects  are  of  particular  significance  in  the  fields  of  prehistory,  pre-
Islamic  history,  Islamic  history,  thought,  art  or  archaeology.  In  all
cases, even when  an export  licence has been applied  for  and issued,
the  State has the right to recover these objects, provided that it pays
a  fair  price  determined  by  mutual  agreement  or  by  expert  opinion
(Article  4).  Any  person  who  exports  a  scheduled  movable  historic
monument  is  liable  to  a  fine  of  between  25,000  and  50,000  CFA
francs.  In  the  event  of  a  repetition  of  the  offence,  the  penalty  is
increased  to  imprisonment  of  a  term  between  one  month  and  six
months  (Article 82).

30

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the Arab World

4.10  Morocco
In Morocco, the Ministry of State for  Cultural Affairs  has published
the Dahir No. 180-341 of  17 Safar  1401 (25 December  1980) prom-
ulgating  Law  No.  22-80  concerning  the  preservation  of  historic
monuments and sites, inscriptions, art objects  and antiquities.28

Objects, whether movable or immovable, whose preservation is of
particular  relevance  to  the  art,  history  or  culture  of  Morocco  are
protected  and  may be  listed  or classified  (Article  1, Article  2 Para-
graph 2). The administrative authorities may carry out at the expense
of the  State and after  informing  the owner any work deemed  useful
for the conservation of a classified  movable item. Temporary  confis-
cation  of the item for  that purpose may be  ordered  for  a period not
exceeding  six  months  (Article  32). It  is  forbidden  to  destroy,  alter,
or export any movable art objects and antiquities which are of histor-
ical,  archaeological  or  anthropological  value  to  Morocco  or  which
are relevant to the study of the past and the human sciences in gene-
ral (Article 43). However, temporary export licences may be granted
for classified  movable objects, in particular for the purposes of exhi-
bition, examination  and  study abroad (Articles  31, 45). A listed  im-
movable  item  may  not  be  defaced,  destroyed,  restored  or  modified
without  due  notice  being  given  to  the  authorities  by  the  owner  or
owners, at least  six months before  the date fixed for  work to  begin
(Article 6).

Ownership  of  classified  movable  items  belonging  to  private  in-
dividuals  may  be  transferred  (Articles  9  and  30).  The  transfer  of
ownership must be preceded  by a declaration  by the owner  (Article
38),  and  the  State  may  exercise  its right  of preemption  (Articles  9,
30,  and  37-42)  in  the  interest  of  the  State  (Article  37).  Adouls,
notaries, public officials,  land registrars, and commissioners  respon-
sible for listing must refuse to draw up, receive or register any certif-
icates recording the transfer of ownership of listed or classified  mov-
able or immovable  property  in the  absence  of a decision  by the  ad-
ministrative  authorities  to  waive  the  right  to  preemption  or,  if  no
explicit decision has been made, in the absence of a document certi-
fying  that they waive their right to exercise  it (Article 42).

Violation  of the provisions  of the  present  law  and  of the  regula-
tions  adopted  for  their application  are punishable  by a fine between
2,000  DH  and  20,000  DH.  For  a second  offence,  the "offender  will
be  liable  to  a  fine  amounting  to  not  less  than  twice  the  fine  pre-
viously imposed and not more than 40,000 DH (Article 53). In addi-
tion, a fine equal to ten times the value of the object  involved  in the
violation  of the  law may be imposed.  This fine is regarded as dam-
ages and serves as confiscation  of the aforesaid  object.  Confiscation
is compulsory  in cases of export without permission  (Article 55).

The  regulations  permitting  settlements  are  unusual.  The  admin-
istrative authorities are entitled to reach a settlement concerning any
breach  of  the  law  or  of  regulations,  either  before  or  after  sentence

31

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

is pronounced (Article 56). A settlement reached without reservation
cancels  the  proceedings  of  the  public  prosecutor  and  those  of  the
administrative  authorities. It is fully  binding upon  the parties and is
not  negotiable  under  any  circumstances.  If  several  offenders  were
involved  in the  same incident, a settlement  reached  before  sentence
is  pronounced  is  valid  for  the  party  who  concluded  the  settlement.
If the settlement is reached after sentence is pronounced, it is binding
for all joint offenders  (Article 57). In both these situations, the settle-
ment  is always valid for  the party  liable  for  damages (Article 58).

4.11  Qatar
In Qatar, the Minister of Information  and the Department of Tourism
and Antiquities are responsible for the enforcement  of Law No. 2 of
1980 on Antiquities.29 The Minister of Information  delegates powers
to the officials  of the Department of Tourism and Antiquities so that
they have the authority to act as officers  of the law in making  official
inquiries  into violations  of the provisions  of this law. Together with
all officers  of the law, they are authorized to enter at any appropriate
time  stores  dealing in antiquities  in order to examine the antiquities
held there (Article 41).

An antiquity  is anything of a movable or immovable  nature  relat-
ing  to  art,  science,  literature,  customs,  beliefs,  daily  life,  public  or
other  events,  discovered  fortuitously  or  otherwise,  which  has  been
inherited  from  past civilizations and generations, dates back at least
forty  years, and  is of artistic or historical  value (Article  1). Movable
antiquities  are antiquities which, bytheir  nature, are not made to be
attached  to the ground and can be removed  without being  damaged
(Article 2).

The Department  of Tourism and Antiquities is responsible for the
protection of antiquities and is charged with their discovery, registra-
tion and maintenance, in addition to the preservation of their charac-
teristics  and  ornamentation,  their  exhibition  to  the  public,  and  the
dissemination  of  knowledge  concerning  antiquities;  the  owner  has
no  right  to object  to any of these activities. Movable  antiquities are
preserved  in  the  National  Museum  of  Qatar  and  in  other  museums
which  may  be  built in the  future,  and  these  antiquities  are  studied,
restored, exhibited and stored there as well (Article  18). The Depart-
ment  of  Tourism  and Antiquities  is  also  responsible  for  organizing
expositions  or  traveling  exhibitions  inside  the  country  and  abroad,
provided  that  the  safety  of  the  antiquities  exhibited  is  guaranteed
(Article  18).

The  Department  of  Tourism  and  Antiquities  in  the  Ministry  of
Information  conducts evaluations of the archaeological character and
significance  of  movable  and  immovable  antiquities  (Article  3). An
antiquity  is  registered  by  decision  of  the  Minister  of  Information,
and  registration  decisions  are  conveyed  to  the  individuals  and  au-
thorities  concerned.  Registered  antiquities,  whether  movable  or im-

32

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the Arab  World

movable, are listed in records kept in the Department of Tourism and
Antiquities,  with  the  significance  and  description  of  each  antiquity
indicated.  If  the  antiquity  is  movable,  the  names  of  its  successive
owners are noted  in the records (Article 4).

Individuals  may  acquire  and  keep  movable  antiquities  on  condi-
tion that the Department  of Tourism  and Antiquities  has had  an op-
portunity  either  to  issue  an  official  document  of  registration  if  the
antiquities  are  of  special  interest  or to  permit  their  free  disposal  if
the antiquities  are not of special  interest.  The holder of an  antiquity
is  responsible  for  preserving  it  and  for  ensuring  that  no  change  is
made to it; if the antiquity is lost or damaged, the holder is required
to  notify  the  Department  of  Tourism  and  Antiquities  (Article  19).
The Department  of Tourism  and Antiquities  may ask the holders  of
registered  antiquities  to  hand  them  over  in  order  to  study,  make
drawings or photograph them, or exhibit them temporarily, on condi-
tion that the Department, as soon as the work for  which the antiqui-
ties were borrowed  is completed, returns them to the holder in their
original  condition  (Article 21).

Antiquities  may not be offered  as gifts  except  within the  strictest
limits,  for  the  purpose  of  serving  the  public  interest,  and  on  the
condition  that the antiquity is registered. The antiquity  also must be
considered dispensable, due to the existence of other antiquities sim-
ilar  to  it  in  material,  fabrication,  historical  significance  and  artistic
value; the offer  of a gift  is subject  to the decision  of the Council  of
Ministers  (Article  25). The Department  of  Tourism  and  Antiquities
may exchange  or lend antiquities to museums and  scientific  institu-
tions in Arab and foreign  states under special  agreements  concluded
for this purpose and, in the case of exchange, subject to the approval
of the Council  of Ministers  (Article 26).

Movable antiquities held in museums cannot be sold (Article 24).
However, ownership of registered movable antiquities may be trans-
ferred.  In  order  to  sell  a  registered  movable  antiquity,  the  owner
must  present  it  to  the  Department  of  Tourism  and  Antiquities  and
inform  the  Department  of  the  price  agreed  upon  by  the  seller  and
purchaser and of the name and address of the purchaser (Article 22).
Such  trade  is limited  to registered  movable  antiquities  and  to those
whose free disposal has been authorized. In order to trade in antiqui-
ties it is necessary to obtain a licence from  the Department of Tour-
ism  and  Antiquities  (Article  27).  The  export  of  antiquities  is  gen-
erally  prohibited.  However, the export of movable antiquities  which
does  not  cause  an  impoverishment  of  the  archaeological  or  artistic
heritage of the country may be authorized by decision of the Minister
of Information  (Article 28).

Antiquities  imported  into  Qatar  without  an  export  licence  from
the  country  of  origin  are  seized  by  officials  of  the  customs,  postal
or  security  services  or  other  responsible  officials  and  handed  over
with an official  report to the Department of Tourism and Antiquities
for  the  purpose  of  investigating  their  origin  and  the  way  in  which

33

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

the  import  agent  obtained them. If the  investigation  proves that the
antiquities  were  smuggled  or  taken  out  of  the  country  of  origin  in
violation  of established laws and with the import agent's  knowledge
of that fact,  the antiquities in question  are subject to confiscation  by
the executive  authorities and considered  state property; they may be
returned to their country of origin on the basis of reciprocity (Article
29).  If  the  investigation  proves  the  good  faith  of  the  import  agent,
the  Minister  of  Information  may  decide  to  seize  the  antiquities  if
their  acquisition is in the interest of the State and subject to payment
of just  compensation.

It  is forbidden  to damage, transform,  impair,  mutilate,  or change
the  features  of  movable  antiquities  (Article  7  Subsection  1).  Any
person who violates provisions of this law or of its executive regula-
tions  is  subject  to  imprisonment  for  a  maximum  period  of  three
years,  a  fine  of  not  more  than  ten  thousand  rials,  or  both.  In  all
cases, the movable antiquity whose owner violated the provisions of
this  law  is confiscated  and handed  over to the  Department  of Tour-
ism  and Antiquities (Article 40).

4.12  Saudi  Arabia
The  protection  of cultural  property  in  Saudi  Arabia  is  settled  in the
regulations for antiquities, Royal decree No. M/26, 3 August 1972,30
and  regulations  concerning  the  export  of  antiquities.  The  Supreme
Council  for  Antiquities3'  and the  Department  of  Antiquities  are re-
sponsible  for their protection.

Antiquities  include  any  property,  movable  or  immovable,  built,
made, produced,  adapted, or designed by humans over two hundred
years  ago, as well  as property  having  acquired  archaeological  char-
acteristics through ancient natural factors. The Department of Antiq-
uities  may  classify  as  antiquities  movable  or  immovable  property
attributed  to  a  more  recent  date,  if,  in  the  Department's  opinion,
such  property  has  archaeological  or  artistic  characteristics  (Article
5). The term "movable antiquities" applies to those antiquities which
were  originally  intended  to  be  separate  from  the  ground  or  from
historic buildings and can be moved from  one place to another, such
as  sculptures,  coins,  inscriptions,  manuscripts,  fabrics,  and  other
manufactured  articles regardless  of the  substance  of which they  are
made, their purpose, or uses (Article 7).

The  duties  of  the  Supreme  Council  include  setting  the  general
policy  of the  Department  of  Antiquities  in  the  fields  of  preserving,
restoring,  beautifying,  and  excavating  archaeological  sites,  con-
sidering the sale, donation, exchange and loan of antiquities, as well
as  the  acceptance  of  donations  of  antiquities  and  the  establishment
of  new  museums.  The  Department  of  Antiquities  collaborates  with
other government agencies, each within its jurisdiction, in  safeguard-
ing  antiquities and archaeological  sites, evaluates the archaeological
nature  of  objects,  historic  buildings,  and  archaeological  sites,  and

34

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the  Arab World

determines  which  antiquities  are to be  registered.  Registration  of a
particular  antiquity  implies that  the  State  recognizes  the  historic  or
artistic  value of that object  and has undertaken  to preserve,  protect,
and  study  it, and to give  it a proper  appearance  in accordance  with
the terms of these regulations  (Article 6).

Organizations, as well  as individuals, have the right to own mov-
able  antiquities  and  to  keep  them  in  private  collections,  provided
that they are shown to the Department of Antiquities for  registration
of important items. The possessor of registered antiquities is required
to safeguard  and preserve them in their original condition. If a regis-
tered  antiquity  is  lost  or  damaged,  the  possessor  must  notify  the
Department of Antiquities immediately. These restrictions also apply
to all  antiquities that have not been  submitted to the Department  of
Antiquities for registration (Article 29). Registered movable antiqui-
ties  in  the  possession  of  individuals  or  organizations  may  not  be
transported without permission  from  the Department  of Antiquities.
The Department must offer  its technical expertise to help move these
antiquities  in the proper  manner,  if it deems  such help to be neces-
sary (Article 37). The Department of Antiquities has the right to ask
possessors of registered antiquities to submit such antiquities for the
purpose  of  studying,  sketching,  photographing,  making  molds,  or
temporarily exhibiting them, provided they are returned to the owner
promptly  and in the same condition  (Article 36).

Ownership  of  registered  movable  antiquities  may  be  transferred,
provided the original owners report the name and address of the new
owner to the  Department  of Antiquities.  If the  new  owner  is  a  for-
eigner and wishes to export the antiquity, the transfer of ownership is
not effective  until an export licence is obtained (Article 32). Movable
antiquities  owned by the State and kept  in its museums may not be
sold  or  offered  as  gifts.  Movable  antiquities  that  can  be  dispensed
with  because  of  the  existence  of  a  large  number  of  similar  items
may  be  disposed  of  by  sale, provided  that  such  sale  is  effected  by
ministerial  decision  following  the approval  of the  Supreme  Council
for  Antiquities  (Article  27).  Movable  antiquities  or  duplicates  and
molds thereof may, by ministerial  decision and with the approval of
the  Supreme  Council  for  Antiquities,  be  exchanged  with  museums
and scientific  institutes, if such exchange  is useful  (Article 28).

Dealing  in antiquities  is permitted  if the dealer  upon  payment  of
an  annual  fee  obtains  an  official  licence  which  is  renewable  for  a
period  of  one  year  (Article  38). Antiquities  that  may  be  traded  are
movable antiquities which have been registered with the Department
of  Antiquities  or  have  been  expressly  exempted  from  registration.
However, dealers may purchase other antiquities, provided that they
show them  to the  Department  of  Antiquities  within  one week  from
the date of purchase and provided that they submit  correct  informa-
tion as to the source of the antiquities  so purchased  (Article 39).

Every  antiquities  dealer  who  holds  a  licence  must  maintain  offi-
cial  records  which  include  a  detailed  inventory  of  the  contents  of

35

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

the store and all daily  sale and purchase transactions. These records
must be shown to employees of the Department  of Antiquities upon
request;  all  antiquities  must  be  submitted  to  employees  of  the De-
partment  of  Antiquities  for  inspection;  the  dealer  must  provide  the
Department  of Antiquities with a photograph  of any antiquity  in his
possession  or permit the  Department  to photograph  it upon  request.
The dealer  is also  required to submit to the Department  of Antiqui-
ties a monthly  report  showing  all antiquities  bought  or sold,  with a
detailed  description  of  the  antiquities  involved  and  the  identity  of
the  respective  seller  or  buyer;  to place  at  the  store  a  sign  showing
that  he  is  licensed  to  deal  in  antiquities  and  post  in  a  prominent
place inside the shop a notice, in Arabic and English, that no antiqui-
ties may be exported without an export licence from  the Department
of Antiquities (Article 41). The employees of the Department of An-
tiquities  have  the  right  at  any  time  to  inspect  antiquities  dealers'
stores  and  to  examine  their records  (Article 42). In case of a viola-
tion, the Department  of  Antiquities  has the right to cancel  or  refuse
to renew a licence  (Article 44).

The  export  of  antiquities  requires  a  special  licence  which  is
granted  by  the  Department  of  Antiquities  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of these regulations. The Department has authority to re-
fuse  or to permit  the export  of antiquities,  depending  on whether  it
finds  that  the export would  impoverish  the country's  archaeological
or  artistic  heritage  (Article  46).  However,  it  is  strictly  forbidden  to
export  certain  types  of  antiquities,  such  as  old  coins, pottery  made
200 years  ago  or earlier, lithic artifacts  and ethnographic  material.
A person who wishes to export must provide details about himself,
the antiquity,  and the manner  and place of export (Article 47). After
studying the antiquities for which an application  for export has been
submitted,  the  Department  of  Antiquities  has  the  right  to  allow  or
disallow the  export or to buy  such of those antiquities which  it de-
sires at the price quoted in the application  for  export, unless it  finds
a marked difference  between the price quoted in the application and
the value estimated by the Department, in which case the latter value
applies, provided  that the sale is approved by decision  of the Minis-
ter  of  Education  (Article  48).  When  the  Department  of  Antiquities
permits  the  export, the  exporter  pays  an  export  duty  of between  15
to 25 percent of the value of the antiquity (Article 50). The exporter
of  antiquities  must submit  the  export  licence  for  inspection  to cus-
toms,  postal,  security  and  other  responsible  officials  whenever  re-
quested. These officials  may confiscate  any antiquities for which no
export licence has been obtained and turn over the confiscated  items
to the Department  of Antiquities  (Article 53).

No movable  or fixed  antiquity may be destroyed, modified,  dam-
aged  or  disfigured  by  writings  or  inscriptions,  or  by  changing  its
characteristics  (Article  11). Any person who appropriates, alters, de-
stroys,  damages,  demolishes,  or, without  permission,  draws  a fixed
antiquity  or  any part thereof  or a movable antiquity, where disposal

36

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the  Arab World

of such antiquity has not been permitted by the Department of Antiq-
uities  and  whether  such  antiquity  is  State  or  privately  owned,  will
be punished with imprisonment for a period ranging from  one month
to  three  years,  or  a  fine  ranging  from  SR  250  to  10,000,  or  both
(Article  67). In all cases of damage  or alteration,  the offender  must
remove the cause of the violation and restore the object to its original
state  within  a period  to be fixed by the  Department  of  Antiquities;
otherwise the Department of Antiquities may  carry out the above at
the offender's  expense  (Article 73).

A person  who steals a State or privately  owned antiquity  may be
punished with imprisonment  for a period ranging from  two to three
years and a fine ranging from  SR 500 to SR  10,000, and the antiqui-
ties are confiscated  (Article  68). A person  who trades  in  antiquities
without a permit or exports, attempts to export, or assists in export-
ing antiquities without a permit may be punished with imprisonment
for a period ranging from  one month to two years, or a fine ranging
from  SR  100 to SR  1,000, or both (Article 69). A penalty  consisting
of either  imprisonment  from  15 days to six months, or a fine of SR
50 to SR 500, or both will be imposed on any person who possesses
unregistered  antiquities  or  transports  antiquities  without  a  licence
(Article 71).

Movable antiquities  may be confiscated  from  owners  in case of a
violation (Article 74). Every antiquity which is confiscated  or seized
in  accordance  with  these  regulations  shall  immediately  be  turned
over to the Department  of Antiquities  (Article 75). The  Department
of Antiquities arranges to recover antiquities  smuggled out of Saudi
Arabia  within  the terms  laid  down  in  agreements,  treaties, and rec-
ommendations of international  organizations and assists in returning
those imported from  other countries on condition of reciprocity (Ar-
ticle  15).

4.13  Sudan
According to the Antiquities Ordinance,32  the protection  of cultural
property  in  Sudan  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Museums  Board  and
the Commissioner  of Archaeology  (Article 4 and 5).

The Ordinance recognizes three categories of antiquities. The first
includes any object, whether movable, immovable or part of the land,
which  was  constructed,  shaped,  inscribed,  erected,  excavated  or
otherwise  produced  or  modified  by  human  agency  before  the  year
A. D.  1821 and any part of such an object  which was added, recon-
structed or restored at a later date. The second includes historic mon-
uments, and the third any human or animal remains of a date earlier
than A. D.  1340 (Article 3). All antiquities except those brought into
the Sudan after  1 st January  1821 are the property of the government.
However,  the  Commissioner  has  the  power  to  disclaim  ownership
of antiquities upon  such conditions  as the Museums Board may ap-
prove (Article 6).

37

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

Anyone who, without the consent  of the Commissioner,  willfully
injures  or  destroys any  antiquity  or historical  site, takes  possession
of or removes any materials and thereby causes the injury or destruc-
tion  of  any  antiquity  or  historical  site,  or converts  any  antiquity  or
historical  site  to  any use  which  is  likely  to  injure  or  destroy  it  or
alter  its character  is liable to  imprisonment  of up to one year, or to
a  fine  not  exceeding £E.2O, or both  (Article  9). Any person  who  is
unable  to  show  that he  obtained  possession  of  a movable  antiquity
lawfully  or  in  good faith  may  be  subject  to  imprisonment  of  up to
three  months, a fine, or both  (Article 20).

The  sale  of  or  an  offer  to  sell  a  movable  antiquity  requires  a
written  licence  from  the  Commissioner,  and  such  sale  is  not  valid
unless  a  licence  is handed  over  (Article  18). The  Commissioner  is
also  responsible  for granting  a licence to export  antiquities  (Article
19). The selling, offering  for  sale, exporting, or attempting to export
antiquities  without  a licence  from  the  Commissioner  is  punishable
with  imprisonment of up to three months, a fine, or both (Article 18
and  19).  Antiquities  involved  in  a  violation  of  this  ordinance  are
surrendered  to the Commissioner  by  the  court that  is trying  the  of-
fence  (Article 22).

4.14  Syria
The protection of cultural property in Syria is codified in the Decree-
Law  No. 222  of October 26,  1963, on  the Treatment  of  Antiquities
in  the  Syrian Arab Republic.33

The Antiquities Authority of the Syrian Arab Republic34 is respon-
sible for the safekeeping  of antiquities and is alone entitled to desig-
nate  objects,  historic  monuments,  archaeological  sites  or  anything
else as antiquities. By placing an antiquity on the schedule of antiq-
uities,  the  State recognizes  its historical,  artistic  or national  impor-
tance and undertakes to ensure its preservation, protection, study and
enhancement  (Article 2).

Antiquities  include  any  movable  or  immovable  property  erected,
manufactured,  produced, written or drawn by humans more than 200
years ago (Christian era) or 206 years ago (in the Hegira35)  (Article
1).  Movable  antiquities  are  those  which  are  designed  by  their  very
nature to be detached from  the soil or from  historic monuments and
which  may be transported. This category  includes sculptures, coins,
figurines,  engravings,  manuscripts,  textiles  and  any  manufactured
object  regardless  of its material, design  or use.  Movable  antiquities
are considered  immovable if they form part of any immovable prop-
erty or of the decoration  thereof (Article 3).

For the  purpose  of the  enforcement  of the  provisions  of this  law
and  any  regulatory  orders  which  complete  it,  the  Director  General
of Antiquities and Museums, the directors of the various services, the
inspectors,  the  deputy  inspectors,  the  curators  of  museums,  deputy
curators  and  the  superintendents  of  antiquities  are  considered  offi-

38

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the Arab World

cers  of the  criminal  investigation  department.  Custodians  and care-
takers of antiquities and their superiors have, in the exercise of their
duties, the same power as police officers  (Article 84).

Any entity or private person in possession of a registered movable
antiquity  may not  repair  or restore  it, unless  with the  authorization
of the Antiquities Authority and under its supervision. The Authority
may  carry  out repair  and restoration  work for  a charge, but the An-
tiquities Council  may exempt the person in possession  of the antiq-
uity from the payment of all or part of this charge. It is also  unlawful
to copy or reproduce antiquities. Any person  who wishes to make a
copy  must  be  authorized  by  the  Antiquities  Authority  which  may
issue  a permit  specifying  the  conditions  for  each  item to be  copied
or  otherwise  reproduced  (Article  39).  The  Antiquities  Authority  is
entitled  to  borrow  any  registered  antiquity  from  the  possessor  for
the purpose of studying it, making drawings, photographs or castings
of it,  or temporarily  exhibiting  it,  provided  that the  antiquity  is re-
turned  to the possessor  in a good  state  of  repair  immediately  upon
completion  of the task  for  which  it was borrowed  (Article 38).

The ownership of a registered movable antiquity may be  transfer-
red,  provided  that  the  vendor  informs  the  Antiquities  Authority  of
the new owner. If the new owner is a foreigner who wishes to export
the antiquity, the deed  of transfer  is only valid after  the  issuance of
an  export  permit  (Article  34).  The  Antiquities  Authority  is  entitled
to  purchase  any  registered  movable  antiquity  belonging  to  private
individuals  or  to  expropriate  the  antiquity  in  question  by  paying
compensation if the acquisition is deemed to be in the public interest
(Article 37). It is unlawful  to transport any registered movable antiq-
uities  without  the  authorization  of  the  Antiquities  Authority,  which
must  ensure  that  such  antiquities  are  transported  by  proper  means
(Article 40).

Those  movable  antiquities  that  are not  indispensable  may  be  ex-
changed  among  museums  and  scientific  institutions,  if  such  ex-
change is considered useful.  The exchange must be ratified  by presi-
dential decree after  approval by the Antiquities Council (Article 31).
Movable  antiquities  which  belong  to  the  State  and  are  kept  in  its
museums  may  not  be  sold  or  given  away.  Nevertheless,  movable
antiquities  of  which  there  is a  sufficient  number  of  duplicates  may
be  sold.  Any  such  sale  must  be  authorized  by  presidential  decree
after  approval  of the Antiquities  Council  (Article 30).

The export of antiquities falls  solely within the competence of the
Antiquities  Authority, which  alone  is empowered  to  issue  an export
permit (Article 66). Registered movable antiquities may be exported
only under a permit issued by the Antiquities Authority (Article 67).
Detailed  regulations  set  out  the  contents  of  the  application  for  ob-
taining an export licence (Article 68) and the procedure for exporting
an antiquity  (Article 69). Depending on the value of the antiquity, it
may be necessary  to obtain  the approval  of the Antiquities  Council
through  the  Director  General  of  Antiquities  and  Museums  or  the

39

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

approval  of the  Minister  of  Culture  and National  Guidance  through
the Antiquities  Council  (Article  70).

If the  Antiquities  Authority  authorizes  the  export  of an antiquity,
the exporter  must  pay  between  10 and 40 percent  of its value  as an
export tax (Article 71). The Antiquities Authority must seal the pack-
age  with  a  lead  seal  and  attach  an  official  manifest  stating  the
number and date of the export permit (Article 73). An exporter must
present  the  export  permit  whenever  required  to  do  so  by  customs
officers,  post  office  officials  or  police  officers.  If  the  possessor  of
an antiquity does not have an export and transport permit, the antiquity
is confiscated  and delivered to the  Antiquities Authority (Article 74).
Within the limits laid down  in the agreements, treaties and recom-
mendations  of  international  organizations,  the Antiquities  Authority
may  take any  measures  necessary  to  secure the return  of  antiquities
illicitly exported  from  the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
Authority  also cooperates  in efforts  to return to their country of ori-
gin any  foreign  antiquities  illicitly imported, provided that  such co-
operation  is reciprocal  (Article  12). The Customs Service must hand
over  to  the  Antiquities  Authority  any  imported  antiquities  in  order
to  ensure  the  registration  of  any  significant  objects  and  to  regulate
them  (Article 33).

Any person  who damages, alters, destroys, demolishes or restores
all or part of any movable or immovable antiquity, which belongs to
either  a private  person  or  to  the  State, without  the  authorization  of
the  Antiquities  Authority,  is  liable  to  imprisonment  for  a  term  be-
tween  one  month  and  three  years,  fine  between  250  and  10,000
pounds, or both  of these penalties  (Article 75). In addition, the court
may  order the offender  to restore  the object  to its original  condition
within a set period; if the person  concerned fails to do so, the Antiq-
uities Authority  may  do  so at his  expense  (Article 81).

The  theft  of  an  antiquity,  which  belongs  either  to the  State  or to
a  private  person,  is  punishable  by  imprisonment  for  a  term  of  be-
tween  two  and  three  years  and  a  fine  of  between  500  and  10,000
pounds  (Article  76).  Any  person  who, without  authorization  of  the
Antiquities  Authority  or  in  contravention  of other provisions  of this
law,  trades  in  antiquities,  exports, tries  to  export  or  aids  and  abets
the  illicit  export  of an  antiquity  is  liable to imprisonment  for  a term
of  between  one  month  and  two  years,  a  fine  of  between  100  and
1,000  pounds, or both  of these penalties (Article 77).

Any person  who acquires unregistered  antiquities, moves antiqui-
ties from  one place to another without authorization, or takes rubble,
stones  or  soil  from  an  archaeological  site  without  authorization  is
liable  to  imprisonment  for  a  term  of  between  two  weeks  and  six
months,  a  fine  of  between  50  and  5000  pounds,  or  both  of  these
penalties  (Article  78). Any  person who enters museums  or archaeo-
logical  sites without authorization  or without having paid the admis-
sion  fee  or  who  after  knowing  of  the  discovery  of  an  unregistered
immovable or movable antiquity fails to notify the authorities thereof

40

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the Arab World

is  liable  to  imprisonment  for  a term  of between  one week  and one
month, a fine of between  10 and  100 pounds, or both of these penal-
ties (Article 79).

Any movable antiquity  involved  in a violation will be  confiscated
(Article 82) and immediately handed over to the Antiquities Author-
ity. If it is not possible to confiscate  antiquities that are stolen, sold,
destroyed  or  discovered  as  a  result  of  clandestine  excavations,  the
person  concerned  must pay  for  such  antiquities.  The value  of these
antiquities is assessed by the purchasing commission and are in addi-
tion  to the penalties referred  to in this  law (Article 83).

The Antiquities Authority may make an appropriate reward, which
cannot  exceed  20  percent  of  the  value  of  an  antiquity  involved  in
the  commission  of  an  offence,  to  any  police,  customs  officers  or
antiquities  officials  who  confiscate  or  assist  in  the  confiscation  of
an  antiquity  (Article  86).  Fines  payable  under  court  orders  are  di-
vided as follows: 50 percent to the treasury; 20 percent to informants;
20 percent to confiscators; 10 percent to officials who cooperate in the
implementation  of the confiscation  regulations. If no informants  are
involved, their share is paid to the Treasury (Article 87).

4.15  Tunisia
Tunisian Law No. 86-35  of 9 May  198636 concerning the Protection
of  Archaeological  Property,  Historic  Monuments  and  Natural  and
Urban Sites codifies the responsibility of Tunisia for the preservation
within its territorial and maritime boundaries of archaeological prop-
erty, historic monuments, and natural and urban sites located in cities
and rural areas, with a view to safeguarding  its national  and cultural
heritage  and the beauty of its landscapes  inherited  from  the genera-
tions which have successively populated the country. This responsi-
bility  extends  to  archaeological  property  and  historic  monuments
which  are  located  within  its territorial  and maritime  boundaries  but
which  belong  to  other  peoples.  Tunisia  has  also  undertaken  to  re-
spect  archaeological  property  and  historic  monuments  outside  its
borders  in accordance  with  approved  international  conventions  and
the rules of international  law (Article  1).

The Minister responsible for archaeological affairs  is charged with
the safeguarding  and restoration of movable and immovable archaeo-
logical property which comes into the government's care and posses-
sion  (Article  16). The Minister oversees the conservation,  preserva-
tion  and  safeguarding  of  archaeological  property,  historic  monu-
ments, natural  and urban  sites, and protective zones (Article 7).

Archaeological  property  includes  any  historic  buildings,  monu-
ments, urban sites, and artifacts of historic or prehistoric importance,
whether  located  in  urban  or  rural  areas,  which  were  created,  pro-
duced  or built  by  humans  more than  a hundred  years  ago. Historic
buildings, monuments  and artifacts  dating back  less than  a hundred
years are  archaeological  property  if there  is  evidence  of the  impor-

41

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

tance of their historical value, authenticity, and artistic originality or
if such classification  is necessary to preserve an intellectual or artis-
tic work  associated with a national  event (Article 3).

Archaeological  property  is  divided  into  movable  and  immovable
property (Article 8). The Archaeological Authority is responsible  for
listing any movable archaeological  property  in special  registers and
preparing  descriptive  index  cards, which are delivered to the keeper
of  such  property  (Article  11 Paragraph  2). The Archaeological  Au-
thority may provide technical and scientific supervision for any work
carried out on movable or immovable archaeological property  in the
possession or under the responsibility  of a public department, a pub-
lic institution, a local community, or private individuals. The owner,
possessor, or user of such property is responsible for the costs resulting
from the safeguarding or restoration of such property (Article 16).

Registered movable archaeological property is not subject to alter-
ation, repair, restoration,  or transport within the country without the
prior  authorization  of the proper  authorities. Representatives  of the
Archaeological  Authority  have  the  right  to  visit,  photograph  and
study  such objects, regardless of their ownership. It  is forbidden  to
damage  them  or  to  subject  them  to  any  treatment  that  may  spoil
their appearance (Article  13). The counterfeiting  of movable archae-
ological property  is prohibited; the copying of such property is only
allowed  with the permission  of the Archaeological  Authority, which
may  prescribe  the  methods  of production.  Such  permission  is  non-
transferable  (Article 14). Any violation of these provisions is punish-
able  with  imprisonment  between  three  months  and  one  year,  a  fine
from  100 to  1,000  dinars, or both  (Article 30).

Private individuals  may possess  and trade in legally imported  ar-
chaeological  property  provided  that  it  has  been  submitted  to  the
proper authorities upon entry into Tunisia or that it has been declared
within one year (Article 41). An owner may not alienate any movable
or  immovable  archaeological  object,  except with a specific  authori-
zation  issued  by the Archaeological  Authority  based  on the  opinion
of the advisory committee. This provision  does not apply to antiqui-
ties dealers who are duly authorized by government authorities (Arti-
cle  15). Archaeological  property  belonging to the State and to insti-
tutions under its authority is inalienable and may not be sold (Article
8).  Movable  or  immovable  archaeological  property,  historic  monu-
ments, museums or sites may be used for cultural, scientific, touristic
or commercial purposes by any institution or any person or corporate
body  only  with  special  authorization  from  the  Archaeological  Au-
thority, which  determines the conditions  for  such use (Article  18).

Antiquities  dealers  in  possession  of  a  special  licence  in  accor-
dance with the decree, dated  8 January  1920, concerning  antiquities
prior to the Arab conquest, were permitted to continue their trade in
the  same  way  after  trie  entry  into  force  of  this  law.  This  licence  is
automatically  withdrawn  one year after  the death of the holder, and

42

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the Arab  World

descendants  are not entitled  to pursue  such  activities  after  that  date
(Article 42).

Any violation of the provisions concerning transfer of archaeolog-
ical property  is punishable by a fine  of 200 to  1,000  dinars and the
confiscation  of  all  instruments,  objects  or products  connected  with
the  offence  (Article  35).  Any  person  who  obstructs  or  attempts  to
obstruct  government  officials  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties  are
liable to a term of imprisonment  of  15 days, to a fine of from  50 to
100 dinars, or to both of these penalties (Article 29). Any confiscated
objects  are  given  to  the  Archaeological  Authority.  The  perpetrator
also bears the cost of any repairs to damaged archaeological property
and  sites  and,  if  necessary,  the  cost  of  the  demolition  of  buildings
illegally  constructed  and  the removal  of anything put  in place con-
trary to the provisions of this law. In the event of irreparable damage,
the  offender  is required  to pay  damages  in relation  to the  prejudice
caused (Article 33). Compensation  and fines are paid to the treasury
and placed at the disposal of the Minister for  Archaeological  Affairs
(Article 36).

4.16  United  Arab Emirates
In the United Arab Emirates, the Head of the Department of Informa-
tion and Tourism is responsible for  the enforcement  of the Law No.
8  of  1970 on Antiquities  and  Excavations.37  The  law  defines  three
kinds of antiquities: any object or building used or made by humans,
which is more than  150 years old; any inscription, in any form, made
more than  150 years  ago; and  any human  or animal  remains  which
are at least  1,000  years old (Article 2).

All  antiquities  are  the  property  of  the  government  except  those
which  were  privately  owned  before  the  entry  into  force  of  the  law
(Article  3). The  government  may  expropriate  any  privately  owned
antiquities  upon  payment  of  compensation  (Article  4).  Regulations
are  issued  for  the  assessment  of  expropriations  by  the  head  of  the
Department of Information  and Tourism  (Article  18). The same De-
partment  is responsible  for the authorization  of exports (Article  16).
Any violation of the law is punished with imprisonment of up to six
months, a fine of not more than  1,000  dinars, or both of these penal-
ties (Article  17).

5  Conclusion

The protection of cultural property is codified  in all examined coun-
tries  in a special  law  devoted  exclusively  to this purpose.  Some of
the  laws  date  from  the  early  part  of  this  century,  but  most  of  the
legislative texts were written  or modified  in the  1970's and  1980's.
In all countries, antiquities  are divided  into categories of immov-
able  and  movable  antiquities.  The  definition  of  antiquity  differs

43

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

slightly  from  country to country usually in terms of the required age
of  an antiquity.  Some  countries  use a fixed  date,  such  as  1780  in
Bahrain,  1700 in Jordan and Lebanon, and 1871 in Sudan. In other
countries,  antiquities  are defined  as objects  that  are older  than 200
years (Iraq,  Saudi Arabia, Syria),  100 years (Egypt,  Libya, Tunisia),
or,  in  younger  states  like  Kuwait  and Qatar,  40 years.  Sometimes
human or animal  remains are also considered to be antiquities.

The state's right of preemption is found  in all legislation. In every
country,  it is necessary  to obtain  a  licence  to transfer  or to export
antiquities.  The laws  generally  forbid  theft,  smuggling,  damaging,
photographing,  and counterfeiting  of  antiquities.  The punishments
include  fine  or imprisonment  up to six years  depending  on the of-
fence  and the country.  Very  often  the attempt  and cooperation  in
violating the law are also punished. In case of repetition, the punish-
ment  is doubled  in some countries.  There  is a harsh  punishment if
the offender  is a government employee. Informers  are often  granted
rewards.

International conventions concerning the illicit import, export, and
transfer  of  ownership  are  reflected  in  the  legislation  of  several
nations,  such as Bahrain, Kuwait,  Qatar and Syria. The draft  bill of
the  Arab  League  is also mentioned  in many  of the  laws. The ideas
contained  in the draft  bill  of the  Arab  League  and in international
conventions  are  thus  codified  in  the  legislative  texts  of the Arab
countries, and, at least according to the legislation of these countries,
their cultural  property is well  protected.

Notes

1  Arabische  Kultur,  in  1 DTV-BROCKHAUS  IN 20  BANDEN  (A-AUF)  244  (1988).
2  Id.
3  Islam,  in  9  BROCKHAUS  (INI-KXE)  10 (1988).
4  W.  MONTGOMERY  WATT,  DER  EINFLUB  DES ISLAM  AUF  DAS  EUROPAISCHE
MITTELALTER  23-26  (1992);  M. A. Cook,  Wirtschaftliche Entwicklung,  in
1  JOSEPH  SCHACHT  &  C.  E.  BOSWORTH,  DAS  VERMACHTNIS  DES  ISLAM
256-260  (1983).

5  BROCKHAUS,  supra  note  1, at 245.
6  Juan  Vernet, Mathematik, Astronomic  Optik,  in 2  SCHACHT  &  BOSWORTH,

supra  note 4, at 244.

7  Id.  at  240-241;  Watt,  supra  note  4, at  52, 83-87.  Today  such  words  as
alchemy,  alkali,  alcohol, Aldebaran,  algebra,  algorithm,  giraffe,  sofa,  Wega
and  zenith,  which  are of Arab origin,  demonstrate  the surviving  Arab  influ-
ence  in various  scientific  fields.  Rechtschreibung,  in  1 DER GROBE  DUDEN
IN  10  BANDEN  (1967).

8  Transjordan  (31.3.1945), Iraq (1.4.1945), Syria (3.4.1945), Egypt (5.4.1945),
Lebanon  (7.4.1945),  Saudi  Arabia  and Yemen  (11.5.1945).  ABDEL  HAMID
RASHED,  ARABISCHE  EINHEIT  WUNSCHBILD  ODER  WIRKLICHKEIT?   30
(1974).

9  Libya  (28.3.1953),  Sudan  (19.1.1956),  Tunisia  and  Morocco  (1.10.1958),
Kuwait  (20.6.1961),  Algeria  (16.8.1962),  Bahrain  and  Qatar  (11.9.1971),

44

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Cultural  Property  in the Arab World

(29.9.1971),  United  Arab  Emirates 

Oman 
(26.11.1973) and Somalia  (14.2.1974). Id. at 30 n.l.

(6.12.1971),  Mauritania

10  Qanun  al-atar  al-muwahhad,  published  in  AL-TURAT  AL-TAQAFT AL-'ARABI
AL-ISLAMT  HARIG  AL-WATAN  AL-'ARABI,  AL-MUNAZZAMA  AL-'ARABIYA
LILTARBIYA  WA AL-TAQAFA  WA AL-'ULUM,  IDARAT  AL-TAQAFA  2 04  — 2 14
(Tunis  1991).

11  Al-qanun al-namudagl lihimayat al-mahtutat fi al-bilad al-'arabTya,  published
in  AL-TURAT  AL-TAQAFT AL-'ARABI  AL-ISLAMT  HARIG  AL-WATAN  AL-'ARABI,
AL-MUNAZZAMA  AL-'ARABTYA  LILTARBIYA  WA AL-TAQAFA  WA AL-'ULUM,
IDARAT  AL-TAQAFA  217-219  (Tunis  1991).

12  The Ordinance No. 67-281  of 20 December  1967 is published  in the  Offi-
cial  Gazette  of 23 January  1968, see UNESCO, THE PROTECTION  OF  MOV-
ABLE  CULTURAL  PROPERTY,  Vol.  I, 45  (Paris  1984).

13  The following  sections refer to the Bahrain Antiquities Ordinance of 1 March
1970,  which is published in UNESCO, THE  PROTECTION  OF  MOVABLE CUL-
TURAL  PROPERTY,  Vol.  II, 15-22  (Paris  1984).

14  Rais (Ra'Ts) means  director or president.
15  The Antiquities' Protection Law was put into effect by Law No.  117 of 1983,

published  in the Official  Gazette on August  11th,  1983.

16  Waqf is si religious  foundation.
17  The following  articles are part of Antiquities Law No. 59 of 1936, amended
by  Law No.  120 of 1974 and  Law No.  164 of 1975, see UNESCO,  THE
PROTECTION  OF MOVABLE  CULTURAL  PROPERTY,  Vol.  II,  99—111  (Paris
1984).

18  Article 2 of the  Law No. 40 of 1926.
19  Qanun  al-atar (Law No. 21 of the year  1988) which  became  effective  on  17
March  1988, published  in Official  Gazette  No.  3540  of 17 March  1988,
published by the General  Antiquities  Authority, Amman.

20  The following  articles  refer  to Princely  Decree No. 11 of 1960 concerning
Antiquities, see  UNESCO,  THE PROTECTION  OF MOVABLE  CULTURAL  PROP-
ERTY, Vol. II, 155-166  (Paris  1984).

21  The following  articles  refer  to Order  No. 166 LR of 1933, see UNESCO,
THE  PROTECTION  OF  MOVABLE  CULTURAL  PROPERTY,  Vol.  I,  188-207
(Paris  1984).

22  See also  Article 89.
23  See, e. g., Article  101 (requiring designation of the port or station  from  which

the antiquity  will  be exported and the kind of packing  case  to be used).

24  Article  1 of the  Order No. 225 LR of 28  September 1934.
25  Article 3 of the  Order No. 225 LR of 28  September 1934.
26  UNESCO,  THE PROTECTION  OF MOVABLE  CULTURAL  PROPERTY,  Vol.  I,

250-263  (Paris  1984).

27  31 July  1972. The following  articles  refer  to Law No. 7 2 - 1 6 0,   see  UN-
ESCO,  THE  PROTECTION  OF  MOVABLE  CULTURAL  PROPERTY,  Vol.  II,
179-194  (Paris  1984).

28  Published  in the  Official  Gazette  3564  of 12  Rabf  II  1401 (18 February
1981), see  UNESCO,  THE PROTECTION  OF MOVABLE  CULTURAL  PROPERTY,
MOROCCO  (1987). The word zahir means "decree." Safar is the name of the
second  month of the  Islamic calendar.

29  UNESCO,  THE PROTECTION  OF MOVABLE  CULTURAL  PROPERTY,  QATAR

(1985).

30  Translation  of  the  Royal  Decree  No. M/26,  verified  by  Dr.  Abdullah

H. Masry, Director,  Department of Antiquities, Ministry of Education.

31  For the organization, members and other details, see Article 1.

45

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040

Christine  Irsheid

32  The Antiquities  Ordinance  No. 2 of the year  1952 is published  in the Sudan

Government  Gazette of March  15,  1952.

33  Published  by the Imprimerie  du Ministere  de la Culture  et de  l'Orientation

Nationale  (Damas, Syrie  1966).

34  The term "Antiquities Authority" refers  to the General  Department of Antiq-

uities and Museums.

35  The hegira  Qiigra) was the flight  of the prophet  Muhammad  from  Mecca in
the  year  622;  the Moslem  era reckons  the years  beginning  with  this  event
and is based  on the lunar  calendar.

36  UNESCO,  THE  PROTECTION  OF MOVABLE  CULTURAL  PROPERTY   (Tunisia

1988).

37  Article  18 of Law No. 8 of the  year  1970, see UNESCO,  THE PROTECTION

OF  MOVABLE  CULTURAL  PROPERTY,  Vol. I, 290-294  (Paris  1984).

46

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:13:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739197000040


