The Fate  of the  Koenigs
Collection:  Public  and  Private
International  Law  Aspects
Andrea  Gattini*

Summary:  The  Koenigs  Collection  of  Old  Master  drawings  was
transferred  during  the  course  of World War II  from  private  owner-
ship to the German  government.  Most of the collection  recently ap-
peared in the Pushkin Museum in Moscow. The author examines the
validity of these transfers  and the proper ownership of the collection
today  from  both  a public  and  private  international  law perspective.
The  dispute  as  to  ownership  between  Russia  and  the  Netherlands
and the role of the German government  is a difficult  one to resolve,
particularly  in light of current claims for war reparations  and recent
developments in international  law concerning the transfer  of cultural
property.

1  Background

Franz Koenigs was a German banker who moved to the Netherlands
in  1922. In the following  years, he amassed an extraordinary collec-
tion of 2,671 Old Master drawings, considered to be one of the finest
in the world.'  Due to the financial  crisis of 1929, Koenigs was forced
to take out a large  loan from  an Amsterdam  bank,  Lisser  & Rosen-
kranz,  using  his  collection  as  collateral.  At  Koenigs'  request,  the
bank agreed  that the collection  would  be deposited  in the  Boymans
Museum  in  Rotterdam.  On the eve  of the  German  invasion  of Hol-
land, the bank, which  was Jewish-owned  and  was at the time wind-
ing down  its activities in the Netherlands,  insisted  on the transfer  of
the  collection  to  its New York branch.  With  the  agreement  of Koe-
nigs  himself,  the  director  of  the  museum,  Dirk  Hannema,  who

*  University  of  Padova.  I  am  grateful  to  Josephine  Leistra,  conservator  at  the
Netherlands  Office  for  Fine  Arts  in  The  Hague,  for  her  kind  assistance  in
providing  information  concerning the present  state of the case. I wish to dedi-
cate  this  article  to  Duncan  Bull,  co-editor  of  The  Burlington  Magazine,  who
first  gave  me the  idea to write  it.

81

Andrea  Gattini

strongly  opposed  the  expatriation  of  the  collection,  persuaded  the
coal  magnate  and  art  collector  van Beuningen  to buy the  collection
and  leave  it in the  museum.

Soon  after  the  occupation,  Hitler's  agent  for  the  projected  Linz
Fuhrermuseum,  Dr.  Hans  Posse,  director  of  the  Dresden  Gemalde-
galerie, began to show an interest in the collection, and on 9 Novem-
ber  1940, Posse, Hannema and van Beuningen reached an agreement
that 526 drawings from the collection (mainly of the German school)
would  be  sold  to  Germany  for  the  price  of  1,400,000  Dutch  guil-
ders.2  On  5 March  1941, the  drawings  were handed  over to  a Ger-
man government emissary, and on 26 May, Dr. Posse confirmed  their
arrival  in  Dresden.  At  the  end  of  May  1945, the  drawings  disap-
peared  from  Weesenstein  Castle near  Dresden, where the Nazis had
stored them  together  with other works of art earmarked for the Linz
Fuhrermuseum.3

It  has  never  been  a secret  that  during  the  last  weeks  of  fighting
and  immediately  afterwards,  the  special  commissions  of  the  Red
Army's  experts,  whose  official  mission  was to  look  for  Soviet  cul-
tural  property  stolen  by  the Nazis  during  the  Barbarossa  campaign
and  later,  extended  their  activities  to  the  removal  and  transport  of
German  cultural  property  to  the  Soviet  Union.  However,  serious
questions  have  remained  over  the  quantity  of  such  property  and  its
fate.  For  almost  fifty  years,  it  was  not  even  known  whether  such
property  had  been  destroyed  or  remained  in  secret  depots  in  the
Soviet  Union.

Rumours  surfaced  frequently  that the Koenigs collection  had met
such  a  fate.  As  early  as  1945—46, the  Dutch  government  directed
diplomatic  notes  to  the  USSR  government  in  order  to  ascertain
whether  the  collection  had  indeed  been  taken  to  the  Soviet  Union
but to no avail.4 To confuse  matters, some scholarly postwar publica-
tions  explicitly  stated  that  drawings  from  the  Koenigs  collection
were in the Dresden  Kupferstich-Kabinett  and others stated that they
were  in the  Soviet  Union.5  In January  1987, the government  of the
former  German  Democratic  Republic  returned to the Dutch  govern-
ment, without consideration, thirty-two drawings from  the collection
which  had  been  found  in  the  Kupferstich  Kabinett  of  the  Dresden
Gemaldegalerie,  together  with  a  drawing  by  Diirer  from  the  same
collection,  which  had  been  presented  in  1946  to  the  Museum  der
bildenden  Kiinste  in  Leipzig  by  soldiers  of  the  Soviet  military  ad-
ministration.

Although  in the late  1980s some Russian art historians had hinted
that the bulk of the Koenigs collection was to be found  in the cellars
of  the  Pushkin  Museum  in  Moscow,6  it  was  only  in  October  1992
that  the  Russian  Minister  of  Culture,  Sidorov,  announced  that  the
major  part  of the collection  had been  "found."  In order to spare the
fragile  reputation  of  the  lifetime  director  of  the  Pushkin  Museum,
Ms. Irina Antonova,7 the Dutch ambassador, Mr. de Vos, was shown

82

The  Fate of the  Koenigs  Collection

The  Beheading  of St.
John  the  Baptist, by
Giambattista  Tiepolo.
Koenigs  inv.: 1.444.
Claimed  by the  State
of the  Netherlands
© Courtesy  of  the
Netherlands  Office  for
Fine  Arts, The  Hague

the  collection  in  the  rooms  of  the  Russian  Ministry  of  Culture. Fi-
nally, in the fall of  1995, the drawings were exhibited in the Pushkin
Museum, some of them  for  the first time.8

The  Koenigs  collection  was  not  the  only  art  treasure  removed
by  Russian  troops  from  Germany  at  the  end  of  World  War  II  and
subsequently "found"  in the storerooms of a Russian museum.9 The
German  government  has  now  been  trying  to  recover  various  items
of its cultural property  from  Russia for almost five years, asking  for
the restitution  of almost  200,000  works  of art, 2 million  books  and
about 3 kilometers of archives removed from  Germany at the end of
the  War.  After  a  promising  start,  negotiations  with  both  Germany
and  the Netherlands10  have  reached  a  stalemate,  largely  as  a result
of Russian political  influence,  which opposes the "concept" of resti-
tution.  In  June  1995, the  Duma  failed  by  some  thirty  votes  to  ap-

83

Andrea Gattini

prove a draft  statute proposed by the Federal Russian Council, which
would have  made restitution conditional  on very strict requirements.
In July  1996, the Duma passed by an overwhelming majority  a stat-
ute based  on a revised draft  by the Federal  Russian  Council, but the
Federal  Council  (Upper  House  of  the  Russian  Parliament)  declined
to  approve  it. On  5 February  1997 the  Duma  again  passed  the bill,
which  was  a  month  later  approved  unanimously  by  the  Federal
Council  but  eventually  vetoed  by  President  Yeltsin.  Both houses  of
the Duma  subsequently  voted to override  the presidential  veto.

Article  7 of the  statute  declares  all  cultural  goods  removed  from
the  territories  of  enemy  states  at  the  end  of the  Second  World War
and presently located within the territory of Russia to be the property
of  the  Russian  Federation  by way  of  its right  to  restitution  in kind.
Article  8  provides  for  an  exception  to  the  property  rights  of  the
Russian  Federation  only  in  the  case  of  cultural  items  which  ascer-
tainably  belonged to "religious or charitable organizations" not con-
nected  with  militarism  or  Nazism  (fascism)  or  to  individuals  who
had  been  dispossessed  on grounds  of religion  or race or because of
their  active  opposition to the Nazi regime. Article  11 makes another
exception  for  cultural  items brought illegally  into the  Soviet Union,
that is, without order or authorization by the relevant Soviet Military
Heads  of the occupied  territory. These  must be returned to the state
"to  which  they belonged," unless they  fall  under  an export prohibi-
tion  by  virtue  of  article  43  of  the  1993  Russian  statute  on  import
and  export  of cultural goods.

The  official  Russian  position  makes  no  distinction  between  the
claim  of  the German  Federal  Republic  and  that  of the Netherlands.
The  argument  is that  the  Koenigs  collection  was  validly  bought by
Germany  in  1940 and had thus become  German  state property;  it is
therefore  to be  regarded  as  German  war  reparations,  as  is all  other
German  cultural  property  seized  after  the  war."  The  stiffening  of
the Russian position has emerged equally in both sets of negotiations
with the Netherlands, although it appears from  some official  remarks
that  the  Russian  government  is not  quite  at  ease with  the refusal  to
return  the  Koenigs collection.  After  all, some people  in Russia  say,
the  Netherlands  was  an  allied  nation  during  the  war  against  Nazi
Germany.12 It may well be that the failure  to return the collection to
the  Netherlands  has  until  now  been  largely  the  result  of  a  merely
political  desire  not  to  set  a  precedent  likely  to  endanger  the  (then
Soviet  and  now)  Russian  position  with  regard  to  restitutions  to
Germany.13

The  Russians  also  seem  to  be  using  the  Koenigs  collection  as a
bargaining  tool. A disingenuous  proposal  has  been  advanced14  that
Germany  should  buy  the  Koenigs  collection  back  from  Russia  and
then  hand  it over  to the Netherlands.  Incidentally,  the new  Russian
statute  expressly  envisages, in article  22, line  2, the possibility  that
the  Russian  Federation  may  enter  into  international  agreements  to
sell  cultural  property  or  to  exchange  it  for  Russian  cultural  items

84

The Fate of the  Koenigs  Collection

which  had  been  exported  legally  from  Russian  territory  in the past.
It is no wonder that the German government has until now  carefully
avoided  any  risk  of  becoming  entangled  in  this  issue.  It  neither
claims  the  collection  as  German  property,  since  that  would  not  be
politically feasible, nor is it willing to support the Netherlands' claim
actively, lest it eventually be called upon to share the costs of restor-
ing the collection  to the Netherlands.

2  Dutch  Claims

The Dutch claim for restitution is based on several international rules
which apply  in time of war occupation,  as well as on domestic  stat-
utes. In countries which they occupied, the Nazis plundered,  confis-
cated and forced  property transfers  on a large scale, in blatant viola-
tion of Article 42 ff. of the Hague Regulations on Laws and Customs
of  Land  Warfare  annexed  to  the  IV  Hague  Convention  of  1907.
Sometimes the Nazis chose to achieve their aims by more circuitous
means.  This  was  particularly  the  case  with  private  art  collections:
Hitler  insisted  on  acquiring  them,  whenever  possible,  in  a  "legal"
manner,  that  is, by  exerting  a discreet  but  nonetheless  considerable
pressure  on the owner to sell.15

The situation in the occupied countries had caused concern among
the  Allies.  On  5 January  1943, the  eighteen  Allied  and  Associated
Powers  in  London  addressed  the  problem  of  transfers  of  and  deal-
ings  in private  property  in Nazi-occupied  Europe  and  solemnly  ap-
proved  the  Interallied  Declaration  against  Acts  of  Dispossession
Committed in Territories under Enemy Occupation or Control.16 Ap-
plying  it,  the  Allies  reserved  all  rights  to  declare  invalid  "any
transfer  of,  or  dealings  with,  property,  rights  and  interests  of  any
description whatsoever which are, or have been, situated in the terri-
tories, which  have  come  under  the  occupation  or  control,  direct  or
indirect, of the governments with which they are at war." The Decla-
ration  specified  that the warning applied  "whether  such  transfers  or
dealings  have  taken  the  form  of  open  looting  or  plunder,  or  of
transactions  apparently  legal  in form,  even when they  purport to be
voluntarily  effected."

The  Netherlands  government  relies  on  the  fact  that  the  Soviet
Union was one of the signatories of the Declaration. Officials  in the
Russian  Ministry  for  Cultural  Affairs  counter  that  there  is  no  evi-
dence  whatsoever  that  the  transaction  between  Posse  and  van  Beu-
ningen, with the mediation  of Hannema, was not entirely  voluntary.
Taking into account the commercial  interests of van Beuningen,  his
sympathy  for  the NSB, the  Nazi-inspired  "Beweging"  led  by Mus-
sert,17  and the  very  fact  that  Hannema  was discharged  from  his  of-
fice as director in  1945 because of his collaboration with the enemy,
the Russian  argument  cannot  easily be swept aside.

85

Andrea  Gattini

Moreover,  the  interpretation  of  the  London  Declaration  proved
the  beginning.  As  early  as  1945,  doctrinal
controversial  from 
attempts,  which  later  proved  unsuccessful,  were  initiated  to  formu-
late  a  second  declaration  establishing  uniform  rules  as  to the  types
of property transactions  covered and a presumption  as to their valid-
ity  or  invalidity.18  The  Soviets  in  particular  insisted  on  a  narrow
interpretation  of the  wording  of the London  Declaration.  They con-
sidered  goods,  whose  purchase by Germans was  arguably  not com-
patible  with  the  scope  of  the  London  Declaration,  to  be  "German-
owned"  and thus  subject  to  confiscation.19

An analysis  of the  Peace Treaty with  Italy produces  a perplexing
conclusion  as well.  By  virtue  of Article  75, Italy  accepted  the prin-
ciples of the London  Declaration.  Article 75, paragraph  2, however,
made it clear that the duty of restitution concerned only "all  identifi-
able  property  at  present  in  Italy  which  was  removed  by  force  or
duress  by  one  of  the  Axis  Powers  from  the  territory  of  one  of  the
United  Nations."  The  French-Italian  Conciliation  Commission  had
to  determine  in  one  case  whether  the  existence  of  a  contract  could
by itself bar the  application  of Article 75 and rightly  decided  that it
did  not.20  Interestingly,  the  approach  of  the  Commission  on  that
occasion was more prudent than that taken by the same Commission
in  a  subsequent  case  regarding  Article  78,  paragraph  3,  which
obliged  the  Italian  government  to  invalidate  transfers  involving
property  rights  and  interests  belonging  to  nationals  of  United
Nations  states  and  located  in  Italy,  "where  such  transfers  resulted
from  force  or duress  exerted by Axis governments  or their  agencies
during the war." Here,  the  Commission  seemed  to be in favour  of a
presumption  of  duress,  by  noting  that  the  freedom  of  choice  of the
citizen  of  a  United  Nations  state  was  more  endangered  "by  the
means of pressure and by a behaviour made up of a special blending
of actions  and  omissions of the organs of the enemy state."21

In  addition  to  the  London  Declaration,  the  claim  of  the  Nether-
lands  government  to  the  Koenigs  collection  is  mainly  based  on
Dutch wartime  legislation.  Long before  the London Declaration, the
Dutch  government-in-exile  enacted  Royal  Decree  A  6  on  7  June
1940,  which  forbade,  among  other  things,  the  entry  into  contracts
with the enemy without  the previous authorization  of a special com-
mission established by the Decree.22 The Decree did not specify how
such authorization could be obtained by persons residing in occupied
Holland. The inference  was that, in the absence of such approval  for
whatever  reason, all  acts were to be considered  invalid  ex tune.23 In
the  early  post-war  period,  the  application  of  the  statute  was  reaf-
firmed  by  Law  H  251  (18  July  1947)  concerning  "Asset  Transfers
in the  Reichsmark  Area."24  The aim  of this  statute  was to annul all
sales which  had  occurred between  Dutch residents  and  non-resident
purchasers from  1  April  1941 to 5 May  1945, for which the payment
had  been  made  in  Reichsmarks  by  the  non-resident  to  the  Dutch
Central  Bank  followed  by  the  transfer  in  Dutch  guilders  from  the

86

The  Fate of the  Koenigs  Collection

Central  Bank to the Dutch seller. Therefore,  the crux of the problem
is whether  statutes enacted by a government-in-exile  should receive
international  recognition  and  whether  such  sweeping,  retroactive
statutes  as  Law  H  251  still  fell  within  the  scope  of  the  London
Declaration.

The investigation begins by reviewing the post-war allied practice
regarding  restitution  of cultural  property.  On  12 February  1947, the
United  States  Military  Government  in  Germany  issued  Regulations
concerning  Looted  Cultural  Property.  Section  18-104  of  the  Mili-
tary  Government  Regulations  defined  Looted  Cultural  Materials  as
consisting  of  all  cultural  objects  which  had  been  acquired  since  1
January  1933 by Nazis "either a) directly by duress or wrongful  acts
of  confiscation,  dispossession  or  spoliation  ...  or  b)  indirectly  by
purchase  or other  transactions  regardless  of whatever  consideration
may have been  employed."25

The United  States  Monuments,  Fine Arts  & Archives  (MFAA), a
special  military  administration  in charge  of  restoring  cultural  prop-
erty found  in the various Nazi depots to its legitimate owners, issued
and consistently applied the rule, that a previous owner of works of
art  lost  his/her  right  to  restitution  if  he/she  had  made  a  voluntary
sale to the Germans, or if he/she failed  to return the payment he/she
received  from  them.  In  such  cases,  the  ownership  of  the  property
passed  to the government  of the  country  of which  the owner  was a
citizen.26  The  MFAA  did  not  reveal  the  legal  grounds  of  this  pol-
icy.27  The  previous  owner's  loss  of property  and  its transfer  to the
State could be viewed  as a sanction for  the owner's violation  of the
relevant statutes, based on the presumed invalidity of all transfers of
and dealings with cultural property  in the occupied territories which
were contrary to domestic statutes and without regard for the volun-
tary or forced  character of the transaction.

This approach appears to conflict  with the later  1954 Hague Con-
vention on the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict.  Paragraph  1  of the Protocol of the Convention reads: "Each
High  Contracting  Party undertakes  to prevent  the exportation, from
a territory  occupied by it during an armed conflict,  of cultural prop-
erty.  ..."28  There  is  some doubt  about the  application  of this provi-
sion.  Some  authors  interpret  the  regulation  as  intending  to  ban  all
types  of removal.  In their  view, the Protocol  would  create an abso-
lute right to restitution  based on the simple fact  of the export of the
cultural property during an armed conflict.  This doctrine also quotes
Paragraph  3 of the Protocol, by which

[e]ach High Contracting Party undertakes to return, at the close
of  hostilities,  to the  competent  authorities  of  the  territory  pre-
viously  occupied,  cultural  property  which  is  in  its  territory,  if
such  property  had  been  exported  in  contravention  of the  prin-
ciple laid down in the first paragraph. Such property shall never
be retained  as war reparations.29

87

Andrea  Gattini

Other authors, who adopt a more restrictive view, see the regulations
as  imposing  a  duty  on  the  occupying  Power  to  forbid  any  transac-
tions  that  are  contrary  to  the  internal  regulatory  legislation  of  the
occupied  country.30  Moreover,  if  it  is  the  same  occupying  Power
which  engages  in  a  prohibited  export  of  cultural  property  from  an
occupied  territory,  its  behaviour  already  constitutes  a  wrong  under
Article  43  of  the  Hague  Regulations,  which  requires  the  occupying
Power  to  respect  the  laws  in  force  in the occupied  country  "unless
absolutely  prevented."

Whatever  the  scope  of  Paragraphs  1 and  3 of  the  Protocol,  it  is
certainly  questionable  whether  the  1954  Hague  Convention  can  be
regarded  as codifying  customary  international  law. On the one hand,
the  MFAA  practice  set  an  impressive  precedent,31  but  the  Soviets
could have argued that they had a different  perspective on the matter.
In  any  case,  Article  23  of  the  1954  Hague  Convention  explicitly
states that  the Convention  does  not apply to events which  occurred
prior to  its entry  into  force.

illegally  exported  cultural 

Moreover,  Paragraphs  1 and  3 of  the  Protocol  do  not  tackle  the
difficult  issue  of  conflicts  of  law  which  might  arise  from  private
transactions  concerning 
items.  The
reasons for this were set out  in a study circulated during the negotia-
tions  by  UNIDROIT,  which  recommended  that  all  issues of private
law be excluded  from  the Draft  Convention, because of the irrecon-
cilable  differences  in  national  laws.  The  delegates  of  the  United
Kingdom  and the United  States  had declared that they would not be
able  to  sign  the  Convention  if  it  contained  a  section  on  restitution.
Eventually,  the  Committee  of  Experts  decided  to  insert  some  rules
on  restitution,  exclusively  from  the  perspective  of  public  interna-
tional  law,  in an  optional  Protocol.32  Last but not  least, prior to the
war, the Netherlands  had  no  laws prohibiting  or limiting the  export
of  cultural  items,33  such  as  Italy  had  in its  law Nr. 1089 of  1939,34
which  had  been  enacted  largely  with  the  intention  of  taming  both
Goering's well-known  appetite for valuable Italian renaissance paint-
ings  and  Mussolini's  generosity  in  making  presents  to  his  Nazi
friends.

3  International  Legitimacy  of Royal

Dutch  Decree  A  6

We therefore return to the bare language and overall scope of Decree
A 6 and again confront  the  fundamental  question of its  international
legitimacy.  In international  law  doctrine, there is general  agreement
that  legitimate  governments-in-exile  can  enact  legislation  during
wartime.  If  problems  arise  within  the  constitutional  system  of  a
country  (for  example, because  of a lack of express provisions regu-
lating  exceptional  powers  of  the  Executive  or  permitting  it  to  sit
abroad), international  law  doctrine  overcomes such problems, by re-

88

The  Fate  of the  Koenigs  Collection

lying  generally  on  considerations  of  necessity  and  expediency35  or
the argument that international  law can in certain circumstances  fill
constitutional  gaps and thus enable a government-in-exile  to act.36

With respect to statutes enacted by governments-in-exile, doctrine
has  sometimes  focussed  on  the  previously  mentioned  Article  43  of
the  1907  Hague  Regulations.  Some  authors  have taken  the  absence
of  any  provision  in  the  Hague  Regulations  concerning  legislative
acts  of  governments-in-exile  as  evidence  that  the  issue  cannot  be
dealt  with  from  a positive  law  stance. For them, the ultimate  legiti-
macy  of the  laws enacted  by the  governments-in-exile  reposes  nei-
ther  in  international  law  nor  in  the  constitutional  provisions  of  the
occupied  country,  but  basically  in  the  acceptance  of  the  national
community.37 If,  after  regaining power, the legislative body endorses
the  acts of the government-in-exile,  their  validity  can no longer  be
questioned.

Although  this  view  bows  to  a remarkable  degree  of  fiction,  it  is
obvious that domestic courts after the war have been only too willing
to  follow  it.38  The  argument,  however,  begs  the  question  of  what
consequences  for  international  law  ensue  from  the presence  of two
different  sets of rules which both  assert exclusive application  in the
same  territory  at the  same  time.  The  fact  we must  consider  is that
international law attributes some, although limited, rights of jurisdic-
tion  and  administration  to  the  occupying  Power.39  Therefore  the
problem which arises in international  law is whether third States are
obligated  to  recognize  all  the  legislative  acts  of  a  government-in-
exile,  and,  more  specifically,  whether  they  are  obligated  to  deny
recognition of transfers  of property which would be legal but for the
prohibition of the  government-in-exile.

If we agree that the occupying  government  has an  internationally
protected  right to exercise  some aspects of the authority  of a legiti-
mate power, in order "to restore and ensure as far as possible public
order  and  safety"  as  requested  by  article  43  of  the  Hague  Regula-
tions,40 it follows  that the  occupying  government  can participate  in
commercial  transactions  freely  agreed  upon  with  residents.41  From
this point of view, an overall prohibition of all transactions with the
occupying  Power,  such  as envisaged by Decree A 6, was  excessive
under  then  prevailing  international  law.42  It  is  interesting  that  this
point  was  raised  by  the  N. V.  Rotterdamse  Bankvereiniging  in  its
appeal  to the Hoge  Raad of the decision  of the Court of Appeals of
The  Hague  of  15  December  1948.  It  contended  that,  even  if  the
Dutch  government-in-exile  must  be deemed  to have had  the  power
to enact  decrees binding upon  persons  in enemy-occupied  Holland,
yet  that  power  could  not  extend  to  decrees,  such  as  Decree  A  6,
which  ran  counter  to  the  duty  of  the  occupying  Power  to  ensure
public  order  and  "economic  life"43  in  the  occupied  territory.  The
Hoge  Raad avoided  this  touchy  question  by  refusing  to decide  this
ground  of  appeal.44  It  stated  that  "proceedings  by  way  of judicial
appeal  are not intended to apply to complaints of violation or  incor-

89

Andrea  Gattini

rect  application  of  general  principles  of  international  law."  It  also
added that by their very silence, the Hague Regulations did not pre-
vent the Dutch government from  enacting Decree A 6, but this argu-
ment  is weak  even for obiter dictum.45

One might  object that the Dutch Decree  was a necessary  and ap-
propriate answer to the extraordinary threat posed by the Nazi occu-
pants.  Indeed,  the  Nazis  made  clear  from  the  beginning  that  they
were not ready to accept the limitations imposed by the Hague Regu-
lations.46 Recently, Benvenisti  has advanced the argument that a re-
gime that illegally attempts to annex permanently  occupied territory
from  its  lawful  sovereign  is not entitled  to any  deference  under  in-
ternational  law,  since  such  an  action  falls  outside  the  international
law  of  occupation.  "Under  such  circumstances  —  so runs the  argu-
ment  — the  ousted  government,  from  exile  or  upon  its  return,  is
under no obligation to respect those measures that would have been
lawful  had  the  occupant  respected  the  basic  norm  of  international
occupation."47

This  elegantly  developed,  far-reaching  argument  is  not  entirely
convincing. The acts of an occupying Power must be judged by their
compliance  with the Hague Regulations, judged  objectively  and not
by  their  alleged  purpose.  Moreover,  the  argument  rests  on  circular
evidence. It is obvious that the returning legitimate government will
have  a  strong  tendency  to  disregard  all  or  most  of  the  measures
taken  by the  occupying  Power, but what  is of greater  importance is
the  attitude  of  third  States. Here,  Benvenisti  provides  us  only  with
examples of non-recognition  by third States of puppet states or gov-
ernments  created  by the  occupier.  Our case  is very  different:  in the
Netherlands,  the  Germans  did  not  establish  a  puppet  state  such  as
that  in  Croatia  or  a puppet government  such  as that  in Norway  but
conferred  supreme  authority  on  a High  Civil  Commissioner  for  the
occupied  territory  in the  person  of  Seyss-Inquart.  The  position  of
courts  in  third  States has  therefore  been  quite  cautious  with  regard
to acts pertaining  to the occupation  of the Netherlands.

A  United  States  case  will  illustrate  this  point.  In  1950, the  State
of  the  Netherlands  brought  an  action  against  the  Federal  Reserve
Bank of New York for the possession of four bearer bonds of Ameri-
can  corporations  held in a blocked  account.  In  1940, the bonds had
been owned by four Jewish Dutch nationals. The Dutch government-
in-exile  had  issued on 24 May  1940, Royal  Decree A  1, which pur-
ported  to  invest  the Dutch  government  with  a protective  title  to all
securities belonging to persons domiciled  in the Netherlands for the
purpose of conserving the rights of the owners. A German Ordinance
of 9 August  1941 compelled Jewish  residents to deposit all negotia-
ble  assets  with  the  occupying  Power,  and  in  1943  the  bonds  were
sold  on  the  Paris  black  market  by  an  agent  of  the  German  govern-
ment.  A  Swiss firm sold  them  at  a discount  to the  interpleaded  de-
fendant,  Archimedes.  The  federal  District  Court  for  the  Southern
District  of  New  York  held  that  the  Netherlands  lacked  title  to  the

90

The  Fate  of the Koenigs  Collection

bonds. The  court  said:  "Under  concepts  prevailing  at  the  time,  the
enactment  of Decree A  1 would not be considered  applicable  in the
occupied  areas  as  a matter  of  international  law  or pursuant  to rele-
vant conflict  of laws principles."48

The federal  Court of Appeals for  the Second Circuit reversed this
judgment,  stating  that  the  physical  location  of  the  bonds  was  not
decisive,  and  that  the domicile  of the corporate  debtor  was  a much
more significant point of contact than the location of the bond instru-
ments. Moreover,  the  court  found  that  modern  authority  pointed  to
the enforceability  of the Dutch Decree under  international  law. Nev-
ertheless, the  court  felt  it was appropriate  to  state  as a general  rule
that  "the  legitimate  sovereign  should  be  entitled  to  legislate  over
occupied  territory  insofar as  such  enactments do  not  conflict with
the legitimate rule of the occupying power  (emphasis added)."49

In  conclusion,  our  research  on  the  relevance  of  Decree  A  6  for
the  solution  of  the  Koenigs  case  shows  at best  a perplexing  result:
admittedly  the  scope  of  Decree  A  6 was  excessive  and  unjustified
under  international  law,  but  on  the  other  side  it  can  not  be  main-
tained that the sale of an art collection was a commercial  transaction
"necessary to restore and ensure public order and safety" as required
by  Article  43  of  the  Hague  Regulations.  Rather  it  seems  that  the
Netherlands Government was free after the war to establish the scope
of Decree A 6 on art sales, especially  when the purchaser  happened
to be Hitler himself. Even if it cannot be maintained that the Nether-
lands  felt  particularly  concerned  by  the  sale  of  a  privately-owned
collection  of  drawings prior  to the war, nevertheless the  experience
of  the  war  helped  develop  a  new  awareness  of  the  need  for  more
effective  protection  of cultural  heritage.50

4  International  Legitimacy  of Dutch  Statute H 251

Apart from  the application  of Decree A 6, a major  argument in sup-
port  of the  Dutch  claim  is that,  even  if the  sale  was not  compelled
by  the  Nazis,  the  drawings  were  purchased  with  worthless  money
and  the transaction  must  therefore  be considered  invalid.  In  fact,  it
can be maintained  that  the price  of  1.400.000 guilders  had  actually
been  paid  by  the  Netherlands  State  Bank,  which  received  in  ex-
change  mere  scraps of paper  from  Hitler. As we have  already  seen,
Statute H 251 of  1947 declared void all asset transfers  in the Reichs-
mark  area  which  had taken  place  between  1 April  1941 and  5 May
1945.  The  explanation  of  that  date  is  that  from  1 April  1941, the
customs  frontiers  and  exchange  control  restrictions  between  the
Netherlands  and  Germany  had been  abolished,  and  the  Netherlands
had been  incorporated  in the economy of the German Grossraum.
However, it is unclear whether Statute H 251 is directly applicable
in our case. In fact, no documentary evidence of the sale contract has
survived, and the exact date of the payment has not been reported. It

91

Andrea  Gattini

could well be that the payment had been settled before  1  April 1941,
given  that  we  know that  the  drawings  were  consigned  on  5 March
1941, but there is no trace of the payment in the records of the Dutch
Central  Bank.  This matter  of  evidence  aside,  the  general  question
that  needs  to  be  confronted  is: was  the  Soviet  Union  in  1945 or at
the  latest  in  1947  obliged  under  international  law  to  recognize  the
sale  of the collection  as null  and void, because  of the  form  of con-
sideration  provided for  the  purchase?

International  law has  developed  very few  rules regarding the oc-
cupier's powers in the financial  affairs  of an occupied country. Here
again the  prevailing rule is that  of Article 43 of the Hague Regula-
tions.  Writing  shortly  after  World  War  II,  F. A.  Mann  regarded  as
permissible  the  introduction  of  the  occupier's  own  currency  in  the
occupied  country  "at least during  the initial  stage  of  occupation."51
Greater difficulties  arise when  in an occupied territory the  domestic
currency circulates alongside the occupier's currency or another cre-
ated  by  the  occupier  for  the  purpose  of paying  its  armed  forces  or
for  requisitioned  goods. On the one hand, the occupier is entitled to
determine the rate of exchange and the volume of circulation of both
currencies  and to make other  decisions, such as to prohibit the  flow
of capital  from  the occupied  territory. On the other hand, the finan-
cial practices  of the occupier must not result in a disguised plunder,
that  is, in the exploitation  of the resources of the occupied  territory
and  its  population  aimed  at  the  disruption  of  its  economy  and  the
enrichment  of the  occupier.52

Unfortunately,  it  is  a  very  difficult  task  to  strike  a  fair  balance
between these two considerations and to find some objective param-
eters.  For example, after  the war  some French  authors  asserted that
the  circulation  in occupied  France  of the Reichskreditkassenscheine
(military currency  denominated  in marks, which was legal tender in
all German  occupied countries until October  1944) and the German
decision  to  change  the  rate  of  exchange  from  17,84 to  20  FF on 1
April  1941 were among the more insidious means of plunder.53 One
might wonder whether either of these two measures deserves such a
harsh judgment. However, it is unquestionable that German wartime
financial  policy  was designed  to  integrate  Europe's  economy  under
German  rule. Trade between occupied or "friendly"  European  coun-
tries and Germany  was financed through a multilateral  clearing sys-
tem, with all the currencies  stabilized  in relation to the  Reichsmark.
Originally,  the  Reichsmark  was  meant  to  be  kept  stable  in  relation
to gold, but after  two years of war the gold standard  was jettisoned.
Also, because of the dramatic fall of German exports and the parallel
rise  of  imports  from  occupied  countries  during  the  war,  Germany
accumulated  a  huge  debit  balance  towards  the  occupied  countries
(40  billion  marks  by  September  1944).54  All  debit  balances  were
frozen  until  after  the war, but  it is  improbable that  Germany  would
have  ever  settled  these  debts.  Presumably,  Hitler  thought  that  after

92

The Fate  of the  Koenigs  Collection

his victory, Nazi domination of Europe would have made such finan-
cial niceties  unnecessary.

As  in  all  other  occupied  countries,  the  Dutch  economy  suffered
severely under Nazi occupation. In a White Book published in 1946,
the  Dutch  Ministry  of  Finance  stated  that  the  Government  had  re-
funded  some  125  million  guilders  to  the  Bank  of  the  Netherlands
for  having  taken  the  Reichskreditkassenscheine out  of  circulation
between  1941  and  1943.  The  global  costs  incurred  between  1940
and  1944 because  of the German  occupation  amounted to almost 9
billion  guilders.55  Under  these  circumstances,  the  Dutch  decision,
by which the State claimed as its property all assets sold to Germans
and paid for in Reichsmarks, was fully justified  and has to be consid-
ered  internationally  legitimate.  The  problem  remains  whether  the
same  consequences  promulgated  by  Statute  H  251  (1947)  can  be
imposed  on  a transaction  possibly  entered  into  before  the  deadline
indicated by the statute itself.

5  Private International  Law  Aspects

A further  difficulty  in the return  of the Koenigs  collection  is raised
by  the  fact  that  only  307  of  the  491  drawings  have  been  found  in
Moscow. Many of the missing drawings are by second-rate  German
artists, but some are priceless.56 There is some  speculation  concern-
ing these missing drawings. They may be elsewhere in Russia; they
may have been taken from  Weesenstein  Castle before  the collection
was removed  by the  Soviets, or they  may  have been  sold  or  stolen
by army  officers  or Soviet officials  before  the collection  was deliv-
ered to the relevant Russian  civil authorities. It is therefore  possible
that  drawings  from  the  collection  may  in  the  meantime  have  been
bought in good faith by individuals, both in Russia and abroad. Some
brief  comments  on the  international  private  law aspects of the case
are therefore  required.

It  is  well  known  that  the  various  national  legal  systems  differ
considerably with regard to the acquisition  in good faith  of movable
cultural  property.57 The basic, almost universally  recognized  rule in
conflicts  of law is the lex rei sitae, that is, the law of the State where
the  movable  property  is  situated  at  the  moment  of  its  acquisition
applies.58  One  example  of  this  rule  is  that  works  of  art  stolen  in
England,  then  taken  to Italy  and  there  purchased  bona fide, cannot
be restored to their former  owner, even if they are later brought back
to England to be re-sold.59

In order to obviate this unpalatable result, some authors have pro-
posed  to  substitute  the  lex  rei sitae  with  the  law  applicable  at  the
place  of  theft  {lex furti)60  or  more  generally  the  law  applicable  at
the place of origin (lex originis).6i  As some critics have pointed out,
however,  the lex furti  can be totally  unknown  to people trading the
object  bona fide  or it may  be as fortuitous  as the lex rei sitae.62 As

93

Andrea  Gattini

for  the  lex originis, in many  cases  it  would  be  a matter  of contro-
versy  to  determine  the place  of  origin.  Furthermore,  accepting  the
lex  originis  as  a  principle  would  not  guarantee  stronger  protection
for  the dispossessed owner; indeed,  it could happen that the lex ori-
ginis  dictates more restrictive  time limitations than the lex rei sitae.
National legal systems also differ  widely in regard to adverse pos-
session,  which  is  considered  by  civil  law  countries  as  a  matter  of
substantive  law  and  applicable  both  to  immovable  and  movable
property.  Common  law  countries,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not  easily
accept acquisitive prescription of movable property and focus on the
statute  of  limitations  which  bars  the  dispossessed  owner  after  the
lapse of a certain period of time from bringing an action for recovery
of  the  property.  Here  again  one  meets  with  significant  differences
between civil law and common law countries: the former  set a fixed
period  from  the  time of the theft  (10  to  30 years); the  latter  prefer
more  flexible  rules,  such  as  the  "demand  and  refusal  rule"  which
requires  the  plaintiff  to  commence  his/her  action  within  a  certain
time  after  the defendant  refuses  to return the goods.63

It is probably for this reason that in the well-known case, Elicofon
v. Kunstsammlungen zu  Weimar,64  the federal  Court of Appeals de-
cided to apply New York law as lex rei sitae rather than German law
as lexfurti.  In fact, the application of German law, as was requested
by  Elicofon's  defence,  would  have  extinguished  the  claim  of  the
Weimar  Museum,  since  the  German  statute  of  limitations  allows  a
30-year time period. Similarly, in the case Menzel v. List, where Mrs.
Menzel  brought  an  action  in  replevin  against  the  collector  List  to
recover her Chagall painting, which  had been taken by the Einsatz-
stab  Rosenberg  in  Brussels  in  1941  and  purchased  bona fide some
fifteen  years  later  in New York by the defendant,  the New York lex
rei sitae  offered  the decisive  advantage  of  not  recognizing  a  valid
title of acquisition  a non domino.65

A  somewhat  different  approach  was  followed  by the federal  Dis-
trict  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  Indiana  and  the  Court  of
Appeals  for  the  Seventh  Circuit  in  the  1989  case, Autocephalous
Greek-Orthodox Church of Cyprus v. Goldberg & Feldman Fine Arts
Inc.66  In  that  case,  6th  century  mosaics,  which  had  been  stolen  in
1979 from  a church in the northern part of Cyprus, were brought to
Geneva  from  Germany  by  a  self-styled  Turkish  antiquities  dealer
and sold to an Indianapolis art dealer at the Geneva airport  in  1988.
The  District  Court judgment,  affirmed  one  year  later  by  the  Court
of Appeals, returned the mosaics to the plaintiffs, denying that Gold-
berg  had  acquired  good  title  because  of  her  lack  of  diligence  in
ascertaining  the mosaics'  provenance. The court chose to character-
ize  the  replevin  action as  a matter  of tort  rather  than  as  a  question
related  to the transfer  of ownership  and  applied  Indiana  substantive
law as the law having "the most significant  contact" with the  defen-
dant's acquisition. To bolster its decision, the court found that Swiss

94

The  Fate of the Koenigs  Collection

law, as lex loci delicti commissi, would have reached  the  same con-
clusion.67

While in these cases the conflict  rules were favourable  to the dis-
possessed  owners, in a  1987 case, De  Weerth  v. Baldinger, the  fed-
eral  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  Second  Circuit  reversed  the  decision
of the District  Court and gave judgment  for the defendant.68  In that
case, the defendant  had acquired  bona fide from Wildenstein's New
York branch thirty years earlier a painting by Monet, which had been
stolen from  Mrs. De Weerth in Germany  in  1945, probably by U. S.
soldiers,  and brought  to  Switzerland.  The  federal  Court  of  Appeals
barred  the  claim  based  on  the  statute  of  limitations.  The  court  re-
fused  to  delay  the  running  of  the  statute  because  the  plaintiff  had
not been  sufficiently  diligent  in attempting to trace her stolen paint-
ing  between  1945  and  1981.69  The  decision  might  appear  too  se-
vere.70  On  the  other  hand,  one  must  not  forget  that,  had  the  claim
been before  the  court  of a European  country, Mrs. Baldinger's  title
of acquisition  would have long since become  indisputable.71

Ingenious attempts have been made to counter the effects  of time
limitations  on  the  question  of  ownership  of  stolen  pieces  of  art.72
An  innovative  solution  would  be  to  refuse  to  add  the  time  period
that  the  art  work  was  in  one jurisdiction  to the  time  the  work  was
in another jurisdiction which recognized acquisition by adverse pos-
session.73 Another proposal  would be to consider  all museum  items
as res extra commercium and therefore  inalienable and exempt from
adverse possession and statutes of limitation.74 However, this appar-
ently  simple  solution  is not feasible,  if the object  is transferred  out-
side the  State which provides  for  its inalienability,  since no  State is
yet  obliged  to  recognise  the  extra commercium character  conferred
upon  an  object  by  another  State.75  Not  even  Article  13  (d)  of  the
1970 UNESCO Illicit Transfer  Convention76  solves the problem. By
this  regulation,  the  Parties  undertake  "consistent  with  the  laws  of
each State  ...  to recognize the indefeasible  right of each  State Party
to  this  Convention  to  classify  and  declare  certain  cultural  property
as inalienable which should therefore  ipso facto not be exported, and
to  facilitate  recovery  of  such  property  by  the  State  concerned  in
cases where  it has been  exported." The reservation  contained  in the
first sentence  of  Article  13 ensures that domestic  conflict  laws will
continue  to  apply.77  A permanent  and  universally  recognised  extra
commercium character  could  only  be  guaranteed  by  international
conventions and would require a considerable degree of cooperation
among the States for the establishment  of reliable international  pub-
lic registers.78

6  Conclusions

By present  standards of international  law relating both to the law of
occupation  and  to  the  protection  of  national  cultural  heritage,  the
Koenigs  case  should  be  decided  in  favour  of  the  Netherlands.  The

95

Andrea  Gattini

inability  of  changes in  law to have retroactive  effect  is, however, a
fundamental  principle  in  that  "a juridical  fact  must  be  appreciated
in  the  light  of  the  law contemporary  with  it,  and  not  of  the  law in
force  at  the  time  when  a dispute  in regard  to  it arises or  fails  to be
settled."79  Even  so, the  Russian  claim  to  ownership  of  that  part  of
the  Koenigs  collection  now  in  Moscow,  however  strong  it  may
appear  prima  facie,  is  on  closer  look  arguable.  The  controversy
between  the  two  governments,  based  as  it  is  on  the  interpretation
of  international  instruments  as  well  as  the  legitimacy  of  domestic
statutes  under  international  law,  is  suitable  for  adjudication  by
arbitration.  Yet it  is improbable that the  Russian  government  would
agree to submit the controversy to an impartial third party. The polit-
icization  of the  issue has already gone too far,  primarily  because of
its  unfortunate  and  unwarranted  linkage  with  the  emotionally
charged  issue of the restitution of German cultural property held by
Russia.

Some years ago, Mr. Gubienko, the then Russian Minister of Cul-
ture,  proposed  the  idea  of  exchanging  the  Koenigs  collection  for
some  of the  twenty-nine  paintings  and twenty-one  drawings  by the
avant-garde  artist Malevich owned by the Stedelijk  Museum in Am-
sterdam.80  This  is  a bold  suggestion.  One  could  indeed  argue  that
the  sale  in  the  late  1950s  of  the  Malevich  legacy  by  the  German
architect  Haring  to the  Stedelijk  Museum  was  not  clearly  legal,  as
Haring was not, strictly speaking, the owner of the works which had
been  entrusted  to him by Malevich in the late  1920s. Obviously  the
Government  of  the Netherlands  officially  refuses  to  enter  into  any
compromise, but it seems inevitable that, to make a diplomatic solu-
tion viable, some sort of exchange, be it only of symbolic value, will
have to be sought. As we have already noted, the new Russian statute
paves the way for such a solution, by permitting the Russian Federa-
tion to conclude  exchange agreements.

As  for  the  private  international  law  aspects,  the  recovery  of  the
missing  drawings,  either  by  the Netherlands  or  by  Russia,  appears
under the present  state of the law more problematic. A most radical
solution,  which  eliminates  all questions connected  with the  conflict
of  law rules,81  is that  suggested  by  the UNIDROIT  Convention  on
Stolen  or  Illegally  Exported  Cultural  Objects,  signed  on  24  June
1995  in  Rome.82  The  Convention,  should  it  ever  enter  into  force,
would only have an indirect  influence  in this case. Article  10, para-
graphs  1 and  2, make clear  that the  Convention  applies only  to ob-
jects  stolen  or illegally  exported  from  the territory  of a Contracting
State after  the Convention enters into force for that State. Article 10,
paragraph  3,  however,  provides  that  "this  Convention  does  not  in
any way  legitimise any  illegal transaction  of whatever nature which
has taken place before the entry into force of this Convention  ... nor
limit  any  right  of  a  State  or  other  person  to  make  a  claim  under
remedies  available  outside the framework  of this  Convention.  ..."

96

The Fate of the Koenigs  Collection

In  peremptory  fashion,  Article  3(1)  states:  "The  possessor  of  a
cultural  object  which  has been  stolen  shall  return  it." Article  3 (3),
which deals with the question of limitation of actions and which was
hotly  debated  to  the  very  last  during  the  negotiations,  states: "Any
claim  for  restitution  shall be brought  within  a period  of three  years
from  the  time  when  the  claimant  knew  the  location  of the  cultural
object  and  the  identity  of  its  possessor,  and  in  any  case  within  a
period  of fifty  years from the time  of the theft."  This  absolute time
limit,  included  to  meet  the  international  art  market's  requirements,
is subject to criticism, and indeed Article 3 (4) restricts its reach, by
stating that a claim for restitution of an object belonging to a public
collection  of  a  Contracting  State  shall  not  be  subject  to  any  time
limitation  other  than  the  period  of  three  years  from  its  discovery.
The reasons for this exception are clear: museum items are normally
catalogued  and  thus  there  is  no  difficulty  for  the  owner  State  to
prove its ownership even a long time after  the dispossession.

It would be difficult  to extend  this type  of reasoning to the Koe-
nigs collection. It was not a public collection at the time of the sale,
nor was  it made known  or displayed  either by  Germany  after  1941
or by the Soviet Union after  1945. Nonetheless, even with regard to
private  collections,  one  could  easily  imagine  a  case  in  which  an
exception from the  strict  statute  of  limitations  of  fifty  years  would
be  fully  justified.  This  is  the  case  of  cultural  property  lost  in  the
event of armed conflict,  where the owner is not even  able to ascer-
tain whether  the property  has been destroyed  or is still  in  existence
somewhere. In these circumstances, it would be excessive to require
the  owner  to  engage  in  continuous  and  costly  searches;  the  time
limitation  should  start  only  from  the  moment  of  the  actual  knowl-
edge of the existence  of the  stolen  object.

As for the Koenigs collection, the solution depends entirely on the
factual  circumstances.  If  the  missing  drawings  had  already  been
stolen  in Weesenstein  by  Soviet  soldiers, without  the knowledge  of
the competent  Soviet  authorities, what  we have just  said  about cul-
tural  items scattered  in the aftermath  of armed conflict  would be of
significance.  It would  follow  that the present possessor  of the miss-
ing  drawings  could  not  use  as  a  time  bar  against  a  claim  by  the
Netherlands or Russia the lapse of his fifty  years of possession.

On  the  contrary,  if  the  missing  drawings  were  stolen  after  their
removal  to Moscow  or at any time  after  the  Soviet  authorities  took
possession  of the collection,  the consequences  are different  and de-
pend  on  the  resolution  of  the  dispute  as  to  ownership  between  the
Netherlands  and  Russia.  Should  the  issue  be  decided  in  favour  of
the Netherlands, a refusal  to bar the Dutch claim  could be based on
the  reasons  stated  above.  Otherwise,  the  time  limit  of  fifty  years
would  effectively  bar  the  Russian  claim  to  restitution,  unless  the
drawings were  found  within  the territory  of the Russian  Federation,
in which case the government could enforce  its claim to the property
by virtue of domestic  statutes.

97

Andrea  Gattini

Notes

1  A complete  list  is given  in  ELEN,  MISSING  OLD MASTER  DRAWINGS  FROM
THE  FRANZ  KOENIGS  COLLECTION  CLAIMED  BY THE STATE  OF THE  NETHER-
LANDS  12  (The  Hague  1989)  [hereafter  ELEN,  OLD MASTER  DRAWINGS].

2  According  to Hannema's  memoirs,  it appears  that  the en bloc  sale  of the
German  drawings  was an obligatory  "choice";  see HANNEMA,  FLITSEN MIT
MIJN  LEVEN  ALS VERZAMELAAR  EN MUSEUMDIRECTEUR  102  ( A m s t e r d am
1973), where he mentions "harde, maandenlange  strijd  met Duitse  museum-
autoriteiten,  die de gehele  collectie  wilden  kopen"  [hard  struggles  going on
for  months,  with  German  museum  people  who wanted  to buy the  whole
collection].  On the other  hand, it is not clear  whether  the sale  of the  other
drawings  (and their  price)  was a consequence  of van  Beuningen's  need for
more cash to enable him to buy drawings from the Cook of Richmond collec-
tion,  then  up for auction.  In addition,  van  Beuningen  had  close  business
relationships  with  Germany,  and it would  not have  been  in his interest to
cross  the Nazi  authorities.  His company,  Steenkolen  Handelsvereeiniging,
was  the sole agent of the  Essen  Rheinisch-Westfalische  Kohlensyndicat and
the  Muhlheim  Rheederei-Gesellschaft  in the Netherlands,  as well  as being
responsible  for the loading  and transport  of coal  from  the Ruhr  in the port
of  Rotterdam.

3  For the systematic  seizure of works of art  (referred  to as Sicherstellung)  by
the Nazis, see  KURZ,  KUNSTRAUB  IN EUROPA 1938—1945  (Hamburg  1989),
and  NICHOLAS,  THE  RAPE  OF  EUROPA  (New  York  1994)  [hereafter  NICHO-
LAS,  THE RAPE  OF  EUROPA].

4  See Leistra,  Art Recovery  in the  Netherlands,  in  CULTURAL  TREASURES
MOVED  BECAUSE  OF THE  WAR  -  A  CULTURAL  LEGACY  OF THE  SECOND
WORLD  WAR 28 (Hansen  & Lemmermeir  eds., Bremen  1995)  [hereafter
Leistra, Art Recovery  in the Netherlands].

5  In a 1966 catalogue on Elsheimer by a renowned German  scholar, two draw-
ings  were  reproduced  and listed  as being  in the collection  of Professor Si-
dorov in Moscow. The drawings were not known to have been  photographed
before  the war. Twenty years  later, in a letter dated  17 August  1983, a Berlin
lawyer  offered  for sale  to the curator  of the  Cabinet  of drawings  of the
Boymans van Beuningen  Museum in Rotterdam a drawing by Hans  Baldung
Grien,  which  belonged  to the missing  collection,  on behalf  of a client who
was  a resident  of the  Soviet  Union. The offer  was dropped  after  the Dutch
Government,  once  it  learned  of the  offer,  declared  that  the drawing, if
brought  to  light,  would  immediately  be  seized.  The drawing  was later
purchased  by a United  States  citizen, Jan Woodner.  The government  of the
Netherlands  brought  suit in federal  District Court for the return  of the  draw-
ing,  The  State  of Netherlands  v. Ian Woodner,  89 Civ.  7425  (S. D. N  Y.
1989); however, the art collector  refused  the demand.  He died  shortly  after,
and  the action  was subsequently  settled.

In  October  1987, a drawing  by Ambrosius  Holbein,  which  had been de-
posited  anonymously  at the British  Museum  for  an opinion,  was identified
as belonging  to the collection  and returned to the Netherlands. The drawing
had  been  deposited  through  the mediation  of a dubious  Russian  journalist,
who is said to have been in contact with the KGB. See ELEN,  MISSING OLD
MASTER  DRAWINGS, supra  note  1, at 20.

6  It was Aleksej  Rastorgoejev,  research  fellow  at the Lomossonow  University
in Moscow, who first drew the attention of the media to the drawings' where-

98

The  Fate of the  Koenigs  Collection

abouts  in an article  published  in January  1991 in the Paris  magazine, Rus-
skaja  Mysl.  Soon  more  detailed  information  was divulged  by  two  other
young art historians,  Konstantin  Akinsja  and Grigori  Kozlov  (the  latter  con-
servator  in the Print  section  of the  Pushkin  Museum)  in the article  Spoils of
War:  The  Soviet  Union's  Hidden  Treasures,  ARTNews,  Apr.  1991, at
130-41.

7  As Vice-President  of the  International  Council  of Museums  (ICOM),  Anto-
nova  had on various  occasions  adamantly  denied  the existence  of "special"
depots in her museum.  Ms. Antonova  has not seemed to be the least  embar-
rassed,  as illustrated  in her telling  article,  We don't  owe anybody  anything,
40  THE ART NEWSPAPER,  July—Sept.  1994, at 7 (English  translation  of an
article  published  in the Nadavya Nazavimaya  Gazeta  on 5 May 1994). The
intransigence  of the  director  of the  Pushkin  Museum  is also  apparent  from
the title, "Twice  Saved," chosen for the  1995 exhibition  in Moscow of some
of the paintings  removed  from  Germany  in  1945.

8  The exhibition  was open from 2 October  1995 to 21 January  1996, with the
title, "Five Centuries  of European  Drawings. Old Master  Drawings  from the
former  Franz Koenigs Collection." Dutch  officials  objected  to the politically
charged  title,  observing  that  there  is no such  thing  as a  "former"  Koenigs
collection.  A Dutch  offer  to lend  fourteen  drawings  from the Museum Boy-
mans  van Beuningen,  closely  related  to those  kept  in Moscow,  was not ac-
cepted  by the Pushkin  Museum.  As a result,  the Netherlands  Ministeries of
Foreign  Affairs  and Education,  Culture  and Science  decided  to organise a
parallel  exhibition,  titled  "Counterparts,"  in the Moscow  Library  of Foreign
Literature,  with  some  30  drawings,  pointedly  chosen  to  illustrate  the art
historical  desirability  of reuniting the collection.  The  catalogue  of the  Push-
kin  exhibition  was published  by Leonardo  Arte,  Milan 1995.

9  Perhaps  the most  widely  publicised  case  was the "rediscovery"  of the  trea-
sure  of Priam, the collection  of archaeological  finds  from  Troy  donated by
Schliemann  to Germany  in  1881 and preserved  in the Berliner  Museum fur
Vor-  und Friihgeschichte  until  the war. It had been  kept  during  the war  in
the  anti-aircraft  tower  (Flakturm)  at the Berlin  Zoo, and by May 1945, all
traces  of it had been  lost. On the missing  cultural  items  from  Berlin  muse-
ums,  see in general  Kuhnel-Kuntze, Bergung-Evakuierung-Ruckfuhrung.  Die
Berliner  Museen in den Jahren  1939—1959, JAHRBUCH  PREUBISCHER KUL-
TURBESITZ  71  (Sonderband  2, 2d  ed.,  Berlin  1984); GOLDMANN  &  SCHNEI-
DER,  DAS  GOLD  DES  PRIAMOS (Leipzig  1995).

10  In April  1993, a Protocol was signed in Moscow establishing a joint  Russian-
Dutch  Working  Group,  which  consisted  of  officials  of both  Ministries  of
Culture,  whose  purpose  was to examine  the Koenigs  case; see Leistra, Art
Recovery  in the Netherlands, supra note 4, at 34. In 1994, the Russian  mem-
bers  of the  Working  Group  under  the presidency  of Professor  Boguslavskij
issued a report on the legal aspects of the claim  for restitution, in which  they
stated  their unanimous  conclusion  that the Netherlands'  claim is valid.  After
completing  its  other  tasks  (that  is,  making  an  inventory  of  the  drawings
found  in  Moscow  and  preparing  for  their  exhibition),  the joint  Working
Group  was dissolved.  The Working  Group's  report  on the legal  issues was
transmitted  to the Russian  State  Commission  on Restitution,  which  has  not
yet  taken  a position  on it.

11  I dealt  extensively  with  the issue of the  status of the  German  cultural  prop-
erty  retained  in  Russia  in  Gattini,  Restitution  by  Russia  of  Works of Art
Removed  from  German  Territory at  the End of  the  Second  World  War, 1
EUR.  J. INT'L  L. 67 (1996).

99

Andrea  Gattini

12  See the remarks  by V. Koelesjov,  chairman  of the  Russian  Commission on
Restitution  of Works of Art, quoted  in Duk & De Jong, De betwiste  voogdij
over  een kunstschat,  HET PAROOL,  20.5.1995, at  18.

13  It is, however, significant  that the Chief of the Academic Staff of the Institute
of  State  and Law of the Russian  Academy  of Sciences,  Boguslavskij,  has
declared  himself  in favour  of the restitution  of the collection to the Nether-
lands; see supra  note  10; see also  Boguslavskij,  Contemporary  Legal  Prob-
lems  of  Return  of Cultural  Property  to its Country of Origin in Russia and
the  Confederation  of  Independent  States,  3  INT'L  J.  CULT.  PROP.  243,  248
(1994).

14  See Rusland  aarzelt  over  teruggave  Koenigscollectie,  DE VOLKSKRANT
31.1.1995,  where the proposal  is attributed  to A. Sevastjanov,  a member of
the directory of the Russian Association of Libraries, Museums and Archives.
15  See NICHOLAS,  THE  RAPE  OF EUROPA,  supra  note  3, at 48, for the case of
the  purchase  from  the Czernin  family  of Vermeer's  famous  "Portrait  of the
Artist in his Studio," now in the Kunsthistorisches  Museum  in Vienna.

16  Text  in  SCHMOLLER,  MAIER,  &  TOBLER,  HANDBUCH  DES BESATZUNGS-
RECHTS  § 52,  at  5 (Tubingen  1957) [hereafter  SCHMOLLER,  MAIER,  &  TO-
BLER,  HANDBUCH  DES  BESATZUNGSRECHTS].  On the Declaration  of  London,
see Wolsey,  The Forced Transfer of Property in Enemy  Occupied Territories,
37  AM.  J. INT'L  L. 282  (1943).

17  Supra  note  2. The ambiguous  character  of the  main  dramatis personae  has
been  forcefully  stressed  by two Dutch  journalists,  Max Pam and  Adriaan
Venema, Russen  zijn gek als ze collectie-Koenigs  aan Nederland  teruggeven,
VOLKSRANT,  7.5.1991. Venema  had previously  referred  to the dubious  role
played by some Dutch art dealers during the occupation  in a much  discussed
book,  KUNSTHANDEL  IN NEDERLAND  1940—1945  (Amsterdam  1986). The
two  authors  throw  a  less  than  flattering  light  on Koenigs'  behaviour, by
pointing to his business connections with Alfred  Flesche, a well-known  Nazi
who  had been  working  for the German  Intelligence  Service  before  the  out-
break  of the  war. During the occupation,  Koenigs  himself  sold  paintings to
Goering, through the mediation  of the art dealer Alois  Miedl, including  nine
by  Rubens,  for  700.000  guilders,  see  NICHOLAS,  THE  RAPE  OF EUROPA,
supra  note  3, at 105. The thesis of Pam and Venema prompted  the immedi-
ate,  uncompromising  reply  of the  Director  of the  Rijksdienst  Beeldende
Kunst,  Mr. De Haas,  Nederlandse  claim op collectie-Koenigs  is geheel le-
gitiem,  VOLKSKRANT  14.5.1991.

18  See Robinson,  Transfer of Property  in Enemy  Occupied  Territory, 39  AM.
J.  INT'L  L. 216 (1945)  [hereafter  Robinson,  Transfer of Property];  Sauser-
Hall,  L'occupation  de guerre  et les droits prives,  58 ANNUAIRE  SUISSE DE
DROIT  INTERNATIONAL  58,  107  (1944).

19  SEIDL-HOHENVELDERN,  THE  AUSTRIAN-GERMAN  ARBITRAL  TRIBUNAL  2
(Syracuse,  N. Y.  1972),  recalls  that  in 1946 and  1947 Austria  nationalized
most  of its heavy  industry.  Many  of the  assets  which  were  intended  to  be
nationalized  by the relevant  laws were claimed by the Soviet  Union  as Ger-
man  property,  even  if there  was evidence  that  they  had been  bought  after
the  Anschlufi  by German  corporations  relying  on favorable  Nazi  decrees.
The  Soviets  were  successful  in prohibiting  the enforcement  of the  Austrian
nationalization  laws as far as those  assets  were  concerned.  Eventually  with
the  State  Treaty  of May  15, 1955, the Soviet  Union  agreed  to transfer its
share of German  assets to Austria  upon  payment  of $152  million  (US) and
the  delivery  of 10 tons of oil  by Austria  (which  was subsequently  reduced
to  6.5 tons).  However,  many  assets  transferred  by the Soviets to Austria as

100

The Fate of the  Koenigs  Collection

allegedly  German  assets  were  restored  by the Austrian  government and
courts to  their  rightful  non-German  owners,  applying  the rule  that  "restitu-
tion had precedence  over  reparation."

20  Dec. 60, 20.5.1950,  Wagons Citernes, in REC. FR. IT. II, at 55.
21  Dec. 125, 1.3.1952, l.V.E M,  in REC.  FR. IT. IV, at 29.
22  Staatsblad  van het Koninkrijk  der Nederlanden  [Stb.]  1940, No. A 6; see  DE
JONG,  HET KONINKRIJK  DER  NEDERLANDEN  IN DE TWEEDE  WERELDOORLOG
19 (9 Deel, eerst  helft,  Den Haag  1979).

23  In this sense, see Robinson,  Transfer of Property, supra  note  18, at 225.
24  Wet van 18 Juli  1947, houdende  voorzieningen  in verband  met herstel ver-

mogensovergang  Rijkmarkengebied,  Stb. 1947, No. H  251.

25  Reprinted 

in  INTERNATIONALER  KULTURGUTERSCHUTZ  UND  DEUTSCHE

FRAGE 288 (Fiedler ed.,  Berlin  1991).

26  For the practice of the MFAA, see Smith,  REPATRIATION  OF ART FROM THE
COLLECTING  POINT  IN MUNICH  AFTER  WORLD   WAR II  (The  Hague  1988).
27  Some German  authors, such  as  SCHMOLLER,  MAIER,  & TOBLER,  HANDBUCH
DES  BESATZUNGSRECHTS,  supra  note  16, § 52  at 17, criticised  the regula-
tions, by which  the obligation  of restitution  to the previous  owner or to the
Government of his/her country was automatically  imposed, without  concrete
evidence  of violence,  coercion  or threat,  as being  contrary  to international
law. See also  GUNTHER-HORNIG,  KUNSTSCHUTZ  IN DEN  VON  DEUTSCHLAND
BESETZTEN GEBIETEN  1939-1945, 133 (Tubingen  1958) [hereafter  GUNTHER-
HORNIG,  KUNSTSCHUTZ].

28  There are currently  87 States party to the Convention  and 73 States party to
the  Protocol.  For the most  recent  analysis  of the Convention,  see  TOMAN,
LA  PROTECTION  DES BIENS  CULTURELS  EN CAS DE CONFLIT  ARME.  COM-
MENTAIRE  DE  LA CONVENTION  DE LA HAYE  DU MAI 1954  (Paris,  UNESCO
1994).

29  See Fitschen,  Licit  International  Art Trade in  Times of  Armed  Conflict?, 5
INT'L  J. CULT.  PROP.  127, 128 (1996)  [hereafter  Fitschen, Licit  International
Art Trade].

30  See  ENGSTLER,  DIE TERRJTORIALE  BINDUNG  VON KULTURGUTERN  IM  RAH-

MEN  DES  VOLKERRECHTS  221  (Cologne  1964).

31  See  also  PROTT  &  O'KEEFE,  LAW AND THE CULTURAL  HERITAGE  -  VOL.
Ill  MOVEMENT  805 (London  1989), for the practice in Switzerland and other
neutral  countries in the aftermath  of the  Second  World War. Under  pressure
from  the Allies,  the Swiss  government  enacted  on December  10, 1945,  a
decree  (known  as the "Booty  Decree")  "concerning  actions  for the  recovery
of goods  taken in occupied  territories during the war." This decree  provided
that a person  who had been  dispossessed  of movables in occupied  territory
in a manner contrary  to international  law either by military or civil  units of
the  occupying  power  could recover  them, if they  were in Switzerland,  from
the present  possessor  in good  or bad faith.  Article 4 of the Decree  specified
that,  if the transferor  in bad faith  was insolvent  or could  not be sued in
Switzerland, the judge might allow the good  faith  purchaser to obtain equita-
ble compensation  from  the Confederation.  The Decree  was repealed on  De-
cember  23,  1947.

32  See Nahlik,  On Some  Deficiencies  of the Hague  Convention,  44  ANNUARIE

DES  ANCIENS  AUDITEURS  DE LA HAYE  105 (1974).

33  See Fitschen, Licit International Art  Trade, supra note 29, at 130, who traces
the broad  formula  of paragraphs  1 and 3 of the Protocol to a proposal of the
Netherlands  and Belgium.

101

Andrea  Gattini

34  Legge  1 giugno  1939, n.  1089, Tutela  delle  cose  di interesse  artistico  e
storico.  For older  Italian  and pre-unitarian  statutes,  see FRIGO,  LA PROTE-
ZIONE DEI BENI  CULTURALI  NEL DIRITTO  INTERNAZIONALE  (Milano  1986).

35  See, e. g.,  Oppenheimer,  Governments  and Authorities  in Exile,  36  AM.
J.  INT'L  L. 568, 582 (1942)  [hereafter  Oppenheimer,  Governments  and Au-
thorities  in Exile].

36  See  MATTERN,  DIE EXILREGIERUNG 63  (Tubingen  1953).
37  A Dutch  author  has stated  in a direct  manner:  "En acceptant  un legislateur
de  fait  (i.e.,  the government-in-exile),  la communaute  accepte  ses actes le-
gislatifs  comme  etant le droit." Vegting, Les acts legislatifs du  gouvernement
neerlandais  pendant  I 'occupation  allemande  et le juge,  REVUE DU DROIT
PUBLIC  60, 66 (1949).

38  For Dutch  case  law affirming  the application  of  Decree  A 6 to  wartime
transactions  in Holland,  see Damhof/Staat  der Nederlanden,  Gerechtshof s-
Gravenhage  3  March  1949,  NEDERLANDSE JURISPRUDENTIE n.  575  (1949),
and  16  ANN. DIG.  PUBL.  INT'L  LAW CASES 429  (1949);  N. V.  Rotterdamse
Bankvereiniging  (Robaver)/Nederlandse  Beheersinstituut,  Hoge  Raad  13
January  1950,  NEDERLANDSE JURISPRUDENTIE n.  493  (1950),  and  16 ANN.
DIG.  PUBL.  INT'L  LAW CASES 428  (1949).

39  See  SCHWARZENBERGER,  INTERNATIONAL  LAW AS APPLIED  BY  INTERNA-
TIONAL  COURTS  AND TRIBUNALS,  VOL. II  THE LAW OF  ARMED  CONFLICT
180  (London  1966)  [hereafter  SCHWARZENBERGER,  INTERNATIONAL  LAW],
who  wrote:

If the disseised sovereign were entitled to exercise a competitive legis-
lative jurisdiction  on matters within the lawful  prerogative of the Occu-
pying  Power in relation  to occupied  territory and for the period of the
occupation,  this  would  involve  taking  for granted  an insoluble  clash
of  conflicting  rights.  While  such  a possibility  cannot  be wholly ex-
cluded, it should not be lightly  accepted  within one and the same  legal
system.

Id. at 200.

40  Morgenstern,  Validity of the Acts  of the  Belligerent  Occupant,  28 BRITISH
YEARBOOK OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 291, 294 (1951). The Dutch  Hoge  Raad
took a contrary  position  in some  postwar  cases  where it maintained  that

in a Dutch  Court, Dutch citizens could  [not], in order to avoid  convic-
tion  on  a  charge  of  aiding  the  enemy,  rely  on  the  contention
that—whatever  the factual  circumstances  might  have  been-they  were
justified  in performing  such  acts  for the benefit  of the enemy  as  the
enemy  was entitled,  according  to the Hague  Regulations,  to demand
from  them.

13 ANN. DIG.  PUBL.  INT'L  LAW CASES nn. 4 4 - 45  (1946). The Special  Crim-
inal  Court  in The Hague  maintained  in another  case  that  "the  Regulations
were  intended  to curtail  the powers  of the  enemy  over  occupied  territory
and  not to define  its rights  against  the population,"  13 ANN.  DIG.  PUBL.
INT'L  LAW  CASES n. 43 (1946). In any case, as Morgenstern  noted,  despite
the  generality  of the  language,  the cases  were  concerned  with  services on
behalf of the enemy which the German occupant was not entitled to demand,
especially  military assistance.

On the general  meaning of Article 43 of the  Hague  Regulations,  see VAN
NISPEN  TOT  SEVENAER,  L'OCCUPATION  ALLEMANDE  PENDANT  LA  DERNIER
GUERRE  MONDIALE 303  (The Hague  1946), who lucidly pointed out the clash
of  interests  in the 1907 Peace  Conference  between  medium-sized  powers,
which  feared  that the provisions of the Hague  Regulations could have  legiti-

102

The Fate of the Koenigs  Collection

mized  the  occupation  of  their  territories,  and the great  powers  "a  qui le
metier de conquerant  n'est  pas interdit."

41  See  SCHWARZENBERGER,  INTERNATIONAL  LAW, supra  note  39, at  203, who
quotes  the case  Hervyn  v. Muller,  decided  in  1922 by the  Belgo-German
Mixed Arbitral Tribunal. In that case, the defendant  submitted that a contract
made in Brussels between Belgian and German nationals during the German
occupation  was null  and void  because  it  contravened  the Belgian  Trading
with  the Enemy  Decree  of  December  12, 1916.  The MAT dismissed  the
argument and stated that the Belgian  Decree was not "in force" in the occu-
pied  country.  For  a  similar  result  applied  specifically  to  art  sales,  see
GUNTHER-HORNIG,  KUNSTSCHUTZ,  supra  note 27, at  129. A contrary  view
was embodied in the resolution adopted by the International Law  Conference
held  in  London  on  12 July  1943 and attended  by  reputable  international
lawyers  and representatives  of the governments-in-exile;  point  3 read:

The rights of the occupant  do not include any right to dispose of prop-
erty,  rights  or  interests  for  purposes  other  than  the  maintenance  of
public order and safety in the occupied territory. In particular, the occu-
pant  is not, in international  law, vested  with  any power  to transfer  a
title  which  will  be valid  outside  that  territory  to any property,  rights
or  interests  which  he purports  to acquire  or create  or dispose  of;  this
applies whether such property, rights or interests are those of the  State
or of private  persons or bodies  (omissis).

See  Bisschop, London  International  Law  Conference  1943, 38 AM. J. INT'L
L. 291 (1944).

42  This  view  was apparently  not shared  by  Oppenheimer,  Governments  and
Authorities  in Exile,  supra  note  35, at 586, who, in reviewing  in  1942  the
legislative activity of the exiled governments, sensed it was "in general con-
fined  to meeting  the emergency  condition."

43  "La vie publique" is the original French text, from  which the reductive  Eng-

lish  translation  "safety"  derives.

44  Robaver  v. Nederlandse  Beheersinstituut,  Hoge  Raad  13 January  1950, NE-
DERLANDSE  JURISPRUDENTIE  n. 493 (1950),  English  translation  in  16  ANN.
DIG.  PUBL.  INT'L  LAW  CASES  case  n.  154 (1949). The  decisions  of  the  Dis-
trict Court of the  Hague (17 December  1947) and of the Court  of Appeal of
the  Hague  (15 December  1948)  are published  in English  in  14 ANN.  DIG.
PUBL.  INT'L   LAW  CASES n.  239  (1947), and  15  ANN. DIG. PUBL.  INT'L  LAW
CASES n. 174  (1948),  respectively.

45  Of course, a different  solution  could now be reached, by arguing that a State
waging  an unlawful  war cannot  obtain  or validly  transmit  title  to property
acquired  in connection  with  or as a result  of the  illegal  warfare.  This  argu-
ment,  forcefully  advanced  by Hersch  Lauterpacht  some  years  after  the  war,
takes  into  account  the  changes  brought  about  in  international  law by the
United  Nations and developments  in the collective  security  system.  Lauter-
pacht, Rules  of  Warfare in an Unlawful  War, in LAW AND POLITICS  IN  THE
WORLD  COMMUNITY  91 (Lipsky ed.,  1953). However, it is very unlikely that
this argument can be applied  retroactively  to the state of the law during the
Second  World  War.  See the Draft  Convention  on the Rights  and the Duties
of  States in Case  of Aggression,  prepared  by the Harvard  Law School Re-
search  in  International  Law, reprinted  in 33  AM. J. INT'L  L. (Suppl.) 827
(1939), which  tends, as it seems de lege ferenda,  to deprive the aggressor of
its rights, but not of its duties, as an occupier.

46  See the German  Decree  of  18 May 1940, regarding  the Establishment  of an
Occupation  Regime  in the Netherlands  (Erlass  des Fiihrers  iiber  Ausiibung

103

Andrea  Gattini

der Regierungsbefugnisse  in den Niederlanden), in which  the two most rele-
vant  provisions  read ambiguously:  "§ 1 De Rijkscommissaris  is beschermer
van de Rijksbelangen  en oefent  in het civiele ressort het opperste  regerings-
gezag  uit. . ..  § 5 Het tot nu toe geldende  recht blijft  van kracht,  voor zover
het met de bezetting te verenigen  is." ["§ 1 The Reich  Commissioner  is the
protector of the Reich interests and exercises the supreme government  power
in  civil  matters. . ..  § 5 Statutes enacted  up to now are maintained in force,
insofar  that  they  are compatible  with  the occupation."]  See also  the Order
of  the Reich  Commissioner  for the Occupied  Netherlands  concerning the
Exercise of Governmental  Authority in the Netherlands  of 29 May  1940.

47  BENVENISTI,  THE INTERNATIONAL  LAW OF  OCCUPATION  71  (Princeton

1993).

48  The decision  has been  commented  on and criticized  by Stein,  Recovery of
Property  Confiscated  by Enemy  Occupant,  1  AM. J. COMP.  L. 261 (1952).

49  See Netherlands  v. Federal Reserve  Bank of New York and Archimedes, 201
F.2d  455  (2d Cir.  1953), reprinted in 18 I. L. R.  case n.  174, at 568 (1951).
Domke, Dutch  Wartime Legislation Before American  Courts,  1 NEDERLANDS
TIJDSCHRIFT  VOOR INTERNATIONAL  RECHT 365, 371  (1953-4),  quoted  the
Archimedes  decision  together  with  the Hoge  Raad  Robaver  decision,  supra
note  44, and others,  to maintain  that  the viewpoint  of the  United  States
courts  coincided  with  that  of the  Dutch  courts,  whereby  the legislation of
the absent  sovereign is enforced  with regard to people  and property  situated
in  the occupied  motherland.  However,  he failed  to note  the fact  that the
United  States  decision  referred  to Decree A 1 and not to Decree A 6.

50  But see NICHOLAS,  THE  RAPE  OF  EUROPA,  supra  note  3, at 427,  according
to  which  "the only full-fledged  art trial to result  from  the events of the war
in  Holland  seems to have been  that of the  Vermeer  forger  Hans van Meeg-
eren."  More  effective  protection  of national  cultural  heritage  was  afforded
by the Statute of February  1984, Wet tot behoud  van cultuurbezit,  Stb.  No.
49 (1984). The topic of the art trade from  the perspective of national  cultural
heritage  was chosen by the Dutch  Association  of International  Law for its
1994  meeting;  see  110  MEDEDELINGEN  VAN DE NEDERLANDSE VERENIGING
VOOR  INTERNATIONAL  RECHT  (Dordrecht  1995).

51  Mann, Money  in Public International Law,  26  BRITISH YEARBOOK OF  INT'L
LAW  259, 275  (1949)  [hereafter  Mann, Money in Public  International  Law].
52  As Hyde  put it, a general  rule of international  law forbids  the occupier "to

make  it possible  for the debtor to rob his creditors by the satisfaction  of a
debt through a greatly depreciated and practically worthless currency." Hyde,
Concerning  the Haw Pia Case, 24 PHILIPPINE  L. J.  141, 144 (1949), quoted
in Mann, Money  in Public International  Law,  supra  note  51, at 276. In Haw
Pia  v. China  Banking  Corp.,  decided  in  1941, the Supreme  Court  of the
Philippines  maintained  that the ability of the occupying  Power to issue cur-
rency as legal  tender  derived  from  Article 43 of the  Hague  Regulations and
from  military  necessity.  In contrast  is the decision  of the Appellate  Civil
Division  of the  High  Court  of Burma  in a  1947 case, Ko Maung  Tin v.  U
Gon  Man,  quoted  in  OPPENHEIM  (LAUTERPACHT),  2  INTERNATIONAL LAW
437 n.4 (7th ed.,  1955); cf. VON GLAHN,  THE OCCUPATION OF ENEMY TERRI-
TORY  203  (Minneapolis  1957).

53  DEBBASCH,  L'OCCUPATION  MILITAIRE  51  (Aix-en-Provence  1960). The same
arguments  were  advanced  by FEILCHENFELD,  THE INTERNATIONAL  ECO-
NOMIC  LAW  OF  BELLIGERENT  OCCUPATION   82 (Washington  1942), and  LEM-
KIN,  Axis  RULE  IN  OCCUPIED  EUROPE  52 (Washington  1944).

54  PETROV,  MONEY  AND  CONQUEST  23  (Baltimore  1967).

104

The Fate of the Koenigs  Collection

55  MlNISTERIE  VAN FlNANCIEN,  DE RlJKSFINANCIEN  GEDURENDE  DE OORLOGS-
JAREN  1940-1944  IN VERGELIJKING  MET DEN TOESTAND DIER  FlNANCIEN IN
VORIGE  JAREN XV,  29  (chart)  (Den  Haag  1946).

56  Still  missing are all five drawings by Hans  Holbein the Elder,  seven  of the
nine drawings by Hans Holbein the Younger, all four  drawings by Altdorfer,
the  only  drawing in the collection by  Griinewald,  four  of the  five  drawings
by Cranach, three of the eight drawings by Schongauer,  six of the ten draw-
ings by Elsheimer,  and nine of the ten drawings by Baldung  Grien.  On the
other  hand, all the drawings by Diirer are present.

57  Some legal systems, like the German, exclude a bonajide  purchase of stolen
or  lost  goods  (§ 935 BGB). Others,  especially  common  law  countries, go
further  and exclude in principle the purchase a non domino as such, applying
the rule nemo plus  iuris in alienum  transferre potest  quam  ipse habuit. Few
adopt  the extremely  liberal  attitude  of article  1153 of the  Italian  Codice
Civile, which allows a bonajide  purchase even of stolen goods. See Reichelt,
La protection  Internationale des biens culturels,  REVUE DE  DROIT UNIFORME
42,  100 (1985);  Siehr,  Zivilrechtliche  Fragen  des Kulturguterschutzes,  in
INTERNATIONALER  KULTURGUTERSCHUTZ 41, 43  (Reichelt  ed.,  Wien  1992)
[hereafter  Siehr, Zivilrechtliche Fragen]; SIEHR, INTERNATIONAL ART   TRADE
AND  THE  LAW, 243  RECUEIL  DES COURS  56  (1993-VI)  [hereafter  SIEHR,
INTERNATIONAL  ART TRADE].

58  SIEHR,  INTERNATIONAL ART  TRADE, supra  note  57,  at  74;  Lagarde,  Com-
merce et protection  des biens culturels en droit international prive,  JOURNAL
DE  LEGISLATION COMPAREE 438  (1986),  indicates  as  an  alternative  rule,  fol-
lowed  mainly by French  doctrine  and jurisprudence,  the lex rei sitae  at the
moment  of the claim to restitution.

59  Winkworth  v. Christie, Manson  & Woods, [1980]  1 All E. R.  1121  (Ch.).
60  See Hanisch, Internationalprivatrechtliche  Fragen im Kunsthandel,  in FEST-
SCHRIFT MULLER-FREIENFELS 193, 215 (1986) [hereafter  Hanisch, Internatio-
nalprivatrechtliche  Fragen]; followed  by Mansel, De Weerth v.  Baldingei—
Kollisionsrechtliches  zum Erwerb gestohlener  Kunstwerke,  8 IPRax 268, 271
(1988)  [hereafter  Mansel, De  Weerth  v. Baldinger].

61  Jayme,  Die Nationalitdt  des Kunstwerkes  als Rechtsfrage,  in  INTERNATIO-
NALER  KULTURGUTERSCHUTZ  7  (Reichelt  ed., Wien  1992);  Jayme,  Neue
Anknupfungsmaxime  fur  den Kulturguterschutz  im internationalen  Privat-
recht,  in RECHTSFRAGEN DES INTERNATIONALEN  KULTURGUTERSCHUTZES 35
(Dolzer, Jayme & MuBgnug eds., Heidelberg  1994). The lex originis criterion
has also been retained by the Institut de droit international in the Resolution
adopted in September  1991 on "The  International  Sale of Works of Art  from
the  Angle  of the  Protection  of the  Cultural  Heritage,"  64  ANNUAIRE DE
L'INSTITUT  DE DROIT INTERNATIONAL II, 402 (1992), drafted  by  a Commis-
sion  chaired  by Professor  Ferrer  Correia.  Article  2 reads:  "The transfer of
ownership  of works of art belonging to the cultural  heritage  of the  country
of origin shall be governed by the law of that country." For the purpose of the
Resolution,  "country  of origin" means the country  "with  which the property
concerned  is most closely linked  from  the cultural  point of view" (Article 1,
lb)—a rather elastic  concept.

62  SIEHR,  INTERNATIONAL ART TRADE, supra  note  57, at  75.
63  On the "demand  and refusal  rule," see Siehr,  Zivilrechtliche  Fragen,  supra

note 57, at 48, 56.

64  536 F. Supp. 829 (E. D. N Y), aff'd,  678 F.2d 1150 (2d Cir. 1981).
65  Menzel  v. List,  253 N. Y.  S. 2d 43 (N. Y. App. Div.  1964), and  267 N. Y.

S. 2d 804 (N. Y. Sup. Ct. 1966).

105

Andrea  Gattini

66  717 F. Supp.  1374 (S. D. Ind.  1989),  aff'd,  917 F.2d 278 (7th Cir.  1990).
On  this  case, see Byrne-Sutton,  The Goldberg Case: A Confirmation  of the
Difficulty  in Acquiring  Good  Title to  Valuable Stolen  Cultural  Objects, 1
INT'L  J. CULT.  PROP.  151 (1992)  [hereafter  Byrne-Sutton,  The Goldberg
Case].

67  See Byrne-Sutton,  The Goldberg  Case, supra  note  66, at 162—64.
68  Mansel, De Weerth v. Baldinger,  supra  note  60, at 270,  criticizes  both the
federal  District  Court and the federal  Court of Appeals  for not having  taken
into  consideration  the possibility  that  the painting had been  held  bona  fide
by  Wildenstein  in Switzerland  for five  years.  In this  case,  he would  have
acquired a valid  title by adverse possession  (§717 Swiss Civil  Code).

69  De Weerth v. Baldinger,  658 F. Supp. 688 (S. D. N Y. 1987), rev'd, 836 F.2d
103 (2d Cir.  1987). The federal  Court of Appeals found  that Mrs. De Weerth
had  reported  the theft  to the police in 1946, but that  since  then  she had not
engaged  in efforts  to establish the whereabouts of the painting. It would have
been  sufficient  for her to consult the Monet catalogue raisonne, published in
1974 by the art dealer Wildenstein,  where her painting  "Vetheuil  vu de File
Saint  Martin" was marked  as Nr. 595.

70  Some  years  later,  the New York  Court  of Appeals,  in the case  Solomon
Guggenheim  Foundation  v. Lubell,  stated  that  under the law of New  York
the  equitable  defence of laches  could  not be interpreted  so extensively and
that  the "demand  and  refusal"  principle  applies  as the general  rule, 569
N.  E.2d 426,  567 N. Y. S. 2d 623 (1991). Mrs. De Weerth  then  asked  for a
new  trial  against  Mrs.  Baldinger.  The federal  District  Court  ruled  again in
favour  of Mrs.  De Weerth,  804 F. Supp. 539  (S. D. N  Y.  1992),  but this
decision  too has been  reversed  by the Court of Appeals  because  of proce-
dural  defects,  38 F.3d 1266 (2d. Cir.  1994). See Furtak,  Abschluss  im  New
Yorker Verfahren De Weerth v. Baldinger  um den gutglaubigen  Enverb  eines
Monet,  15 IPRax  128 (1995).

71  Siehr, Zivilrechtliche  Fragen,  supra  note  57, at 59.
72  For a radical  view  which  advocates the abolition  of protection  for buyers of
reported  stolen  art, see Bibas,  The Case Against  Statutes  of Limitations  for
Stolen  Art,  5  INT'L  J. CULT.  PROP.   73 (1996).

73  This  has been  proposed  recently  by Jayme, Zur  Verjahrung des  dinglichen
Herausgabeanspruchs  bei  Wechsel des Lageortes  eines  Kunstwerkes,  15
IPRax 43 (1995). This solution  is inconsistent with well established  case law
and  statutory  law; see Siehr,  International  Art Trade, supra  note  57, at  89.
Hanisch,  Internationalrechtliche  Fragen,  supra  note  60, at 220, quotes in
this  context  the  1968 Swiss  Federal  Court  decision  in the case  Koerfer v.
Goldschmidt  (BGE 94 II 297). Koerfer  had bought at an auction in Germany
in  1941 two paintings by  Toulouse-Lautrec,  which  had been  confiscated as
Jewish  property.  In 1944, Koerfer  sent  them  to  Switzerland  to his wife.
The  Swiss  Federal  Court applied the Swiss  period of five  years for adverse
possession  but did not exclude  from  a theoretical  point  of view  the possi-
bility of counting the limitation  period that had already run abroad. The court
held  that  the plaintiff  was  unable to bring  his claim  during  the  defendant's
period of possession in Germany and that the defendant,  therefore,  could not
avail  himself  of this  time  period.  For discussion  of this  case,  see Lalive,
Jurisprudence  suisse  de  droit  international  prive,  26 SCHWEIZERISCHES
JAHRBUCH  FUR INTERNATIONALES  RECHT  259, 322  (1969-1970).

74  MuCgnug, Museum-  und Archivgut  als res extra commercium?,  in  INTERNA-
TIONALER  KULTURGUTERSCHUTZ  141 (Reichelt  ed., Wien  1992),  reprinted

106

The  Fate of the  Koenigs  Collection

in  RECHTSFRAGEN  DES INTERNATIONALEN  KULTURGUTERSCHUTZES  1 99
(Dolzer, Jayme & MuBgnug eds., Heidelberg  1994).

75  See  Siehr,  Kulturgiiter  als  res  extra  commercium  im  internationalen
Rechtsverkehr, in FESTSCHRIFT  TRINKNER  703 (1995). For two cases  dealing
with  French  public  property,  see Hoge  Raad  18.1.1983  (De Raad  v.  OvJ,
case of the Madonna of Batz-sur Mer), NEDERLANDSE  JURISPRUDENTS 1402
(Nr. 445,  1983), and commented  by  Verheul,  Foreign  Export  Prohibitions:
Cultural  Treasures and Minerals,  31  NETHERLANDS  INT'L  L. REV. 419
(1984); Tribunal of Rome, 27 June  1987 (Stato francese e Ministero Francese
dei beni culturali c. Ministero per i beni culturali e ambientali, De Contessini,
case of the Riom tapestries), reprinted  in  71  RIVISTA DI DIRITTO  INTERNAZI-
ONALE 920 (1988), confirmed  by Corte die Cassazione, 24 November 1995,
n.  12166, reprinted in FORO  ITALIANO I, 907 (1996). For a recent  case con-
cerning five medieval ivory statuettes belonging to the Hessen State Museum
of  Darmstadt  which  had been  stolen  at the end of the Second  World War
and offered  for sale at an auction by the French bonafide  possessor in 1993,
see the order of the Tribunal  de grande  instance de Paris 28.09.1993, reject-
ing  the Museum's  claim  for restitution.  The statuettes  were  not sold  at  the
auction, and the possessor  later  agreed to sell them  at a much reduced  price
to the Museum.  The ordinance  is reproduced  in 15 IPRax  255 (1995),  with
comment  by Jayme,  Kunstwerke  als Kriegsbeute,  15 IPRax  260 (1995)
[hereafter  Jayme, Kunstwerke  als  Kriegsbeute].

76  823 U. N.TS.231.
77  See  Frigo,  Transferimento  illecito  di beni  culturali  e legge  applicable, 2

DIRITTO  DEL COMMERCIO  INTERNAZIONALE  611  (1988).

78  See the interesting proposals de legeferenda  by Hanisch,  Internationalpriva-
trechliche Fragen, supra note 60, at 224, on the duty to provide a "genealogi-
cal  tree"  for all valuable  objects  sold  on the art market  which  would be
supervised  by an organisation  modelled  on the International  Council of Mu-
seums.

79  Island  of Palmas  case  (The Netherlands  v. U. S. 1928),  2 UN  REP.  INT'L

ARBITRATION  AWARDS  (R. I. A  A.)  829,  845.

80  Malevich  Drawings  in Exchange for the Koenigs  Collection?,  3 THE  ART

NEWSPAPER  n.  15, Feb.  1992,  at  2.

81  The European  Union  has adopted a different  approach  in its Council  Direc-
tive  93/7 of 15 March  1993, On the Return  of Cultural  Objects  Unlawfully
Removed  from  the Territory  of a  Member  State,  27 March  1993 OFFICIAL
JOURNAL  EC (L 74) 74. Article  12 states  that  "ownership  of the  cultural
object  after  return  shall  be governed  by that  law of the  requesting  Member
State,"  although  it is not clear  whether  this  also  refers  to its conflict  rules.
For the opposing  viewpoint,  with  convincing  arguments, see Siehr,  Interna-
tional Art Trade, supra  note  57, at 232; Siehr,  Kulturguterschutz  innerhalb
der  Europdischen  Union,  95  ZEITSCHRIFT  FUR  VERGLEICHENDE  RECHTSWIS-
SENSCHAFT  170, 180 (1996).  Contra  Jayme,  Kunstwerke  als  Kriegsbeute,
supra  note  75, at 260, who interprets  the  Directive  as implying  a special
conflicts  of law rule  (/'. e., lex originis)  for works  of art;  Jayme,  Kultur-
guterschutz  in ausgewahlten  europdischen  Ldndern,  95 ZEITSCHRIFT  FUR
VERGLEICHENDE  RECHTSWISSENSCHAFT  158,  168  (1996).

82  The Institute's  work  was promoted  by UNESCO,  and it was primarily the
research  of Gerte  Reichelt  of the  University  of Vienna  which  led to  the
adoption of a Draft  Convention in 1990. See Reichelt, Die Rolle von Unidroit
Jiir  den  Internationalen  Kulturguterschutz,  in FESTSCHRIFT  SCHWIND 205
(Wien  1993);  Reichelt,  Die  Vereinheitlichung des privatrechtlichen  Kultur-

107

Andrea  Gattini

giiterschutzes  nach  dem UNIDROfT-Vertragsentwurf  1990,  in  RECHTSFRA-
GEN  DES INTERNATIONALEN  KULTURGUTERSCHUTZES  67  (Dolzer,  Jayme   &
MuCgnug eds., Heidelberg  1994). The text of the Convention  is printed in 5
INT'L  J. CULT.  PROP.   155  (1996).  See  Frigo,  La  convenzione  dell'UNI-
DROIT  sui beni  culturali  reubati  o  illecitamente  esportati,  32 RIVISTA DI
DIRITTO  INT. PRIV.  PROC.  435  (1996). The  1990  Preliminary  Draft  Conven-
tion  was  reproduced  with  an explanatory  report  by Schneider,  REVUE DE
DROIT  UNIFORME  16 (1990).  The  1993 revised  Draft  Convention  with com-
mentary  by  Siehr  was  printed  in  3  INT'L  J. CULT.  PROP. 303  (1994).

108


