The Fundamental Aims of

Cultural Property Law

frank g. fechner*

The law of cultural property is primarily based on the interests of the states concerned. If
a cultural object is of high monetary or identi(cid:222)catory value, states will contest the owner-
ship, and many of these cases are resolved by compromise. If a cultural object is of less mon-
etary or identi(cid:222)catory value, states often neglect its preservation. Yet the law for protec-
tion of cultural property should not only be a method for the arbitration of national
interests but should also take into account the interests of humankind in general, including
preservation of the object in its original context, public accessibility, and the scienti(cid:222)c, his-
toric and aesthetic interests that can be associated with an object. While some states are un-
able to protect their cultural heritage, especially in times of war, public international law
does not prevent a state from destroying its cultural heritage. Cultural heritage law is de-
veloping rapidly, and national laws and international conventions are in the process of cre-
ation. At this time, the author posits, it is therefore necessary to consider the reasons for the
protection of cultural objects.

In recent years, cultural property law has developed rapidly. A growing
number of books and articles in the legal literature shows the increasing
level of interest in this area. Furthermore, this interest corresponds as well
to  the  growing  number  of disputes  over  cultural  objects.  In  the  last
decades, especially, the claims of formerly colonial and other nations have
created interest, as demonstrated for example, by the controversies con-
cerning the famous  (cid:210)Elgin Marbles(cid:211) in the British Museum, the  (cid:210)No-
fretete(cid:211) in Berlin, and the (cid:210)Benin-bronzes(cid:211) in several European museums.
More recently, in the years since the opening of the Central and Eastern
European states, debate has arisen concerning the return of cultural trea-
sures removed during World War II. This is especially true for (cid:210)Priam(cid:213)s
treasure,(cid:211) the (cid:222)nds that were discovered by Heinrich Schliemann at Troy,
brought by him to Germany and then removed by Soviet soldiers in 1945.
Cultural property law, however, has aims other than to resolve political
questions, and the questions with which it is concerned are often less spec-
tacular. This article tries to draft the fundamental aims or principles for a

*Priv. Doz. Dr. iur., Tübingen. For helpful comments, the author would like to thank Dr.
Lyndel V. Prott, UNESCO, Paris.

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 7, No. 2, 1998, pp. 376— 394
' 1998 International Cultural Property Society

1 intro-
duction

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

376

legal protection of cultural heritage(cid:209)a branch of law that is just now
coming into existence.

Questions of cultural property are frequently resolved in a political way
with a compromise between the con(cid:223)icting interests. This pragmatic ap-
proach often can be effective in balancing the different interests involved.
However, it also can lead to short-term solutions that do not take into ac-
count the inherent value of cultural items and may even endanger their ex-
istence. It is not suf(cid:222)cient merely to be able to return a statue taken from a
temple to its country of origin(cid:209)there is a loss when the statue is brought
to a magazine of a museum, and the temple from which the statue came has
been destroyed by plunderers. The same holds true for illegally excavated
objects taken from their context of scienti(cid:222)c importance. Cultural property
law must prevent the destruction both of objects and of contexts.

An effective system for the protection of cultural property should in-
corporate the different branches of law. It is most important that the na-
tional rules for the protection of ancient monuments and sites harmonize
with the national rules for the export of cultural objects. This can be a prob-
lem in states with rules that are valid only in a certain region, like the laws
of the German L(cid:138)nder. Furthermore, methods of protection are not effec-
tive if restricted to rules of national law. In a modern world of global mar-
kets, national and international rules also must be harmonized. Preservation
of historic monuments and protection against export of cultural treasures
are, in this approach, just branches of a uni(cid:222)ed cultural property law.

The creation of a global system is not, however, identical with the
uni(cid:222)cation of norms. In fact, uni(cid:222)cation of norms would not be desirable.
An object of cultural property may be worthy of protection for a small
local area, even if the object is not suf(cid:222)ciently signi(cid:222)cant to be part of a na-
tional or global system of protection. It would be unrealistic to expect a
global system to care for every object of merely modest, local interest but
without importance for science or in its aesthetic respect. In these cases,
local or domestic protection is the maximum protection affordable in order
not to over-stress the international system. Nevertheless, some harmoniza-
tion seems inevitable. Con(cid:223)icting rules are not useful when they lead to de-
struction of cultural property. This holds true in national as well as in in-
ternational law.

International law provides no generally accepted de(cid:222)nition of the term
(cid:210)cultural property.(cid:211) This lack of a shared de(cid:222)nition leads to misunder-
standings and makes it possible to abuse the term for political aims. The
danger of enlarging this branch of law lies in the use of the word (cid:210)culture(cid:211)
as a slogan and not as a legal term. The temptation to broaden the de(cid:222)ni-
tion is particularly acute now, when the law of cultural property is in a state

2 definition
of cultural
property

fundamental aims of cultural property law

377

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

of (cid:223)ux. Yet, an overly inclusive de(cid:222)nition of cultural property means not
only a weakening of the notion itself but also a weakening of the legal rules
for its protection. Thus a broad notion of cultural property can be even
more harmful than a too-narrow one; if a tight de(cid:222)nition might exclude
some objects worthy of protection, a too-broad one might well fail to be
effective at all. Only a clear and narrow de(cid:222)nition can prevent misuse of
cultural property law and the loss of cultural property itself. 

The (cid:222)rst task of cultural property law, then, is to de(cid:222)ne  (cid:210)cultural
property.(cid:211) It would be dif(cid:222)cult to specify a uni(cid:222)ed, generally acceptable
de(cid:222)nition, especially since different notions may be appropriate for the dif-
ferent layers of national and international law. Nevertheless, it would be
helpful to lay out some fundamental aspects on which everyone can at-
tempt to agree.

2.1 the nature of cultural property

Until recently, national laws and international conventions concerning cul-
tural property law applied only to physical objects.1 There is now an in-
creasing  tendency  to  include  nonphysical  objects  as  well,  for  example,
music, dance, handicrafts, religious rites, and methods for the production
of certain goods (as in Japan).2 Some argue for the protection under cul-
tural property law of traditions, life-styles, or even entire indigenous peo-
ples from contact with civilization. All of those things are undoubtedly
worth being protected, but the question may be posed whether it is not
necessary to provide different methods for the protection of physical ob-
jects. Like the protection of cultural property, the preservation of folk life
also involves conservation. The difference lies in the object being protected. 
Human behavior and structures of societies are not easily ruled by laws
and should be free of external control. What is more important is that the
preservation of folk life can con(cid:223)ict with the preservation of cultural ob-
jects.  A  better  approach  would  be  to  make  use  of the  laws  protecting
human rights, minorities, religious freedom, and intellectual property. To
avoid misunderstandings, I suggest naming this larger scope cultural protection
law, while the notion cultural property law 3 refers to the more speci(cid:222)c area.
This article addresses cultural property law, even if the term places too
much stress on the relation between an object and its (cid:210)proprietor.(cid:211)

It is worth searching for common principles because both are human-
itarian tasks that strengthen one another. Like cultural protection law, cul-
tural property law does not protect primarily things, but human beings4;
and as we see in practice, both branches of law are often violated simulta-
neously.5 If human rights, especially the right to life, are disregarded, there
will be no respect for cultural objects either. Thus, cultural property law
can be called a human right.6 However, cultural property law does not have

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

frank g. fechner

378

to be based on claims of living people.7 As in other branches of law(cid:209)for
example, the law of animal rights(cid:209)there has been a development away
from a purely anthropocentric approach that does not care about the fu-
ture. In cultural property law, this trend can be expressed by the term (cid:210)pri-
maut(cid:142) de l(cid:213)objet(cid:211) (the primacy of the object8) that puts the conservation of
the cultural object (cid:222)rst. Nevertheless, an object as such can never be of an
absolute value. At a time of efforts merely to (cid:222)nd compromises among in-
terests, it seems necessary to remember that some things are in need of pro-
tection independently of whether or not their owners have any interest in
their protection. This sentence, broadly accepted in the scienti(cid:222)c literature
as far as rules for the protection of monuments in the various national laws
are concerned, seems to have no lobby in the area of international trade
with cultural heritage. The need for protection independent of the interests
of the owning state is not an accepted norm in international law.

2.2 context of an object

Another modern method of enhancing the ability of the law to protect
cultural objects concerns the preservation of the original context of such
objects. It is at least generally and theoretically accepted that the scienti(cid:222)c
value of an object is greater if there is information about its context, if the
relation of the object to its surroundings is known. The best examples are
the strata in which archaeological (cid:222)nds are embedded9 and the use of an
ethnographic collectible. Thus, the concept of cultural property includes
not only the things attached to the object but also its context, which is
worth protecting when it is of speci(cid:222)c value. Nevertheless, in some cases,
separation of the object from its context cannot be avoided, especially
when separation ensures that the object can provide evidence for future
generations of the culture out of which it was created. In all of these cases,
it is necessary to document the context together with the objects by de-
scription, drawings, photographs, etc.10

Moreover, it may be desirable to preserve a particular assemblage or
collection of objects.11 Examples are Renaissance collections of art and rar-
ities, whose worth frequently lies not in the value of the individual pieces
but in their combination. Such collections make evident the motives and
desires of those who collected them. Archaeological sites are of high value
even if they do not contain one single object worthy of being exhibited, be-
cause they may well incorporate a lot of information about the way of life
of the people who once dwelled at that place.12

2.3 relation to culture

The terminology makes evident that cultural property has to do with cul-
ture. Palaeontological (cid:222)nds, places with mineral rarities, and natural mon-

fundamental aims of cultural property law

379

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

uments (such as caves with stalactites and stalagmites, or old trees) are not
part of cultural property. These objects may well need protection but, be-
cause of their different nature, their protection requires different rules.
Only in a few cases is it possible to create a rule common to both, as has
been done with the UNESCO Convention for the Protection of the World
Cultural and Natural Heritage (1972).13 It is also not necessary that an ob-
ject of cultural property qualify as a work of art, if the object can be re-
lated to the standard of culture of a speci(cid:222)c time. An extension of the legal
protection  of cultural  property  to  objects  not  made  by  human  beings
seems possible as long as the objects show some relation to people, such as
the bones found at an ancient burial.

2.4 significance

Some  authors  frequently  consider  (cid:210)signi(cid:222)cance(cid:211) as  another  part  of the
de(cid:222)nition of cultural property. This is a necessary method of limiting the
number of items protected and of keeping the protective system effective.
The problem with this criterion is in the establishment of an object as
signi(cid:222)cant. The result may differ from person to person, from group to
group, and from time to time, according to taste and fashion. The subjec-
tivity of this determination makes this element dangerous because it is pos-
sible that the value of an object for science as well as for other peoples or for
future generations will thereby be disregarded, excluding the object from
protection. On the other hand, the task of global protection of cultural
property cannot be more than to protect objects of general importance.
Hence, it is reasonable to create a legal system of protection with different
intensities at the local, national, and international levels, according to the
importance of the object for only a small group, a nation, or the whole of
humankind.14 A system that cares for objects of lesser importance in the
same way that it cares for those of greater importance would be ineffective;
yet, a global system should never hinder protection on a lower level.

International conventions frequently leave it to states to decide what
they want to de(cid:222)ne as (cid:210)national treasures,(cid:211) but the conventions add cate-
gories in order to limit the freedom of national de(cid:222)nition.15 This method is
helpful in stimulating different national measures and is in accordance with
the principle of subsidiarity.16 This principle means that a problem that can
be resolved by a local administration should not be decided by the state
and that a question that can better be decided by the state should not be
decided by an international organization. 

It is dangerous for cultural property when a state does not want to care
for its cultural assets or is not able to do so. Times of war and internal strug-
gles, such as revolutions, are only extreme situations; however, a less excep-
tional, but fairly common reason is lack of money for or an interest in the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

frank g. fechner

380

protection of a state(cid:213)s cultural heritage. Although the identi(cid:222)catory function
of cultural property law so often proclaimed in modern scienti(cid:222)c literature
is helpful for the attribution of cultural objects to certain groups of peo-
ples, this legal aspect should not be overemphasized. Cultural property can
be the basis for the uni(cid:222)cation of a community or ethnic entity. Thus, the
removal or destruction of cultural heritage can be a violation of the princi-
ples of a state(cid:213)s moral community, which is based on human dignity.17

Nevertheless, this criterion does not seem to be useful for the de(cid:222)ni-
tion of cultural property because it is too dependent on emotions. A single
group cannot determine which objects ought to be preserved nor can the
proprietor  of a  historic  monument  decide  about  its  preservation.  If a
group does not want to protect an object, it still remains a part of cultural
property. A group cannot be forced to protect its own cultural heritage. Yet
this lack of regard means the loss of a cultural treasure for humankind. It
would diminish the value of cultural property law if it had no other func-
tions than to protect cultural symbols against external threats18 or merely to
decide con(cid:223)icts between groups or states, that each claim the same object.
There is also the problem of objects that are not claimed as (cid:210)property(cid:211) by
anybody. Are they not worth being protected? Certain cultures disappeared
a long time ago, and we no longer have any direct relation to them. Never-
theless, their relics are worthy of protection by cultural property law for
they are documents of the development of humankind.

Contrary to subjective approaches, it seems preferable to search for
generally acceptable criteria for a de(cid:222)nition of cultural property. In this re-
spect, scientists in the (cid:222)eld of cultural property law mention a variety of
criteria. These can be summed up in three general groups directly based
upon the scienti(cid:222)c, artistic, or historic importance of an object.19 Thus, it
is the object(cid:213)s signi(cid:222)cance as a source of information, its aesthetic con-
tents20 or its age21 that makes it a cultural property in the sense of law.22
These three criteria are independent of each other and do not all have to be
satis(cid:222)ed at the same time, even though this frequently happens.

2.5 criteria of no importance

Some criteria are not helpful for the de(cid:222)nition of cultural property. Besides
the importance of an object, its quality cannot be an additional criterion.
Cultural property and works of art are notions that must be kept strictly
separate. Many objects of interest for cultural history are not works of art.
To narrow the concept of cultural property to works of art, dismissing sci-
enti(cid:222)c or historic value, means to give away important sources of informa-
tion. Nor is the state of conservation of an object a signi(cid:222)cant criterion.
Although a badly preserved object can be of low value in some cases, it may
well be worth studying and preserving.

fundamental aims of cultural property law

381

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

For the de(cid:222)nition of cultural property, the market value of an object is
not a criterion. The economic value of an item can be of importance in de-
termining whether there is a public interest in exhibiting the object. Nev-
ertheless, the market value is not decisive for the question of whether an
object is to be considered cultural property. For that reason, the value lim-
itations of the European Council Regulation and the European Council
Directive23 are of dubious usefulness.24 As seen in many cases, unspectacu-
lar objects that are of no value for any collector and thus do not obtain
high prices on the market are of special importance for science. The mon-
etary value of cultural property, moreover, can vary in reaction to fashion
or economic factors.

A time limitation for the de(cid:222)nition of cultural property does not seem
adequate. Often the importance of a work of art will only be realized after
a period of time has passed. On the other hand, sometimes a work of art is
recognized as a masterpiece immediately after its creation. A time limita-
tion such as (cid:210)before 1800(cid:211) or (cid:210)more than 100 years old(cid:211) may be helpful for
the enactment of legislation, but it is not a reason for protection and thus
should be avoided.25 The place of origin of an object is also not an appro-
priate criterion. Cultural property originating from abroad should not be
ignored by domestic laws and left to destruction. Moreover, every state is
responsible for merchandise that has been imported after its removal by 
destruction  of a  cultural  monument  or  archaeological  site.  Finally,  the
de(cid:222)nition of cultural property should be independent of the ambitions
and economic situation of the proprietor of the object or of the state
where the object is located. If the nature of cultural property has been
de(cid:222)ned by these methods, then different legal consequences can attach to
this characterization.

3.1 preservation of material form

The primary aim of cultural property law26 is the preservation of cultural
property in its original form. The main reason for this preservation is that
cultural items are unique and cannot be reproduced. This difference in
comparison with the nature of other goods is most important for the dis-
tinctive rules of this branch of law. The struggle for preservation is an ex-
pression of the skills of other people and former cultures and results from
the interest in one(cid:213)s own past. At the same time, the protection of cultural
objects realizes our responsibility towards future generations. The preser-
vation of substance precedes any attribution of cultural property to a spe-
cial place or people. Since the judgment of King Solomon, it has been well
known that preservation goes before attribution.

The preservation of substance requires not only protection against de-
struction but also measures against damage and theft of the object. It is

3 aims of
cultural
property law

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

frank g. fechner

382

also necessary to provide optimal conditions of preservation and quali(cid:222)ed
application of conservation techniques. In addition, the inventory and doc-
umentation of cultural property and its condition are necessary. It may also
be important to collect samples, for example, of original plaster work.
Documentation is (cid:222)rst a precaution in case of later damage or destruction
of the object and second a basis for scienti(cid:222)c research. The complete doc-
umentation of an archaeological excavation must reproduce the original
strata and context of the site. Thus, after the excavation, the documentary
record  represents  the  untouched  cultural  property  as  it  was  originally
found.

Another disputed question in the (cid:222)eld of restoration concerns the re-
construction of destroyed material. At (cid:222)rst sight, the rebuilding or recre-
ation of an object would seem to be an aim of cultural property law. Un-
doubtedly, reconstructions may be necessary in order to preserve the entity
of a historic view of a town or a place of reminiscence, like the home of
Goethe in Frankfurt. A reconstruction falls under cultural heritage law only
as far as reconstruction is possible without diminution or destruction of
substance. This holds true, for example, if a fallen statue is returned to its
original place. Certainly, each case must be considered individually. Re-
constructions can be of better or worse quality, depending on the budget
and knowledge available. In most cases, the main reason for reconstruction
is to attract tourists. In reality, however, so-called reconstructions are not
actually re-constructions but are instead creations of replicas.27 This way of
rebuilding is especially dubious in those cases where original materials must
be destroyed(cid:209)for example, if a crumbling historic foundation must be
pulled down in order to rebuild a wall. After all, the aims of reconstruction
often differ from those of preservation.

3.2 preservation in the original context

In addition to the preservation of original material, it is the task of cultural
property law to preserve objects in certain places. This necessity is obvious
if the separation of an object from its context means the destruction of the
inherent value of the object as cultural heritage. This principle applies to
the protection of entities that, by separation of the parts, would lose their
importance as a whole. For example, if a triptych is taken apart and the
three pictures sold separately, its market value will increase; nonetheless, the
scienti(cid:222)c and aesthetic value of the entity is lost, and the separated paint-
ings are not as informative as the whole.28 Another example is provided by
a picture and the original frame chosen or made by the artist. Similarly, it
seems reasonable to leave a cultural item at the place where it has its great-
est  importance.  A  ceiling  painted  by  an  Italian  master  for  a Venetian
palazzo may be preserved in a nineteenth century American mansion, but

fundamental aims of cultural property law

383

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

the painting(cid:213)s cultural value is diminished by its displacement from its in-
tended architectural setting.

National laws and international conventions should not tolerate or
even encourage a tearing apart of cultural entities.29 A judicial means of
linking an object to a certain place might be to treat cultural objects as im-
movables, even if they are movable in fact.30 These reasons can justify de-
mands for the repatriation31 of cultural property,32 which is particularly ap-
propriate if a country or nation has lost so much of its cultural heritage
that it is unable to demonstrate its cultural background.33 A duty to return
cultural property has to be accepted for objects of use uniquely at the place
of their  origin34 (for  example,  religious  statues  worshipped  in  certain
churches or temples). Repatriation in such cases is not a guarantee for the
return to the place of origin.35

These are the main tasks of cultural property law. There are, however,
several other aspects that can be considered. Although from the perspective
of cultural heritage law, these are only secondary aims, they cannot be for-
mulated without exceptions, while the primary principle of preservation of
substance may be overruled only by other important principles, such as the
preservation of human life.

3.3 other tasks of cultural property law

3.3.1 Accessibility to the public

The accessibility of cultural assets to the public is frequently de(cid:222)ned as an
aim of cultural property law, and in many cases this is reasonable. Acces-
sibility is the justi(cid:222)cation for public funding. If works of art are bought or
if historic monuments are restored with taxpayers(cid:213) money, then the public
does not expect such works to vanish into inaccessible reserves or castles.
For this reason, the right of preemption of the state seems a good tool to
prevent the disappearance of works of art of high rank into private collec-
tions, as tax releases are linked to the public accessibility of a collection or
building.36

What is the relationship of this aim to the task of preservation? In the
interest of cultural property law, it cannot be right to make cultural objects
accessible to the public if their substance is endangered by this accessibil-
ity. So, cultural property law may regulate access to endangered cultural ob-
jects or prevent their accessibility. This is of importance, for example, for
the tombs of ancient Egypt, which are endangered by mechanical destruc-
tion and the breath of visitors. The priority of the preservation of cultural
heritage also excludes sending an item to an exhibition, if its safety is en-
dangered by transport. In these cases, it seems important to preserve the
documentary value of an object for the future, while a copy takes the place
of the original abroad.

frank g. fechner

384

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

Museums are traditionally accessible to the public; and, ideally, they
are the best places for preservation of cultural assets. Nevertheless, cultural
heritage can also be endangered in museums. One of the main problems is
the  conservation  of the  exhibits.  Some  materials  cannot  be  conserved
suf(cid:222)ciently (as, for example, excavated artifacts made from iron) and there-
fore are endangered even in a museum. Another danger can arise from the
acquisition policies of museums. Some museums buy unknown items with-
out asking for pedigrees (documents of provenience), despite all the ethi-
cal codes. This policy can promote illegal trade in art and clandestine ex-
cavations. In this respect, every state has the duty to control its museums.

3.3.2 Accessibility for scienti(cid:222)c research

Another important aim of cultural heritage law should be the accessibility
of cultural assets for scienti(cid:222)c research. This is the only way cultural objects
can reveal their inherent information. It is a demand of objectivity not to
limit access to items to scientists who are nationals.

In considering this principle, it should be kept in mind that scienti(cid:222)c
research as such can endanger cultural objects. Examples are extraction of
material for analysis, removal of a picture painted over an older painting,
and especially archaeological excavations, whereby revealing the informa-
tion inherent to the context necessarily means its destruction.37 In these
cases, the destruction should not be allowed without (cid:222)rst balancing the ad-
vantages and disadvantages and without ensuring that the documentation
of the original site follows scienti(cid:222)c norms.

3.3.3 Attribution to certain individuals, societies, or nations

A reasonable aim of cultural property law can be to attribute objects to a
certain group of people and to leave these items in their (cid:210)living context.(cid:211)
In extreme cases, this can require not only exhibiting the items for those
people in a local museum but also making the objects available for practi-
cal use. The most important subcategory of this role is the attribution of
sacral objects to a religious community. A statue that is adored as miracu-
lous may not(cid:209)under normal circumstances(cid:209)be taken away and exhib-
ited in a museum. National as well as ethnic minorities may be interested
in keeping objects that are part of their identity. Finally, a whole nation can
claim certain objects as being of symbolic value. The attribution by reasons
of identi(cid:222)cation seems to gain more and more importance in linking cul-
tural heritage to a certain territory.38

The question of how to attribute cultural assets to speci(cid:222)c groups or
individuals for purposes of cultural identi(cid:222)cation makes it necessary to dif-
ferentiate between distinct groups that may not be treated in the same way.
First,  cultural  assets  can  be  attributed  to a  certain  individual,  such  as  the

fundamental aims of cultural property law

385

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

owner. The protection of this attribution results from the rule of law prin-
ciple that the state must follow its own laws and human rights provisions.
Moreover, the protection of this sort of property can prevent damage to
the cultural heritage. Theft of cultural property endangers the integrity of
the object, causing loss of information about its origin and history, not to
mention the item(cid:213)s accessibility. The proprietor of an important work of
art will, under normal conditions, be the best guarantor of its preservation.
In a case where the condition is endangered due to a lack of money, the
only reasonable decision from the economic point of view may be to sell
the object to more (cid:222)nancially powerful hands. All of these arguments make
it reasonable to protect the link between proprietor and cultural object.
Only in case of abuse or neglect is it necessary to enforce the separation of
cultural property from its owner.

Second, cultural assets can be attributed to people for whom these ob-
jects often carry religious importance. If possible, cultural heritage law
should respect religious feelings. Nevertheless, it is necessary to balance this
attribution with the principle of preservation of substance. This balance
becomes more dif(cid:222)cult because the belief in an object(cid:213)s religious power is
normally linked solely to the original, and a replica will not be accepted as
equivalent. When the safety of an object is not guaranteed, however, it
would be negligent not to remove the original (if, for example, a church
cannot protect itself against thieves). On the other hand, there is no prob-
lem in bringing these things back to their original location if circumstances
change. One example is the return of icons from Russian museums to the
churches from which they originally came(cid:209)an action now under discus-
sion. But, at their original locations, these icons might be injured by the
breath of the immense crowds of church visitors; they are not suf(cid:222)ciently
protected against theft, and, moreover, they are endangered by rainwater
during processions.

An extreme question is whether cultural objects should be restored or
removed so that they can be intentionally destroyed. Some Native Ameri-
can groups, for example, leave objects to be destroyed by natural conditions
as part of religious practice. Similarly, an ethnic group might believe that
an object in a museum threatens its community and must therefore be de-
stroyed in a certain way (for example, by being thrown into a sacred river).39
It seems contrary to cultural property law to permit this destruction; as it
has been understood up to now, cultural property law has the aim of pro-
tecting cultural objects, not facilitating their destruction. The protection of
cultural property contains a sort of right of asylum for objects endangered
in their substance. This can only result from a balancing of interests with
reasons contrary to cultural property law. Maybe the consumption of pul-
verized mummies is felt as a relief to some people even today40; neverthe-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

frank g. fechner

386

less, it is doubtful that the rare relics of a time long past and of high sci-
enti(cid:222)c value should be devoted to these wishes.

In  addition  to  strengthening  religious  feelings,  cultural  items  can
strengthen the self-con(cid:222)dence of a population. In these cases, cultural as-
sets are symbols of integrative power or serve a political aim.41 Such a func-
tion is reasonable, provided that it does not lead to an endangering of the
object. Without doubt, the willing destruction of cultural heritage is in-
tolerable, as are complete sellouts of the cultural heritage of a people.

Third, cultural assets can be attributed to states. Many states have taken
measures to keep certain cultural objects in their own territory by forbidding
their export.42These national public laws have no relevance in other states and,
as a consequence, have no authority if an object has left the territory. This
does not hold true if one state accepts(cid:209)normally by means of a conven-
tion(cid:209)the duty to respect the export regulations of another state. For exam-
ple, the United States respects the export regulations for archaeological (cid:222)nds
of some states of Central and South America, as well as Mali and Canada. A
number of conventions are based on the principle of reciprocal recognition of
export restrictions, such as the UNESCO Convention of 1970.43

National  export  regulations  differ  concerning  protected  property.
While some are very liberal, others are more restrictive, especially in states
in which a rich cultural heritage is preserved. Nevertheless, restrictive laws
frequently  are  circumvented.  A  collector  of customs  might  be  open  to
bribery,44 or an export permission might be obtained for a copy and the
original exported instead. Every state will be able to name suf(cid:222)cient rea-
sons for its national mode of regulation. One of these reasons is the self-
presentation of the state; another is the desire to educate the population
through museum collections. 

In several cases, however, it is unclear whether export restrictions are the
result of either cultural property law or cultural nationalism.45 In general,
cultural exchange among states is desirable for a reciprocal understanding of
peoples. Only those restrictions on international trade that are based on the
principles of cultural property law seem justi(cid:222)ed. This holds true mainly for
those cultural items that lose historical, artistic, or scienti(cid:222)c value when they
are removed from their place of origin. Export regulations thus can be rea-
sonable to prevent the dispersal, for example, of original furniture of castles,
of archives, of historic libraries and of important collections.

Finally, cultural assets can be attributed to humanity as a whole. This idea
tends to remove cultural heritage from the arbitrariness of single states and
to attribute it to all human beings, independent of their nationality. Dif-
ferent theories use the term (cid:210)common heritage of mankind(cid:211) in connection
with this attribution.

Some authors consider the principle of the common heritage of hu-

fundamental aims of cultural property law

387

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

mankind useless for cultural property law.46 The weakness of this princi-
ple becomes evident when it leads to contradictory results. The principle
has been mentioned on the one hand to justify the repatriation of cultural
objects and, on the other hand, to support a proposal to treat cultural her-
itage as an international cultural property, possessed by the unity of states
and governed by an international of(cid:222)ce that makes it available for every-
body.47 This proposal, in fact, has no chance of being realized, because it
neither takes into account the prestige value of cultural property nor uti-
lizes the opportunity to make the owner responsible for the preservation of
this property. The principle of responsibility of the owner that dominates
national  statutes  for  the  care  and  preservation  of ancient  monuments
should be used for international cultural property law as well, instead of
collectivizing cultural property and transferring the responsibility to a dis-
tant administration of uncertain competence.

A modi(cid:222)ed idea, proposed in connection with the principle of the
common heritage of humankind but predating much of the debate about
it, would be preferable. According to this idea, cultural assets are attributed
to certain states, but these states have the duty to keep and to protect them
in the interest of the whole humankind48 for future generations. Thus,
states are merely trustees of treasures of importance for the whole of hu-
manity. As a result, the state in which the object is situated has the duty to
protect it and to prevent its destruction. If the state is not able to provide
suf(cid:222)cient protection, it is obliged to ask the international community of
states for assistance. International sanctions could be imposed against a
state that is unwilling to ful(cid:222)ll its duties. At this time, trusteeship is not a
rule of international public law, but it is a tenet worthy of further devel-
opment. The idea of a common heritage of humankind seems reasonable
as a high-ranking principle and as a tool for decisions. No attempt would
be made to redistribute rights in a new way. 

Cultural heritage of importance is so precious for all humanity that
the property right cannot justify the decision of a single person or a single
state to destroy it or to leave it unprotected. Any decision concerning the
destruction of cultural property that is oriented by these principles has to
include an examination as to whether the decision is right in regard to the
interests of all humankind and to future generations. Such examination
eliminates time-bound and subjective interests and places primary value on
the importance of the object. The common heritage in the sense of trustee-
ship contains still another idea. With cultural property law in universal use,
it is inconsistent to make regulations exclusively for the cultural objects of
one(cid:213)s (cid:210)own(cid:211) culture and to exclude cultural items of foreign origin. A cul-
tural property law that is ruled by reasonable aims tries to incorporate ob-
jects belonging to foreign cultures as well.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

frank g. fechner

388

4 national
and inter-
national
rules of
protection

Finally, one must consider which sort of norms can realize most effectively
the aims of cultural property law. A global system of preservation founded
on the cooperation of all states would be preferred. The weakness of con-
ventions, nevertheless, should not be forgotten. Frequently, they do not im-
pose duties; and, furthermore, they may include only some states, if long
negotiations ever lead to any consensus at all.

For an effective protection of cultural property, states importing cul-
tural objects from abroad should legislate in regard to both their (cid:210)own(cid:211)
cultural heritage and that being imported. It is an obvious violation of the
principles of cultural property law for states importing cultural objects to
attempt to put the burden of responsibility for cultural heritage exclusively
on the states of origin. The belief that the states of origin must put their
cultural objects under better control is hardly possible in many circum-
stances. Frequently sites are large and dif(cid:222)cult to supervise by reasons of
their topography, if they are known at all. Wars and internal quarrels often
make it impossible to protect sites, churches, temples and so on, as the sit-
uations in countries such as Afghanistan and the former Yugoslavia make
obvious.49 Thus, it cannot be in the interest of cultural heritage to liberal-
ize the exploitation of cultural objects under such circumstances.50 If a
state has no prohibitive export regulations, there can be no (cid:210)illegal(cid:211) trade
in its cultural property. In addition, some states for various reasons prefer
to sell their own cultural property (to gain money, for example). Never-
theless, this trade is contrary to the principles of the protection of cultural
property. As far as the protection of substance is concerned, it makes no
difference whether cultural assets are destroyed (cid:210)legally(cid:211) or (cid:210)illegally.(cid:211) Im-
porting states cannot lay the burden of responsibility for the preservation
of the cultural heritage only on other states, as demonstrated by sites not
situated in the territory of any state, such as those on the bottom of the
high seas.

For this reason, the recognition of foreign export regulations(cid:209)as fre-
quently suggested by some politicians(cid:209)cannot protect cultural heritage
effectively. On the one hand, export regulations that are based on cultural
nationalism are too strict to be appropriate for enforcement by importing
states.51 On the other hand, cultural items are not protected by such a sys-
tem if the export regulations are too liberal or if there are no regulations at
all for the objects concerned. A better method would be the introduction
of import regulations oriented towards the aims of cultural heritage law.
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora (CITES) could serve as a model for such regulations. This
convention provided signi(cid:222)cant help in protecting endangered animals and
plants because the trade in those species has been restricted and, in some re-
spects, completely forbidden. CITES has been successful, for example, in

fundamental aims of cultural property law

389

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

achieving protection for elephants by restricting the trade in ivory. The
problems are very similar in that the danger in both cases occurs from the
demand created by the markets of the industrialized states. Formulating
such rules is not easy, but the example shows that there are appropriate
ways to protect cultural heritage.

Particularly in regard to the liberalization of world trade, it seems im-
portant to regulate exceptions at the same time. A good example is in the
framework of the liberalization of international trade by the GATT Treaty
and in the protection of intellectual property in the TRIPS Agreement.
Import rules must be accompanied by additional national rules to make
prohibition effective. Proposals to this end are various. The possibility of
their realization, their acceptance in the population, and their practicabil-
ity are quite different. It would be relatively uncomplicated to establish a
permit system, for example, for dealers of archaeological (cid:222)nds, and to pro-
hibit trade of new (cid:222)nds that do not originate from scienti(cid:222)c excavations.52
Such a system has the advantage of simply transferring into binding law the
existing codes of conduct of art dealer associations53 and incorporating
dealers who are not members of such an association.

Theoretical re(cid:223)ections on cultural property law can easily lead to con-
crete proposals for legislation as well as for national regulations and inter-
national conventions. An inevitable requirement for the success of cultural
property law, however, is the political will to protect cultural objects be-
cause of their inherent value and for individual cultures and humanity as a
whole.

1. Sabine von Schorlemer, Internationaler Kulturg(cid:159)terschutz: Ans(cid:138)tze zur Pr(cid:138)vention im Frieden
sowie im bewaffneten Kon(cid:223)ikt 50 (Duncker and Humblot, Berlin 1992). Another opinion
is that of UNESCO; for more details, see Martin Philipp Wyss, Kultur als eine Dimension
der  V(cid:154)lkerrechtsordnung,  Vom  Kulturg(cid:159)terschutz  zur  internationalen  kulturellen  Kooperation 110
(Schulthess Polygraphischer Verlag, Zurich 1992).
2. See Wyss, supra note 1 at 110; Ki(cid:223)e Jote, International Legal Protection of Cultural Heritage 139
(Juristf(cid:154)rlaget, Stockholm 1994).
3.  Concerning  the  notion  (cid:210)cultural  heritage,(cid:211) see  Lyndel V.  Prott  and  Patrick  J. 
O(cid:213)Keefe, Cultural Property, 9 Encyclopedia of Public International Law 62; and, from the
same authors, (cid:210)Cultural Heritage(cid:211) or (cid:210)Cultural Property(cid:211)? 1 International Journal of Cul-
tural Property 307 (1992).
4. Felix Ermacora, Der v(cid:154)lkerrechtliche Schutz des Menschen und seiner Kultur in den
bewaffneten Kon(cid:223)ikten der Gegenwart, in Das kulturelle Erbe im Risiko der Modernit(cid:138)t 35,
36 (Gerhard Sladek ed., Schriftenreihe (cid:210)Sicherheit & Demokratie,(cid:211)Vienna 1993).
5. Id. at 37; see also Lyndel V. Prott, Kulturg(cid:159)terschutz(cid:209)Neue Aktionen der UNESCO,
in Das kulturelle Erbe im Risiko der Modernit(cid:138)t 105, 111 (Gerhard Sladek ed., Schriftenreihe
(cid:210)Sicherheit & Demokratie,(cid:211)Vienna 1993).
6. Ermacora, supra note 4 at 40.

frank g. fechner

390

notes

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

7. Concerning the general con(cid:223)ict, see John Henry Merryman, Two Ways of Thinking
about Cultural Property, 80 American Journal of International Law 831, 840 (1986).

8. Wyss, supra note 1 at 171. For an object-oriented policy, see John Henry Merryman,
The Nation and the Object, 3 International Journal of Cultural Property 61, 74 (1994).

9. For the legal consequences of this archaeological fact, see Frank Fechner, Rechtlicher
Schutz arch(cid:138)ologischen Kulturguts. Regelungen im innerstaatlichen Recht, im Europa(cid:209)und V(cid:154)lkerrecht
sowie M(cid:154)glichkeiten zu ihrer Verbesserung (Duncker and Humblot, Berlin 1991).

10. Frank Fechner, Grenzen der Forschungsfreiheit am Beispiel der Bodendenkmal-
p(cid:223)ege, Juristenzeitung 777 (1992).

11. Patrick J. O(cid:213)Keefe, The Heritage Value of a Private Collection, in La libre circulation
des collections d(cid:213)objets d(cid:213)art: The Free Circulation of Art Collections 179 (Quentin Byrne-Sutton
and Marc-Andr(cid:142) Renold eds., Schulthess Polygraphischer Verlag, Zurich 1993). 

12.  For  methods  of preservation,  see  the  example  of the  Inuits,  in  Jonathan  Adlai
Franklin, Respecting Ancestors, Archaeologists, and the World Art Community: En-
acting a Post-Excavation Cultural Preservation Policy, 3 International Journal of Cultural
Property 37 (1994).

13. In consequence, (cid:210)cultural heritage(cid:211) is de(cid:222)ned differently from (cid:210)natural heritage(cid:211)
(Art. 1 and Art. 2). Palaeontological (cid:222)nds, rare minerals, etc. are also speci(cid:222)cally listed
as cultural property under the 1970 UNESCO and 1995 Unidroit Conventions. The
demand to incorporate natural parks into the protection of the 1954 Hague Conven-
tion seems to be a very justi(cid:222)ed example. See Prott, supra note 5 at 116.

14. A convention that aims at global acceptance can only ask for an (cid:210)outstanding uni-
versal value(cid:211) as do Articles 1 and 2 of the 1972 UNESCO Convention at several points.

15. So, for example, Article 1 of the 1970 UNESCO Convention. The system of Eu-
ropean Community law is very similar.

16. The principle of subsidiarity was established in Article 3b para. 2 of the EEC treaty.
According to this article, in areas which do not fall within its exclusive competence, the
community shall take action, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, only in-
sofar as the objectives of the proposed action cannot be suf(cid:222)ciently achieved by the
Member States and can, therefore, by reason of the scale or effects of the proposed ac-
tion, be better achieved by the community. Here it is meant as a general principle that
can be useful in cultural property law as well.

17. Beat Sitter-Liver, Wider das Recht des St(cid:138)rkeren. Ethische (cid:134)berlegungen zum
Umgang  mit  Kulturzueugen,  Informationstag  (cid:210)Kulturg(cid:159)ter  zwischen  Markt  und  Museum,
Schlu§bericht 12, 17 (Nationale Schweizerische UNESCO-Kommission, Sektion Kultur
ed., Nationale Schweizerische UNESCO-Kommission, Sektion Kultur, Bern 1993).

18. Roman Schlauss, Kulturg(cid:159)terschutz als Teil der Identit(cid:138)ts(cid:222)ndung, in Das kulturelle
Erbe im Risiko der Modernit(cid:138)t 23 (Gerhard Sladek ed., Schriftenreihe (cid:210)Sicherheit & Demo-
kratie,(cid:211)Vienna 1993).

19. Cf. Article 1 of the 1972 UNESCO Convention.

20. This means its importance as study material to artists as well as its effect on the
public and as an object of pleasure.

21. Age and historic signi(cid:222)cance are not synonymous.

fundamental aims of cultural property law

391

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

22. In regard to historical importance, the criterion of (cid:210)national(cid:211) or (cid:210)identi(cid:222)catory(cid:211)
signi(cid:222)cance has no importance of its own. History is a broad notion and includes the
history of small groups as well as cultures. The religious signi(cid:222)cance of an object is
normally not important by itself because in most cases at least one of the other cri-
teria named above will be ful(cid:222)lled.
23. Annexes to the Council Regulation on the export of cultural goods of 1992, O.J.
1992 No. L 395, p. 1 et seq., and Council Directive on the return of cultural objects un-
lawfully removed from the territory of a Member State of 1993, O.J. 1993, No. L 74,
p.  74  et  seq.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  category  of value  zero.  Both  documents  are
reprinted in 6 International Journal of Cultural Property 379, 387 (1997).
24. Frank Fechner, Die Vorhaben der EG zum Kulturg(cid:159)terschutz, Die (cid:133)ffentliche Ver-
waltung 609 (1992); Frank Fechner, Consequences for German Law of the European
Union Rules on the Export of Cultural Goods, in Les objets d(cid:213)art dans l(cid:213)Union Europ(cid:142)enne.
Aspects juridiques et pratiques/Works of Art in the European Union. Legal and Practical Aspects 127
et seq. (Quentin Byrne-Sutton and Marc-Andr(cid:142) Renold eds., Schulthess Polygraphis-
cher Verlag, Z(cid:159)rich 1994).
25. On the other hand, laws have to take into account the interests of living artists in
selling their works of art on the international market.
26. Concerning this question, see the articles in Prinzipien des Kulturg(cid:159)terschutzes (Frank Fech-
ner, Thomas Oppermann, and Lyndel V. Prott eds., Duncker and Humblot, Berlin 1996).
27. This holds true even for many cases of so-called (cid:210)anastylosis.(cid:211)
28. Compare the three notions(cid:209)preservation, context, and integrity(cid:209)of John Henry
Merryman, Cultural Property Export Controls, 111 Archiv f(cid:159)r Urheber-, Film-, Funk- und
Theaterrecht (UFITA) 63, 88 (1989); and Merryman, supra note 7 at 843, who calls this
form of destruction of cultural knowledge a form of vandalism.
29. Lyndel V. Prott, Movables and Immovables as Viewed by the Law, 1 International
Journal of Cultural Property 389, 391 (1992).
30. Patrick J. O(cid:213)Keefe, Formulating General Principles by Reference to International
Standards, in Prinzipien des Kulturgüterschutzes 277 (Frank Fechner, Thomas Oppermann,
and Lyndel V. Prott eds., Duncker and Humbolt, Berlin 1996).
31. For details, see Lyndel V. Prott, Repatriation of Cultural Property, University of British
Columbia Law Review, Material Culture in Flux: Law and Policy of Repatriation of Cultural Prop-
erty 229 (Special Issue 1989).
32. For these questions, see Jeanette Green(cid:222)eld, The Return of Cultural Treasures (2d ed.,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1996).
33.  Lyndel  V.  Prott,  Restitutionspolitik  der  UNESCO  in  Zusammenarbeit  mit
Museen, in Internationaler Kulturg(cid:159)terschutz 157, 161 (Gerte Reichelt ed., Manzsche Verlags-
und Universit(cid:138)tsbuchhandlung, Vienna 1992).
34. Reinhard Mu§gnug, Das Kunstwerk im internationalen Recht, in Kunst und Recht.
Justiz und Recht 15, 29 (C.F. M(cid:159)ller Juristischer Verlag, Heidelberg 1985). See also Ludwig
Engstler, Die territoriale Bindung von Kulturg(cid:159)tern im Rahmen des V(cid:154)lkerrechts 15 (Heymann,
Cologne 1964).
35. The mosaics removed from the church of Lythrankomi in northern Cyprus after
the Turkish invasion and ordered returned to the Autocephalous Greek-Orthodox

frank g. fechner

392

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

Church of Cyprus by U.S. courts are a special example. See Quentin Byrne-Sutton, The
Goldberg Case: A Con(cid:222)rmation of the Dif(cid:222)culty in Acquiring Good Title to Valuable
Stolen Cultural Objects, 1 International Journal of Cultural Property 59 (1992). The mosaics
are now located in the Museum of Icons in Nicosia as they could not be returned to
the original church for political reasons. For cultural property law, this case also pro-
vides an example in which circumstances do not permit the return of cultural heritage
to its place of origin.

36. See Frank Fechner, Sammlertum, M(cid:138)zenatentum und staatliche Kunstf(cid:154)rderung in
Geschichte und Gegenwart(cid:209)aus verfassungsrechtlicher Sicht, in Sammler, Stifter und
Museen, Kunstf(cid:154)rderung in Deutschland im 19, und 20, Jahrhundert 12, 21 (Ekkehard Mai and
Peter Paret eds., B(cid:154)hlau Verlag, Cologne 1993).

37. Some modern methods, such as aerial photography, sonar scanning, magnetic (cid:222)eld
measuring and radar survey, provide an exception.

38.  Wilfried  Fiedler,  Neue  v(cid:154)lkerrechtliche  Ans(cid:138)tze  des  Kulturg(cid:159)terschutzes,  in 
Internationaler Kulturgüterschutz 69, 74 (Gerte Reichelt ed., Manzsche Verlags-und Uni-
versit(cid:138)tsbuchhandlung, Vienna 1992).

39. See the example given by Lyndel V. Prott, The International Legal Protection of the
Cultural Heritage, in Prinzipien des Kulturgüterschutzes 295, 303 (Frank Fechner, Thomas
Oppermann, and Lyndel V. Prott eds., Duncker and Humbolt, Berlin 1996).

40. This is not an invented example. See Peter Ehlebracht, Haltet die Pyramiden fest! 5000
Jahre Grabraub in Ägypten 9 (Econ Verlag, D(cid:159)sseldorf, Vienna 1980).

41. For example, great efforts have been made to bring back the feather crown of
Montezuma, which is exhibited in the Vienna Museum of Ethnology, in the belief
that the return of the object would assist in unifying the people and giving them
self-con(cid:222)dence.

42. For the export regulations of the different states concerning cultural goods, see
Lyndel V. Prott and Patrick J. O(cid:213)Keefe, National Legal Control of Illicit Traf(cid:222)c in Cultural
Property (UNESCO 1983); Manuel des r(cid:142)glements nationales relatives (cid:136) l(cid:213)exportation des biens cul-
turels (Lyndel V. Prott and Patrick J. O(cid:213)Keefe eds., UNESCO 1988).

43. It must be mentioned that France joined the 1970 UNESCO Convention on Jan-
uary 7, 1997. Canada and Australia have been implementing foreign export laws for
many years and are both party to that convention.

44. See also J. David Murphy, The People(cid:213)s Republic of China and the Illicit Trade in
Cultural Property: Is the Embargo Approach the Answer? 3 International Journal of Cul-
tural Property 227 (1994).

45. For views opposing cultural nationalism and supporting cultural internationalism,
see Merryman, supra note 28 at 74; Merryman, supra note 7 at 842, 846; Kurt Siehr, Na-
tionaler  und  Internationale  Kulturg(cid:159)terschutz.  Eingriffsnormen  und  der  inter-
nationale Kunsthandel, in Festschrift f(cid:159)r Werner Lorenz 525, 526 (Bernhard P(cid:222)ster and
Michael R. Will eds., J. C. B. Mohr, T(cid:159)bingen 1991).

46. See, e.g., Rudolf Dolzer, Die Deklaration des Kulturguts zum (cid:210)common heritage of
mankind,(cid:211) in Rechtsfragen des internationalen Kulturg(cid:159)terschutzes 13, 20, 23 (Rudolf Dolzer,
Erik Jayme and Reinhard Mu§gnug eds., C. F. M(cid:159)ller Juristischer Verlag, Heidelberg
1994).

fundamental aims of cultural property law

393

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

47. Sharon Anne Williams, The International and National Protection of Movable Cultural Prop-
erty: A Comparative Study 201 et seq. (Oceana Publications, Dobbs Ferry N.Y. 1978).
48.  Bernhard Walter,  R(cid:159)ckf(cid:159)hrung  von  Kulturgut  im  internationalen  Recht 21  ((cid:134)bersee-
Museum Bremen 1988); von Schorlemer, supra note 1 at 564; Wyss, supra note 1 at 14;
Sitter-Liver, supra note 17 at 23.
49. For the practices of art merchants, see Michel van Rijn, Hot Art, Cold Cash (Little,
Brown and Company, London 1993).
50. For the opposing view concerning archaeological materials, see Merryman, supra
note 28 at 96, and supra note 7 at 849.
51. In its one-sided support of cultural nationalism, one can see the reason for the fail-
ure of the UNESCO Convention of 1970; Merryman, supra note 7 at 844 et seq. How-
ever, the convention is in force in eighty-six States, at least (cid:222)ve of which have impor-
tant art trade and Western-style legal systems (Australia, Canada, France, Italy, and the
United States). Switzerland has announced that it will become a party, while the
United Kingdom is reconsidering the convention under the new government. Finally,
the convention should be seen in the context of UNESCO(cid:213)s other standard-setting in-
struments that emphasize the importance of exchange and the heritage of humanity as
a whole.
52. Some states have known such a system; see Patrick J. O(cid:213)Keefe, Feasibility of an In-
ternational Code of Ethics for Dealers in Cultural Property for the Purpose of More
Effective Control of Illicit Traf(cid:222)c, in Cultural Property 21 (UNESCO Report 1994).
53. Id. at 68.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:16:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739198770390

frank g. fechner

394


