The Nation and the  Object
John Henry Merryman* •

This  essay  attempts  to  add  a  second  dimension  to  the  traditionally
one-dimensional  discussion  of  cultural  property  policy.2  It  does  so
by  addressing  a  central  policy  question:  when,  if  ever,  may  mu-
seums, collectors and dealers properly provide a market  for  cultural
objects  that  have  been  exported  from  a  foreign  nation  contrary  to
that  nation's  laws.3  A  related  policy  question  is  whether  the  legal
authorities of one nation should enforce  the cultural property  export
controls of another. Two different  approaches to these questions lead
to divergent results in some situations but are mutually reinforcing in
others. We can call these approaches  "nation-oriented"  and  "object-
oriented." The policies of most  source  nations  and the  international
dialogue  about  cultural  property  still  are  heavily  nation-oriented.
I suggest that the dialogue would be enriched and that institutional,
national  and  international  cultural  property  policies  would  be  im-
proved  by  placing  less  emphasis  on  the  nation  and  more  on  the
object.4

1  The Basic  Position

A  nation's  attitude  toward  the  export  of  privately  owned  cultural
objects  has  a domestic  and  an  international  face.  The choice  of an
export  policy  and  of  a  legal  regime  for  its  administration  and  en-
forcement  are matters of domestic concern, to be decided  according
to  internal  political  and  legal  criteria.  For  example,  Italy,  a  nation
whose  cultural  property  regime  might  seem  to  some  people  to  be
excessively retentive, is nevertheless free  to persist in that regime or
to  change  it  as  it  sees  fit.  Should  an  Italian  collector  smuggle  his
Boccioni  painting  out  of  Italy  in  violation  of  the  Italian  cultural
property  export  control  law  and  take  it  to  Japan,  however,  the  Ja-
panese authorities have no legal obligation to return  it to Italy or to
take  any  other  action  in response  to  the  Italian  export  control  law.
Whether  or not  they  will  do  so is  for  the  Japanese  to decide.  Italy,
by  enacting  a  domestically  valid  export  control  law,  cannot  create
an international  obligation  to enforce  that law.

*  Stanford Law School, California.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

61

John  Henry  Merryman

These  truisms  are  summed  up  in international  law in the concept
of national  sovereignty  and  in  the related principle that the authorit-
ies  of  one  nation  will  not  enforce  the public  laws  of  another.5  Na-
tions  may  agree  by  treaty  to  enforce  each  other's  export  controls,
but there are few  such  treaties.6 In their absence, the importation of
illegally  exported  cultural  objects  is legally permissible. The Italian
who smuggled his Boccioni painting out of Italy and took it to Japan
has  not  violated  Japanese  law,  and  Japan  has  no  obligation  under
international  law  to  enforce  the  Italian  export  control.  This  is  "the
basic  position."

Source nations with retentive cultural property export controls dis-
like  the  basic  position,  and  others  are  troubled  by  it.  To  avoid  its
effects,  they  have  pursued  two  strategies.  One  is  for  the  source
nation  to  try  to  convert  illegal  export  into  theft  by  enacting  legis-
lation  declaring  that  cultural  objects  are  state  property.  This  looks
like  it ought  to  work  because  the courts  of all  modern  nations  will
order  the  return  of  stolen  property  to  its  owner  (subject  to  periods
of limitation and the rights of  good faith  acquirers).7 The strategy is
appealing  because  it  is  both  politically  easy  -  perhaps  even politi-
cally profitable  —  and inexpensive; there can be little internal politi-
cal  opposition  to  a  measure  described  as  "protecting  the  nation's
cultural  patrimony,"  and  it  costs  nothing  to  write  a  few  additional
words  into the  law book.

The  difficulty  is  that  many  such  nations  have  constitutions  that
require  a  special  legal  procedure  and the  payment  of  compensation
in  order  to  expropriate  privately  held  property.8  To carry  out  such
legal procedures  is laborious  and  time-consuming,  and to pay  com-
pensation to private holders of  cultural objects  is expensive. Further,
such  nations  may  lack  the  additional  physical  (i. e.,  museums  and
storage  facilities)  and  human  (i. e.,  professional  registrars,  curators
and conservators)  resources needed  to acquire and care for the large
quantities of objects  held by collectors and dealers. To establish and
maintain  such physical  and  human  resources is, again, expensive. It
is  accordingly  common  to  find  that  the  state  ownership  law  is  not
applied  within  the  enacting  state; large  numbers  of  cultural  objects
remain  in  the  hands  of  domestic  collectors  and  dealers, are  openly
traded  among  them,  and  are  left  at  death  to their  heirs. The  statute
may  say  that  the  state  is  the  owner,  but  that  is  not  the  way  public
officials  or private  collectors  and dealers  act.  The empirical  indicia
of  ownership  — possession,  use  and  disposal  -  all  are  in  private
hands, and the state ownership  law  is, in practice, mere rhetoric.

The  1989  decision  in  Peru  v. Johnson9  illustrates  the  problem.
Relying  on such  a statute, Peru claimed ownership of gold, ceramic
and fabric  objects  that  allegedly  had been removed  from  Peru with-
out  an  export  permit  and  had  found  their  way  into  a  private  Cali-
fornia  collection.  The  collector  introduced  uncontroverted  evidence
that the statute was not applied within Peru and argued that enacting

62

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

The Nation  and the  Object

the  statute  alone  was  not  enough  to  establish  state  ownership.  The
Court  agreed:

The  domestic  effect  of  such  a  pronouncement  appears  to  be
extremely  limited.  Possession  of the  artifacts  is  allowed  to re-
main  in private  hands, and  such objects  may be transferred  by
gift  or bequest or intestate succession. There is no indication in
the record  that  Peru  has  ever  sought  to  exercise  its  ownership
rights in such property, so long as there is no removal from  the
country.  The laws  of Peru  could reasonably be  considered to
have no more effect than export restrictions (emphasis added).

As we have seen above, one state does not, in the absence of a treaty
obligation,  enforce  the export  controls of  another.10

Long  before  the  Peru  v. Johnson  case  arose,  the  drafters  of  the
1970 UNESCO Convention had to deal with the problem of rhetori-
cal  state  ownership  laws.  They  did  so  by  defining  theft  (for  the
purposes  of the Convention) in a precise and restrictive way. Under
Article  7 (b) (i), parties to the  Convention  agree to prohibit  the im-
port of,  and to recover  and return to the source nation:

cultural property stolen from a museum or a religious or secular
public monument or similar institution in another State Party to
this Convention,  ... provided that such property is documented
as pertaining to the inventory  of that  institution.

Similar  language  appears  in  Sec.  308  of  the  U. S.  implementing
legislation.''  This language clearly excludes objects in private hands,
as well  as those  in undiscovered  and  undocumented  archaeological
sites, from  the "stolen" category.

The second  strategy used by those who dislike the basic position
is to urge the  adoption  of treaties  and  national  legislation  in  which
nations  agree  to  enforce  each  other's  cultural  property  export  con-
trols. The centerpiece of that effort,  the  1970 UNESCO  Convention,
contemplates  "concerted  action"  by  the  importing  nations  in  order
to be  effective.  Few  importing  nations  (only  Australia,  Canada  and
the  USA)  have,  however,  become  parties  to  UNESCO  1970.
Belgium,  France,  Germany,  Great  Britain,  Japan,  the  Netherlands,
the  Scandinavian  nations  and  Switzerland,  among  others,  all  have
declined  to  become  parties,  and  the  Convention,  other  than  for  its
symbolic  importance and the inspirational  language  in its preamble,
is now generally  considered  to be a  failure.

Accordingly,  despite  the  adoption  of  state  ownership  laws  in  a
number of source nations and  little success in persuading  importing
nations  to agree  to enforce  source  nation  export  controls, the  basic
position  described  above  continues  to  be  the  international  norm.
Since  most  would  agree  that  the  basic  position  fails  to  deal  ad-
equately with some kinds of recurring problems, it seems  important

63

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

John  Henry  Merryman

to identify  ways of modifying  it that source and market nations will
find  more  acceptable.  We will  return  to  that  topic  after  a brief  de-
scription  of nation- and object-oriented  cultural property policies.

2  Nation-Oriented  Policy: Cultural  Nationalism

The basic position has been under concerted attack by source nations
and by people sympathetic to their cause since the end of World War
II. In  that  attack,  the  dominant  premise  has  been  that  of  cultural
nationalism:  objects  belong within  the  physical  boundaries  of  the
nations within  which they are found  or with which  they are histori-
cally  associated:  the Elgin  Marbles  belong  in  Greece,12  Italian  Re-
naissance paintings belong in Italy, Aztec codices belong in Mexico,
and so on. This assumption has provided the ideological basis of the
export  control  legislation  in source nations throughout  the world. It
is  a  major  premise  of  the  1970  UNESCO  Convention,  the  1992
European  Communities  Commission  Directive  and Regulation, dis-
cussed  infra, and  much other  international  legislation  affecting  cul-
tural property, and it suffuses  the literature and the international dia-
logue  on cultural  property policy.

The contemporary  power  of the  cultural  nationalism  premise de-
rives from  Western intellectual history. Today, after  more than a cen-
tury and a half, our minds and emotions still are controlled by Byron
and Goethe  and Herder, by  19th century romanticism  and  19th cen-
tury  nationalism,  and in the cultural  property  dialogue  these  forces
powerfully  coincide.13  Often  a  nation's  representative  need  only
claim  that  an  object  is part  of  its  "cultural  patrimony"  or  "cultural
heritage"  to  make  the case  for  its  retention  within  or  return  to  the
national  territory.  Instant,  automatic  sympathy  for  national  cultural
property  claims is the conditioned response; the legitimacy of reten-
tive  legislation  and  of  demands  for  "repatriation"  of  objects  that
have  left  the national territory  is seldom  questioned.

3  Object-Oriented  Policy: Preservation,  Truth, Access

In  an  object-oriented  cultural  property  policy,  the  emphasis  is  on
three conceptually  separate but, in practice, interdependent  consider-
ations: preservation,  truth  and  access, in declining  order  of  import-
ance.  The  most  basic  is  preservation:  protecting  the  object  and  its
context  from  impairment. Next comes the  quest  for  knowledge,  for
valid  information  about the human past, for the historical,  scientific,
cultural  and  aesthetic truth  that  the  object  and  its  context  can  pro-
vide. Finally, we want the object to be optimally accessible to schol-
ars (for  study)  and to the public (for  education  and  enjoyment).14

Applying  an  object-oriented  policy,  whether  it  would  be  proper
for  a  museum  or  collector  or  dealer  to  acquire  an  object  depends

64

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

The Nation  and  the  Object

first  on  whether  its  export  is  likely  to  endanger  the  object  or  its
context; second, on whether through its acquisition the object's  truth
is  more  or  less  likely  to  be  fully  revealed;  and  third,  whether  as a
result of the acquisition the object will be more or less readily avail-
able  to  scholars  for  research  and  to  the  public  for  education  and
enjoyment.

4  The Policies Contrasted:  The Cleveland  Poussin

A French collector who owned a Poussin painting,  The Holy Family
on the Steps, sold it to Sherman Lee, then Director of the Cleveland
Museum,  who brought  it  to  the  U. S.  without  requesting  an  export
permit  from  French  officials  and  hung  it  in the  Museum.  Mr. Lee
had been advised by eminent  French and American  counsel  that the
French export control law made an export permit unnecessary in this
case. The French  government,  adopting  a contrary  interpretation  of
the  law,  reacted  vigorously,  indicting  Mr.  Lee  for  various  crimes,
making  strong  representations  to  the  U. S.  government  and  de-
manding the Poussin's  return.15  From a nation-oriented  posture the
French  position  is  easily  justified:  the  painting  was  made, by  a
Frenchman;, it  is  part  of  France's  "cultural  patrimony";  it  was  re-
moved  from  France  without  France's  permission;  it  should  be  re-
turned.

From an object  orientation, however, things look different.  This is
an  illegal  export  case.  There  was  no theft;  the  owner  of  a painting
in  a  private  collection  in  France  willingly  sold  it  to  the  Cleveland
Museum. Moving the painting from  a private collection  in France to
the public collection  of a great American  museum did not endanger
the  work.  The  painting  was  not  torn  from  context,  and  no  larger
work was dismembered to move it; no serious argument can be made
that  historical  truth  or  other  meaning  were  impaired.  The  painting
will  be  better  preserved  in  the  Museum  than  in  the  French  private
collection and will be significantly  more available for study by scho-
lars and for  enjoyment  by viewers.

To the French government's dramatic claim that the French people
have  been  deprived  of  an  important  piece  of. their cultural  heritage
—  a familiar  cliche  of  cultural  nationalism  —  the obvious  response
is that the French people had no access to this painting in the French
private  collection.  If  this  work  was  so  central  a part  of  the  French
cultural  patrimony,  why  did  the  French  government  not  acquire  it
from  its French owner and hang it in the Louvre, where it would be
professionally  restored,  preserved  and protected  and be vastly more
available  for  study  and  enjoyment  by the  French  than  it  was  in the
private collection?  In fact, the Louvre already held another (and, in
the opinion of many, better) version of the same subject by Poussin.
But in that case, even  if we apply nationalist  criteria, how  seriously
can we take the complaint that the French  cultural  heritage was  im-

65

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

John  Henry  Merryman

paired?  Finally,  after  the painting  is exported,  in what  sense can it
be  said  that  the  French  have  "lost" the  Poussin?  What,  besides  lo-
cation, has  changed?

If the Aztec Calendar Stone were in a museum in Paris it would
still honor the Aztecs, just as the Parthenon Marbles in the Brit-
ish  Museum  in  London  honor  the  artistry  of  classical  Greek
sculptors  and  the  culture  in  which  they  lived  and  worked.  To
speak  of  the  "loss  of cultural  heritage" means  one thing  when
cultural  objects  are  destroyed  or  suppressed.  It  means  some-
thing  entirely  different  when  what  is  "lost"  is  location  within
the national  territory. In the Cleveland  Museum, the Poussin is
still a Poussin.16

Overreaching  claims based on cultural nationalism  often  go to even
greater  extremes,  as when the French  government,  in  1992,  refused
to allow  a privately owned Van Gogh painting (discussed  below) to
leave  France.  France  is  of  course  not  the  only  or  even  the  worst
example; in recent years the Italian government has refused  to allow
a Van Gogh painting, a Matisse painting, and a group of water colors
by Adolf Hitler, all sold or offered  for  sale by their owners, to leave
the  national  territory.17  A number  of  Central  and  South  American
nations  classify  all  pre-Columbian  and  colonial  objects,  including
many  that  are  by  any  standard  redundant,  as  inalienable  national
patrimony  and totally prohibit their export, even though the national
authorities  are  unprepared  to  provide  the  material  and  human  re-
sources  necessary  for  their  proper  excavation,  preservation,  study
and  display.

5  Further  Illustrative  Cases

Case  1. D, an American dealer, hires  local workmen  to hack a
stela from  a Mayan temple in the Guatemalan jungle and bribes
local police  and customs officers  to permit  its removal  and ex-
port.18  D imports the stela into California  and offers  it for  sale
to a major  museum. The director  of the museum  would  like to
add  the  stela to the collection  and  has  a trustee  willing  to put
up the money.

Here  the  two  approaches  to  cultural  property  concur.  On  the  one
side, nationalist  values clearly are offended.  The foreign  dealer and
the  local  workmen,  customs  officers  and  police  all  have  violated
Guatemalan  law  and  policy,  which  prohibit  unauthorized  exca-
vations  and  removals  and  damage to cultural  monuments  and sites.
And from  an object orientation, any possible increase in accessibility
of the stela is far outweighed by impairment of the higher values of
preservation  and truth. These people have damaged the temple (and,

66

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

The Nation  and the  Object

in all probability, the stela). Unless the temple with the stela in place
had been thoroughly studied and documented, information  about the
human past has been  irretrievably  lost; the stela  is now a decontex-
tualized  orphan,  the  temple  an  amputee.  Cases  of  this  kind  present
the strongest  case  for  international  cooperation  between  source and
market  nations,  although  they  leave  substantial  space  for  disagree-
ment about the means to be used to deal with the problem.19

Case  2. The  Director  of  a  great  French  museum  is  offered  an
Andean feathered  cape that the curator would like to add to the
museum's  collection  of Andean textiles and costumes. The de-
aler bought  it from  its owner, a private collector  in Peru.

This case exemplifies  the regrettably  common case  in which, under
prevailing  policy,  object-oriented  values  are  sacrificed  to  cultural
nationalism. Peruvian law prohibits export of the cape, and the appli-
cation  of  nation-oriented  cultural  property  policies  would  prohibit
the French museum from  acquiring it. That would be so even if were
shown that the fragile object would be far less well preserved, would
yield.no  greater truth, and  would  be less accessible  to  scholars and
to  viewers  in  the  Peruvian  private  collection  than  in  the  French
museum.

Case  3. A German  museum  is offered  a stone  head of Buddha
that appears to have been severed from a larger sculpture, prob-
ably  of  a  standing  Buddha.  The  collector  who  offers  it  to  the
museum  bought  it  from  a dealer  in  Singapore  during  a  recent
Asian voyage and has no information  about its source. The mu-
seum's  curator has little hope  of identifying  its specific  origin.
The  head  would  be  a  spectacular  addition  to  the  museum's
Asian art collection.

In Case 3, there would  appear  to be no nation-oriented  impediment
to  acquisition.  But  suppose  an  inquiry  to  the  Chinese  Ministry  of
Culture revealed that the head once was part of an identifiable  sculp-
ture  that  now  stands  headless  in  the  museum  in  Xian,  where  the
collection  receives  a high  standard  of protection  and  active  preser-
vation.  The  stone  head  is  not  fragile;  united  with  the  body,  it  will
offer  more historical and aesthetic meaning than the sum of the sep-
arated  parts;  large  numbers  of people  will  see and  enjoy  the  sculp-
ture  there,  and  it  will  be  freely  available  to  scholars  for  research.
Even  if the  Chinese  authorities  made no claim to the  head, there is
a strong object-oriented  case for urging the curator to work with the
dealer  and  the  Chinese  to  reunite  the  head  with  the  body, either  in
Xian or in the German  museum.

Case 4. A French collector buys a Van Gogh painting in Switz-
erland  in  1955  and  brings  it to  his  home  in  Paris.  In  1989 he

67

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

John  Henry  Merryman

decides  to  sell the work through  a London  auction  house. The
competent French official  denies permission to export the paint-
ing,  and  that  decision  is  affirmed  in  the  courts.  The  collector
may keep the painting or may sell it within France but may not
export  it.20  The collector  smuggles  the  painting  out  of  France
in  violation  of French  law  and  consigns  it for  auction  in  Lon-
don. A Japanese  museum would  like  to add  the painting  to its
collection.

This  case  resembles  the  Poussin  case,  discussed  above,  in  which
nation-oriented  and  object-oriented  approaches  suggest  divergent
outcomes. A similar analysis applies here, perhaps with even greater
force,  since here the artist was not French  (though the painting was
made  in France). Such cases, in which cultural nationalism  justifies
export  control  but object-based  considerations  would  permit  or en-
courage  export,  exemplify  a much  larger range  of cultural  property
than  easel  paintings.  Similar  considerations  apply  to  tapestries,
drawings,  prints,  photographs,  sculptures,  ceramics, jewelry,  coins,
stamps,  books,  manuscripts,  maps,  musical  instruments,  furniture,
and  many  other  movable  objects  whose  owners  are, under  present
law  and policy,  prohibited  from  exporting  them. Normally  the  only
justification  for  such  export  controls  is,  as  in  the  Poussin  and  van
Gogh  cases,  nationalist  retentionism,  unrelated  to  any  object-based
concerns.

Case 5. A disgruntled junior member of the royal family  of the
Kom, a tribal society in Cameroun, removes a revered sculpture
called  the  Afo-A-Kom  from  the  royal  compound  and  sells  it
to  a French  dealer.  The  sculpture  is eventually  acquired  by an
American  dealer who offers  it for  sale at his New York gallery.
In  an emotional  press conference,  the cultural  attache (a Kom)
of the Cameroun embassy in Washington  states that the  Afo-A-
Kom  is  a religious  and ceremonial  object  "beyond  money, be-
yond  value.  It is  the heart  of the  Kom,  what  unifies  the tribe,
the spirit of the nation, what holds us together." The Cameroun
ambassador,  who  is  not  a Kom,  is  on  the  contrary  unenthusi-
astic.  Cameroun  is  trying  to  build  a  nation.  Glorification  of
tribal  customs  and  loyalties  divides  rather  than  unites  the  di-
verse  groups  that  compose  the  Cameroun  people  and  makes
nation-building  more  difficult.21  The  curator  of  tribal  art  at  a
major  American  museum  would  like  to  have  the  Afo-A-Kom
in the collection  —  "It would be a spectacular  accession."

Case 5 illustrates a problem that has only recently received discrimi-
nating attention  from policy-makers: what is to be done with claims
by  tribal  groups  (not,  be  it  noted,  nations)  for  the  return  of  ritual,
ceremonial,  religious  objects?22  In  many  cases  the  objects,  if  re-
turned,  will  be  exposed  to  the  elements  or  consumed  or  otherwise

68

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

The  Nation  and  the  Object

destroyed or, if protected, will be kept in secret places, available  for
viewing only by a select few and generally unavailable for scholarly
purposes or public enjoyment.  Should the objects be returned  —  e.g.,
from the Smithsonian Museum in Washington to an American Indian
tribal  group  in South  Dakota  —  even though  object-oriented  values
will  consequently  be  seriously  impaired?  And  if  the answer  is yes,
what justifies  this  sacrifice  of object-oriented  values?

One easy way to deal with the question  is to treat removal  of the
Afo-A-Kom  from  the  royal  compound  as  theft,  bringing  into  play
the principle of public order, already discussed, that condemns  theft
and requires return of the  stolen object  to its owner.  Suppose, how-
ever,  that  the  Afo-A-Kom  were  not  treated  as  stolen;  why  does  it
seem  right  that  it  be  returned  to  the  Kom  despite  the  consequent
impairment  of object-oriented  values?  How  is such  a case  different
from  the  French  government's  refusal  to  permit  export  of  the  van
Gogh  or  its  demand  for  return  of  the  Poussin?  Is  there  something
here that transcends mere Byronism, or is this just cultural national-
ism all over again  in more exotic  form?

There  are  three  significant  distinguishing  factors.  In  the  Afo-A-
Kom  case  (and  the  same  would  be  true  in  the  case  of  ceremonial
objects  claimed  by  American  Indian  tribal  groups  and  analogous
cases in a variety of traditional societies in other parts of the world):
1) the  culture  and  belief  system  from  which  the  object  came  were
still alive; 2) the object was made to be used in religious/ceremonial
ways  by that  culture  according  to  that  belief  system;  and  3)  if re-
turned,  the  object  would  again  be  put  to that  use. It  is the  concur-
rence  of these considerations  that explains why  it seemed right that
the Afo-A-Kom  return to the Kom.

In  most  cultural  property  cases,  however,  the  attempt  to  make
such  an  argument  would  seem  strained  and  artificial.  The  relics of
earlier  cultures  in  Egypt,  Greece,  China  and  Mexico  have  little  or
no contemporary  religious or ceremonial  function.  People who live
in  those  nations  today  may  place  a  high  value  on  such  relics  for
other  reasons, but  even  if they  originally  were made  to serve  some
ceremonial  or religious function  they no longer do so. Most import-
ant, the specific  cultural  value of the relics  —  for  example, as testi-
mony of the way of life  of a vanished people, as great works of art
of  a  specific  time  and  place,  as  evidence  of  the  genius  of  a  great
artist  or  a  great  culture  — is  independent  of  location  within  the
national  territory.  In the Cleveland  Museum, the  Poussin  serves the
same kinds of functions  it would serve  in a French museum.

It may be that there are moveable cultural objects whose retention
within the national  territory  is important to the people of that nation
in the way that the Afo-A-Kom  was said to be important to the Kom
or that ritual objects are important to American Indian tribal groups.
Perhaps  the  Liberty  Bell  for  the  Americans  or  the  Crown  of  St.
Stephen for the Hungarians are examples of objects whose presence
within  the national  territory  has that kind of "tribal" significance  to

69

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

John  Henry  Merryman

the people of their nations.23 But the catalog of such objects is likely
to  be  extremely  short  for  any  nation,  and  such  cherished  objects
normally  are  already owned  by the nation or by  some major  public
institution  within  it and  are  not  for  sale.  In  the  rare  case  in  which
such  an  object  is privately  owned  it can and  should be acquired  by
the  state; to  allow  it to  remain  in  private  hands  seems  inconsistent
with  the  argument  that  the  object  is  in  some  way  essential  to  the
spiritual  life  of  the nation.  In  short, the problem  we are  discussing
— how  to  deal  with  the  voluntary  but  illegal  export  of  privately
owned  objects  —  is highly  unlikely  to  involve  cultural  property  of
this transcendently national-"tribal" kind.

6  Conclusion

Emphasis  on  the  object  and  on  object-based  values  shakes  one's
faith  in cultural  nationalism  as the measure of cultural property pol-
icy  and  changes  one's  view  of  the  proper  outcome  in  commonly
recurring cultural property cases. Some readers may find this empha-
sis on the  object  novel and will prefer  to cling to the more  familiar,
and simpler, one-dimensional  cultural nationalism. In fact,  however,
object-oriented  concerns  are  far  from  new to the  discussion  of cul-
tural  property  policy,  ethics  and  law. The  field  archaeologists'  per-
sistent campaign  to protect sites and monuments against clandestine
excavation  and  removal  is quintessentially  object-oriented;  it  seeks
to  preserve  objects  and  contexts  and  the  opportunity  for  their pro-
fessional  documention  and  study.24  Even  retentive  national  legis-
lation  is  often  referred  to  as  "protective"  by  its  advocates  and  de-
fenders,  thus  attributing  to  it  an  object-oriented  purpose.25  The
Hague Convention on the Protection  of Cultural  Property  in the Ev-
ent  of  Armed  Conflict  of  1954,  although  it  contains  some  con-
cessions to cultural nationalism, is a primarily object-oriented  docu-
ment.  The preamble states its purpose:

The High  Contracting  Parties,  ...
Being convinced that damage  to cultural property belonging to
any people  whatsoever  means  damage  to  the  cultural  heritage
of all mankind, since each people makes its contribution to the
culture  of the world;
Considering that  the preservation  of  the  cultural  heritage  is of
great  importance  for  all peoples of the world  and that it is im-
portant that this heritage receive international  protection;  ...
Being  determined to take  all  possible  steps  to  protect  cultural
property;
Have agreed  ...

It  is  a  short  step  from  Hague  1954,  limited  in  application  to  the
threat  to cultural  property  during  armed  conflict,  to a more  general

70

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

The Nation  and  the  Object

recognition  of  the  importance  of  object-oriented  values  in  inter-
national  cultural property policy.

That  step has been  taken  in the  Preliminary  Draft  Unidroit  Con-
vention  on  Stolen  or Illegally  Exported  Cultural  Objects.26 The rel-
evant  provisions  are  found  in  Article  5, dealing  with  the  return  of
illegally  exported  cultural  objects.  Article  5  (2)  requires  a  state's
request for the return of an illegally exported cultural object to "con-
tain all material information  regarding the conservation, security and
accessibility  of  the  cultural  object  after  it  has  been  returned  to  the
requesting  state." Article  5  (3)  states  that  the  court  shall  order  the
return of the object  only if the requesting  State:

proves that the removal  of the object  from  its territory  signifi-
cantly impairs one or more of the following  interests:
(a) the physical  preservation  of the object  or its context,
(b) the integrity  of a complex  object,
(c) the preservation  of information  of,  for  example, a  scientific

or historical  character,

(d) the use of the object  by a living culture,
(e) the outstanding cultural  importance of the object  for the re-

questing  State.

These  novel  provisions,  with  their  emphasis  on  preservation  and
truth,27 have had a mixed reception. The strongest objections to them
come from  source nations that continue to demand that other nations
enforce their export controls, whether or not such controls are shown
to be consistent with some internationally validated cultural property
policy.  It  seems  unrealistic,  however,  to  suppose  that  major  im-
porting nations will ever give unqualified  deference  —  what is some-
times  referred  to  as  a  "blank  check"  —  to  source  nation  demands.
This is shown by the refusal  of all but a few market nations to accede
to  the  1970  UNESCO  Convention  (even  though  its  provisions  are
tempered  by substantial  restrictions  on cultural  nationalism)  and by
their  demonstrated  reluctance  to join  in  bilateral  cultural  property
treaties with  source nations.

In fact,  the center of gravity  in the  international  cultural  property
policy  dialogue  already  has  significantly  shifted.  The  injection  of
object-oriented  values into the UNIDROIT  draft  proposal  for  inter-
national  legislation  dealing  with  the  export  of  cultural  property  is
merely  one among  many  indicators  of a movement  away from pri-
mary reliance  on  cultural  nationalism  among those most  concerned
with the development  of policy.

Contemporaneous  developments  within  the  European  Communi-
ties,  unfortunately,  must  be  seen  as  a  regression  or,  at  best,  a  lost
opportunity.  In  preparation  for  the  establishment  of  the  free  move-
ment of goods within the Community  the Council  has  promulgated
a  Directive  and  Regulation  that,  in  effect,  call  for  unconditional
Community-wide  enforcement  of national  export controls ("the  aim

71

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

John  Henry  Merryman

is  mutual  recognition  of  the  relevant  national  laws").28 Neither  the
Directive  nor  the  Regulation  contains  any  reference  to  object-
oriented values. The Council's definition  of "cultural objects," which
provided  an  opportunity  for  the  limitation  of  overreaching  national
retentionist  policies,  has  instead  been  made  so  general  as  to  leave
such policies  relatively untouched.

The dialogue about the international movement of cultural  objects
accordingly continues, as it should. Applicable policy, ethics and law
are, in their present states, crude and incomplete. The quality  of the
dialogue will only be improved, and progress in solving international
cultural  property  problems  will  only  be  measurably  advanced,  by
denying  legitimacy  to the  excesses  of  cultural  nationalism  and  by
insisting  on  appropriate  attention  to  the  preservation  of,  the  truth
about and access to the objects  that, in the words of the  1954 Hague
Convention,  constitute "the cultural heritage of all  mankind."

Notes

1  Copyright  John  Henry Merryman  1993. I am grateful  to Clemency  Coggins,
Andre  Emmerich,  Pierre  Lalive,  Linda  Pinkerton,  Marcia  Tucker  and  Sos-
thene  de  Vilmorin  for  assistance,  suggestions  and  criticism.  Any  errors  of
fact, judgment  or taste are mine.

2  A  subsequent  article  will  argue  for  the  introduction  of  a  "third  dimension"
into  cultural  property  policy  discussions,  one  that  recognizes  the  legitimate
interests  of  the  museum/collector/dealer  complex  and  the  importance  of  a
licit  traffic  in  cultural  objects.

3  It  is  clear  that  museums,  collectors  and  dealers  should  refuse  to  acquire
stolen  objects.  I here address an entirely different  kind of question: the  effect
to  be  given  to  foreign  legislation  that  inhibits  the  export  of cultural  objects
without  regard  to their ownership. An extreme example  is described  in  Case
4,  infra,  in  which  France  refused  an  export  permit  to  the  owner  of  a  van
Gogh  painting.

4  For  an  earlier  effort  to broaden  the  cultural  property  policy  discussion  see
my  Two  Ways  of  Thinking  about  Cultural  Property,  80  Am.  J. Int'l.  L.  831
(1986).

5  The two  leading  decisions are English: Kingdom  of Italy  v. de Medici  (1918)
34  T. L. R.  623  (Medici  papers  exported  from  Italy  and  offered  for  auction
in  London); Attorney  General of  New Zealand  v. Ortiz  [1982]  1 Q. B. 349,
[1982]  3  W. L. R.  571 (Court  of  Appeal),  [1983]  2 W. L. R.  809  (House  of
Lords)  (Maori  carved  wood  panel  exported  from  New  Zealand  and  offered
for  sale  in  London). The  black-letter  principle  that  one  nation  will  not  en-
force  the  public  laws of another  has been  the object  of some scholarly  criti-
cism.  See  P. Lalive, Sur l'application  du droit  public  etranger,  Annuaire  Su-
isse  de  Droit  International  103  (1971);  P. J.  O'Keefe  and  L. V. Prott,  Law
and the  Cultural  Heritage, Volume  3: Movement  (1989)  652ff;  M. Frigo, La
Protezione  dei  Beni  Culturali  nel  Diritto  Internazionale  332ff  (1986).

6  The  UNESCO  Convention  on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Preventing  the
Illicit  Import,  Export  and  Transfer  of  Ownership  of Cultural  Property  of  14
November  1970 was an attempt  to  fill  this  lacuna.  For an  authoritative  dis-
cussion  of the Convention  and  its drafting  see Bator, An Essay  on the  Inter-

72

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

The Nation  and  the  Object

national  Trade  in  Art, 34  Stanford  L. Rev.  275  (1982). The  Convention  has
been widely adopted among source nations, but few  market nations  (specifi-
cally, Australia, Canada and the USA) have ratified  and implemented  it. The
US  legislation  enacted  to  implement  its adherence  to the  Convention  is the
Cultural  Property  Implementation  Act of  1983,  19 U. S. C.  §§2601  ff.

7  This  rule  is  never  questioned.  For  recent  examples  of  its  application  see
Kunstsammlungen  zu  Weimar v. Elicofon,  678  F.  2d  1150  (2d  Cir.  1982)
(court ordered return of two stolen Diirer portraits to East German museum);
Autocephalous  Greek  Orthodox  Church  of  Cyprus  v. Goldberg,  917  F.  2d
278  (1990)  (court  ordered  mosaics  stolen  from  early  Christian  church  in
Cyprus returned  to plaintiff);  Verheul, Foreign  Export  Prohibitions:  Cultural
Treasures and Minerals, 31 Netherlands Int'l. L. Rev. 419 (1984) (discussing,
at  pp.420—422,  a  Dutch  decision  ordering  the  return  of  a  stolen  sculpture
to  its  French  owner).

8  Most  Central  and  South  American  nations,  for  example,  have  constitutions
containing  such  provisions  and  supreme  courts  with  the  power  to  refuse  to
apply  legislation  that  conflicts  with  constitutional  limitations  on  legislative/
administrative  powers.  The only published  decision  on the point to come  to
my  attention  is  a  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Costa  Rica,  Boletin
Judicial  No. 90 of  12 May  1983. The  Court  found  the  Law  on  the  National
Patrimony  of 28 December  1981 unconstitutional  as an attempt  to expropri-
ate private property  without  observing  the procedures  or providing  the com-
pensation  required  by  the  Costa  Rican  Constitution.  The  infrequency  of re-
ported  litigation  on the constitutionality  of similar state ownership  laws may
simply  indicate  that  attempts  to apply  them  internally  are  unusual.

9  Government  of  Peru  v. Benjamin  Johnson,  et  al,  720  F. Supp. 810  (C. D.
Cal.  1989). The case is noted  in,l  International  Journal  of Cultural Property
169  (1992).  The  court  found  three  independent  bases  for  rejecting  Peru's
claim:  1) Peru  did not prove  that  the  objects  it claimed  were  removed  from
Peruvian  territory;  2) Peru did  not prove  that the objects  were removed  at a
time  when  Peruvian  legislation  claiming  state  ownership  was  in  force;  and
3)  the  Peruvian  legislation  was,  as  indicated  in  the  text,  effectively  merely
an export  control. The decision  was affirmed  by the  U. S. Court  of  Appeals
of the 9th Circuit  in a brief memorandum  opinion  that referred  solely to the
finding  that  Peru  had  "failed  to prove  that the objects  originated  in  modern-
day  Peru."  The  Court  of  Appeals,  however,  ordered  that  its  decision  be
"unpublished"  (meaning  that  the  opinion  does  not  appear  in  the  official  re-
ports  of the  Court's  decisions  and  may  not  be  cited  to  or  by  federal  courts
in  the  9th  Circuit.  The  "unpublished"  decision 
is  published  in  1991
U. S. App. Lexis  10385). The trial court's opinion thus stands as the authori-
tative  discussion  and  disposition  of the case.

10  Peru  v. Johnson  is one of the  few  reported  decisions  in which  the  rhetorical
nature  of  state' ownership  laws  has  been  effectively  argued.  The  same  kind
of  argument  was  made and  rejected  in  U. S.  v.  McClain,  593  F. 2d  658  (5th
Cir.  1979) (prosecution  for  violation  of U. S. law prohibiting  importation  of
stolen  property;  removal  of antiquities  covered  by  Mexican  state  ownership
law  treated  as  theft),  but  the  case  can  be  distinguished.  In  an  analogous
Italian  case, Republica  del  Ecuador  c. Danusso,  18 Rivista  di diritto  intern-
azionale  privato  e  processuale  625  (1982)  the  court  ordered  illegally  ex-
ported  cultural  objects  returned  to the government  of  Ecuador because  such
a  statute  made them  state property, but  there  is no  indication  in  the  opinion
that the point  was  argued.

11  Cited  supra,  note 4.

73

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

John  Henry  Merryman

12  For a  full  discussion  of the Greek claim  to the Parthenon  sculptures  see  my

Thinking  about  the Elgin  Marbles, 83 Mich.  L. Rev.  1880 (1985).

13  For a  fuller  discussion of cultural  nationalism  see my The  Retention  of Cul-

tural  Property,  21  U. C. Davis  L. Rev. 477, 489ff  (1988).

14  The  notion  of  public  accessibility  of  cultural  objects  naturally  raises  the
question:  which  public? In a  French  museum  in which  thousands of  visitors
see  an  Aztec  artifact,  relatively  few  of  the  viewers  will  be  Mexicans.  In
making a judgment  on accessibility  does one count the thousands of viewers
or only  the relatively  few  Mexicans? The cultural  nationalist  easily and  nat-
urally  assumes that the Mexicans are the relevant public, while to the  object-
oriented  person  the  number  of  interested  viewers,  regardless  of  their
nationality,  is the  significant  figure.

15  These events received a good deal  of newspaper publicity at the time but no
case  was  brought  before  an  American  court.  Eventually  the  matter  was  re-
solved  by  agreement  between  the  Cleveland  Museum  and  the  French  auth-
orities,  and  the  French criminal  charges  against  Mr.  Lee  were  dropped.  See
Nilson, Poussin's Holy Family Feud, ARTnews 78 (Feb.  1982); Dispute over
Cleveland  Poussin  Flares  Again,  ARTnewsletter  3  (July  10,  1984);  N. Y.
Times,  March  28,  1987, at  Lll,  col. 4.

16  Merryman,  The  Retention  of Cultural  Property,  21 U. C.  Davis  L. Rev. 477,

498  (1988).

17  In  another  case,  involving  another  Matisse  painting  from  an  Italian  private
collection,  a  distinguished  American judge  commented  on  the  slender  con-
nection  between  the  object  and  the  culture  of  the  nation  of  whose  cultural
patrimony  it  was  claimed  to  be  an  important  component.  In  Jeanneret
v. Vichey, 693 F. 2d 259 (2d Cir.  1982), the dispute centered around a Matisse
painting  that  had  been  exported  from  Italy  without  a  permit  (which  was
probably  not  required) by  the  deceased  collector's  heir  and  taken  by  her  to
New  York,  where  it  was  subsequently  sold  to  Marie  Louise  Jeanneret,  a
Swiss  dealer.  Having failed  to  resell  the  work  at the price  she  sought,  Ms.
Jeanneret  visited  an  Italian  friend  who  worked  for  the  Ministry  of  Culture
in  Rome.  Shortly  thereafter  the  Ministry  began  inquiries  about  the  work's
Italian  history and export and eventually  a declaration  issued  stating that the
Matisse  was  of "particular  artistic and  historical  interest" to  Italy. Ms. Jean-
neret  used  this  ex post classification  and  the  ambiguity  about  the  necessity
of an export  permit as the basis  for  an action  for rescission  and damages  for
breach  of  warranty  of warranty  of title.  In reversing  and  remanding  a lower
court judgment  for plaintiff  Circuit  Judge  Friendly  commented:

The  somewhat  surprising  conclusion  that  exportation  of  a  painting  by a
prolific  French  post-impressionist  master would represent  "a  tremendous
loss  to  the  national  heritage"  of  Italy  was  sought  to  be justified  on  the
grounds  that  it  had been  shown  at  the  Venice  Biennale  in  1952  "in  the
large  exposition  dedicated  to  art" and  "because  it is part  of the era of  'a
return  to  normalcy'  which  pervaded  all  Europe  at  the  end  of  the  first
world  war,  characterized  by  a  return  to  classic  and  Renaissance  motifs
particularly evident in this balanced, well-composed  painting by a master
of  contemporary  art and  specially  rare  among  Italian  collections  of  sig-
nificant  works  of that  period."  One  is tempted  to  wonder  why  if  Italian
collectors  do  not  care  enough  for  Matisse  to  buy  his  paintings,  one  of
these,  not  claimed  to  be  an  outstanding  masterpiece,  should  be  thought
to constitute  such an important  part  of the  Italian national  heritage, (note
6, p. 263).

74

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

The Nation  and the  Object

And  at  another  point  Judge  Friendly  referred  to  "...  the  tenuous  nature  of
the claim that a not especially notable painting by a French twentieth-century
master  who  was  testified  to  having  left  a  thousand  paintings  constituted  an
important  part  of Italy's patrimony  ..."  (p. 267).

18  The  facts  are  similar  to  those  in  U. S.  v. Hollinshead,  495  F. 2d  1154  (9th
Cir.  1974),  in  which  the  dealer,  Hollinshead,  was  criminally  convicted  for
violation of the U. S. National Stolen Property Act. A companion civil action
brought  by Guatemala  was  settled  before  trial  and, after  a period  of display
at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the stela was returned to Guatem-
ala. This happy  outcome would not have been possible had the field  archae-
ologist  Ian  Graham  not  drawn  and  photographed  the  stela  in  place  in  a
temple  at the  Machiquila  site shortly  before  its clandestine  removal by  Hol-
linshead.

19  Even if clandestine excavation and looting of archaeological  sites and monu-
ments  to  feed  an  international  market  (and  the  local  market,  which  in  some
source nations is substantial) were the only agenda item, a conference  among
source  and  market  nations  would  have  a  number  of  related  questions  to
discuss:  how  to  deal  realistically  with  the  existence,  and  the  difficulty  of
controlling,  the  black  market  in  antiquities;  how  adequate  are  the  source
nation's  protection  of  sites  and  monuments  and  the  funding  and  training  it
provides  for  its  relevant  police  and  customs  services;  how  willing  is  the
source nation to reduce the demand for illegally excavated objects by permit-
ting  the  export  of redundant  objects,  whether  by  sale, exchange,  or on  loan
to  foreign  museums;  how  well-equipped  is  the  source  nation  to  conserve,
display,  study  andpublish  cultural  objects  that  it retains  or that  are  returned
to  it; and  so  on.  A market  nation's  agreement  to  try  to  control  the  entry  of
such  objects,  even  if  it  were  more  successfully  implemented  than  other  at-
tempts to control  the  import  of  forbidden  objects  or  substances, would  deal
with  only  one  facet  of the  problem.

20  These  are  the  facts  in  a  1992  decision  of  the  Conseil  d'Etat:  Cons.  d'Etat
lOe et  2e  sous-sect.,  31.7. 92, req.  n.  111758  et  120294,  Walter;  Sem.  Jur.
7.  10. 92 (Actualites). There is a discussion  of this and companion  litigation
.  in The Art Newspaper, vol. IV no. 27 (April  1993) p. 1. The Conseil  affirmed
the denial  of an export  permit  to the  owner.  It also  held  that  the owner  was
not entitled  to  compensation,  even  if  he could  show  that  forbidding  export,
and  thus  limiting  sale  of  the  painting  to  the  French  market,  substantially
reduced  its market  value.  However,  a  subsequent  decision  of the  Paris Tri-
bunal  d'Instance  of  28  May  1993 held  the  state  liable  to  the  owner  for  the
difference  between  the  national  price  and  the  international  price.  That  de-
cision  will  probably  be  appealed.

21  The  Afo-A-K.om  case, which  was  settled  without  litigation  by  the  return  of
the sculpture  to the  Kom,  is briefly  described  in John  Henry  Merryman  and
Alfred  E. Elsen,  Law, Ethics  and the  Visual  Arts (2d  ed.  1987) pp. 56-58.
22  In  the  United  States  a  comprehensive  federal  law,  the  Native  American
Graves  Protection  and  Repatriation  Act  of  1990,  25  U. S. C.  3001 ff,  was
enacted to deal with these and related matters (e.g., unauthorized  excavations
and removals  from  Indian  and  federal  lands) as they affect  American  Indian
and  Native  Hawaiian  groups.

23  I do not purport here to address the claims of nations for the return of objects
improperly removed from them during the age of imperialism: e.g., the many
objects, including Benin bronzes, taken from Nigeria during the British Puni-
tive  Expedition  that  remain  in  London  or  the  masterpieces  of  painting  and

75

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X

John  Henry  Merryman

sculpture  appropriated  by  Napoleon  during  the  Italian  Campaign  and  still
held  by  French  museums.

24  The  classic  American  discussion  of  the  clandestine  excavation  and  removal
problem  is  by  Professor  Clemency  Coggins,  a  field  archaeologist  and  art
historian:  Illicit  Traffic  of  Pre-Columbian  Antiquities,  29  Art.  J.  94  (1969).
Dr. Coggins  described  the  mutilation  and  loss of  information  resulting  from
the  clandestine  removal  of  monumental  sculptures  and  reliefs  from  sites  in
Mexico and Central America. Her widely read and discussed article is gener-
ally  credited  with  galvanizing  American  concern  and  action,  leading  to  the
1970  Treaty  of  Cooperation  between  the  United  States  of  America  and  the
United  Mexican  States  Providing  for  the  Return  of  Stolen  Archaeological,
Historical  and  Cultural  Properties,  22  U. S. T. 494,  TIAS  No.  7088, and  to
the  Regulation  of  Importation  of  Pre-Columbian  Monumental  or  Architec-
tural  Sculpture or Murals Act of  1972,  19 U. S. C. §§ 2091-2095. Archaeol-
ogists'  concerns,  as expressed  in  Dr.  Coggins's  article, also  influenced  U. S.
participation  in  drafting,  and  eventually  ratifying,  the  1970 UNESCO  Con-
vention.

25  The practice  of  referring  to  cultural  property  export  controls  as "protective"
implies that  their  object  is the  preservation  of cultural  property.  This  usage,
commonly  encountered  in  the  cultural  property  dialogue,  has  crept  into  a
variety  of  international  instruments.  But  when the purpose  is merely  to pre-
vent the voluntary  export  of objects  under  circumstances that offer  no threat
to  preservation,  truth  or  access,  "protection"  becomes  merely  a  euphemism
for  retention.  Of course  it will  not  do  to protest that retention  equals protec-
tion.  In  some  cases  it  may,  but  in  many  others  retention  would  be, and  has
been, more dangerous to cultural  property than export. There is no necessary
relation  between  the two  concepts.

26  International  Institute  for  the  Unification  of  Private  Law,  Preliminary  Draft
Unidroit Convention on  Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects (1991).
The  Draft  was  prepared,  at  the  request  of  UNESCO,  by  an  international
group  of  experts  convened  by  the  Institute.  As  this  essay  is  written,  three
conferences  of  governmental  experts  to  discuss  the  Preliminary  Draft  Con-
vention  have  been  held,  and  a  fourth  is planned  for  late  1993.

27  The  drafters'  intention  was  for  (d)  and  (e)  to  capture  the  considerations

summed  up  in  the  discussion  of  case  5,  supra.

28  Council  Directive  93/7 of  15 March  1993, JOCE (L) 27 March  1993, on the
return  of cultural  objects  unlawfully  removed from  the territory of a Member
State,  enforces  source  nation  export  controls  within  the  EC. Council  Regu-
lation  No.  3911/92  of  9  December  1993, JOCE  (L)  31  December  1992, on
the  export  of  cultural  goods,  enforces  source  nation  export  controls  at  the
Community's  external  borders.

76

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S094073919400007X


