    (2013)   20:  431– 450 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2013                         The Politics of Preservation: Privileging 
One Heritage over Another 
       Jonathan S.     Bell   *           

 Abstract: Heritage preservation is distinctly political, often presenting a 
privileged elitist interpretation of historic sites, while denigrating or even 
destroying later significant built environments. Structures that are the emanation 
of subsequent cultures, but similarly tied to the place, are often undervalued, 
underinterpreted, and even purposely obliterated from the landscape. This article 
considers the politics of heritage related to privileging one type of historic structure 
to the complete detriment of the other. The example of Gurna, in Egypt, serves 
as a powerful case study for the loss of a living historic built environment solely 
for the simplified or “flattened” interpretation of a place. In highlighting the 
preferential protection and presentation of the World Heritage Site of the Theban 
Necropolis and ultimate demise of the historic hamlets of Gurna, the article builds 
on previous work in the field on interpretation, the impact of tourism, and the 
conflicting identities of historic sites.      

    [It] is not until a building has assumed this character, till it has been 
entrusted  with  the  fame,  and  hallowed  by  the  deeds  of  men,  till  its 
walls have been witnesses of suffering, and its pillars rise out of the 
shadows of death, that its existence, more lasting as it is than that of the 
natural objects of the world around it, can be gifted with even so much 
as these possess, of language and of life. —John Ruskin  

   INTRODUCTION 

 The preservation of heritage is inherently political. Archaeologists, cultural resource 
managers, conservators, and governments make particular decisions about the 
objects and places they preserve, the methods by which they interpret these relics 
of the past, and the histories they privilege in the process. Certain histories and 

  *  Department of Urban Planning ,  UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairs ,  3250 Public Affairs Building , 
 Box 951656 ,  Los Angeles ,  CA 90095-1656 . Email:  jsbell@ucla.edu . 

431

 432   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

physical remains are necessarily excluded, privileging one period, class, or cat-
egory of heritage over the others in a given place. This act of marginalization 
is multiscalar and self-perpetuating in nature, attracting tourists and scholars 
alike  from  far  and  wide  to  partake  in  the  consumption  and  reaffirmation  of 
the showcased history, while ignoring or even denigrating the contiguous his-
tories  that  are  underinterpreted.  As  a  singular,  idealized  association  between 
history and place is established and reinforced, communities that value alter-
nate  meanings  of  a  place  are  often  disenfranchised  and  disempowered.  This 
article presents a consideration of the politics of heritage as they relate to the 
sustainable coexistence of designated heritage sites and living historic commu-
nities. Considering the extreme example of the western hamlets of Gurna and 
their recent demise, the article questions whether the practice of preservation 
can  be  depoliticized  to  valorize  a  privileged  heritage  without  denigrating  an 
underprivileged one. 

 Although a decades-old corpus of sociological and anthropological literature 
considers power relationships in multiple contexts, it is only recently that scholars 
have focused this theoretical lens on the heritage disciplines, underscoring the 
intrinsic politics of heritage. In so doing, a number of imperial, colonial, and elitist 
rhetorics have come to light, questioning the legitimacy and appropriateness 
of preserving one heritage over another, or one spatial association over another. 
Indeed, there is a recent recognition of the profound conflict between the privileged 
and the marginalized over differing social values, lived traditions, and everyday 
practices that are collocated. 

 The village of Gurna, on Luxor’s West Bank in Egypt, serves as a case study 
to represent the pinnacle of conflict between a local historic community estab-
lished within and around a vast expanse of pharaonic remains. Efforts to uncover, 
study, and display the wonders of pharaonic Egypt intimately involved the local 
Gurnawis from the early days of European-led archaeological efforts. However, 
in more recent years, the privileged story of the pharaonic heritage and its related 
modern industries of archaeology, research, and tourism dramatically overwhelmed 
the Gurnawi presence and long intertwined existence in the area to allow forced 
relocation of the community and demolition of its own historic and striking 
vernacular. Only a few years later, the loss of Gurna symbolizes the failure of 
government officials and heritage professionals to preserve living communities 
amid the pharaonic tombs and structures that are the focus of economically important 
tourism and ongoing archaeological study. 

 In order to establish the historicity of the Gurnawi settlements and their close 
relationship to the European discovery of the pharaonic remains in the area during 
the 18th and 19th centuries, the article relies on content analysis of text, maps, and 
drawings from the period referring to the people of Gurna. Modern changes to the 
cultural landscape, particularly the demolition of the Gurnawi homes, are evident 
through before-and-after comparisons of satellite images, which further reveal 
the politically significant buildings that survived demolition. Recent literature on 

THE POLITICS OF PRESERVATION  

  433 

concepts of living heritage and approaches to preserve the multilayered value 
of cultural and historic sites provides a framework for considering Gurna and 
developing best practice models.   

 HERITAGE AS CONCEPT 

 The practice of heritage preservation has long been considered one of benev-
olence, safeguarding vestiges from the past for the benefit of the future. This 
concept, as understood by historic preservation professionals, derives principally 
from European architectural and art historians in the 19th century looking on the 
great ruins of the past with romanticism and developing theories about the socio-
cultural values of historic structures.  1   Social thinkers and architectural theorists 
of  the  time  highlighted  the  significance  with  which  monuments  were  imbued 
and argued over their legacy and preservation approaches.  2   From these theoretical 
writings and efforts to restore examples of the built heritage emerged a focus 
on preserving not only physical vestiges, but also understanding the technology 
and values imbued therein. James Marston Fitch notes that the “comprehensive 
protection of such monuments and artifacts, and the scholarly examination of 
the theories and techniques that produced them, is of central importance to our 
cultural future.”  3   Focus, therefore, has typically been placed on the protection 
and examination of the physical in the first case, with more recent consideration 
of intangible values to ensure a holistic approach to preservation and interpreta-
tion of historic sites.  4   

 Efforts to understand intangible values have highlighted the assignation of value 
as an intrinsic component of the “consumption” of historic sites, including not 
only use and admiration, but also protection and preservation. The 19th-century 
art historian Alois Reigl claimed “the term ‘monument’… can only be meant sub-
jectively, not objectively. We modern viewers, rather than the works themselves 
by virtue of their original purpose, assign meaning and significance to a monu-
ment.”  5   Meaning is not intrinsic to a work of art or a monument, but is actively 
redefined by those who experience it, with each stakeholder group and, arguably, 
each individual adding a new layer of significance and meaning. Nearly a hundred 
years after Reigl was writing, David Lowenthal claimed that ongoing assignation of 
value is inherent to the use and care of things historic. “Heritage is ever revitalized; 
our legacy is not simply original but includes our forebears’ alterations and addi-
tions. We treasure that heritage in our own protective  and  transformative fashion, 
handing it down in the faith that our heirs will also become creative as well as 
retentive stewards.”  6   For Lowenthal, the admiration and protection of heritage are 
themselves acts of value assignment and, as such, create new associations with a 
place that are supplemental and cumulatively expand its significance. As the focus 
of cultural consumption, in one form or other, heritage becomes the object of 
“commodification” and takes on new meaning with each act of use, repair, study, 
or reuse.  7   Preservation aims to protect the most significant and documented of 

 434   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

these layers of meaning, while respecting all physical and intangible accretions. 
However, it is a politically charged activity. 

 The selection of one assignation of meaning as the focus of preservation has 
political implications with socioeconomic and cultural manifestations. Laurajane 
Smith refers to this privileged rhetoric as the “authorized heritage discourse,” 
which she contrasts with the existence of a “range of popular discourses and prac-
tices” that may counter the former.  8   Smith further highlights that the authorized 
heritage discourse is “self-referential,” in that it establishes who has the capacity to 
inform it and, ultimately, who does not. In this way, a dominant interpretation of 
a heritage site can simply overwhelm other interpretations and discourses integral 
to its layered significance but not “authorized” as valid or valuable. The result is a 
disempowerment and disenfranchisement of the other “subaltern,” to use Smith’s 
language, viewpoints or associations. Casting aside of these layers of significance 
can lead to the ultimate loss of socioculturally and historically important informa-
tion, including physical sites themselves. 

 It is necessary at this point to discuss the role of  place  in defining and empower-
ing built heritage as a sociopolitical entity. Unlike an  objet d’art  that can be moved 
from locality to locality and is then recontextualized within each new environment, 
immovable heritage (e.g., constructed buildings, land art, grottoes, and natural 
sites) is inextricably intertwined with its physical, social, cultural, and economic 
context. As a backdrop to the creation, use, re-creation, modification, and decay 
of these sites, place is both  witness  and  participant  over time. It is much more than 
a geographical location pinpointed on a map and serves as the setting that creates, 
defines, and redefines over time the use and value of a cultural heritage site. The 
importance of place, as theorized by geographer Carl Sauer, is its identity as the 
“combination of natural and man-made elements.”  9   This sense of identity is fur-
ther elaborated by the concept of “place memory,” defined by Dolores Hayden as 
the embodiment of “the human ability to connect with both the built and natural 
environments.”  10   Place as a concept integrates both its physical components and 
the emotional associations with the setting. Arguably, the latter attachment may 
endure even though the former physical elements have changed or been removed. 
In other words, place embodies the varied assignments of values over time without 
temporal  distinction  and  simultaneously  recognizes  endogenous  and  exogenous 
impacts on the creation, modification, and re-creation of these values. The pres-
ervation process, in its purest form, aims to identify, document, and safeguard all 
these superimposed layers of meaning and interpret their spatial associations.   

 SELECTING A PAST TO PROTECT 

 Nonetheless,  the  act  of  preservation  often,  if  not  always,  requires  some  form  of 
selection and identification of a privileged heritage discourse. Physical manifesta-
tions of the approved discourse are protected, while other physical accretions and 
evidence of later associations may be willfully destroyed. Preservation establishes a 

THE POLITICS OF PRESERVATION  

  435 

sanctioned perspective presented and interpreted for posterity that then serves to 
exclude and marginalize other layers of meaning. Such exclusion, in turn, can limit 
access to and use of a place, and disenfranchise entire communities with divergent 
associations to the heritage place, to the degree of affecting their lifestyle, liveli-
hood, and even identity. 

 Much of the literature on the politics of preservation has focused on the very tan-
gible processes of archaeology and related cultural tourism. On one hand, scholars 
identify archaeology as a tool for governments to promote specific agendas and 
control sociocultural conflict.  11   On the other, archaeologists and other heritage 
professionals take on the mantle of creating culture and defining heritage, often 
intricately interwoven with the process of establishing national identity and, more 
recently, legitimizing and coalescing subgroup identity.  12   Casting the preservation 
process as an application of moral relativism, whether promoted by government 
or by scholar, Meskell states in no uncertain terms that the “creation of heritage 
is a culturally generative act that is intrinsically political. Heritage consultants and 
archaeologists could be said to invent culture, and, in the process, constitute heri-
tage.”  13   Thus, the act of preservation, including herein the processes of discovery, 
study, and documentation, serves to establish a sanctioned, or authorized, discourse 
about a place. Those involved in this act, often an educated and/or governing elite, 
are then responsible for identifying and privileging one or more selected interpre-
tations and uses of a heritage place. 

 The tourism industry represents another important stakeholder in the pres-
ervation  process,  itself  creating  accretions  and  new  layers  of  meaning  while 
often underscoring the authorized heritage discourse. As a mass act of cultural 
consumption,  14    tourism  has  enormous  impact  on  the  perceived  significance 
and associations of a place. Hall identifies tourism as an inherently political power 
struggle that results in the domination of tourists over the indigenous popu-
lation,  and  examples  abound  of  the  negative  impact  of  tourism  on  the  lives 
of  residents.  15    This  domination  further  accords  tourists  a  simplified  or  “flat-
tened” history that supersedes all others for the sake of presentation. The inter-
preted heritage site tends to tell the story of the local elite, often overlooking 
the underclasses intimately involved in the processes of creation, rediscovery, 
or  present-day  activity.  16    McKercher  and  du  Cros  note  that  tourism  requires 
transformation of the cultural resource “to make it appealing and relevant to 
the tourist” and “simple and singular in its theme.”  17   In this way, tourism often 
results in a singular interpretation of a site: one story with a simplistic message 
presented for the sake of outsiders. Tourists appear to occupy a Gramscian cul-
tural hegemony that privileges their simplified understanding of the places they 
visit and reinforces a singular accepted discourse.  18   Although many cultural site 
managers strive to highlight multiple layers of historical significance and socio-
cultural values related to a place, loss of certain discourses through the selection 
process is inevitable. Nonetheless, heritage professionals should strive to preserve 
and interpret as many of the discourses as possible.   

 436   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

 GURNA: A VILLAGE BUILT ON HISTORY 

 The village of Gurna that would become a north–south linear sprawl of sizable 
mudbrick houses on Luxor’s West Bank was established at least as early as the 18th 
century on top of a vast field of pharaonic remains from Egypt’s New Kingdom 
(roughly 1550–1069  bce ). Although the Gurnawis—those who live at the foot 
of the Theban Mount ( Al-Gurn )—were themselves associated with the era of 
discovery and archaeology of the region, they and their communities have been 
marginalized by a history of contempt and a modern series of relocation efforts. 
The goal of these efforts, as expressed by the Egyptian authorities, was to remove 
the community from atop the ancient tombs that first brought it there. Events that 
began in 2006 resulted ultimately in the wholesale demolition of the community’s 
historic buildings, forced relocation of residents, and refusal to interpret the com-
munity’s historical associations to the World Heritage Site within which it resided. 
 The region in question, long known as Thebes and highlighted by Herodotus for 
the wonder of its pharaonic vestiges, regained interest among itinerant Europeans 
in the 18th century. An early drawing of the West Bank in 1743 (see  Figure 1 ) 
depicts some of the larger pharaonic remains and two outlying villages within the 
Nile flood plains and near the edge of the desert, one of which is labeled Gurna.  19   
Vivant Denon, a participant in the Napoleonic expeditions of Egypt and first director 
of  the  Louvre  Museum,  made  multiple  references  to  Gurna,  which  he  called 
“Kurnu,” and his interaction with the Gurnawis in his 1802 publication on Egypt.  20   
He notes that hamlets of Gurna were already established amid the pharaonic tombs 

 

 

  FIGURE  1.    Anonymous,  A View of Thebes, on the West of the Nile , the village of Gurna is 
indicated by the letter “A,” plate in Richard Pococke,  Description of the East and Some Other 
Countries, Vol. 1  (1743).    

THE POLITICS OF PRESERVATION  

  437 

beyond the edge of the Nile flood plain and that some of the residents took shelter in 
them.  21   Despite the difficult and oft belligerent encounters between the Gurnawis 
and the French expedition, the former, which Denon interchangeably termed 
“incorrigible,” “criminals,” and “dogs,” eventually agreed to guide him through 
some of the larger tombs of the pharaohs.  22   A later panoramic drawing of the 
Theban hillside by Robert Hay of Linplum  23   in the 1820s depicts the locals living 
and working amid the tombs (see  Figure 2 ), presumably attracted more and more 
to the desert from the floodplains by the advent of Europeans involved in archaeo-
logical exploration and in need of paid labor.         

 As interest in Egypt grew from the early 19th century and beyond, more Euro-
peans specializing in the discovery of pharaonic remains and eager for a “cultural” 
vacation came on the scene. Isabella Frances Romer published a work about her 
explorations of Egypt and Palestine and mentioned the village of Gurna and its 
people in the 1840s.  24   Alexander Henry Rhind commented on Romer’s fanciful 
sketches of western Thebes dotted with villas as a potential vacation spot for British 
subjects.  25   A number of manor-like structures built as residences for Egyptologists 
and travelers spending time in the area became a part of the Theban landscape. 
It appears to be around this same period that the Gurnawis constructed similar 
manor-like homes in the area, presumably following the lead of their European 
neighbors, though adapting the construction to their own needs and expectations.   

 GURNAWI VERNACULAR 

 The three modern hamlets of Gurna that lay within the historic precinct were com-
posed of multiple large, mudbrick family residences, sometimes of two or more 

 

 

  FIGURE  2.    Robert Hay of Linplum, Detail from Panorama, 1820s (Hay Collection, British 
Library).    

 438   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

stories, and often brightly colored to contrast with the Theban desert landscape 
(see  Figure 3 ). Irregular fenestration was common, with most windows on the east 
side of the structures, facing the flood plains and Nile beyond. Building interiors 
comprised organically organized spaces with undulating walls and earthen molded 
furnishings often built into the mudbrick walls or integrated into the clay floors. 
Of note were the towering pigeon roosts, integrated earthen ovens, and granaries 
and other storage areas protruding from the walls. As Hassan Fathy, famed archi-
tect and researcher of the Gurnawi vernacular, noted in his description of the res-
idences, “the villagers allow themselves to mold the most individual and beautiful 
plastic forms … the plan of a room or the line of a wall would not be a dull, square, 
measured thing but a sensitively molded shape, like a pot.”  26   Often, a seamless inte-
gration of interior and exterior spaces composed the homes, integrating the unique 
plastic forms highlighted by Fathy (see  Figure 4 ). The layout and program of these 
residences are representative of the Gurnawi response to their environment, using 
the only material readily available to them: mud from the Nile flood plains. Mud 
plasters usually covered both the interior and exterior of the walls, with shades of 
yellow, aquamarine, or pink often adorning the exterior. Some of these structures 
incorporated in their plan an underlying tomb, used as additional living space.         

 The location of the structures, grouped into three principal settlements that 
overlay an area dotted with thousands of New Kingdom pharaonic tombs, is 
testament to the strong physical relationship of Gurna and the Gurnawis to the dis-
covery, reuse, and visitation of the tombs. Historic reference to and ongoing res-
idence within some of the tombs, their documented involvement in the European 
archaeological endeavor, and Gurnawi interaction with modern tourists highlight 
the integral role of the pharaonic landscape and its consumption within Gurnawi 
culture and livelihood. Locals had not only lived with and among these ancient 

 

 

  FIGURE   3.     Sheikh  ‘Abd  el  Gurna  hamlet,  view  from  southwest,  February  2009  (author’s 
photo).    

THE POLITICS OF PRESERVATION  

  439 

 

 

  FIGURE  4.    Gurnawi house, Sheikh ‘Abd el Gurna hamlet, view from northeast and above, 
with built-in earthen oven ﬂ ue in foreground and mosque visible in distance, February 
2009 (author’s photo).    

sites for at least two centuries, but they had also come to rely on their discovery, excava-
tion, and visitation for their survival, often dedicating part of their homes to the man-
ufacture and sale of tourist trinkets and, according to some officials, original artifacts. 
 The scenic architecture and lively participation of the Gurnawis in the life of the 
extensive archaeological site on the West Bank, which became a UNESCO World 
Heritage  Site  in  1979,  has  concerned  Egyptian  authorities  since  the  1940s  and 
incited them to call for their relocation. The practical challenge proffered by the 
authorities is the policing of the thousands of tombs in the area that are overlaid 
and partially inhabited by the Gurnawis. Many Gurnawi houses have incorporated 
one or more pharaonic tombs as subterranean chambers used for storage, living 
quarters, barns, and countless other spaces for everyday use. Soon after Egyptian 
independence from Britain, the antiquities authorities began investigating ways to 
protect the tombs by relocating the Gurnawis who lived among them. As early as 
the 1940s, the authorities attempted to create a “New Gurna” far to the east and 
outside of the historic area, planning to relocate many of the inhabitants from 
the center of tourist activity, on which they relied for their livelihood. The unfin-
ished village, designed by Hassan Fathy after extensive study of Gurnawi lifestyle 
and relationship to their built environment, failed as an endeavor, in part because 
Gurnawis vehemently resisted the move from their ancestral homes to a modern 
vernacular village dissimilar to their own aesthetic and lifestyle.  27   In the 70 years 
since, efforts to attract and forcibly relocate the villagers to new, climatically and 
culturally  inappropriate  concrete  buildings  have  continued  with  mixed  results. 
Most recently, the authorities addressed the question by demolishing nearly all 
the structures of Gurna’s western hamlets and forcibly relocating the inhabitants. 
Although  families  resisted  bulldozing  of  their  earthen  manors  by  continued 

 440   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

 

 

  FIGURE  5.    Satellite image of Sheikh ‘Abd el Gurna hamlet, August 2002 (Google Earth).    

occupancy, the majority of vernacular structures were destroyed between 2006 and 
2009 (see  Figures 5  and  6 ), affecting some 3500 families through forced relocation 
and dissolution of a once vibrant agglomeration of hamlets.  28             

 PRESERVING THEM OUT OF HOUSE AND HOME 

 The loss of the Gurnawi homes represents the destruction of an historic ver-
nacular architecture in favor of preserving the authorized, more highly valued 

 

 

  FIGURE  6.    Satellite image of Sheikh ‘Abd el Gurna hamlet, October 2009 (Google Earth).    

THE POLITICS OF PRESERVATION  

  441 

heritage in the same place. Despite the expressed concern for the impact of the 
community on the prized subterranean heritage, the authorities simultaneously 
demolished a unique opportunity to interpret the story of Gurna and its resi-
dents: the first and only museum of Gurnawi history and culture housed within 
two restored historic structures. The Gurna Discovery Center, as it was called, 
had  been  established  in  April  2001  as  a  free  museum  of  Gurna  history  and 
culture open to locals and tourists alike and authorized by the Supreme Council 
of Antiquities. Included in the exhibitions were copies of Robert Hay’s pano-
ramas, historic photos of Gurnawis and their residences, and reports and images 
of modern-day events relevant to the area. Although the protection of this center 
would have preserved some aspects of the Gurnawi story and a physical example 
of the built heritage, it was destroyed in 2010 during the last wave of demolitions, 
apparently approved by then-director of the Supreme Council of Antiquities, 
Zahi  Hawass,  as  part  of  a  plan  to  protect  the  nearby  tomb  of  Nakht,  an 
astronomer under the 18th Dynasty Pharaoh Thutmose IV (approximately 14th 
century   bce ).  29    The  website  of  the  Discovery  Center  acknowledges  its  own 
demise  with  a  banner  stating  “the  information  below  is  now  history—yet 
another part of the vanished history of Gurna.”  30   A sole building was preserved 
from  within  the  destroyed  Gurnawi  hamlet  of  Sheikh  ‘Abd  el  Gurna.  Met-
ropolitan  House,  the  1912  field  house  built  by  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of 
Art  currently  used  by  the  Polish  team  working  at  the  temple  of  Hatshepsut 
(see  Figures 7  and  8 ), is linked to the elite history of Egyptology and ongoing 
archaeological discovery. Its continued presence amid the piles of rubble that 
once  represented  vibrantly  colored,  sizable  Gurnawi  residences  underscores 

 

 

  FIGURE  7.     Satellite  image  of  Sheikh  ‘Abd  el  Gurna  hamlet,  August  2002;  arrow  indicates 
Metropolitan House (Google Earth).    

 442   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

 

 

  FIGURE  8.    Satellite image of Sheikh ‘Abd el Gurna hamlet, October 2009; arrow indicates 
Metropolitan House (Google Earth).    

the official preference for an archaeological past that is part of the authorized 
heritage  discourse  (see   Figure  9 ).  While  targeting  the  local  vernacular  in  the 
area for demolition, this building was protected as part of the site’s archaeo-
logical heritage.             

 At  the  end  of  2009,  in  the  midst  of  one  of  the  final  campaigns  of  Gurna 
demolitions, the Egyptian cultural authorities, announced that Howard Carter’s 
field  house  would  be  turned  into  a  museum.  31    This  announcement  not  only 

 

 

  FIGURE  9.    Detail of built-in earthen oven amid the rubble of destroyed residence, February 
2009 (author’s photo).    

THE POLITICS OF PRESERVATION  

  443 

underscored the undeniable significance of the ancient Egyptian heritage, but 
also formalized protection and interpretation of the history of its modern dis-
covery.  Previously,  Hawass  had  often  referred  to  inadvertent  discoveries  by 
villagers throughout Egypt as events precipitated by their pack animals or live-
stock rather than by the villagers themselves, reinforcing a common view that 
villagers  had  no  active  involvement  in  the  archaeological  endeavor.  32    Due  in 
part to this official view, the Gurnawi contribution to the discoveries of Luxor’s 
West Bank remains underrepresented and undervalued, and the relocation and 
demolition  of  the  community  undermine  the  association  of  Gurna  with  the 
pharaonic  remains.  The  lack  of  physical  vestiges  of  the  Gurnawi  community 
atop the pharaonic tombs removes the need for interpretation and allows for 
a privileged retelling or “cleansing” of the archaeological history that supports 
only the authorized discourse of the West Bank as a pharaonic city of the dead, 
omitting subsequent living communities. 

 A few scholars have considered the relationship between the politics of her-
itage  and  the  previous  efforts  to  relocate  the  Gurnawis.  Mitchell  highlights 
factors of identity construction and nation-making in Egypt as integral to the 
process  of  defining  a  pharaonic  history  that  is  separate  from  a  more  recent 
Islamic identity.  33   He further notes the changing polemic of the government 
from a focus on the protection of the pharaonic site in the 1940s to a concern 
for  tourist  experience  and  safety  in  the  1990s,  in  both  cases  denouncing  the 
role  of  Gurnawis  as  participants  in  the  archaeological  discovery  of  the  sites 
and in the tourism industry that now overruns them. Meskell in turn considers 
the  relationship  between  violence  and  tourism,  questioning  the  motivations 
behind the 1997 massacre of tourists that took place in the area, though not 
involving the Gurnawis, who were among the first to come to the aid of victims 
and overpower the terrorists. “It could be argued that the construct of ‘global 
world heritage’ is, in part, a remnant of colonialism.”  34   She likens tourism and 
violence, respectively, to a form of imperialism and a backlash against foreign 
hegemony. Meskell further represents tourism in Egypt as a force for marginali-
zation of modern local communities in light of the focus on pharaonic identity: 
tourists are not encouraged to discover the later periods of Egyptian history, 
and  little  or  none  of  the  revenue  reaches  the  locals,  remaining  largely  in  the 
hands of foreign tourism companies and, once in Egypt, with national entities 
based  in  Cairo.  35    The  heritage  industry  that  caters  largely  to  foreign  tourists 
makes no effort to introduce a more informed history of the places they visit, 
causing both tourist and guide to overlook many rich and integral vestiges of 
local  and  regional  history  in  favor  of  the  authorized  discourse.  However,  it 
is important to note that Gurnawis had, prior to the demolitions, integrated 
themselves somewhat effectively into the heritage industry on the West Bank, 
serving  as  unofficial  guides,  selling  trinkets  and  wares,  working  with  foreign 
missions, and even showcasing their own community and heritage to interested 
tourists. 

 444   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

 The World Bank and USAID conducted studies in Luxor and throughout Egypt 
related to the protection of the pharaonic remains that privileged tourism while 
disenfranchising local communities. They lauded economic development efforts 
to increase high-end tourism by effectively separating tourists from local com-
munities and preventing their interaction.  36   This reinforced an archaeological 
perspective on Egypt’s history by extricating subsequent and even contemporary 
layers  of  habitation  from  the  interpretation  of  these  places.  Quite  surprisingly, 
USAID conducted studies of plans for Gurnawi relocation, including proposed 
designs of housing and research on their cultural values and lifestyle, all without 
questioning whether the relocation was indeed necessary or if there were viable 
options for mitigating concerns about the community’s interaction with the phar-
aonic Necropolis.  37   The understanding that Gurnawis were “criminals” and “tomb 
robbers”  38   seems to rest on the judgments of 18th- and 19th-century European 
explorers without consideration for the modern socioeconomic context. Addition-
ally, the significance of the thousands of adjacent pharaonic tombs, many of which 
are in deplorable condition and have been thoroughly documented, was never 
reconsidered in light of the living community sharing the land. Indeed, the value 
of the pharaonic landscape is uncontested, but authorities have refused to accept 
the significance of the community as an intrinsic component of this landscape. It 
is worth noting that many members of the Egyptology community were adamant 
that the Gurnawis or, at least, the physical evidence of their community should 
remain and become part of an overarching conservation and interpretation plan 
for the West Bank.  39   However, the concerns of the largely foreign archaeological 
community for the preservation of Gurna hamlets were met with simple govern-
ment reiterations of the need to protect the pharaonic heritage.   

 CONCLUSION 

 Gurna is one of many examples of living communities disenfranchised by preser-
vation efforts, but it provides a challenging and test-worthy case for considering 
alternatives to this approach of site protection inspired by eminent domain. Con-
cerns for the pharaonic tombs that dot the landscape of the West Bank are justified; 
inappropriate use and introduction of waste water and animals have exacerbated 
their deterioration. In such cases, heritage professionals and government officials 
have the responsibility and, often, the mandate to take necessary action. Nonethe-
less, there appears to have been no attempt to educate the Gurnawis to work with 
site managers and mitigate these threats. The authorities instead focused on their 
forced relocation, conducting numerous trials and employing a diverse group of 
consultants to facilitate that process over a 70-year period that culminated in forced 
relocation  and  demolition.  Although  small  numbers  of  residents  did  relocate  in 
response to some earlier campaigns, the efforts were large failures overall and were 
even known to result in violence, as Mitchell notes occurred in 1998 when police 
opened fire on protesting villagers.  40   These failures, particularly with episodes of 

THE POLITICS OF PRESERVATION  

  445 

protest and violence, are clear evidence of the attachment of the villagers to their 
homes and land. As mentioned previously, this was not only an ancestral associa-
tion or attachment to place, but for many this attachment was borne by economic 
necessity to earn from the tourism that engulfed them. 

 Reconciling a living community and its needs with the preservation of the her-
itage  beneath  was  the  principal  question  that  unfortunately  received  no  answer 
from the acts of demolition. There are multiple preservation options that better 
serve the interests of the Gurnawis, while still protecting the historic tombs and 
other pharaonic heritage in the vicinity. These approaches can be divided into two 
main categories: (1) community development models that aim to keep the Gur-
nawis living in their homes above the tombs and (2) preservation approaches that 
facilitate relocation of the residents while protecting and interpreting a corpus of 
their vernacular in situ. Each category has a broad spectrum of possibilities related to 
the size of the remaining community, the number of buildings preserved, amount 
of access locals and others have, and so forth. However, all these options must 
incorporate appropriate and adequate protection of the pharaonic tombs and rel-
evant education about their significance. 

 In the first category of possible approaches, the government and site managers 
might have worked with the local community as partners and stakeholders in the 
preservation process, learning what activities threaten the pharaonic tombs and 
developing mitigation strategies, such as drainage for wastewater, systems of refuse 
removal, regulations about animals, and restrictions on tomb access and theft. In 
this way, the site managers could develop a working relationship with the villagers 
and involve them in strategies for protecting the heritage site on which they live, 
simultaneously  increasing  security  and  establishing  a  warning  system  for  major 
problems of preservation. Concomitant with these efforts, they could underscore 
the importance of the living Gurnawi heritage, its physical manifestations, and the 
current lifestyle. The existence of the Gurna Discovery Center provided a unique 
opportunity to showcase the long history of the community and their significant 
association with the historic archaeological endeavor of the region. This approach 
requires long-term planning and intensive training, and carries with it heightened 
risk for continued damage to the tombs, but encourages a deepened respect for 
the heritage site by locals, allowing their continued habitation and establishing 
additional layers of desperately needed security and monitoring for the pharaonic 
sites. Involvement of the Gurnawis in the protection of the site could have been 
integrated into a preservation master plan for the West Bank, integrating their role 
in the process, while also interpreting the significance of the Gurnawi presence and 
their vernacular architecture to visitors. 

 The second category comprises options more readily implemented by preserva-
tion professionals and government officials, given that post-relocation protection 
and preservation are far more easily ensured by site managers. An initial education 
campaign would still be required to raise awareness about the significance and 
fragility of the pharaonic heritage among the Gurnawis, while encouraging their 

 446   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

willingness  to  be  relocated  in  cooperation  with  the  government.  However,  a 
history  of  70  years  of  largely  unsuccessful  relocation  efforts  underscores  the 
improbability of unhindered, peaceful implementation. Nonetheless, over the 
years, some families did abandon their homes in favor of relocation. These aban-
doned buildings could have been preserved as part of the historic landscape of 
the West Bank, with one or more even open to tourism, as part of the interpreta-
tion of Gurnawi heritage presented by the Gurna Discovery Center. In the extreme 
scenario that occurred, with demolition of nearly all structures, the opportunity 
still remained to preserve a few select structures, including the Gurna Discovery 
Center, to serve as a signpost of the community and built heritage that was for 
centuries integral to the cultural landscape of the West Bank. 

 Although the above suggestions clearly have no opportunity for implementa-
tion in Gurna now, it is hoped that these approaches may be developed and tested 
in other cases where living communities of historic importance are threatened by 
calls for preservation of adjacent heritage sites. Preservation approaches that would 
have integrated the Gurnawi settlement would have been preferable to any other 
alternative, although they may have been difficult to implement without risking 
additional damage to the pharaonic tombs. In some cases, forced relocation may 
be necessary, but simply bulldozing homes as soon as inhabitants left for the 
day represents a barbaric and inhumane method of forcing compliance, since 
residents have no home to which to return. Other methods of relocation must be 
researched and considered. Even in the most dire of cases, where demolition may 
be determined necessary for most structures, the Gurna Discovery Center should 
have been preserved as the sole vestige of Gurna’s past association to the phara-
onic landscape. Ultimately, the loss of the Gurnawi houses represents a decision to 
privilege one authorized discourse over another. The active destruction of living 
cultural heritage embodied by historic settlements and the lives impacted together 
form undeniable testimony. Although the calls for relocation of the community 
and destruction of the homes arose from a perceived need to protect the pharaonic 
heritage, the drastic actions have resulted in an irreparable denigration of the cul-
tural landscape and history that included the Gurna settlements.    

  ENDNOTES 

  
 1  .    This  line  of  questioning  and  consideration  of  a  matrix  of  human  experiences  and  values  is 
rooted in the classical historical tradition set forth by Herodotus. Although Herodotus’ writings are 
undeniably concerned with temporal progression, earning him the moniker “The Father of History,” 
his  Homeric  engagement  with  storytelling  and  the  social  context  of  events  addresses  physical 
spatialities. This, of course, should be understood in conjunction with his geographic breakdown of 
classical and preclassical events. The distinction here is that the interaction with history begins with 
the physical remains of times past as bearers of historic, present, and future social values, rather than 
the formless story.  
  
 2  .    Among these are John Ruskin and Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, who agreed about the 
importance of certain examples of the built environment, but had contradicting views of the nature 

THE POLITICS OF PRESERVATION  

  447 

 5  .    Riegl, “The Modern Cult of Monuments,” 72.  
 6  .    Lowenthal, “Stewarding the Past in a Perplexing Present,” 22 (emphasis original).  
 7  .    See Appadurai,  The Social Life of Things .  
 8  .    Smith,  Uses of Heritage , 4.  
 9  .    Cited in Hayden,  The Power of Place , 16.  
 10  .    Hayden,  Power of Place , 46.  
 11  .    Smith,  Archaeological Theory .  
 12  .    See Meskell, “Sites of Violence” and Meskell, “The Intersection of Identity and Politics in Ar-

of their value and the approach to preserve them. Indeed, Ruskin in his work  The Lamp of Memory  
made clear that monuments were vestiges from the past that belonged to those who built them, but 
were shared by subsequent generations. Thus, according to his reasoning, it was not within the right 
of anyone to “obliterate” them and it was equally inconceivable to attempt restoration, which he saw 
as a form of destruction. Quite in contrast to this view, the French theorist and architect, Viollet-le-Duc, 
saw the care of historic buildings as an opportunity to improve on the original, re-creating and 
adding to a building to make it the best example of its type and period. Viollet-le-Duc was entrusted 
with the restoration of numerous medieval buildings in France, among them the cathedrals of Notre-
Dame in Paris and Saint-Sernin in Toulouse. The latter has famously undergone a “derestoration” in 
recent years to remove his many additions and changes to the Romanesque basilica.  
 3  .    Fitch,  Historic Preservation , 23.  
  
  
 4  .    Charters and guidelines for cultural heritage management and protection have reflected the 
development of the field, evolving from a simplistic focus on the physicality of monuments and built 
heritage, as highlighted within the 1964 Venice Charter, to more nuanced and multicultural concepts 
of intangible values and the significance of place and practice, in addition to physical remains, as 
developed by the 1979 Burra Charter and subsequent Nara Document in 1994.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
chaeology,” 279–301; Kohl, “Nationalism and Archaeology,” 223–46.  
 13  .    Meskell, “Sites of Violence,” 127.  
  
  
 14  .    A vast literature on cultural consumption exists, but the constraints of the current article do 
not allow for greater consideration of this. See Tally Katz-Gerro, “Cultural Consumption Research,” 
11–29 for a discussion of the field. A profound consideration of the implications and impacts of cul-
tural tourism as a practice of consumption is Oakes,  Tourism and Modernity in China .  
  
 15  .    Hall, “Politics and Place,” 99–113. See also Wang, “From a Living City to a World Heritage 
City,” 1–17 for a Chinese example of tourism and related preservation decisions disenfranchising and 
displacing the local community.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Egypt , for reference to Gurna and its inhabitants.  
  
 23  .    Robert Hay of Linplum (1799–?) arrived in Egypt in 1824 and assembled a team of artists and 
architects to record the many monuments and extensive art of ancient Egypt. His exquisite draw-
ings, panoramic sketches, and notes remain a valuable resource to archaeologists and heritage profes-
sionals working in the region.  
  
 24  .    Romer,  A Pilgrimage to the Temples and Tombs of Egypt, Nubia, and Palestine .  
  
 25  .    Rhind,  Egypt: Its Climate, Character, and Resources , 55.  
  
 26  .    Fathy,  Architecture for the Poor , 41.  
  
 27  .    The  New  Gurna  project  was  under  the  charge  of  famed  architect  Hassan  Fathy.  See  Fathy, 
 Architecture for the Poor  for a recount of the approach, trials, and failure of the project, as well as 
discussion of Gurnawi vernacular. One of the posited reasons for their original refusal is the fact that 
Gurnawis are Arab desert-dwellers and not  fellahin , or peasant-farmers, and consider their place of 

 16  .    Hall, “Politics and Place,” 108.  
 17  .    McKercher and Du Cros,  Cultural Tourism , 127.  
 18  .    See Lears, “The Concept of Cultural Hegemony,” 567–93 for an overview of Gramsci’s concept.  
 19  .    The illustration appeared in Pococke,  Description of the East and Some Other Countries .  
 20  .    Denon,  Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt .  
 21  .    Denon,  Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt , 112.  
 22  .    Denon,  Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt , 238. See also Sonnini,  Travels in Upper and Lower 

 448   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

 28  .    Jill  Kamil,  “Vindicating  Gurna,”   Al-Ahram,   7  February  2008,   http://weekly.ahram.org.

 29  .    A number of communications between the founder and director of the Gurna Discovery Center, 

activity, livelihood, and social space to be on the desert sands rather than the fertile floodplains where 
New Gurna was located. Of course, the dissociation from the center of tourist activity and the related 
moneymaking opportunities, as well as their traditional homes, must also have been a factor.  
  
eg/2008/883/feature.htm  (accessed 20 February 2011).  
  
Caroline Simpson, and Egyptian officials are cited in a talk given by Simpson, “Theban Blindness.”  
 30  .    See  http://www.Gurna.org/discovery.html  (accessed 5 May 2011).  
  
 31  .    “Tutankhamun finder’s home on show.”  
  
 32  .    See Wynn,  Pyramids and Nightclubs .  
  
 33  .    Mitchell, “Making the Nation.”  
  
 34  .    Meskell, “Sites of Violence,” 128.  
  
 35  .    Meskell, “Sites of Violence,” 130–31. Through personal communications with Egyptian site 
  
managers in Luxor, I have learned that revenue from ticket sales to enter the tombs and other sites 
are not available to the sites in question but held in Cairo and managed by the Supreme Council of 
Antiquities. This is evident when seeing the facilities and equipment of the antiquities offices in Luxor.  
  
  
  
 Architecture for the Poor .  
  
 39  .    The author had the privilege of attending three Luxor West Bank Conservation Planning meet-
ings that involved government officials, members of a number of foreign archaeological missions, 
and the representatives of other organizations, such as the Getty Conservation Institute and USAID, 
working in the Necropolis. The fate of the Gurna hamlets was discussed during these meetings and in 
private conversations with government officials and foreign archaeologists.  
  

 36  .    Meskell, “Sites of Violence,” 134.  
 37  .    Mitchell, “Making the Nation,” 224.  
 38  .    Some of the monikers for Gurnawis in Denon,  Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt  and Fathy, 

 40  .    Mitchell,  Rule of Experts .   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Anderson  ,   Benedict R  .  Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism . 
 London :  Verso ,  1983 .  

    Appadurai  ,    Arjun  .   The  Social  Life  of  Things:  Commodities  in  Cultural  Perspective .   Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press ,  1986 .  

    Denon  ,   Vivant  .  Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, During the Campaigns of General Bonaparte in the 
Country . Translated by   Arthur     Aikin  .  New York :  Heard and Forman ,  1803 .  

    Fathy  ,    Hassan  .   Architecture  for  the  Poor:  An  Experiment  in  Rural  Egypt .   Chicago :   University 
of Chicago Press ,  1973 .  

    Fitch  ,   James Marston  .  Historic Preservation: Curatorial Management of the Built World .  Charlottesville : 
 University Press of Virginia ,  1990 .  

    Habermas  ,   Jürgen  ,   Sarah     Lennox  , and   Frank     Lennox  . “ The Public Sphere: An Encyclopedia Article .” 
 New German Critique   3  ( Autumn   1974 ):  49 – 55 .  

    Hall  ,   C. Michael  . “ Politics and Place: An Analysis of Power in Tourism Communities .” In  Tourism 
in Destination Communities , edited by   Shalini     Singh  ,   Dallen J.     Timothy  , and   Ross Kingston     Dowling  , 
 99 – 113 .  Oxon, UK :  Cabi ,  2003 .  

    Handler  ,   Richard  .  Nationalism and the Politics of Culture in Quebec .  Madison :  University of Wisconsin 
Press ,  1988 .  

THE POLITICS OF PRESERVATION  

  449 

    Hayden  ,    Dolores  .   The  Power  of  Place:  Urban  Landscapes  as  Public  History .   Cambridge,  MA :   MIT 
Press ,  1995 .  

  “ Howard Carter’s Luxor Home Now a Museum ,”  http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/8342428.stm  
(4 November 2009; accessed 10 January 2013).  

    Katz-Gerro  ,    Tally  .  “ Cultural  Consumption  Research:  Review  of  Methodology,  Theory,  and 
Consequence .”  International Review of Sociology   4  ( 2004 ):  11 – 29 .  

    Kohl  ,   Philip  . “ Nationalism and Archaeology: On the Constructions of Nations and the Reconstruc-
tions of the Remote Past .”  Annual Review of Anthropology   27  ( 1998 ):  223 –46.  

    Lears  ,   T. J. Jackson  . “ The Concept of Cultural Hegemony: Problems and Possibilities .”  The American 
Historical Review   90  ( 1985 ):  567 –93.  

    Lefebvre  ,   Henri  .  The Production of Space . Translated by   D.     Nicholson Smith  .  Cambridge :  Blackwell , 
 1991 .  

    Logan  ,   William  . “ Introduction: Voices from the Periphery: The Burra Charter in Context .”  Historic 
Environment   18 , no.  1  ( 2004 ):  2 – 8 .  

    Lowenthal  ,   David  . “ Stewarding the Past in a Perplexing Present .” In  Values and Heritage Conservation: 
Research Report , edited by   Erica     Avrami  ,   Randall C.     Mason  , and   Marta de     la Torre  ,  18 – 25 .  Los Angeles : 
 Getty Conservation Institute ,  2000 .  

    McKercher  ,   Bob  , and   Hilary Du     Cros  .  Cultural Tourism: The Partnership between Tourism and 
Cultural Heritage Management .  New York :  Haworth Hospitality Press ,  2002 .  

    Meskell  ,   Lynn  . “ The Intersection of Identity and Politics in Archaeology ,”  Annual Review of Anthro-
pology   31  ( 2002 ):  279 – 301 .  

   ——— . “ Sites of Violence: Terrorism, Tourism, and Heritage in the Archaeological Present .” In 
 Embedding Ethics , edited by   Lynn     Meskell   and   Peter     Pels  .  Oxford :  Berg ,  2005 .  

    Mitchell  ,   Timothy  . “ Making the Nation: The Politics of Heritage in Egypt .” In  Consuming Tradition, 
Manufacturing Heritage , edited by   Nezar     Alsayyad  .  London :  Routledge ,  2001 .  

   ——— .   Rule  of  Experts:  Egypt,  Techno-Politics,  and  Modernity .   Berkeley :   University  of  California 
Press ,  2002 .  

    Oakes  ,   Tim  .  Tourism and Modernity in China .  London :  Routledge ,  1998 .  

    Pococke  ,   Richard  .  Description of the East and Some Other Countries , Vol.  1 .  London :  W. Bowyer , 
 1743 .  

    Rhind  ,   Alexander Henry  .  Egypt: Its Climate, Character, and Resources as a Winter Resort .  Edinburgh : 
 Thomas Constable ,  1856 .  

    Riegl  ,   Alois  . “ The Modern Cult of Monuments: Its Essence and Its Development .” In  Historical and 
Philosophical  Issues  in  the  Conservation  of  Cultural  Heritage ,  edited  by    Nicholas  Stanley      Price  , 
  Mansfield Kirby     Talley  , and   Alessandra Melucco     Vaccaro  ,  69 – 83 .  Los Angeles :  Getty Conservation 
Institute ,  1996 .  

    Romer  ,   Isabella Frances  .  A Pilgrimage to the Temples and Tombs of Egypt, Nubia, and Palestine, in 
1845-6 .  London :  R. Bentley ,  1846 .  

 450   

 JONATHAN S. BELL

    Ruskin  ,   John  . “ The Lamp of Memory .” In  Historical and Philosophical Issues in the Conservation of 
Cultural Heritage , edited by   Nicholas     Stanley Price  ,   Mansfield Kirby     Talley  , and   Alessandra Melucco   
  Vaccaro  ,  322 –23.  Los Angeles :  Getty Conservation Institute ,  1996 .  

    Simpson  ,   Caroline  .  “Theban Blindness: A Case History of Severe Archaeological Hypermetropia.” 
Paper presented at the Disciplinary Measures: Histories of Egyptology in Multi-disciplinary Contexts 
conference, London, June 2010 .  http://www.qurna.org/links.html  (accessed 10 June  2011 ).  

    Smith  ,    Laurajane  .   Archaeological  Theory  and  the  Politics  of  Cultural  Heritage .   London;  New  York : 
 Routledge ,  2004 .  

    ——— .  Uses of Heritage .  London :  Routledge ,  2006 .  

    Sonnini  ,   Charles Sigisbert  .  Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt: Undertaken by Order of the Old Government 
of France , Vol.  III .  London :  J. Stockdale ,  1807 .  

   US/ICOMOS . “ ICOMOS Charters & Other International Doctrinal Documents .”  US/ICOMOS 
Scientific Journal   1 , no.  1  ( 1999 ).  

    Viollet-le-Duc  ,    Eugène-Emmanuel  .   The  Architectural  Theory  of  Viollet-le-Duc:  Readings  and 
Commentary . Edited by   M. F.     Hearn  .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press ,  1990 .  

    Wang  ,   Shu-Yi  . “ From a Living City to a World Heritage City: Authorized Heritage Conservation and 
Development and Its Impact on the Local Community .”  International Development Planning Review  
 34  ( 2012 ):  1 – 17 .  

    Wynn  ,   L. L  .  Pyramids and Nightclubs: A Travel Ethnography of Arab and Western Imaginations of Egypt, 
from King Tut and a Colony of Atlantis to Rumors of Sex Orgies, Urban Legends about a Marauding Prince, 
and Blonde Belly Dancers .  Austin :  University of Texas Press ,  2007 .    


