Penal Protection of
Cultural  Property:
The Canadian  Approach
Stephen Z. Katz*

The illicit  taking  and  movement  of cultural  property  is on  the
horizon of international  criminal law. The total value of stolen
or  smuggled  objets  d'art  involved  in  international  trafficking,
running  over  $1  billion  annually,  is  second  only  to  narcotics.
It is a story of big-time dealers, collectors, institutions, clandes-
tini and  tombaroli  of every nationality.1

The importance  of cultural  property  for  individuals,  nations
or  the whole of humanity  does not need  to be proved.  It gives
each person  his intellectual  identity, irrespective  of whether  he
is the creator  or simply a user. Cultural property in its entirety
constitutes  a  huge  heritage  which  determines  our  awareness
and  inspires  new  bursts  of  creativity.  Any  reduction  in  this
heritage,  built  up  over  the centuries  and  constantly  added  to,
means  a  loss.  The  protection  of  cultural  property  is  rightly
considered  to be everybody's  duty.2

These  quotes,  while  disparate  in  nature,  echo  an  identical  theme:
the  need  to  ensure  the  preservation  and  protection  of  cultural
property, and the need for an effective  means of achieving that end.
This commentary  is an  examination  of the Canadian  experience.

On  September  6,  1977,  Canada  enacted  the  Cultural  Property
Export  and  Import  Act,3  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  Act).  The
purpose of the Act is to preserve in Canada  significant  examples of
Canadian heritage in movable cultural property,4 and to protect the
legitimate interests of foreign  states concerned with the preservation
of  their  own  heritage  in  movable  cultural  property.5  The  aims  of
the  Act  are  accomplished  by  a  control  list  and  system  of  export
permits,6  and  a  mechanism  for  the  recovery  and  return  of  any
foreign  cultural  property  to  a  reciprocating  state  that  has  been
illegally  imported  into  Canada.7  The  scope  of  this  commentary

*  Member  of  the  Manitoba  Bar;  Partner,  Walsh,  Micay  and  Co.,  Winnipeg,

Canada.

11

Stephen Z. Katz

will  summarize  the  Canadian  legal  framework  for  protecting  both
domestic and foreign cultural property; define and analyze the penal
aspects of  the law; and  discuss the practice  of this scheme.

Domestic  Cultural  Property
The  Act  envisages  the  protection  of  domestic  cultural  property  by
a control list8 and a system of export permits.9 The general principle
of  the  system  is  the  establishment  by  order  of  the  Governor  in
Council  of  a  Canadian  Cultural  Property  Export  Control  List10
(hereinafter  referred  to as the Control List). The Control  List is the
basis  upon  which  the  whole  system  functions.  Items  which  fall
within  the Control  List are subject  to control  of  the Act, and  must
remain  within  Canada  unless  issued  an  export  permit  under  the
Act."

The  criteria  for  inclusion  on  the  Control  List  are  set  out  in

Section 4 of  the Act, which states:

(2)  Subject  to  subsection  (3),  the  Governor  in  Council  may
include in the Control List, regardless of their places of origin,
any  objects  or  classes  of  objects  hereinafter  described  in  this
subsection, the export of which the Governor in Council deems
it necessary to control in order to preserve the national  heritage
in  Canada:
(a)  objects of any value that are of archaeological, prehistorical,
historical,  artistic  or  scientific  interest  and  that  have  been  re-
covered  from  the soil of  Canada,  the  territorial  sea of  Canada
or  the inland  or other  internal  waters  of  Canada;
(b)  objects  that were made  by,  or  objects  referred  to  in  para-
graph  (d)  that  relate  to, the aboriginal  peoples  of  Canada  and
that  have  a  fair  market  value  in  Canada  of  more  than  five
hundred  dollars;
(c)  objects  of decorative art, hereinafter  described  in this para-
graph,  that  were made in the territory  that is now Canada  and
are more  than  one hundred  years old:

(i)  glassware, ceramics, textiles, woodenware and works in
base  metals  that  have  a  fair  market  value" in  Canada  of
more  than five hundred  dollars, and
(ii)  furniture,  sculptured works in wood, works in precious
metals  and  other  objects  of  decorative  art  that  have  a
fair  market  value  in  Canada  of  more  than  two  thousand
dollars;

(d)  books,  records,  documents,  photographic  positives  and
negatives,  sound  recordings  and  collections  of  any  of  those
objects  that  have a  fair  market  value  in  Canada  of more  than
five hundred  dollars;
(e)  drawings, engravings, original prints and water-colours that
have a fair market value in Canada of more than  one thousand
dollars; and

12

Penal Protection  of Cultural  Property

(f)  any  other  objects  that  have a  fair  market  value  in  Canada
of more than  three thousand  dollars.
(3)  No object shall be included in the Control List if that object
is  less  than  fifty  years  old  or  was  made  by  a  natural  person
who  is still living.
(4)  For  the  purposes  of  this  Act,  an  object  within  a  class  of
objects  included  in the  Control  List  is deemed  to  be an  object
included  in  the  Control  List.  1974-75-76,  c.50,  s.3;  1980-
8 1 - 8 2 - 8 3,   c.167, s.34

Thus  the  Control  List  may  be  comprised  of  objects  or  classes  of
objects  which  are  situated  in  Canada,  'regardless  of  their  place  of
origin, or  the nationality  of their creator',  which  are deemed neces-
sary  to  control  in  order  to  preserve  the  national  heritage  of  Can-
ada.12  However  no  object  shall  be  included  in  the  Control  List  if
the  object  is  less  than  fifty  years  old,13  or  was  made  by  a  natural
person  who is still living.14

An  object  that  falls  within  the  purview  of  the  Control  List  can
be  exported  from  Canada  only  if  the  person15  receives  an  export
permit  or  a  general  permit16  under  the  Act.  If  the  object  is  to  be
sold  or disposed  of within  Canada,  the  owner  is free  to do  so; it is
only  when  the  owner  of  the  object  wishes  to  export  it  that  the
Control  List will apply.

The  Procedure
An  owner17  of an  object  on  the Control  List who wishes  to  export
it must first submit an application  for  an export  permit  to a permit
officer.18  The  permit  officer  who  receives  an  application  for  an
export  permit  from  a  Canadian  resident  shall  issue  the  permit
forthwith  if  the  person  establishes  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  permit
officer  that  the object  was imported  into  Canada  within  thirty-five
years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  application  and  was
not  exported  from  Canada  under  a  permit  issued  under  the  Act
prior to that importation,19 or was loaned to an institution or public
authority  in Canada  by a person  who was not a  Canadian  resident
at  the  time  of  the  loan,20  or  is to  be  removed  from  Canada  for  a
purpose  prescribed  by regulation  such  as display  or  exhibition  ab-
road  for  a period  of time as may be prescribed  by  regulation.21

Where  the  permit  officer  does  not  issue  an  export  permit  as
already  mentioned,  and  where  he  is  not  aware  of  any  notice  of
refusal  sent in respect of the object during the two years immediately
preceding  the  date  of  the  application,22  then  he  must  determine
whether  the  object  is  included  in  the  Control  List.23  If  the  permit
officer  determines that the object  is not included in the Control List
then  he  shall  issue  a  permit  for  the  object.24  However  where  the
permit  officer  determines  that  an  object  is or  might be included  in
the  Control  List,  then  he  shall  refer  the  application  to  an  expert
examiner  for  consideration.25  The  duties  of  the  permit  officer  are

13

Stephen  Z.  Katz

purely  administrative.  They  do  not  pass  any  artistic judgment  on
the  object.

When  an application  for an export permit is referred  to an expert
examiner,26  then  he  shall  determine  whether  the  object  is  included
in  the  Control  List.27  The  expert  examiners  are  usually  custodial
institutions  such  as  museums,  art  galleries,  provincial  archives  or
university  libraries.  Instructions  regarding  the  duties  and  responsi-
bilities  of  the  expert  examiners  are  issued  to  ensure  the  Act  is
applied  uniformly  across  the country.28 Where the expert  examiner
determines  that  an  object  is not  included  in  the  Control  List,  then
he  shall  advise  the  permit  officer  to  issue an  export  permit  for  the
object.29  However,  where  the  expert  examiner  determines  that  an
object is included in the Control List, then he shall further  determine
whether  the  object  is  of  outstanding  significance  by  reason  of  its
close association  with Canadian history or national life, its aesthetic
qualities,  or  its  value  in  the  study  of  the  arts  and  sciences;30 and
whether  the  object  is  of  such  a  degree  of  national  importance
that  its  loss  to  Canada  would  significantly  diminish  the  national
heritage.31

If the expert examiner determines that an object is not of outstand-
ing significance  or does not meet the degree of national importance,
then  he shall advise the permit  officer  to issue an export permit  for
the  object.32  However  where  the  expert  examiner  determines  that
an  object  is  of  outstanding  significance  and meets  the  degree  of
national  importance,  then  he shall  advise  the  permit  officer  not  to
issue an  export  permit for  the object.33 The permit  officer  will then
send  a  written  notice  of  refusal  to  the  applicant,  with  the  reasons
given  by  the expert  examiner  for  the  refusal.34

An applicant who receives a notice of refusal may request a review
of his application  for  an export permit  by the Review Board.35 The
request  for  a  review  must  be  in  writing  and  must  be  made  within
thirty  days  after  the date on which  the notice of  refusal  was sent.36
The  Review  Board  in  considering  a  request  for  a  review  of  the
application  applies the same criteria as the expert examiner in order
to  determine  whether  the  object  has  outstanding  significance  and
national  importance.37  The  Review  Board,  unlike  an  expert  exam-
iner, may receive any information  presented to it orally or in writing
that  it considers  to  be relevant  to  any matter  before  it.38

If  the  Review  Board  determines  an  object  fails  to  meet  one  or
more  of  the  required  criteria,  then  it will direct  a  permit  officer  to
issue  an  export  permit.39  However,  where the  Review  Board  deter-
mines an  object meets all the required criteria, and the Review Board
is  of  the  opinion  that  a  fair  offer  to  purchase  the  object  might  be
made  by  an  institution  or  public  authority  in  Canada  within  six
months  of  its  determination,  then  the  Review  Board  may  establish
a  delay  period  of  two  to  six  months  during  which  time  no  export
permit will be issued for  the object.40 In any other case, i.e., an  offer
is  unlikely,  or  a  delay  period  has  passed,  the  Review  Board  will
direct  a permit  officer  to issue an export permit.41 The Act does not

14

Penal Protection of Cultural Property

provide  an  appeal  procedure  from  a  determination  of  the  Review
Board, and all its decisions are final and binding upon the applicant.
Where the Review Board establishes a delay period, written notice
of  the  delay  period  and  its  decision  shall  be  sent  to  the  applicant
and  the  Minister.42  The  Minister  upon  receiving  the  notice  of  the
delay period  shall advise such institutions  and  public authorities in
Canada  as  he  sees  fit  of  the  object  and  the  delay  period.43  If  an
offer  to  purchase  is  made  within  that  period  but  is  not  accepted,
either the applicant or the institution or public authority making the
offer  can request the Review Board to determine a fair cash offer  to
purchase.44 The request must be by notice in writing45 and must be
made not less than thirty days before the end of the delay period.46

Where the Review Board establishes a delay period  and  does not
receive a request  to determine  a fair  cash  offer  to purchase, it shall
after  the  delay  period,  and  upon  request  of  the  applicant,  direct  a
permit  officer  to  issue  an  export  permit.47  However,  where  the
Review Board  receives a request it shall determine  the amount  of a
fair  cash  offer  to  purchase,48  and  then  both  parties  are  advised  of
its decision.49 There is no requirement that the Review Board  furnish
details  of  their  considerations  or  their  method  in  determining  the
fair  cash  offer  to purchase.

Where  the  Review  Board  has  determined  a  fair  cash  offer  to
purchase  and  no offer  to purchase is made during that  period  then
it shall direct a permit officer  to issue an export permit.50  However,
if an offer  to purchase is made during that period which is equal to
or greater  than  the amount  of  the fair  cash  offer  to purchase, then
no export permit will be issued.51 The applicant may refuse  the  offer
but  then  he  must  either  retain  the  work,  or  seek  to  deal  it  inside
Canada,  or reapply  after  two years for  an export  permit.52

Under the scheme an export permit cannot be withheld absolutely,
and  is  subject  to  a  bona fide domestic  offer  to  purchase  at  a  fair
cash purchase price. Nonetheless this procedure has been the subject
of criticism; both  by nature of its interference  with property  rights,
and the effect  the delay period has on discouraging foreign buyers.53
In addition to the export permits the Act provides for the issuance
of two Ministerial  permits: the general permit and  the open general
permit.54  The  general  permit,  really  a  bulk  licence,  is  issued  to
reputable  dealers  to  alleviate  undue  hardship  or  interference  with
business.55 The open general permit applies to all persons.56 In  effect
it  creates  an  exception  to  the  Control  List.  The  Minister  issues an
open  general  permit  if,  for  instance,  a  particular  class  of  object
subject to control is in abundant  supply.57 The Minister may at any
time amend,  suspend, cancel or  reinstate either  of these permits.58

Offences  and  Punishment
The  offences  and  punishment  are  set out  in  Sections 40 — 45 of  the
Act. The Act provides that in respect of domestic cultural  property

15

Stephen Z. Katz

it  is an  offence  to: export  or  attempt  to  export  from  Canada  any
object  included  in  the  Control  List  except  under  the  authority  of
and  in  accordance  with  a  permit;59  or  to  transfer  the  permit  to  or
allow  it  to  be  used  by another  person;60  or  to  wilfully  furnish  any
false or misleading information or knowingly make any misrepresen-
tation  in applying  for or  obtaining  any permit.61  Every person who
contravenes any of these provisions is guilty of an offence  and liable
on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding five thousand dollars
or  to  imprisonment  to  a  term  of  twelve  months  or  both;62  or  on
conviction  on  indictment  to  a fine not  exceeding  twenty-five  thou-
sand  dollars  or  to imprisonment  to a term not exceeding five years
or  to  both.63  Where  a corporation  commits  an  offence  under  this
Act any  officer,  director  or agent  of the corporation  who  directed,
authorized, assented to, acquiesced in or participated in the commis-
sion  of  the  offence  is liable  to  the  punishment  as provided  for  the
offence,  whether  or  not  the  corporation  has  been  prosecuted  or
convicted.64  A  conviction  under  the Act,  for  any  offence,  does  not
act as a bar  to prevent the applicant  from  applying for a permit  for
that  or  other  objects.

Proceedings under the Act may be instituted,  tried or  determined
at  the place in  Canada where  the offence  was committed,  or  at  the
place in Canada in which the person charged resides or has his  office
or place of business at the time of the institution of proceedings.65 A
prosecution  of  a  summary  offence  must  be  instituted  at  any  time
within but not later than three years after  the time when the subject
matter  of the complaint  arose.66

Foreign  Cultural  Property
As previously stated, the Act is not limited to the control of domestic
cultural  property. In recognition of the growing world concern over
the  illicit  traffic  in  cultural  property,67  and  in  response  to  the
UNESCO  Convention,  the Act has established  a procedure  to pro-
tect the cultural  property  of foreign  states. This objective  is accom-
plished  by  two  means:  a  control  of  the  import  into  Canada  of
foreign  cultural  property  which  has  been  illegally  exported  from  a
reciprocating  State,68 and by establishing a procedure for  a recipro-
cating  State  to  obtain  the recovery  and  return  of  illegally  exported
foreign  cultural  property.69

For the sake of clarity it should be stressed that while the two means
are closely associated with each other, they are nonetheless separate
and distinct. It is by virtue of the control, designating the property as
having  been  illegally imported  into  Canada,  that  the mechanism  is
triggered  for  permitting  the government  of a  reciprocating  State  to
request the recovery and return of the foreign cultural property.

Control  of  Illegally Exported  Foreign  Cultural  Property
The Act  provides  for the control  of the import  into  Canada  of any
'foreign  cultural  property'70  that  has  been  illegally  exported  from

16

Penal Protection of Cultural  Property

the 'reciprocating State'.71 The control  is governed  by Section 37(2)
and  is supplemented  by a mechanism  for  prosecuting  violators.72

Section  37(2) of the Act states:

(2)  From and after  the coming into force of a cultural property
agreement  in Canada  and  a  reciprocating  State, it  is illegal  to
import into Canada any foreign  cultural property that has been
illegally exported  from  that  reciprocating  State.

Thus  once  a  'cultural  property  agreement'73  has  come  into  force
between  Canada  and  a  foreign  State,  it  then  becomes  illegal  to
import  into  Canada  any  foreign1 cultural  property  that  has  been
illegally exported from that reciprocating State.74 This point requires
three observations: (1) the Act makes no reference to foreign  cultural
property  that has been illegally exported  from  a reciprocating  State
before the  coming  into  force  of  a. cultural  property  agreement;  (2)
there  is no  provision  in  the  Act  that  makes  it  unlawful  to  have  in
one's  possession  any  foreign  cultural  property  knowingnthat  the
foreign  cultural property has been illegally exported  from  a recipro-
cating State; (3) The Act fails  to define  the term  'illegally exported'.
The  significance  of  these  omissions  was  demonstrated  in  the  first
prosecution  under  the Act.  In  R  v Heller, Zango and Kassam15 the
three^accused were prosecuted for illegally importing foreign cultural
property  into  Canada  that  had  been  illegally exported  from  a reci-
procating  State.76 The  Crown  elected  to  proceed  by way-of  indict-
ment  and  all  three  accused  elected  a  preliminary  inquiry  before
the  Provincial  Court  Judge.  The  factual  situation  surrounding  the
importation  of  the  object  was  not  in  issue  and  was  set  out  in  the
judgment  as follows:

On 1st December  1981 the two accused Heller and Zango, U.S.
citizens, arrived at the Calgary International Airport on- a direct
Air Canada  flight  from  New York  City, U.S.A. They had with
them the object in question. Heller reported that fact to  officials
from  the customs  and  excise  branch  of  the  Canadian  govern-
ment stationed  at the airport.  He advised  them  of its estimated
worth,  that  being  several  hundred  thousand  dollars.  The
Canadian  officials  allowed  entry  of the object  into  Canada.

After  they cleared  formalities  with  the  immigration  officials
at the airport, Heller and  Zango were met outside the customs/
immigration  area  by  the  third  accused,  Kassam,  a  Canadian
citizen.

The  three  accused  then  proceeded  from  the  airport  to  the
Glenbow  Museum  in  downtown  Calgary  with  the  object  to
meet with officials  of  the  museum.

The ostensible  purpose  of the visit to the Glenbow  Museum
was  (and  in  fact  the  visit  of  Heller  and  Zango  to  Canada)  to
have  the  object  examined  for  authenticity,  and  to  show  it  to

17

Stephen Z. Katz

representatives  of  Mobil  Oil  Canada.  Prior  to  this  time  the
three  accused  were led  to  believe  that  Mobil  might  purchase
the object  from  them and donate  it  to  the museum.

Shortly after  the arrival of the three accused at the museum,
and  during  the  'examination',  the  meeting  was interrupted  by
entry  into  the  room at  the Glenbow  by members of  the  Royal
Canadian  Mounted  Police.

The  object  was seized,  and  the  three  accused  were  charged

as hereinbefore  described.

The object
The  object  seized  is  a  sculpture  of  some  antiquity,  created
between  1,800  and 2,900 years ago. Its origin  as attested  to by
Dr.  Eyo,  an  internationally  recognized  authority  on  Ancient
Africa,  was in a time when  there existed  in that  part  of  Africa
which  now  comprises  the  country  of  Nigeria,  a  civilization
known  as  the  Nok  culture.  This  culture  of  civilized  society
flourished  during the period  900 B.C. and  200 A.D.

The  world  first  formally  became  aware  of  the  existence  of
this Nok culture in 1943, when, during mining activity in a part
of  Nigeria,  items  similar  to  the  sculpture  in  this  case  were
unearthed.

It  is assumed  that such  sculptures  were of some religious or
political  significance  to  members  of  the  Nok  culture.  Dr.  Eyo
testified  that  there were only four  other such sculptures known
to exist, all smaller in size. He further  testified  that the sculpture
was  a  Nigerian  antiquity,  within  the  meaning  of  current  Ni-
gerian  legislation.

A  Miss  Eroku,  a  lawyer  employed  by  the  Nigerian  govern-
ment, and an expert in Nigerian law, reviewed the development
of legislation dealing with the control of exportation  of antique
African  sculptural  works  of  art.  The  first  such  legislation  was
enacted  in 1924.

The  opinion  of both  Dr.  Eyo  and  Miss  Eroku  was that  the
Nok  sculpture in this  case would  be  subject  to  the  legislation
in place, as  amended,  since 1924.

Dr. Eyo first became aware of the existence of Ex. 2 in 1980,
during a visit to New York City. At that time the sculpture was
offered  for  sale  to  the  Nigerian  government  by  the  accused
Zango. Dr.  Eyo at that  time advised  Zango  that  the  sculpture
had  been  illegally removed  from  Nigeria, and  that  it should  be
returned.  Zango  (and  the  accused  Heller,  later)  had  further
contact  with  Dr.  Eyo  in  Lagos  in  attempts  to  secure  proper
export  documents.

One  can  only  assume  that  Dr.  Eyo's  statement  made  to
Zango  in  New York  in  1980 was  the  first  indication  that  any
of  the  accused  had  that  the  Nok  sculpture  may  have  been
illegally  removed from  Nigeria.77

18

Penal Protection of Cultural  Property

At the completion  of the preliminary  inquiry  the Crown  moved  for
an  order  of  committal  for  all  three  accused.  In  opposition  to  the
motion  counsel  for  the accused  argued  there  was  no  evidence  that
the  object  had  been  illegally  exported  from  Nigeria  within  the
meaning of the Canadian  legislation.

The  Court  held  to  succeed  on  the  motion  for  committal  the

Crown must have adduced  evidence on  the following  matters:
(a)  the object  was 'foreign  cultural  property';
(b)  there  existed  between  Canada  and  Nigeria  on  1st  December

1981 a  'cultural  property  agreement';

(c)  that Nigeria  on  1st December  1981 was a 'reciprocating  State';
(d)  the  'foreign  cultural  property'  was imported  into  Canada  after
the  coming  into  force  of  the  'cultural  property  agreement'  be-
tween Canada  and  Nigeria;

(e)  The Nok  sculpture was illegally exported  from  Nigeria.
The  Court  was  satisfied  there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  support
claims  (a)  to  (d).  On  the  issue  of  whether  the  Nok  sculpture  was
illegally exported  from  Nigeria,  within  the meaning  of  the Act,  the
Court  held:

I  am  satisfied,  as  I  have  said,  that  the  Canadian  Parliament
intended,  by its legislation  to embody the principles  and  terms
of  the  UNESCO  convention  dealing  with  the  'illicit  inter-
national  traffic  in cultural  property'.

I  have examined  the provisions  of  the international  conven-

tion with respect  to  the meaning  of the term.

Article 7(a) of the international  convention to which  Canada
and  Nigeria  are  parties  specifically  states  that  the  convention
only  applies  to  cultural  property  '[w]hich  has  been  illegally
exported  after  entry  into  force  of  this convention  in the  states
concerned',  and  further  '[which  has  been]  illegally  removed
from  the  state  after  the  entry  into  force  of  this  convention  in
both  states'. Similar words are found  in section  7(b).

I  am satisfied  that  the meaning  to  be attached  to  the  words
'illegally exported' must be restricted to that time frame  follow-
ing  the  entry  by  Canada  as  a  party  to  the  international  con-
vention.

With  respect  to  the  motion  for  committal,  then,  there  must
be some evidence  that  Ex. 2, the Nok  sculpture,  was  exported
from  Nigeria  after  28th June 1978.78

The  Court  then  found  there  was  no  evidence  presented  at  the
preliminary  inquiry  that  the  Nok  sculpture  was  exported  from
Nigeria after 28th June 197879 and all three accused were discharged.
The  Crown  applied  to  the  Alberta  Court  of  Queen's  Bench  for
an  order  of  certiorari  to  quash  the  order  of  the  Provincial  Court
discharging the accused.80 The Court of Queen's Bench granted  the

19

Stephen Z. Katz

Crown's  application  on  other  procedural  grounds.  On  the issue of
the sufficiency  of the evidence to  order  the discharge of the accused
the Court  held:

Having  ruled  that  the  Provincial  Judge  lost jurisdiction,  it  is
not  necessary  for me to deal extensively with the  interpretation
of  the  Cultural  Property  Export  and  Import  Act.

Notwithstanding  my  ruling  that  the  Provincial  Judge  lost
jurisdiction,  I  am  in  agreement  with  his  finding  on  the  whole
of  the evidence that  there  is insufficient  evidence regarding  the
expropriation  of the Nok  artifact  from  Nigeria.81

As  the  Crown  was  unable  to  prove  that  the  Nok  sculpture  was
illegally  exported  from  Nigeria  after  28  June  1981,  the  Nigerian
government  was  thereby  precluded  from  requesting  the  Attorney-
General  of  Canada  to  institute  an  action  for  the  recovery  of  the
Nok  sculpture.82

The case demonstrates  an  arguable  deficiency  in  the  Act, in  that
any  foreign  cultural  property  that  has  been  illegally  exported  from
the  reciprocating  State  before  28  June  1978,  or  that  is  already  in
Canada  before  that  date,  is  immune  from  prosecution  under  the
Act and  consequently  cannot  be the  subject  matter  of a request  for
the recovery of that property. Therefore  until the existing legislation
is changed  the  system  will  only  offer  a  modest  form  of  protection.

Recovery  and  Return  of  Foreign  Cultural  Property
The Act has also provided  a procedure  under  which a  reciprocating
State  is  enabled  to  gain  the  recovery  and  return  of  its  cultural
property that has been illegally exported  and imported into Canada.
The  recovery  begins  with  the  government  of  the  reciprocating
State submitting a request in writing  to  the  Minister for  any  foreign
cultural  property  that  has been  imported  into Canada  illegally, and
that  is  in  the  possession  of  or  under  the  control  of  any  person,
institution  or  public  authority.83  The  Attorney-General  of  Canada
may then institute an action  for  the recovery  of the property  by the
reciprocating  State. The  Court  in  which  the action  has  been  taken
may  make an  order  for  the recovery  and  the return  of the property
to the reciprocating  State.84 Where  the person,  institution  or public
authority  involved  in  such  an  action  is  a  bona fide  purchaser  for
value, or has  a valid  title to  the property, and had  no knowledge at
the  time  of  purchase  or  when  such  title  was  acquired,  that  the
property  had  been  illegally  exported  from  the  reciprocating  State,
then  the  Court  may  fix  such  amount  to  be  paid  as  compensation
by  the  reciprocating  State  to  that  person,  institution  or  public
authority  as  the Court  considers just  in  the circumstances.85

While  the  protection  afforded  by  the  Act  to  foreign  cultural
property  is not  as extensive  as one  might have hoped,  the Act does

20

Penal Protection of Cultural  Property

accomplish  several  objectives.  First,  the cost  in  taking  legal  action
in a foreign jurisdiction  is so high as to dissuade most  governments
from  attempting  it, save for  the exceptional case. The provisions of
Section  37(3)  have  permitted  a  reciprocating  State  to  pursue  the
recovery  and  return  of  the  property  with  no  cost  to  it  save  the
amount  of compensation  the Court may order  it to pay in the case
of a bona fide  purchaser  for  value or a person  who has a valid  title
to  property.  Second,  the  issue  of  ownership  or  possession  of  the
property  by  the  reciprocating  State  — which  caused  the  problems
for the New Zealand government in obtaining the return of cultural
property  in  A.G.  of  New Zealand v OritzS6  —  has  been  eliminated
and replaced with the requirement that the foreign cultural property
has been illegally exported  from  the reciprocating  State. Third,  the
Act has attempted  to strike a reasonable balance between  the inter-
ests of a  reciprocating  State  in  the  recovery  and  return  of  cultural
property and the property rights of the bonafide purchaser for value
or a person  holding a valid  title to  the property.

In conclusion it is submitted the Canadian parliament has initiated
the first phase of an important campaign  to ensure the preservation
and  protection  of  both  domestic  and  foreign  cultural  property.
However,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  this is  a first step.  Future
efforts  must  concentrate  on  better  law  enforcement  techniques;
improving  existing  legislation;  the  development  of  greater  inter-
national cooperation and scrutiny in the traffic  of cultural property;
as well as a campaign to heighten the public's awareness of the need
to preserve their cultural  heritage.

Notes

1  Rafzigher,  J.A.R.,  'International  Penal Aspects of Protecting Cultural  Prop-

erty',  (1985)  19  The International Lawyer 835 at 835.

2  Koumantos,  G.,  'International  Legal  Protection  of Cultural  Property',  Pro-
ceedings  of  the  Thirteenth  Colloquy  on  European  Law,  Delphi,  20 — 22
September  1983, at  12.

3  Statues  of Canada  1974-75-76  c.50,  s.l.
4  Communications  Canada:  Annual  Report  1987 — 88,  Cultural  Property  Ex-

port  and  Import  Act,  p. 7.

5  Clark,  I.C., 'The Cultural  Export  and  Import  Act of Canada:  Legislation  to
Encourage  National  Cooperation',  (1982-83)  15  N.Y.J.  of  Int'l  Law  &
Politics, 771 at 771.

6  Cultural  Property  Export  & Import  Act,  Revised  Statutes  of  Canada  1985,
sec.4.  The  preservation  in  Canada  of  significant  examples  of  Canadian
heritage  in  movable  cultural  property  is  also  accomplished  through  tax
incentives for private individuals who donate or sell cultural objects to public
institutions, and by grants to assist institutions in purchasing cultural  objects
under certain circumstances. As the scope of this commentary  is on the penal
aspects  of  the  law  only  passing,  if  any,  reference  will  be  made  to  the  tax
incentive  system.

21

Stephen Z. Katz

7  Ibid.,  sec.37(3).
8  Ibid.,  sec.4.
9  Ibid.,  secs.7-16.
10  Ibid., sec.4. See: The Canadian Cultural Property Export Control List ch.448,

5,  Consolidated  Regulations  of Canada  (Consol.Reg.Can.)  3269 (1978).

11  Clark,  supra  5,  at  775-776  refers  to  the  Control  List  as  '...  a  detailed
definition  of the classes of objects which are subject  to control. It is the legal
reference  document  for  determining  whether  an  export  permit  is  required
before  cultural  property  can  be exported  from  Canada'.

12  For the rationale behind the inclusion of the italicized objects on the Control
List see H.M. Treasury (Great  Britain), The Export  of Works of Art: Report
of  a  Committee  Appointed  by  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  50 (1952)
'Waverly  Report'  at 36. This report  was influential  in inspiring the Canadian
control  system.

13  Supra  6, sec.4(3).
14  Ibid.  For  the  rationale  behind  these  exemptions  see  Clark,  supra  5,  at

774-775.

15  The  wording  of  sees. 7 and  8 of the  Act  restricts  applications  for  an  export
permit  only  to  'a  resident  of  Canada'.  See sec.2 of  the  Act  which  defines  'a
resident  of  Canada'.
16  Supra  6,  sec.l7(l)(2).
17  There is no  requirement  in the wording of the Act that  the applicant  for  the
export permit be the owner of the object. The writer recognizes the distinction
but for  the purpose of this commentary refers to the case of an owner seeking
an  export  permit  under  the Act.

18  Supra  6,  sec. 5
19  Ibid.,  sec.7(a).
20  Ibid.,  sec.7(b).
21  Ibid., sec.7(c). In  1987 — 88 the program processed  192 applications, of which

130 were issued  export  permits by the permit  officer.  Supra  4, p. 3.

22  Ibid.,  sec.l6(l).
23  Ibid.,  sec.8(l).
24  Ibid.,  sec.8(2).
25  Ibid.,  sec.8(3).
26  Ibid.,  secs.2  and  6.
27  Ibid., sec.9.
28  See Clark,  supra  5, at  777.
29  Supra  6,  sec. 10.
30  Ibid.,  seel l(l)(a).
31  Ibid.,  seel l(l)(b).
32  Ibid.,  seel 1(2).
33  Ibid.,  seel 1(3).
34  Ibid.,  sec.l3(l).
35  Ibid.,  sec.2, 18.
36  Ibid.,  sec.29(l).  There  is  no  provision  in  the  Act  for  the  Review  Board  to
extend  the  period  on  which  a  request  for  a  review  can  be  made.  In  certain
circumstances this could result in undue hardship on the part of the applicant.

37  Supra  6, sec.29(3).
38  Ibid.,  sec.25. This would  appear  to  allow  an  applicant  to  request  to  appear
before  the Review Board  to offer  relevant evidence and  to make  submissions
on  the  merit  of  the  application.

39  Ibid.,  sec.29(4).
40  Ibid.,  sec.29(5)(a).

22

Penal Protection of Cultural  Property

41  Ibid.,  sec.29(5)(b).
42  Ibid., sec.29(6).
43  Ibid., sec.29(7).
44  Ibid.,  sec.30(l).
45  Ibid.
46  Ibid.,  sec.30(2).  There  is  no  requirement  in  the  Act  that  the  other  party  is

sent  a copy  of  the  notice.

47  Supra  6, sec.30(4).
48  Ibid., sec.3O(3).
49  Ibid.
50  Ibid., sec.3O(5).
51  Ibid.
52  Ibid., sec.16.
53  Williams, S., 'The Protection  of the Canadian  Cultural  Heritage: The Cultu-
ral Property  Export  and  Import  Act', (1976)  The Canadian Yearbook of  Int'l
Law, 292 at  305-306.
54  Supra  6, seal7(1 )(2).
55  Supra 5, at 779. Sec.17(1) restricts such applications to 'a resident of Canada'.
56  Ibid.,  sec. 17(2).
57  Supra  5, at  779-780.
58  Supra  6,  sec.l7(l)(2).
59  Ibid., sec.40.
60  Ibid.,  sec.41.
61  Ibid., sec.42.
62  Ibid.,  sec.45(l)(a).
63  Ibid., sec.45(l)(b). Rafzigher,  J.A.R., supra  1, at 844 states: 'Canada's system
...  is  particularly  interesting  because  it  imposes  the  heaviest  fines  — up  to
$25,000 (Canadian)  —  and is one of the newest and most elaborate  schemes.'
However,  it  must  be  observed  that  the  Act  makes  no  provision  for  the
confiscation,  seizure  or  forfeiture  of  the  object  which  is  the  subject  matter
of  the  offence.  Clearly  a  penalty  which  included  the  possibility  of  the
confiscation, seizure or forfeiture  of the object would act as a strong deterrent
to any  potential  smuggler.

64  Ibid., sec.46.
65  Ibid., sec.47.
66  Ibid.,  sec.45(2).
67  Supra  5, at 785.
68  Supra  6, sec.37(2).
69  Ibid., sec.37(3).
70  Ibid.,  sec.37(l).
71  Ibid.,  sec.37(l)(2).
72  Ibid.,  sec.43.
73  Ibid.,  sec.37(2).
74  Ibid.,  sec.37(l).
75  (1983) 27 Alia.  Law  Reports  (2d)  346 (P.C.J.).
76  The  offence  was  contrary  to  sees.  37  and  39(1)  which  have  since  been

amended  to  sees. 37(2) and 41.

77  Supra  75 at  347-348.
78  Ibid,  at  353-354.
79  This date  marks Canada's  becoming  a  party  to  the  UNESCO  Convention.
80  R.  v Heller el al. (1984)  30 Alta.  Law  Reports (2d) 130.
81  Ibid,  at  138. A  similar  conclusion  was  reached  in  United States  v  McLain,
545 F 2d 933 where  the Court  held at  1003: 'In  order  to say whether  any of

23

Stephen Z. Katz

the  pre-Columbian  movable  artifacts  were "stolen",  it  is necessary  to  know
first  when the artifact  was exported from  Mexico. If the exportation  occurred
after  the effective  date of  the  1972 law, the artifact  may have been  stolen  —
but  only  if  it  were not  legitimately  in  the  seller's  hands  as  a  result  of  prior
law  ...  If  the  exportation  occurred  before  1972, but  after  the effective  date
of  the  1934 law, it would  be necessary  to  show the artifact  was found  on  or
in  an  immovable  archaeological  monument.  If  the  exportation  occurred
before  the  effective  date  of  the  1934 law,  it could  not  have  been  owned  by
the  Mexican  government,  and  illegal exportation  would  not,  therefore,  sub-
ject the receiver of the article to the strictures of the National Stolen  Property
Act.  Because  the jury  was  not  told  that  it  had  to  determine  when  the  pre-
Columbian  artifacts  had  been  exported  from  Mexico  and  to  apply  the
applicable  Mexican law to that  exportation, convictions of all the  appellants
must  be  reversed.'
82  Supra  6, sec.37(3).
83  Ibid.
84  Ibid.,  sec.37(5).
85  Ibid.,  sec.37(6).  The  legal  obligation  in  establishing  a  claim  under  this
subsection  is: that  one is a bonaflde  purchaser  for  value or  had  a  valid  title
to the property; and had  no knowledge at the material  time that  the property
had  been illegally exported  from  the reciprocating State; rests upon the party
seeking the order  of compensation  and the standard  of proof is on a balance
of  probabilities.

86  [1982]  1 Q.B.  349  rev'd  [1982]  3 W.L.R.  570 (C.A.)  appeal  dismissed  [1984]

A.C.  1 (H.L.).

24


