International Journal of Cultural Property (2013) 20:233–256. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2013 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739113000118

The Coherence of the Concept of
Cultural Property: A Critical Examination
Betina Kuzmarov*

Abstract: This article asks a simple question: Is cultural property a coherent
concept? It answers this question through a critical examination of the
concepts of cultural and property that builds on the work of Alan Audi. The
article examines concepts of property and culture as they have developed
separately in political theory. It suggests that arguments about cultural
property are shaped by the discursive structure of the public/private divide. On
this basis, the structure of cultural property arguments are critically examined.
Then conclusions are drawn about the role of the public/private divide in
structuring the tension between culture and property. It is concluded that this
tension that defines the concept of cultural property.

INTRODUCTION

Newspaper articles published in the New York Times from 1933 to 1939 illustrate
the role that cultural policy played in the Nazi program of identification of Jewish
citizens and noncitizens, ostracism of those deemed to be of Jewish descent within
German society, and confiscation of Jewish property; strategies that ultimately pro-
duced the conditions for the annihilation of German and European Jewry.1 In
May 1933, the New York Times reported that Goebbels, the Minister of Popular
Enlightenment and Propaganda, called a meeting of managers, actors and art di-
rectors of German theaters. At this meeting, he reportedly asserted that artists do

*Department of Law and Legal Studies, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Email:
betina_bpkuzmarov@carleton.ca.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: This paper developed out of an original presentation at the ILSA Con-
ference, December 19–20, 2010 in Herzliya, Israel. The author wishes to thank the participants in
this conference, Zoran Oklopcic, the anonymous reviewers, and Alex Bauer for their feedback and
support.

233

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

234

BETINA KUZMAROV

not have the luxury of being “apolitical” because artists are leaders in society.2 As
a result, he also suggested that as the “national mentality” is fixed in the mind of
the populace, they would gradually and voluntarily remove Jewish artists from
German cultural life. This was because to Goebbels, art was not “international,”
but a manifestation of the “German popular mentality.”3 Although, as the author
of this article noted, the legislation to secure this removal was in fact already in
place.4 Public law was a way of ensuring that even privately artists could not sup-
port their Jewish colleagues.

Thus, the legal and political ostracism of Jewish artists5 and the limitation of
Jewish cultural participation were promoted as a key part of Nazi policy. As the
New York Times reported that, architecture was the “pet hobby” of Hitler and he
took a great interest in the arts.6 As a result, as early as 1935, Tolischus was able to
report from Berlin that “[h]aving ostracized the Jews legally, socially and profes-
sionally, the National Socialist regime is undertaking the final step in its solution
of the Jewish question—namely the economic “liquidation” of the Jews.”7 And by
December 1935, the result of this policy was clear, as Tolischus reported that even
without a formal law, “cultural organizations” were requiring that Jewish cinema
owners and art dealers “aryanize” their property.8 Aryanization rapidly became an
excuse to take Jewish property.9

Soon this period of voluntary aryanization of Jewish property (including cul-
tural property) was followed with outright confiscation by the authorities.10 More-
over, the policy of confiscation was extended to require registration of all Jewish
private property.11 One example of the effect that this requirement had on cul-
tural property was reported in Munich in 1938. The New York Times noted that,
on the basis of a decree of April 1938 requiring Jewish citizens to declare all an-
tiquities and art, “[e]xperts from the Reich Chamber of Culture, accompanied by
members of the Secret Police, today made its tour of homes of formerly wealthy
Jews and removed works of art. They were taken in trucks to the National Mu-
seum here.”12 As a result, by July 1939, the conditions were such that it was pos-
sible for Propaganda Minister Goebbels to address the Congress of German Art
and outline a program for Nazi art (based on extensive funding for the arts), which
reflected the “common experience of the people.”13 This was possible, he argued,
because the “Jewish art salon snare” had been broken, thus reversing the “degra-
dation” of German art by Jews.14 As he stated, “art is the function of the national
life, and to place it in proper relation to the national life is not only a cultural but
eminently a political task.”15 This was achieved by ensuring that all artists were
members of the “organization of German artists.”16 Thus, the removal of Jewish
citizens from German culture, by first ostracizing them and then depriving them
of property, produced the conditions that enabled their annihilation.

This historical example highlights the ways in which the private protection of
property in Nazi Germany was denied to those of Jewish descent in order to pre-
vent public participation in culture. It is this tension between the public and the
private in cultural property law that this article will investigate. Primarily this ar-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

235

ticle argues that cultural property laws are structured by the push and pull be-
tween the private nature of property and the public nature of culture, and that it
is the political sphere that mediates this tension. Moreover, this article argues that
the tension between the public and the private spheres arises out of the fact that
within leading political theories culture is the purview of the state, while property
is the purview of everything else—nonstate actors, such as corporations, individ-
uals, and civil society.17 This divide between public and private exists because there
must be public protection of private property (in order to ensure property rights
are respected) and, simultaneously, there must be public recognition of property
as part of an individual’s ability to participate in culture.

To provide theoretical support for the relationship between the public and pri-
vate in the structure of cultural property disputes, this article will explore the
groundbreaking work of Alan Audi. Audi argues that “. . . discussion surrounding
the protection or restitution of cultural property has come to rely on a dizzying
array of self-referential and self-justifying series of legal theories and counter theo-
ries.”18 On this basis, Audi’s work reveals the semiotic19 structure of cultural prop-
erty arguments.20 And this article builds on Audi’s work by arguing that this
semiotic structure is in fact a manifestation of the public/private divide.21

Audi suggests that arguments about cultural property are structured by “argu-
ment bites.” Argument bites are opposed arguments that are often found together
in pairs. These pairs emerge because raising one side of the argument bite often
provokes someone competent in these arguments to respond with the argument’s
counterpoint, the other half of the argument bite.22 These patterns emerge in re-
sponse to hard cases that fall outside the easily analyzed legal problem.23 Audi
outlines several categories of argument bites that shape arguments of cultural prop-
erty. These are competence arguments, moral arguments, rights arguments, ad-
ministrability arguments, and historical arguments.24 Later in this article, these
categories of argument bites will be reexamined in order to uncover the public/
private (culture-property) divide in each argument. Audi ends his analysis by sug-
gesting that “there is still much work to be done.”25 This article takes up Audi’s
challenge by examining one consequence of the semiotic structure he uncovers;
that it is shaped by the tension produced by the public/private divide. Moreover
this article will illustrate that this tension is not merely structural, it is a product
of the theoretical assumptions on which dominant approaches to cultural prop-
erty law are based.

In undertaking this critical examination of the structure of arguments about
cultural property, this article will take direction from Kennedy’s discussion about
“how to get started” in critical theory. Kennedy argues that first you should “[i]den-
tify a distinction that drives you crazy . . . ,”26 then you should “find in each half of
the distinction the things, traits, aspects, qualities, characteristics or whatever that
were supposed to be located in the other half and vice versa. This is classically
called chiasmus . . . ,” from there you can “put the question of whether the dis-
tinction you just destabilized corresponds to a real division in reality on hold,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

236

BETINA KUZMAROV

suspend it, or put it in parentheses or brackets (Husserl calls this the epoch)—
turn your eyes away from it and instead try to figure out why the people who use
the distinction work so hard to maintain belief in it. . .”27 Last, “trace the conse-
quences of this distinction . . .” through use of one of the schools of critique.28
These steps will be revisited at points throughout this article to bolster the asser-
tion that arguments about cultural property are shaped by the public/private di-
vide. For example, following Kennedy’s advice, this article will begin with an
examination of the nature of the public/private divide itself. It will then bracket
this finding to unpack the use of this distinction in cultural property arguments
through Audi’s (and Kennedy’s) semiotic structure of cultural property. From this
critical examination, this article will propose that the public/private divide pro-
vides a structure in which we can understand arguments about cultural property.
While there are many definitions of culture and property, this article chooses
not to try to define such disputed concepts as this is unlikely to yield any fruitful
conclusions, only a stalemate. Instead this article will focus on the structure of
argumentation that shapes these disputes about cultural property examining po-
litical theory related to the separate, but linked, concepts of property and culture.
In doing so this article addresses three issues of relevance: First, it addresses the
key role that concepts of property play in political organization; second, it ex-
plains how these concepts of property are directly linked to our understanding of
culture; and third, it examines the effect that these links have on our understand-
ing of cultural property disputes.

Moreover, it is necessary to clarify both the scope of this article and the method
it will use. Primarily this requires a statement of what this article will not do: It
will not undertake a comprehensive examination of forms of argument in cul-
tural property disputes—in this it will build on the interesting work of Alan Audi.
It will also not contain a comprehensive genealogy of the concept of property or
the concept of culture. It is not an intellectual history of these ideas. Instead, what
this article will do is argue that debates about cultural property are generally framed
within the public/private divide, an argument that has not yet been fully devel-
oped in work on cultural property. As a result the scope of the analysis in this
article is limited to those scholars who are instrumental in highlighting or uncov-
ering the structure of cultural property arguments.

THE PUBLIC/PRIVATE DIVIDE

As Horwitz notes, the public/private divide (or distinction as he calls it) “. . . arose
out of a double movement in modern political and legal thought.”29 This distinc-
tion, a product of the dominant Northern–Western framework of law, is, as he
observes, intimately tied to the concept of sovereignty and the modern idea of the
nation-state as the creation of a truly “public sphere.”30 However, this leads to
claims of unfettered state power, which ultimately provokes a reaction among nat-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

237

ural rights theorists to establish a private sphere that could protect individuals
from these claims of power by the state.31 It is from this basis that the divide be-
tween the public and the private is instituted in law.32 Further, Barnett notes that
this divide used in four different senses: (1) as a distinction between “substantive
standards of regulation” (Was the harm to society or an individual?);33 (2) as a
distinction between subjects of causes of action (Is it the government or an indi-
vidual who brings the claim?);34 (3) as a distinction between the “subjects of legal
regulation”35 (Is the regulation designed to limit the actions of governments or
individuals?);36 and (4) Distinction in the “institutional framework” for enforcing
legal regulation (i.e., should the state or private individuals guide the institutions
that enforce the law?).37 Thus, the public/private divide has multiple, and often
overlapping meanings. The words private and public are used in any or all of these
ways, sometimes simultaneously.38 This divide, in all of its senses, influences the
ideas of culture and property expanded upon on this article.
As a result, the public/private divide will be understood here in its broadest
sense to refer to actions tied to the nation-state or not.39 So, it makes sense to
understand the divide as Horwitz does; as a theoretical construct that historically

. . . could approximate the actual arrangement of legal and political in-
stitutions only in a society and economy with relatively small decentral-
ized nongovernmental units. Private power began to become increasingly
indistinguishable from public power precisely at the moment late in the
nineteenth century, when large-scale corporate concentration became the
norm. The attack on the public/private distinction was the result of a
widespread perception that so-called private institutions were acquiring
coercive power that had been formerly reserved to governments.40

As Horwitz also notes, in the United States, this divide reaches its apex in the late
nineteenth century and early twentieth century attempts to scientifically and rig-
idly separate law from politics by enforcing the separation between the public and
the private.41 The reaction to the rigidity this created was harsh. By the 1930s, the
legal realists dismiss the public/private divide as purely ideological and based on
political premises. While this progressive approach retreats after World War II as a
reaction to totalitarianism,42 by the 1980s, it was once again common in the lit-
erature to argue that this divide was in “decline.”43
But if the public/private divide is in decline, how can one explain its tenacious na-
ture and its continued use in the literature? It is worth noting that most authors in
the dominant tradition, however critical they are of the existence of the public/
private divide in practice, have accepted the premise that the divide exists—
rationalizing its existence either as a theoretical construct or as a by-product of
political philosophy. As Lacey notes,“The difficulty lies in the fact that once one en-
gages in a critique of the division, one gets sucked into the very categorization one
is attempting to undermine.”44 Horwitz, too, implicitly notes the continued impor-
tance of the divide in the history he sets out. And Kennedy explicitly acknowledges
the salience of the public/private divide to legal theory when he writes, “[t]he his-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

238

BETINA KUZMAROV

tory of legal thought since the turn of the century is the history of the decline of a
particular set of distinctions—those that taken together, constitute the liberal way
of thinking about the social world.”45 Regarding the public/private divide, this means
that at a minimum, scholars would agree that this distinction forms a framework in
which law takes shape within the tradition of the Global North–West.
Therefore, it is the position of this article that the public/private divide continues
to have relevance as a core dichotomy in legal thought in the Western tradition. It
will be asserted that this salience persists even if, or especially when, it is difficult to
apply in practice. This is because it is at these junctures that invocation of the divide
is most obviously incongruous. This inconsistency leads to uncomfortable ques-
tions as to why the divide is being used in the first place. The point here is, as Lacey
suggests, to see how this divide operates “ideologically.”46 And ultimately to argue
that it is deployed strategically for political aims. To build on this point, it is nec-
essary to undertake the second of Kennedy’s recommendations, to examine this di-
vide in application in political theory as this will help explain the meaning of the
divide and its connection to cultural property. Later, Kennedy’s third and fourth rec-
ommendations will be returned to in the concluding section of this article.

THE CONCEPT OF PROPERTY IN POLITICAL THEORY

As was demonstrated earlier, the public/private divide is still considered a salient as-
pect of the framework of law within the dominant legal structure in the Global
North–West. From this perspective two things become clear: First, one must un-
derstand how this framework manifests itself in the structure of arguments about
cultural property. This requires in depth examination of the two components of cul-
tural property; concepts of culture and concepts of property. Second, to under-
stand how culture and property have been interpreted in cultural property one must
understand the meaning of these concepts as they have developed (and been crit-
icized) in political theory. From there one can meaningfully assess the way these con-
cepts fall into the semiotic discourse of the public/private divide. Consequently, the
logical starting point for this examination is to begin with an exploration of the theo-
ries of property which have shaped the concept of property in the Global North. Fol-
lowing on this discussion the concept of culture will then be examined.

Classically, liberal theory conflates the concept of individual liberty with the

ability of the individual to own property. As John Locke put it,

Man being born, and has been proved, with equal title to perfect free-
dom and an uncontrolled enjoyment of all rights and privileges of the
law of Nature, equally with any other man, or number of men in the
world, hath by nature a power not only to preserve his property—that is
his life, liberty and estate, against the injuries and attempts by other men,
but to judge and punish breaches of that law in others, as he persuaded
the offence deserves, even with death itself in crimes where the heinous-
ness of the fact, in his opinion requires it.47

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

239

Therefore, Locke considers the right to property as coextensive with people’s nat-
ural rights and a just social order. Moreover, this quotation is taken from a section
“of political or civil society,” which implies that Locke is locating property at the root
of natural law48 and on this basis, asserting that property is the root of the political
order of society. Consequently, in one rhetorical move, Locke makes the right to pri-
vate property the ultimate guarantor of political order. This linking of private prop-
erty and public order is important for understanding later theories of property and
makes Locke’s work worth examining in some further detail.

According to Locke, the idea that public order rests on a foundation of private
property is itself tied to notions of individual liberty. Underkuffler notes that for
Locke (and the English Whigs more generally) property is given a broad defini-
tion. To Locke, property includes more than things, it is a natural right of persons
that is present in nature; for Locke property includes a persons’ “lives, liberties
and estates”—property includes the human person, his or her dignity and physi-
cal property.49 Underkuffler explains that this broad notion of property produces
a “moral space” in which the individual can operate,50 ideally as a space for self-
actualization. In sum: Locke defines property broadly to create a private space for
self-actualization of the individual person. Moreover, to Locke property is an a
priori qualification for full political participation. As a result, for Locke, private
property is a requirement to enter the public.

Consequently, Locke’s notion of property is “Janus faced.” According to Locke,
property is simultaneously the guarantor of private liberty and the ticket to enter
the public sphere—and it is this dual nature of property that has endured con-
ceptually. This duality implies that there is a link between the role of the state in
protection of the right to property and an individual’s ability to self-actualize. Prop-
erty does this by creating a private sphere in which the individual is free from
interference. Conversely, this space creates an opposing public space into which
individuals enter when they need to enforce their rights or protect or procure prop-
erty. Therefore, the relationship between the public and private sphere that Locke
identifies creates a conceptual divide that all theories of property, and thus cul-
tural property, must address.

Historically, key theorists adopt Locke’s Janus-faced view of property. However,
where agreement tends to break down among these theorists is over the nature of
the relationship between private property and public participation. One impor-
tant theorist who disagrees with Locke on this point is Immanuel Kant. Like Locke
before him,51 Kant believes that the state is designed to ensure each person’s free-
dom is respected. Further, like Locke, Kant derives the legitimacy of the state from
a social contract. As a matter of fact, Ellis calls Kant’s point of view “revisionist
contractarianism.”52 However, it is here that the similarities between Locke and
Kant end.

Kant’s ideal state is a “just community” in which individuals “deal with each
other at arm’s length.”53 This vision of the state has been called a minimal liberal
state54 because in a departure from Locke, Kant sees the state at as a legal entity

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

240

BETINA KUZMAROV

arrived at by social contract to minimally secure an individual’s rational inter-
ests.55 Thus, Kant wants to limit individual freedom in the name of the interests
of the community in so far an individual’s rational interests interfere with the
rights of others.56Consequently, to Kant, the state’s right to act derives from an
individual’s natural right to autonomy, but this autonomy can be limited in the
name of the rational interest of the creation of a civil society.57

From this natural right to autonomy, Kant derives all other rights. He does so
in a manner that has been called formalistic.58This formalism is evident when Kant
identifies property rights as rights in which we “presuppose a natural right” but
that this “does not mean that we were originally or by nature entitled to proper-
ty.”59 For Kant, property rights are not natural rights in the sense meant by Locke;
they are a right that is a natural consequence of a civil society. It does not predate
civil society but is a consequence of people joining together in a state.60As Kant
explains:

For although each individual’s concepts of right may imply that an ex-
ternal object can be acquired by occupation or by contract, this acqui-
sition is only provisional until it has been sanctioned by a public law,
since it is not determined by any public (distributive) form of justice
and is not guaranteed by any institution empowered to exercise this
right.61

As such, Kant’s approach to property is that prior to the creation of the state prop-
erty rights are “provisionally” guaranteed because “people will need to appropri-
ate objects in order to survive” and so this right to possess things must be protected
as part of the social contract in exchange for other social goods such as political
stability.62 Or as Kant puts “[i]f no one were willing to recognize any acquisition
as rightful, not even provisionally so, before a civil state had been established, the
civil state would itself be impossible.”63 But to Kant, the main difference is that in
civil society the laws of property ensure that property is protected by principles of
distributive justice.64Thus, for Kant, unlike for Locke, property rights exist prior
to the state but are only fully protected once a civil society is created.65

From this basis Kant concludes that property rights are not to be held in com-
mon and that any form of property right other than private possession is contrary
to the political order.66 A necessary precursor to this, however, is that a “sover-
eign” actor—the legislator or “ruler of the people”67—become (at least in theory)
the supreme owner of the land, as this allows for property to be “distributed” as
opposed to “aggregated.”68 By this, Kant means that the sovereign must theoreti-
cally “possess everything” because it is only if sovereigns hold this ability that they
can then truly have the power to distribute the land to individuals.69 As a result,
this means that no group in society (class, etc.) can hold land indefinitely because
the sovereign can always withdraw this right with just compensation.70 However,
as Ryan notes, “. . . . the paradox in all this, if there is one, lies in Kant’s emphasis
on the external, public sphere and yet, to push most of what we value in like into
essentially private concerns.”71 Thus, Kant, unlike Locke, believes that property

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

241

rights do not predate but derive from the existence of the state. In sum, Kant, like
Locke, sees property as a private right (based on the categorical imperative). How-
ever, Kant, even more powerfully than Locke, sees the basis for private property in
the public sphere and the power of the sovereign.

This examination of Locke and Kant’s theories of property leads to several con-
clusions of relevance at this point: Key theorists of property identify property as a
private right. Key theorists also agree that private property is intimately related to
participation in the public sphere. Therefore it can be concluded that that there is
a clear relationship between the public and the private spheres within the concept
of property. Where agreement breaks down, however, is over the best way to bal-
ance the Janus-faced nature of private property. It is this tension between the pub-
lic and the private within concepts of property that theorists continue to struggle
with.

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PUBLIC

AND THE PRIVATE SPHERES

A more recent example of a political thinker within the Northern–Western tradi-
tion who has wrestled with the relationship between the public sphere and private
property is Hannah Arendt. Arendt, like Locke and Kant, categorizes property as a
private right. For example, Penner describes Arendt’s approach to property as “a
realm in which the individual engages in the use of tangible things to provide the
necessaries of life. . .”72 but, in a departure from Kant, it also contains the “mys-
terious side of a person’s existence.”73 Consequently, for Arendt, property is nec-
essary because it creates a space from which an individual can participate in the
public sphere.74 Therefore, unlike the Locke or Kant, Arendt sees property from
the perspective of its relationship to public participation, and as a result she is an
important thinker on the public/private divide and its relationship to the political.
Arendt argues that under the conditions of modernity the institution of prop-
erty has been eroded and been replaced with wealth. Unlike property, wealth is
just economic power, and while property requires wealth, wealth does not require
property.75 Arendt’s complaint is that the modern focus on wealth has led to the
decline of the institution of property and therefore of the private sphere.76And the
decline of the institution of property troubles Arendt because her project is to try
to reclaim a space for the public sphere in the wake of totalitarianism.

One of the issues Arendt has with totalitarianism is that it subverts the polit-
ical space, which she describes as the space in which the public and private spheres
meet. In an early essay, Arendt equates the ability to access rights (civil rights
particularly) with citizenship. Thus, she recognizes that the “rights of man” were
intimately identified with the “rights of peoples in the European nation-state sys-
tem.”77 This identification of rights with the state is problematic as it creates
individuals whose rights are not necessarily recognized by their government, the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

242

BETINA KUZMAROV

stateless.78 To Arendt, the problem of statelessness highlights a weakness in rights
theory more generally—that rights depend on recognition by the state. This equa-
tion is fatal for her because, as she puts it, “[t]he calamity of the rightless is not
that they are deprived of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness or equality
before the law and freedom of opinion—formulas that were designed to resolve
problems within their communities—but that they no longer belong to any com-
munity whatsoever.”79 This problem was clearly illustrated in the example of Nazi
restrictions on Jewish cultural property that opened this article.

These ideas are expanded on in Arendt’s discussion of totalitarianism. She notes
in her discussion of the “total domination” necessary for totalitarianism that it is
an advance on previous horrors not because “everything is permitted” under to-
talitarianism, an idea she notes that was present in utilitarian versions of liberal
political theory, but that under totalitarianism—and this “normal people” reject—
“everything is possible.”80 Norris argues Arendt believes “totalitarianism’s ideo-
logical thinking and the breakdown of the structures that allow for political action
in concert cripple common sense.”81 Consequently, Arendt begins from the posi-
tion that totalitarianism “destroys” the private—the sphere (as seen in the exam-
ination of Locke and Kant) of which property is a part.82 This is an implicit criticism
of the way that totalitarianism can use the state to ignore or subvert individual
rights. As she notes, “The destruction of a man’s rights, the killing of the juridical
person in him, is a prerequisite for dominating him entirely.”83 Therefore, to Arendt,
totalitarianism obliterates the private sphere leaving no space for the individual.
Obliterating the private sphere, she argues, destroys the individual then cannot
participate in politics—exercise political judgment—so that they are, as a conse-
quence, unable to enter the public sphere.84 On this basis, Arendt views the re-
moval of individual rights and destruction of the “judicial person” as a key step in
“dominating them entirely.”85 For Arendt it is the relationship between judicial
recognition of the person, protection of their property and then the ability to be
fully recognized politically that is central.86 And once the individual is fully dom-
inated, as Arendt notes, everything is possible.

Some of the unresolved issues these observations raise87 form the basis of
Arendt’s general political theory, which is developed in her work The Human
Condition. In this work, Arendt is concerned with the sphere of the active life
(the vita activa)—which, in classical philosophy, was always contrasted with the
preferred category of the life of the mind (the vita contemplativa)—a sphere that
she felt defined an “underappreciated” series of activities that had come to the
fore in modern society.88 To Arendt, the human condition is bounded by the
finality of death, and in between birth and death, people live an active life. An
active life is comprised of labor, work, and action. Each of these “activities” is
carried out in a different “condition” or sphere of life. Labor is carried out in the
“earth”(the “terrestrial” or physical sphere of life); work is carried out in the
“world” (“civilization” and action).”89 Each of these spheres is defined by its re-
lationship to two further principles, which are freedom and distinction. Labor is

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

243

least related to freedom and distinction because it is biologically tied to the basic
physical need to “produce and consume” in order to live; work is closer to free-
dom and distinction because it is tied to the need to produce and consume, but
for utility, not survival. Work produces things, creating unnatural “spaces,” such
as art or politics, which bring us together. Thus, work builds a space in which
individuals can be distinct and create things to last beyond themselves.90 Work,
she defines as free. Last, she holds that action is the “quintessential political ac-
tivity” because it “allows humans to initiate a new course of events.”91 Action is
the epitome of freedom because it uses “diverse human agents” who act, and act
in ways that have meaning (e.g., through speech, an innate human activity).92 It
is through this freedom that humans “reveal their political genius.”93 And for
Arendt, politics is a positive activity in which people coordinate on common
concerns. Thus, it is quintessentially a “public activity.”94

It is in contrast to the space required for public activities that the private emerges.
As Arendt notes, “[i]t is with respect to this multiple significance of the public
realm that the term ‘private’ in its original sense, has meaning. To lead an entirely
private life means above all to be deprived of things essential to a truly human life:
to be seen and heard by others, to be deprived of an ‘objective’ relationship with
them that comes from being related to and separating from them through the
intermediary of a common world of things, to be deprived of the possibility of
achieving something more permanent than life itself. The privation of privacy lies
in the absence of others; as far as they are concerned, private people do not appear
and therefore it is as though they did not exist. Whatever they do remains without
significance or consequence to others.”95 Therefore, the destruction of the public
(which Arendt worries about earlier in the work) would also lead to the destruc-
tion of the private.96 This leads her to conclude that there is a “profound connec-
tion” between the public and the private, which reveals itself most fully in the idea
of property and wealth as outlined earlier. She says that in premodern society,
“[p]rivacy was like the other, the dark and hidden side of the public real, and
while to be political meant to attain the highest possibility of human existence, to
have no private place of one’s own (like a slave) meant to be no longer human.”97
Thus, in a manner similar to Locke,98 she recognizes property as a historical pre-
condition to political participation, as it gives an individual the means (and free-
dom) to enter the political.99

However, Arendt argues that in the modern world these two ideas are divorced,
and that this divorce began with the rise of society. “[T]he rise of housekeeping,
its activities, problems and organizational divides—from the shadowy interior of
the household into the light of the public sphere . . .”—has, Arendt believes, chal-
lenged both the private and the political.100 For Arendt the rise of social, the emer-
gence of activities formerly private, has had the effect of making property public;
a point she makes through discussion of the rise of the term “commonwealth.”101
And she argues, because property has become public, it has been narrowed con-
ceptually to include the person itself, a proposition she traces to Locke (and his

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

244

BETINA KUZMAROV

labor theory of property). Moreover, she believes this narrowing is dangerous. As
she writes: “[t]he greatest threat here is not the ability of private ownership of
wealth but the abolition of property in terms of a tangible worldly place of one’s
own.”102 The removal of a physical space of property leads, in Arendt’s view to the
revelation of things that “should be hidden.”103 Thus, she argues that “[t]he most
elementary meaning of the two realms [the public and the private] indicates that
there are things that need to be hidden and others that need to be displayed pub-
licly if they are to exist at all.”104 To Arendt, this distinction is illustrated in the
private (not negative) nature of goodness, once public, it is no longer the “good.”105
Therefore, to summarize to this point: Arendt divides the human condition into
three activities, labor, work, and action. Politics takes place in the sphere of action—
where people take action in a plurality of individuals—and so the political must
be public. In order for there to be a functioning political sphere, there must be a
corresponding private sphere. Thus like the other theorists examined earlier, Arendt
holds that a clear separation between the public and private is essential to the
political.106

This need to separate the public and private leads Norris to note that for Arendt,
“[p]olitical action consists of public speech and deed in a condition of plurality.
Because it is essentially concerned with public appearance, politics is the realm of
doxa, of opinion.”107 And if there is to be a plurality of people who act in public
(separate from their private selves), who express their opinion to others there must
be a way of deciding between those actions, of judging them as a political ac-
tion.108 Consequently, Arendt bases her discussion of the ability to participate in
politics (and thereby entering the public) on the ability of individuals to judge, a
concept she borrows, from Kant in his Critique of Judgment. In this work Kant
argues that our judgments of beauty are shared publicly,109 as opposed to mere
questions of taste, which are personal. Beauty is a universal standard because it
stems from our ability to “think in place of others,” a process that allows us to go
beyond our mere subjective opinions and create a universal standard.110 Thus, in
a neat rhetorical move, Arendt incorporates Kant’s aesthetic theory of judgment,
which is often linked with culture, into her notion of the political. This is crucial
for her because she moves her notion of culture into the public sphere. Her ques-
tion, as Norris notes is “how to create a model of political judgment that will
allow some judgments to be recognized as superior to others without collapsing
this plurality into identity.”111 Borrowing from Kant she argues that it is this abil-
ity to noncoercively “woo” others to our opinion that allows us to exercise polit-
ical judgment.112 Arendt then uses the idea of political judgment to explain how
private individuals can participate in the political sphere and by extension in the
public sphere.

Conceptually, Arendt’s notion of “political judgment” leads to a need to protect
private property as part of the private sphere within which this wooing can occur.
Thus, Arendt, in this regard, is not so different from Locke and Kant in her iden-
tification of property as private and separate from the public sphere. However,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

245

Arendt tackles head on the problem of how to connect the public and private
spheres, seeing them as mutually constitutive. Moreover, she does so without re-
sorting to Kant’s weak notion of contractarianism, which is open to exploitation
by the state. Instead she turns Kant’s theory on its head—she uses his theory of
aesthetic judgment as an alternate conceptualization of the political. In making
this link between aesthetics and politics (a link which Norris notes hasn’t been
uncritically received),113 Arendt implicitly joins judgments of cultural worth—
beauty and so forth—with political judgments; two issues that would otherwise
seem opposed when looking at the idea of cultural property, since property is com-
monly seen as part of the private sphere, and culture is often thought of as a pub-
lic good. However, Arendt provides a potential link between these two concepts
through the idea of political judgment.

Thus, Arendt, together with Kant and Locke illustrate a pattern in leading po-
litical theories of property in which property is structured by the relationship be-
tween the public and the private. As is evident from this review, the public and
private share a dichotomous relationship in which the preservation of each sphere
is necessary for the existence and functioning of the other. Moreover, Arendt’s use
of Kant’s theories aesthetic judgments adds a third element to this divide—the
political as the link between the private and participation in the public sphere.
And crucially, Arendt provides us with a clear link between ideas of culture and
ideas of property, which makes Arendt’s theories of property particularly impor-
tant in the discussion of culture. These theories will now be examined in more
detail.

THE CONCEPT OF CULTURE IN POLITICAL THEORY

The examination of the concept of culture in political theory picks up where the
discussion of the concept of property left off—with a discussion of the work of
Arendt. This is because, as noted earlier, Arendt’s work on political theory raises a
link between the concept of property and the concept of culture. In fact, unlike
Locke or Kant, Arendt connects the public and the private (and thus property and
culture) through her discussion of the concept of judgment and its role in polit-
ical participation. In this discussion she focuses specifically on the role of culture
in judgment, and thus implicitly links culture, the private and the public. Thus,
Arendt’s theory is a key link between culture and property within Northern–
Western political, and consequently legal thought.

In her essay “The Crisis in Culture: Its Social and Political Significance,”114 Arendt
writes that “culture and politics belong together because it is not knowledge or
truth which is at stake, but rather judgment and decision, the judicious exchange
of opinion about the sphere of public life and the common world and the deci-
sion of what manner of action is to be taken in it. . .”115 The link between the two
concepts is found in “the capacity to judge,” which is “a specifically political abil-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

246

BETINA KUZMAROV

ity. . .the ability things not only from one’s point of view but in the perspective of
all those who happen to be present.”116 Arendt’s political judgment is a specific
type of judgment, which is valid for all those whose points of view the one mak-
ing the judgment considers.117 Additionally, since the judgment is theoretically
based on objective information, this act of judging is public.118 Moreover, because
it is based on putting oneself in the place of others, and then (as noted earlier)
wooing them to a point view, it is a political act, since it allows a judgment (gen-
erally thought of as private) to become public.

Interestingly, Arendt’s act of political judgment is also about producing culture.
For Arendt, culture is a specifically political act—a judgment made as to what is
valid culture by considering the views of all those who the person making the
judgment considers valid.119 Consequently, Arendt stands for the idea that judg-
ments about culture are political. In sum: According to Arendt, cultural judg-
ments are a type of political judgment and therefore cultural judgment acts as a
link between private opinions and public appreciation of culture. Thus, culture is
inherently public because judgments about culture take place in the same way as
political judgments. Moreover, according to Arendt, culture is removed from the
private sphere by its need to be politically judged. Therefore Arendt’s notion of
culture builds on the public/private divide identified in the discussion of property
in the previous section. Previously, it was concluded that for each of the key theo-
rists in the dominant Northern–Western tradition, public participation rested on
a strong private sphere, identified with a concept of property. This section exam-
ined how Arendt extended this discussion of the divide between the public and
the private to include the idea of political judgment and how political judgment
mediates between private ideas of taste and public ideas of culture. Consequently,
one can derive from Locke and Kant the clear idea that property is situated within
the private sphere and from Arendt that culture is located in the public sphere
through the process of political judgment.

CRITICAL ANALYSIS

The preceding section asserted that arguments about cultural property are shaped
by the public/private divide. Moreover, the discussion of the concepts of culture
and property establishes that within the dominant framework, culture is consid-
ered a public concept and property is considered a private concept. This distinc-
tion produces tension because there is a need for public protection of private
property (in order to ensure property rights are respected) and a need for the
public recognition of property as part of one’s ability to participate in culture. As
such, legal arguments about cultural property are defined by the opposition of
culture as public and property as private.

From this point of view, the “argument bites” that Alan Audi identifies are a
natural result of the tension between the private nature of property and the public

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

247

nature of culture. The basis of Audi’s semiotic examination is the observation that
the self-serving, “imperfect,” nature of legal arguments has not been recognized
outside of legal academics, when in fact many of the actors in cultural property
argument (anthropologists, curators, government actors) are engaged in a sub-
stantive argument over “ownership” of cultural property.120 Audi here is hinting at
a bigger problem within cultural property arguments that this article will now
expand upon.

As noted at the outset of this article, Audi outlines several categories of argu-
ment bites that shape arguments of cultural property. To be clear, these are com-
petence arguments, moral arguments, rights arguments, administrability arguments,
and historical arguments.121 However, within each of these categories, he identi-
fies several argument bites that can now be examined in order to uncover the ex-
istence of a tension between the public and the private (culture and property) in
each argument. Before beginning, it is important to note that this analysis is in-
tended to deepen or add to Audi’s prescient analysis, not negate it. Moreover, it
will not be possible to examine each argument in detail (although it is argued that
this could be done), so samples of each category of arguments will serve to make
the point.

For example, in competence arguments, Audi identifies the following argu-
ment: “Source nation patrimony laws should not be enforced in domestic (market
country courts) because they are against public policy versus source nation patri-
mony laws establish ownership and we must honor ownership as defined by the
state in question out of deference, public policy or comity.”122 The first “compe-
tence” argument, that source nation patrimony laws are against public policy, is
the public argument. Culture is inherently public, and private laws of other na-
tions should not interfere with the policy of a state that has determined that this
piece of property is part of its culture. The second argument is essentially the op-
posite. Private property rights are valuable in and of themselves, and rights to prop-
erty of other states should be protected, regardless if the property has public
(cultural) value.

In moral arguments, Audi identifies the argument that “property should be
considered the inalienable (nontransferable) property of states versus cultural prop-
erty is property like any other (feely alienable).”123 This argument is a straight-
forward instance of the public/private divide. The first argument, that property
is the alienable property of the state treats cultural property as inherently public
(as long as one identifies the public solely with the state, which we often do in
practice). The second argument, cultural property is freely alienable, is clearly an
instance of privileging cultural property as private property. Similarly, his argu-
ment that “buyers should not have to check the provenance of objects” is a state-
ment that there is no public interest in the history of objects of cultural property.
A requirement of due diligence would imply that a spurious provenance might
in some way override the private property rights. So naturally, this opposite ar-
gument appears in the second half of the argument bite that “buyers should be

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

248

BETINA KUZMAROV

obligated to exercise due diligence to check provenance of objects.”124 Unsurpris-
ingly, this second argument about due diligence implies a public interest in ob-
jects of cultural property.

Along similar lines, in his “rights arguments,” Audi identifies the following ar-
gument bite: “States have the right to limit export or trade of cultural property
versus people have the right to dispose of cultural property however they wish.”125
Again, at its root, this is an argument that falls into the public/private divide, with
the first argument stressing the public interest in cultural objects, the second ob-
ject stressing its private property nature. On this point, it is not surprising that in
his administrability arguments, he uses the following argument: “Forcing buyers
to verify provenance is unduly burdensome versus We do not want to give buyers
an incentive to turn a blind eye to wrongdoing.”126 In this case, the argument bite
begins by taking the private part of the argument—we do not want to inhibit
private property transactions. Conversely, the implication that private property
transactions should not be supported when they cover up wrongdoing implies a
public interest in objects of cultural property. Finally, Audi examines historical
arguments of cultural property. One example of he gives of these arguments is as
follows: “The state or group claiming title to this property has no historical claim
to the property because so much time has elapsed versus the state or group claim-
ing the title has a historical claim for a fact specific reason.”127 While this argu-
ment initially seems to be an argument of international versus national approaches
to cultural property, it can also be read as an argument for private property rights
to be enforced versus public claims of groups or states to property based on ar-
guments of culture.
While Audi does not raise this specifically, it is clear that sitting in the background
of arguments about cultural property is the public/private (a.k.a. culture/property)
divide. Further, Audi asserts that these argument bites are used “mechanically,”128
but this article will also suggest that this semiotic structure is used instrumentally—as
a rhetorical move by states or actors to advance whichever claim (public or private)
that best matches their interest in a given property. This potential for instrumen-
tality becomes particularly evident when one examines the arguments that Audi ar-
gues “cluster” together. These arguments cluster together through rhetorical moves
that Kennedy calls operations—traditional patterns or ways of making these argu-
ments.129 By raising one argument in the cluster, one automatically calls attention
to the other arguments in the cluster with which one could support or counter the
argument.130 Last, clustering ultimately leads to “nesting “or reproduction of these
stock arguments, which ultimately ends up structuring cultural property arguments
in patterns.131 However, the discussion of leading approaches to culture and
property earlier illustrates that these patterns are not merely structural, they are a
product of the theoretical assumptions on which dominant approaches to cultural
property law are based. In sum, this analysis adds to Audi’s analysis by asserting that
the argument bites he uncovers are an instrumental product of the public/private
divide.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

249

The discussion of property as private and culture as public was specifically de-
veloped in the work of Locke and Kant. This section added to this analysis by
demonstrating that Audi’s argument bites operate through the tension of the public/
private divide. This tension can be diagramed as follows:

Private

Public

Property ___________________________________________________ Culture

But this diagram is not yet complete. As was noted earlier, Arendt argues that the
relationship between the private and the public is mediated through the political
through the act of judgment as it is through judgment that culture moves from
the private sphere into the public sphere. Thus, much as the legal realists asserted
earlier in the last century, it would seem that the political acts as a basis for de-
terminations of cases of cultural property. This is evident in the fact that when
examined in practice, as in the example of Nazi policy on Jewish cultural prop-
erty, that opened this article, the divide is used both ways. As the discussion of
Arendt earlier indicated, the political is the space in which the public and private
meet. Therefore, the political is what acts as the bridge between the concepts of
culture and the concepts of property.

As such, a revised schema for understanding arguments of cultural property is

as follows:

Property

Culture

Politics

Therefore, the relationship between culture and property in the cultural property
argument is theoretically dichotomous, but how the divide is negotiated or which
argument is chosen in a given case is inherently political. It is used instrumentally.
Culture is public, but it depends on the protection of private property and prop-
erty is private but it depends on the public protection of property. Therefore it is
clearly the political that mediates or allows for this relationship between the pub-
lic and the private to develop. Culture and property are opposed concepts, medi-
ated instrumentally through the filter of the political.

CONCLUSION

To return to the opening premise, this article asks a deceptively simple question.
Are arguments about cultural property structured by the public/private divide? In
short, the answer to this question is yes. This divide, which is well entrenched in

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

250

BETINA KUZMAROV

political theories and by extension in legal theory, is found to apply to the concept
of property and the concept of culture. Moreover, this article asserts that these
concepts operate as opposite poles of argumentation, but between these two poles
any argument advanced is based on what is politically expedient, so this divide is
mediated by the political. Finally, this structure then gave further depth to the
understanding of the argument bites that often shape arguments of cultural prop-
erty. In sum, arguments about cultural property are in fact shaped by relationship
between the public sphere and the private sphere, as mediated strategically by
political judgment.
This last point goes some way to answering the question bracketed earlier con-
cerning continued relevance of the public/private divide. The divide is not iron-
clad, in fact, it serves a different purpose—it allows those who are making claims
about cultural property to argue from side of the divide that serves its interest
best. These interests will be mediated instrumentally, that is, politically. This goes
some way to further explaining the apparent difficulty of advancing many cul-
tural property claims through law. Thus, this article begins to fill a gap in the
literature between the debates over the role of the state in protecting cultural prop-
erty. Future research will expand on this final point and will examine the practical
application of this model. Critical legal scholars argue that there are “uncon-
scious” aspects to law,132 so this future work will argue that debates about cultural
property are intimately tied to this legacy of Northern–Western political theory
and the privileged position it grants to ownership (individual or state). This leads
to two final points. The model of cultural property outlined in this article has
more general application within the area of cultural property. Consequently, fu-
ture research will explore how the public/private divide in fact shapes debates about
the national or international nature of culture, by its privileging of the nation-
state as the primary protector of property rights to goods of cultural worth. Other
promising avenues for application of this are to explore the replication of this
divide in transnational cultural property disputes, such as restitution cases. Fi-
nally, feminist critiques of the public/private divide can also be applied under-
standing the complex nature of the divide itself and its continued salience. Future
work will take up all these challenges.

ENDNOTES

1. The process of annihilation of European Jewry in Nazi Germany followed a specific pattern
and development. Hilberg, The Destruction of the European Jews; See also, Rich, “Genocide as a So-
ciopolitical Process,” 402. Most prominently, Hilberg proposes the following schema for the destruc-
tive process: definition, dismissal of employees and confiscation of business firms, concentration,
exploitation of labor and starvation of members, annihilation and confiscation of personal effects.
Hilberg, The Destruction of the European Jews, 267. For purposes of this article, Miller’s simplifica-
tion of Hilberg’s schema will be used. Miller identifies his schema as beginning with identification of
the Jewish population, then ostracism of the Jewish population, then property confiscation, and last
annihilation. Miller, Nazi Justiz, 3. Rickman, Conquest and Redemption, 10.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

251

2. F. T. Birchall, “Propagandist Art is Nazis’ Demand,” The New York Times, 10 May 1933, 10.
3. Birchall, “Propagandist Art is Nazis’ Demand.”
4. Birchall, “Propagandist Art is Nazis’ Demand.”
5. Further, as part of this separation of Jews from German society, the Nazi propaganda ma-
chine became increasingly interested in defining who was Jewish. See Hilberg, The Destruction of the
European Jews, 31.

6. Associated Press, “Hitler Upholds Art, Scores Jews,” The New York Times, 12 September 1935, 9.
7. O. D. Tolischus, “Nazis in New Drive on Jews in Trade,” The New York Times, 8 October 1935,
13. The decree as quoted in Miller, Nazi Justiz, 98; See also, Dean, “Seizure of Jewish Property in
Europe,” 22; Miller, Nazi Justiz, 98; For further discussion see, e.g., Miller, Nazi Justiz, 98–99; See also
Alders, “Organized Looting,” 173.

8. O. D. Tolischus, “Germany Delays New Law on Jews,” The New York Times, 19 December 1935,

22.

9. See, for example Rickman, who notes that “Soon the practice of Aryanization increased evolv-
ing into an institution where outright confiscation became the practice.” Rickman, Conquest and
Redemption 17.

10. By December 1938, there was a comprehensive degree requiring “liquidation or forced sale”
of any business deemed a Jewish “commercial establishment.” Bajohr, “Aryanization and Restitution
in Germany,” 37.

11. In Germany, registration was required by decree of 26 April 1938. Bajohr, “Aryanization and

Restitution in Germany,” 37; Rickman, Conquest and Redemption, 14.

12. “Munich Jews Art Taken,” The New York Times, 18 November 1938, 3; See also Miller, Nazi

Justiz, 98 where this example was first brought to my attention.

13. “Goebbels Sees Art Restored to Folk,” The New York Times, 16 July 1939, 20.
14. “Goebbels Sees Art Restored to Folk.”
15. “Goebbels Sees Art Restored to Folk.”
16. “Goebbels Sees Art Restored to Folk.”
17. As Olsen notes “The distinction between the public and private can of course mean several
different things. The two public/private dichotomies that are most important to feminist analysis of
U.S. law are the State/Civil Society dichotomy and the Family/Market dichotomy.” This first dichot-
omy “distinguishes ‘the State’ from the rest of society.” It is this notion of the public and private that
is referred to throughout this article when the term public/private divide is used. See Olsen, “Inter-
national Law,” 157. See also Lacey, “Theory into Practice.” This divide, it has been argued, is also
central to the legal relations between states (and therefore cultural property claims) in so far as
international law (a) excludes the private (internationally or domestically) from its purview, or (b) uses
the public/private divide strategically to the detriment of the private (and thus, feminists argue,
women). See Engle, “After the Collapse of the Public/Private Distinction,” 143 ff. These critiques
have provoked a response in the literature (see, e.g., Lacey, “Theory into Practice,” 100 ff), but it is
outside the scope of this article to address them all here. These critiques are important in establish-
ing the point that the public/private divide is central to our world view in the modern West and so
are key to understanding the structure of arguments about cultural property as well as its exclusions
and weaknesses.

18. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 131–132. I undertake this analysis in full

awareness of the trenchant comments on Audi’s work in the same journal and Audi’s rejoinder.
19. Semiotics is defined as the “[t]he study of signs or symbols and their use or interpretation.”
Oxford Dictionaries. http://oxforddictionaries.com/view/entry/m_en_gb0754040#m_en_gb0754040
.007 (accessed 9 May 2011).

20. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument, “132.
21. Although many argue that ideas such as the “public” or “private” originate in Roman law, I
will begin from the supposition that there is something fundamentally different about these con-
ceptual oppositions as they have been applied in modern political writings in the Global North or
West as they refer to the “state” and “everything else.” See, for example and contra, Barnett, “Four
Senses of the Public Law,” 270, n. 5. Further, by the terms “Global North or Northern,” I refer to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

252

BETINA KUZMAROV

the fact that global difference is hard to conceptualize and that the theorists discussed here are
not representative of all traditions. This is coupled with the term Western in order to refer to the
fact that these theorists come from a specifically European tradition. See Del Casino, Social Geog-
raphy, 26.

22. See Audi,” Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 133; See generally, Kennedy, “A Semi-

otics of Legal Argument,” 325, 329.

23. Audi,” Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 134.
24. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 134–136.
25. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 150.
26. Kennedy, “The Semiotics of Critique” 1189.
27. Kennedy, “The Semiotics of Critique” 1189.
28. Kennedy, “The Semiotics of Critique” 1189.
29. Horwitz, “History of the Public/Private,” 1423
30. Horwitz, “History of the Public/Private,” 1423.
31. Horwitz, “History of the Public/Private,” 1423.
32. Kennedy would argue that this is part of the “liberal way of thinking about the social world.”
As a result he would also argue that that these distinctions are on the decline. See Kennedy, “Decline
of the Public/Private,” 1349. This article is interested in the existence of the distinction and its effects
and so fits nicely into Kennedy’s discussion of the decline of this distinction.

33. Barnett, “Four Senses of the Public Law,” 268 ff.
34. Barnett, “Four Senses of the Public Law,” 269, ff.
35. Barnett, “Four Senses of the Public Law,” 270 ff.
36. See generally, Barnett, “Four Senses of the Public Law,” 270ff.
37. Barnett, “Four Senses of the Public Law,” 271, ff.
38. Barnett notes that these relationships are “strategic” in so far as once one aspect of the cat-
egory is invoked it often leads to one of the other forms being used as well. This bolsters the argu-
ment for instrumentality made in this article. See for example, Barnett, “Four Senses of the Public
Law,” 272–273.

39. See, for example, Olsen, “International Law,” 157, as discussed above.
40. Horwitz, “History of the Public/Private,” 1428.
41. Horwitz, “History of the Public/Private,” 1425.
42. Horwitz, “History of the Public/Private,” 1427.
43. See Horwitz on Stone. Horwitz, “History of the Public/Private,” 1427; See generally, Kennedy,

“Decline of the Public/Private.”

44. Lacey, “Theory into Practice,” 101.
45. Kennedy, “Decline of the Public/Private,” 1349.
46. Lacey, “Theory into Practice,” 102.
47. Locke, Second Treatise, 38 (s. 87).
48. Locke, Second Treatise, 35 ff.
49. Underkuffler, “On Property,” 138; Ideally Underkuffler wished to recover such a broad defi-

nition of property for U.S. Constitutional jurisprudence.

50. Underkuffler, “On Property,” 138.
51. Ryan, Property and Political Theory, 73–74.
52. Ellis, “Citizenship & Property Rights” 545.
53. Ryan, Property and Political Theory, 76.
54. Ryan, Property and Political Theory, 76.
55. Ryan, Property and Political Theory, 79.
56. Reiss, “Introduction,” 22.
57. Reiss, “Introduction,” 22.
58. Ellis, “Citizenship & Property Rights,” 549.
59. Williams, “Kant’s Concept,” 34.
60. Williams, “Kant’s Concept,” 38.
61. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals, 138.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

253

62. Ryan, Property and Political Theory, 83.
63. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals, 138.
64. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals, 138.
65. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals, 137–138. Kant argues that only the distributive justice of

coercive law can fully ensure these rights, which may or may not be fully protected otherwise.

66. Ryan, Property and Political Theory, 81.
67. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals, 141, 144.
68. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals, 148.
69. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals, 148.
70. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals, 148.
71. Ryan, Property and Political Theory, 75.
72. Penner, Idea of Property in Law, 215.
73. Penner, Idea of Property in Law, 215.
74. Penner, Idea of Property in Law, 216.
75. Penner, Idea of Property in Law, 216.
76. Penner, Idea of Property in Law, 216.
77. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Rights of Man,” 32.
78. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Rights of Man,” 34.
79. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Rights of Man,” 36.
80. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism,” 122.
81. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 174.
82. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 174.
83. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism,” 132.
84. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 174.
85. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism,” 132.
86. The consequences of this denial are eloquently discussed in Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt,

“Origins of Totalitarianism,” 132ff.

87. As Baehr notes, “In the early fifties Arendt had planned to write a coda [to the Origins of
Totalitarianism] on the totalitarian elements of Marxism. . . ,” which eventually became a series of
works that includes Between Past and Future, infra and the Human Condition. He cites to Bernard
Crick who calls these “footnotes” to her earlier work. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Editor’s In-
troduction,” xxvii.

88. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Editor’s Introduction,” xxviii.
89. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Editor’s Introduction,” xxviii.
90. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Editor’s Introduction,” xxviii–xxix.
91. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Editor’s Introduction,” xxix.
92. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Editor’s Introduction,” xxix.
93. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Editor’s Introduction,” xxx.
94. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “Editor’s Introduction,” xxx.
95. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 205.
96. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 207.
97. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 208.
98. Thanks to Zoran Oklopcic for making this connection more explicit.
99. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 208–209.
100. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 191.
101. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 210.
102. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 212.
103. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 213.
104. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 214.
105. Baehr, Portable Hannah Arendt, “The Human Condition,” 214–215.
106. This position has been contentious and has led her to stances that many, including this au-
thor, would criticize. Baehr notes her relationship to feminism, her position on affirmative action,
and her position on desegregation. See, for example, Baehr’s introduction in Portable Hannah Arendt,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

254

BETINA KUZMAROV

xxxiv ff, and “Reflections on Little Rock”, 231. This commitment to the public and private led Arendt
into some morally frought territory as it is precisely the relationship between the public, private and
political that allows for the very ambiguity Arendt herself sought to avoid. It is impossible to her-
metically seal these categories as she would have preferred. Further, some have argued that Arendt’s
distinction was always historically untenable. As Norris notes, “The questionable accuracy of Arendt’s
account of the Greek experience has led some critics to reject her fundamental distinction between
the public and the private.” Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 169; although Norris himself is not convinced of
this argument from historical inaccuracy, it is an important point to note. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,”
169–170. Finally, her commitment to these spheres shows how important they are within the
Northern–Western political tradition.

107. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 170.
108. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 170–174.
109. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 166, 175.
110. See generally, Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 166–167.
111. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 166.
112. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 167.
113. Norris, “Arendt, Kant,” 174.
114. Arendt, Between Past and Future, 197–226, “The Crisis in Culture.”
115. Arendt, Between Past and Future, 223, “The Crisis of Culture.”
116. Arendt, Between Past and Future, 221, “The Crisis of Culture.”
117. Arendt, Between Past and Future, 221, “The Crisis of Culture.”
118. Arendt, Between Past and Future, 220, “The Crisis of Culture.”
119. See generally discussion of Arendt, above.
120. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 131–132.
121. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 134–136.
122. Audi, Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 134.
123. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 134.
124. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 135.
125. Audi,” Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 135.
126. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument” 135.
127. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 136.
128. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 136.
129. Audi, Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 136, See generally Kennedy’s discussion of

operations at Kennedy, “Semiotics of Legal Argument” 329 ff.

130. Audi relying on Kennedy, Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 137.
131. Audi, relying on Kennedy. Audi, “Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument,” 137–138.
132. As Goodrich notes in his study of the link between legal rhetoric and psychoanalysis: “The
analysis of unconscious aspects of legal decision-making is not a new theme either within European
or Anglo-American legal thought.” Goodrich, “Jani Anglorum,” 108.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alders, A. “Organized Looting: The Seizure of Jewish Property in the Netherlands, 1940–1945.” In
Networks of Nazi Persecution: Bureaucracy, Business and the Organization of the Holocaust, edited by
G. Feldman and W Seibel. New York: Berghahn Books/USHMM. 具http://books.google.ca/books
?id⫽MD76MR8nDeoC&printsec⫽frontcover&dq⫽Networks⫹of⫹Nazi⫹Persecution:Bureaucracy,⫹
Business⫹and⫹the⫹Organization⫹of⫹the⫹Holocaust&hl⫽en&ei⫽qKRyTYqfOIadgQfv3em4BQ&sa
⫽X&oi⫽book_result&ct⫽result&resnum⫽1&ved⫽0CCgQ6AEwAA#v⫽onepage&q&f⫽false典 (2005;
accessed 5 March 2011).

Arendt, H. Between Past and Future: Eight Exercises in Political Thought. New York: Viking, 1968.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

THE COHERENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF CULTURAL PROPERTY

255

Audi, A. “The Semiotics of Cultural Property Argument” International Journal of Cultural Property
14 (2007): 131.

Baehr, P., ed. The Portable Hannah Arendt. New York: Penguin, 2000.

Bajohr, F.“Aryanization and Restitution in Germany.”In Robbery and Restitution: The Conflict over Jew-
ishPropertyinEurope,editedbyM.Deanetal.NewYork:BerghahnBooks/USHMM.具http://books.google
.ca/books?id⫽sEVJzfNbuUwC&pg⫽PA204&dq⫽Robbery⫹and⫹Restitution:⫹The⫹conflict⫹over⫹
Jewish⫹Property⫹in⫹Europe⫹(2007,⫹Berghan⫹Books/USHMM),&hl⫽en&ei⫽GKVyTfi6DMX2
gAfb2OXoAQ&sa⫽X&oi⫽book_result&ct⫽result&resnum⫽1&ved⫽0CCgQ6AEwAA#v⫽onepage
&q&f⫽false典 (2007; accessed 5 March 2011).

Barnett, R. E. “Four Senses of the Public Law—Private Law Distinction.” Harvard Journal of Law and
Public Policy 9 (1989): 267.

Dean, M. “Seizure of Jewish Property and Interagency Rivalry in the Reich and Occupied Soviet
Territories.” In Networks of Nazi Persecution: Bureaucracy, Business and the Organization of the Ho-
locaust edited by G. Feldman and W. Seibel. New York: Berghahn Books/USHMM. 具http://books.google
.ca/books?id⫽MD76MR8nDeoC&printsec⫽frontcover&dq⫽Networks⫹of⫹Nazi⫹Persecution:
Bureaucracy,⫹Business⫹and⫹the⫹Organization⫹of⫹the⫹Holocaust&hl⫽en&ei⫽qKRyTYqfOIadg
Qfv3em4BQ&sa⫽X&oi⫽book_result&ct⫽result&resnum⫽1&ved⫽0CCgQ6AEwAA#v⫽onepage&q
&f⫽false典 (2005; accessed 5 March 2011).

———. “The Seizure of Jewish Property in Europe: Comparative Aspects of Nazi Methods and Local
Responses.” In Robbery and Restitution: The Conflict over Jewish Property in Europe, edited by M. Dean
et al. New York: Berghahn Books/USHMM. 具http://books.google.ca/books?id⫽sEVJzfNbuUwC&pg
⫽PA204&dq⫽Robbery⫹and⫹Restitution:⫹The⫹conflict⫹over⫹Jewish⫹Property⫹in⫹Europe⫹
(2007,⫹Berghan⫹Books/USHMM),&hl⫽en&ei⫽GKVyTfi6DMX2gAfb2OXoAQ&sa⫽X&oi⫽book
_result&ct⫽result&resnum⫽1&ved⫽0CCgQ6AEwAA#v⫽onepage&q&f⫽false典 (2007; accessed 5
March 2011).

Ellis, E. “Citizenship & Property Rights: A New Look at Social Contract Theory.” Journal of Politics
68 (2006): 544.
Engle, K. “After the Collapse of the Public/Private Distinction: Strategizing Women’s Rights” Studies
in Transnational Legal Policy 25 (1993): 143.

Del Casino, V. J. Jr., Social Geography. West Sussex, UK: Blackwell, 2009.

Goodrich, P. “Jani Anglorum: Signs, Symptoms, Slips and Interpretation in the Law.” In Politics, Post-
modernity and Critical Legal Studies: The Legality of the Contingent edited by C. Douzinas, P. Goorich,
and Yifat Hachamovitch. New York: Taylor & Francis, 1994.

Hilberg, R. The Destruction of the European Jews, student edition. New York: Holmes and Meir, 1985.
Horwitz, M. J. “The History of the Public/Private Distinction.” University of Pennsylvania Law Re-
view 130 (1982): 1423.

Kant, I. The Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysics of Morals, translated by T. K. Abbott. Min-
neola: Dover, 2005.

———. “The Metaphysics of Morals.” In Kant: Political Writings, edited by H. Reiss. Translated by
N. B. Nisbet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.

Kennedy, D. “A Semiotics of Legal Argument” in Collected Courses of the Academy of European Law,
Volume III, Book 2, edited by the Academy of European Law. The Netherlands: Wolters Kluwer,
1994.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118

256

BETINA KUZMAROV

———. “The Semiotics of Critique.” Cardozo Law Review 22 (2001): 1147.
———. “The Stages of the Decline of the Public/Private Distinction.” University of Pennsylvania
Law Review 130 (1982): 1349.
Lacey, N. “Theory into Practice? Pornography and the Public/Private Dichotomy.” Journal of Law
and Society 20 (1993): 93.

Locke, J. The Second Treatise of Government and a Letter Concerning Toleration. New York: Dover,
2002.
Miller, R. L. Nazis Justiz. Westport/London: Praeger, 1995.

Norris, A. “Arendt, Kant and the Politics of Common Sense.” Polity 29 (1996): 165.
Olsen, F. E. “International Law: Feminist Critiques of the Public/Private Distinction.” Stud Studies in
Transnational Legal Policy 25 (1993): 157.

Penner, J. E. The Idea of Property in Law. Oxford: Clarendon, 1997.

Reiss, H. “Introduction.” In Kant: Political Writings, edited by H. Reiss. Translated by N. B. Nisbet.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.

Rich, H. “Genocide as a Sociopolitical Process.” Canadian Journal of Sociology 12 (1987): 393.

Rickman, G. J. Conquest and Redemption: A History of Jewish Assets from the Holocaust. New
Brunswick: Transaction. http://books.google.ca/books?id⫽r6l1nrzaefEC&printsec⫽frontcover&dq
⫽Conquest⫹and⫹Redemption:⫹A⫹History⫹of⫹Jewish⫹Assets⫹from⫹the⫹Holocaust&source
⫽bl&ots⫽siM4_57Rsf&sig⫽kAeIRPOz6ZFRTkae4K8iMVcSW4U&hl⫽en&ei⫽hqVyTaaXFIjAgQfu2
e3TCg&sa⫽X&oi⫽book_result&ct⫽result&resnum⫽1&ved⫽0CBgQ6AEwAA#v⫽onepage&q&f
⫽false (2007; accessed 5 March 2011).

Ryan, A. Property and Political Theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1984.

Sax, J. L. “Heritage Preservation as a Public Duty: The Abbe Grégoire and the Origin of an Idea.”
Michigan Law Review 88 (1990): 1142.

Williams, H. “Kant’s Concept of Property.” The Philosophical Quarterly 27 no. 106 (1977): 32.

Underkuffler, L. S. “On Property: An Essay.” Yale Law Journal 100 (1990): 127.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:23:10, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739113000118


