    (2015)   22:  111– 130 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2015               

    Fighting against the archaeological looting 
and the illicit trade of antiquities in Spain 
       Ignacio     Rodríguez Temiño   *  

   Antonio     Roma Valdés    †   

    

         Abstract:     During the seventies, archaeological looting, of both land and underwater 
sites, not only was widespread in Spain, but also went unpunished. This situation 
stemmed from a lack of effective administrative and criminal legislation, human 
resources to combat the plague, and educational policies warning of how harmful 
such practices were, in spite of damning reports in the media and the social alarm 
raised in certain professional and political fields. The new political and social phase 
that began with the Constitution of 1978 has enabled the country to overcome this 
situation in three ways: first, by passing new, more appropriate administrative and 
criminal laws to help combat looting and illicit trade; second, through the creation 
of new regional governments (the autonomous communities) able to enforce 
these laws, and which have hired archaeologists specializing in cultural heritage 
management. The fight against the criminal aspect of looting and the illicit trade of 
antiquities has also been intensified by the creation of police and prosecuting bodies 
dedicated to the area of cultural heritage, among others. Last, educational policies 
have been put in place to help increase social awareness of the importance of our 
cultural heritage and the global loss its destruction represents. In this article we 
will present the first two points that have improved the initial situation as regards 
archaeological looting and the illicit trade of looted goods.      

   1.     INTRODUCTION 

 The  European  Convention  on  the  Protection  of  the  Archaeological  Heritage 
(Revised) (Valletta 1992)  1   defines archaeological heritage as the entity composed 

  *  Conjunto Arqueológico de Carmona ,  Junta de Andalucía [Carmona Archaeological Ensemble, 
Regional Government of Andalusia, Spain] . Email:  ignacio.rodriguez.temino@juntadeandalucia.es  
   †   Fiscalía de Santiago de Compostela ,  Ministerio de Justicia [Public Prosecutor’s Office of Santiago 
de Compostela, Ministry of Justice, Spain] . Email:  a.roma-valdes@justicia.es  

111

 112   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

by “[a]ll remains and objects and any other traces of humankind from past times,” 
including structures, constructions, groups of buildings, developed sites, movable 
objects, monuments of other kinds as well as their context, whether situated on 
land or under water (art.1). It is probably not the best definition of archaeological 
heritage, but it is important to highlight that the Valletta Convention deals directly 
with the protection of archaeological heritage threatened by illicit excavation. The 
signatory countries are required to set up procedures for authorizing and supervising 
excavations and other archaeological activities and to avoid illicit excavations and 
any kind of removal of elements from the archaeological sites. 

 This treaty considers archaeological heritage as a finite resource suffering from 
what may be called a “tragedy of commons”: the depletion of a shared resource by 
individuals, acting independently and rationally according to each one's self-interest, 
despite their understanding that their depleting of the common resource is con-
trary to the group’s long-term interest. Of course, there is a loss of archaeological 
heritage resulting directly from the continuous human occupation of a particular 
place  for  thousands  of  years,  and  this  loss  of  archaeological  record  increases  as 
population growth and economic development take a rising toll. But the loss 
of archaeological heritage due to looting is something else entirely. In non-legal 
terms, this kind of looting is defined as the loss of archaeological goods and their 
associated information, caused by art theft and removal of soil for artifacts to supply 
the illicit market in antiquities. This concept of looting always has a sense of a desired 
damage done to a site or other any archaeological entity. This is the meaning of the 
term “looting” as it is used in this paper, although by Spanish administrative legisla-
tion, “looting” has a broader meaning (according to Article 4 of the Ley de Patrimonio 
Histórico Español [Spanish Historical Heritage Act], hereinafter “LPHE,” according 
to its Spanish acronym) relating to any act or omission that prevents or disrupts the 
social function of cultural property.  2   

 It is important to highlight that in this paper we are dealing with the term “loot-
ing” as defined above; we are not referring to other kinds of damage (intentional 
or otherwise) inflicted on archaeological goods. Further, in Italy and neighboring 
countries, significant archaeological sites have been destroyed using heavy equip-
ment, while in Spain, the most common type of looting on land involves the illicit 
use of metal detectors. 

 Underwater  archaeological  devastation  has  improved  in  recent  years  through 
technological development that enables access by remote control to mesopelagic 
depth. This new technology has been used by treasure hunting companies to reach 
shipwrecks of the so-called  Carrera de Indias , a route used by Spanish sailors to reach 
Latin American colonies, and its sunken treasures. To the issue of underwater 
archaeological  devastation,  we  will  apply,  in  this  article,  the  same  principles 
exposed above, and for that reason, attention will be focused on shipwrecks, 
although the range of material entities covered by the definition of “underwater 
cultural  heritage”  held  by  the  Convention  on  the  Protection  of  the  Underwater 
Cultural Heritage, adopted by UNESCO in 2001, covers a wider range of goods. 

FIGHTING AGAINST ARCHAEOLOGICAL LOOTING  

  113 

 Obviously these conventions are only a drop in the ocean of the protection of the 
archaeological heritage, but having said this, there should be an agreement that they 
have a paramount role in the fight against archaeological looting, at least in Spain. 

 In this article, we examine the handling of archaeological looting, including the 
illicit trade of looted goods, in Spain. To do this, we analyze several issues: first, the 
nature and characteristics of archaeological looting, on land and under water, and 
the profiles of those who carry out this kind of action against the archaeological 
heritage and their  modus operandi ; Secondly, the Spanish legal framework will 
be described with a focus on the juridical tools that can be used to combat the 
looting and smuggling of archaeological items. Finally, some information will be 
offered about the enforcement of this legal framework.   

 2.     THE LOOTING OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND THE USE OF 

METAL DETECTORS 

 As previously explained, metal detectors are a key factor in the looting of land 
archaeological sites. They are used to locate not only items close to the surface, but 
also burial structures containing metal grave goods that are later dug up without 
the use of archaeological methodology of any kind. In these cases looters select only 
whole objects that can be added to a collection or sold. 

 These devices used for searching for metal archaeological objects were introduced 
into Spain in the 1960s by American metal-detecting enthusiasts who worked on 
the joint-use Spanish-American military bases in Rota (Cadiz) and Morón de 
la Frontera (Seville). Their use soon extended to erudite local experts who sought 
to develop their individual collections. Somewhat later, they were employed pro-
fessionally in the search for artifacts and the extraction of grave goods destined for 
sale as part of the illicit domestic and foreign trade in antiquities.  3   Archaeologists 
showed little interest in them as instruments for improving archaeological work, 
and  their  use  was  frequently  rejected.  Instead,  they  become  have  the  symbol  of 
the search for coins and other metallic objects, disassociated with archaeological 
methodology and outside the law, even though there are many archaeologists who 
do use them in the course of their field work today.  4   

 At  present,  it  is  certainly  true  that  the  ability  of  metal  detectors  to  locate 
archaeological  remains  is  not  generally  exploited  in  archaeological  research 
projects carried out by academic archaeologists in Spain; rather, it chiefly is used 
to search for coins and other collectors’ items. This represents a transfer of public 
goods into private hands that is unacceptable within the Spanish legal framework. 
However, even if the items recovered in this way, in the absence of any scientific 
archaeological intervention, were handed over to museums or other public institu-
tions, this kind of search reflects a concept of heritage where object takes priority 
over context; beauty or rarity over historical significance; economic value over use; 
private acquisition over public enjoyment. In short, it is a concept of archaeology, 
or more fittingly an  archaeography , which is not far removed from antiquarianism, 

 114   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

thankfully banished from academic and professional archaeology some time ago. 
Moreover, the above process refers to the very best of cases because, in the worst-
case scenario we would be talking about looting, about the merciless and planned 
devastation of the cultural wealth of a country in order to bolster the illicit antiq-
uities market, all for the benefit of a few. 

 Today, metal detection is still the most common form of archaeological looting 
on land. According to studies conducted by specialized units of the Guardia Civil 
(Spanish Civil Guard), and based on the number of cases reported, the unautho-
rized use of metal detectors is involved in more than 75 percent of all police inter-
ventions relating to the protection of archaeological heritage.  5   

 This figure is supported by other independent analyses performed by the Instituto 
Andaluz de Patrimonio Histórico (the Heritage Institute of Andalusia) on the 
preservation of archaeological heritage in Andalusia, as part of the project Modelo 
Andaluz  de  Predicción  Arqueológica  (Andalusian  Model  for  Archaeological 
Prediction,  or  MAPA  from  its  Spanish  name).  The  rate  of  surface  looting, 
which  is  normally  associated  with  the  use  of  metal  detectors,  is  16.2  percent 
for all the known archaeological sites in Andalusia, exceeded only by the effects 
of  surface  ploughing  (38.1%).  6    Looting  involving  major  earthworks  barely 
reaches 2.4 percent, although we should hardly dismiss this, as it represents an 
open flouting of current law. 

 Several studies have been performed in Spain on the profile of metal-detector 
users in an effort to establish their  modus operandi .  7   With some slight variations 
(in line with surrounding countries), we can generally divide them into two main 
groups: amateurs and professionals. 

 The first of these groups uses these devices primarily to search for metal objects 
in the upper strata of the ground and usually have their own collections, although 
they  would  not  rule  out  occasionally  selling  a  find  if  it  were  valuable.  They 
are aware that their activity is illicit, but they easily justify it by arguing that these 
are lost objects without an owner. In the 1980s, when the phenomenon of looting 
began, there were many local-history experts among these enthusiasts. Today, the 
percentage of local-history experts has waned considerably. They generally belong 
to  metal-detecting  clubs  and  are  enormously  suspicious  of  professional  archae-
ologists, to a lesser extent if the archaeologist belongs to a university, but to a far 
greater extent if they are employed by the cultural administrative authorities. They 
make sporadic trips into the field and, today, in some regions of Spain, such as 
Andalusia, where they are under greater pressure from the authorities, they tend 
to use their devices more frequently in areas of low archaeological interest, such as 
beaches. This group is far from cohesive and is divided between those who prefer 
to continue to look for archaeological objects and try to avoid being caught by the 
Guardia Civil, and a minority that seeks an alternative to their hobby, becoming 
involved in archaeological research projects, especially those studying battle fields 
or  mass  graves  of  persons  shot  during  the  civil  war,  where  their  activities  are 
protected under the historical memory project remit.  8   

FIGHTING AGAINST ARCHAEOLOGICAL LOOTING  

  115 

 The second group comprises professional looters. They make regular trips into 
the field that they plan carefully, choosing where exactly to go to and gathering 
information about the place. The chosen sites may be hundreds of kilometers from 
their homes. They use mid- to top-of-the-line metal detectors, occasionally modi-
fied to achieve greater detection depth. As their priority is not coins or other metal 
objects churned up in the surface strata, but rather structures, especially burial sites 
where they may find grave goods, they also use pulse-induction metal detectors 
and  double-coil  metal  detectors.  Once  they  have  detected  a  possible  tomb,  they 
drive a metal pole into the ground to determine its depth and area, then return at 
night to raise, if possible, not only the detected tomb, but the contents of the whole 
burial site. 

 Professional looters may work in small groups of three or four people, though 
they generally work alone, like the person arrested as part of Operation Helmet, 
who pillaged the site of the Celtiberian city  Aratikos  (Zaragoza) for 15 years and 
was responsible for the export and illicit sale of a collection of Celtiberian helmets 
that  the  Spanish  government  is  trying  to  prevent  being  auctioned  by  Hermann 
Historica and Christie’s.  9   Those who act alone use online auction portals such as 
eBay to contact possible buyers. Nevertheless, flexible networks are also common, 
where members communicate via the Internet and mobile phone. The aim of these 
organizations is to bring together different specialists: on the one hand, the looters 
themselves, and on the other, intermediaries and traders. Occasionally, organized 
groups appear that add looting and the illicit trade of antiquities to other crim-
inal activities, using the purchase of archaeological objects as a way of laundering 
money.   

 3.     UNDERWATER LOOTING 

 Although archaeological maps of the Spanish coast are providing us with the first 
inventories of underwater sites, we are still largely unaware of the scale of under-
water looting. All looting is done clandestinely, but the location of underwater 
archaeological heritage sites (in places hidden from sight and difficult to monitor) 
makes the damage inflicted especially subtle. It generally passes unnoticed, making 
it difficult to detect and assess the effects of it.  10   Nevertheless, according to esti-
mates of the number of shipwrecks affected by occasional or systematic underwa-
ter looting, eight out of ten shipwrecks have been looted on the Spanish coast.  11   

 The  first  type  comprises  increasing  numbers  of  seaside  tourists  and  leisure 
divers, who threaten any shipwrecks or loose archaeological materials from sunken 
ships that are close to the coast. Among looters of this type, the looting is not pre-
meditated, but when someone happens upon an item, or a collection of items, by 
chance, the person does not hesitate to take a souvenir in the belief that because it 
is in the sea, it belongs to the finder.  12   

 The second type refers to those who dive alone or in small groups in places where 
they know there are wrecks or have heard they may find one. They are searching 

 116   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

for the cargo the ship was carrying and are usually aware of its historical value. 
They are often collectors and, on occasion, sellers or intermediaries in a pur-
chase agreement. As opposed to the previous type of looter, this type generally uses 
special underwater metal detectors. 

 Chance finders (who keep items) and systematic looters do not generally cause 
major destruction with a single dive. However, over a long period of time, the 
destruction  accumulates  and  becomes  devastating,  and  these  looters  become 
responsible for the complete obliteration of wrecks and collections of archaeolog-
ical materials located close to the coast. 

 Yet these coastal wrecks are not the only ones to suffer the consequences of 
looting, as underwater depths no longer ensure the safety of shipwreck remains. 
Deep-sea wrecks that avoided natural destruction and remained untouched by 
human avarice until a few decades ago are now within reach of a third type of 
underwater  looter:  treasure  hunters.  As  a  result,  Spanish  and  Caribbean  waters 
now share the honour of being considered a kind of underwater Potosí (i.e., treasure 
trove) in need of an owner. 

 In the beginning, treasure hunters were no different from the amateurs diving 
for pleasure, but stories told of early discoveries of wrecks fed a legend that drew 
many adventurers to underwater looting. The birthplace of the phenomenon was 
the Caribbean and the coasts of Virginia and Florida, but between the 1960s and 
the 1980s, shipwreck looting spread to all the seas on the planet. From the 1990s, 
onward,  technological  advances  made  ever-more-daring  ventures  possible,  for 
which the system for obtaining funding had to change, with some organizations 
even opting for stock-market participation.  13   

 One characteristic common to all treasure hunters is the scant regard they show for 
the scientific protocols of archaeology, in spite of the fact that they often boast of having 
many more resources than archaeologists and that, as noted by T. Villegas Zamora, 
they present themselves as the only option for exploring one wreck or another.  14   

 F. Castro has also analyzed the profiles of people described as treasure hunters 
and reached the conclusion that, with certain exceptions, this category includes 
very different types of people (and associated companies) with different  modus 
operandi .  15   

 The first type comprises highly efficient professionals, who carry out their work 
with  extreme  discretion  and  are  heard  about  only  when  the  looted  items  have 
reached the auction houses. They leave no traces behind them, destroying all evi-
dence of the original remains from which the items sent to auction were extracted. 
 The second type is the largest and most visible. It is composed of small com-
panies with their own small boats. Their radius of activity is limited, and they gen-
erally loot well-known wrecks, where looting is commonplace, on weekends. The 
objects they bring up do not typically cover the expenses incurred. 

 The third type is no better prepared, scientifically, than the second, but it does 
give  the  appearance  of  being  concerned  with  the  field  of  science.  It  comprises 
those companies that have been floated on the stock market, receive much media 

FIGHTING AGAINST ARCHAEOLOGICAL LOOTING  

  117 

attention, and are viewed favorably by an insufficiently informed public. Without 
a doubt, this type poses the greatest threat to underwater archaeological heritage. 
Unlike the first type, this group openly flaunts its activity and generally tries to give 
it the appearance of a historical research project, making the most of the unique 
opportunity afforded by the discovery of a shipwreck with valuable cargo. How-
ever, the tone of this group’s speeches,, and the way in which it tries to sell the need 
to make the most of the unique opportunity, is overwhelmingly irresponsible and 
inaccurate. 

 These looters’ way of working has also been closely studied. They generally begin 
by commissioning archives experts and scholars to carry out research in order to 
establish the precise location of the wrecks. It is well known Mel Fisher’s search for 
the  Atocha  in 1985 changed course as a result of the involvement of Eugene Lyon, a 
specialist in shipwrecks and the Archivo General de Indias (General Archive of the 
Indies), in carrying out research that led to the discovery of the bulk of the wreck. 
Recently, in 2005, Odyssey Marine Exploration, Inc. (NASDAQ: OMEX) hired an 
American  expert  to  identify  specific  wrecks  that  they  had  found  in  the  Strait  of 
Gibraltar and the surrounding area. This person’s involvement enabled them to 
loot the frigate  Nuestra Señora de las Mercedes.   16   

 In Operation Bahía I, the Guardia Civil seized a considerable amount of doc-
umentation, a large part of which had been copied from the Archivo General de 
Indias.  17   The professional services of experts in these documents were contracted 
in order to obtain the copies.  18   

 Once a wreck has been definitively, or even only tentatively, located, the effort 
to obtain funds from investors who have nothing to do with underwater salvage 
begins. This is the time for advertising and exaggeration. As a rule, press confer-
ences are called, documentaries are filmed, and the financial dividends of the 
operation are clearly presented, although there is also plenty of talk of the historic 
opportunity  to  reach  a  ship  and  discover  its  secrets.  Once  the  financial  backing 
has  been  secured,  the  next  step  is  to  obtain  necessary  permits  from  the  appro-
priate coastal country in the event of the wreck being located in territorial waters. 
Although it is becoming increasingly difficult to obtain authorization for these 
pillaging operations, until relatively recently, many countries did grant permits in 
exchange for a percentage of the sale of the recovered objects. This situation seems 
to be changing as a result of the more widespread acceptance of the 2001 UNESCO 
Convention. 

 The final step is the operation itself and the looting ,which tends to be fairly dis-
creet. Although documentaries about the process are filmed, they are not made public 
until the cargo is beyond the reach of any state or third-party intervention. Once the 
wreck has been located, its cargo is raised using a suction hose several times the size 
of the kind used by archaeologists, which sucks up all material of any economic value 
and leaves the remains of the boat nearly stripped of documentary interest. 

 Odyssey Marine Exploration, in its search for the wreck of  HMS Sussex  in 
Spanish waters, and the team that extracted part of the cargo of  Nuestra Señora de 

 118   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

las Mercedes  in international waters in 2007 (a  cause célèbre  with regard to under-
water looting thanks to the ruling in favor of Spain by the court of Tampa, which 
obliged the looters to return more than 500,000 coins looted from the wreck), both 
followed this pattern of behavior.  19     

 4.     THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK TO COMBAT LOOTING 

 Spain has signed all the agreements, conventions, and other international legal 
documents directly related to looting, and which define the general legal frame-
work of policies developed on the subject. However, our national legislation is still 
a key element that distinguishes us from other countries. 

 Spain’s domestic legislation is quite complex and little understood outside the 
country; therefore, we believe that providing a short explanation of its special char-
acteristics could be of interest here. 

 Concerns about the conservation of archaeological remains emerged in Spain 
during the eighteenth century. The first laws to address such remains stated that, 
being of unknown ownership, they should be given to the administrative author-
ities for conservation. The law thus prevented their possible destruction due to 
ignorance of the finder, but it conflicted with the articles that the Código civil 
(Civil Code) of 1889 devotes to the so-called hidden treasure (or treasure trove, 
according to the traditional  nomem iuris  used by Anglo-Saxon law).  20   

 The Código civil states that any hidden treasure belongs to the owner of the land 
where it was found. But if the discovery is made by a third person on the property 
of another or of the state, and is made by chance, one half of the discovery’s value 
will be attributed to the finder. In the case of objects of particular artistic or scien-
tific interest, the state shall be allowed to acquire them through expropriation and 
in return for a fair payment, which shall be distributed in conformity with the rules 
stated.  21   

 This issue was addressed by the Ley de Excavaciones Arqueológicas (Archaeological 
Excavations Act) of 1911. This regulation aimed to resolve both conceptual prob-
lems (the definition of an archaeological excavation and what should be understood 
by “antiquities”) and problems of a more practical nature, such as what should be 
done with moveable archaeological property recovered from excavations, found 
by chance, and without any archaeological activity involved. The regulation also 
made the export of archaeological goods abroad subject to prior authorization. All 
of these matters would be present in later legislation and would form the basis of 
Spanish law on archaeological heritage. 

 The Ley de Excavaciones Arqueológicas marked the start of a long process regarding 
the handling of historical heritage within the Spanish legal system. Throughout the 
process, a guiding thread has been the defense of the public interest with regard 
to historical goods as opposed to the rights of the goods’ owners. This culminated 
with the backing that the Constitución española of 1978 (Spanish Constitution, 
hereinafter “CE,” from the Spanish acronym) gave to the guardianship of this 

FIGHTING AGAINST ARCHAEOLOGICAL LOOTING  

  119 

type of goods by public authorities, regardless of their ownership status. Possibly 
influenced by the looting that was rife in the late 1970s, the CE also assigned 
responsibility for the punishment of the most serious crimes against historical 
heritage to the branch of criminal law (i.e., the penal code).  22   With this step, the CE 
gave a clear message about the need to preserve historical goods, not only through 
awareness campaigns, but also through the  ius puniendi  of the state.  23   

 The  CE  also  established  a  regional  level  of  government,  the  Autonomous 
Community, and a broad range of jurisdiction over historical heritage was trans-
ferred to these governments from the central government. However, the specific 
fight against looting is the shared responsibility of the central government and the 
governments of the autonomous communities, in accordance with the provisions 
of  Article  149.28  CE  and  in  line  with  Tribunal  Constitucional  (Constitutional 
Court) Sentence 17/1991. 

 In order to implement this transfer of jurisdiction, Spain has a state law, Ley 
16/1985 de Patrimonio Histórico Español (Spanish Historical Heritage Act, here-
inafter  “LPHE,”  from  the  Spanish  acronym),  and  17  regional  laws  within  its 
administrative legislation, applicable to each Autonomous Community, on histor-
ical and cultural heritage.  24   

 The right of guardianship of cultural goods was born of the confrontation between 
their protection and the rights of ownership, which the state had limited in their 
most  extreme  forms  to  prevent  the  disappearance  of  the  goods.  We  are  talking, 
therefore, of a reactive law concerned only with the policing powers of the authorities 
with regards to these goods. 

 The LPHE considers archaeological heritage as special heritage defined accord-
ing to the archaeology as the prevailing methodology used to study it, regardless 
of whether archaeological remains have been excavated or not. This definition 
replaces the traditional criterion of antiquity to define archaeological heritage with 
a new, scientific one.  25   The introduction of this criterion aimed to encompass the 
international provisions that already contained it and, in particular, the innovation 
of the Commisione Franceschini,  26   later reworded by M. S. Giannini.  27   

 Regarding  this  definition,  M.  A.  Querol  and  B.  Martínez  draw  an  important 
conclusion that, to a certain extent, would explain the development of some specific 
archaeological-heritage  protection  features  of  regional  government  legislation. 
According to these authors, the LPHE considers archaeological heritage as comprising 
not only known goods but also unknown, or suspected, goods; in other words, 
those that are still below ground.  28   

 Taking this into account, the legislation provides a protective umbrella for all goods 
belonging to our archaeological heritage, regardless of whether certain relevant goods 
are also protected by a higher protective statute. There are two types of protection: first, 
the creation of an archaeological public dominion in Article 44.1 LPHE, in response to 
the awareness of the fragility of archaeological remains, and requiring normal guard-
ianship terms of public dominion to be applied to them  29  ; second, specific laws related 
to how new goods appear, as regulated archaeological activity or chance findings. 

 120   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

 As  opposed  to  the  legal  system  regulating  archaeological  activity  that  is  more 
focused  on  disciplining  those  involved  in  the  dynamic  activity  of  searching  for 
historical information based on archaeological evidence and establishing require-
ments that affect its purpose, methodology, management team, and the final desti-
nation of the discovered materials,  30   legal and administrative techniques for chance 
findings are intended to clarify the legal situation of the archaeological good once it 
has been found. In these situations, the law is not interested in what brought about 
the discovery, as long as it was separate in both purpose and location from the dis-
covery of archaeological goods; it is, however, interested in the guardianship of the 
discovered material in order to ensure it is not lost. In regards to this, it is important 
to point out that metal detectors do not produce chance findings; rather, findings 
are causal and should, therefore, receive a different judicial response. As González 
Pacanowska and Díez Soto say, “[t]he third party who discovers the treasure as a 
consequence of works designed for that purpose is not allowed to receive any part 
of the treasure or of its value, as such solution would encourage practices that may 
be very prejudicial to the preservation of historical patrimony.”  31   The doctrine is 
almost in line with jurisprudence  32   on this matter.  33   

 Although administrative legislation on historical and cultural heritage, on both a 
state and sub-state level, includes provisions referring to underwater heritage, some 
thought should be given to what the distinguishing features of cultural heritage are 
when it is found underwater, and an appropriate regulation for these specific cases 
should be introduced in the new laws on historical and cultural heritage.  34   

 This  legislation  also  regulates  certain  aspects  of  the  trade  in  cultural  goods. 
Some  state  regulations  established  between  1924  and  the  present,  and  some  of 
the regional laws of the autonomous communities, make it obligatory for persons 
trading in cultural objects to record their transactions in a book subject to moni-
toring by the authorities. Moreover, both the LPHE and the regional laws establish 
the duty of auctioneers to notify the authorities of any items of historical value that 
become available and to to enable them to act on their preferential right to pur-
chase them. In all cases, it is prohibited to transfer the title of any goods belonging 
to the Catholic church or the government, any goods in the public domain, such 
as archaeological artifacts, or goods originating from countries involved in armed 
conflict. When goods have been illicitly exported, Article 29 LPHE establishes the 
obligation of the state to carry out the pertinent action to ensure their recovery, 
including the option of using any means to acquire them.  35   

 The Constitución española establishes the need for punitive regulations that may be 
penal in nature (23 CE). In a way similar to that of countries in our legal environment, 
there are two forms of this power: the penal power of the law courts and the power 
exerted through punitive administrative law. The concept behind the latter is criminal 
law (although it is somewhat more subtly defined to moderate its application), and 
its procedural components are delimited by Ley 30/1992 de Régimen Jurídico de las 
Administraciones Públicas y del Procedimiento Administrativo Común (Regulation 
on Public Administration and Common Administrative Procedure Law). 

FIGHTING AGAINST ARCHAEOLOGICAL LOOTING  

  121 

 In short, Spanish law establishes a series of crimes and criminal misdemeanors 
in criminal law related to historical heritage in general and archaeological heritage 
in  particular,  with  competent  judges  and  public  prosecutors  to  apply  it,  and 
another set of administrative offences, established in the LPHE and the rest of the 
regional laws on historical and cultural heritage, which, due to their lesser degree 
of severity, fall under the jurisdiction of the public authorities and are subject to 
appeal before the Court for Contentious Administrative Proceedings. As a conse-
quence of the principle  ne bis in idem,  the ruling by a criminal court prevents an 
administrative  sanction  being  applied  to  the  same  incident  when  related  to  the 
same  person.  The  distinctive  feature  of  punitive  administrative  law  is  its  aim  to 
control risks to archaeological heritage by tying the threat of a sanction to an order 
to proceed or not proceed. 

 As opposed to the criminal laws that include fines and custodial sentences, the 
administrative laws only contemplate the possibility of imposing the penalty of a 
fine, although, as provided for in Article 114.2.c of the Ley 14/2007 de Patrimonio 
Histórico de Andalucía ( Andalusian Historical Heritage Act ), there is also the pos-
sibility of definitively confiscating metal detectors and any other equipment seized 
by  the  state  security  forces  when  they  discovered  the  persons  in  question  using 
them without the necessary authorization. 

 As with the rest of the regional regulations on historical and cultural heritage, 
the  LPHE  bases  its  regulation  of  punitive  power  on  three  important  directives: 
preventing actions against goods belonging to historical heritage from becoming 
the source of income for offenders, the need for restitution, and compensation for 
any damages caused. 

 Based on these guidelines, administrative legislation on historical and cul-
tural heritage contains provisions on specific conduct that causes damage, whether 
through action or omission, as well as on any non-compliance with the obligations 
imposed  in  the  relevant  articles  of  the  regulations,  even  when  non-compliance 
results  in  damage  to  archaeological  goods,  and  regardless  of  whether  they  have 
been included in one of the catalogues or inventories included in these laws. Such 
conduct is classified as an administrative offense when the degree of severity means 
it is not considered a crime. 

 Nevertheless, archaeological heritage lacks an ad hoc definition of looting that 
explicitly refers to the movement of earth to search for ancient objects without 
using archaeological methodology. In regional (or sub-state) legislation on his-
torical and cultural heritage, advances have been made, with the chart of offenses 
contained in the provisions of the LPHE, by classifying the unauthorized use of 
metal detectors as an administrative offense. If a person is reported for using a 
metal detector without authorization, the corresponding punitive proceedings 
may be initiated and the person fined, in the event of the proceedings concluding 
that the person was indeed using the metal detector without prior authorization 
in an area where it is likely archaeological remains may appear (either an archae-
ological site or an area close to it), given that, in such a case, all the characteristics 

 122   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

would coincide for the incident to be sanctioned through administrative channels: 
illegality and malicious or negligent conduct that can be attributed to a person 
as perpetrator. These are offenses that arise as a result of a prior general duty 
for diligence and care to avoid any possible damage. 

 As our basis, we use the fact that, in the case of historical heritage, an asset that 
is legally protected by both administrative and penal law, it is its constitutionally 
recognized social purpose to reinforce the predicable collective rights of the very 
nature of the cultural goods, which are connected to the development of personality 
through culture, and not merely their physical or material safety. However, penal 
law is governed by the principle of minimum intervention, making it subsidiary 
in nature and limiting it to the most serious offenses that interfere with the public 
enjoyment that these goods are destined for. 

 The Código Penal (Penal Code) of 1995 (hereinafter “CP,” from the Spanish 
acronym) incorporates a mixed system of protection. On the one hand, there is a 
classification of certain types of conduct under the heading, “On Crimes Against 
Historical Heritage” (Articles 321 to 324 CP), and, on the other, a series of general 
aggravating factors for the crimes of theft (Article 235.1 CP); robbery (Article 241.1 
CP); fraud (Article 250.5 CP); misappropriation (art. 252 CP); misappropriation of 
public funds (articles 432.2 and 625.2 CP, the latter regarding absence of damage) 
as well as specific classifications related to planning breaches (art. 319.1 CP) and 
crimes against cultural goods in cases of armed conflict (art. 613.1 CP and 77 of 
the Código Penal Militar (Military Penal Code) of 1985. To this we should also add 
Article 2.e (exportation without prior authorization of amounts exceeding 50,000 
euros) of Ley Orgánica 12/1995, de Represión del Contrabando (Anti-Smuggling 
Act) of December 12, modified in 2011. 

 This  penal  system  for  historical  heritage  has  been  subject  to  many  doctrinal 
analyses, a large number of which have specifically focused on archaeological her-
itage, given the major implications of the hidden nature of much heritage, which 
results in it being vulnerable to damage and destruction. 

 We should point out that almost none of the analysts are pleased with this sys-
tematic classification given the wide-ranging nature of criminal activity involving 
historical heritage.  36   

 The newly established crimes against historical heritage contained in a specific 
chapter in the Código Penal of 1995, comprise four types of malicious or negligent 
conduct and a form of special misconduct in public service for civil servants. The 
legal doctrine has highlighted the absence of a crime that specifically encompasses 
archaeological looting not only on land, but also underwater.  37   

 Current criminal regulation has been the subject of frequent criticism, as it requires 
an economic value to be attributed to something as incalculable as archaeological 
damage: in accordance with Article 625 CP, criminal damage is punishable with a 
prison sentence or a small fine depending on whether or not the value exceeds 
400 euros. According to the jurisprudence of the courts, an amount must be 
attributed during the trial to the damage done to an archaeological site, the contents 

FIGHTING AGAINST ARCHAEOLOGICAL LOOTING  

  123 

of  which  are  essentially  hidden.  García  Calderón  uses  compelling  arguments  to 
explain  that  such  a  division  is  disastrous  and  proposes,   de  lege  ferenda,   that  the 
concept of incalculable value be used for any damaging activity affecting cultural 
heritage, and that other aspects of typical conduct be used for classification. The 
calculation of the economic value of the damage thereby becomes an indicator of 
the civil liability of the persons who caused the destruction or deterioration.  38   

 The  main  difference  between  the  administrative  and  criminal  legal  systems, 
regarding  the  use  of  metal  detectors,  is  that  the  first  is  aimed  at  prevention. 
Administrative  systems  punish  the  conduct  itself,  the  use  of  devices  without 
prior authorization, and do not require any results (the location of archaeolog-
ical objects) to have been obtained. However, in criminal law, it is the result 
of that conduct (archaeological site damage caused by removing deposits with-
out archaeological methodology) that is being punished, rather than the use of 
devices for locating the site. 

 International cooperation measures in place to help each state combat the illicit 
trafficking of cultural goods can be classified as measures aimed at intervention 
and control, punitive measures, and measures for the restitution of goods,, which 
are worth little if no inventories or catalogues of the main goods exist.  39   

 Spain’s regulation of the export of cultural goods continues to be based on the 
imposition of limits and obstacles for a few categories of goods, while the rest can 
be exported freely.  40   Indeed, it has become evident,that the LPHE is based on the 
principle of the freedom to transfer the title of cultural goods, not because it ex-
pressly states this, but because it does not restrict the inherent right to property 
ownership without prejudice through the establishment of limits and exceptions. 
It is, therefore, halfway between those countries that have banned all exportation 
and those where almost the only option available to the state to obtain any goods 
subject to export is to purchase them.  41   

 In spite of the administrative controls and legal provisions, reality shows us, via 
the media, that there is a fairly flourishing national and international market for 
archaeological goods that is in no way limited. In theory, it should be impossible 
for any archaeological goods to cross Spanish borders without express authoriza-
tion, yet hundreds of advertisements on eBay and other online auction sites sell 
these kinds of objects. Currently, the police units specializing in the fight against 
the illegal trade in antiquities insist that the looters themselves are putting the ar-
chaeological objects into circulation via the Internet.  42     

 5.     LAW ENFORCEMENT 

 Although the main function, as regards the protection of archaeological heritage 
(and historical heritage in general), of the state and regional governments, and the 
state security forces as part of them, is to prevent damage to this heritage, it is clear 
that deterrent measures are not always effective and that these goods are becoming 
damaged.  The  state’s  function  must  then  be  modified  to  include  investigating 

 124   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

incidents in order to bring looters to justice and sentence them according to the acts 
committed, and to do so by bringing them before the courts or to the attention of 
the cultural administrative authorities. These two tracks cover the different degrees 
of severity of the illegal conduct. In the cases that we have put forward, the admin-
istrative reprimand is given to those who use a metal detector to search for sur-
face archaeological objects or to do so in areas where the existence of such objects 
is plausible. Although this track is proving very effective at reducing looting, this 
administrative action is not, unfortunately, being performed equally in all auton-
omous communities. Andalusia stands out as one of the most active in its use of 
this approach. In the province of Seville alone, the Guardia Civil reported more 
than 1,000 people using metal detectors without authorization between 1991 and 
2011. The number of punitive disciplinary actions processed reflects a decrease in 
the number of reported cases, which dropped from one hundred in 1999 to only 
eight in 2010 and to two the following year.  43   It is certainly true that, as a result 
of this pressure exerted by the authorities, many professional looters living in this 
autonomous community have chosen to carry out their activity in other commu-
nities where there is a lesser degree of awareness or where fewer resources are dedi-
cated to oversight and where, therefore, they can act with greater impunity.  44   

 However, as we have seen, these people are not the only users of metal-detecting 
devices. Professional looters (who, however, refer to themselves as metal-detecting 
enthusiasts), and others on a higher level, trade and traffic in archeological goods, 
while sophisticated companies employ other methods of underwater looting. These 
cases fall outside the jurisdiction of the administrative authorities, thus entering 
that of judges, public prosecutors, and the police. 

 Investigation into such cases is the responsibility of the criminal investigation 
department.  In  line  with  the  provisions  of  the  aforementioned  LPHE,  both  the 
Cuerpo Nacional de Policía (National Police Force) and the Guardia Civil have cre-
ated specific groups dedicated to hunting down the perpetrators of crimes against 
historical heritage. Their investigations are not aimed at resolving a single crime, 
but rather at breaking up groups that have committed a relatively high number 
of crimes of this kind, as the investigators also try to reach the intermediaries and 
buyers in order to recover as many items as possible. Therefore, complex means 
of investigation are necessary, just as they are for other aspects of organized crime, 
such as intercepting communication, surveillance, deliveries, and the use of under-
cover agents. These last measures are regulated by criminal procedure law for the 
case of unauthorized exportation. 

 The hearing is assigned to an examining magistrate, with the participation of the 
public prosecutor’s office, the organizational capacity of which has allowed for a 
public prosecutor, dedicated to prosecuting crimes against cultural heritage, plan-
ning breaches, and crimes against the environment, to be present at each ruling, 
providing unity of criteria when passing judgment on these forms of criminal 
activity. The coordination of prosecutors is done via a public prosecutor in the 
Ministerio Fiscal (Crown Prosecution Service). 

FIGHTING AGAINST ARCHAEOLOGICAL LOOTING  

  125 

 The cultural administrative authorities have collaborated on this kind of inves-
tigation, acting as advisors to the police and identifying archaeological objects in 
home searches, but above all by providing specific training to the members of the 
state security forces, both the Cuerpo Nacional de Policía and the Guardia Civil, 
as well as to judges and public prosecutors. Specialist departments have also been 
developed in the prosecutors’ offices with regards to planning, historical heritage, 
and the environment. Together with the personnel of the cultural administrative 
authorities, these departments have generated a critical mass of human resources 
prepared to act in response to archaeological looting, although resources always 
seem insufficient, and we advocate improving and increasing the human and 
material resources available. 

 Finally, we should also mention the collaboration of the Spanish Navy in helping 
to protect existing wrecks in waters under Spanish jurisdiction as a result of an 
agreement signed between the ministries of defense and culture. This has enabled 
treasure hunters’ ships to be intercepted in areas where shipwrecks are known to 
exist.  45   

 The  impact  of  action  by  state  security  forces  has  been  felt  most  keenly  since 
1990s. In 1999 and 2000, the first operations took place and hit the headlines in the 
press: Operation Trajano and Operation Zeus.  46   Dizzyingly high figures also began 
to appear. Nine thousand archaeological objects were recovered in the first of these 
operations and more than 800 in the second. Yet this is nothing compared to the 
figures corresponding to Operation Tambora in February 2002, when more than 
160,000 items were recovered. Since then, operations have continued against looting 
on land (Operations Lirio, Tertis, Dionisos, Pitufo, and Helmet) and underwater 
(Operations Bahia I and Bahía II being among the most well known). These have 
gradually uncovered the different  modus operandi  of the looters in all their forms. 
Thousands of objects have also been confiscated—more than 700,000 in total—
and hundreds of people have been charged, although with fewer sentences being 
given than would be hoped. Judges hearing or trying these cases may consider that 
the committing of a criminal offense has not been proven with sufficient clarity. 
Based on these results, in their investigations, the police take great care to document 
the site where the looting has taken place after monitoring the looters’ activities, in 
an effort to determine the origins of the pieces with precision.   

 6.     CONCLUSIONS 

  Eppur si muove  (“and yet it moves”): This phrase, attributed to Galileo Galilei, leads 
us neatly to our conclusion that, in spite of all the problems associated with the 
fight against looting and the slowness in obtaining tangible results, a close look at 
the Spanish situation reveals that the public authorities are slowly but surely 
moving forward. 

 This first legal response was, in all likelihood, deemed necessary to restrain 
the growth of archaeological plunder and the feeling of impunity among those 

 126   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

involved in the illicit trade of artifacts. Today, however, new means of dealing with 
this issue are being explored, such as the decriminalization of the use of detectors 
on beaches (provided the beaches are not protected by cultural legislation) as well 
as the incorporation of detectorists into archaeological research projects. Both 
policies are indeed necessary and must be complemented by educational programs 
that emphasize the social value of archaeological heritage. 

 For better results in the fight against looting, it is necessary for governments to 
prioritize archaeological heritage. Achieving this goal requires not only a change in 
the specific governmental responses to matters related to treasure hunting, but also 
a shift in the public approach to archaeology as a whole. Looting and illicit trade 
make less sense when a society demands respect for the vestiges of its own history, 
but it is still naïve to consider the fight against plundering to be truly over.    

  ENDNOTES 

 3  .   Rodríguez Temiño 2012.  
 4  .   Fernández Flores  1999 .  
 5  .   Cortes Ruiz  2002 .  
 6  .   Muñoz Reyes et al.  2004 .  
 7  .   Sánchez Arroyo  1998 ; Pérez Domínguez  1998 ; Montero González, “La policía del Patrimonio”; 

 1  .   Available at  http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/143.htm .  
  
  
 2  .   “For the purpose of this Law, spoliation shall be understood as any action or omission placing 
all or any of the values of the property comprising the Spanish Historical Heritage at risk of loss or 
destruction or preventing it from carrying out its social function [….]” (Art. 4 LPHE).  
  
  
  
  
  
Cortés Ruiz  2002 ; Villanueva Guijarro  2009 ; Enríquez Navascués and González Jimenez  2005 .  
  
 8  .   This is an interest group that aims to recover the memory and mortal remains of people shot 
by General Franco’s nationalist troops during the Spanish Civil War and the following years, merely 
because they were republicans. Their remains are generally found in common graves in areas outside 
cemeteries (see Rodríguez Temiño and Matas Adamuz  2013 ).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
5 February 2006.  
  
  
de la Vega  2012 .  
  
 20  .   According to the Código civil (arts. 351, 352), a “hidden treasure” is a hidden and unknown 
deposit of money, jewelry, or other precious objects, the lawful ownership of which is not apparent 
(art. 352), in the sense that, according to the circumstances of the finding, it is not to be presumed 
that it has a present owner (see González Pacanowska and Díez Soto  2011 , 622 ff).  
 21  .   See Moreu Ballonga  1993 .  
  
  
 22  .   “The public authorities shall guarantee the preservation, and promote the enrichment of the 
historical, cultural, and artistic heritage of the people of Spain and the property that makes them up, 

 9  .   J. Méndez and J. A. Montañés, “Un saqueo a plena luz,”  El País , 10 March 2013.  
 10  .   Alonso Villalobos and Navarro Domínguez  2002 ; Carrera Tellado  2009 .  
 11  .   Noriega Hernández  2009 . 115 ff.  
 12  .   Nieto Prieto  2001 , 92–94.  
 13  .   Noriega Hernández  2009 , 128–33.  
 14  .   Villegas Zamora  2008 .  
 15  .   Castro  2005 .  
 16  .   Rodríguez Temiño  2012 , 217–235.  
 17  .   E. Espinosa, “La Guardia Civil desmantela una banda de ‘cazatesoros’ en Cádiz,”  El País , 

 18  .   Rodríguez Temiño  2012 , 214–217.  
 19  .   On this subject see, Aznar Gómez  2004 , 368 ff; Dromgoole  2004 ; Ruiz Manteca  2012 ; and Cabo 

FIGHTING AGAINST ARCHAEOLOGICAL LOOTING  

  127 

regardless of their legal status and the ownership. The penal law shall punish any offences against this 
heritage” (art. 46 CE).  
 23  .   The power or authority of the state to punish.  
  
 24  .   The autonomous laws usually alternate between the use of two syntagms as  nomen iuris : 
  
 historical heritage  and  cultural heritage . However, these terms should be thought of as synonymous 
(see Rodríguez Temiño  2011 ).  
 25  .   García Fernández  1989 .  
  
 26  .   Franceschini  1966 .  
  
  
 27  .   Giannini  1976 .  
 28  .   Querol Fernández and Belén Martínez  1996 , 97.  
  
 29  .   Barcelona Llop  2000 .  
  
 30  .   Barcelona Llop  2002 ; García Fernández  2002  and Rodríguez Temiño  2010 .  
  
  
 31  .   González Pacanowska and Díez Soto,  2011 , 623.  
  
 32  .   Tribunal Supremo (Supreme Court) Sentence (Court for Contentious Administrative Proceedings, 
 section 3 ) of the April 10, 2005, on the compensation to be given in the form of a reward to the finder 
of the treasure of Padilla de Duero (Valladolid) (found using a metal detector), states that the find 
cannot be deemed a chance finding, but must be classified as the product of a search for archaeolog-
ical remains using a metal detector.  
 33  .   Barcelona Llop  2002 ; Moreu Ballonga  1993 ; and Rodríguez Temiño  2010 .  
  
 34  .   See Aznar Gómez et al.  2010 .  
  
 35  .   See Roma Valdés  2011 .  
  
 36  .   Roma Valdés  1998 ; Roma Valdés  2008 ; Renart García  2002 , 208–21; and García Calderón  2008 .  
  
 37  .   Roma Valdés  1998 , 33.  
  
 38  .   García Calderón  2008 , 82–83.  
  
 39  .   See Magán Perales  2001  and García Labajo  2008 .  
  
  
 40  .   Spain has signed international agreements against illicit trafficking of cultural property, such 
as UNESCO’s Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and 
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (Paris, 1970).  
 41  .   Fidalgo Martín  2008 .  
  
 42  .   Cortés Ruiz  2002 .  
  
 43  .   Rodríguez Temiño  2012 , 276 ff.  
  
  
 44  .   On May 26, 2013, the  Diario de Ávila  newspaper reported the existence of organized gangs of 
looters from Andalusia that were emptying archaeological sites in that province (Ávila), which is part 
of the autonomous community of Castile and León.  
  
 45  .   On May 27, 2013, the  El País  newspaper reported a press release from the Spanish agency EFE, 
which stated that ships of the Spanish Navy had expelled the treasure-hunting vessel  Endeavor  from 
Spanish territorial waters.  
  
 46  .   S. F. Fuertes, “Recuperadas 9.000 piezas arqueológicas en Internet,”  El País , 26 September 1999; 
and L. Garrido, “La Guardia Civil recupera una espada de hace 3.000 años y otras 800 piezas,”  El País , 
14 September 2000.   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Alonso Villalobos  ,   C.   and   M.     Navarro Domínguez  .  2002 . “ El patrimonio arqueológico subacuático 
y los cuerpos de seguridad del Estado .” In  La protección del patrimonio arqueológico contra el expolio . 
 Seville :  Junta de Andalucía ,  33 – 44 .  

    Alzaga García  ,   M.    2006 . “ La protección del patrimonio arqueológico subacuático .” In  Curso sobre 
Protección del Patrimonio Arqueológico en Andalucía .  Seville :  Junta de Andalucía ,  31 – 56 .  

    Aznar Gómez  ,   M. J.    2004 .  La protección internacional del patrimonio cultural subacuático con especial 
referencia al caso de España .  Valencia :  Tirant le Blanch .  

 128   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

    Aznar Gómez  ,   M. J.  ,   R.     Azuar Ruiz  ,   J. L.     Casado Soto  ,   R.     Castillo Belinchón  ,   A.     Fernández Izquierdo  , 
  C.     García Rivera  ,   M.     Martín-Bueno  ,   X.     Nieto Prieto  ,   M. A.     Pérez Bonet   and   E.     Rodríguez Puentes  . 
 2010 .  Libro Verde. Plan Nacional de Protección del Patrimonio Subacuático Español .  Madrid :  Ministerio 
de Cultura .  

    Barcelona Llop  ,   A.    2000 . “ El dominio público arqueológico .”  Revista de Administración Pública  
 151 :  133 –65.  

    ——— .  2002 . “ Aspectos del régimen jurídico de las autorizaciones arqueológicas .”  Revista Aragonesa 
de Administración Pública   21 :  113 –46.  

    Cabo  de  la  Vega  ,    E.     2012 .  “ La  protección  del  patrimonio  cultural  subacuático  y  el  caso 
‘Nuestra  Señora  de  las  Mercedes.’  Síntesis  del  proceso .”   Patrimonio  Cultural  y  Derecho    16 : 
 97 – 106 .  

    Carrera Tellado  ,   J. E.    2009 . “ Expolio subacuático. Actuaciones de la Brigada de Patrimonio Histórico 
del  Cuerpo  Nacional  de  Policía .”  In   Patrimonio  arqueológico  sumergido:  una  realidad  desconocida , 
edited by   E. M.     Álvarez González    .  Málaga :  Universidad de Málaga ,  191 – 202 .  

    Castro  ,    F.     2005 .   “Caçadores  de  tesouros:  proposta  de  uma  taxonomia.”   História  e-história  ,   http://
www.historiaehistoria.com.br/materia.cfm?tb=artigos&id=20  ( accessed 14 April 2011 ).  

    Cortés Bechiarelli  ,   E.    2005 . “ Función social y tutela penal del Patrimonio Arqueológico .” In  Tres 
estudios jurídicos sobre el Patrimonio Histórico .  Seville :  Junta de Andalucía ,  17 – 49 .  

    Cortés  Ruiz  ,    A.     2002 .  “ Actuaciones  policiales  contra  expolios  arqueológicos .”  In   La  protección  del 
patrimonio arqueológico contra el expolio .  Seville :  Junta de Andalucía ,  61 – 78 .  

    Dromgoole  ,    S.     2004 .  “ Murky  Waters  for  Government  Policy:  The  Case  of  a  17th  Century  British 
Warship and 10 Tonnes of Gold Coins .”  Marine Policy   28 , no.  3 :  189 –98.  

    Enríquez Navascués  ,   J. J.   and   F.     González Jiménez  .  2005 . “ Arqueología y Defensa del Patrimonio. La 
experiencia del Grupo de Delitos contra el Patrimonio Histórico de Extremadura .”  Complutum  
 16 :  33 – 57 .  

    Fernández  Aparicio  ,    J.  M.     2004 .   La  protección  penal  del  Patrimonio  Histórico .   Sevilla :   Junta  de 
Andalucía .  

    Fernández Flores  ,   Á.    1999 . “ El uso de detectores de metales en intervenciones arqueológicas urbanas: 
métodos de aplicación y resultados .” In  Actas del XXV Congreso Nacional de Arqueología .  Valencia : 
 Generalitat Valenciana ,  258 –61.  

    Fidalgo Martín  ,   C.    2008 . “ Sistema judicial y protección del patrimonio histórico-artístico .” In  La 
lucha contra el tráfico ilícito de Bienes Culturales .  Madrid :  Ministerio de Cultura ,  51 – 66 .  

    Franceschini  ,   F.    1966 . “ Relazione de la Commisione d’indagine per la tutela e la valorizzazione 
del patrimonio storico, archeologico, artistico e del paesaggio .”  Rivista Trimestrale di Diritto Publico  
 1 :  119 – 243 .  

    García Calderón  ,   J.    2008 . “ La relación del patrimonio histórico con el derecho penal .” In  La lucha 
contra el tráfico ilícito de Bienes Culturales .  Madrid :  Ministerio de Cultura ,  67 –  86 .  

    García Fernández  ,   J.    1989 . “ The new Spanish archaeological heritage legislation .” In  Archaeological 
Heritage  Management  in  the  Modern  World ,  edited  by    Henry  C.      Cleere    .   London :   Unwin  Hyman , 
 182 –94.  

FIGHTING AGAINST ARCHAEOLOGICAL LOOTING  

  129 

    ——— .  2002 . “ La protección del patrimonio arqueológico. Especial referencia a los artículos 40.2, 41 y 
42 de la Ley del Patrimonio Histórico Español .”  Patrimonio Cultural y Derecho   6 :  169 –79.  

    García Labajo  ,   J. M.    2008 . “ La convención de París de 1970 y UNIDROIT .” In  La lucha contra el tráfico 
ilícito de Bienes Culturales .  Madrid :  Ministerio de Cultura ,  123 –30.  

    Giannini  ,   M. S.    1976 . “ I beni culturali .”  Revista Trimestrale di Deretto Publico   1 :  3 – 38 .  

    González Pacanowska  ,   I.   and   C. M.     Díez Soto  . 2011 . “ National Report on the Transfer of Movables 
in Spain .” In  National Reports on the Transfer of Movables in Europe, Volume 5: Sweden, Norway 
and Denmark, Finland, Spain , edited by   W.     Faber  ,   and   B.     Lurger  .  Munich :  Sellier European Law , 
 393 – 667 .  

    Magán Perales  ,   J. M.    2001 .  La circulación ilícita de bienes culturales .  Valladolid :  Nova Lex .  

    Montero González  ,   L.    2001 . “ La policía del patrimonio histórico: historia y delitos. El caso andaluz .” 
In  La policía del Patrimonio Histórico. Prevención, persecución y sanción de las infracciones contra el 
Patrimonio Histórico mueble en España , edited by   M.     García Pazos     and   L. M.     Arroyo Yanes    .  Cádiz : 
 Ayuntamiento de El Puerto de Santa María ,  39 – 58 .  

    Moreu Ballonga  ,   J. L.    1993 . “ Hallazgos de interés histórico, artístico y/o arqueológico .”  Revista 
de Administración Pública   132 :  71 – 208 .  

    Muñoz Reyes  ,   A. M.  ,   J. M.     Rodrigo Cámara  , and   S.     Fernández Cacho  .  2004 . “ Los datos a examen: 
estadística e índice de perdurabilidad de los sitios arqueológicos andaluces .”  PH. Boletín del Instituto 
Andaluz del Patrimonio Histórico   49 :  72 – 79 .  

    Nieto Prieto  ,   X.    2001 . “ El Centro de Arqueología Subacuática de Cataluña .”  PH. Boletín del Instituto 
Andaluz del Patrimonio Histórico   34 , no.  9 :  91 – 96 .  

    Noriega Hernández  ,   J.    2009 . “ El problema de los cazatesoros sobre los pecios de pabellón español en 
el mundo. Historia de un expolio .” In  Patrimonio arqueológico sumergido: una realidad desconocida , 
edited by   E. M.     Álvarez González    .  Málaga :  Universidad de Málaga ,  103 –34.  

    Pérez Domínguez  ,   M.    1998 . “ Expolio. Medidas de prevención y protección .” In  Protección del patri-
monio histórico. La Guardia Civil y la conservación de los bienes culturales .  Valladolid :  Junta de Castilla y 
León ,  147 –53.  

    Querol  Fernández  ,    M.  Á.    and    B.      Martínez  Díaz  .   1996 .   La  gestión  del  Patrimonio  Arqueológico  en 
España .  Madrid :  Alianza Editorial .  

    Renart García  ,   F.    2002 .  El delito de daños al patrimonio cultural español. Análisis del artículo 323 del 
Código Penal de 1995 .  Granada :  Comares .  

    Rodríguez Temiño  ,   I.    2009 . “ Notas sobre la regulación de las actividades arqueológicas .”  Patrimonio 
Cultural y Derecho   13 :  87 – 116 .  

    ——— .  2010 . “ Teoría y práctica de los hallazgos arqueológicos .”  Patrimonio Cultural y Derecho  
 14 :  171 –90.  

    ——— .  2011 . “ Sobre el patrimonio cultural, el etnológico inmaterial y su valor identitario .”  Patrimonio 
Cultural y Derecho   15 :  11 – 49 .  

    ——— .  2012 .  Indianas jones sin futuro. La lucha contra el expolio del patrimonio arqueológico .  Madrid : 
 JAS Arqueología S.L.U .  

 130   

 IGNACIO RODRÍGUEZ TEMIÑO AND ANTONIO ROMA VALDÉS

    Rodríguez Temiño  ,   I.   and   F. J.     Matas Adamuz  .  2013 . “ Arqueólogos contra ‘piteros,’ ‘piteros’ contra 
arqueólogos: superar una incomprensión .” In  Arqueología pública en España , edited by   J.     Almansa 
Sánchez    .  Madrid :  JAS Arqueología S.L.U ,  62 – 85 .  

    Roma Valdés  ,   A.    1998 . “ La protección penal del patrimonio arqueológico .”  Estudios Jurídicos. 
Ministerio Fiscal   8 :  3 – 32 .  

    ——— .  2008 .  La aplicación de los delitos sobre el Patrimonio Cultural .  Granada :  Comares .  

    ——— .  2011 .  Comercio y circulación de bienes culturales. Guía jurídica para profesionales y coleccioni-
stas de arte y antigüedades .  Madrid :  Difusión jurídica .  

    Ruiz Manteca  ,   R.    2012 . “ El llamado caso Odyssey: análisis y valoración .”  Patrimonio Cultural y 
Derecho   16 :  31 – 95 .  

    Sánchez Arroyo  ,   J. A.    1998 . “ Expolio Arqueológico .” In  Protección del patrimonio histórico. La Guardia 
Civil y la conservación de los bienes culturales .  Valladolid :  Junta de Castilla y León ,  137 –46.  

    Villanueva Guijarro  ,   M. Á.    2009 . “ Actuaciones de investigación y persecución de delitos contra el 
patrimonio .” In  Patrimonio arqueológico sumergido: una realidad desconocida , edited by   E. M.     Álvarez 
González    .  Málaga :  Universidad de Málaga ,  175 –90.  

    Villegas  Zamora  ,    T.     2008 .  “ Los  peligros  de  la  explotación  comercial  del  patrimonio  cultural  sub-
acuático .”  Museum Internacional   240 :  20 – 33 .    


