A  Licit  International  Traffic  in
Ancient  Art:
Let  There  Be  Light!
Clemency  Chase Coggins*

1  Introduction

The premise  of this  conference  is that  a licit  international  traffic  in
ancient  objects  is  of benefit  to  all;1  a totally  licit  traffic  in  ancient
art should, indeed, be encouraged  -  but both the licit and the illicit
trade  need  to  be  understood  and  discussed  more  realistically.  The
distinctions between licit and illicit, and between stolen and illegally
exported,  gloss  over  the real  issue when  it comes  to ancient  works
of art. This is original  context.

The  different  affected  parties  —  countries  of  origin,  specialists,2
collectors, and art dealers  —  involved with the movement of cultural
property  share  fundamentally  the  same  goals  for  the  preservation
and appreciation of ancient art  —  yet these groups are often  in con-
flict.3  Their  interests,  while  theoretically  identical,  appear  func-
tionally  to be  irreconcilable.  Such differences  stem  from  pragmatic
values that define the various points of view  -  whether the immedi-
ately validating and self-correcting  mechanism of the market is seen
to be most equitable and most healthy; or if a conservative historical
rationale, involving a long view, and an approximation of truth, gov-
erns. It is the intent of this paper to suggest  they must not  continue
to  be  irreconcilable,  and  that  disclosure  is  the  stony  road  that  can
lead to detente, if not  reconciliation.

2  The Scholar as Apologist  for  the Licit Trade

Every point in this debate has been made many times by each side,
and no one listens anymore. It seems that few  measures have genu-
inely enhanced the preservation  of the world's ancient  cultural heri-

Adjunct  Professor  of  Archaeology  and  of Art  History,  Boston  University; As-
sociate, Peabody  Museum  of Archaeology  and Ethnology, Harvard  University,
Cambridge,  Massachusetts.

61

Clemency Chase Coggins

tage;  in  fact,  the  situation  may  be  deteriorating.  This  is deeply dis-
couraging for someone who has worked for twenty-six years to miti-
gate this critical  situation, and who is on record in opposition  to the
market  in  antiquities,  as  I  am.  My field of  specialization  is  ancient
American  art  and  archaeology.  Trained  as an  art  historian  in  an  ar-
chaeological  field,  it  became  clear  to me  in  1968 that  little  ancient
Maya sculpture would remain  in Guatemala and Mexico, if the loot-
ing  of  sites  were  to  continue  at the  1960s rate.4 The  overwhelming
importance of original context was little understood by many collec-
tors  and  experts  at  that  time; this  was  largely  because  most  of the
world's collections, private and public, had been acquired serendipit-
ously, or imperialistically,  with little thought to original context. The
connoisseur's  qualities  of  uniqueness and aesthetic  appeal  governed
the  acquisition  of  antiquities,  rather  than  interest  in  lost  historical
significance  —  whereas pristine original context is not simply desir-
able  for  real  historical  understanding;  it  is  essential.  A  significant
and beautiful  ancient object  set in lonely splendor in a museum case
may  evoke  a visceral  sense of loss in an  archaeologist.

In outlining the archaeological  point of view Professor  John Mer-
ryman  suggests,  disbelievingly,  in  his  essay  that  archaeologists
would eliminate all commercial demand for such objects, if possible,
that archaeology  is at war with the market, and that some archaeolo-
gists are delighted  when  fakes  appear on the market.5  But this is all
absolutely  true. Furthermore,  archaeologists  do, indeed, assume that
an  ancient  object  was  illicitly  acquired  unless  there  is  convincing
proof to the  contrary.6  Guilty  until proven  innocent.

The mistrust  between  antiquities  dealers and archaeologists  is in-
flamed by the increasingly  destructive  role played by market  incen-
tives. Accordingly  scholars  who lend their expertise to the trade are
now considered  unethical,  and are seen as collaborators  in the muti-
lation  and  corruption  of  the  past.7  Such  conflicts  are  also  found  in
other  dimensions.  Merryman  speaks  of  several:  the  nation  versus
the  object,8  the  source  nations  versus market  nations,9  and  national
interests  versus  international  ones.10

3  Nemo  dat  quod  non  habet

Why is the law  such an important  factor  in the international trade in
antiquities?  Because  the  traffic  is  not  entirely  licit.  Because  trade
implies  the  transfer  of  ownership,  and  this  can  not  succeed  under
common law if the seller does not possess legal title (nemo dat quod
non habet). And because  incompatible  legal  systems are involved in
most  transfers  of  ancient  objects.  Once  integral  to  a  rooted  living
culture,  these  things  have  been  transformed  into  rootless  property
-  subject  to  shifting  supply  and  demand,  and  to  current  political
jurisdictions. Merryman  describes widespread  objections,  mostly by
specialists,  to  the  commodification  of  the  cultural  heritage,"  but, I

62

Licit Trade:  Let There  be  Light

believe  that  before  they  condemn  commercialization,  per  se, these
critics  are  expressing  despair  at  the  irredeemable  transformation
from  precious record to bibelot.

"When,  if  ever,  may  museums,  collectors,  and  dealers  properly
provide  a market  for  cultural  objects  that  have been  exported from
a  foreign  country  contrary  to the  nation's  laws?"12  This  is the big
question, and Merryman poses it from a perspective  in international
law  that  was  earlier  explored  by  the  late  Paul  Bator  whose  pion-
eering work  in the international  trade  in art laid the  foundations  for
current  thought  and  policy.13  Bator  observed  that  art  elevates  and
civilizes;  that  art  is  a  good  ambassador;  and  that  the  international
interchange  of  art  is  desirable.14  He  identified  different  interests in
the cultural  property  debate,15 and he demonstrated  that attempts to
cut  off  the  international  trade  in  art  only  create  a  corrupting  black
market.16  "The best way to keep art is to  let it go".17 Nevertheless,
Bator was convinced of the seriousness of the escalating  destruction
and loss of cultural heritage and he proposed mechanisms that would
encourage  both  interchange  and  a  legal  market,  in  addition  to rec-
ommending  a radical reduction  in export  restrictions.

Bator  has been  proven  right  about  the  counter-productive  effects
of export controls  —  in the numerous archaeologically-rich  countries
that  impose  them the  illicit market  has  only  increased.  While  loans
and  exchanges  between  countries  have  become  more  common,  as
he  recommended,18  they  may  actually  stimulate  more  than  they
dampen  the  illicit  trade.  However,  one  of  Bator's  most  significant
proposals has not been received  as enthusiastically  as has his attack
on export controls. This is his observation that the art world operates
in  secret.19  The  art  market  requires  concealment  at  every  level,  to
protect  sources, to protect  buyers, to protect  itself  —  and  collectors
and museums have traditionally accepted this restriction  — to protect
themselves.  If  all  such  transactions  were  public  (and  also  honest),
there might be no illicit market.

In his timeless book,  The Plundered Past, Karl  Meyer noted that
this huge speculative business, the art market, has no Securities and
Exchange  Commission  (as  does  the  U.S.  stock  market)  to  enforce
fair  dealing  and  to  protect  the public  interest.20  Instead,  it operates
more like the clandestine narcotics traffic.  Bator advocates the com-
plete disclosure of museum acquisition records, as a means of open-
ing  up  and  legalizing  the  market,  and  of  protecting  the  public
interest.

John  Merryman's  extensive work on the international  trade  in art
supports most of Bator's  proposals  and conclusions, with  some  dif-
ferent  emphases.  Merryman  adduces  the  1954  Convention  for  the
Protection  of  Cultural  Property  in  the  Event  of  Armed  Conflict,
known as the Hague Convention, as the first significant  international
formulation  of legal principles on this subject.21  The Hague Conven-
tion  recognizes  that  "damage  to  cultural  property  belonging  to any
people whatsoever means damage to the cultural heritage of all man-

63

Clemency  Chase  Coggins

kind"  and  "that  this  heritage  should  receive  international  protec-
tion".22  The  Hague Convention  provides  a  basis  for  the  1970 UN-
ESCO Convention, and, paradoxically, also for Merryman's position
regarding the international art trade which he describes as "the inter-
nationalist  image"23  (in  distinction  to  the  nationalism  that  he  as-
cribes  to  the  UNESCO  cultural  property  convention).  The  inter-
nationalist  image  proclaims  that  the  cultural  heritage  of  mankind
belongs  to  all,  and  encourages  cross-cultural  interchange,  as  does
Bator. The Hague Convention,  however, has nothing to do with the
art trade. Its purpose is to provide protection for the cultural property
of signatory nations when endangered by war. This convention's ex-
pression  of  international  concern  for  the safety of  the common cul-
tural heritage in no way implies that this heritage should also be the
common property  of all,  although  it is routinely  invoked  in support
of the antiquities trade.

In  direct  contrast  to  the  internationalist  image,  Merryman  de-
scribes a "nationalist image" which is a product of cultural national-
ism. He describes cultural nationalism as rooted in a nineteenth cen-
tury  Romantic  idea  that  inspires  the  protection,  and  especially  the
retention, of cultural property.24  Merryman sees cultural nationalism
as  an  emotional  attitude,25  adopted  by  many  archaeologically  rich
(source)  countries,  that  leads  to  "hoarding"  instead  of  to  snaring
cultural  property;26  thus  cultural  nationalism  is  antipathetic  to  the
international  traffic  in art.  In  this  view  cultural  nationalism  is bad.
Internationalism  is good.

Merryman posits a third point of view, the "object/context  image",
which  is  also  protectionist.27  This  position  focuses  on  the  preser-
vation  of  an  object  and of  its  original  context.  Strangely,  this  "im-
age" groups together archaeologists  and art historians who are  often
in  disagreement  over the relative  importance  of context  and  object.
But  the  context/object  image  does  associate  all  those  who  would
keep objects  for preservationist reasons  —  in distinction to national-
ist ones.  However, if this philosophy  governs, objects  may "langu-
ish",28 or remain "chastely invisible",29 innocent victims of a "covet-
ous neglect",30  when they might,  instead, be  considered  candidates
for  sale as surplus  items in redundant  collections. One serious prob-
lem with this hybrid "image" is an artificial  and divisive  distinction
that seems to be made between (esoteric?) "information  that is made
accessible  to  scholars for  study"31  and  what  everybody  else wants.
Most  "object/context"  scholars are interested  in recording,  learning,
and  teaching  about  history  for  the  benefit  of  everyone,  and  for  the
long run. To accept such a goal  as the description of only one com-
peting  interest,  as  lawyers  do,  seems  to  me  misleading  and  re-
ductionist.

Like  Bator,  Merryman  emphasizes  the  principle  of  international
law  which  declares  one country  will  not  automatically  enforce  the
export  laws  of  another.  This  is  especially  important  in  the  inter-
national  traffic  in  antiquities  because  if  the  United  States,  for  in-

64

Licit Trade:  Let  There  be  Light

stance,  were  to  enforce  the  laws  of  Peru,  which  declares  cultural
property is inalienable national property, then all Peruvian objects in
the United  States might be considered  stolen. However,  this did not
happen  in the  1989 case of Peru v. Johnson?2  If Peru had won, the
decision might have made the import of all Peruvian antiquities into
the United  States illegal, and thus seriously distorted the art market,
which  some  see  as  a  beneficent,  self-regulating  mechanism,  that
works  with  Darwinian  efficiency  to  preserve  and  sell  the  finest  art
—  where others  see only  relentless  market  incentives  that  stimulate
the destruction  of sites to provide new material  for sale.

Whatever  the  image,  internationalist,  nationalist,  or  object/con-
text;  whether  archaeologist,  curator,  collector  or  dealer  all  parties
are  in rhetorical  agreement  on an  ethic  of  conservation  and  preser-
vation.  Yet,  these  interests  often  disagree  over  specific  cases. Yes,
we must preserve  objects  and  contexts, and yes, we  must  conserve
an  unknown  archaeological  heritage,  but  for  how  long,  and  for
whom? Archaeologists prefer to bank the archaeological heritage for
the future. They excavate as little as possible, and only for a specific
reason.  Finding  treasure  is  not  a  good  reason.  Similarly  the  basic
principle  for  conservators  of  cultural  property  is  mimimum  inter-
vention  —  as in the physician's  Hippocratic  oath  —  they  should, at
the very  least,  do no harm.  Such issues  are also encountered  in the
conservation  of  the  world's  natural  resources,  except  that  historical
resources,  ancient  cultural  property,  are  unique;  they  can  never  be
replaced, nor can they be renewed.  Sadly, this is precisely why they
are so desirable to the international  traffic  in art.

4  The Market

The  international  trade  in  ancient  art  is  thriving.  In  full-page  color
advertisements one dealer boasts that his gallery has "quadrupled  its
sales  over  the  past  two  years".33  Karl  Meyer  explains  that  the  art
market  goes up  in all economic  climates34 and, by some miracle, it
seems  that  both  supply  and  demand  are  increasing  steadily.35  How
do  we  explain  this  state  of  commercial  nirvana?  Bator  notes  that
little  is  known  about  the  workings  of  the  art  market,36  and  Meyer
observes  that  it  is  unregulated.37  Why  rock  the  boat?  Why  disturb
or constrain  a successful  part of the world  economy?  Perhaps  first
because the art market is not monolithic; ancient art is but one small
part of it.

The art market comprises myriad, often  over-lapping,  subspecialt-
ies that may be limited by region (for  instance Asian or North Amer-
ican),  by  date  (mediaeval,  contemporary),  by  medium  (paper,
bronze), or by form  (paintings, furniture).  Another way to divide the
art  market  is  between  archaeological,  and  some  ethnographic,  ob-
jects versus everything else. With very few exceptions these archae-
ological  and  ethnographic  materials  constitute  what  their  countries

65

Clemency  Chase  Coggins

of  origin  consider  cultural  heritage  and  they  constitute  the  bulk  of
the  illicit  market.  The  difference  between  most  art  dealing  and  the
dealing  in such objects,  is  that it is not possible to make a living by
selling  only  the  few  archaeological  and  ethnographic  objects  that
have been  acquired  legitimately.  Some law is broken at some point,
and  often  at  many  points,  in their  trade.  Selling  antiquities  is  often
called  the  "second  oldest  profession"  —  one  enshrouded  in  secrecy
because  grave-robbing  has,  from  the  beginning,  been  a  reliable
source  of the  goods.

Is it possible to change  the  oldest, the original, segment of the art
market?  Probably  not very  much, but we must try, just  as we try to
preserve whales, or rain forest; because we know they are invaluable
and  vulnerable  elements  in  our  common  existence  on  earth.  How-
ever,  the  supply  of  ancient  cultural  resources  is  finite.  To continue
consuming at the current rate would be as short-sighted as promoting
a great modern painter  by  selling all his paintings, then killing him;
or stimulating  the  market  in old  English  furniture  by burning  down
all the country  houses.  Prices  would go up, many dealers would go
out  of  business,  and  the  cultural  losses  would  be  incalculable.  The
antiquities  market  is  approaching  this  phase  of  self-extinction  by
over-consumption.

In  their  defense  of  this  immemorial  trade  antiquities  dealers  de-
scribe the inevitable  smuggling and bribery which are routine in any
country  that  tries  to protect  its cultural  heritage  with  export restric-
tions. Such illegal  commerce  also entails fraudulent  documentation,
and  eventually  it  stimulates  the  production  of  fakes.  Karl  Meyer
describes  "the  prevalence  of  fakes  [as] the  venereal  disorder  of the
illicit  art  market  — the  punishment  for  excessive  desire  and  bad
judgement"38  Nevertheless, the robbery  of objects  and the creation
of  fakes  is  considered  by  some  a  validation  of  worthiness  for  in-
clusion  in  the  market.39  In  fact,  the  more  desirable  objects  are  the
illicit ones.

Despite the cynics,  some  antiquities  dealers are apparently  taking
initiatives to encourage  a licit market. In April  1984 a code of pract-
ise  for  the  Control  of  International  Trading  in  Works  of  Art  was
signed by representatives  of  several  British auctioneers and dealers.
They  agreed  "to  the  best  of  their  ability,  not  to  import,  export  or
transfer  the  ownership  of  objects...[exported  illegally  from  their
country  of  origin].40 A  newly  formed  association  of  antiquities  de-
alers in Europe  and the United  States, The International  Association
of Dealers  in Ancient Art aims  "to actively encourage the protection
and preservation  of ancient  sites."41 In support of this objective  they
quote the Hague  Convention concerning  "the cultural  heritage of all
mankind", and conclude  "we believe that a more liberal and rational
approach  to regulations  on  the  export and  import of art will help to
protect  world  cultural  heritage."42  The  significance  of  these  state-
ments is probably that they  should have been made at all, since they
have not  been  in  the  past.  The  antiquities  trade  has  a  characteristic

66

Licit  Trade:  Let There  be  Light

attribute which one observer describes as "transparency"; this is very
much  like the  emperor  who had  no  clothes. What  everyone  knows
to be true is not what is discussed.

Many antiquities dealers would prefer to operate legally and have
their trade  function  respectably  like the rest of the art market  — by
recycling old collections, and buying up newly and legally available
material.  But,  unlike  most  paintings  and  sculpture,  archaeological
material  must  be  removed,  usually  destructively,  from  the  ground.
Could it be made legally available, as is invariably suggested? Only
if the possessing  countries  were  to change their  laws  to  accommo-
date  the  art  market.  The  position  of  the  international  trade  is  that
these countries should not be so retentive, and that they should make
"duplicates" available. Jerome M. Eisenberg, editor of the magazine
Minerva, declares that "the  illicit trade could, without  doubt, be re-
duced  significantly  by  allowing  a  limited  and  carefully  controlled
legal  export  of  antiquities  from  those  countries  with  an  abundance
of archaeological  material."43

This position has been expressed by everyone  who would  like to
encourage  a  licit  trade.  It  is  logical  and  appealing.  But  I  always
wonder  exactly  which  objects  they  have  in  mind.  Many,  many  ar-
chaeologically-rich  countries do not have  storerooms  full  of "dupli-
cates". Whereas,  if  those  countries  in which  their  ancestors  did,  in
fact, produce duplicates, like fired  clay oil lamps and water vessels,
should decide to sell some  —  the  art dealers  would not want them.
They want the very singular objects most countries would choose to
keep, as one dealer wrote:

I  for  one,  do  not  want  to  live  in  a  xenophobic  gray  world  of
endlessly  rotating  traveling  shows, coffee  table books  of ever-
increasing  gaudiness,  and  — God  forbid  — plaster  casts  from
overseas.  I want  continually  to  look  at new  and  beautiful  ob-
jects that delight the senses and excite the mind.44

These words  express  the  feelings  of  most  antiquities  dealers;  from
them one must conclude that talk of "duplicates" which will supply,
even  satiate, the market  is a smoke  screen  for  inaction. Even  if the
source  countries  were  to  allow  the  sale  of  fine  objects  from  their
collections, thus creating a significant  legitimate market,  and if this
were somehow to supplant the illicit market, most antiquities dealers
would  still  be  out of  work.  They will  not benefit  directly from the
loans  and  exchanges  between  countries  foreseen  in  the  empyrean
future.

Everyone agrees that inventoried property  —  no matter how neg-
lected  —  may be described as stolen if removed from  its owner.  But
not if  the  property  was  previously  unknown.  Most  countries  enact
broad export prohibitions in an effort  to retain such invaluable unin-
ventoried material  and,  as Bator has  shown,  and we all know, they
do not work. What  if there were no export restrictions?  Would that

67

Clemency  Chase  Coggins

solve  the  problem,  and  protect  a  country's  cultural  heritage?  The
United  States  has  no  export  restrictions,  and  our  native  American
heritage  is  spread  around  western  Europe.  Is everyone  happy? Not
the  indigenous  community  whose  heritage  has been  sold,  nor most
anthropologists,  and now there  is pressure to impose export restric-
tions on U.S. cultural property for the first time. Has free  trade been
the answer?

How do the world's  source countries  view the constant proposals
for  the replacement of their export restrictions with mechanisms  for
controlled  sale and export? They say, "Why should we?". This com-
mon  response is a good example of "cultural nationalism".  It repre-
sents, not  only  the lack  of an  "internationalist  image", but  different
values as well. The practise  of collecting the art of other cultures is
uniquely western  -  perhaps a vestige of imperialism; it is unknown
and  irrelevant  to  most  of  the  source  countries.  They  do  not  covet
our cultural property. Western art  is seldom  in their museums; they
may never have  seen any, and do not miss it. Their museums, how-
ever mismanaged,  are celebrations  of their own cultures  —  not vast
warehouses  of  the  art  of  the  entire  world  as  are  our  compendious
public  and private treasuries.

Most  culturally  rich  source  nations  do  not  want  our  art.  Why
should  they  change their  laws  so  we  can  have  theirs?  "Because",
we  answer "otherwise  we will take  it, (and we do not  consider this
stealing)". The archaeologists, cultural  caretakers, and  others  in the
source nations understand this implied threat only too well, but they
seldom  have  political  power,  and  national  politicians  are  unwilling
to enact laws that involve selling the national patrimony, in order to
forestall  theoretical  losses.  Yet,  many  of  these  countries  are  very
poor and would benefit  by reaping this potential economic resource.
It is  invariably  averred by advocates  of the "internationalist  image"
that allowing controlled export would stop the illicit traffic,  and that
the revenue  would be helpful  to the countries  of origin  —  although
only the  latter is clearly true.

5  Solutions?

In  1969  a  UNESCO  Convention  was  drafted  that  was  intended  to
solve  these  problems  through  agreements  between  countries  signa-
tory to the Convention.  Since each nation  expected the  other  signa-
tory nations  to observe  its cultural  property  export  laws, Merryman
has  termed  the  Convention  a  "nationalist"  reponse  to  the  problem.
The  final  UNESCO  "Convention  on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and
Preventing  the  Illicit Import,  Export,  and  Transfer  of Ownership  of
Cultural  Property",  adopted  in  November  1970,45  and  now  signed
by  81 nations, has not significantly  restricted the  illicit  trade  in art,
although  it  has  facilitated  the  return  of  stolen  inventoried  objects.
Probably the principal reason for this ineffectiveness  is that only one

68

Licit  Trade:  Let There  be  Light

major  art  importing  nation  has  signed  it  —  the  United  States. Al-
though this may change dramatically if Switzerland, a major art trad-
ing country, signs the UNESCO cultural  property  convention.46

A more  "internationalist"  approach  characterizes  the new  "Unid-
roit  Convention  on  the  International  Return  of  Stolen  or  Illegally
Exported  Cultural  Objects".47  This  will  promote  the  licit  traffic  by
confining  international  disputes over ownership to law courts within
the various  signatory  countries; ideally  these  will  include those  art-
importing  countries  that  have  not  signed  the  UNESCO  Cultural
Property  Convention.  The  Unidroit  Convention  has  the  virtue  of
forcing the source countries to pay attention, if they want something
back;  it  should  confine  the  suits  for  return  to  significant  objects.  It
also emphasizes the values of the preservation  of the  object,  and of
its context  and  associated  materials  in considerations  for  the return
of cultural property.48 Such a system presupposes adequately trained
specialists  and  cultural  administrators,  as  well  as  designated  finan-
cial  resources, in the requesting countries.

A  national,  as  opposed  to  a  "nationalist,"  response  to  the  UN-
ESCO Cultural Property convention, might be United  States partici-
pation,  as  the  only  major  art-importing  country  to have  signed. By
signing  the  Convention  the  United  States  expressed  both  its  great
concern  over  the  destruction  and  loss  of  cultural  heritage  in  other
countries, and acknowledged  the significant  role played by the U.S.
art market in that loss. The U. S. enabling legislation requires a very
deliberate  response,  as opposed  to  the  automatic  action  envisioned
in the Convention,  to a country  that requests the imposition  of U.S.
import  controls  against  their  illegally  exported  endangered  cultural
property. The country must demonstrate the seriousness of a specific
situation before the U.S. will impose import controls to help to limit
the  illicit  traffic,  and thus  ultimately  reduce  further  depradations  in
the source country.49 Using a formula  that requires carefully  defined
requests,  the  United  States  has  imposed  import  restrictions  on  ar-
chaeological objects from an endangered zone in El Salvador (1987);
on ethnographic textiles from  a town in Bolivia (1989); on archaeol-
ogical  materials  of  a  particular  ancient  culture  from  a  site  in  Peru
(1990);  on  archaeological  materials  from  a  state  in  Guatemala
(1991);  and  on  archaeological  objects  from  a  region  of  Mali
(1993).50

Have these U. S. import prohibitions on targeted endangered  ma-
terials  stopped  the  destruction  and  loss?  Certainly,  most  of  these
objects  are  now  rarely  on  the  market  in the  United  States.  But  the
impact  in the  source countries  has varied.  The U.S. initiatives  have
generated  beneficial  publicity  and  long-term  educational  efforts  in
most of the nations involved  —  and this is perhaps the most import-
ant benefit.  In some cases, however, the U.S. import bans may have
tended  to  divert  the  illicit  traffic  to  other  art-importing  countries
where  such  controlled  and  thus  potentially  rare  objects  may be es-
pecially  attractive.  The  import  restrictions  have  similarly  enhanced

69

Clemency Chase  Coggins

the  value  of  the  banned  objects  that  are  already  in  the  legitimate
market.  With  or  without  U.S.  involvement,  the  illict  trade  in  these
objects  flourishes  —  but,  increasingly,  the  problem  is  seen  differ-
ently.

6  Disclosure

Despite twenty-five  years of international effort,  and increasing pub-
lic awareness little, if  any, progress has been made toward controling
the illict traffic  or, more important in this context, encouraging a licit
trade in ancient objects —  although there is some hope in evidence of
a slow  but fundamental  change  in values.  Everyone  would prefer a
quick and painless solution. Signing conventions is not the cure. The
bitter  pill  may  be  disclosure.  If  antiquities-acquiring  museums,
which  are  usually  publicly  subsidized  (even  in  the  United  States),
were  not  allowed  to  maintain  secret  records,  their  behavior  would
change.  Documentation  involves  a  lot  more  than  title  to  an  object
(when  it even  ensures  that). Documentation  should  establish  an ob-
ject's  provenance,  which  often  means  only  its  history  as  cultural
property.  Documentation  may  also  bear  on provenience.  "Proveni-
ence"  is  the  same  word  as  the  French provenance,  but  in  English
"provenience" refers  explicitly to an object's  original context. Most
ancient  objects  in museums  are of unknown  origin, and every  scrap
of  information  about  both  provenience  and  provenance,  including
local  contacts,  middlemen  and  dealer  identity  and  location,  price,
invoices, tangential correspondence  and so forth, may all be of value
in  the  effort  to  trace  and  reestablish  a  degree  of  historical  signifi-
cance. In the future,  when  aesthetic fashions may have changed, this
information  is  the  only  real  "quality"  and  legitimacy  an  object
will  have.51

Let us consider  museums  who buy, and have  always bought,  im-
portant  antiquities  through  the  licit  market,  which  is  nevertheless
usually  illicit  in  some  phases. Here  is  an  example  from  one  of my
classes:  one  hundred  years ago  a prominent  U.S. museum  bought a
large  stone  sculptural  relief  from  another  country.  It was  related  in
many ways to a relief that remained in the country of origin, but their
true  relationship  was  unknown  because  they  were  both  excavated
illegally.  Perhaps  one  of  them  is  fake,  perhaps  they  both  are.  The
stone  has  been  tested  inconclusively.  Stylistic  and  iconographic
analyses  are  also  inconclusive. The only  way to shed any new  light
on  this  persistent  question  lies  in  the  original  correspondence  and
acquisition  records  of  the  importing museum.  But, even  though  the
evidence  is  a  century  old,  the  museum  will  not  make  it  available.
This is not uncommon.  While an object may be on public view, both
its  provenance  and  even  its  provenience  are  usually  hidden  behind
an  uninformative  label. "Don't  ask,  don't  tell" is the  prevailing  ac-
quisition  philosophy  in  many  museums.  But  such  secrecy  is  no

70

Licit  Trade:  Let There  be  Light

longer the rule in the United States, and perhaps the major long term
effect  of  the  UNESCO  Cultural  Property  Convention  has  been  the
adoption  by  many  museums  of  acquisition  policies  that  preclude
buying  undocumented  antiquities  that  have  left  their  countries  of
origin  since the  date  of the  Convention.52  Another  important  result
is  the  increasing  attention  these  issues  continue  to  receive  twenty-
five  years later, as demonstrated  by this  conference.

Museums that  acquire  antiquities,  like  the J.  Paul  Getty  Museum
in Malibu, California,  are adopting a new openness; when the  falsi-
fied  provenance  of  a  recently  acquired  Greek  kouros  prompted
doubts about its authenticity, the Getty Museum addressed the auth-
enticity  question  directly  through  a  public  exhibition  and  a  collo-
quium,53 although the museum  did not reveal information  about the
actual  purchase.54  Such  candor  is  an  innovation  for  art  museums,
one that must eventually lead to an opener market. Disclosure  often
depends,  however,  on  the  demands  of  the  consumer  (the  museum,
the public), and, unfortunately,  on the persistence  of the press.

Another  heartening  example  of  museum  disclosure,  albeit  tenta-
tive,  may  be  found  in an  exhibition  now  touring  the  United  States.
Entitled Painting the Maya Universe: Royal Ceramics of the Classic
Period, it consists of about eighty beautiful  polychrome vessels, plus
figurines, jades  and  other  small  grave  goods.55  All  but  eight  exca-
vated  objects  were  exported  illegally  from  Guatemala,  Mexico  and
Belize, most  in the  last  ten to fifteen years.  Their presence  is  stark
testimony  to scores of demolished  architectural  contexts  and totally
obliterated  funerary  assemblages  in  their  countries  of  origin.  For a
specialist  in this  field  such  a collection  affords  a nearly  intolerable
blend  of pleasure  and  horror. What  is unusual  is that  Dorie Reents-
Budet, who curated the exhibition and wrote most of the sumptuous
catalogue,  has  included  a  chapter  entitled  "Collecting  Pre-Columb-
ian  Art  and  Preserving  the  Archaeological  Record".56  In  this  she
reviews the collecting history of Maya ceramics, decries the destruc-
tion  of  archaeological  sites,  and  makes  a  valuable  comparison  be-
tween the  kind  of information  derived  from  a looted  vessel  in con-
trast  to  a  similar  excavated  vessel.  Although  she  never  links  her
condemnation  to  the  objects  she  is  actually  exhibiting;  they  are  in
fact  typical  of the current  traffic  in antiquities,  since they  would be
considered stolen by the source nations, but not by the United  States
at  the  time  they  entered  the  country.  Today, however,  such  objects
from the Guatemalan  state of Peten, which is the source of about 70
per cent of the vessels, would be returned to Guatemala; in  1990 the
United  States  imposed  import  restrictions  on  such  objects  in  re-
sponse  to  an  Emergency  Request  from  Guatemala,  under  the U.S.
legislation  which  enacts  the  UNESCO  Convention  on  Cultural
Property.57

Dorie  Reents-Budet  also  strives  to  educate  museum-goers  who
may  not  read  this  chapter  in  the  catalogue,  by  presenting  a  ten-
minute video in which she makes the same points and advises view-

71

Clemency  Chase  Coggins

ers  that  labeled  objects  without  provenience,  and  usually  without
dates  of  acquisition,  may  be assumed  to be  illegally  excavated  and
of unknown provenience.58 In this film Reents-Budet does not specifi-
cally direct her remarks to her own own exhibiton, although the con-
clusion should be inescapable — if any museum-goers actually viewed
this tape, which was announced  in small print at the entrance to the
exhibit,  and  shown  some  distance  away  on  a  monitor  in  a  disused
lobby of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts.59

These  efforts  at  explaining  to  the  public  some  of  the  unsavory
background  of museum  antiquities  is encouraging,  as are the  codes
of  practise  adopted  by  some  antiquities  dealers  —  no  matter  how
cosmetic  and unenforceable  they  may be. They  apparently  reflect  a
desire  to  operate  more  legally.  Another  attempt  to join  the  licit  art
market  and  upgrade  the  image  of  antiquities  dealers  may  be  found
in  the  new journal  Minerva, edited  by  the  owner  of  Royal-Athena
Galleries, Jerome M. Eisenberg.60 This publication enrages most ar-
chaeologists  who view it as a glossy  false  facade  that serves simul-
taneously to hide and to promote the illict traffic  in antiquities, since
most  readers  can not distinguish  the licit from  the illicit in editorial
content, or in advertisements.61 However, the editor does make some
effort  to  report  the  ongoing  debate  over  the  international  traffic  in
antiquities.62  Perhaps most disturbing  to many archaeologists, how-
ever, is the fact that scholars have lent their expertise, and thus their
imprimatur  on  the  illicit  trade,  by  writing  articles  for  Minerva.
Viewed  in the  best possible  light this periodical might  be seen as a
small  step toward  disclosure.

Despite  the  continuing  health  of  the  gray  market  in  ancient  art,
there  is  some  reason  to  believe  that  the  overwhelming  evidence  of
its  bad  effects  may  lead  to  its  eventual  decline,  if not  demise,  and
that the  forces  of conservation  will win the war, although there may
be  many  battles  lost  along the  way.  Some  cause  for  such  optimism
may be found  in the catalogue of the exhibition of the George Ortiz
collection.63 This stunning display of 260 ancient objects took place
in  1994 at the Royal Academy of Arts, London. Generally acclaimed
for  its beauty, the exhibition has also been attacked for its  self-com-
placency and insensitivity to cultural and historical values.64 George
Ortiz  explains  in his  introductory  essay that  "Art  is a projection  of
the ego"  and that,  initially, he had "hoped  that by acquiring  ancient
Greek  objects  [he] would acquire the spirit behind them."65  But de-
spite  the  avowedly  spiritual  message  of  his  introductory  remarks,
and despite the "splendid  melange"66 they represent, Ortiz has actu-
ally  produced  a  catalogue  which  implicitly  acknowledges  the  pri-
macy  of  historical  context  for  both  significance  and  for  value.  In
addition  to  including  a fine color  photograph  each  entry  essays the
traditional  apparatus of scholarship, replete with a meticulous physi-
cal  description,  differences  of interpretation  and  opinion,  footnotes,
and  a blibliography.  Despite his aesthetic  rhetoric  Ortiz has tried to
supply  as  much  historical  context  as  he  can,  thereby  exposing  and

72

Licit Trade:  Let There  be  Light

acknowledging the limitations of these unprovenienced works, while
depending for any validation on the work of scholars. However  frag-
mentary, the documentation offered  by George Ortiz provides tantal-
izing  phrases  from  the  lost  "chapters  of  our  own  human  past"  la-
mented  by Colin  Renfrew.67

Another step toward disclosure is perhaps exemplified  by the case
of  the  Mycenaean  objects  publicly  exhibited  in  the  Michael  Ward
Gallery  in New York City  in March  1993. For this  exhibition  Ward
produced a hard-cover catalogue with scholarly analysis that associ-
ated  the  objects,  which  were  mostly  gold,  with  a  specific  Greek
region and style, while further  suggesting they may have been parts
of  a  single  tomb  assemblage.68  Presumably  because  of  this  hypo-
thetical  association  Ward  chose  to  sell  them  together  as  a  group.
The  catalogue  did  not  include  any  information  about  the  modern
provenance of the collection  —  which is tantamount to declaring that
it had passed,  probably recently, through  the illicit market.

The  exhibition  was  reviewed  in  The New  York Times, with  the
information  that  Ward  had  tried  to  ascertain  if  the  objects  were
known to be missing from  Greece, before putting them up for sale.69
Museums now usually  check with a presumed  country of origin be-
fore  acquiring  important  antiquities, but  it was unusual  for  a dealer
to take  such  precautions.  Greece  replied  in the  negative.  Struck  by
the  newspaper  coverage,  two  different  archaeologists  notified  the
Greek  government,  which  then  sued  for  the  return  of  the  objects,
since further  study had associated the gold with specific illegal exca-
vations in Greece.70 The case was settled out of court by Ward agree-
ing to donate  the  objects,  for  a tax  write-off,  to  a charitable  Greek
organization  in  the  United  States.71  It  is  to  be  hoped  they  will  be
reunited  in  Greece  with  the  tomb  furnishings  they  resemble,  al-
though their original  context and associations  can never be securely
known.

The most obvious lessons from this affair  were learned by Michael
Ward who will not henceforth  exhibit and attempt to document such
a  collection,  and probably  by the scholar,  now vilified,  whose pub-
lished  analysis  tipped  off  the  investigation  and  suit.  Yes, this  case
makes clear the dangers and penalties of trading in objects  from  the
illicit  market,  both  for  the  dealer  and  for  any  experts  he  may  hire.
But  have  the  most  important  values  been  preserved?  Was  this  the
best possible  outcome?

7  Reality

I  submit  that  the  highest  value,  both  before  and  above  national  or
international  concerns  about cultural  property,  is the truth  about the
object itself. More important than the law. More important than prop-
erty rights. Just  the  facts  —  as close  as  possible  to  the whole  truth
that  remains.  No  matter  how  historical  interpretation  or  aesthetic

73

Clemency  Chase  Coggins

taste  may  change,  the  basic  documentation  is  the  only  real  title.
Preserving  such information  may involve  some painful  concessions.
Foremost  among these  is acknowledgement  of the inevitable persist-
ence of the  illicit  market,  no matter how the relative  proportions  of
illicit  versus  licit  may  vary. If  such  a traffic  will  always  exist, then
it  is incumbent  upon  scholars  to use  every possible means to wring
more  information  from  the trade. First, this would  entail  extracting,
recording  and  using  information  from  dealers.  Second,  it would  in-
volve  using  any  expertise  provided  by  those  who  authenticate  and
make attributions  of  illicitly  acquired  cultural property.

Dealers  might  be  forced  to  provide  more  details  of  both  prov-
enance and provenience if they had to keep detailed registers.72 They
might  be  forced  to  provide more  information  if museums  (ultimate
rcipients)  would  refuse  an  object  without  such  pedigrees,  which
would  then  be  public.  But  does  this  information  have  any  value
when  it  may  be  falsified?73  Perhaps  fraudulent  provenance  would
not clarify  the original provenience of an object, but even a  falsified
record  can  contribute  to  an  aggregate  picture  of  the  market  —  re-
vealing  some of what is now  hidden. The names alone of a string of
middlemen and dealers in several countries may some day contribute
to the basic documentation  of related objects  in far-flung  collections
—  to  the recreation  of  modus  operandi. The purpose  of  such regis-
tration  would be  to  arrive  at some  degree of truth. Not to prosecute
antiquities dealers. The search for historical accuracy is timeless and
can, failing  every other recourse, wait for complete disclosure. Each
museum acquisition  record  should grow through time as more facts,
scholarly,  commercial,  contradictory,  filter  in.  If  dealers  kept  com-
plete  records  which  included  every  scrap  of  information  that  came
to  them  —  true  or  not  — they  could,  at  the  very  least,  make  such
archival  data  public  after  any  possibility  of  legal  repercussions.  I
submit  that  the  complete  identity  of  an  object  as  a part  of  cultural
heritage  dwarfs  its  transitory  role  as cultural  property. Even  dealers
in the illicit traffic  might play  a constructive role, if they are encour-
aged,  or required.  Traditionally  their  only  option  has been the  self-
protective  promulgation  of  romanticized  provenience  and  falsified
provenance.

By  the  same  token,  the  knowledgeable  analyses  of  scholars  who
value  the  object  itself  above  its  historical  context  must  be  reinte-
grated  into  the  single  tapestry  of  archaeological  reconstruction.  At
the  moment,  such  experts  are  seen  as  encouraging  the  continuing
loss of cultural  heritage by  enhancing the market value of an  object,
and thus validating  its role  in the illicit traffic.74  I believe this is true
-  but  here's  the  rub.  We  must  concentrate  on  the  timeless  object,
enhancing  every possible  facet  of its existence, ancient and modern,
rather than  on  its fallible  purveyors  and mortal  analysts. It seems to
me  that  the  incident  of  the  Mycenaean  gold  and  the  Ward  gallery
might  have been resolved  even  if the dealer had not been  disgraced
for making  the collection  public, along with its historically  valuable

74

Licit  Trade:  Let There be  Light

but  incriminating  analysis.  Somehow,  such  efforts  must  be  encour-
aged  —  even  though  the  objects  may  have  come  through  the  illicit
market, which they practically  always have done . If the country of
origin  can demonstrate  its loss  —  then  it should  always be  possible
to negotiate return, without  legal means.

The American Journal  of Archaeology, a classical  publication  of
the Archaeological  Institute  of America,  has followed  its parent  or-
ganization  in stipulating that it will not publish, as the Institute will
not  accept  for  delivery,  papers  that  constitute  the  first  professional
presentation  of  an object  that has  left  its country  of origin  illegally
since  the  passage  of  the  UNESCO  Convention  on  cultural  prop-
erty.75 This policy denies  validation by the Journal, or by the Insti-
tute, to objects from the illicit trade, while eventually acknowledging
their  existence  and  (seriously  compromised)  significance.  As an  ar-
chaeologist  and an art historian,  I support  the intelligent  realism  of
this  policy  which  allows  for  the  value  of  every  possible  obtainable
kind  of  analysis.  However,  because  of  the  ongoing  destruction  of
ancient Maya sites in Guatemala and Belize, I have been as adamant
and uncompromising as any archaeologist in my disavowal of schol-
ars who appear to have encouraged  such looting by their  validating
work,  albeit  indirectly.  Since  all  such  objects  are  pillaged  we  do
not  know  where  they  came  from;  we  do  not  know  their  historical
associations; we do not even know if they are authentic. As a metho-
dological  premise  I  will  not  base  interpretations  on  such  seriously
flawed evidence. Nevertheless, one must evaluate and use very piece
of analysis that exists. The enormous amount of information  held by
the  many  scholars  who advise  dealers must  not be  lost.  In  order to
salvage  it,  let  there  be  a functional  truce  between  the  connoisseurs
and  the  archaeologists.  The  museums  of  the  world  are  filled  with
unprovenienced  objects  and  many  will  continue  to  acquire  them.
Since we can never change this situation completely, we must come
to  terms  with  the  intolerable  circumstances,  and  figure  out  how  to
exploit them.

The best  possible  chance  for  making  truces,  for  salvaging  infor-
mation,  and  for  returning  significant  objects  lies  in  mediation  and
negotiation  as Phyllis Messenger has outlined  in her valuable article
"Forging  New  Partnerships".76  Every  possible  effort  must  be  made
to solve these conflicts  before the law is involved. She cites cases in
which negotiations have produced compromises that to some degree
satisfied  each  side of the dispute, for  instance: the conservation  and
return  to  Mexico  of  part  of  a bequest  of  illegally  exported  ancient
murals left to a San Francisco museum; the return of a pillaged stone
lintel  to  Thailand  by  a  Chicago  Museum  thanks  to  a  benevolent
intermediary;  or  a  gift  to  Mexico  of  representative  samples  of  an
archaeological  collection  removed  legally  in the first  decade of this
century  to  a  Cambridge,  Massachusetts  museum.  These  were  all
possible  through  mediation  based  on  underlying  goodwill,  rather
than legal confrontation.  Models and precedents exist for negotiated

75

Clemency  Chase  Coggins

arrangements,  what  is  lacking  is the recognition  of this  eventuality
as routine  and unavoidable. Institutional  machinery  for  mediation is
needed,  not more laws.77

8  Conclusions

In  conclusion  of this consideration  of the  licit  trade  -  I endorse  it,
of course, but see little evidence of a hopeful  prospect for the  future.
Lack  of  enthusiasm  about  the  licit  market  reflects  the  fundamental
fact  that once an object has been extracted from  its context, it makes
little  difference  to  the  fabric  of  cultural  heritage  whether  it  travels
legally or illegally. A looted object that a country is willing to export
has lost just as much of its historical  significance  as one in the illicit
trade. They are equally undesirable from the point of view of cultural
heritage.  From  the  point  of  view  of  cultural  property,  defined  as
material  alienated  from  its  original  historical  setting,  the  best  way
for  reintegration  into the world's cultural heritage  is through the  full
disclosure  of  provenance,  the  full  acknowledgement  of  equivocal
status, and the total exploitation  of available  expertise.

While we make every effort to preserve the ancient, and the ethno-
graphic  heritage  of the  world,  we  can  also  work  to  widen  the  licit
trade, and to supplant the passion for prosecution of the illicit  traffic
with  a  lust  for  the  truth,  remembering  that  cultural  heritage  is  for
the  future,  whether  it  is  safely  under  ground  or  actively  building  a
provenance  in a collection.  Let there be  light.

Notes

1  Merryman, John,  A Licit  International  Trade  in Cultural  Objects,  pp.  13—60

supra.

2  "Specialists" in this context,  includes archaeologists, art historians, curators,
conservators  — all  those  professionally  dedicated  to  the  preservation  of
ancient art. They correspond  to J.  Merryman's  "object/context  image", p. 14
supra.

3  Bator,  Paul  M.,  The  International  Trade  in  Art,  Chicago,  University  of
Chicago  Press,  1983:19.  Bator  identifies  one  important  axis  of  this  conflict
when  he observes  "Accomodating  these  two  fundamental  values  —  the  ap-
preciation  of beauty and the search  for knowledge  —  is the central  challenge
involved  in our  inquiry."

4  Coggins, Clemency, "Illicit Traffic  of Pre-Columbian  Antiquities", Art Jour-

nal  (1969):  94-98.

5  Merryman,  p. 34  supra.
6  Idem.
7  See:  See  the  Codes  of  Ethics  of  the  Society  of  Professional  Archaeology,
of  the  Archaeological  Institute  of  America;  of  the  Society  for  American
Archaeology;  and  see  Cook,  B.F.,  "The  archaeologist  and  the  art  market:
policies  and practice", Antiquity,  65 (1991): 533—7; Elia, Ricardo,  "Conser-

76

Licit  Trade:  Let There  be  Light

vators and unprovenienced  objects: Preserving the cultural heritage  or servic-
ing the antiquities  trade?", paper  presented  to the Conservation  and the An-
tiquities  Trade  Conference,  British  Academy,  London,  3/12/1993.

8  Merryman, John, "The Nation and the Object",  International Journal  of  Cul-

tural Property,  1:3 (1994) pp. 61-76.

9  Merryman,  John, "Two ways of thinking  about  cultural  property',  American

Journal  of International  Law, 80(4) (1986): 832.

10  Merryman,  pp. 10—11 supra.
11  Ibid, pp. 38-40.
12  Merryman,  1994, supra,  note  8, p. 61.
13  Bator, supra,  note 4.
14  Bator, ibid, pp. 29—30. But: " From this analysis it should be clear  that  there
is  no  absolute  value  in  movement  of  the  cultural  heritage",  O'Keefe,  P.J
and L.V. Prott,  1989, Law and the Cultural Heritage,  London,  Butterworths,
Vol. Ill, [115].

15  On  interests  see: O'Keefe,  P.J. and L.V. Prott,  Law and the Cultural  Heri-
tage,  London,  Butterworths,  (1983)  vol. 1, [120-149]; and fora  distinction
between  interests  and values  see: Ibid, (1989) vol. Ill, [131].

16  Bator, supra,  note 4; pp. 41—43.
17  Ibid:  46.
18  Ibid:  89.
19  Ibid: 84-86,  n. 146.
20  Meyer,  Karl  E., The Plundered  Past,  New York, Athenaeum,  (1973) xii.
21  Merryman,  (1986) supra,  note 9:  831.
22  UNESCO,  (1983),  77ie  Protection  of  Movable  Cultural  Property,  Paris,

vol. I:  336.

23  Merryman  (1986), supra,  note 9.
24  Idem.
25  Merryman  (1985)  "Thinking  about  the  Elgin  Marbles",  Michigan  Law  Re-

view  83:8, pp. 1880-1923.

26  Merryman,  p. 19 supra.
27  Merryman,  ibid, p. 14.
28  Ibid, p. 20.
29  Bator, supra,  note 4; p. 18.
30  Merryman  (1985), supra,  note 25; p. 1919.
31  Merryman,  p. 14 supra.
32  See discussion of Peru v. Johnson  in Merryman (1994), supra,  note  8, pp. 62,
63.  Peru's  declared  ownership  of the nation's  ancient  cultural  property  was
viewed by a California  court as "no more effective  than export  restrictions",
and  thus  would  not be  not enforced  by  another  nation  in  the absence  of a
treaty.

33  Minerva,  (1990)  1:1, inside  back  cover.
34  Meyer,  1973, supra,  note 20; p.  3.
35  Merryman,  p. 17 supra.
36  Bator, supra,  note 4; p. 13.
37  Meyer,  1973, supra,  note 20; idem.
38  Ibid, p. 108.
39  Merryman,  p. 48 supra;  fn. 28.
40  O'Keefe,  P. J. and L.V. Prott, Law and the Cultural Heritage,  vol. 3, Move-

ment,  London,  Butterworths,  1989, [1032].

41  Rules  of  the  International  Association  of  Dealers 

in  Ancient  Art,

article 2 (3), 1994.

42  Ibid.

11

Clemency  Chase  Coggins

43  Minerva,  (1994): 2.
44  Marks,  Peter,  'Other  points  of  view', Auction,  IV(5) (1971):  34.
45  See  O'Keefe  and  Prott,  1989, supra,  note  14; vol.  Ill,  chapter  14.
46  Faber-Castell, Christian  von, "Switzerland  moves  toward UNESCO  Conven-

tion", Art Newsletter, XIX: 7, pp. 4,  5, 7.

47  See  Merryman,  1994, supra,  note  8: p. 71.
48  Merryman,  pp. 27—28  supra.
49  Cultural  Property Advisory Committee, Preserving  Mankind's Heritage: U.S.
Efforts  to  Prevent  Illicit  Trade in  Cultural  Property,  United  States  Infor-
mation  Agency,  1991; and  see:  O'Keefe  and  Prott,  1989,  supra,  note  14;
[1403,  1473,  1482,  1492-97].

50  Looting  Theft and Smuggling:  A  Report  to  the  President  and  the Congress.
The  Cultural  Property  Advisory  Committee  1983 — 1993, Cultural  Property
Advisory  Committee,  United  States  Information  Agency,  1993,  pp.11,
14-22.

51  For  instance,  when  a  nineteenth  century  taste  for  Hellenistic  sculpture  re-
turns, the  formal  abstraction  of Cycladic  figurines  may  consign  them  to the
basement.  The majority  of these sculptures come from  illicit excavations and
the analytic literature must, as a consequence, rely on stylistic criteria  —  with
little  security  about  percentage  of  fakes  (Gill,  David  W. J.  and  Christopher
Chippindale,  "Material  and  Intellectual  Consequences  of  Esteem  for  Cy-
cladic  Figures", American Journal  of Archaeology,  97 (1993)  601—659).
If  all  dealer  and  acquisition  information,  including  hearsay,  were  available
there  might  still  be  some  hope  of  establishing  original  sources,  networks,
authenticity,  modus  operandi  -  by  comparison  with  other  collections  and
dealer  records.

52  Or  since  1983 when  U.S. enabling  legislation  was  passed.
53  Bianchi, Robert Steven,  'Saga  of the Getty Kouros', Archaeology, (1994) 47:
3,  22, 23;  The Getty Kouros  Colloquium,  the  J.  Paul  Getty  Museum  and the
Nicholas  P. Goulandris  Foundation  Museum  of  Cycladic  Art,  Athens,  1993.
54  Elia,  Ricardo,  "A  Corruption  of  the  Record",  Archaeology,  (1994)  47:3,

24, 25.

55  Reents-Budet,  Dorie,  Painting  the  Maya  Universe:  Royal  Ceramics  of  the

Classic  Period,  Durham,  North  Carolina,  Duke  University  Press,  1994.

56  Ibid, pp.  290-311.
57  See  supra,  notes  50,  51. In  1994  U.S.  import  restriction  was  renewed  for

ancient  objects  from  Peten,  Guatemala.

58  "The  Buena  Vista  Vase:  Archaeology  vs.  Looting",  Duke  University  Mu-

seum  of Art,  Durham,  North  Carolina,  1994.

59  The  exhibition  was  at  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston,  from  April  15 —
June  26,  1994.  Then  it  traveled  to  the  Denver  Art  Museum,  7/15-9/15,
1994; Los Angeles County Museum of Art,  10/8- 1/8,1995;  Yale University
Art  Gallery,  New  Haven,  Connecticut,  2/10-4/23,  1995.

60  Published  in  London,  the  first  issue appeared  in  January,  1990.
61  Butcher,  Kevin  and  David  Gill,  "Mischievous  pastimes  or  historical  sci-
ence?"  Antiquity,  64  (1990),  946-950;  Elia,  Ricardo  J.,  "Popular  archae-
ology  and  the  antiquities  market:  a review  essay", Journal  of Field Archae-
ology,  18, (1991), 95-103.

62  Eisenberg, Jerome  M., "The Unidroit  Convention  on  the International  Return
of  Stolen  or  Illegally  Exported  Cultural  Objects:  Report  on  the fourth  meet-
ing", Minerva,  March/April  1994.

63  In pursuit  of  the Absolute:  Art  of the  Ancient  World from  the  George Ortiz

Collection,  Berne,  Benteli-Ward,  1994.

78

Licit Trade:  Let  There  be  Light

64  Renfrew,  Colin,  "Justifying  an  interest  in  the  past",  The Guardian,  January
26,  1994; Fenton, James, "A collection robbed of its true history",  The Inde-
pendent,  January  31, 1994.

65  From  the  unpaginated  introduction  "In  Pursuit  of the Absolute", Ibid.
66  Renfrew,  supra,  note 64.
67  Ibid.
68  Betts, John  H.,  Gold of the Mycenaeans:  Important  Finger rings,  sealstones
and  Ornaments  of the  15th Century B.C.  New  York,  Michael  Ward  Gallery,
1993.

69  Reif,  Rita,  "Rare  Gold  Baubles:  Small,  Ancient  and  Radiant",  New York

Times, 4/4/93, p. C:39.

70  Boucher,  Isabel, "Having  your Mycenaean  cake and eating it"  The Art News-

paper,  35, February  1994.

71  Reif,  Rita,  "Greece  and  Gallery  Settle", New  York Times, 12/31/1993.
72  See: O'Keefe  and  Prott,  (1989), supra,  note  14; [628-633].
73  Reports from  dealers, museum curators, and in the press suggest that  falsified

documentation  is now  the  norm.

74  See supra,  note 8.
75  Kleiner,  F.S.,  "On  the  publication  of  recent  acquisitions  of  antiquities",
American  Journal  of Archaeology,  1990, 94: 525—527. For  an  endorsement
of this policy  see Cook,  B.F., (1991), supra,  note  7.

76  Messenger,  Phyllis  Mauch,  "Forging  New  Partnerships  for  the  Study  and
Preservation  of  the  Pre-Columbian  Past",  in  Collecting  the  Pre-columbian
Past,  Elizabeth  H.  Boone,  ed.,  Washington,  D.C.  Dumbarton  Oaks,  1993,
pp. 291-314.

77  At  a  conference  organized  by  the  International  Association  of  Dealers  of
Ancient  Art, Constance  Lowenthal  proposed  the  creation  of a  computerized
registry  in  which  objects  might  be  listed  until  title  was  passed;  Explorers
Club, New York, 7/6/94. As  Director of the International  Foundation  for Art
Research,  which  keeps records  of  stolen  art,  Lowenthal  also  mentioned  that
I FAR has created  a list of names to contact  in every  country,  when  inquiring
about cultural  property.

79


