 (2013) 20:155–174. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2013 UNESCO and the Fate of the World
Heritage Indigenous Peoples Council
of Experts (WHIPCOE)
Lynn Meskell*

Abstract: In December 2000, a World Indigenous Peoples Forum was held in
conjunction with the 24th session of UNESCO’s World Heritage Committee in
Cairns, Australia. Representatives from Australia, Canada, and New Zealand har-
nessed the momentum of these events and their location to propose the forma-
tion of a new committee, the World Heritage Indigenous Peoples Council of
Experts (WHIPCOE). The initiative was taken in response to concerns voiced by
indigenous peoples to their lack of involvement in the development and imple-
mentation of laws, policies, and plans for the protection of their knowledge,
traditions, and cultural values, which apply to their ancestral lands, within or
comprising sites now designated as World Heritage properties. This article traces
the fate of that proposal and underlines the intransigence of sovereign states
during those short-lived discussions. It goes on to suggest alternate routes for
indigenous representation and recognition within the World Heritage system.

2012 July 4: The final session of UNESCO’s World Heritage Committee
36th annual meeting in Saint Petersburg. Over the previous 10 days,
delegates from 21 States Parties comprising the World Heritage Com-

*Department of Anthropology, Stanford University. Email: lmeskell@stanford.edu.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: This research owes its origins to Jane Lydon and the conference she or-
ganized in Prato (Italy) through Monash University, Melbourne (Australia), on the topic of indig-
enous connections. A version of the article was delivered as the opening address at the World
Archaeology Congress at the Dead Sea in Jordan, and I am grateful Claire Smith for that invitation.
Other colleagues who deserve special mention for sharing their expertise are Claudia Luizza, Wil-
liam Logan, and Gamini Wijesuriya. For their invaluable insights into UNESCO World Heritage I
thank Melissa Baird, Hamady Bocoum, David Berliner, Kristal Buckley, Christoph Brumann, Ian
Hodder, Sophia Labadi, Ian Lilley, Webber Ndoro, and Lindsay Weiss. I am especially indebted to my
colleagues at UNESCO Paris Headquarters including Lon Addison, Lazare Eloundou Assomo, Alessan-
dro Balsamo, Francesco Bandarin, Marc Patry, Kishore Rao, and Mechtild Rössler for their generos-
ity and patience. Lauren Yapp offered valuable editorial assistance and two anonymous reviewers
provided helpful comments.

155

156

LYNN MESKELL

mittee, mainly ambassadors and government ministers, debated the mer-
its of cultural and natural heritage sites from around the globe, stressing
the need to diversify the list, support underrepresented countries, and
implement indigenous heritage forms and values divergent from West-
ern models. In the last remaining minutes of the day, States Parties were
invited to express any final issues supplemental to the rigorous program
of evaluating nominations, judging risk and conflict situations, navigat-
ing dwindling budgets, and assessing the future of the 1972 World Her-
itage Convention on its 40th anniversary. The German ambassador to
UNESCO, Martina Nibbeling-Wrießnig, already extremely vocal and pro-
cedural throughout the meetings, perhaps moved by the unfolding blood-
shed in Timbuktu (Mali), felt compelled to make a statement. She
explained that in Europe, monuments and heritage hold more impor-
tance than in other nations since there had been over 100 years of pro-
tective legislation. And they are built in stone. This has enabled European
sites to more easily fulfill the criteria for World Heritage inscription. At
the regional level, she explained—and this was taken to mean in the
Global South—people are aware of the value of their sites, but changes
in government have subsequently complicated matters. She admitted that
financing was also a contributing factor. As the audible rumblings of
dissatisfaction grew, she called for countries to work together, that these
were all issues to be discussed openly, and for the Committee to get “be-
yond the clichés.” Nibbeling-Wrießnig looked to her colleagues and asked
“if you need expertise we would be willing to help, it is a tiny thing that
I can offer now.”

The events described above constitute the starting point for this article, the rev-
elation that after decades of indigenous heritage practice and scholarship, inno-
vative programs such as the UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the
Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003), and the prominence of indigenous represen-
tatives, so much still remains to be accomplished. This is a story of opportunity
lost, of the failure to foreground indigenous perspectives and implement program-
matic change within the world heritage arena in the face of nation-state desires
and residual colonial sentiments.

In this article I trace these structural tensions through the implementation of the
UNESCO Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Nat-
ural Heritage (1972) and the prevailing statist desires for national heritage as the
organization confronts new calls for heritage recognition from indigenous com-
munities. UNESCO could be described as a cosmopolitan organization fostering
peace and humanitarian efforts that developed out of the universalist aspirations for
global governance envisaged by the League of Nations.1 Today, it remains embed-
ded within modernist principles of progress and development and similarly
subscribes to the liberal principles of diplomacy, tolerance, and development. Im-
portantly, one of UNESCO’s stated “millennium challenges”2 is the very issue of sov-
ereignty in an increasingly transnational world and in the face of indigenous claims
and rights that often conflict with nation-state agendas. One volatile and high-profile
area where this plays out is in the field of cultural heritage and, specifically, with the
inclusion and management of indigenous heritage places and practices.

There have been a number of international initiatives to integrate indigenous
communities and their heritage within UNESCO’s governance. In the culture sec-

UNESCO AND THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

157

tor, the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage at-
tempts to showcase and preserve traditional, contemporary, and living culture
“inherited from our ancestors and passed on to our descendants.” There is a rec-
ognition that “cultural heritage does not end at monuments and collections of
objects” and further that “an understanding of the intangible cultural heritage of
different communities helps with intercultural dialogue, and encourages mutual
respect for other ways of life.”3 This “living heritage embodied in people” is not
confined to sites or even regions.4 Perhaps not surprisingly, social anthropologists
have focused most attention upon this convention because of its reliance on the
concept of culture and privileging of human diversity.5 There are other powerful
treaties such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948); the Inter-
national Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966); the Inter-
national Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966); and the Convention
on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions (2005).
I mention these international conventions to acknowledge the mechanisms by
which indigenous connections might be forged across nations to produce differ-
ent knowledges and working practices. My own work as an archaeologist, how-
ever, specifically addresses the 1972 World Heritage Convention and the “protection”
of archaeological or material cultural heritage. As the flagship charter for the or-
ganization, it remains the most desirable and prestigious badge for nation-states
to secure. I would argue that such emblematic recognition, encapsulated by the
principle of outstanding universal value (OUV)—however suspect in concept6—
potentially accrues tangible, site-based investment, partnerships, tourism rev-
enues, and development that cannot be matched by UNESCO’s other treaties. While
easier in principle to attain, inscription on the Intangible Heritage List is consid-
ered the soft option by some indigenous groups and States Parties. Paraphrasing
one high-ranking UNESCO official, “the difference between world heritage and
intangible heritage is something like the shift from a solid to a gas.”

Returning to the misrepresentation of indigenous heritage and the continued
paternalism of powerful Western nations on the World Heritage Committee re-
vealed by Ambassador Nibbeling-Wrießnig in 2012, I will describe one mecha-
nism proposed more than a decade ago that would have potentially ameliorated
such positions. I refer to the brilliantly conceived World Heritage Indigenous Peo-
ples Council of Experts (WHIPCOE), proposed first in Australia in 2000 only to
be quashed in Helsinki a year later. In Saint Petersburg, the issue of indigenous
participation in nomination processes, the lack of transparency, and failures to
uphold the UN rights of indigenous people was again raised, yet it is unlikely that
WHIPCOE will be resuscitated in the foreseeable future for reasons I will outline.
This is then a story of a radical, yet failed, attempt to craft a global indigenous
council of experts within an organization founded on nation-state sovereignty.
Regrettably, this is more a story of disconnection than one of connection. Such a
situation today may seem surprising, however, a closer examination of the disci-
pline of archaeology itself reveals the resilience of national boundaries and bound-

158

LYNN MESKELL

edness, national legal frameworks, and particularistic histories.7 Where possible, I
trace effective connective measures, but I also push at the limits of a truly global,
as well as an indigenous, heritage within the current UN structure and gover-
nance. This represents preliminary research into the politics and practices sur-
rounding UNESCO, which is an organization that is both central to the workings
of contemporary archaeology but also, at the same time, poorly understood.

WHY UNESCO?

As part of the UN family, UNESCO or more correctly the World Heritage Con-
vention, is the only mechanism for global governance in the heritage sphere.
Founded on international diplomacy and the aspirational goals to build peace and
intercultural understanding, the organization is attempting to move beyond stat-
ist agendas, demonstrated controversially by the recent recognition of Palestinian
sovereignty.8 Established after the end of World War II in the wake of devastation
and atrocity, UNESCO’s task was to promote peace and “change the minds of men”9
primarily through education and promotion of cultural diversity and understand-
ing. While the specific issue of indigenous heritage has come to the fore only in
recent decades, there was always a foundational commitment to ethnic commu-
nities, minorities, refugees, and other disenfranchised groups as a result of con-
flict, persecution, and intolerance. The didactic mission of UNESCO stemmed from
a specifically European organization called the International Committee on Intel-
lectual Cooperation (ICIC) which operated between 1936 and 1946,10 rather than
being a direct offshoot from the United Nations. Founded by prominent figures
such as Henri Bergson, Marie Curie, Albert Einstein, and Thomas Mann, the ICIC
was established to create a “state of mind conducive to the peaceful settlement of
international problems within the framework of the League of Nations.”11 Not
surprisingly, the work was focused on education, universities and libraries, and
internationalism. Given this history of recognition and reconciliation, the long-
standing ethos of cultural diversity, and protection of minority lifeways, it is not
surprising that UNESCO has emerged as the only structural avenue to global gov-
ernance and promotion of cultural heritage.

Within the UN family, UNESCO may not be as powerful as the high-profile
international peacekeeping, environmental, or development programs; instead it
is perceived as the cultural arm, the visionary agency, and the “ideas factory” for
the larger organization.12 Secretariat members, who I interviewed at the Paris head-
quarters, expressed their pride at the scope and public impact of initiatives UNESCO
has launched over the decades. Their mandate for world making includes advanc-
ing tolerance, diversity, and rights, all of which have a direct bearing on the pro-
motion of indigenous heritage globally.

The World Heritage Centre (WHC) was established in 1992 to act as the focal
point and coordinator within UNESCO for all matters related to world heritage.

UNESCO AND THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

159

WHC ensures the day-to-day management of the 1972 World Heritage Conven-
tion. It organizes the annual sessions of the World Heritage Committee (“the Com-
mittee”) and its bureau, and provides advice to States Parties in the preparation of
site nominations. WHC along with the advisory bodies also organizes international
assistance from the World Heritage Fund and coordinates both the reporting on
the condition of sites and the emergency action undertaken when a site is threat-
ened. Advisory bodies such as the International Centre for the Study of Preserva-
tion and Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM) organize technical seminars
and workshops, update the World Heritage List and database, and develop teach-
ing materials devoted to heritage preservation.13 Archaeologists often assume
incorrectly that it is WHC that constitutes the major arm of decision-making re-
garding world heritage. However, that responsibility, in fact, falls to the Commit-
tee, in accordance with Article 8 of the Convention. This fact is particularly salient
if we are envisioning instigating structural changes in the understanding and man-
agement of heritage, such as recognition of participation by nonstate actors like
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)14 or upholding the heritage rights of mi-
norities within nation-states. Currently, only States Parties serving on the Com-
mittee have voting rights: not NGOs or indigenous groups, not advisory bodies
like the International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) or the Inter-
national Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), not even the WHC itself.

The Committee is made up of 21 States Parties, elected at a General Assembly,
that serve a four-year term. Members must all be signatory nations to the World
Heritage Convention and their representatives are state-appointed ambassadors,
politicians, and professionals from both cultural and natural heritage. The Com-
mittee is the actual body responsible for the implementation of the World Her-
itage Convention. It defines the criteria for inscription, use of the World Heritage
Fund, and allocates financial assistance upon requests from States Parties. Signif-
icantly, it has the final say on whether a property is inscribed on the World Her-
itage List.15 The Committee can also defer its decision and request further
information on properties from the nations in question. It examines reports on
the state of conservation of inscribed properties and asks States Parties to take
action when properties are not being properly managed. It also decides on the
inclusion and removal of properties on the List of World Heritage in Danger16
and the deletion of properties from the List.

As of August 2012, there are 962 World Heritage Sites: 745 cultural sites, 188
natural and 29 mixed properties located across 157 States Parties. There are now
38 sites on the World Heritage in Danger List, most being concentrated in Africa.
There are many more cultural sites listed than natural ones, a product of the his-
torical development of the list, which is now being actively remedied. The list is
also historically dominated by properties in Europe,17 although there have been
vigorous efforts from the WHC and the Committee to create a more representa-
tive list. Some of those efforts include a new “upstreaming process” that was sug-
gested at the 33rd sessions in Seville in 2009,18 designed to assist underrepresented

160

LYNN MESKELL

countries in preparing robust conservation dossiers and identifying the criteria
for OUV, optimally leading to successful inscription. This could serve as a pow-
erful mechanism to empower indigenous groups to showcase their heritage sites,
but only with national government support, because only UN States Parties that
have ratified the Convention can nominate properties to the World Heritage List.
UNESCO is first and foremost an intergovernmental organization.

As stipulated in the 1972 Convention, serious decision-making heft has been
traditionally given to the recommendations of three external advisory bodies, com-
prised of international experts who conduct site visits and evaluations: ICCROM,
ICOMOS, and IUCN. ICCROM was set up in 1959 as an intergovernmental or-
ganization dedicated to the conservation of cultural heritage and is only involved
in state of conservation reporting in a limited manner. ICOMOS was founded in
1965 and provides evaluations of cultural and mixed properties proposed for in-
scription on the World Heritage List. Both ICOMOS and the IUCN are inter-
national NGOs. IUCN was established in 1948 and provides technical evaluations
of natural heritage properties and, through its worldwide network of specialists,
reports on the state of conservation of listed properties. These bodies communi-
cate their findings in lengthy reports online and in briefer presentations at the
international meetings.

For the last two years, I have been an official observer at these sessions and have
reported on the political machinations and national agendas that have eclipsed
issues surrounding archaeological heritage and connected communities.19 With
the growing dominance of strategic political alliances within the Committee of 21
states, the recommendations of the advisory bodies have been increasingly over-
turned and publicly derided.20 Throughout this article I focus primarily on the
cultural, rather than natural, properties and management, since the latter would
require a more substantive engagement with global initiatives including conser-
vation, biodiversity, and community-based management.21

Vociferous critiques of the World Heritage system may seem like much-needed
critical postcolonial interventions against what is seen to be a traditionally European-
dominated organization.22 They may also be read as overt attempts to displace the
northern hegemony that has historically characterized the World Heritage List in his-
toric terms. For those States Parties leading the challenge, this could be seen as a rev-
olution against the so-called expert adjudicators and their role in the contest that
site nomination has become. Since ICOMOS has been criticized for being too white
and European,23 this could be positioned as a strategic defiance of long-held heg-
emonic positions on the places where world heritage is located, how it is under-
stood, and the ways in which it can be legitimately practiced and lived. This could
indeed be liberating, particularly for traditional and living heritage. Yet in the ses-
sions I have either attended or analyzed, the properties being debated inhabit the fa-
miliar taxonomies of chateaux, churches, mosques, historic centers, forts and, to a
lesser extent, archaeological excavations. The question remains, can such challenges
drive substantive revisions to the Convention’s core mission or will they be fleeting

UNESCO AND THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

161

challenges that merely serve nationalistic goals that are themselves reliant upon the
composition of the Committee?

Senior UNESCO figure Laurent Lévi-Strauss recently commented that UNESCO
is moving from a “monumentalist” position to a more “anthropological” one.24
This move has much to do with pressures from nonstate actors, who are largely
indigenous people, and their particular understandings of cultural heritage. The
shift was signaled to some degree by the creation of a new category of heritage
within the 1972 Convention for Cultural Landscapes that incorporates the “com-
bined works of nature and of man.”25

This extension of the original typology of cultural sites (monuments, groups of
buildings, sites) reflects the evolution of the concept of heritage in many regions
of the world.26 According to the then-director of the WHC in Paris, the creation
of this new category resulted from changes in the traditional view of heritage as
“monument,” linked to European history, to include heritage concepts applicable
to all regions of the world.27 To date, there are some 97 cultural landscapes on the
World Heritage List, famous examples being Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park (Aus-
tralia), Konso Cultural Landscape (Ethiopia), and Mapungubwe Cultural Land-
scape (South Africa). While growing in popularity and potentially a powerful tool
for local practices and place-making,28 such nominations do not necessarily solve
the wider problem of indigenous heritage sites per se. Moreover, some critics claim
that the cultural landscape category may serve to essentialize indigenous people
and values as inherently tied to the land, or to project a unified and simplistic
image of indigenous groups.29

Indeed more than a decade ago, discussions about cultural landscapes had al-
ready identified the need for some advisory body of indigenous experts, given the
traditional knowledge and management practices required for those particular prop-
erties.30 These experts could advise on the appropriate identification, evaluation,
and management of mixed properties and cultural properties with indigenous as-
sociations plus the identification, management, and possible renomination of prop-
erties listed for their natural World Heritage values that may also hold indigenous
values. And, as the situation described at the opening of this article reveals, pow-
erful and knowledgeable representatives like the German ambassador to UNESCO
have a poor understanding of indigenous practices and heritage forms, as well as
living heritage and their attendant contextual values. To date there is little official
input from indigenous authorities to the World Heritage Committee. Their pri-
mary involvement remains as stakeholders (named or not, consulted with or not)
in the nomination dossiers or state of conservation reports prepared by States Par-
ties and brought before the Committee. Significantly, they are more likely to be
given a voice regarding the natural heritage properties than in cultural properties,
because their plight has garnered the support of environmental NGOs and agen-
cies worldwide. What does this shortfall mean for the relationships between world
cultural heritage and indigenous people, and how did UNESCO arrive at such a
situation?

162

LYNN MESKELL

OPPORTUNITY LOST: THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

In December 2000, a World Indigenous Peoples Forum was held in conjunction with
the 24th session of UNESCO’s World Heritage Committee in Cairns, Australia. Rep-
resentatives from Australia, Canada, and New Zealand harnessed the momentum of
these events and their location to propose the formation of a new committee, the
World Heritage Indigenous Peoples Council of Experts (WHIPCOE). The initia-
tive was taken in response to concerns voiced by indigenous peoples to their lack of
involvement in the development and implementation of laws, policies, and plans for
the protection of their knowledge, traditions, and cultural values that apply to their
ancestral lands, within or comprising sites now designated as World Heritage prop-
erties.31 Following on from these initial discussions in Cairns, an indigenous peo-
ples working group with representatives from Australia, Canada, and New Zealand
further developed the idea in a paper that was presented to the 25th session of the
World Heritage Committee held at UNESCO’s Paris Headquarters in June 2001.32
During the Paris meeting, delegates from Thailand and Zimbabwe expressed
their concern about the implications of WHIPCOE for site inscription and con-
servation processes. Both nations were concerned that this could lead to the es-
tablishment of another permanent mechanism acting as an advisory body to the
Committee. Thailand argued that there were only a few countries in the world
where interventions by such a Council may be needed. They asserted that internal
agreements among the heritage authorities and the indigenous communities them-
selves would be more appropriate in such cases. The delegate of Zimbabwe, en-
dorsing statements by Thailand, raised a further question about the definition of
the term “indigenous.” Moreover, he questioned whether it was realistic to expect
that the States Parties would have a chance to undertake a serious study of this
proposal and provide comments by the time of the next Committee session. In
response to this pushback, Canada countered, applauding the efforts of the work-
ing group and calling for more voices to be heard in the world heritage process.
Ways had to be found, Canada imputed, to involve advisory bodies and States
Parties to work with these new perspectives.33

The United States stressed that the establishment of WHIPCOE might affect a
large variety of States Parties and sites—the scope of which had yet to be fully re-
alized. This was particularly pertinent to properties inscribed according to Cultural
Criterion vi: sites “directly or tangibly associated with events or living traditions, with
ideas, or with beliefs, with artistic and literary works of outstanding universal sig-
nificance.” Underlining the importance of defining the term “indigenous,” the U.S.
representative stated that this critical issue could lead to one of the most important
developments in the application of the World Heritage Convention. Australia sug-
gested further work would continue on the definition and that the issue go forward
to the Committee for discussion as a policy matter. Australia concluded by reiter-
ating that these issues were of importance to their country and to all people work-
ing to protect the treasury of our global heritage. It was decided that the working

UNESCO AND THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

163

group would include indigenous representatives from Australia, Belize, Canada, Ec-
uador, New Zealand, the United States, and the secretariat for the Convention on Bio-
logical Diversity along with representatives from ICOMOS, IUCN, ICCROM, the UN
Indigenous Peoples Working Group, the WHC, and other interested parties. The
chair formally closed the discussion by noting that the WHIPCOE proposal repre-
sented a critical moment for the world heritage movement.34

Unfortunately, any decision whether to formally constitute the indigenous coun-
cil was then held over yet again to the next bureau meeting in Winnipeg, Canada,
in September 2001. Despite the glacial rate of change within UNESCO, there were
signs that a global council could effectively prioritize and oversee the protection
of indigenous knowledge, traditions and cultural values at World Heritage sites.
By all accounts they had the support of the WHC and some critical States Parties
including Australia, Canada, and New Zealand, those nations renown for estab-
lishing indigenous heritage partnerships. That same year Australian ICOMOS is-
sued the Statement on Indigenous Cultural Heritage proposing that indigenous
people be effectively involved in decisions affecting their heritage, and in manag-
ing places significant to them.35 Finally, tribute was paid to the work of the In-
digenous Peoples Working Group and it was recommended that the proposal to
establish WHIPCOE should be formally considered by the 25th session of the World
Heritage Committee in Helsinki in December 2001.

Some months later in Winnipeg 20 participants discussed the merits and po-
tentials of WHIPCOE. A representative from the office of the UN High Commis-
sioner for Human Rights underscored the history and position of indigenous issues
within the greater UN system. Representatives of ICOMOS, ICCROM, and IUCN
offered overviews of their mandates, structures, processes, activities, and existing
working relationships and interaction with indigenous people. During the ple-
nary discussion, numerous suggestions were made for possible roles for WHIP-
COE within the World Heritage process. These included ensuring full consultation
with local people, strengthening the management of existing sites, promoting in-
tangible cultural heritage and traditional knowledge, and assisting with crafting
management guidelines and participating in the nomination and evaluation of
sites.36 A council might afford opportunities for training, specifically sharing suc-
cessful indigenous site management approaches and practices between groups in-
ternationally. Perhaps more radically, a council might provide expertise concerning
the interests of cultural and/or minority groups as distinct from States Parties. It
could build connections with UNESCO’s advisory bodies and between other UN
agencies, conventions, and agreements. The ambition was, no less, to herald in
new era of relationships between traditional people and the World Heritage sys-
tem,37 on national and international scales, which tacitly entailed navigating the
issues of state sovereignty.

Again no decision was taken, and instead, reports would be drafted, texts final-
ized, definitions and operating procedures outlined. The final progress report was
then translated and placed on the WHC secure website accessible to the 21 com-

164

LYNN MESKELL

mittee members and the advisory bodies.38 Additionally, the director of WHC,
Francesco Bandarin sent letters and reports to individual States Parties and in-
vited their comments.39 The results were presented in Helsinki at the 25th session
of the World Heritage Committee in December 2001.40 A cogent statement of pur-
pose was outlined coupled with WHIPCOE’s proposed functions, structure, mem-
bership, reporting, and funding sources.

The responding letters, only nine of which were sent and held on record, reflect
the particular nationalist concerns and ethos of individual states. They are an in-
dictment of the problems that the UN nation-state structure affords and its in-
ability to grapple with citizens within states, nonstate actors, minorities—especially
indigenous minorities—and to attenuate affective connections across borders. Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, Mexico, Brazil, and Iceland commended and supported the
proposal.41 Israel purported no comment, but was concerned over the definition
of “indigenous.” Finland hoped such a council would not impinge upon the UN
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and that the financial arrangements would
be clarified.

The United States chose to defer its comments till after the proposed Winnipeg
meeting and similarly refrained from submitting a list of sites on the World Her-
itage and Tentative Lists that “have indigenous peoples issues.”42 They claimed to
“have a clearly defined legal relationship to indigenous peoples that would render
it inappropriate for us to submit such lists without consulting them.”43 This proves
both a convenient and ironic deflection in retrospect given that the United Na-
tions sent a mission in 2012 to evaluate the scope of infringement of basic human
rights accorded to Native Americans in the United States. It is a clear and familiar
example of one nation’s defense of its territorial sovereignty, its resistance to in-
ternational jurisdiction and internal minority self-determination, in limiting the
scope of a progressive global initiative. More ironic still was that between 1984
and 2003, the United States had formally withdrawn from UNESCO and was merely
occupying observer status.

While the US view may not seem surprising given its historic relationships with
native peoples and antipathy toward the UN system,44 the scale of France’s objec-
tions seem excessive. First, France objected to the institutionalization of a council
on legal, practical, and financial grounds. Second, they claimed the issue of indig-
enous people was adequately covered within the UN system through the UN Eco-
nomic and Social Council adopted Resolution 2000/22, the Establishment of a
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. Described as a problem of institutional co-
herence, they cited “unwieldy bureaucratic procedures, for an issue which only con-
cerns a limited number of States Parties and which can be treated by other means.”45
They expressed concern over jurisdiction, participation, and authority. Yet the key
issue was the “problem of sovereignty.”46 France’s position was that indigenous is-
sues should be “resolved in the framework of the Rules and Procedures of the States
Parties concerned. It is for the authorities of these States to establish discussion
groups aiming at an improvement, if necessary, of the participation of indigenous

UNESCO AND THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

165

peoples in the definition and implementation of the measures for the identifica-
tion, protection and management of the properties concerned—in conformity with
the criteria of the Convention.”47 France recalled Resolution 2000/56 of the UN
Commission for Human Rights that encourages governments to establish national
committees48 and not international organs.

France may seem historically removed from indigenous affairs, yet there are size-
able groups within their borders who are considered indigenous, such as the Bret-
ons and also the Basques. Notably they have not ratified the International Labour
Organization convention on the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples, Conven-
tion 169, nor has the United States. Sovereignty is indeed the problem and, like
the United States, France refuses international scrutiny of their domestic policies
over ethnicity, difference, and multicultural diversity. It is estimated that at least
half of the “European countries do not involve local stakeholders in the prepara-
tion of their Tentative Lists and at least two thirds draft their Lists without any
public consultation.”49 The possibility of an advisory council of indigenous ex-
perts potentially crossing national lines in solidarity over one nation’s properties,
even though they would have had to be nominated in the first instance by States
Parties, was deemed intolerable. The moment for connection and a powerful global
alliance of indigenous representatives had passed—dashed by two nations whose
motto is, ironically, liberty and equality.

In Helsinki this negative mood was echoed by the 21-body Committee: Argen-
tina, Belgium, China, Colombia, Egypt, Finland, Greece, Hungary, India, Leba-
non, Mexico, Nigeria, Oman, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, South Africa, Thailand, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and Zimbabwe. Perhaps the result would have been different if the com-
position of the Committee had been different and involved States Parties like Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, and Canada. And since Committee procedure is framed by
strong consensual and conservative elements, the outcome should not be surpris-
ing. Nonetheless, a number of Committee members, observers, and the represen-
tatives from the advisory bodies commented that indigenous peoples have a special
role with respect to certain World Heritage properties and that a network could
provide a positive forum for an exchange of information and experience concern-
ing their protection.50

Ultimately, the Committee reiterated problems relating to the WHIPCOE’s fund-
ing, legal status, and authority in regard to the States Parties, advisory bodies, the
Committee, and the WHC.51 The thorny definition of “indigenous” resurfaced again
coupled with the relevance of such a distinction in different regions. Given this
pushback, the Committee did not approve the establishment of WHIPCOE as ei-
ther a consultative body of the Committee or as a network to report to the Com-
mittee.52 The Committee further denied funding for a second meeting to discuss
WHIPCOE as proposed in WHC-01/CONF.208/13. Instead, they recommended
that “indigenous peoples could meet on their own initiative, be included as part of
State Party delegations to the Committee and were encouraged to be involved in

166

LYNN MESKELL

UNESCO’s work relating to the intangible heritage.”53 Such a dismissal imputes
that (1) indigenous people should organize themselves separately since their con-
tributions are not deemed mainstream procedurally; (2) that they resign them-
selves to the positions adopted by their sovereign states, often likely to be against
their own interests; and (3) that indigenous contributions pertain only to intan-
gible “living traditions,” rather than tangible heritage sites and places.

The issue of an indigenous expert network, however, is not going to simply dis-
appear. Writing in 2012, Heuheu, Kawharu, and Tuheiava argue that the need is
ever more pressing and that the political climate has changed from the previous
decade. First, they point out that 148 nations have now signed the UN Declara-
tion on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Second, the World Heritage Committee
has formulated “community” as a strategic objective.54 There is talk that UNESCO
will prepare a new statement on indigenous peoples, and in its 40th anniversary
year it further urges States Parties to “involve indigenous peoples and local com-
munities in decision making, monitoring and evaluation of the state of conserva-
tion of the properties and their Outstanding Universal Value and link the direct
community benefits to protection outcomes [and] respect the rights of indig-
enous peoples when nominating, managing and reporting on World Heritage sites
in indigenous people’s territories.”55

OTHER ROUTES

Former WHC director Francesco Bandarin56 indirectly questions the hegemony
of statist structures, by asking whether the heritage that lies outside the jurisdic-
tion of States Parties might be supported indirectly, by establishing links with other
international legal tools, or developing partnerships with institutions and organi-
zations expressed by civil society? This opens the door for potential non-State Party
support and site nomination, but it remains to be seen if such properties would
be inscribed under the auspices of the nation. It is indeed desirable to imagine
this process, yet it rather confounds the underlying structure of a UN organization.
In a much-cited landmark case, the Mirrar aboriginal community directly pe-
titioned UNESCO headquarters and convinced the bureau to send a mission to
investigate the detrimental impacts of the Jabiluka uranium mine on indigenous
living traditions as well as the environment.57 As Lydon evocatively describes,58 a
UNESCO mission then visited Kakadu and Canberra, and the following month
handed down its finding that the Jabiluka mine posed serious threats to the cul-
tural and natural values of the Kakadu World Heritage Area. This led to the un-
precedented threat of placing a property on the World Heritage in Danger List
without the consent of the State Party, representing a significant challenge to state
sovereignty and an international embarrassment to the Australian government.
These moves garnered support from a coalition of Green movements across Eu-
rope and international indigenous, social activist, and environmental groups.59 Then

UNESCO AND THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

167

in 2011, Jeffrey Lee, traditional owner of the Djok (Gundjeihmi) clan, spoke di-
rectly to the Committee in the UNESCO Paris meetings: He was petitioning for
Koongarra to be inscribed on the List as part of Kakadu National Park, which
indeed it was. It is likely that natural heritage properties like Kakadu entreat more
protection and global attention because of conservation and biodiversity issues as
opposed to archaeological sites. However, this example may signal the mobiliza-
tions that also could be operationalized for cultural properties if an indigenous
council of experts had been formed in 2001.

I recently spoke with a number of senior officials at UNESCO headquarters
about the related issue of human rights, specifically indigenous rights and those
of connected communities around World Heritage properties. Given that there is
now in force a Declaration for the Rights of Indigenous People,60 ratified by some
150 nations, surely there could be some provision within the mechanism of the
1972 Convention to make nations accountable if groups were being forcibly relo-
cated, marginalized, persecuted, or even excluded from the socioeconomic ben-
efits of their own heritage places. This would have real consequences for indigenous
groups as well as other local and minority communities and their rights to resti-
tution and self-determination. Perhaps not surprisingly, opinions were mixed. Some
felt that States Parties would never allow such discussion at the heritage forums,
and would quash immediately the invocation of the rights charter in terms of na-
tional heritage. This would mean it would be impossible to delete a property from
the World Heritage List if there were violations. Another set of interviewees, some
of the most senior members of the Secretariat, suggested that there might be a
route to holding states accountable to the larger Committee when sites were being
nominated. Indeed, there are more rigorous provisions now for determining
whether States Parties are including all the relevant stakeholders, working closely
and equitably with communities, and sharing benefits. As I have seen myself through
the nomination and inscription process at the archaeological site of Çatalhöyük, a
site I work at in central Turkey, both ICOMOS and the WHC take such negotia-
tions very seriously.

But what of the nations themselves? Speaking at the 11th session of the Perma-
nent Forum on Indigenous Issues in May 2012, Agnes Leina (Il’Laramatak Com-
munity Concerns) spoke directly to UNESCO about indigenous groups affected
by the selection World Heritage Sites. She underlined the need to obtain the free,
prior and informed consent from indigenous peoples regarding the choosing of
World Heritage Sites on traditional lands and territories. The three sites she listed,
Western Ghats (India), Sangha Trinational (Congo/Cameroon/Central African Re-
public), and the Kenya Lake System in the Great Rift Valley (Kenya), have sub-
sequently been inscribed by the Committee on the World Heritage List in 2011
and 2012.61 Leina contended that all three properties were nominated without the
meaningful involvement or participation of affected communities. Instead these
problems had been “unresolved, unaddressed or ignored altogether.”62 She urged
the World Heritage Committee to set aside its decision until those peoples were

168

LYNN MESKELL

consulted. Moreover, Leina indirectly invoked the ghost of WHIPCOE, calling for
the establishment and involvement of an indigenous advisory body in the evalu-
ation of all nominated properties situated in the territories of indigenous peoples
and in monitoring the conservation and management of such World Heritage prop-
erties. At the 2012 World Heritage Committee meetings in Russia there was con-
siderable debate over the issue of affected communities, and yet indigenous concerns
were still trumped by the interests of even postcolonial states like Kenya and India,
their positions backed by their allies on the Committee.

Voting to remove a site already inscribed on the List may be impossible on the
grounds of deleterious treatment of communities and would not find the support
of States Parties on the Committee, who ultimately have the final vote. However,
in theory, it may be possible not to inscribe a new site if affected communities
were marginalized or not properly consulted. This was the argument put forward
by Australia ICOMOS in 2001,63 that without free, proper and informed consent
(FPIC) sites could not be nominated.64 As the above scenario demonstrates, we
have yet to see such measures enacted in World Heritage sessions, but as the foot-
hold of new nations takes hold it may provide an effective mechanism for mem-
bers of the Committee to make public the plight of indigenous peoples and shame
countries into attending to their concerns, much like what happened in the Kakadu
case with Australia.

Returning to the inescapability of nation-state sovereignty, the possibility for
the aforementioned radical developments recognizing indigenous communities rests
entirely upon the composition of the Committee of 21 States Parties. As outlined
above, those Committee members rotate every four years and fashion alliances on
the basis of region, religion, economics, and historical (often colonial) linkages.
While one can never truly predict the voting alliances and transnational pacting,
from recent Committee sessions, it seems likely that there will continue to be a
strong anti-European, antitraditionalist stance toward heritage definitions, values
and even conservation policies.

Considering the future possibility of a global indigenous network to advise on
World Heritage, no one denies that there is a considerable and growing body of
shared expertise, successful management strategies, and alternative understand-
ings of heritage and heritage connections across natural and cultural properties.
As the continued desire for WHIPCOE underscores, webs of indigenous inter-
action may be proliferating, so too the traffic in ideas and findings, yet the im-
possibilities of actual instrumentalization are what I find compelling. How can
organizations like UNESCO be empowered to not only endorse but to execute
rights-based strategies, much like they moved on Palestinian recognition and
sovereignty—albeit after many decades of campaigning? What structurally im-
pedes this progression? The short answer is the bounds of the Convention, which
is in itself a treaty that can have “no third-party effect unless this is clearly in-
tended by States Parties and consented to by third states.”65 Certain nations seem
strongly receptive of additional changes to the operational guidelines and the larger

UNESCO AND THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

169

UNESCO structure generally, evinced repeatedly in the last two annual World Her-
itage Committee sessions. But ultimately these goals are frustrated and impeded
by the interests of nations, by the desire for consensual and diplomatic solutions
and thus by the UN structure itself, in terms of its very definition and mandate.
Perhaps there is a more fundamental divide too: The possibilities for indig-
enous collaboration across state lines are complicated by particular local cultures,
national legal framings, histories of oppression and relationships with the state.
These fraught specificities, while unifying in sentiment, can also impinge upon
implementing international processes and legislation. Whether one is talking about
universal human rights or world heritage, these seemingly global elements (uni-
versal and world) remain stymied by statism. The issues of who counts as indig-
enous and whose voices are heard remains critical. Some indigenous groups find
themselves represented by international NGOs, whose representatives often have
no lived connection to the people or places in question. Other groups become the
fleeting concern of organizations primarily committed to environmental cam-
paigning rather than community rights or broader heritage desires. Many mar-
ginalized groups within nations may not identify or be positioned as ethnically
indigenous, but have longstanding claims to land and place and still require pro-
tection and representation. All of these connected communities call for global re-
dress and rights, and yet international processes like World Heritage must be vehicles
to further alienate and victimize them at home when delegations return and con-
ferences come to a close. Returning to Ambassador Nibbeling-Wrießnig’s senti-
ments at the opening of this piece—at the present moment, powerful Western
nations on the World Heritage Committee might be willing to extend offers of
help and their own brand of expertise, but they remain reluctant to embrace a
network of indigenous experts who could effectively address and attend to prob-
lems in their own countries, and indeed globally.

ENDNOTES

1. Singh, UNESCO: Creating Norms; Stoczkowski, “UNESCO’s Doctrine of Human Diversity”;

Valderrama, History of UNESCO.

2. Bandarin, World Heritage: Challenges.
3. UNESCO, Convention for the Safeguarding.
4. Logan, “Playing the Devil’s Advocate,” 14.
5. For example, Arantes, “Diversity, Heritage and Cultural Politics”; Brown, “UNDP’s Commit-
ment to Defend”; Brumann, “Outside the Glass Case”; Hafstein, “Intangible heritage as a List”; Erick-
sen, “Between Universalism and Relativism”; Schmitt, “Global Cultural Governance”; Schmitt, Cultural
Governance.

6. Meskell, “Negative Heritage and Past Mastering”; Rico, “Negative Heritage”; Scholze, “Ar-

rested Heritage”; Bertacchini and Saccone, “Toward a Political Economy.”

7. See Lilley, Native Title; Pauketat and Meskell, “Changing Theoretical Perspectives”; Watkins,
“Becoming American or Becoming Indian?”; Logan, “Cultural Diversity, Heritage and Human Rights.”

8. De Cesari, “World Heritage and National Sovereignty.”
9. See http://www.unesco.org/new/en/unesco/about-us/who-we-are/history/constitution/.

170

LYNN MESKELL

_SECTION⫽201.html.

http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID⫽32906&URL_DO⫽DO_TOPIC&URL

10. Hoggart, Idea and Its Servants; Droit, Humanity in the Making.
11. Valderrama, History of UNESCO, 3.
12. Pavone, Labyrinth of the World.
13. See http://whc.unesco.org/en/134.
14. See
15. See http://whc.unesco.org/en/list.
16. See http://whc.unesco.org/en/committee.
17. Labadi, “Representations of the Nation.”
18. Decision 33 COM 14.A2, para. 14.
19. Meskell, “From Paris to Pontdrift”; see also Askew, “Magic List of Global Status”; Logan, “Cul-

tural Diversity, Cultural Heritage.”

20. Economist, “UNESCO’s World Heritage Sites”; Jokilehto, “World Heritage.”
21. But see Meskell, “From Paris to Pontdrift.”
22. See Strasser, “Putting Reform into Action.”
23. Meskell, “The Rush to Inscribe,” 150.
24. Quoted in Singh, UNESCO: Creating Norms, 84.
25. See http://whc.unesco.org/en/conventiontext/.
26. Droste et al., Cultural Landscapes.
27. Bandarin, World Heritage: Challenges, 194.
28. Taylor and Lennon, “Cultural Landscapes: A Bridge”; Aplin, “World Heritage Cultural

Landscapes.”

Landscapes and World Heritage.”

29. See Labadi, “Review of the Global Strategy”; Baird, “Politics of Place”; Kawharu, “Ancestral
30. UNESCO, Report on the Proposed, 5 (WHC-2001/CONF.205/WEB.3).
31. See http://whc.unesco.org/en/activities/496/.
32. See also Logan, “From Kakadu to Cape York.”
33. UNESCO, Report of Rapporteur, 9 (WHC-2001/CONF.205/10).
34. UNESCO, Report on the Proposed. (WHC-2001/CONF.205/WEB.3).
35. Hales et al., “Indigenous Free Prior Informed Consent,” 4.
36. WHIPCOE, These Are Our Powerful Words.
37. See UNESCO, Progress Report, 9 (WHC-2001/CONF.208/13).
38. WHIPCOE, These Are Our Powerful Words.
39. CL/WHC.9/01.
40. UNESCO, Progress Report. (WHC-2001/CONF.208/13).
41. See also Kawharu, “Ancestral Landscapes and World Heritage.”
42. Cleary, “Letter to the World Heritage Center” (CL/WHC.9/01).
43. Cleary, “Letter to the World Heritage Center” (CL/WHC.9/01).
44. Pavone, Labyrinth of the World; Hoggart, Idea and Its Servants.
45. Musitelli, “Letter to the World Heritage Center” (CL/WHC.9/01).
46. Musitelli, “Letter to the World Heritage Center” (CL/WHC.9/01).
47. Musitelli, “Letter to the World Heritage Center” (CL/WHC.9/01).
48. See para. 15.
49. Zacharias, “UNESCO Regime,” 323.
50. UNESCO, Report on the Twenty-Fifth Session, para. 15.4 (WHC-01/CONF.208/24).
51. Labadi, “Review of the Global Strategy.”
52. UNESCO, Report on the Twenty-Fifth Session, para. 15.5 (WHC-01/CONF.208/24).
53. UNESCO, Report on the Twenty-Fifth Session, para. 15.4 (WHC-01/CONF.208/24).
54. Heuheu et al., “World Heritage and Indigeneity,” 12.
55. Cameron and Rössler, “World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples,” 48.
56. Bandarin, World Heritage: Challenges, 193.
57. Lydon, “Young and Free”; Logan, “Closing Pandora’s Box.”
58. Lydon, “Young and Free,” 44.

UNESCO AND THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

171

59. Lydon, “Young and Free.”
60. United Nations General Assembly, Declaration on the Rights.
61. See http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1060 and http://whc.unesco.org/en/newproperties/.
62. See ECOSOC, Permanent Forum.
63. See Australia ICOMOS, Statement on Indigenous Cultural Heritage.
64. Hales et al., “Indigenous Free Prior Informed Consent”; see also Ween, “World Heritage and

Indigenous Rights”; Disko, “World Heritage Sites in Indigenous.”

65. O’Keefe, “World Cultural Heritage,” 192.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aplin, G. “World Heritage Cultural Landscapes.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 13, no. 6
(2007): 427–46.

Arantes, A. A. “Diversity, Heritage and Cultural Politics.” Theory, Culture and Society 24, no. 7–8
(2007): 290–296.

Askew, M. “The Magic List of Global Status: UNESCO, World Heritage and the Agendas of States.”
In Heritage and Globalisation, edited by S. Labadi and C. Long, 19–44. London: Routledge, 2010.

Australia ICOMOS. Statement on Indigenous Cultural Heritage. November, 2001.

Baird, Melissa F. “The Politics of Place: Heritage, Identity, and the Epistemologies of Cultural Land-
scape.” PhD diss., Department of Anthropology, University of Oregon, 2009.

Bandarin, F. World Heritage: Challenges for the Millennium. Paris: UNESCO, 2007.

Bertacchini, E., and D. Saccone. “Toward a Political Economy of World Heritage.” Journal of Cultural
Economics 36, no. 4 (2012): 327–52.

Brown, M. “The UNDP’s Commitment to Defend Cultural Diversity with UNESCO.” Museum In-
ternational 56, no. 4 (2004): 18–23.

Brumann, C. “Outside the Glass Case: The Social Life of Urban Heritage in Kyoto.” American Eth-
nologist 36, no. 2 (2009): 276–99.

Cameron, C., and M. Rössler. “World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples: The Evolution of an Impor-
tant Relationship.” World Heritage 62 (2012): 44–49.

Cleary, S. J. “Letter to the World Heritage Center” (21 September 2001). Paris: UNESCO.

De Cesari, C. “World Heritage and National Sovereignty: On Palestine’s UNESCO Bid.” Weblog entry,
Leiden-Stanford Heritage Network. http://www.networkedheritage.org/2011/12/06/world-heritage
-and-national-sovereignty-on-palestine%E2%80%99s-unesco-bid/ (6 December 2011).

Disko, S. “World Heritage Sites in Indigenous Peoples’ Territories: Ways of Ensuring Respect for
Indigenous Cultures, Values and Human Rights.” In World Heritage and Cultural Diversity, edited by
D. Offenhäußer, W. Zimmerli, and M.-T. Alberts Cottbus, 167–77. Germany: German Commission
for UNESCO, 2010.

Droit, R.-P. Humanity in the Making: Overview of the Intellectual History of UNESCO 1945–2005.
Paris: UNESCO, 2005.

Droste, B. v., H. Plachter, and M. Rossler, 1995. Cultural Landscapes of Universal Value: Components
of a Global Strategy. Heidelberg, Germany: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag, 1995.

172

LYNN MESKELL

Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). “Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Eleventh Ses-
sion.” http://www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2012/hr5093.doc.htm (15 May 2011).
Economist. “UNESCO’s World Heritage Sites: A Danger List in Danger.” http://www.economist.com
/node/16891951 (26 August 2010).

Ericksen, T. H. “Between Universalism and Relativism: A Critique of the UNESCO Concept of Cul-
ture.” In Human Rights: An Anthropological Reader, edited by M. Goodale Malden, 356–71. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.

Hafstein, V. “Intangible Heritage as a List: From Masterpieces to Representation.” In Intangible Her-
itage, edited by L.-J. Smith and N. Akagawa, 93–111. London: Routledge, 2009.

Hales, R. J., J. Rynne, C. Howlett, J. Devine, and V. Hauser. “Indigenous Free Prior Informed Con-
sent: A Case for Self Determination in World Heritage Nomination Processes.” International Journal
of Heritage Studies 19, no. 3 (2013): 270–287.

Heuheu, T. t., M. Kawharu, and R. A. Tuheiava. “World Heritage and Indigeneity.” World Heritage 62
(2012): 6–15.

Hoggart, R. An Idea and Its Servants: UNESCO from Within. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction, 2011.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. http://www.hrcr.org/docs/Civil&Political
/intlcivpol.html (1966; accessed 14 May 2013).
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. http://www.ohchr.org/EN
/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx (1966; accessed May 2013).

Jokilehto, J. “World Heritage: Observations on Decisions Related to Cultural Heritage.” Journal of
Cultural Heritage Management and Sustainable Development 1, no. 1 (2011): 61–74.

Kawharu, M. “Ancestral Landscapes and World Heritage from a Maori Viewpoint.” Journal of the
Polynesian Society 118, no. 4 (2009): 317–38.

Labadi, S. “A Review of the Global Strategy for a Balanced, Representative and Credible World Her-
itage List 1994–2004.” Conservation and Management of Archaeological Sites 7, no. 2 (2005): 89–102.

———. “Representations of the Nation and Cultural Diversity in Discourses on World Heritage.”
Journal of Social Archaeology 7, no. 2 (2007): 147–70.

Lilley, I., ed. Native Title and the Transformation of Archaeology in the Postcolonial World. Sydney:
University of Sydney, 2000.

Logan, W. “Closing Pandora’s Box: Human Rights Conundrums in Cultural Heritage Protection.” In
Cultural Heritage and Human Rights, edited by H. Silverman and Fairchild Ruggles, 33–52. New
York: Springer, 2008.

———. “Cultural Diversity, Heritage and Human Rights.” In The Ashgate Companion to Heritage
and Identity, edited by B. Graham and P. Howard, 439–54. Farnham: Ashgate, 2008.

———. “Playing the Devil’s Advocate: Protecting Intangible Cultural Heritage and the Infringement
of Human Rights.” Historic Environment 22, no. 3 (2009): 14–18.

———. “Cultural Diversity, Cultural Heritage and Human Rights: Towards Heritage Management
as Human Rights-Based Cultural Practice.” International Journal of Heritage Studies 18, no. 3 (2012):
231–44.

UNESCO AND THE FATE OF WHIPCOE

173

———. “Australia, Indigenous Peoples and World Heritage from Kakadu to Cape York: State Party
Behaviour under the World Heritage Convention.” Journal of Social Archaeology 13, no. 2 (2013).

Lydon, J. “Young and Free: The Australian Past in a Global Future.” In Cosmopolitan Archaeologies,
edited by L. M. Meskell, 28–47. Durham: Duke University Press, 2009.

Meskell, Lynn M. “Negative Heritage and Past Mastering in Archaeology.” Anthropological Quarterly
75, no. 3 (2002): 557–74.

———. “From Paris to Pontdrift: UNESCO Meetings, Mapungubwe and Mining.” South African
Archaeological Bulletin 66, no. 194 (2011): 149–56.

———. “The Rush to Inscribe: Reflections on the 35th Session of the World Heritage Committee,
UNESCO Paris, 2011.” Journal of Field Archaeology 37, no. 2 (2012): 145–51.

Musitelli, J. “Letter to the World Heritage Center” (25 September 2001). Paris: UNESCO.

O’Keefe, R. “World Cultural Heritage: Obligations to the International Community as a Whole?”
International & Comparative Law Quarterly 53, no. 1 (2004): 189–209.

Pauketat, T., and L. M. Meskell. “Changing Theoretical Perspectives in Americanist Archaeology.” In
Voices in American Archaeology, edited by W. Ashmore, D. D. Lippert, and B. Mills, 193–219. Wash-
ington, DC: Society for American Archaeology, 2010.

Pavone, V. From the Labyrinth of the World to the Paradise of the Heart: Science and Humanism in
UNESCO’s Approach to Globalization. New York: Lexington, 2008.

Rico, T. “Negative Heritage: The Place of Conflict in World Heritage.” Conservation and Management
of Archaeological Sites 10, no. 4 (2008): 344–52.

Schmitt, T. M. “Global Cultural Governance: Decision-Making Concerning World Heritage between
Politics and Science.” Erdkunde 63, no. 2 (2009): 103–21.

———. Cultural Governance: Zur Kulturgeographie Des UNESCO-Welterberegimes. Wiesbaden: Franz
Steiner Verlag, 2012.

Scholze, M. “Arrested Heritage: The Politics of Inscription into the UNESCO World Heritage List:
The Case of Agadez in Niger.” Journal of Material Culture 13, no. 2 (2008): 215–31.

Singh, J. P. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO): Creating
Norms for a Complex World. London: Routledge, 2011.

Stoczkowski, W. “UNESCO’s Doctrine of Human Diversity: A Secular Soteriology?” Anthropology
Today 25, no. 3 (2009): 7–11.

Strasser, P. “‘Putting Reform into Action’—Thirty Years of the World Heritage Convention: How to
Reform a Convention without Changing Its Regulations.” 
11 (2002): 215–66.

Taylor, K., and J. Lennon. “Cultural Landscapes: A Bridge between Culture and Nature?” Inter-
national Journal of Heritage Studies 17, no. 6 (2011): 537–54.

UNESCO. Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage. Paris:
UNESCO, 1972.

———. Progress Report on the Proposed World Heritage Indigenous Peoples Council of Experts (WHIP-
COE). Paris, UNESCO, 2001.

174

LYNN MESKELL

———. Report of the Rapporteur on the Twenty-Fifth Session of the World Heritage Committee. Paris:
UNESCO, 2001.

———. Report on the Proposed World Heritage Indigenous Peoples Council of Experts (WHIPCOE).
Paris: UNESCO, 2001.

———. Report on the Twenty-Fifth Session of the World Heritage Committee. Paris: UNESCO, 2001.
———. Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. Paris: UNESCO. http://
whc.unesco.org/en/sessions/25COM/documents/ (17 October 2003).

———. Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. Paris:
UNESCO, 2005.

United Nations General Assembly. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights. New York: United
Nations. http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html (10 December 1948).
———. Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People. New York: United Nations. http://www.un.org/
Docs/journal/asp/ws.asp?m⫽A/RES/61/295 (2 October 2007).

Valderrama, F. A History of UNESCO. Paris: UNESCO, 1995.

Watkins, J. “Becoming American or Becoming Indian?: NAGPRA, Kennewick, and Cultural Affilia-
tion.” Journal of Social Archaeology 4, no. 1 (2004): 60–80.

Ween, G. B. “World Heritage and Indigenous Rights: Norwegian Examples.” International Journal of
Heritage Studies 18, no. 3 (2012): 257–70.

World Heritage Indigenous People’s Council of Experts (WHIPCOE). “These Are Our Powerful Words:
Summary Report of the Working Group Workshop on the World Heritage Indigenous People’s Coun-
cil of Experts.” Winnipeg, Manitoba, 5–8 November 2001.

Zacharias, D. “The UNESCO Regime for the Protection of World Heritage as Prototype of an
Autonomy-Gaining International Institution.” In The Exercise of Public Authority by International
Institutions, edited by A. von Bogdandy, 301–36. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2010.


