International Journal of Cultural Property (2006) 13:415–417. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2006 International Cultural Property Society
DOI: 10.1017/S0940739106060255

PIMA Code of Ethics for Pacific Islands
Museums and Cultural Centres
Canberra, Australia, February 2006

PREAMBLE

The Pacific Islands Museums Association (PIMA) has existed as an Affiliated Or-
ganisation of the International Council of Museums (ICOM) since 1998. PIMA
and its members fully endorse and support the ICOM Code of Ethics. In addi-
tion, PIMA is proud to produce this specialised code for professional museum
work particularly adapted to the values of Pacific Islands Museums and Cultural
Centres.

GUIDING PRINCIPLES

Pacific Islands Museums and Cultural Centres:

1. are the custodians of collections of cultural and natural history that they
hold in trust, foremost for their creator communities and the peoples of the
Pacific, secondly for the benefit of people and communities elsewhere1;

2. have a primary responsibility to assist communities to maintain and safe-

guard their continuing intangible heritage;

3. build and maintain relations of cultural understanding and mutual respect

with the communities they serve;

4. support the reconnection of ex-situ cultural resources, located domestically

or internationally, with their creator communities;

5. are advocates for the conservation of cultural diversity, biodiversity and sus-

tainable, culturecentred development;

6. will advocate with governments to provide the appropriate financial and other

support they require to discharge their responsibilities;

415

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:45:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739106060255

416

DOCUMENTS

7. will advocate with governments for the effective implementation of national
legislation and international conventions relating to the protection and con-
servation of cultural and natural resources; and

8. encourage museums from outside the Pacific to support the repatriation of

cultural resources to the countries and communities of origin.

In Line with These Principles Pacific Islands Museums and
Cultural Centres Will:

1. Relate with communities

1.1 engage communities in all aspects of the management of museums as

well as their own cultural and natural heritage;

1.2 assist communities to manage their own heritage by providing training,

capacity-building and ongoing support;

1.3 build the professional skills of their staff and the communities they serve;
1.4 ensure appropriate representation of the creator communities’ knowl-
edge and beliefs in all museum activities, public programs and interpre-
tative materials;

1.5 maintain an active relationship with communities in the documentation
and conservation of historical, cultural and natural places, which can be
used in museum exhibitions and educational programs.

2. Provide access

2.1 address their responsibilities to provide appropriate access to their prem-
ises, collections, research and public programs for all members of the
communities they serve;

2.2 support the use of local vernacular languages, where appropriate, in pub-
lic programs, publications and interpretive materials (e.g., labels, wall
texts, tour guiding, talks) in addition to the official languages of the re-
spective country or territory.

3. Monitor research

3.1 develop and promote guidelines for the undertaking of research on
aspects of the cultural and natural heritage, addressing responsibili-
ties of both museums and others facilitating fieldwork and research (‘tar-
get bodies’) and the institutions supporting researchers (‘sponsoring
bodies’);

3.2 develop mechanisms to ensure that researchers collect for facilitating mu-
seums (‘target museums’) as well as for their own institutions (‘spon-
soring bodies’).
4. Assess significance

4.1 ensure that their personnel are knowledgeable in appropriate processes

for assessing the significance of cultural and natural resources;

4.2 assess the significance of cultural resources on the basis of the primary
importance of the cultural values that they bear for their creator com-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:45:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739106060255

DOCUMENTS

417

munities, in addition to the secondary values of their authenticity, age
or rarity;

4.3 refrain as far as practicable from placing monetary values on cultural

and natural resources.

ENDNOTES

Please Note: This Code of Ethics was developed during a special session of the Pacific Museums in
Sustainable Heritage Development Workshop, held at the Australian National University in Can-
berra during February 2006. The facilitation was expertly co-chaired by PIMA Executive Board Mem-
bers, Lawrence Foana’ota (Director, Solomon Islands National Museum) and Ralph Regenvanu
(Director, Vanuatu Cultural Centre) with the assistance of Bernice Murphy (Chair, ICOM Ethics
Committee) and Professor Amareswar Galla (Director of Graduate Studies in Sustainable Heritage
Development, The Australian National University and Vice President, ICOM). The Workshop was
convened by the Pacific Asia Observatory for Cultural Diversity in Human Development and the
Cross Cultural Taskforce of ICOM. For details visit: www.pacificasiaobservatory.org

1. The dichotomy of natural and cultural is an introduced concept to indigenous peoples of the
world who uphold the holistic and integrated world view where cultural includes what is perceived
as natural.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:45:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739106060255


