Cultural  Property  and  'Sufficient
Interest':
the  Rose  and  the  Globe  sites
Andrew Gurr*

Archaeology  in  Britain  these  days  is  a  highly  politicized  activity.
Most  of  the  major  remains  of  buildings  that  have  interest  for
archaeologists are in town centres, and are therefore liable to become
victims  of  that  most  peculiar  of  modern  euphemisms,  redevelop-
ment.  New  buildings  in  town  centres  involve  huge  amounts  of
money  and,  very  often,  a  direct  conflict  between  the culture  of  the
past  and  the  finances  of the  future.  Normally  only the  government
or its principal cultural  agent,  English  Heritage, can supply enough
funds  to preserve artefacts  which are discovered  in city centres, and
usually  they do not  try. The cost  of buying off  the developers  from
the  site  of  the  Rose  in  Southwark  in  1989 would  have  swallowed
half of English Heritage's preservation  budget for the entire country
for the year. The story of the Rose and the Globe sites in Southwark,
the  consequences  of  the  striking  archaeological  discoveries  made
there, and  the different  fates  of the two sites, point  to some signifi-
cant  inadequacies  in English  policy  towards  such rarities.

There  are  two  ways  of  protecting  ancient  sites  from  destruction
by  careless  redevelopment.  One  is  scheduling  by  the  Secretary  of
State  for  the  Environment.  The  other  is  restraints  or  conditions
imposed  with  planning  permission  granted  by  local  authorities. Of
the two, scheduling is by far  the more substantial means of securing
the  preservation  of  a  site  of  cultural  interest.  It  is  a  power  the
Department  of  the  Environment  (DoE)  can  exercise  under  the
Ancient  Monuments  and  Archaeological  Areas  Act  1979,  as
amended  by  the  National  Heritage  Act  1983.'  Section  1 (3) of  the
1979 Act states  that

the  Secretary  of  State  may,  on first compiling  the  schedule  or
any  time  thereafter,  include  any  monument  which  appears  to
him  to be of national  importance. The  Secretary  of State shall
consult  English  Heritage  before  he  includes  in  the  schedule  a
monument  situated  in  England.

*  Professor of English, University of Reading.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Andrew  Gurr

When a site is scheduled, no development or alteration can be made
to  it  without  a  Scheduled  Monument  Consent.  Before  this  can  be
obtained, the Act demands the widest possible consultation of public
interest  in the site. The main  flaw  in  this plain  requirement  became
apparent  over  the  Rose  site  in  1989.  For  various  reasons,  almost
entirely  financial,  the Secretary  of  State decided  not  to  schedule  it.
A  pressure  group  formed  to  protect  it,  The  Rose  Theatre  Trust,
initiated  proceedings  to  secure  a judicial  review of  the  Secretary  of
State's  decision  against  scheduling.  Schiemann J  ruled  that  they
lacked the 'interest'  to challenge such a decision. Neither any indivi-
dual or group of individuals could do so. 'It seems to me', he wrote
in his judgment,

that  the decision  not  to schedule is one of  those  governmental
decisions in respect of which the ordinary citizen does not have
a  sufficient  interest  to  entitle  him  to  obtain  leave  to  move  for
judicial  review.2

Joanna  Goyder,  reporting  on  the  case  in  Building Law  Monthly,2
concluded  on  the evidence  of  this instance  that  the  law  relating  to
the  scheduling  of  national  monuments  is  inadequate.  It  makes  no
provision  for  a  proper  mechanism  for  consultation.  She  also  con-
cluded  that  the  uproar  caused  by  the  decision  not  to  schedule  the
site,  together  with  Schiemann  J's  ruling  on  identifiable  interest,
indicates that scheduling as a device for protecting cultural property
ought  to  be made stronger  and  more widely available.

There are many  other  flaws  in  English  Heritage's  policy  towards
archaeological sites. Mostly they are generated by the usual shortage
of  funds,  either  for  analytical  work  or  for  preservation.  English
Heritage  has developed  its policy towards sites of historical  interest
over the last five years, largely in reaction to a classic paradox which
has always dogged  the discipline of archaeology  itself: that  to learn
precise  information  from  a site almost  always entails destroying  it.
Field archaeologists need to have faith in their technology of record-
ing,  because  once  a  site  is  excavated  it  can  never  be  put  together
again  exactly  as  it was. Besides  the  simple  process  of moving  mat-
erials  out  of  their  original  position,  digging  introduces  chemical
changes,  alterations  in  water  content,  in  ground  magnetism,  and
probably  other effects  which modern  technology  has not yet identi-
fied.  A site can therefore be dug only once. And yet without digging,
the exact character of a site, what it contains, what it can teach, must
remain a matter of guesswork. Given the cost of field archaeology, in
the absence of generous funding  English Heritage's policy is to leave
known  sites  undisturbed  in  the  ground.  This  meets  their  official
requirement  for  'preservation'  of rare sites, but it also leaves buried
the  chance  of  finding  any  information  from  them,  and  in  many
cases  of  arousing  public  interest  in  their  contents.  Although  there
was ample and  evident  declared  public interest  in  the Rose and  the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

10

Cultural  Property  and  'Sufficient  Interest'

Globe,  this  policy  has  still  been  applied  with  painful  directness  to
both sites.

The other chief agents who can help in preserving ancient remains
are  local  authorities,  with  their  control  over  planning  applications.
All applications for  new building and redevelopment have to be put
to  them  for  permission,  as  required  by  the  Town  and  Country
Planning  Act  1971.4  By  a  Section  51  agreement,  they  can  make
planning  permission  for  new  buildings  conditional  on  an  archaeo-
logical  'rescue dig', an excavation  to ascertain  what is buried  in the
site before  the builders move in. This procedure can secure not only
the  identification  of  historical  remains  on  sites  of  archaeological
interest,  but  can  make  provision  for  the  developer  to finance their
discovery,  a-vital  accessory,  though  not  always  one  that  serves  the
developer's  interest.  That  is really  all  that  local  authorities  can  do.
What  happens  if  a  Roman  villa  or  an. Elizabethan  theatre  is dis-
covered  on  a  site  not  in  their  control?  The  only  weapon  then
available  to any 'interested'  party  is publicity  in the media, and  the
hope of a national uproar  of the kind that was raised  over the Rose
site.  Except  for  those  few  cases  where  the  government  can  be
persuaded to step in and declare the site a national monument, there
are no other political devices to turn developers from  their path once
they have met the conditions laid down in the planning permission to
allow an exploratory dig. And governments are not often  persuaded
to find the resources  to compensate  developers  for  the loss of their
site, as in the case of the Rose.

The  role  of  English  Heritage  is  important  in  both  forms  of
protection  of  important  sites.  Set  up  by  the  1979  Act  with  the
function  of advising the government  about all the material  artefacts
of  cultural  and  historical  interest  in  England,  it  has  a  woefully
small  budget  to cope with the gigantic spread  of its responsibilities.
Consequently  its  advice  to  the  Secretary  of  State  is  likely  to  be
influenced  by  other  factors  besides  the  merely  cultural  evaluation
of  the  'heritage'  interest  in  a  site.  Rumour  has  it  that  when  the
Rose's  fate  was  in  question,  English  Heritage  was  preparing  to
recommend  to the Secretary of State that he should schedule it. The
Secretary, who was then Nicholas  Ridley, pointed  out to  them  that
if  they  did  so  he would  have  to  take  the  cost  of compensating  the
developers  out  of  their  own  annual  budget.  At  an  estimated  £70
million,  that  would  have  consumed  more  than  half  the  money
available for  English Heritage's work across the entire country. Not
surprisingly,  they  recommended  that  the  Rose  site  should  not  be
scheduled.  Evaluation  of England's  cultural  heritage  is often  based
on  other  considerations  than  purely cultural  or  historical value.

In  evaluating  sites  English  Heritage  has  a  complex  role  to  play.
Its  principal  activity  over  all  sites  of  archaeological  interest  is  to
record  their existence, and when they are threatened  for  any reason
to  take  the  initiative  in  securing  their  preservation.  This,  besides
making  recommendations  for  scheduling,  may entail  advising local

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

11

Andrew  Gurr

authorities and  in extreme cases undertaking  rescue digs to  identify
the  remains  on  a  threatened  site. The  work  involves  a  vast  survey
and  archival  exercise  at  different  levels  of  intensity,  and  the giving
of  encouragement,  sometimes  financial,  to  local  authorities  to  set
up  Archaeological  Officers  and  Monument  Records  Officers  who
will  carry  out  the  detailed  work  of  recording  and  protecting  local
sites.

This work  of English  Heritage covers every site in England, with
one  massive  exception.  London  itself  is  at  present  almost  a  black
hole so far  as safeguarding  its archaeological  interests is concerned.
The Greater London Council's resources once allowed it to maintain
a substantial and experienced department that looked after  the city's
huge archaeological  and historical  treasures, and  to publish  records
of  its  many  findings.  English  Heritage  never  had  to  develop  the
records and  the control  over London  that  it has over all other  local
authorities in England. But the boroughs which took over the GLC's
functions  when  it  was abolished  in  1986 are  too  small  individually
to  command  the  resources  and  the  expertise  that  the  central  body
had.  None  of  the  London  boroughs  maintains  the  level  of  staffing
that  the  GLC  used  for  checking  on  redevelopment  proposals  and
to  identify,  record  and  safeguard  important  sites. The  Museum  of
London  has a large archaeology  unit,  but  it is not  an  official  local
government  watchdog,  it  lacks funds,  and  most  of its field work  is
rescue digging on well-known  sites funded  by the developers.

The amphitheatre  playhouses  of  Shakespeare's  time, such  as  the
Rose  and  the  Globe  in  London,  are  a  peculiar  phenomenon  in
several  distinct  ways.  No  more  than  ten  or  eleven  such  buildings
were ever constructed. The first, a radically  novel  kind  of structure,
was erected in 1567, and the last in 1614. They were all pulled down
during  the long closure of the  theatres  between  1642 and  1660. No
accurate  records  about  any  of  them  and  few  illustrations  have
survived.  And  yet  they  provided  Shakespeare  and  his  fellows  with
the venues for  the greatest  drama  ever written  in English. As such,
they ought to have been the focus  for massive investigation. Yet the
loss  of  precise  evidence  about  their  distinctive  design  meant  that
they  were  neglected  for  centuries.  Scholars  valued  Shakespeare  on
the  page  and  not  on  the  stage.  Theatre  impresarios  thought  his
Globe primitive compared with modern  roofed  theatres. Archaeolo-
gists, too, were trained  on  Roman  remains, which  in  London  were
only to  be found  by digging straight  through  the intervening  layers
of Elizabethan  and  medieval debris. That  is why the Globe was not
dug  for  in  the  eighteenth  century  when  the  first  brewery  buildings
went  up  on  the  site,  and  why  even  as  late  as  1957  the  ten-storey
Southbridge  House  went  up  on  the  Rose  site  without  any  prior
excavation.  Whether  that  was  the  reason  why  the  remains  of  the
third  playhouse  for  which  Shakespeare  wrote  his  plays  (after  the
Rose and  the Globe), the Curtain  in Shoreditch, were allowed  to be
destroyed  without  any  prior  archaeological  study  is  still  open  to

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

12

Cultural  Property and  'Sufficient  Interest'

question.  In  the late  1980s, just  after  the GLC was abolished, a tall
office  block  with  deep cellarage  was erected  on  the  Curtain  site. It
was  named  'Shakespeare  House'. No  archaeological  dig was called
for  by the local  authority  before  building  started.5

With  the abolition  of the GLC  London  lost its chief protector of
sites of cultural  value. The rescue digs that  the Museum  of London
teams  undertake  are  necessarily, of  limited  value.  They  are  high-
speed  explorations  of  sites,  intended  only  to  identify  the  type  and
condition  of any remains, hot  to study  and  evaluate  them, and  still
less  to  set  them  up  for  public.display.  Rescue  digs  are  paid  for  by
developers as a condition  of planning consent.  Paymen't for  longer-
lasting  and  more  searching  forms  of  archaeology  is dependent  on
other  funding,  which  in  the  case  ,of  newly-discovered  remains  is
usually  only  produced  now  by appeals  to  the  public  stimulated  by
media  noise.  London  archaeology at  present  is in  poor  condition.
The Museum of London  has no funds  for  preservation, and  English
Heritage's  fief  does  not  include  London,  except  where  sites  have
been  scheduled  or where scheduling  is under  consideration.

Even where it becomes  involved,directly  in historic sites, English
Heritage cannot always necessarily-work in the broad public interest.
In  reaction  to  the  archaeological  paradox  of  destroying  sites  to
reveal  them,  its  policy  as  overseer  and  protector  of cultural  sites
has  evolved  into  a  rather  narrow  interpretation  of  the  concept  of
site  preservation.  Its  guiding  lines  are  set  out  in  a  1989  paper
outlining  the  policies  for  'Our  Archaeological  Past  1979 —1999'.6
The  objective  is  chiefly  preservation  of  any  remains  in situ.  The
paper  declares  (Section  4.1)  that

English  Heritage's duty to preserve is clearly stated  in the legal
definition  of  its  function,  and  was  previously  stated  in  the
academic objectives  for  the decade. The 1980s have seen  major
initiatives  to  ensure  the  preservation  of  the  existing  heritage.
Survey work and work  on  Sites and  Monuments, Records have
been  directed  towards  quantifying  the  known  archaeological
resource, so that  appropriate  measures can ultimately  be taken
to manage  it  efficiently.

This is a fair statement of its obligations. It leaves unclear, however,
what  is  meant  by  'preservation'.  More  to  the  point,  it  takes  no
account  of  the  obligation,  which  in  other  aspects' of  its  activities
English Heritage exploits to the extent that it has been called merely
a  tourist  organization,  of  putting  the  cultural  artefacts  on  public
display.  That  is another  question  which  the  issues of the  Rose and
the Globe  sites have  raised.

Archaeologists  have  long  been  divided  by the conflict  that  exists
between  the  principles  and  the  practice  of  their  work.  The  chief
justifying  principle  of  all  archaeology  is  the  unearthing  of  new
information,  improving  human  knowledge  of  the  past  through  the

13

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Andrew  Gurr

"Permission to reproduce this Figure online has not been obtained" 

A  view of  the  Rose
excavation  from  ten
storeys  up, seen  from
the south  across  Park
Street.  Photograph  by
Andrew  Fulgoni.  The
piles of  Southbridge
House  (1957) are  still
visible,  and  the  two
positions  of  the  tapered
state  foundations.

study of such early artefacts as can be found. For that to be possible,
the  artefacts  must  be preserved  in  their  original  condition.  That  is
one of the more substantial  reasons for trying to preserve them. But
the  practice  of  field  archaeology,  which  entails  digging  a  site  to
destruction,  to some extent calls this principle in question. The first
uncovering  cannot  ever  be repeated,  because  the  uncovering  alters
the site and the objects in it. Archaeologists need to have great  faith
in their own diagnostic skills. The remains they unearth are changed
by  the  very  process  of  unearthing  them.  No  subsequent  work  can
do  much  to  verify  or  repeat  the  original  findings.  So  every  dig  is

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

14

Cultural  Property  and  'Sufficient  Interest'

"Permission to reproduce this Figure online has not been obtained" 

unrepeatable,  even  when,  as  current  practice  requires,  a  section  of
the  remains  is  left  undug  for  future  study:  And.since  every  site is
unique  in  one  way  or  another,  the  potential  losses  if  mistakes  are
made are huge. That  is why English  Heritage defines  the  'preserva-
tion'  that  the Act calls for  as leaving sites undug  and  unexplored.
Applying such a policy to the Rose and  the Globe sites, however,
indicates  the  difficulties  of  applying  a  blanket  policy  to  particular
instances.  Geoffrey  Wainwright,  chief  archaeologist  and  a  director
of  English  Heritage,  was  reported  in  the  press7  in  June  1990  as
saying  that

we are  quite  content  for  the  Globe  to  stay  buried  and  see no
reason to disturb it. In another 25 years there may be techniques
to enable us to excavate and  save the findings.  But, at  present,
excavation  is destruction.

This attitude, which on a scheduled site offers  financial economies as
well as meeting English Heritage's official  duty to preserve remains,
sharpens  the principal  question  that  is raised  by both  the Rose and
the  Globe  sites,  about  what  we  can  define  as  cultural  value.  Is
preservation  intended  to  record  the  remains  for.the  present  or  to
keep  them  for  a  hypothetical  future  generation  of  archaeologists?

The  Globe's  stair  turret
and  outer  wall  (the
angled  line of  stones
running  through  the
centre). The  entrance
was  from  the  left  into
the  narrow  lobby,
framed  by  the  double
line  of  bricks  seen  at
the  bottom  left  of  the
picture. The  squares of
modern  concrete  have
partly  destroyed  the
crosswalls  of  the
corridor  taking
playgoers  from  the
lobby  into  the
playhouse  yard  on  the
right.  Photograph  by
the  Museum  of
London.
Credit  for  both
photographs:
Museum  of  London

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

15

Andrew  Gurr

Recording archaeological remains by digging them up and  subjecting
them  to scientific  analysis, and  then  replacing them in their original
location  for  public  display,  is  a  traditional  way  of  responding  to
public interest in cultural sites. The public's familiarity  with all early
remains,  from  Stonehenge  to  Fishbourne  Palace,  is a  consequence
of this form  of treatment. The alternative, preserving a site by doing
nothing to it, may be justifiable  on the grounds that the technology
available  to  modern  field  archaeologists  is  inadequate  to  discover
its  secrets  without  destroying  it,  although  that  view  might  be seen
as underrating all the field archaeology across the world  undertaken
to date. Leaving the remains buried is certainly cheaper than financ-
ing a dig. But it also denies the possibility of gaining new information
from  the  site,  of  increasing  human  knowledge  and  of  generating
public  interest  in what  it  has  to display.  Public policies  concerning
the  evaluation  of  cultural  property  need  to  take  into  account  not
just  the preservation  of such potential resources for human  learning
but  their  exploitation.  In  this  regard  the  archaeology  section  of
English  Heritage  has defined  its duty  rather  narrowly.

Both the Rose and the Globe sites are unique. Once the developers
have  completed  their  long-legged  office  block  over  the  Rose  site,
almost  the  entire  foundations  of  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  Eliza-
bethan  playhouses  should  become  available  for  further  study.  The
amphitheatre  playhouses were designed  as machines for  staging the
new kinds of play that  Marlowe, Shakespeare, and  their peers were
writing. The Rose was very probably one of the machines for which
Shakespeare wrote his first plays. The design  of these machines was
completely  lost  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  The only
sixteenth-century  illustration  of the  Rose playhouse, a crude depic-
tion  even  though  it  was  made  from  the  tower  of  Southwark  Ca-
thedral just  a  few  hundred  yards  away,8  showed  it  as  an  angular
six-sided  structure.  The  archaeologists  have  now  proved  that  it
actually  had  fourteen  sides. The one positive piece of evidence  that
the  initial  and  far  from  complete  excavation  at  the  Rose  has  pro-
duced  shows  how  unreliable  the  contemporary  documents  about
the  playhouses  are.  To  have,  as  now  seems  possible,  the  entire
ground-plan  of such a unique structure is a phenomenally  fortunate
enhancement of our knowledge. When to that is added the possibility
of  finding  a  great  deal  more  about  the  Globe  itself,  towards  the
building of which Shakespeare himself  paid  ten per cent of the cost
and  for  which  he  wrote  Hamlet  and  all  his  greatest  plays,  the
question  of  leaving  the  two  sites  untouched  now  in  the  hope  that
future  generations  of  archaeologists  will  learn  from  it  is  a  truly
painful  responsibility.  It also  raises the question  of who, in making
policy,  has  the  authority  and  responsibility  for  such  a  momentous
decision.

The  decisions  over  the  Rose  and  the  Globe  will  be  made  by
different  bodies, working according to quite different  considerations.
A  brief  summary  of  the  recent  history  of  the  two  sites  will  show

16

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Cultural  Property  and  'Sufficient  Interest'

why. The Rose's location  has long been  known  —  the lane  running
alongside  it  is  still  called  Rose  Alley  — but  until  recently  the
traditional  preoccupation  of  archaeologists  with  London's  Roman
remains, and  ignorance of the shifting  ground  levels in  Elizabethan
times, gave little confidence that any remnants of the first playhouses
of  Shakespeare's  time  would  survive.  A  ten-storey  office  block,
Southbridge  House, was built  on  the  Rose site as recently  as 1957,
without  any  call  (even  by  the  GLC  officers)  for  a  preliminary
dig.  The  same  doubts  existed  when  Southwark  Council's  planning
committee  gave  permission  for  a  new  ten-storey  office  block  to be
erected on the site. Nonetheless, this permission, granted to the then
owners, the Heron  Corporation,  in September  1988, did carry  with
it  an  agreement  that  the  developers  would  finance  a  two-month
exploratory  dig  first.  This  agreement  was  of  the  kind  customarily
reached  under a Voluntary Code of Practice drawn up in 1986.9 The
Code,  agreed  between  the  British  Property  Federation  and  GLC
archaeologists, was adopted as a guide for good practice by planning
authorities as well as by developers, which gave it some muscle. Over
the Rose site Harvey Sheldon, chief archaeologist at the Museum of
London,  insists  that  Heron  Corporation  agreed  to  a  two-month
'evaluation'  of  the  site,  to  be  followed  if  necessary  by  a  further
period  of  work.1"  When  Imry  Merchant  acquired  the  site  and  its
planning permission  in October  1988 they accepted  the terms of the
Heron  Corporation  agreement, although  they were not prepared  to
allow more than the initial two months for the 'evaluation'. Anxious
to  start  building,  they  paid  a  Museum  of  London  team  to  start
work  that  December.

When  it  became  evident  that  there  was  a  considerable  quantity
of  remains  in  good  condition,  Imry  Merchant  agreed  to  a  further
ten  weeks  of  digging,  giving  the  Museum  of  London's  team  of
archaeologists  a chance  to  do  some  exploratory  analysis, up  to  14
May  1989.  But  by  then  the  Rose  site  had  attracted  tremendous
public  attention.  In  response  to  a  question  laid  down  by  Simon
Hughes,  MP  for  Southwark,  in Prime  Minister's  Question  Time in
Parliament  during  the  week  before  the  end  of  the  dig,  even  Mrs
Thatcher declared that she considered it a site of historic importance.
This  response  brought  the  Rose  into  the  national  television  news,
and  drew  thousands  of  people  to  the  site  at  the final weekend. As
a  result  of  the  public  protests,  which  included  people  physically
blocking the road  in front  of the lorries arriving on the morning of
15  May  to  start  the  building  work,  the  Secretary  of  State  for
the  Environment  announced  on  16 May  that  he  would  give  Imry
Merchant  up  to  £1  million  in  order  to  buy  a  month's  time  for
negotiations.

English  Heritage  took  a  leading  part  in  these  negotiations  over

the site, identifying  three  objectives:

First, to persuade Imry to re-design their foundations  in a non-
damaging  fashion.  Second,  to  ensure  full  protection  of  these

17

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Andrew  Gurr

remains  while  the  office  building  was  going  up.  And  third,  to
persuade  Imry  to  do  the  re-design  in  a  way  that  would  allow
the remains to be uncovered again and displayed to the public.''

This  three-point  plan  was  not  wholly  consistent  with  the  English
Heritage policy of 'preserving'  sites by leaving them  buried.  But the
Rose  was  already  half-uncovered,  and  it  had  aroused  the  kind  of
public interest  that could  hardly be ignored.  Moreover,  there was a
chance  that  the  developer  might  provide  some  of  the  resources
needed  for  public display  in this case.

In the event, this ad hoc adaptation of English Heritage's archaeo-
logical policy had some success. Imry Merchant's architects, Richard
Siefert  and  Partners, redesigned  the structure so that it would  stand
on  six  huge  legs  straddling  the  Rose.  Instead  of  the  underground
car park originally planned, which would have eliminated  the Rose's
remains completely, in July they secured permission from  Southwark
Borough  Council  for  a new set of plans. These plans allowed  them
to  compensate  for  the  loss  of  the  ground  and  underground  floors
by  raising  the  building  higher,  replacing  the  basement  and  ground
floor  with  two additional  storeys at the top. The position  of the six
legs destroyed  some  of  the  foundations,  but  in  theory  left  most  of
the site free  so that  it could  eventually  be shown  to  the public.

English  Heritage's  archaeologists  then  made a series of 'keyhole'
digs at  the sites of the new piles, to  identify  what was to be lost by
their installation on the northern and southern flanks of the remains.
They  also  supervised  the  work  of  covering  the  remains  under  a
carpet of sand and concrete to protect them during the construction
work,  and  installed  gauges to  measure  the water  content  under  the
sand  and  concrete.  All  this  was  done  before  construction  work
started  in  September.  Imry  Merchant  offered  its  support  for  the
archaeological work on the site to be renewed after  the new building
is  completed,  and  for  the  eventual  display  of  the  remains  to  the
public.  Subsequent  calculations  about  this  retrieval  work,  allowing
two years  for  uncovering, recording and  studying  the  remains, and
a  further  year  to  put  them  back  on  display,  indicate  that  the  cost
is likely  to  be in  the  region  of £5 million. Who  will  pay  for  that  is
at  present  unclear.

This  semi-conclusion  to  the  Rose  story  did  not  satisfy  many  of
the protesters. In July the Rose Theatre Trust, a group of enthusiasts
under  the chairmanship  of  Simon  Hughes  MP, started  proceedings
asking  for  a judicial  review  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  not
to  schedule  the  site.  It  was  this  action  which  led  to  Mr  Justice
Schiemann's  ruling,  cited  above,  that  they  had  no  'interest'  in  the
Rose.  They  also  protested  that  the  new  piles  would  damage  the
drainage  area  to  the  north,  and  destroy  part  of  the  southern  wall,
including one of the pile caps. This did indeed happen, and although
the  English  Heritage  archaeologists  took  meticulous  notes  of  the
finds they  made  in  their  rescue  digs  on  the  pile  sites,  they  were  a

18

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Cultural  Property  and  'Sufficient  Interest'

different  team  from  the  original  diggers,  and  there  was  inevitably
some risk of a lack of co-ordination between the Museum of London
and its findings and the English Heritage findings. Discoveries about
the rest  of  the  Rose's  foundations,  including  the  'Depot'  section  to
the  east  against  Southwark  Bridge,  which  is owned  by  Southwark
Council  and  is  not  part  of  the  Imry  Merchant  development,  now
await  the completion  of the office  block  and  the provision  of  funds
for  further  archaeology.

The  Rose  story,  whether  it  is one  about  the  survival  of  cultural
artefacts  or  of a national  policy towards archaeological  remains, is
far  from finished. The original exploratory  dig had  hardly begun to
turn  into  an  analytical  dig when  the  Museum  of London  team was
banished  from  the  site.  It  is  estimated  that  another  94  weeks  of
analytical  excavation  will  be  needed  for  the  site  to  be  properly
studied.  So as a  non-preserved  and  partly  analysed  site  its  story  is
far  from finished. As a story  of preservation,  the elimination  of the
underground  car park  from  the original  redevelopment  plans was a
triumph,  but  what  has  been  preserved  is  not  an  untouched  site of
the  kind  that  the  English  Heritage  policy  prefers.  And  until  the
theatre's  remains  can  once  again  be  put  on  display  to  the  public,
its  present  appearance  as  a  building  site  will  only  frustrate  the
thousands  of  visitors  who  still  come  to  Park  Street  from  all  over
the world  to see it.

The  uncovering  of  the  Globe  is,  so  far,  a  very  different  story.
While there can be no doubt  that the decisions about  the Globe site
were  strongly  influenced  by  a  desire  to  avoid  the  troubles  that
followed  the discovery  of the Rose, the difference  in the two  tracks
is also  a  striking  illustration  of  the  alternative  routes  that  the law
currently makes possible. Until 1984 the Globe's location was known
only by a plaque on a wall on the south  side of Park  street, on  the
other side of Southwark  Bridge from  the Rose site. The plaque was
put there after some adroit detective work on early maps and records
to  find  the  most  likely  site  of  the  Globe.  This  was  done  by  W. W.
Braines,  a surveyor  working  for  the  London  County  Council, pre-
cursor of the GLC, who published  his findings in 1924.12 According
to  Braines,  the  Globe's  site was  overlain  by at  least  two  buildings.
One  was  the  Courage  Brewery  bottling  plant  in  Park  Street,  Brai-
nes's  preferred  location,  where  the  plaque  was  placed.  The  other
was  Anchor  Terrace,  a  mid-nineteenth  century  row  of  Georgian
houses fronting  Southwark  Bridge Road  on its eastern side.

The bottling  plant  was on  a concrete  floor  without  any cellarage
under  it.  Its  demolition  in  1984  immediately  raised  the  possibility
of  excavating  under  its  floor  to  look  for  any  remaining  traces  of
the Globe. Eventually  Hanson  Trust  acquired  both  Anchor  Terrace
and  the  tract  of  now-vacant  land  behind  it,  including  the  bottling
plant  floor,  used  since  1984  as  a  car  park  for  the  workers  in  the
Anchor  Terrace offices.  No  application  for  planning  permission  on
the  site was made. Instead,  in mid-1989, just  after  the Rose  furore,

19

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Andrew  Gurr

Hanson Trust asked the Museum of London  to conduct an explora-
tory dig in the vacant stretch  of land at the rear of Anchor Terrace.
The  object  was  to  locate  the  position,  and  evaluate  the  condition,
of  any  part  of  the  Globe's  foundations  that  might  be  uncovered.
They allowed  three months and  £250,000 for  the work.  It  began in
the summer  of 1989.

In October, during the last week of the dig, a section of the Globe
was at  last clearly  identified.  It  lay  in  the  north-west  corner  of  the
excavated  site, by Park Street and behind Anchor Terrace, very near
to where Braines had put the plaque to mark the site. The media gave
this find ample publicity. Hanson put the small section uncovered by
the  Museum  of  London  team  on  public  display  for  a  week,  then
covered  it to protect  the remains, using the  technique employed  by
English  Heritage  to  protect  the Rose.

The excavated  section of the Globe was only about eight per cent
of  the  likely  extent  of  the  remains, which  were  in  good  condition,
and at a level indicating that much of the foundations  might survive
at  a level about  three  feet  under  the cellar  floor  of Anchor  Terrace
and  other  parts  of  the  site.  Not  enough  of  the  remains  were  un-
covered  to fix the precise extent  of  the  rest  of  the  Globe,  since the
Health  and  Safety  Act  prevented  the  diggers  from  trenching  too
close  to  Anchor  Terrace  itself,  which  stretches  over  the  central
section  of  the  remains.  It  was  clear,  though,  that  the  remains
uncovered  were of  the  north-eastern  flank  of  the  theatre's  founda-
tions, and  that  most  of the rest, including  the area with  the highest
priority  for  making  new  discoveries,  the  stage,  lay  under  Anchor
Terrace.

Seeking to identify  the precise location  of the rest of the  founda-
tions,  in  February  1990  Hanson  Trust  paid  for  a  ground  impulse
radar  scan  of the cellarage in Anchor Terrace. This new technology
assays the relative densities of materials under the ground and leaves
them  untouched.  It  can  differentiate  between  London  clay  and
stone, and identify  some kinds of timber structures, to a considerable
depth.  It  is  commonly  used  to  test  the  ground  on  building-sites
when  new  piles  or  foundations  are  to  be  dug.  It  is,  however,  not
yet precise or sensitive enough to do the kind of job that is envisaged
in the English  Heritage policy  for  leaving historic remains  buried.13
The  radar  scan  done  in  the  cellars  of  Anchor  Terrace  certainly
indicated  that  there  are  substantial  remains  at  the  level  where  the
Globe's  foundations  should  be.  But  the  limited  sections  of  the
cellarage  that  were available  for  the  scan  restricted  the findings. It
did, however, confirm  that an extension  of the archaeology into the
underfloor  area  of the cellars could  be tremendously  rewarding.

The grade  level  of  the  remains uncovered  in  the  exploratory  dig
showed  that  the floor  of Anchor Terrace's cellars lies between  three
and  four  feet  above anything  that  may  remain  there of the Globe's
foundations.  More digging in these cellars therefore  offered  the best
chance  of fixing what  the  precise  extent  of  the  Globe  foundations

20

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Cultural  Property  and  'Sufficient  Interest'

is.  Accordingly,  in  July  1990 Hanson  Trust  applied  for  permission
to  conduct  some  further  'keyhole'  digging  in  the  cellarage  of  their
building, which is now vacant. This act invoked the third and  fourth
of  the  four  authorities  who  might  be  expected  to  exercise  some
degree  of  control  over  the  Globe  remains.  The  relative  share  of
authority  among  these four  bodies is another  legal tangle.

Hanson  Trust  own  the  Globe  site.  To  a  large  extent,  therefore,
theirs  is  the  principal  authority.  They  paid  for  the  initial  dig  and
the  radar  scan,  and  are  prepared  to  pay  for  the  further  keyhole
digging.  Theirs  will  obviously  be  the  chief  profit  or  loss  from
whatever  decisions are made  over use of  the site. Their  application
for  planning  permission  to  redevelop  the  site  with  new  buildings,
as  with  any  permissions  for  redevelopment  in  Southwark,  would
normally  have  gone  to  the  planning  committee  of  the  borough
council,  the  second  of  the  four  bodies with  authority  over  historic
sites. But in December  1989 the DoE, advised  by English  Heritage,
and  presumably  well  aware  that  Hanson  had  not  yet  applied  to
Southwark  for  planning  permission  to  redevelop  it,  scheduled  it as
a national monument. The Globe site differed  from  the Rose initially
in the absence  of any planning  permission. We might well ask why
Hanson Trust had not applied  to redevelop the site, though it would
be  fairly  idle  speculation.  The  absence  of  modern  piles  and  old
cellarage,  along  with  the  confident  plaque  in  Park  Street  alleging
that  this was the site of the Globe, made  the survival  of  significant
remains  highly  likely.  Even  before  the  Rose  furore  it  was possible
that  the  site  would  have  been  scheduled  if  any  remains  were  un-
covered.  In  the  event  they  were,  and  the  site  was  scheduled  with
some  speed.  This  gave  both  the  DoE  and  English  Heritage  an
interest  by  statutory  right  in  any  decisions  made  about  its  future.
So, in accordance with the Ancient  Monuments and  Archaeological
Areas  Act  1979  (as  amended),  the  application  for  further  keyhole
digging went not to Southwark Council but to the Heritage Sponsor-
ship Division  of  the DoE.

English  Heritage,  as  official  consultants  to  the  DoE,  initially
expressed  concern  about  the effect  of  any  digging on  the  structure
of Anchor Terrace, so Hanson Trust called in Ove Arup as consultant
engineers  for  advice.  This  was  encouraging.  English  Heritage  then
gave permission  for  a single excavation  in one cellar, to ascertain if
any  Globe  remains  survive  under  the  floor.  If  they  are  found,
English Heritage will reconsider the position. A final decision about
the  Hanson  application  is still awaited  at  the time of writing.

In  all of  this, English  Heritage  and  the  Secretary  of State have a
double  responsibility, because the Georgian  Anchor Terrace itself is
a  Grade 2  listed  building.  Even  if  Hanson  Trust  only  wished  to
reconstruct  the  terrace  to  renew  its  use  as  an  office  block,  they
would  need  the  Secretary  of  State's  permission  before  they  could
make  any  alterations  to  it,  regardless  of  what  lay  beneath  it.  Any
attempt  to  excavate,  let  alone  put  on  public  display,  the  Globe's

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

21

Andrew  Gurr

remains as a whole would  be likely to require Anchor Terrace to be
demolished.  Since  a  listed  building  sits  on  top  of  a  listed  set  of
earlier  foundations,  it  is  evident  than  the  DoE  has  a  double  and
potentially conflicting  interest  in the site. The Georgian  Society has
already  expressed  its opposition  to  any  work  being  done  that  may
damage  or  otherwise  affect  Anchor  Terrace.  The  two  bodies,  the
Secretary of State's office and its only official  advisory body, English
Heritage, have to choose between several difficult  alternatives. They
might (a) leave both  the Globe and Anchor Terrace as they are; this
is the small-cost alternative which would give least return  to the site
owners.  Secondly,  (b)  they  might  leave  the  Globe  remains  buried
and restore Anchor Terrace; this would satisfy  the Georgian  Society
but infuriate  the world's Shakespeareans. Or (c) they might excavate
in  the  cellarage  to  discover  a  little  more  about  the  Globe,  and  the
extent of the full  remains, and then restore Anchor Terrace for  office
or  other  use. Or (d) they might demolish  Anchor  Terrace, excavate
the  complete  Globe  site  (assuming  that  it  does  not  extend  beyond
Anchor  Terrace  and  under  Southwark  Bridge  Road,  which  is  not
yet evident), and  put  it  on  display  as a visible national  monument;
this  would  satisfy  the  Shakespeareans  but  infuriate  the  Georgian
Society.  Such  a  range  of  choices  puts  the  entire  policy  of  the
government  and  English  Heritage over cultural  artefacts  to the test.
It  should  be  added  that  Schiemann  J's  ruling  over  the  lack  of
'interest'  by  any  individuals  in  the  Rose  site  might  be expected  to
apply  also  to  the  Globe.  The  difference  or  'interest'  between  the
two  sites  and  the  cases  related  to  them  in  fact  point  up  the  chief
difficulty  in law over  this matter.  The Rose Theatre  Trust  based  its
case partly on  the point  that when a site is scheduled, the Secretary
of  State  is obliged  by  the  1979 Act  to  undertake  the  widest  public
consultation  before any building consent can be given, but a  refusal
to  schedule  obviates  that  requirement.  Schiemann J  found  that  the
Secretary  of  State  had  not  acted  unlawfully  in  refusing  to  schedule
the  site,  so  the  Rose  Trust's  challenge  failed.  But  counsel  for  the
Secretary  of State  had  also challenged  the locus standi of  the  party
applying  for  judicial  review.  On  this  Schiemann J  referred  to  the
Supreme  Court  Act  1981, quoting  s 31 (3):

No  application  for  judicial  review  shall  be  made  unless  the
leave of the High  Court  has been  obtained  in accordance  with
rules  of  court;  and  the  court  shall  not  grant  leave  to  make
such  an  application  unless  it  considers  that  the  applicant  has
sufficient  interest  in  the  matter  to  which  the  application  re-
lates.14

Noting  that  his judgment  'might  surprise  many  laymen  and  some
lawyers who do not practise in this branch  of the law', Schiemann J
declared  that

22

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Cultural  Property  and  'Sufficient  Interest'

the law does not see it as the function  of the courts to be there
for  every  individual  who  is interested  in  having  the  legality of
an administrative  action  litigated. Parliament  could  have given
such a wide right of access to the court  but it has not done so.
The  challenger  must  show  that  he  'has  a  sufficient  interest  in
the matter  to which  the application  relates'.

Regrettably  perhaps,  his judgment  gives  no  indication  of  what  he
would  define  as  sufficient  interest.  One  reason  for  that  may  lie in
what  he  went  on  to  say.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  made
under  the  1979  Act  which  formed  the  basis  of  the  application,  he
argued,  does  not  give  any  individual,  even  when  organized  into  a
company  of such individuals, 'expressly or impliedly a greater  right
or  expectation  than  any  other  citizen  of  this  country  to  have  that
decision  taken  lawfully'.  The  opinion  of  an  aggregation  of  indivi-
duals claiming to represent public concern, it seems, does not consti-
tute sufficient  interest. On this basis, he rejected  the application  'on
the dual grounds that the applicant  has no standing to make it, and
that  in any event  it has no legal merits.'15

This judgment,  insofar  as it defines  standing in such matters, has
potentially  a much wider application  than  to the process of judicial
review. Concepts of public interest and hence the processes of public
consultation  on  cultural  matters  may  be  open  to  question  in  the
same way. One could wish that Schiemann J's written judgment had
been  more explicit. The  DoE  and  English  Heritage  are  not  obliged
to,  consult  anyone  over  their  decision  about  the  Rose's  remains,
since  they  have  not  been  scheduled,  and  even  on  scheduled  sites
when Scheduled  Monument Consent is applied for the  identification
of standing or interest may be called in question. On the other hand
the  rejection  of  individual  or  corporate  'interest'  in  the  Rose  is
likely  to  become  more  difficult  where  the Globe  is concerned.  Sam
Wanamaker's  International  Shakespeare  Globe  Centre (ISGC),  for
instance, is a company which has already completed the  foundations
of a large-scale scheme to construct  an exact  replica  of the original
Globe  close  to  the  original  site. To make  the  reconstruction  exact,
the  ISGC  needs  to  learn  all  it can  from  the  remains  that  lie under
Anchor  Terrace.  It  therefore  has  a  direct  financial  'interest'  and  a
direct cultural  interest  in pursuing the excavation  and evaluation of
the  Globe's  remains. The  scheduling  itself  of  the  Globe  would  not
be in question,  but  the consequent  decision  by the  DoE  over what
is to be done with the  remains, to  leave them  buried  or  to excavate
and display them, arguably  is a matter  of 'sufficient  interest'  to the
ISGC  corporation.  Whether  an  application  by  the  ISGC  over  the
Globe could  be treated  in law like the Rose Theatre Trust's applica-
tion  over  the  Rose is open  to some question.

Such  signs  of  'interest'  in  the  Globe's  remains  are  by  no  means
the only direct expression of public concern for their exposure. Until
the  Rose  and  the  Globe  remains  were  uncovered,  no  trace  of  any

23

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Andrew  Gurr

of the open-air  amphitheatres  that  launched  Shakespearean  theatre
had  ever  been  found.  And  since  the  Globe  (and  possibly  the  Rose
too)  was  the  hardware  for  which  Shakespeare  wrote  his  softwear,
they  have a claim  to  be among  the  most  important  archaeological
remains in the country. Shakespeare is taught and performed  across
the  world,  in  schools  and  universities,  and  in  theatres  everywhere.
Educationists  and  actors  have  a  claim  to  a  direct  professional
interest  in  learning  from  the  remains  as  much  and  as  quickly  as
possible. If English  Heritage  applies its general  policy to the Globe
when  it  advises  the  DoE  about  what  should  be done  with  the site,
Schiemann J's judgment on standing will be more difficult  to sustain
than  it was over  the Rose.

The uniqueness  of the Globe and  the Rose makes  them  a special
case  even  in  a  world  where  every  ancient  artefact  is  unique.  They
were the machines  for  which  Shakespeare's  plays were written, and
until  we can  reconstruct  them  as  working  machines  we cannot  be
sure what the plays were meant to do. It is in the interest of everyone
who has been drawn  into study of the plays to promote  the  further
exploration of the Southwark sites. But there is no means of identify-
ing public interest  in the law as it stands. So, as with  the Rose, the
future  of the Globe site is likely  to spill into  the media  once again.
The law is inadequate,  not  only  in its definition  of  'interest'  in  the
scheduling  of  historic  sites  and  provision  for  consultation,  as well
as  its  provision  for  public  consultation,  but  in  the  way  in  which
decisions  over  what  might  be scheduled  are  likely  to  be  influenced
by financial questions  more  than  by cultural  considerations.

There  are  still  too  few  safeguards  to  protect  sites  of  historic
interest,  especially  in  London.  Above  all,  perhaps,  there  is still  no
clear policy in government or the law about what constitutes a valid
criterion  for  value  in  cultural,  historical  or  heritage  artefacts.  It  is
sadly  true  that  the  nearest  we have  to  a  basis  for  value-judgments
over archaeological  remains is the attention  a site gets in the media.
And  without  full  digging, it cannot  be well-informed  attention.

One is tempted  to put  the case in more extreme terms. All law is
inescapably  based  on  precisely  delimited  definitions  of  its  terms,
and  it is usually more effective  when it declares what should  not be
done  than  when  it tries to say what should  be done. Both  practices
work  against  the  public  interest  that  has  been  so  loudly  expressed
over  the  Rose  and  the  Globe  sites.  The  Globe  case  shows  that
English Heritage's interpretation  of its requirement to foster  'preser-
vation' of sites maintains public ignorance about what they contain,
and thus implicitly questions any valuation based on public interest.
The Rose case shows that  the only legally identifiable  'interest'  in a
historic site is either  the Secretary of State's or the developer's. The
result  of  these interpretations  of preservation  and  interest  is a tacit
denial  that  there can  be any public interest  in any historic site. The
law does not appear  to help the Secretary of State for  the Environ-
ment with its identification  of what the statute calls 'any  monument
which appears  to him  to  be of national  importance'.

24

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

Cultural  Property and  'Sufficient  Interest'

Notes

1  Ancient  Monuments  and  Archaeological  Areas Act  1979; National  Heritage

Act  1983. See Statutes  in Force, HMSO,  London,  1990.

2  R v Secretary of State for  the  Environment,  ex parte  Rose  Theatre Trust Co.

[1990]  1 All  ER  754 at  767.

3  Joanna  Goyder,  'Scheduling  Monuments:  the  Rose  Theatre  Case',  [1989]

Building Law Monthly  June, pp. 5 — 8.

4  Town  and  Country  Planning  Act  1971. See Statutes  in Force, HMSO,  Lon-

don,  1990.

5  In  February  1990 the  Department  of the Environment  published  a consulta-
tive  document  entitled  'Archaeology  and  Planning'  as  a  guide  for  local
authorities.  It  restates  the  current  legislation,  and  describes  good  practice
over sites of historic interest.  It was criticized  (London Archaeologist 6, 1990,
p.  142),  for  its  assumption  that  local  authorities  will, even  after  the  GLC's
abolition, all have the archival and  human  resources to make fully  informed
planning decisions over such sites. The guide was reissued  in November  1990
(PPG  16). The  redevelopment  of  the  Curtain  site,  implemented  after  1986
when  the GLC  was abolished,  gives some point  to  the criticism.

6  Developing Frameworks:  Policies for  our  Archaeological Past  1979—1999,

London  (English  Heritage),  1989.

7  The Evening Standard,  14 June  1990, p. 18.
8  John  Norden,  a  London  author  and  surveyor,  in  his  Panorama,  1600. See
Andrew  Gurr  and  John  Orrell,  'What  the  Rose  can  tell  us',  Antiquity  63
(1989), 421 —9.  Norden's  two  views are  reproduced  on  p. 422.

9  The Code was agreed  between and  issued  by the British Archaeological  Trust
and  the  Developers  Liaison  Group,  a  body  set  up  by  the  British  Property
Federation  and  the  Standing  Conference  of Archaeological  Unit  Managers.
A  succinct  account  of  the  Voluntary  Code's  working  and  its  fragility  is in
Christine  Eccles,  The  Rose  Theatre, London,  1990,  pp. 156 — 7.  Eccles  also
gives  an  outline  of  the  legal  position  over  the  Rose and  a  detailed  account
of  the  Rose Theatre  Trust's campaign  in  Chapters  4 and  5 (pp. 147 — 237).
10  See G.J.  Wainwright,  'Saving  the  Rose',  Antiquity  63 (1989), 430-35,  and
Harvey  Sheldon,  'The  Museum  of  London  and  the  Rose',  Antiquity  64
(1990),  286-8.

11  Wainwright,  ibid p. 432.
12  W. W. Braines,  The Site of the Globe Playhouse, Southwark,  London  (LCC),

1924.

13  English  Heritage's  'Planning  Policy  Guidance'  paper  (see note 3) does  state
(Introduction,  13)  that  'If  physical  preservation  in situ  is  not  feasible,  an
archaeological  excavation  for  the purposes  of "preservation  by record" may
be an  acceptable  alternative'.

14  R v Secretary of State for  the Environment, ex parte  Rose  Theatre Trust Co.

[1990]  1 All  ER  754 at 765.

15  Ibid, pp.  766-68.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 20:58:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739192000043

25


