The Lapps in Finland

tore modeen*

The Lapps of Scandinavia constitute a small indigenous ethnic community divided between four states:
Norway, Sweden, Finland and Russia. The Lapps used to depend on reindeer farming and lacked their
own schools. Because of their low social status and the lack of governmental understanding for their
cultural needs, most of the Finnish Lapps had been assimilated with the majority population. Only
in recent years an effort has been made by the government to encourage the preservation of the Lapp
language and the Lapp civilization. A Lapp parliament has been created and the Lapp Language Act
makes it possible for the Lapps to communicate in their own language with the authorities. It is to be
hoped that these measures will bring positive results in a situation where only few Lappish speaking
people remain in Finland, many of them having difﬁculties ﬁnding a livelihood in their homeland,
the northernmost part of Finland.

1 history

At the beginning of the Christian era, big territories in Scandinavia and most of
the land that belongs today to the Finnish Republic were inhabited by nomadic
Lapp tribes. The Roman historian Tacitus in 98 a.d. mentions the Fenni people,
having in mind the Lapps. Other ancient historians (Prokopios, Jordanes, and
Paulus Vanefrid) called the Lapps skrid(cid:222)nnar, that is, skiing Finns.1

The Lapps are supposed to have settled in Finland, coming from the east, in
the Bronze Age and can therefore be considered an indigenous population group
in Finland. In the second century a.d., new settlers, Finns, and somewhat later,
Swedes, the latter representing a more advanced civilization, took over most parts
of Finland, leaving only the poor northern areas (Lapland) to the Lapps. Finland,
particularly Lapland, has until recent times remained very sparsely populated.

2 lapp self-administration

The Lapps were originally a people of hunters and (cid:222)shers. The wild reindeer,
caught in long rows of open pits, traces of which can still be seen in Lapland, was
their most important game. A local Lapp village (sijd or siida) comprised one or
two collective units and had its own council and administration. The Lapp village

*A. Årt Professor Emeritus of Public Law of the University of Helsinki-Helsingfors (Finland) and a
frequent writer on subjects concerning the legal situation of ethnic communities in Europe.

133

134 tore modeen

was based on strict democratic principles and had a legal system that functioned
both within the village and between different villages, with its own courts of law.
The village was responsible for the rights of the collective, (cid:210)owned(cid:211) the land and
its resources, and decided how the resources were to be used and distributed.2

3 the colonization of lapland

Colonization of the northern part of Scandinavia and the Kola Peninsula, areas
belonging today to Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Russia, and the exploitation of
its resources began at the dawn of the Middle Ages and grew during the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries, when trade with the Lapps (cid:223)ourished and taxes were
levied on them. People coming from other parts of Scandinavia and Russia began
to settle on land that had belonged to the Lapps.

In the Lapp areas belonging to Finland today, other tribes, the kvaens and the
Carelians from the south, were the (cid:222)rst foreign peoples claiming rights to the Lapp
lands. In the thirteenth century the Swedish kings had given the birkarlar (a peo-
ple of unclear origin but coming from the south) the right to impose taxes on the
Lapps and engage in trading with them. In reality, the birkarls, together with the
Helsingar, who came from Helsingland in central Sweden, exploited the Lapps and
their economy.

In the sixteenth century, King Gustav I of Sweden (and Finland) reorganized
taxation and trade in Lapland and appointed lappfogdar (bailiffs) to govern and ad-
minister justice among the Lapps. King Gustav I also encouraged colonization of
Lapland by Swedes and Finns. This meant that the Lapps had to move away and
seek new lands farther north. Thus they had to abandon their southernmost set-
tlements, by Saima Lake in Savolax in southern Finland, at the beginning of the
sixteenth century. However, colonization of the northernmost Finnish settlement,
in the Kemi Lappmark, did not begin until after 1673.

There were never any armed confrontations between the Lapps and the intrud-
ers from the south. The Lapps ceded their territories to the foreign colonizers
without a (cid:222)ght. It frequently happened that the Lapps were assimilated by the
colonists. As the wild reindeer disappeared, the Finnish colonists living in Lapland
began to keep tame animals, and the Lapps soon followed their example, giving up
hunting and (cid:222)shing for reindeer herding. This was their main source of livelihood
for a long period of time.

Today the reindeer is used almost exclusively for its meat, but in the period of
self-suf(cid:222)cient farming, the reindeer was kept as a domestic animal for transporta-
tion purposes and for its milk. In some periods, reindeer milk and cheese were just
as important food sources as was the meat. The expansive regions near the Kemi

the lapps in finland 135

River in present-day northern Finland were rich in wild game of all kinds, both
those hunted for their fur and those hunted for their meat.

When Lapp families gave up the nomadic life style and settled down as farm-
ers, they usually became assimilated with the Finns in one generation. During the
course of history, the Lapps in Finland to a large extent lost their ethnic identity
through economic and cultural assimilation as a result of colonization by Finnish
settlers in what is today Finnish Lapland.3

4 political history

Since several states claimed sovereignty over Lapland, Lapps were forced to pay
taxes to several Crowns. Missionaries and Christianization followed in the wake of
trade and the levying of taxes on the Lapps. In time, the states that had claimed
Lapland divided the area among themselves. The (cid:222)rst stage in this division was the
1751 border drawn up by Sweden and Denmark-Norway, dividing Lapland along
the mountain ridge from J(cid:138)mtland to Finnmark. When Russia conquered Finland
in 1809, the border between Sweden and Russia (Finland) was established as was
the border between Russia and Norway (then ruled by the king of Sweden) in
1826. The eastern part of Lapland with the Kola Peninsula was already at that time
under Russian rule.

In the areas under Swedish sovereignty, the Lapps enjoyed a great deal of free-
dom. The Swedish kings of the Vasa dynasty recognized and accepted Lapp own-
ership of the land and encouraged state bailiffs and magistrates to follow tradi-
tional Lapp and Swedish custom in Lapland. In 1751, when the national border
between Sweden (with Finland) and Denmark-Norway was established, the Lapps
were guaranteed ownership of land and waters in what was called (cid:210)the codicil of
the border treaty.(cid:211)

One year later, in 1752, the provisions of the codicil were transformed into
Swedish law through a proclamation by the Svea Court of Appeal. Lapp courts
and Lapp case law then became a part of the Swedish legal system. The right of
the Lapps to land and waters was not questioned by the Swedish Crown. The
human status of the Lapps and their right to land and waters remained intact into
the ninteenth century.4

What later became Finnish Lapland was a part of Sweden until 1809, and the
Lapps living there enjoyed the same rights as Swedish citizens. Thus in Finland, too,
the Lapps originally possessed the Lapp-taxed lands as a collective. They had own-
ership rights and inherited, bought, and sold this land. Later much of the Lapp-
taxed land was lost. In 1925 the Finnish state claimed ownership of these lands with-
out meeting any protests from the Lapps. The Lapps were not organized in any way
and lacked resources to stand up against the state in a lawsuit. Since that time, 97

136 tore modeen

percent of the old Lapp lands in what remains today of the old Lapp homeland,
the four northernmost municipalities in Finland, is regarded by the state as state
property. Only in recent years has the question of the ownership of the old Lapp
lands and waters been raised again in Finland and Sweden. In Finland, the Lapps
closely followed the development in Sweden of the dispute concerning the owner-
ship of the old Lapp lands and waters, settled by the Supreme Court of Sweden
on January 29, 1981, since the legal background is the same in both countries.5

5 language and culture

The Lapp language (Lappish) belongs to the Finno-Ugric family. It is thus related
to Finnish and Hungarian but cannot be understood by members of the other
Finno-Ugric ethnic groups. Lappish is divided into four main dialects according
to earlier cultural and economic patterns but not following national borders. These
dialects differ very much from one another, so that great dif(cid:222)culties exist for Lapps
speaking different dialects in communicating among themselves. Most Finnish
Lapps speak the northern dialect, but there are also speakers of the central dialect
(Enare). The southern dialect is not used by the Finnish Lapps, but the eastern di-
alect, spoken by the Russian Lapps, is used by the Skolt Lapps living in Finland.
The Skolts (cid:223)ed from their homeland, the Petchenga district, to Finland when Fin-
land had to give up this area, which was originally a part of Russia proper but was
ceded to the new Republic of Finland by the Peace Treaty of Dorpat (1920), under
the 1944 armistice. The cession was con(cid:222)rmed by the 1947 peace treaty with the
Soviet Union. The Skolts have been subject to particular legislation, which will be
treated below.

The continued existence of the Lapp language as a living language is threat-
ened in many ways. The earlier language policies of the states with Lapp popula-
tions were aimed, implicitly if not explicitly, at obliterating the Lapp language.
Until recent years, Lappish was not taught in the schools. Not until 1975 did the
Lapp language become a subject taught in the Finnish schools in the Lapp home-
land, although Finnish still remains the language of instruction. The Lapps have
long fought to gain of(cid:222)cial status for the Lapp language both in the schools and in
government.6

6 the lapp movement in finland

6.1 birth of the movement
While the rest of Finland developed into a modern industrialized society, Lapland
remained a very backward territory. The Lapps continued to herd their reindeer
and keep their nomadic style of life far into the twentieth century. Compared with

the lapps in finland 137

the Finns, even those living in Lapland, the Lapps remained poor and underdevel-
oped. They did not even try to improve their living and cultural conditions until
after World War II, and during this period the Finnish government did almost
nothing to help the Lapps in this matter.

In the years 1939— 40 and 1941— 44, a state of war existed between Finland and
the Soviet Union. In 1941— 44 Finland was allied with Nazi Germany. In 1940,
Germany had occupied Norway, so German troops were also present in Norwe-
gian Finnmark. Under an agreement between the governments of Finland and
Germany, Germany was in charge of the military operations against the Soviet
Union in Finnish Lapland as well. Under the armistice treaty concluded between
Finland and the Soviet Union in September 1944, the Finns had to drive away the
German troops from Lapland. Before leaving, the Germans destroyed all buildings
and bridges. The Finns had evacuated the civil population from Lapland prior to
this  military  operation  and  the  Swedish  government  agreed  to  receive  many
Finnish refugees in Sweden. Others went to the parts of Finland not occupied by
the Germans.

The Lapps were told to go to the Kalajoki valley in northern Ostrobothnia.
This was the (cid:222)rst time in history that Finnish Lapps from the various regions met
each other. They decided to organize themselves into a Lapp Union, the (cid:222)rst step
toward political mobilization. At this stage, the union did not, however, develop
into an effective national pressure group as did similar Lapp organizations in Nor-
way and Sweden.

The most important initiative taken by the Lapp Union in a joint meeting
with the newly founded Lapp Cultural Union was to organize a meeting in Enare
in 1947, where a memorandum was drawn up listing desired government measures
necessary to safeguard the future of the Lapp language and culture. At the meet-
ing it was decided to send a Lapp delegation to the capital in May 1947 asking for
support for their case from the state. Before any measures could be taken, a study
of the Lapp situation was necessary. This coordinated Lapp action eventually led
to the appointment by the Finnish government of a Committee on Lapp Affairs
in 1949.7

6.2 the lapp committee in 1952 and the following years
The State Committee on Lapp Affairs, composed of three Lapps and three Finn-
ish experts on Lapp issues, published its report in 1952.8 The committee proposed
state action to develop policies that would assure the Lapps a proper social and
economic position as a distinct ethnic group. The main recommendation on land
title and use concerned the (cid:210)hereditary rights(cid:211) of the Lapps to more extensive land
use and the establishment of a (cid:210)Lapp Homeland(cid:211) in northern Finland with state-
and Lapp-owned land to be available exclusively to the Lapps. Another proposal
concerned the establishment of a Lapp Fund to help (cid:222)nance the projects. The

138 tore modeen

fund had to be increased annually by 1 percent of the value of the annual growth
of state forests.9 This initiative did not, however, result in any positive action from
the government. In the 1950s and 1960s very little was done about this matter by the
state. The Lapps met with growing dif(cid:222)culties in establishing a livelihood in the
new society that arose in Finland during these years. One step forward, however,
was the 1960 decree that established the Advisory Council on Lapp Affairs.10

Only very slowly did a more liberal attitude toward the protection of aborig-
inal peoples begin to take root in the international community. This trend was also
observed by the Finnish, who began to be aware of their neglect regarding the
Lapp population. In the 1970s three state committees were appointed to look at
the Lapp school question.11 The Skolt Lapp community(cid:213)s affairs were studied by
a fourth committee.12 A (cid:222)fth committee was appointed in 1971 by the government
to study the economic, social, cultural, and legal situation of the Finnish Lapps.
This committee was presided over by Asko Oinas, later to be appointed governor
of Lapland County, and its members came partly from the Lapp community. The
committee published an extensive report giving much valuable information about
the state of the Lapp community.13

6.3 who is a lapp?
As the purpose of the study was to look at the Lapp situation, the (cid:222)rst question to
be answered was: Who is to be regarded as a Lapp? It is obvious that such a
classi(cid:222)cation will meet with practical dif(cid:222)culties in a situation where the ethnic
group lacks a developed language and a written culture and lives dispersed over a
large territory also inhabited by another, very dominant ethnic group. The crite-
rion for being a Lapp was decided to be the Lapp language. However, this criterion
was not to be applied in the same way as to the two major ethnic groups in Fin-
land, the Finns and the Swedes, in which the determination is based on the actual
use of the language (mother tongue or intentional appearance to either group), be-
cause such a method would obviously have left too few Lapps to allow for sup-
porting measures. Thus even a person who does not speak the language but who
comes from a family of Lappish-speaking people is considered a Lapp.

In an earlier study,14 a person who either spoke a Lapp dialect or at least one
of whose parents used the language at home was considered a Lapp. Later, in
1962, this de(cid:222)nition was expanded. Even a person with a parent or grandparent
raised in a Lappish-speaking family, that is, with family members who as chil-
dren had learned Lappish as their (cid:222)rst language, was considered a Lapp. Under
the de(cid:222)nition of 1962, 4,409 persons were registered in 1970 as Lapps in Finland,
almost 90 percent of them residing in the four northernmost municipalities:
Enontekis, Enare, Sodankyl(cid:138), and Utsjoki. Because of dif(cid:222)culties (cid:222)nding a liveli-
hood, Lapps had moved away from their homeland, and the number of those
leaving exceeded that of newborn children. Once they migrated, the Lapps were

the lapps in finland 139

quickly assimilated into the Finnish ethnic community. The number of Lapps
was thus declining.

6.4 no particular lapp rights
The 1973 Committee found that the Lapp ethnic community enjoyed almost no
particular rights in Finland. The Finnish constitution mentioned only the two
main ethnic communities: the Finns and the Swedes. There were no Lappish-
language schools. The school authorities were, however, supposed to organize,
when possible, the teaching of Lappish in the Finnish elementary schools.

The effect of the land distribution, which took place in Lapland in 1925, was
not only that the old Lapp lands had reverted to state ownership, but that no men-
tion of the Lapps(cid:213) traditional (cid:222)shing and reindeer-herding rights in this area was
to be found in the of(cid:222)cial documents and land titles. Only in the statute on envi-
ronmental law was there a provision obliging the state to take into account the in-
terests  of the  nomadic  Lapps  when  creating  national  parks. The  committee
stressed the fact that the Finnish authorities had not paid any attention to the
Lapps(cid:213) traditional way of living and to their customary rights to use the land for
the feeding of their reindeer and the waters for (cid:222)shing. Sport (cid:222)shers were thus al-
lowed to exploit waters that used to provide the Lapps with their food. The Rein-
deer Herding Act of 1929 gave the owners of reindeer (Lapps as well as Finns) the
right to herd their animals on state land, but in some cases the land had been ex-
ploited by the state for other purposes without compensation to the reindeer own-
ers. The old customary right of farmers of the northernmost municipalities to
take wood from state forests and use it for their own purposes had been con(cid:222)rmed
by a governmental decree of 1885, but a later decree in 1914 had substantially nar-
rowed this right. Hunting rights belonged to the landowner, but on state land the
villagers had the customary right to hunt. This was not an exclusive Lapp privilege,
however.

6.5 the livelihood of the lapps
Of the Lappish population in the four northernmost municipalities, in 1962 15
percent earned a living from farming, 37 percent from reindeer herding, 3.5 percent
from reindeer herding and (cid:222)shing, and 5 percent from (cid:222)shing only. Handicrafts
and tourism were other important sources of income for the Lapps.

The pasture of the reindeer had become problematic, since more and more
land was being exploited for other purposes. During the war, the Germans had
built a network of roads in Lapland, previously almost roadless, and this network
was being enlarged by the Finnish state. The increasing traf(cid:222)c resulted in many ac-
cidents when reindeer were hit by cars. The Reindeer Herding Act was reformed in
1968, with the land being divided among twelve reindeer herding groups. A rein-
deer herding district carries a collective responsibility for fencing and herding ac-

140 tore modeen

tivities. In 1970— 71, there were 72,600 reindeer, 48,000 of which were in the Lapp
homeland. Although with the new roads communications in Lapland improved,
because of the great distances, it still takes about ten hours to drive from the
provincial capital Rovaniemi to the Lapp municipality of Utsjoki. The long dis-
tances make the cost of living quite high.

In 1970, only 10 percent of the Lapps were still nomads, moving from one
place to another with their herds. The others had settled down in their own or
rented houses. Only one physician and two dentists were working permanently in
the Lapp area, but the new Public Health Act of 1972 would bring better health
services. The number of social workers in the area was important, however.

The report mentions different opinions concerning the possibilities of sav-
ing the original Lapp culture if the traditional way of life is abandoned. The Lap-
pish dialects differ too much among themselves to make possible the creation of
a uniform Lappish written and spoken language in the whole Scandinavian Lap-
pish area. At that time only a small amount of instruction was given in Lappish
in only a few Finnish elementary schools in the Lapp area. There were few Lapp
textbooks and only two hours per week of Lapp radio programs. No Lappish
newspapers were published in Finland; there was only a magazine, Sabmelas, which
appeared eight times a year and was distributed free of charge to the Lapps.

The Finnish Lapps thus speak mostly Finnish, even among themselves. In the
Lapp area only 17 percent speak Lappish as their main language. All Lapps mas-
ter Finnish. Many children even in Lappish-speaking families are switching to
Finnish, because it is the school language and the language spoken by their Finnish
neighbors. Contacts with public authorities and even in shops take place in Fin-
nish, even if both parties are able to communicate in Lappish. The Lappish lan-
guage does not enjoy the prestige necessary to save it.15 Most Lapps are Lutheran.
Only  the  Skolt  minority  is  Orthodox. The  ministers  are  mostly  only  Finnish
speaking.

The report(cid:213)s conclusion was that the future of the Lapp culture is very un-
certain. There is a risk of its disappearing, especially since the majority population,
the Finns, lacks understanding of the value of the Lapp culture. As has been al-
ready mentioned, the Lapps did not enjoy any kind of political or cultural auton-
omy in Finland at this time.

7 the proposals of the 1973 committee 
and later implementation

The committee made a number of proposals aimed at improving the situation of
the Finnish Lapps. The most important proposal concerned the bringing about of

the lapps in finland 141

a Lapp Act. According to the proposed act, anybody who so wished could be reg-
istered as a Lapp in the Lapp homeland. This region would be declared of(cid:222)cially
bilingual: Lappish-Finnish. The Lapps living in the region would be authorized
to use their own language in contacts with the authorities, who would be obliged
to serve them in Lappish. School conditions were to be improved. A Lapp parlia-
ment was to be created. The natural resources in their region were not to be al-
lowed to be exploited without the permission of the Lapp Parliament. A Lapp
fund was to be created to support cultural and economic activities in favor of the
Lapps. In the Finnish Constitution Act, a provision was to be included concern-
ing the protection of the Lapp ethnic group. Other proposals were made by the
committee regarding such areas as legal aid, (cid:222)shing, law enforcement, the protec-
tion of the environment, communications, agriculture, (cid:222)shing, reindeer herding,
tourism,  compensation  matters,  the  cost  of living,  social  and  health  services,
schools, newspapers and radio, and museum activities.

7.1 the lapp assembly
The suggestions of the committee quickly resulted in the creation of an assembly
representing the Lapps, but it was given only consultative powers.16 This assembly
was given the task of following closely the development of Lapp affairs. It was au-
thorized to make suggestions to the Finnish authorities and to function as a ref-
eree body in questions related to legal, economic, social, and cultural matters re-
garding the Lapp population. The Finnish government appointed the members of
the assembly according to the support they received in elections held within the
Lapp community.

The (cid:222)rst initiatives taken by the assembly concerned the right of the Lapps
to receive education in their own language, to use the Lapp language in dealings
with the authorities, and to receive state guarantees for the future existence of the
Lapp cultural traditions. The assembly considered the land issue to be an impor-
tant matter. A 1979 report prepared by its legal counsel refers to the historical
rights of the Lapps. These rights were to be examined. An open question was thus
whether the Lapp villages and taxed lands had ceased to exist as units of real estate.
Obviously the present real-estate register did not acknowledge them. The issue
was: Could the Lapps claim a collective right under private law to the areas of land
and water, or had all rights been transferred to the state? The publication of this
report coincided with the statements on Lapp land and water made by the Con-
stitutional Committee of the national Parliament during the 1970s. The Consti-
tutional Committee of Parliament did not pronounce an opinion on this matter
but left the question open. The statements of the committee might, however, be
interpreted in a way allowing for a solution according to which some form of
ownership might still be accorded to the Lapps.17

142 tore modeen

7.2 proposals of the advisory council
In 1978 the Advisory Council established a subcommittee to examine the historic
issue of the Lapp claim to lands and waters in the homeland region based on the
Lapps(cid:213) use of these lands since time immemorial. Of great importance for spread-
ing the knowledge of the Lapp case was a scholarly book on the legal situation of
the Lapps in Sweden (with Finland) prior to the middle of the eighteenth century,
written by Kaisa Korpijaakko-Labba and submitted in 1989 as a doctoral thesis to
the law faculty in Rovaniemi. The book was (cid:222)rst published in Finnish and later
also in Swedish.18

Not until 1986 did the Advisory Council begin to work in a sustained man-
ner toward the development of a proposal for a Lapp bill. Under the provisions
of an amended decree,19 the Ministry of the Interior assumed responsibility for the
work of the Lapp Advisory Council. This reform had the overall result of devel-
oping a more comprehensive agenda of activities on Lappish issues. In 1990 the
Advisory Committee published its proposal for a Lapp Act, which focused on the
land title issue.20

Two reports of the Advisory Council were published by the government. The
(cid:222)rst contained a proposal for a statute concerning the use of Lappish in dealings
with the authorities. In the Lapp homeland, Lappish should be given the same po-
sition in this respect as Finnish and Swedish in the country at large. The use of
Swedish and Finnish would depend on the ethnic structure of each administrative
and judicial district. Lappish should, however, be authorized to be used irrespec-
tive of the number of Lappish-speaking people in the Lapp homeland and also
by the Lapps in interaction with some Finnish national authorities of importance
to the Lapps.

According to the proposal, a client would be given the right to have docu-
ments issued in Lappish in the original or in translation. The authorities would be
obliged to issue of(cid:222)cial announcements in Lappish as well. A Lapp member of a
public body would be authorized to use his language at sessions of the body. The
Language Act was to be applied not only to state but also to municipal and church
authorities. The municipalities would receive state grants to pay Lappish transla-
tors. State of(cid:222)cials would not, however, be obliged to master Lappish even in the
Lapp homeland, although they would receive paid leaves to learn Lappish. A Lapp
language of(cid:222)ce would be created and (cid:222)nanced with State funds.21

7.3 the lapp language act
The proposals of the 1987 committee were received positively by the government.
Soon a government bill22 on this matter was placed before Parliament. The Con-
stitutional Committee and the Cultural Committee of Parliament also supported
the bill.23 The bill, published in Finnish, Swedish, and Lappish, was approved by
Parliament and signed by the president of the republic. The act,24 also published in

the lapps in finland 143

the three languages, states that every Lapp, irrespective of citizenship, has the right
to use Lappish in courts of law and with other authorities. A Lapp is a person who
considers him or herself a Lapp, provided that the individual or at least one parent
or grandparent learned Lappish as his or her (cid:222)rst language. A Lapp has the right
to register language af(cid:222)liation in the population books.

Not only of(cid:222)cial announcements and street signs but also more important
governmental forms were to be issued in Lappish. Statutes concerning the Lapps
especially were also to be published in Lappish. The Lapp language of(cid:222)ce is sub-
mitted to the Lapp Parliament. The language law applies to the state, municipal,
and church authorities of the districts of Enontekis, Enare, and Utsjoki, and of
the Lapp part of Sodankyl(cid:138). Since the of(cid:222)cials are under no obligation to learn
Lappish, the rights of the Lapps are ensured by translation and interpretation.
Mastering  of Lappish  is,  however,  considered  a  merit  in  the  appointment  of
of(cid:222)cials in the Lapp homeland. A reference to the Lapp Language Act was added
to the National Language Act of 1922.

7.4 the lapp assembly
Because of growing recognition of the importance of Lapp issues in Finland, the
political role of the Lapp Assembly increased substantially. A number of discus-
sions took place at the of(cid:222)cial level as to why the Consultative Assembly should
not be elevated to the status of a Lapp Parliament and be established by an act of
the national Parliament, rather than its existence continuing to rely on a decree.25

7.5 the preparation of the lapp autonomy act and 
the second report of the advisory council
The Lapp members of the Advisory Council on Lapp Affairs were the driving
force in the preparation of the Lapp Act. The preparatory work was done by
the Advisory Council and was published by the government in the name of the
Lapp Parliament.26 The aim of the proposed Lapp Autonomy Act was, according
to the government, to create a situation of equal treatment of the Lapp population
in comparison with the two main national groups in Finland: the Finns and the
Swedes. The Lapps should also be given better opportunities to in(cid:223)uence the man-
agement of their affairs.

Several of the twenty-seven articles of the proposed Lapp Act deal speci(cid:222)cally
with land use and Lapp means of livelihood. The underlying premise of the pro-
posal was that, since the Finnish state had not been able to prove conclusively that
it held any legal title to these areas or that the land title the Lapps had enjoyed
previously had been abrogated, these lands should be returned to the Lapps.27 Ac-
cording to article 1 of the proposed statute, the objective of the reform was to
restore the rights of the Lapp population to the lands, waters, and a livelihood
within their traditional territories, as de(cid:222)ned by the 1973 Decree (Enontekis,

144 tore modeen

Utsjoki, Enare, and part of Sodankyl(cid:138) municipalities), and to create the necessary
conditions for the development of the culture, language, and social conditions of
the Lapp population. One means of achieving this long-term objective of a col-
lective Lapp administrative control over what are now state lands would be to
strengthen the position of the Lapp representative bodies, notably the Lapp As-
sembly, in dealing with all issues of concern to the Lapp people.

The work of the Advisory Council had been somewhat hindered in that the
representatives of the Central Finnish Land and Forestry Of(cid:222)ce did not partici-
pate actively in the Lapp Act discussions, nor was the Lands and Forestry Ministry
supportive of the recommendations of the council when they were made public.28
The Ministry of the Interior circulated the proposed Lapp Act for of(cid:222)cial com-
ments and received replies from more than (cid:222)fty bodies. These comments were
partly supportive, partly negative. Some responded that a serious injustice had
taken place in Finnish history that the state was obligated to redress. Others ad-
mitted that although some injustice might have occurred, a more important argu-
ment was that the government had to be responsible for governing on behalf of all
of the people residing in Lapland as well as in the Finnish national interests. The
answers illustrate the dilemma for any government in a pluralistic society: that of
balancing the interests of the majority with the special needs of a minority, espe-
cially an indigenous one such as the Lapps.29 The Finnish government did not in-
clude any provisions concerning the land and water rights of the Lapps in its bill.
The bill concerns only the legal status of the Lapps and their self-determination
in cultural matters.

7.6 the constitution act
The government also proposed a provision to be included in the Finnish Consti-
tution Act concerning the Lapps(cid:213) right to use autonomous powers in their home-
land. More detailed provisions were to be given in a particular statute. This statute
would determine how the jurisdiction should be divided between the Lapp self-
governing body, on the one hand, and the Finnish state and local government bod-
ies, on the other hand. The self-governing body was given the name of the Lapp
Parliament.30 The Lapp Parliament was to be directly elected by and among the
Lapps and would function in relation to the Ministry of Justice. The proposed
statute would contain provisions as to the election of the Lapp Parliament, the
composition of the Parliament, and its jurisdiction. The criteria for being a Lapp
appear in the act, as do the boundaries of the Lapp homeland.

The Finnish Constitution Act was amended in many respects on July 17, 1995.
The article concerning the linguistic and cultural rights of the inhabitants in-
cluded the following provision: (cid:210)The Sami as an indigenous people as well as the
Romanies and other groups shall have the right to maintain and develop their own
language and cultures. Provisions governing the right of the Sami to use the Sami

the lapps in finland 145

language before the public authorities shall be prescribed by Act of Parliament.(cid:211) At
the same time, a new Article 51a was included in the Constitution Act: (cid:210)As an in-
digenous people the Lapps shall be guaranteed cultural autonomy in respect of
their language and culture within the Lapp homelands in the manner prescribed by
Act of Parliament.(cid:211)31 The fact that the Lapps are mentioned in the same phrase as
the Gypsies shows good will on the part of the Finns in taking into consideration
the unfavorable situation not only of the Lapps but also of the Gypsies, who do
not enjoy any kind of positive special treatment.32 The governmental bill passed
through Parliament and was issued on July 17, 1995, together with the amendments
to the Constitution Act. The Lapp Parliament Act was amended later the same
year.33 More detailed provisions concerning accountability, audit, and personnel
matters were added to the act.

During the parliamentary proceedings, its Constitutional Committee issued
a report pertaining to the bill.34 This report refers to Finland(cid:213)s declaration in con-
nection with the country(cid:213)s joining the European Community. According to this
declaration (Protocol no. 3), the Lapps may be given exclusive rights to reindeer
herding in their homeland (a right they do not enjoy under the actual law). The
committee proposed some amendments to the governmental bill, which were ac-
cepted by Parliament and included in the act.

According to the Lapp Parliament Act, the criteria for being regarded as a
Lapp are: the person must consider himself to be a Lapp, and (1) he himself or one
at least of his parents or his grandparents must have learned Lappish as his or their
(cid:222)rst language, or (2) he must be the descendant of a person who has been of(cid:222)cially
registered as a Mountain-Lapp, a Forest-Lapp, or a Fisher-Lapp, or (3) at least one
of his parents must have been registered as a voter in the election to the Lapp As-
sembly or the Lapp Parliament. Number 2 of these criteria is new.

The  Lapp  homeland  remains  the  same:  the  municipalities  of Enontekis,
Enare, Utsjoki, and the Lapp reindeer-herding district of Sodankyl(cid:138). The juris-
diction of the Lapp Parliament consists mainly of initiating and giving opinions
to the Finnish authorities in matters concerning the Lapp language and culture
and the position of the Lapps as an indigenous people. The Lapp Parliament rep-
resents the Lapps in relation to other public bodies. It administers certain state
funds. The Lapp Parliament has to submit a yearly report to the Finnish govern-
ment on relevant events concerning the Lapps. The Finnish authorities are required
to consult the Lapp Parliament on all important matters concerning the Lapps as
an indigenous people and the Lapp homeland. The act mentions six areas of spe-
cial interest to the Lapps, including community planning, the use of state land,
and amendments to the legislation concerning the Lapps and the Lapp language.
The matters to be handled by the Lapp Parliament are prepared by the Lapp gov-
ernment, to which certain decision-making powers may be transferred by decision
of the Lapp Parliament. The Parliament is assisted by of(cid:222)ces and a staff. The sta-

146 tore modeen

tus of an employee is either that of a civil servant (a public law position, similar to
that of a state of(cid:222)cial) or the individual may be engaged by an agreement under
private law.

The act contains detailed information as to accountability and audit. The
provisions concerning personnel refer to appointment and the duties of the
staff. Appeals against decisions made by the Lapp Parliament are reviewed by
the  Supreme  Administrative  Court  of Finland. The  Lapp  Parliament  itself
functions as an appellate body regarding decisions made by agencies or of(cid:222)cials
submitted to it.

The chapter concerning voting rights is of particular interest. Any person
mentioned in the article who is to be regarded as a Lapp has the right to be reg-
istered as a voter and to exercise the right to vote. Voting rights belong not only
to Finnish citizens but also to aliens residing among the Lapp people who have
resided in Finland for at least two years. Any person with voting rights who agrees
to be nominated as a candidate for Parliament is eligible to be a member of the
Lapp Parliament.

8 the skolt lapps

The Skolt Lapp group has been subject to a great deal of special legislation.35 As
refugees from the former Finnish Petchenga (Petsamo) district, which was ceded
to the Soviet Union, the Skolts had the same rights as the 500,000 other refugees
from the ceded Finnish territories who were given the opportunity to settle down
in  the  remaining  territory  of Finland  and  be  provided  with  a  livelihood. The
Finnish government also endeavored to consider the special needs of this ethnic
group. It attempted to preserve the speci(cid:222)c Skolt Lapp identity. As has been al-
ready mentioned, the Skolts speak their own Lapp dialect and belong to the Or-
thodox Church.

Several statutes were issued in the years after World War II aiming at procur-
ing farms for the Skolt Lapps. For instance, statutes 1955:273 and 1969:593 con-
cerned dwelling places, and statute 1969:590, reindeer-herding land property for the
Skolt Lapps. Other statutes concerning postwar refugees in Finland also applied
to the Skolt Lapps, such as 1945:396 and 1950:549.

The Skolts were settled in two villages in the municipality of Enare. They
are organized in village councils headed by a chief.36 Their number is actually 545.
In the same area there are also 252 Lapps belonging to other tribes as well as
some Finns. As of 1991, 233 small farms had been given to the Skolt Lapps. Only
nine are reindeer-herding farms. A great proportion of the Skolt Lapps are with-
out jobs.

9 assessment of the actual status 
of the finnish lapps

the lapps in finland 147

The Lappish Language Act on the use of Lappish in transactions with the au-
thorities (1991:516) has not proved to be very successful. The author of this paper
recently met with some representatives of the Finnish Lapp community. They
stressed the fact that the Finnish authorities have correctly applied the law so that
forms (for instance, tax returns) are available in Lappish today, but most contacts,
written and oral, still take place in Finnish. The Lapps all master Finnish. They are
accustomed to speaking Finnish to the governmental agencies. Such a custom is
not easily changed, especially if the contacts must pass through interpreters and
thus become quite complicated. The Lapp language (i.e., the dialects) still lacks the
vocabulary needed for government and administration of justice.

The Lapp representatives pointed out that the successful introduction of Fin-
nish as a language to be used in governmental and judicial matters in Finland (to-
gether with Swedish, which was the only language used until then) took place over
a period of twenty years (1863— 1883). In other respects, this reform took place
under more favorable conditions. The Lapps are afraid that it will be many years
before the Lapp Language Act is effective, if ever. In the statutes, the term (cid:210)Lap-
pish(cid:211) is used as if there were a common Lapp language. However, it is well known
that there is not.

The Lapp Autonomy Act does not contain any provisions concerning land
and water matters, which naturally is resented by the Lapps. They had great ex-
pectations in this area which closely concerns their livelihood. The Lapp Parlia-
ment has only limited powers and very limited funds to use (about 5 million marks
annually). In comparison with the Lagting of (cid:129)land Province, the jurisdiction of
the Lapp Parliament is very limited. Not only is the autonomy of (cid:129)land Province
guaranteed  by  international  law  and  Finnish  constitutional  law,  but  it  can  be
changed only with the approval of the Lagting. The (cid:129)landers have also been given
the right to elect a member of Parliament. An (cid:129)lander is considered a person
with a particular kind of provincial citizenship: hembygdsr(cid:138)tt. The great majority of
(cid:129)landers are Swedish speaking. The Finnish-speaking (cid:129)landers (with hembygdsr(cid:138)tt)
enjoy the same rights as the Swedish (cid:129)landers, for instance, concerning the exclu-
sive right of an (cid:129)lander to own real property or to conduct trade in the province.
No such guarantees exist for the Lapps. The Lapps cannot prevent the provision
concerning them in the Constitution Act from being abolished, if the Finnish gov-
ernment and a quali(cid:222)ed majority of the Finnish Parliament should decide so. The
Swedish minority in Finland does not enjoy any special rights, either, but there are
enough Swedes to guarantee a representation in Parliament (in most governments,

148 tore modeen

there have also been Swedish members). The Swedish school system is highly de-
veloped, as is Swedish literature in Finland.

The Lapps are too few to be represented in the national Parliament. The no-
tion of Lapp is too broad to be useful. Criterion 2 (ancestors who have been reg-
istered as Mountain-Lapps, Forest-Lapps, or Fisher-Lapps) even includes Finns
with no relation to the Lapp ethnicity. Under the present law, most of the people
registered as Lapps and given voting rights do not speak Lappish. Some of them
are not even descendants of Lapps. According to statistics, fewer than 1,600 Lapps
are Lappish speaking, but 6,400 people are registered as Lapps. The Finnish na-
tional government mentions these problems in its report for 1997 submitted to
Parliament. The Ministry of Justice is preparing an amendment to the Lapp Par-
liament Act that will limit the de(cid:222)nition of Lapp to those with Lappish-speaking
ancestors only.37

The Finnish-speaking inhabitants of the Lapp homeland also resent the (cid:210)spe-
cial treatment(cid:211) in favor of the Lapps and demand similar favors from the govern-
ment. In northern Finland there are Finnish pressure groups for defending the
non-Lapp interests in the area. One such group in the Sodankyl(cid:138) municipality has
even received local government grants.38

The Lapp homeland is not able to provide Lapp education except in the (cid:222)rst
years of elementary school. There are still not enough Lappish-speaking teachers
and textbooks available in Lappish for the higher levels.39 The Scandinavian Lapps
have not succeeded in creating a more united Lapp homeland. The Lapps continue
to be divided among four countries. Of great importance, however, is the Nordic
Lapp Cultural Institute in Kautokeino (Norwegian Finnmark), administered by
the Nordic Council ((cid:222)nanced by all Scandinavian states).

notes

1. (cid:210)Finns(cid:211) was the traditional Norwegian name for the Lapps. Finnmark is also the northern-
most province of Norway, inhabited by Lapps. In Swedish (cid:210)Lapp(cid:211) is used; in Finnish the cus-
tomary term is Lappalainen, although in recent years Same and Saamelainen are becoming more fre-
quent. The Lapps call themselves Sami. Compare also with Suomalainen, meaning Finn (in the
actual sense of the word) in Finnish. See Israel Roung, Sami Usage and Customs: The Sami National
Minority in Sweden 23ff. ( R(cid:138)ttsfonden [The Legal Rights Foundation], Uppsala 1982).
2. Lars Anders Baer, The Sami: An Indigenous People in Their Own Land, in The Sami National
Minority in Sweden 13 (1982).
3. Roung, supra note 1, at 25, 33 (1982). See also Saamelaiskomitean mietint(cid:154), Komiteanmietint(cid:154) [Govern-
mental Report] 1973:446, at 8ff; Marjut Aikio, Saamelaiset kielenvaihdon kierteess(cid:138) [English abstract:
The Cycle of Language Shift Among the S(cid:135)mi) (SKS, Helsinki 1988].
4. Baer, supra note 2, at 13ff.
5. Israel Roung, The Sami National Minority in Sweden 33 (1982); Magnus M(cid:154)rner, The Land Rights
of the Sami and the Indians, in The Sami National Minority in Sweden 36 (1982); Gerhard Hafstr(cid:154)m,

the lapps in finland 149

The Judgment in the Taxed Mountain Case, in The Sami National Minority in Sweden 117 (1982);
The Decision of the Supreme Court, in The Sami National Minority in Sweden 146 (1982); Kaisa Ko-
rpijaakko-Labba, On samernas r(cid:138)ttsliga st(cid:138)llning i Sverige-Finland [The Legal Situation of the
Sami in Sweden-Finland] (Finnish Lawyers(cid:213) Publishing Co., Helsingfors 1994) (Finnish edi-
tion, Helsinki 1989); Lennard Sillanp(cid:138)(cid:138), Political and Administrative Responses to Sami
Self-Determination,  Commentationes  Scientiarum  Socialium:  Societas  Scientiarum  Fennica (Helsinki
1994); Saamelaiskomitean mietint(cid:154), Finnish Governmental Report 1973:46, at 15.
6. See Baer, supra note 2, at 10.
7. Sillanp(cid:138)(cid:138), supra note 5, at 58.
8. Saamelaiskomitean mietitint(cid:154), Governmental Report 1952:12. See also Saamelaisasiain komitealta, Gov-
ernmental Report 1951:20.
9. Sillanp(cid:138)(cid:138), supra note 5, at 101ff.
10. 1960:401. Samedelegationen (Sw.); Saamelaisasiain neuvottelukunta (Fi).
11. Governmental Reports 1971:B 63, 1973:88, 1974:96.
12. Governmental Report 1973:69.
13. Saamelaiskomitean mietint(cid:154), Governmental Report (1973:46).
14. Report 1952:12.
15. See also Aikio, supra note 3.
16. Delegationen f(cid:154)r same(cid:138)renden (Sw.); Saamelaisvaltuuskunta (Fi); Decree of November 9, 1973:824.
17. Sillanp(cid:138)(cid:138), supra note 5, at 93.
18. Korpijaakko-Labba (1994).
19. 1987:367.
20. Sillanp(cid:138)(cid:138), supra note 5, at 95, 101.
21. Saamelaisten kielilaki(cid:209)Spr(cid:140)klag f(cid:154)r samerna (Governmental Report 1987:60).
22. 1990:180.
23. Reports 1990:13 and 1990:4.
24. 1991:516.
25. Sillanp(cid:138)(cid:138), supra note 5, at 216. See also the Ministry of Justice Report of 1994.
26. Saamelaisasian neuvottelukunnan mietint(cid:154) 1. Samedelegationens bet(cid:138)nkande 1 (Governmental Report
1990:32).
27. Id. at 195.
28. Sillanp(cid:138)(cid:138), supra note 5, at 103, 195.
29. Id. at 198ff. Governmental Bill 1994:248, the Lapp Autonomy Act 1995:988.
30. Sameting in Swedish, S(cid:135)medikki in Lappish, Saamelaisk(cid:138)r(cid:138)j(cid:138)t in Finnish. Compare with Lagting: the
Parliament of the autonomous province of the (cid:129)land Islands (Act 1991:1144) and Svenska Fin-
lands Folkting representing the Swedish ethnic group of Finland (Act concerning State grants
1985:902, Decree 1985:1023).
31. Semiof(cid:222)cial English translation.

150 tore modeen

32. The Constitutional Committee stressed the importance of indicating the Lapps as an in-
digenous people (Report 1994:25).The Lapp Parliament Act (1995:974).
33. 1995:1725.
34. Report 1994:17; Bill 1994:248.
35. The present Skolt Lapp Act bears number 1995:253 and consists of seventy-three articles. It
has replaced Act 1984:611.
36. See Governmental Bill 1994:243 and the report of Parliament(cid:213)s Committee on Legal Affairs
1994:35.
37. Regeringens ber(cid:138)ttelse till Riksdagen f(cid:154)r (cid:140)r 1997, 14.
38. See Tore Modeen, Wer ist Lappe (und wer ist Schwede) in Finnland? Europas Ethnica 168ff
(1997).
39. News item, Hufvudstadsbladet [a daily newspaper in Swedish published in Helsingfors], April
19, 1998.


