How Do You Patent a Landscape? The

Perils of Dichotomizing Cultural 

and Intellectual Property

russel lawrence barsh*

For a variety of conceptual, historical, and political reasons, contemporary international law dis-
tinguishes between (cid:210)natural(cid:211) land forms, cultural monuments, movable cultural property, the per-
forming arts, and scientiﬁc knowledge. Indigenous peoples do not make these distinctions. Rather,
they tend to regard landscapes as inherently cultural products in which artworks, literature, per-
formances, and scientiﬁc-knowledge systems are inextricably embedded. Scientiﬁc knowledge must
periodically be rehearsed within the landscape in recitations and performances that remember the
historical process by which people and their nonhuman kinfolk constructed the landscape. Detach-
ing speciﬁc cultural or scientiﬁc (cid:210)objects(cid:211) from the landscape and commodifying them, as is con-
templated by most current proposals for protecting indigenous peoples(cid:213) rights, will undermine the
indigenous institutions and procedures necessary for perpetuating the quality and validity of local
knowledge.

(cid:210)we know that the indigenous peoples who live in the most fragile environments
of our world, possess the key for future survival.(cid:211)1 The words of the Austrian pres-
ident Alois Mock, spoken at the World Conference for Human Rights at Vienna
in 1993, would encourage an optimist to say that we have come a long way since the
1970s in recognizing the rights of indigenous peoples and the global value of their
cultures. Twenty years ago, multilateral development programs and aid donors
were still debating the best approach for (cid:210)modernizing(cid:211) indigenous peoples; last
year, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
launched a world program to indigenize biotechnology and environmental science.
It is commonplace for diplomats and scientists to equate the protection of the
world(cid:213)s remaining cultural diversity with the search for (cid:210)sustainable solutions(cid:211) for
development.

No state contends that indigenous peoples should be denied rights to their

*Associate Professor of Native American Studies, University of Lethbridge (Alberta, Canada). For my
ﬁrst teacher of landscape knowledge, ratu Apenisa Donumaivanua, vunivalu Emalu ni Wainimala,
nomuni veiwekani ena lomani tawa mudu.

14

how do you patent a landscape? 15

unexploited  funds  of useful  knowledge,  or  to  the  diversity  of cultures  within
which they have maintained their knowledge. Agreement on the precise legal form
such rights should take has been impossible, however, because of fundamental dif-
ferences of interests among states and between states and indigenous peoples. In-
digenous peoples insist that scienti(cid:222)c knowledge is an inalienable part of their cul-
tures and territories. Developing countries want preferential access to all of the
indigenous knowledge within their borders, hoping to stimulate the development
of more exportable commodities. Industrialized countries want immediate access
to indigenous peoples(cid:213) knowledge under the least restrictive conditions(cid:209)prefer-
ably conventional intellectual property mechanisms such as patents(cid:209)so that they
can develop new commodities to sell back to developing countries.2

In the rush to reach a political consensus on indigenous science, an important
conceptual problem has been overlooked. The path of least resistance for indige-
nous peoples seeking state protection is to accept a separation of land, culture, and
science into separate legal categories, to be protected under separate international
instruments and through separate intergovernmental mechanisms. If this separa-
tion is implemented, indigenous cultures may gain a reprieve, but the price will be
a distortion of the very nature of indigenous cultures, and of the relationship be-
tween indigenous peoples and their lands.

1 competing paradigms

The concept of (cid:210)cultural property(cid:211) is incompatible with the ways indigenous peo-
ples conceive of their relationships with performances, visual and plastic arts, lit-
erature, language, and spiritual activity. Categorizing certain human works and
knowledge as (cid:210)cultural(cid:211) re(cid:223)ects a relatively recent Western dichotomization of art
and science, which manifests itself in the organization of university faculties as
well as the law. Science can sometimes be art, if it is very beautiful (as in the case
of some scienti(cid:222)c photography and (cid:222)ne pre-photographic scienti(cid:222)c illustrations)
or if it is old enough to have become a part of history. On the other hand, art is
rarely confused with science, because we have been taught that it serves different
purposes. As the philosopher and scientist Bronowski observed nearly a half cen-
tury ago, creativity and the struggle for understanding inspire artists as well as sci-
entists.3 Both search for patterns of meaning in our life(cid:213)s encounters with the uni-
verse and with one another.

In separating art from science, the modern West institutionalized the separa-
tion  of subjective  (spirit)  and  objective  (material)  that  it  had  inherited  from
Greco-Roman philosophy. In this view, spirit, and its expression in sentiment and
values, cannot elucidate our physical reality, nor can physical means detect, mea-
sure, or illuminate the spirit. Indigenous peoples would reject the cosmological du-

16 russel lawrence barsh

alism of spirit and material as fervently as a contemporary physicist would dismiss
strict dichotomization of energy and matter(cid:209)and for the same reason: spirit and
material, like energy and matter, are interchangeable.

Art became a victim of its association with religion in the days when West-
ern science was (cid:222)ghting to break free from theological dogma and establish itself
as a superior arbiter of truth. The emergence of industrial capitalism, with its de-
pendent awe of technology, increased the credibility and social power of science.
Wealthy patrons who had devoted their fortunes to the production of art became
pro(cid:222)t-seeking investors in science. Art and science continue to compete for fund-
ing and public attention as if they were unrelated and independent domains of
human thought. Applying the dualism of art and science to peoples who make no
such distinction is cognitive imperialism, for they cannot obtain protection for
their rights without bifurcating their knowledge systems along Western lines and
thereby reproducing within themselves the Western contradiction and con(cid:223)ict be-
tween art and science, spirit and material.

The distinction between cultural and intellectual property rights in Western
legal traditions is not exactly contiguous with the dualism of art and science. It
re(cid:223)ects the in(cid:223)uence of yet another dualism in Western thought, which also ap-
pears strange to indigenous peoples: the separation and antagonism of individ-
ual and society. The cultural property category is associated with art and society,
the intellectual property category with science and the individual. Cultural prop-
erty, as that concept is applied in international law, consists of the works of indi-
viduals that have gained collective signi(cid:222)cance; intellectual property rewards indi-
viduals  for  their  works. This  dichotomization  is  implicitly  historical  as  well.
Individual works become cultural after the creators are dead. Indigenous societies
tend to view individuals(cid:213) creativity in a simultaneous social context or dialectic, in
which the value of the individual work arises from its ability to help reproduce it-
self and reproduce society. Japan(cid:213)s designation of Living Treasures approximates
the indigenous conception of respecting creative people.

1.1 reductionism and the landscape
There is a further and deeper contradiction. The Western distinction between na-
ture and culture is re(cid:223)ected in the assumption that nearly all cultural and intellec-
tual property can be completely detached from the landscapes in which they arose.
Ceremonial tools, songs encoding ecological knowledge, even sacred architecture
can, like the Temple of Dendur (removed from the Nile valley to New York(cid:213)s Met-
ropolitan Museum of Art), be understood and  (cid:210)preserved(cid:211) anywhere. Or can
they? Not if the object or performance is dialectically linked to the landscape, in
the sense that its speci(cid:222)c meaning and message are formed by its use. A song about
a particular bird can be understood only super(cid:222)cially if at all by someone who has
never seen or listened to that bird. It may be a song that indigenous people sing
to a bird, moreover, so that the response of the bird may be the real message.

how do you patent a landscape? 17

Indigenous  peoples  conceive  of landscapes  as  socially  constructed  moral
spaces, fashioned out of relationships among coexisting species that have devel-
oped over a very long time through marriages, treaties, and shared endeavors.4 The
ecosystem is a dynamic network of kinship, trade, and diplomacy, of which human
societies are only one part and in which alignments of power and cooperation con-
tinue to shift and change with little warning. In order to survive, humans must un-
derstand and respect their commitments to other species, exercise caution when-
ever they intervene in other species(cid:213) affairs, and watch the ecosystem very carefully
for signs of impending changes. A seasonal cycle of travel, visiting landmarks,
medicine  gathering,  and  performances  constitutes  an  annual  (cid:210)reading(cid:211) of the
ecosystem and of the history of interspecies relationships embedded within key
features of the landscape. By reading the landscape and performing it, people
teach, rehearse, and exercise their responsibilities, renewing the land.

The signi(cid:222)cance of journeys and performances must be understood in the
context of the fact that most ecosystems are anthropogenic. In other words, the
physical  and  biological  landscape  is  a  human  product.  Human  activity  has
modi(cid:222)ed landforms, altered the abundance of plants and animals, changed water
(cid:223)ows and soil chemistry. Agriculture is a familiar example: even before the steel
plow and internal-combustion engine, farmers created distinctive landscapes of
(cid:222)elds, ditches, and terraces that altered preexisting ecosystems and create new eco-
logical niches, such as the hedgerows of Celtic Britain and the carp ponds of Tang
China. Shifting cultivation in tropical forests creates a distinctive patchiness in for-
est architecture by altering processes of succession. Nonagricultural peoples are
also active ecological engineers, notably through the periodic use of (cid:222)re to re-
structure plant communities, and thereby create and maintain unnatural land-
scapes, such as Australia(cid:213)s eucalyptus forests and North America(cid:213)s sweeping tall-
grass prairies.5

Intervention by hunting, pastoral, and horticultural societies was frequently
successful  at  increasing  the  biological  production  of foods  and  materials  for
human consumption, while accomodating high levels of biological diversity. They
practiced an ecological architecture which aimed at producing biological stability,
just as physical architecture aims at structural stability. Stability did not imply
changelessness, however. Ecosystems inevitably changed regardless of human ef-
forts to achieve security, and human societies were continually in the process of
reevaluating and modifying their patterns of intervention(cid:209)history recorded in
the stories embedded in the landscape. The Blackfoot have site-speci(cid:222)c stories
about wildlife ecology spanning more than 12,000 years, from the catastrophic loss
of large mammal species (or (cid:210)megafauna(cid:211)) after the last glacial period to the end
of the dog days, when horses returned to the prairies.

It must be recognized that the human creation of a landscape over tens of
generations involves an enormous investment of effort and a vast accumulation of
knowledge. Indigenous science may be highly localized geographically but can em-

18 russel lawrence barsh

body a longer-term perspective of geological and ecological processes such as ero-
sion and forest succession and of the strategic action required to avoid undesirable
long-term results.6

Over the millennia, moreover, people and their nonhuman neighbors have
coadapted behaviorally and grown mutually dependent. Indigenous peoples(cid:213) de-
scription of ecosystems as a web of social relationships is biologically accurate, in-
sofar as each species depends for its present form and habitat on the history of its
interaction with other species, including humans.7 This collective historical process
of constructing contemporary ecological reality through changing relationships
among a multitude of species is what indigenous people see, recall, and retell as
they travel through ancestral landscapes. The Chickasaw legal scholar Sakej Hen-
derson speaks of landscapes as an Order, in which all species are interconnected by
kinship, a shared history, and locally speci(cid:222)c texts such as stories, songs, dances,
and ceremonies.

The separation of nature and culture is therefore both arti(cid:222)cial and mislead-
ing. Except in Antarctica and the highest alpine regions, the biosphere has been
shaped by millennia of conscientious and largely sustainable human use. Indige-
nous and tribal peoples conceived of the entire landscape as a part and product
of culture that required annual human maintenance to remain productive. Nature-
culture dualism should be recognized for what it was, a tool that the Roman and
later Western empires deployed to de(cid:222)ne other nations and peoples out of the do-
main of culture. As part of nature, the lands of other societies could be appro-
priated without moral or legal scruple.8

1.2 embedded landscapes
From an indigenous perspective, then, an ancestral landscape is a book of human
history and ecological science. It can be read through the performance of stories
and ceremonies associated with landmarks, which serve as the chapter headings
and index. Each generation adds to the text (as in all good empirical science)
through patient observation of changes in the ecosystems which each landmark an-
chors in mental space. Oceanscapes and skyscapes are embedded by seafaring peo-
ples with history and science in the same way.9 I refer to this textual quality of a
long-travelled and extensively coadapted landscape as (cid:210)embeddedness,(cid:211) emphasiz-
ing the layers of linguistic, social, spiritual, and ecological knowledge and meaning
that rest beneath the visible panorama.

Embeddedness can be found in (cid:210)engineered landscapes,(cid:211) such as the elabo-
rately terraced mountain farms and lowland irrigation networks of southeast Asia
or the Andes,10 as well as in landscapes that have simply been traveled, foraged, and
observed.11 Indigenous ecological models may traditionally be recorded and com-
municated in media that Europeans regard, moreover, as (cid:210)artistic(cid:211) and emotive
rather than empirical, such as song and movement.12 Honeybees have long been

how do you patent a landscape? 19

known to communicate spatial models to one another through dance,13 so it should
come as no surprise that human dances can be used to demonstrate animal behav-
ior, trophic webs, or ecological principles. My Blackfoot and Cree students have
been exploring the reasons why certain species (cid:222)gure prominently as inspirations
for Prairie Indian dances: some were useful to people (for example, bison) while
others played key ecological roles (wolves and beaver), or served as indicators of
ecological productivity (eagles and prairie chickens).

Many indigenous peoples make two-dimensional maps but usually do not re-
spect the Western convention of using rectilinear coordinates to represent terres-
trial orientation and physical distance. They tend to focus on time rather than
space, often representing the elapse of time as a spiral rather than a straight line.
Time maps depict the journey and stops along the way to hunt, conduct cere-
monies, and tell stories.14 The earliest European maps also used courses, stations,
and elapsed time rather than rectilinear coordinates, which were developed by
Roman surveyors preoccupied with ownership of the earth(cid:213)s surface(cid:209)and thus
with measurable geometric boundaries.15

Within the indigenous paradigm, then, the landscape is not merely a storage
place for various kinds of things, some of which are useful. It is a library of local
history and possibilities, and the appearance, behavior, and spatial distribution of
landforms and species is a text that can be read in prescribed sequences. The land-
scape is also a laboratory in which new knowledge is continually being created, as
humans and other species switch strategies and adapt to one another anew. Since
people are as much a part of the coadaptive mechanism as birds or trees, the re-
moval of the people or the termination of their way of interacting with the land-
scape necessarily results in a cascade of responsive ecological adjustments. As a
Kalahari San elder explained to me, if the people are removed (cid:210)the land will die.(cid:211)
Removing the knowledge of the people(cid:209)their speci(cid:222)c protocol for reading
the scienti(cid:222)c text embedded in their landscape(cid:209)will have the same effect. All
species have coadapted with human activity; change the human activity and (cid:210)the
land will die,(cid:211) by gradually evolving into a different landscape. Grasslands revert to
scrub, and quilted biodiverse forests become oligarchic forests with the cessation
of human burning, hunting, herding, and horticulture.

The embedding of landscapes is not unique to indigenous or tribal peoples as
we classify them today. European landscapes were embedded with Gallic, Teutonic,
and Celtic stories centered on sacred springs and groves, like the grove that Cae-
sar Augustus ordered his engineers to destroy during the seige of Marseilles.16 The
Volkerwanderung that followed the collapse of centralized Roman administration re-
sulted in a massive redistribution of ethnic groups (e.g., the Germanic Lombards
and Franks to Gallic northern Italy and France), but migrating groups eventually
invested their new landscapes with fresh layers of stories and sacred meaning. Eu-
ropeans migrating to the Americas, especially those who lived for generations close

20 russel lawrence barsh

to  the  land,17 also  invested  the  landscape  with  sacred  meanings  and  localized
knowledge. In the words of one Mennonite farmer with whom I exchanged ob-
servations about prairie dynamics, (cid:210)every (cid:222)eld is a little different from the others.(cid:211)

1.3 respectful use of knowledge
Few indigenous land tenure systems have been documented, and even less attention
has been paid to the ways indigenous peoples transfer rights to knowledge about
the land. In my research experience, however, land rights and knowledge rights are
so closely intertwined that the use of terms such as (cid:210)land tenure(cid:211) completely dis-
torts indigenous conceptions of law. Separating land ownership from knowledge
ownership re(cid:223)ects a peculiarly Western reductionism, which views the right to use
land as separable from knowledge of how to use land properly. To illustrate, I will
draw on three North American societies with which I have (cid:222)rsthand experience:
the Mi(cid:213)kmaw, an Atlantic hunting and (cid:222)shing nation; the Coast Salish and their
neighbors in the Paci(cid:222)c Northwest; and a prairie hunting society, the Blackfoot.18
Among  the  Mi(cid:213)kmaw,  hunting  areas  and  coastal  (cid:222)sheries  were  allocated
among clans in large tracts or estates known as umitki, which followed the bound-
aries of bays, river watersheds, lakes, and marshes. The clan regarded all of the an-
imals and plants living within its umitki as its kinfolk and its own role as that of
a steward or guardian. To assert a claim to hunt or (cid:222)sh within a umitki, it was nec-
essary to show some relationship with the custodial clan and thereby, implicitly, a
kinship with the animals and plants found there. Similar arrangements existed in
the Paci(cid:222)c Northwest among the Coast Salish as well as neighboring peoples such
as the Nootkans, Tlingits, and Gitksan.19 Clans or small related villages exercised
stewardship of riparian, coastal, and forest estates, dispersed over considerable dis-
tances from their settlements. Access to an estate required the assertion of con-
sanguineal or af(cid:222)nal kinship ties to its custodians.20 Since communities were in-
termarried throughout the region, the effect of this criterion was not to exclude
anyone from living resources, but to establish priority of access as a function of
the degree of kinship between use-seekers and stewards.

Family names, totemic heraldry, songs, and dances were associated with the
ecology and history of each Mi(cid:213)kmaw umitki and Salish estate. Rights of access
could be asserted through genealogy and performances; good knowledge of the
symbolic regalia of a place was evidence of some legitimate personal connection
with it. Teaching someone the symbolic regalia associated with a place was tanta-
mount to a grant of rights of access. Songs, dances, geographical names, and sto-
ries were not merely documents of (cid:210)title,(cid:211) however. They also encoded some basic
knowledge of the structures of local ecosystems and their proper use. Thus, for ex-
ample, the Mi(cid:213)kmaw of Listaguj (present-day Restigouche, Quebec) had a salmon
as their umitki crest. This was not arbitrary symbolism: the Restigouche River is
the most productive salmon habitat in the Mi(cid:213)kmaw territory, and Listaguj peo-

how do you patent a landscape? 21

ple were masters of salmon (cid:222)shing. Salmon heraldry was not only associated with
rights  to  the  (cid:222)shery  but  deeply  embedded  with  local  proprietary  information
about (cid:222)shing.

The Mi(cid:213)kmaw and Salish legal systems also recognized specialized, individ-
ual aspects of access and expertise within the larger framework of clan geography.
Mi(cid:213)kmaw  hunters  and  (cid:222)shers  accepted  the  guidance  of local  sa(cid:213)ya and  saqmaw
(headmen or chiefs) as to harvesting quotas. In the Paci(cid:222)c Northwest, managerial
authority is far more formalized. The name of an estate is ceremonially conferred
on an individual chief, who symbolically becomes the estate and the physical cus-
todian of all of the crests and other regalia associated with the land. Stewardship
roles are not inherited lineally but often pass to collateral kinfolk or to children
specially adopted for this purpose. Public assemblies, feasting, and performances
accompany transfers of land responsibilities in these cultures, combining a renewal
of cultural identity and social ties with each realignment of land rights. Among
Mi(cid:213)kmaw, recognition of authority and rights must take place on Potlotek Island
during the midsummer gathering; on the northwest coast, in the feast hall of the
territorial clan or house group.

Among Blackfoot, ecosystem-level knowledge has been maintained by a num-
ber of species-speci(cid:222)c ceremonial associations, such as the Horn Society, which
comes together annually to collaborate on the Sun Dance, a celebration of the ul-
timate source of all life. Each society has an inventory of songs, ceremonies, and
ceremonial bundles that represent its speci(cid:222)c expertise.21 Society membership and
the stewardship of bundles must be rotated every few years, morever. As a result,
every worthy person has opportunities over a lifetime to learn the knowledge as-
sociated with several societies and bundles(cid:209)and no knowledge can be monopo-
lized by a privileged minority.22 The permanent (cid:210)ownership(cid:211) of knowledge is in-
conceivable, even within Blackfoot society. To remain alive, knowledge must be
transferred continually and only at speci(cid:222)ed geographical points such as the Belly
Buttes.23

The foregoing examples illustrate two important points. There is considerable
diversity in the ways indigenous societies distribute the responsibility for main-
taining knowledge. Authority and expertise may nominally reside with individu-
als for a lifetime (e.g., Northwest Coast and Mi(cid:213)kmaw), or with groups in rotation
(Blackfoot). In either case, however, the underlying function of customary law is
keeping knowledge systems intact and continuously accessible within a speci(cid:222)c kin
group or community. Even where entrusted to individual specialists in whose rep-
utations the community must trust (much the same as within Western science, en-
gineering, and medicine), knowledge remains (cid:222)rmly anchored in ecological space
and cannot be detached and moved.

If I am correct in this generalization, knowledge is an intrinsic part of a sin-
gle social process that mediates land use and knowledge. Breaking knowledge into

22 russel lawrence barsh

fragments and separating those fragments from the land truncate its scienti(cid:222)c
value, distort its social meaning, and undermine the balance of power within in-
digenous societies.

2 international standards

Indigenous perspectives have been appreciated philosophically at the United Na-
tions, at least at a technical level, since the publication of an exhaustive study of in-
digenous peoples (cid:222)fteen years ago that called for international recognition of (cid:210)the
entire relationship between the spiritual life of indigenous peoples and Mother
Earth.(cid:211)24 (cid:210)One cannot really speak of respect for indigenous cultures,(cid:211) the study
explained, when extractive industries are permitted to destroy the land in which
these cultures are embedded.

When the International Labour Organisation adopted its Convention on In-
digenous and Tribal Peoples, 1989 (no. 169), discussed in section 2.3 below, it rec-
ognized (cid:210)the special importance for the cultures and spiritual values of the peo-
ples concerned(cid:211) of their relationship with their lands and territories (article 13).
The (cid:210)distinctive spiritual and material relationship(cid:211) of indigenous peoples with
their lands and territories is also stressed in the current draft of a United Nations
Declaration  on  the  Rights  of Indigenous  Peoples  (article  25).  As  the  leading
United Nations legal expert on indigenous peoples has recently observed, (cid:210)This
special relationship is not merely with the physical aspects of the land, but is con-
ceived of as a direct and personal kinship with each of the species of animals and
plants that co-exist with people in the same territory. Biological, zoological and
botanical knowledge is not simply a matter of learning the names, habits and uses
of species, but of carefully maintaining and renewing ancient social and ceremo-
nial relationships with each species.(cid:211)25 Indigenous peoples continue to stress this
viewpoint and international bodies continue to acknowledge it, but it has largely
been disregarded in the operational language of legally binding instruments and
program mandates.

2.1 positions of indigenous peoples
Unity and interdependence of land, cultural property, and intellectual property have
been emphasized repeatedly by organizations of indigenous peoples. The Charter of
the Indigenous-Tribal Peoples of the Tropical Forests, adopted by twenty-nine asso-
ciations from Africa, Asia, and the Americas for the 1992 United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development (UNCED), refers to the (cid:210)unity of people and
territory(cid:211) and (cid:210)indigenous models of living,(cid:211) and argues that local management and
control of the (cid:210)whole living system(cid:211) in indigenous territories are not only (cid:210)the best
guarantee of the conservation of biodiversity,(cid:211) but essential for the protection of cul-
tural and intellectual property rights. The Kari-Oca Declaration, adopted by a 1992

how do you patent a landscape? 23

global conference of indigenous peoples in Brazil just prior to UNCED, declared un-
ambiguously that (cid:210)traditions cannot be separated from land, territory or science(cid:211) (ar-
ticle 96). In the 1993 Mataatua Declaration, the International Conference on Cul-
tural  and Intellectual Property Rights of Indigenous Peoples, convened in New
Zealand by Maori leaders, came to the same conclusions.26

More recent statements made in connection with the implementation of the
1992 Convention on Biological Diversity (see section 2.4 below) have reiterated the
unity of land, culture, and ecological knowledge. The Thammasat Resolution, pre-
pared by a December 1997 meeting of Third World scientists and indigenous or-
ganizations in Bangkok, rejected any commercialization or commodi(cid:222)cation of
local ecological knowledge as intellectual property. (cid:210)Our rights are inalienable,(cid:211)
the participants explained. (cid:210)As community/collective rights, they are indivisible
and intergenerational.(cid:211)27

Similarly, the Coordinadora Ind(cid:146)gena Campesina de Agroforesteria Comuni-
taria Centroamericana, an association of more than (cid:222)fty grass-roots indigenous
and rural organizations in Central America, declared that (cid:210)[t]he conservation of
natural  resources  ultimately  depends  on  whether  indigenous  and  rural  people
maintain mutually bene(cid:222)cial relationships with those resources.(cid:211)28 Unfortunately,
the prior evolution of legal concepts and mechanisms in international law are in-
compatible with the indigenous conception of embeddedness.

2.2 unesco and cultural property
The lead agency of the United Nations system with respect to culture, UNESCO,
has long distinguished between movable cultural property and culturally signi(cid:222)cant
landscapes. This was not originally the case. The (cid:222)rst relevant UNESCO instru-
ment, the Convention on the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Con(cid:223)ict (The Hague, 1954), de(cid:222)nes cultural property as (cid:210)movable or im-
movable property of great importance to the cultural heritage of every people,(cid:211)
and includes not only individual structures but groups of buildings, larger histor-
ical districts ((cid:210)centres containing monuments(cid:211)), and archaeological sites as desig-
nated by the state in whose territory they are located.29 The presence of artifacts,
rather than contemporary human uses or cultural meaning, is an implicit criterion
of cultural property in the Hague Convention. It does not expressly apply to a sa-
cred spring or a grove of trees that was conserved and shaped by human use but
lacks architectural constructions.

In 1970— 1972, UNESCO launched three important initiatives that distin-
guished among the protection of movable cultural property, the protection of cul-
turally or aesthetically signi(cid:222)cant landscapes, and the protection of scienti(cid:222)cally
interesting ecosystems: the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Prevent-
ing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property
(hereafter, the Convention on Cultural Property), the Convention concerning the

24 russel lawrence barsh

Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (hereafter, the World Her-
itage Convention), and the Man in the Biosphere Programme (MAB Programme).

2.2.1 Convention on Cultural Property
The scope of the Convention on Cultural Property is restricted to works of art,
antiquities, rare books and manuscripts, and collections of ethnological, archaeo-
logical, historical, geological, or zoological materials (cid:210)speci(cid:222)cally designated(cid:211) as
important by the state party.30 The effect of the convention is prospective, applic-
able only to events that have taken place since its coming into force in 1972, and
is not legally binding on museum-rich states that have failed to ratify it, such as
Germany and the United Kingdom.

Important ceremonial tools such as Blackfoot medicine bundles and Coast
Salish power boards are often not in museums, because they continue to be used.
Although ceremonial tools are not necessarily excluded from the operation of the
convention for this reason, they would need to be (cid:210)speci(cid:222)cally designated(cid:211) as cul-
tural properties by state authorities. Even if they were designated for protection by
the state, furthermore, ceremonial tools have little value after they have been sep-
arated from the landscapes to which they pertain.

Blackfoot bundles illustrate this problem. Since the 1970s, many Blackfoot
bundles have been retrieved from museums and returned to the seasonal ceremo-
nial cycle. Bundles must be opened and renewed yearly in connection with the Sun
Dance. Each bundle keys into one component of the local ecosystem, represented
by a keystone species such as the beaver. Collectively, the bundles represent the
toolbox for operating and maintaining the ecosystem as a whole; the bundle hold-
ers keep and teach all of the requisite technical expertise, which is symbolically re-
hearsed at the annual bundle openings. The bundles, ceremonies, and speci(cid:222)c eco-
logical  components  to  which  they  are  keyed  are  inseparable  in  more  than  a
symbolic sense, however. Separated from its landscape, a bundle is unintelligible,
and there is no practical way of learning how it works.

2.2.2 World Heritage Convention
The World Heritage Convention, which was adopted in 1972 and came into force
in 1975, offers publicity and limited (cid:222)nancial incentives for states to protect im-
portant places as opposed to important things. Article 1 of the convention de(cid:222)nes
(cid:210)cultural  heritage(cid:211) as  monumental  art  works,  groups  of buildings,  and  other
(cid:210)works of man or the combined works of nature and of man . . . which are of out-
standing universal value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropo-
logical points of view.(cid:211)This may include (cid:210)an outstanding example of a traditional
human settlement which is representative of a culture which has become vulnera-
ble under the impact of irreversible change.(cid:211) Article 2 treats (cid:210)natural heritage(cid:211) as
including landforms, biological formations (e.g., forests or reefs), the habitats of
threatened species, and (cid:210)natural areas(cid:211) that possess (cid:210)outstanding universal value

how do you patent a landscape? 25

from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty.(cid:211) Heritage sites
must be suf(cid:222)ciently large to protect all (cid:210)key interrelated(cid:211) physical and biological
elements (the principle of integrity).

Although the World Heritage Convention can apply to anthropogenic ecosys-
tems that are still in use (under the concept of a (cid:210)traditional human settlement(cid:211)),
it does not appear that this was the basis for the original nomination of any of the
hundreds of sites on UNESCO(cid:213)s World Heritage List. One issue is the criterion
of (cid:210)outstanding universal(cid:211) importance, which implicitly limits nominations to a
handful of major representative sites. Another issue is the explicit requirement that
the culture concerned be facing irreversible extinction. If change is irreversible,
how can the site be (cid:210)safeguarded(cid:211)? Why exclude cultures whose anthropogenic
landscapes are threatened with development but are not (cid:210)irreversibly(cid:211) doomed?

An examination of the World Heritage List con(cid:222)rms a bias toward (cid:210)natural(cid:211)
areas and (cid:210)dead(cid:211) cultures.31 Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, and Peru have nomi-
nated a total of eight ruined Maya and Inca cities, for example, and Brazil and Ar-
gentina have nominated the ruins of the sixteenthth-century Jesuit missions of the
Chaco border region, but each of these countries has living indigenous cultures of
direct descent from these (cid:210)dead(cid:211) civilizations. The United States nominated pre-
Columbian ruins at Chaco Canyon (New Mexico), Mesa Verde (Colorado), and
Cahokia (near present-day St. Louis), all of which were occupied as recently as the
1400s. Several of the (cid:210)natural areas(cid:211) nominated by the United States (Everglades,
Redwood, Olympic, and Hawaii Volcanoes National Parks) are subject to contin-
uing hunting or ceremonial use by living cultures but this did not (cid:222)gure in site se-
lection or design.

Canada has thus far nominated ten World Heritage sites. At least two of the
(cid:222)ve Canadian sites chosen for their (cid:210)natural(cid:211) beauty were modi(cid:222)ed by hunting
and burning that continued well into this century (Nahanni National Park in the
Northwest Territories, and the Rocky Mountain National Parks complex on the
Alberta-Britsh Columbia border). Wood Buffalo National Park, selected as the hab-
itat of a threatened species, was also shaped by hunting and burning and falls
within the hunting area reserved by the Dene under Treaty no. 8 (1899). Although
the abandoned historical villages of Gwaii Hanaas in the Queen Charlotte Islands
and Alberta(cid:213)s Head-Smashed-In Buffalo Jump were nominated as archaeological
sites,32 the Haida and Peigan (Apikuni) people who built them still live nearby and
continue to use the areas for cultural activities. Park of(cid:222)cials consulted local lead-
ers over the design and operation of interpretive facilities and chie(cid:223)y employ local
people, but the focus of the parks has been the preservation of artifacts rather than
the perpetuation of contemporary cultures.

In 1995, Canada and the United States jointly nominated Glacier-Waterton
International Peace Park on the Alberta-Montana border, in the heart of tradi-
tional Blackfoot territory. Glacier was expropriated by an act of Congress in 1888,
despite an 1868 treaty setting it aside as a part of the Blackfeet Indian Reservation;

26 russel lawrence barsh

Waterton was purportedly part of Blackfoot treaty cession to the British Crown in
1878, but the boundaries of the cession remain in dispute. While Blackfoot con-
tinue to assert subsistence and ceremonial interests in both national parks, they are
regarded as merely one of many public (cid:210)stakeholders,(cid:211) and not as owners or co-
managers.  Glacier-Waterton  is  also  a  UNESCO  Biosphere  Reserve,  overseen
jointly by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Environment Canada,
but Blackfoot knowledge and traditional use of the area remain peripheral to man-
agement and research activities.

Nearly a million indigenous people live in Canada, and indigenous people are
a majority of the total population in the northern half of the country.33 Canada(cid:213)s
largest national parks are also located in the north. There was scarcely any mention
of indigenous peoples at a 1996 scienti(cid:222)c review of the operation and future of
Canada(cid:213)s thirty-two national parks, however, except in connection with Tuktut
Nogait National Park, established earlier that year at the request of local Inuit to
protect the caribou herd upon which they have traditionally relied for food.34 It re-
mains to be seen how plans for comanaging Tuktut Nogait with the Inuit com-
munity of Paulatuk will work in practice.

Australia represents what is arguably the best practice under the World Her-
itage  program. Two  Australian  sites  originally  nominated  for  their  (cid:210)natural(cid:211)
beauty(cid:209)Kakadu National Park and Uluru National Park(cid:209)were subsequently
returned to their aboriginal traditional custodians for management. At Kakadu,
however, aboriginal managers and national parks of(cid:222)cials have been in con(cid:223)ict over
periodic burning to (cid:210)clean up(cid:211) the savannah and return it to aboriginal ecologi-
cal conditions.35 Con(cid:223)icts between indigenous peoples and national parks of(cid:222)cials
over ecosystem management have become a global reality in recent years, and even
with the best of intentions, states are likely to encounter stiff grass-roots opposi-
tion if they propose adding any occupied sites to the World Heritage List in the
future.36

In any event, the machinery of the convention is relatively weak. There are
minimal resources for technical or (cid:222)nancial assistance, and the main bene(cid:222)t to par-
ticipating states is positive publicity and the possibility of attracting tourism.
Thus, while the World Heritage List can in principle accommodate embedded
landscapes, the list has not been used for this purpose, and the bene(cid:222)ts for in-
digenous peoples are far from being clear or certain.

2.2.3 MAB and the Seville Strategy
UNESCO(cid:213)s Man in the Biosphere program had its genesis in research sponsored
by UNESCO in the early 1960s, and in the recommendations of an intergovern-
mental conference on the (cid:210)scienti(cid:222)c basis for rational use and conservation of the
biosphere(cid:211) held at UNESCO(cid:213)s Paris headquarters in September 1968. The original
mandate for MAB was adopted by UNESCO at its 1970 General Conference, and
the program was strongly endorsed by the United Nations Conference on the

how do you patent a landscape? 27

Human Environment at Stockholm in 1972.37 The Stockholm conference resulted
in the establishment of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),
and a three-way split in the United Nations(cid:213) division of labor in the (cid:222)elds of con-
servation and ecology: UNESCO for basic research, FAO for implementation
in the realms of (cid:222)sheries, forestry, and agriculture, and UNEP for policy and
monitoring in relation to worldwide (cid:210)protection and improvement of the envi-
ronment.(cid:211)38 MAB was therefore aimed at promoting scienti(cid:222)c study of human-
ecological interactions, rather than the protection of human-ecological systems,
and its output consisted of scholarly publications and reports. The MAB Network
of Biosphere Reserves, launched in 1974, was conceived as a laboratory to study
ways of (cid:210)conserving biological diversity, promoting economic development, and
maintaining associated cultural values,(cid:211)39 but the human dimension was generally
subordinated in practice to the study of nonhuman species.

UNESCO member states made important changes to the World Heritage and
MAB programs in 1995. (cid:210)Cultural landscapes(cid:211) were expressly added to the World
Heritage program, and the functions of Biosphere Reserves were rewritten to place
a greater emphasis on local use and knowledge. As revised, Goal I of the MAB net-
work is to (cid:210)use Biosphere Reserves to conserve natural and cultural diversity(cid:211) by
adding and enlarging sites as well as taking stronger measures to protect (cid:210)fragile
and vulnerable environments, both natural and cultural.(cid:211)40 Reserve managers are
also encouraged to (cid:210)secure the support and involvement of local people(cid:211) by pro-
tecting (cid:210)areas where traditional life styles and indigenous uses of biodiversity are
practiced (including sacred sites)(cid:211) and by working with local people to develop
sustainable alternative means of livelihood if their existing activities are no longer
compatible with conservation. It remains to be seen what in(cid:223)uence these new di-
rectives will have on the operation of the existing 324 Biosphere Reserves, or on the
extent to which new Biosphere Reserves and World Heritage sites are set aside with
primarily human-ecological functions.

2.2.4 Indigenous Knowledge as “Folklore”
UNESCO interest in the arts and knowledge of indigenous peoples took a sepa-
rate track from the World Heritage and MAB programs. In 1980, the UNESCO
General  Conference  invited  the  director-general  to  undertake  a  study  of the
(cid:210)preservation of folklore(cid:211) in collaboration with WIPO.41 From 1981 to 1984 the
two agencies convened regional and international meetings of experts to draft the
Model Provisions for National Laws on the Protection of Expressions of Folklore
against Illicit Exploitation and Other Prejudicial Action, which in(cid:223)uenced na-
tional legislation in at least some African states.42

Concern about (cid:210)folklore(cid:211) had originally been voiced by developing countries
during  the  1967  Stockholm  Diplomatic  Conference  for  revision  of the  Berne
(Copyright) Convention, resulting in an amendment of the convention that per-
mits each state to appoint a (cid:210)competent authority(cid:211) to represent the unidenti(cid:222)able

28 russel lawrence barsh

authors of folkloric works.43 In other words, the member states of the copyright
union assumed the ownership of all folklore originating within their respective ter-
ritories. More than a decade later, however, the experts assembled by UNESCO
and WIPO concluded that this approach did (cid:210)not appear to have been particularly
effective or expedient.(cid:211)44 They recommended the drafting of a treaty, autonomous
from the Berne Convention, that would commit state parties to the appointment
of competent authorities, and establish procedures for the authorization and mon-
itoring of commercial uses of folklore.

The experts agreed that (cid:210)folklore(cid:211) should include (cid:210)characteristic elements of
the traditional artistic heritage developed and maintained by a community(cid:211) col-
lectively or through the activities of individual artists and performers, such as
(cid:210)folk tales,(cid:211) songs, dances, and plays, as well as carvings, pottery, jewellery, bas-
ketry, textiles, costumes, architecture, and other tangible works.45 The emphasis
was on products and performances; the experts concluded that sites where folklore
has traditionally been performed are not eligible for legal protection.46 From the
outset, then, UNESCO and WIPO separated (cid:210)culture(cid:211) from land.

Although the project of a treaty on folklore was abandoned in the mid-1980s,
WIPO has continued to promote the Model Provisions, viewing them as a rea-
sonable balance between the individualistic framework of international copyright
law and the collective aspects of the cultures of indigenous and tribal peoples.

2.2.5 “Ethnodevelopment” and Land
In 1981 UNESCO invited a number of international legal scholars, Latin Ameri-
can government of(cid:222)cials, and Latin American Indian leaders to San Jos(cid:142), Costa
Rica, to discuss and re(cid:222)ne the concepts of ethnocide and ethnodevelopment. The
participants de(cid:222)ned the ethnodevelopment of a people as: (cid:210)the extension and con-
solidation of the elements of its own culture, through strengthening [its] inde-
pendent decision-making capacity [as] a culturally distinct society to direct its own
development and exercise self-determination[.](cid:211)47 Participants concluded that land
is so central to Indian cultures that cultural protection is impossible without ter-
ritorial security. (cid:210)For the Indian peoples, the land is not only an object of posses-
sion and production. It forms the basis of their existence, both physical and spir-
itual, as an independent entity. Territorial space is the foundation and source of
their relationship with the universe and the mainstay of their view of the world.(cid:211)48
Although this statement approximates the indigenous conception of the in-
separability of landscapes, cultural expressions, and knowledge, it has not yet re-
sulted in any UNESCO program or legal instrument. On the contrary, the San
Jos(cid:142) meeting in(cid:223)uenced the early development of draft standards by subsidiary or-
gans of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and shaped the phi-
losophy of the International Labour Organisation(cid:213)s Convention on Indigenous
and Tribal Peoples, 1989 (no. 169), discussed in section 2.3 below.

how do you patent a landscape? 29

2.2.6 Flaws in the UNESCO Framework
From  the  viewpoint  of indigenous  peoples,  there  are  fatal  loopholes  in  the
UNESCO treaty framework. The Hague Convention urges parties to take steps
to safeguard their cultural property against (cid:210)the foreseeable effects of an armed
con(cid:223)ict,(cid:211)49 and the Convention on Cultural Property prohibits illicit removal of
cultural property across state borders, but neither instrument protects cultural
property from activities of the custodial state itself or of its citizens within its
own borders. Most indigenous peoples have had ample cause to mistrust states
and are reluctant to rely upon states to represent or respect their interests. Fur-
thermore, UNESCO itself has not worked closely with indigenous organizations
at  a  policy  level.  Despite  recent  appeals  by  the  U.N.  General  Assembly  for
strengthening indigenous peoples(cid:213) own scienti(cid:222)c and educational institutions,50
UNESCO has yet to include indigenous organizations and institutions directly in
its research programs.51

2.3 land and heritage as human rights
The International Labour Organisation (ILO) initially became involved in the
protection of indigenous peoples and their lands in the 1950s, responding to a
postwar wave of massive deforestation, displacement, migration, and urbanization
of indigenous peoples in monsoon Asia and Latin America.52 The ILO identi(cid:222)ed
indigenous peoples(cid:213) lack of secure land tenure as a root cause of their increasing
exploitation as urban workers and plantation laborers and concluded that land
rights should be included in programs aimed at ensuring indigenous peoples(cid:213) eco-
nomic equality and full (cid:210)integration.(cid:211) Article 11 of the ILO Convention on In-
digenous and Tribal Populations, 1957 (no. 107), adopted after (cid:222)ve years of study
and negotiations and rati(cid:222)ed by twenty-eight Asian, African, and Latin American
states, provides that:  (cid:210)[t]he right of ownership, collective or individual, of the
members of the populations concerned over the lands which these populations
traditionally occupy shall be recognised.(cid:211)The removal of indigenous peoples from
their (cid:210)habitual territories(cid:211) is prohibited except for reasons of national security, na-
tional economic development, or public health (article 12). Customary land tenure
law is to be respected, moreover, unless it obstructs indigenous peoples(cid:213) own so-
cioeconomic development (article 13). As a general matter, the state parties are
obliged to respect indigenous peoples(cid:213) (cid:210)cultural and religious values and forms of
social control(cid:211) (article 4).

The dispossession of indigenous peoples continued and accelerated in the
1960s and 1970s.53 At the same time, indigenous peoples began to organize at the
international level and to assert their own interests and perspectives, focusing on
self-determination rather than integration. The ILO responded by convening a
fresh round of negotiations to revise the 1957 convention. Re(cid:223)ecting considerable
(albeit mainly informal) indigenous input, the ILO Convention on Indigenous and

30 russel lawrence barsh

Tribal Peoples, no. 169 (1989), strengthened the land provisions of the earlier treaty
in four main respects:

Expressly including (cid:210)the total environment(cid:211) in the de(cid:222)nition of (cid:210)land,(cid:211) so
as to include living resources and surface waters (Article 13.2);54

Extending protection to (cid:210)lands not exclusively occupied by them, but 
to which they have traditionally had access for their subsistence and
traditional activities(cid:211) (Article 14.1);

Eliminating the provisions in the 1957 convention which permitted the
removal of indigenous peoples from their territories without their consent
under speci(cid:222)ed circumstances (Article 16);

Providing that indigenous peoples have the right (cid:210)to decide their own 
priorities for the process of development as it affects their lives, beliefs,
institutions and spiritual well-being and the lands they occupy or otherwise
use(cid:211) (Article 7.1).55

The 1989 convention also provides generally that state measures that may affect in-
digenous peoples directly shall not be considered before consulting with indige-
nous peoples (cid:210)in good faith, with the objective of achieving agreement or consent(cid:211)
(article 6); and that no measures specially applicable to indigenous people may be
adopted without their consent (article 4). Taken together, the provisions of ILO
Convention no. 169 recognize that indigenous peoples have the right to remain on
their lands in conformity with their own values, laws, and ceremonies. Unfortu-
nately, only seven states have rati(cid:222)ed ILO Convention no. 169.

At the same time that the ILO was beginning to consider revising its 1957 con-
vention, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and its advisory
group of legal experts, the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, were responding to the report of a decade-long Study of
the Problem of Discrimination Against Indigenous Populations, which empha-
sized that indigenous peoples (cid:210)have the right to the natural cultural heritage con-
tained in the territory(cid:211) in which they have lived and the right (cid:210)freely to determine
the use to be made of it(cid:211) in accordance with their own social institutions, laws, and
values.56 The study(cid:213)s view of land as the nexus of culture was not coincidental,
since it was mainly the work of the Guatemalan jurist Agosto Willemsen-D(cid:146)az, the
organizer of the 1981 UNESCO workshop on ethnocide and ethnodevelopment.
The  study  went  further:  it  endorsed  indigenous  peoples(cid:213) right  to  self-
determination generally and recommended drafting a comprehensive human-rights
instrument for their protection. The Commission on Human Rights responded
promptly, albeit cautiously, in 1982: it authorized its Sub-Commission to establish
a Working Group on Indigenous Populations (WGIP) to meet annually, review

how do you patent a landscape? 31

the situation further, and explore the need for new legal standards. With rapidly
growing indigenous input(cid:209)meetings were attended by hundreds of indigenous
people by the 1990s(cid:209)the (cid:222)ve legal experts comprising the WGIP completed the
draft Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in 1993 and submitted it
through the Sub-Commission to the Commission on Human Rights. The text
proved too radical for most states, including four of the Permanent Five, and was
diverted to a commission-level working group of states for further consideration.57
There it continues to languish.

At the insistence of indigenous participants themselves, the draft declaration
accords separate treatment to land, cultural property, and intellectual property
(draft articles 25— 27, 12, and 29, respectively). Indigenous peoples are recognized
as having unrestricted ownership and control of their arts and sciences (the adjec-
tive (cid:210)traditional(cid:211) is not used) as well as of all the territories and resources they
(cid:210)have traditionally owned or otherwise occupied or used.(cid:211) The past tense in the
land provision is a point of particular contention with states, as may easily be
imagined. Industrialized countries also strongly object to the recognition of intel-
lectual property rights that are not time limited or expressly subjected to WIPO
conventions and the WTO-TRIPs Agreement (see section 2.4 below). Only the
draft provision relating to cultural property appears to be acceptable to most
states, although its reference to a right of repatriation has been criticized.58

Critical study of the draft text is merely academic, in any event. If adopted in
its original form, the declaration would recognize self-determination, which com-
prehends indigenous peoples(cid:213) authority to make their own laws controlling land,
culture, and science. The declaration is not likely to be adopted without substan-
tial revisions, however, in which case it is also unlikely that its interesting but ob-
jectionable elements will survive.

As an interim measure, indeed, indigenous organizations convinced the Sub-
Commission and Commission in 1991 to entrust the WGIP chairperson, Erica-Irene
Daes, with a separate project on (cid:210)the protection of the cultural and intellectual
property(cid:211) of indigenous peoples. Daes concluded that it was more appropriate to
combine cultural and intellectual property under the concept of (cid:210)heritage,(cid:211) which
she de(cid:222)ned as (cid:210)everything that belongs to the distinct identity of a people and is
theirs to share, if they wish, with other peoples,(cid:211) including (cid:210)natural features of the
landscape(cid:211) as well as products and artistic representations of land.59 (cid:210)All elements
of heritage should be managed and protected as a single, interrelated and inte-
grated whole.(cid:211) In a subsequent technical report on land rights, Daes reiterated the
point that cultural, spiritual, and scienti(cid:222)c aspects of indigenous societies cannot
meaningfully be separated from the lands from which they have developed.60

According to Daes, conventional patent and copyright measures are inade-
quate because of their limited duration, and the prerequisites of novelty and
individual authorship.61 Indigenous peoples(cid:213) heritage must be respected as an in-
alienable aspect of their relationship with their land, which is (cid:210)the classroom in

32 russel lawrence barsh

which the heritage of each indigenous peoples has traditionally been taught . . .
through a lifetime of personal experience travelling through and conducting cere-
monies on the land.(cid:211) (cid:210)[C]eremonies and traditional artistic works are regarded as
means of renewing human relationships with the land, even as (cid:210)deeds(cid:211) to the ter-
ritory, so that they can never be detached geographically, and used elsewhere, with-
out completely losing their meaning. . . . For this reason, indigenous peoples do
not believe that their knowledge of ecology, the uses of plants and animals, ritu-
als or medicine can ever be alienated completely. Like human family relatonships,
these forms of knowledge are permanent and collective.(cid:211)62 Daes argued that the
most effective protection of indigenous heritage would be through states(cid:213) recog-
nition of indigenous peoples(cid:213) control of research and documentation in their ter-
ritories.63 The principles and guidelines she proposed for this purpose are unfor-
tunately languishing at the level of the Commission on Human Rights, stalled like
the draft Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.64

2.4 in-situ biodiversity conservation
Indigenous peoples were one of the three most active nongovernmental political
lobbies at the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED), together with women and environmentalists.65 As a result, indigenous
peoples became one of the eight (cid:210)major groups(cid:211) identi(cid:222)ed by UNCED as (cid:210)crit-
ical for the effective implementation(cid:211) of its recommendations at the grass-roots
level, and in the follow-up work of the newly established U.N. Commission on
Sustainable Development.66 Indigenous participants also convinced states to rec-
ognize traditional knowledge and customary uses of living resources in the Con-
vention on Biological Diversity, the keystone environmental treaty adopted in
the framework of UNCED and the most popular, rati(cid:222)ed by three-fourths of all
states.

Although the Montreal-based secretariat overseeing the Biodiversity Conven-
tion is associated with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),
policy decisions are taken by an annual Conference of Parties, or COP, and im-
plementation resources are mainly supplied by the Global Environment Facility
(GEF), jointly administered by UNEP, UNDP, and the World Bank. This means
that the COP enjoys some (cid:223)exibility in shaping an independent approach to the
rights of indigenous peoples(cid:209)although, of course, it is still governed by the same
states as U.N.—system organs.

In broad terms, the Biodiversity Convention promotes conservation of threat-
ened species in situ (in their original habitats) rather than zoological collections or
captive breeding programs wherever possible, offering technical and (cid:222)nancial as-
sistance to developing countries as an incentive to participate. In-situ conservation
necessarily implies an (cid:210)ecosystem approach,(cid:211) in which management plans are di-
rected at the structure and integrity of entire ecosystems rather than the preserva-
tion of particular species. A technical workshop recently organized by the govern-

how do you patent a landscape? 33

ments of Malawi and the Netherlands concluded that the ecosystem approach, in
turn, must recognize that (cid:210)all ecosystems are managed for the bene(cid:222)t of humans(cid:211)
and that changing patterns of land use are (cid:210)the greatest threat to biological diver-
sity.(cid:211)67 Since local knowledge and use are central to sustainability, (cid:210)management
should be decentralized to the lowest appropriate level.(cid:211) The importance of mo-
bilizing (cid:210)local and indigenous communities(cid:211) in ecosystem management was also
stressed  by  a  recent  intergovernmental  technical  meeting  reviewing  the  overall
functioning of the convention.68

The Biodiversity Convention refers to indigenous people and local commu-
nities in two related contexts.69 Article 8(j) directs states to (cid:210)respect, preserve and
maintain knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local commu-
nities embodying traditional lifestyles(cid:211) and to (cid:210)promote their wider application,(cid:211)
subject to indigenous consent and an equitable sharing of resulting bene(cid:222)ts. Ar-
ticle 10(c) directs states to (cid:210)protect and encourage customary use of biological re-
sources in accordance with traditional cultural practices that are compatible with
conservation or sustainable use requirements.(cid:211)While territorial security and local
autonomy are not expressly mentioned, they are both necessary for the effective
implementation of articles 8(j) and 10(c). Without the continued sustainable use
of their territories, indigenous peoples cannot maintain and develop their local
knowledge systems, and without the maintenance of local knowledge systems,
local uses of land will not be sustainable.70

It is not yet clear whether the interdependence of articles 8(j) and 10(c), and
their mutual dependence on territorial rights, could be accepted by states. Many
powerful developing countries, especially in Asia, resist any recognition of indige-
nous peoples(cid:213) land rights, while powerful industrialized states such as the United
States and Japan are adamantly opposed to measures that might prevent the com-
mercialization of traditional plant-genetic and pharmacological knowledge. States
as a whole appear able to agree on only two points thus far. Indigenous knowledge
does not (cid:222)t the criteria of conventional mechanisms such as patent and copyright,
necessitating agreement on new, sui generis legal categories that apply solely to
knowledge. At present, the political momentum favors detaching knowledge from
land rights.

Indigenous peoples(cid:213) organizations have successfully lobbied for a larger role in
the process. COPIII (1997) authorized the convening of a technical workshop at
Madrid where government and indigenous experts exchanged views on imple-
menting articles 8(j) and 10(c) and concluded by agreeing to disagree.71 COPIV
(1998) welcomed this (cid:210)dialogue(cid:211) as a useful starting point and decided to establish
a new ad hoc open-ended working group on Article 8(j) and related provisions of
the convention, with representatives from indigenous and local communities as
of(cid:222)cial observers.72 The secretariat was directed to compile and analyze case stud-
ies of best practices.

There is a danger that the working group will become a cul-de-sac serving

34 russel lawrence barsh

only to divert and eventually exhaust indigenous organizations while states make
decisions about indigenous knowledge at WIPO and the World Trade Organiza-
tion. With only the best of intentions, it may be argued, WGIP has distracted a
majority of indigenous organizations for sixteen years in drafting a nonbinding
policy declaration while indigenous communities worldwide continue to be dis-
placed. In the immortal words of the New York Yankee catcher and coach Yogi
Berra, (cid:210)It(cid:213)s d(cid:142)j(cid:136) vu all over again.(cid:211) Then again, there may be an even greater dan-
ger that the working group will classify and de(cid:222)ne the knowledge rights of in-
digenous peoples to the satisfaction of states, detaching knowledge from land-
scapes to the extent that sui generis rights will merely be a thin shadow of patent
and copyright law. In that event, the whole exercise will have the ultimate effect of
trade promotion for biotechnology at the expense of indigenous societies and their
landscapes.

2.5 the world trade organization and trips
In a world that has become united, since the disintegration of Soviet power, in the
pursuit of foreign direct investment and export growth, international trade bod-
ies such as the WTO wield increasing in(cid:223)uence. Trade sanctions and the response
of investors and currency markets to national (cid:222)nancial and trade policies are more
potent motivators than the verbal chastisement of human-rights bodies or the
modest technical and (cid:222)nancial incentives tied to environment treaties. Membership
and voting power in trade bodies is more selective and weighted, moreover, giving
the wealthiest industrialized countries even more leverage than they enjoy in the
U.N. system.

The initiative for global harmonization of intellectual property regimes has
come from the United States and other wealthy, technology-exporting countries.73
The prize has been speedy access to the genetic diversity of farms and forests in
developing countries and an ability to convert traditional knowledge into globally
binding patents before developing countries themselves acquire the capacity for
biotechnology of their own. Promoters of this scheme won a signi(cid:222)cant victory
with the adoption of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPs Agreement) in 1994.74 To defend their victory, they have
subsequently resisted the adoption of alternate intellectual property standards by
other intergovernmental fora, such as COP.

As the WGIP chairperson, Erica-Irene Daes, contends, however, there is no
necessary inconsistency between TRIPs and special measures for the protection of
indigenous knowledge.75 The TRIPs Agreement contains at least two windows for
national legislation that distinguishes between indigenous knowledge and other
forms of useful knowledge and provides legal security appropriate to each form of
knowledge.

The (cid:222)rst window represents a compromise between the promoters of TRIPs
and industrializing countries such as India and Brazil, which are rapidly building

how do you patent a landscape? 35

their own biotechnology industries and are large enough to exact concessions for
their cooperation.76 Under article 27 of the TRIPs Agreement, states may deny
patents to: inventions that must be controlled in order (cid:210)to protect human, animal
or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment(cid:211) (biosafety
exemption); (cid:210)diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of
humans or animals(cid:211) (biomedicine exemption); and, plants and animals and (cid:210)es-
sentially biological processes for the production of plants or animals,(cid:211) provided
that some alternative legal protection is given to plant varieties (species exemp-
tion).

A great deal of indigenous knowledge falls within the biomedicine and species
exemptions, including pharmacology, physiology, zoology, botany, and ecology
generally. It is therefore within the sovereign authority of individual states to take
these forms of local knowledge out of the patent system, and enact national leg-
islation specially adapted to the concerns of indigenous peoples.77

A second window is found in the provision of the TRIPs Agreement on trade

secrets (article 39.2):

Natural and legal persons shall have the possibility of preventing
information lawfully within their control from being disclosed to, or
acquired by, or used by others without their consent in a manner contrary 
to honest commercial practices as long as such information:

(a) is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise
con(cid:222)guration of its components, generally known among or readily
accessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with the kind 
of information in question;

(b) has commercial value because it is secret; and

(c) has been subject to reasonable steps under the circumstances, by the
person lawfully in control of the information, to keep it secret.

Specialized knowledge of medicinal plants and restricted-access ceremonies
conducted  on  the  land  arguably  fall  within  this  provision. These  varieties  of
knowledge are taught sparingly to carefully chosen or initiated persons, who are
instructed not to divulge what they have learned. Specialists from other societies
(for example, a neighboring indigenous people(cid:213)s healers or a visiting botanist) or-
dinarily do not possess the same knowledge in any detail but might pro(cid:222)t by ac-
quiring it. As long as indigenous scientists and healers themselves maintain (cid:210)rea-
sonable(cid:211) efforts  to  preserve  con(cid:222)dentiality,  they  should  be  able  to  claim
trade-secret status consistent with TRIPs. States would need to re(cid:223)ect this pos-
sibility in their national legislation, of course, in order to provide a remedy in na-
tional courts.78

36 russel lawrence barsh

While the legal issues remain unresolved, at least one U.N. body has already
launched  a  program  to  promote  trade  in  indigenous  peoples(cid:213) knowledge. The
UNCTAD(cid:213)s Biotade Initiative purports to bridge the aims of TRIPs and COP by
investing in the capacity of developing countries to identify, document, and mar-
ket valuable biological resources. Global marketing campaigns and national-level
research and training programs will reportedly promote private-sector bene(cid:222)t shar-
ing with indigenous peoples while encouraging indigenous peoples themselves to
engage in (cid:210)value-added activities(cid:211)(cid:209)that is, the marketing of their knowledge.79
It would appear, then, that a race is developing between forging an interna-
tional consensus on appropriate national measures to secure the integrity of in-
digenous peoples(cid:213) knowledge and international programs aimed at facilitating
the most rapid possible purchase of all valuable and as yet untapped indigenous
knowledge.

2.6 regional intergovernmental initiatives
Regional intergovermental organizations tend to be more like-minded and coop-
erative than global bodies. This has certainly been the case for European regional
organizations  such  as  the  European  Community,  the  Council  of Europe,  the
Council for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and NATO. It has also been in-
creasingly true of Southeast Asian, Latin American, and sub-Saharan African re-
gional organizations. In some regards there has also been more progress on in-
digenous peoples(cid:213) rights at the regional level.

The Organization of American States (OAS) is close to adopting a regional
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples that follows the broad outlines
of ILO Convention no. 169 and is therefore largely acceptable to most Latin Amer-
ican states.80 It goes farther than ILO Convention no. 169 in several respects, how-
ever, including respect for indigenous peoples(cid:213) traditional laws and intellectual
property rights. (cid:210)[T]raditional collective systems for control and use(cid:211) of indige-
nous peoples(cid:213) territories must be maintained as (cid:210)a necessary condition for their
survival, social organization, development, and their individual and collective well-
being(cid:211) (preamble, paragraph 5). Indigenous legal systems are therefore recognized
as part of each state(cid:213)s legal system, both generally, and with speci(cid:222)c reference to
land ownership and use (articles 16 and 18). Indigenous peoples furthermore have
a right to the ownership and control of their intellectual property through: (cid:210)trade-
marks, patents, copyright and other such procedures as established under domestic
law; as well as special measures to ensure them legal status and institutional ca-
pacity to develop, use, share, market and bequeath that heritage to future gen-
erations(cid:211) (article 20). While acknowledging the crucial linkage between cultural
survival, the ways people use their land, and their ecological knowledge, the draft
emphasizes conventional time-limited, commoditized mechanisms such as patent
law. It does not exclude other approaches, however.81

African nations have been particularly sympathetic to indigenous peoples(cid:213)

how do you patent a landscape? 37

concerns at COP and regard local knowledge as Africa(cid:213)s most valuable remaining
asset for development. The Organization of African Unity (OAU) has already
adopted model legislation on Community Rights and the Control of Access to
Biological Resources, drawing on elements of the Biodiversity Convention as well
as UNESCO(cid:213)s Model Provisions on Folklore.82 Under the model law, any (cid:210)un-
dertaking(cid:211) involving the use of biological or genetic resources requires full disclo-
sure and (cid:210)prior informed consent(cid:211) of both the state and the concerned local com-
munity (article 4). The applicant must specify how the local community will be
involved in the work, how it will be informed of the results of the work, and how
it will share in the bene(cid:222)ts through royalties or other forms of compensation.
Grounds for the denial of applications include ecological risks as well as (cid:210)adverse
effects upon human health or upon the quality of life or the cultural identity of
the local communities(cid:211) (article 7).

Customary  law  is  explicitly  recognized  as  the  criterion  of local  consent.
(cid:210)[L]ocal communities shall at all times and in perpetuity be the lawful and sole
custodians of the relevant knowledge, innovations and practices(cid:211) (article 5.2). Each
state is responsible for ensuring (cid:210)the prior informed consent and participation(cid:211) of
communities, as well as their adequate compensation, and for this purpose will
identify the (cid:210)the types of collective intellectual property rights(cid:211) that exist in com-
munities(cid:213) customary laws and try to standardize procedures for the registration of
traditional knowledge and future innovations (cid:210)through a process of consultation
and participation(cid:211) (article 5.5).

Communities retain the right to restrict or prohibit research on their knowl-
edge or the biological resources in their territories where they can demonstrate that
(cid:210)the integrity of their natural or cultural patrimony(cid:211) would be threatened (article
7). Moreover, states must not interfere with (cid:210)traditional use and exchange of bio-
logical and genetic resources as well as related knowledge(cid:211) when it is (cid:210)carried out
by and between local communities based upon their customary practices,(cid:211) which
limits the regulatory authority of states to trade with nonindigenous or nontribal
people (article 3).

If there is a serious (cid:223)aw in the OAU model, it is the emphasis on codi(cid:222)cation
of customary law. Codi(cid:222)cation has a long, controversial history in African law.83 It
has helped Africanize legal systems left behind by European colonizers, rendering
them somewhat more compatible with African cultures and social organization.
However, codi(cid:222)cation minimizes the (cid:223)exibility that is an essential aspect of cus-
tomary law systems.84 Indigenous and tribal law systems stress procedure, rather
than substantive rules, and encourage parties to ventilate, negotiate, and  accom-
modate one another.85 Agreement and (to the extent that this is ever possible) har-
mony are sought, rather than the standardization of human conduct in accordance
with some broad, legislated plan. When asked to expound (cid:210)rules,(cid:211) customary-law
practitioners either are vague (e.g., (cid:210)people should respect others(cid:211)) or overgeneral-
ize on the basis of their own experiences. Converting to a system of rules changes

38 russel lawrence barsh

the outcome of adjudication from accomodation to polarization and promotes a
concentration of power in the hands of the (cid:210)winners(cid:211) who know how to play the
game.

Consider, for example, a recent dispute within a Blackfoot sacred society.
Wives ordinarily accompany their husbands into the society and play an impor-
tant complementary ceremonial role. A respected man was chosen by the (cid:210)grand-
fathers(cid:211) of the society to be initiated, but a few individuals objected to admitting
the initiate(cid:213)s spouse, an Indian from a distant, unrelated community. After several
days(cid:213) delay the two were admitted together, without any kind of formal decision as
to the eligibility of (cid:210)outsiders(cid:211) to be members of the society. Codi(cid:222)cation would
require the express adoption of an eligibility rule covering all foreseeable cases, and
strictly enforcing such a rule would have split the society rather than protecting
its existence.

2.7 national-level initiatives
Although international and regional organizations have approached the issue of
protecting indigenous heritage with enthusiasm, there has been little legislative ac-
tion at the national level.

One country that has responded promptly to the concerns expressed by in-
digenous peoples is Costa Rica in its Biodiversity Law, 1998 (no. 7788), which con-
tains a chapter on (cid:210)access to genetic and biochemical aspects [of biodiversity] and
protection of the associated knowledge.(cid:211) Access requires the (cid:210)prior informed con-
sent(cid:211) of local representatives, such as (cid:210)indigenous authorities,(cid:211) under agreements
that protect local knowledge, share bene(cid:222)ts equitably, and contribute to the con-
servation of local ecosystems (article 63). Informed consent must be obtained in
a form and manner appropriate to the community concerned (article 65). In gen-
eral terms, (cid:210)The State recognizes and expressly protects, under the category of sui
generis community intellectual property rights, the practices and innovations of
indigenous peoples and local communities, related to their use of biodiversity and
the associated knowledge. This right exists and is legally recognized by the mere
fact of the cultural practice or knowledge . . . ; it does not require prior notice, ex-
press  recognition,  nor  of(cid:222)cial  registration(cid:211) (article  82;  author(cid:213)s  translation).
Knowledge covered by this article cannot be registered by conventional mecha-
nisms, such as patents, and communities retain the right (cid:210)to block access to their
resources and associated knowledge on cultural, spiritual, social, economic or other
grounds(cid:211) (article 66).86

Costa Rica does not require the codi(cid:222)cation of customary laws as a condition
for protection but directs the state authority to involve indigenous and campesino
communities in a (cid:210)participatory process . . . to determine the nature, scope and
conditions [for the exercise] of these rights(cid:211) (article 83). Eventual codi(cid:222)cation will
bene(cid:222)t researchers and bureaucrats by reducing the effort and risks involved in try-
ing to identify and comply with local laws. As noted earlier, however, local com-

how do you patent a landscape? 39

munities would thereby lose the (cid:223)exibility of freely interpreting and applying their
own norms.

Neither the OAU model law nor Costa Rican law protects indigenous knowl-
edge in the context of the landscape and land-centered ceremonial life. Both laws
separate ecological knowledge from cultural practices such as the maintenance and
use of sacred sites. Thus communities can exclude nonmembers from their terri-
tories to prevent the unauthorized collection of biological specimens or ecological
knowledge, but not to prevent the desecration of sacred sites or disruption of cer-
emonies(cid:209)even though the sites and ceremonies are necessary for the maintenance
of the ecosystem and associated ecological knowledge.

In the Philippines, territorial rights and intellectual property have both been
addressed by the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act of 1997, which drew its inspira-
tion from ILO Convention no. 169 rather than the Biodiversity Convention. Chap-
ter 3 establishes procedures for local communities to obtain demarcation and
registration of their (cid:210)ancestral domains,(cid:211) de(cid:222)ned as (cid:210)not only the physical en-
vironment but the total environment including spiritual and cultural bonds to
the[se] areas(cid:211) as well as minerals and water (sections 3.a and 4). Rights of access
and use and the transfer of rights are governed by the (cid:210)customary laws and tradi-
tions of the community concerned(cid:211) (section 8.a). Communities are entitled to ex-
ercise (cid:210)the inherent right to self-governance and self-determination,(cid:211) retain their
own (cid:210)values, practices, and institutions,(cid:211) and determine their own development
policy (sections 13 and 17).

Additional measures are provided to (cid:210)guarantee respect for their cultural in-
tegrity(cid:211) (sections 2 and 29). Indigenous peoples have (cid:210)the right to practice and re-
vitalize their own cultural traditions and customs. The State shall preserve, protect
and develop the past, present and future manifestations of their cultures as well as
the right to the restitution of cultural, intellectual, religious, and spiritual property
taken without their free and prior informed consent or in violation of their laws,
traditions and customs,(cid:211) as well as the right to use, control, and preserve (cid:210)indige-
nous sacred places(cid:211) and (cid:210)ceremonial objects(cid:211) and (cid:210)full ownership and control and
protection of their cultural and intellectual rights(cid:211) in the (cid:222)elds of genetics, botany,
medicine, ecology, and the arts (sections 32— 34). Access to biological resources
and related knowledge systems requires (cid:210)prior informed consent . . . obtained in
accordance with customary laws of the concerned community(cid:211) (section 35).

Assuming that it could be implemented fully, this approach comes closest to
encompassing all of the necessary components of indigenous knowledge systems:
land, cultural activity, and scienti(cid:222)c knowledge. Australia provides a useful coun-
terpoint, because the focus of recent Australian legislation has been land rights.
Under the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Act, 1984, the responsi-
ble minister may, on the application of an aboriginal group or community, declare
that a particular site or object is part of Australia(cid:213)s aboriginal heritage and give its
traditional custodians temporary protection from outside interference or develop-

40 russel lawrence barsh

ment. This authority has been used sparingly and is rooted in the assumption that
aboriginal ancestral territories can be divided into separate sacred and secular
precincts.87 The High Court has meanwhile determined that colonization did not
automatically extinguish all aboriginal rights to use their lands, and that some of
these rights may coexist today with the rights of Crown lessees such as pastoral-
ists and mining companies.88

In its struggle to reconcile the interests of aboriginal peoples, pastoralists,
and industry in the context of the High Court(cid:213)s rulings, Australia has two broad
options. It can follow the lead of Canada, in its negotiated settlements of land
claims in the north, by demarcating some exclusively aboriginal territories in ex-
change for extinguishment of aboriginal interests over larger areas already occu-
pied or desired by nonaboriginal people. Or it can try to de(cid:222)ne certain aborigi-
nal use rights that persist notwithstanding nonaboriginal occupation and use of
the same lands and try to persuade nonaboriginal Australians to respect aborigi-
nal customary law with respect to aboriginal rights. The (cid:222)rst approach would be
simpler in the short term and more likely to meet with broad public support, but
it would sever aboriginal links with key elements of their ancestral territories and
speed the loss of ceremonies and knowledge. The second approach might never
result in a complete, (cid:222)nal separation of aboriginal and nonaboriginal interests
and would probably require continual renegotiation of the terms of the condo-
minium, but it would be more likely to maintain complete systems of aboriginal
ceremonies and knowledge.89

3 conclusions

The indigenous paradigm, in which knowledge is indistinguishable from land and
culture, contrasts sharply with the reductionist approach of the Western legal tra-
dition. A reductionist approach has nonetheless been adopted by the international
legal system. This is partly due to jurisdictional fragmentation within the United
Nations and re(cid:223)ects a peculiarly reductionist way of thinking about society that
is alien to indigenous and tribal peoples. It also serves the current economic in-
terests of Western industry.

It is important to avoid romanticizing and thereby trivializing indigenous peo-
ples(cid:213) land consciousness and ecological knowledge.90 Indigenous peoples routinely
modi(cid:222)ed  ecosystems  to  make  them  more  accessible  and  productive  in  human
terms. They have not been spiritually opposed to the engineering of landscapes or
the consumption of living resources; they have learned to be clever engineers and
ef(cid:222)cient consumers. The information required to engineer an ecosystem in a sus-
tainable fashion and adapt it to long-term biological and climatic variation is con-
siderably greater than the information required to harvest the products of an un-
modi(cid:222)ed ecosystem without affecting its productivity.

how do you patent a landscape? 41

At the same time, it is important to acknowledge that indigenous peoples
everywhere are experiencing intense economic, ecological, and political pressures
to become reductionists and convert their estates to competitive commodity cap-
italism. Most indigenous communities have already polarized around this issue.
Some individuals are anxious to claim and sell local knowledge as a commodity.
They argue that there is no other way to bene(cid:222)t from it. Lawyers, scientists, and
agencies such as UNESCO and WIPO lend credibility to such arguments by
adopting (cid:210)protective(cid:211) legal standards that commodify local knowledge. While the
advocates of sui generis mechanisms purport to protect indigenous peoples from
the Procrustean bed of patent and copyright, they propose alternatives that have
the same ultimate effect: extracting knowledge from the land so that it can be frag-
mented and sold in pieces.

Proponents of sui generis rights may reply that the sale of local knowledge
does not prevent local people from continuing to apply their knowledge to the
management of their territories. There is (at least) the appearance of sharing,
rather than a transfer of exclusive rights. If knowledge is shared with non-kin who
live outside of the territory, such as a Canadian botanist or a Swiss pharmaceu-
tical (cid:222)rm, however, I do not see how the purchasers can observe the ethical stric-
tures that are associated with that knowledge and are encoded in journeys, songs,
and ceremonies. The community will become accustomed to the idea that the
bene(cid:222)ts of knowledge can be separated from the performances that comprise the
code of conduct toward the landscape. It will grow more dif(cid:222)cult to persuade
children that knowledge belongs to the land and those who respect the land, be-
cause they will see outsiders pro(cid:222)ting from local knowledge without ever visiting
the land or performing the ceremonies. By selling their knowledge of the land,
then, communities will break their ethical relationship with the land(cid:209)they will
(to use an indigenous construct) have broken their compact with other species.
The likely result, whether in indigenous or Western logic, will be the breakdown
of ecological sustainability.

One additional hazard merits consideration. The export of local knowledge
gives state of(cid:222)cials and nonindigenous scientists a basis on which to reassert su-
perior expertise. Having acknowledged the validity of local knowledge, states and
scienti(cid:222)c institutions can easily regain their former power simply by purchasing
local knowledge and uploading it into their existing resource-management models,
thereby eliminating the need for further cooperation with local communities. Thus
the sale of indigenous knowledge would strip indigenous peoples of the most
powerful argument they have been able to make in support of self-determination:
their local expertise and the relationship between the use of that expertise and the
maintenance of a direct, historical, and personal relationship with their ancestral
territories.

At a recent technical workshop of United Nations system of(cid:222)cials on indige-
nous  peoples(cid:213) intellectual  property  rights,  the WGIP  chairperson,  Erica-Irene

42 russel lawrence barsh

Daes, concluded that (cid:210)there is wide agreement that failure to provide some kind of
sui generis protection for indigenous peoples(cid:213) heritage and science will discourage
indigenous people from sharing their knowledge, and in the long term risk the ir-
reversible loss of much of this knowledge.(cid:211) She personally (cid:210)had found indigenous
people growing so suspicious and disheartened by the exploitation of their cul-
tures, that their elders are becoming increasingly reluctant even to teach their own
youth.(cid:211)91 The international system faces a dilemma. If it does not act quickly, in-
digenous knowledge will be lost; but if it acts in a way that detaches knowledge
from the land, knowledge will still be lost after a brief reprieve.

notes

1. United Nations Department of Public Information, Mrs. Rigoberta Menchu Tum Proposes the Cre-
ation of a High Commission for Indigenous Populations, U.N. Press Release No. DH/V/406 (June 21,
1993), at 2.
2. See, e.g., Surendra J. Patel, Can the Intellectual Property Rights System Serve the Interests of
Indigenous Knowledge? Valuing Local Knowledge 305 (Stephen B. Brush and Doreen Stabinski eds.,
Island Press, Washington D.C. 1996).
3. J. Bronowski, Science and Human Values (Harper & Row, New York 1959, rev. ed. 1965).
4. E.g., Philippe Descola, In the Society of Nature; A Native Ecology in Amazonia (Nora Scott trans.,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1994); Gerardo Reichel-Dolmatoff, Cosmology as
Ecological Analysis: A View from the Rain Forest, 11 Man 307 (1976).
5. Henry T. Lewis and Theresa A. Ferguson, Yards, Corridors, and Mosaics: How to Burn a Bo-
real Forest, 16 Human Ecology 57 (1988); Russel L. Barsh, Fire on the Land, 23 Alternatives Journal
36 (Fall 1997).
6. E.g., Christopher Anand Scott and Michael F. Walter, Local Knowledge and Conventional
Soil Science Approaches to Erosional Processes in the Shivalik Himalaya, 13 Mountain Research
and Development 61, 71 (1993).
7. See, e.g., Coevolution (Matthew H. Nitecki ed., University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1983), for
discussions of long-term physical as well as behavioral accomodations between species.
8. Russel L. Barsh, Food Security, Food Hegemony, and Charismatic Animals, in Towards a Sus-
tainable Whaling Regime (Robert L. Friedheim ed., MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, in press).
9. David Lewis, We, the Navigators: The Ancient Art of Land(cid:222)nding in the Paci(cid:222)c 181— 215 (University of
Hawaii Press, Honolulu 1972); Saul H. Reisenberg, The Organisation of Navigational Knowl-
edge on Puluwat, Paci(cid:222)c Navigation and Voyaging: Polynesian Society Memoir No. 39 91 (Ben R. Finney
ed., The Polynesian Society, Wellington 1976).
10. J. Stephen Lansing, Priests and Programmers: Technologies of Power in the Engineered Landscape of Bali
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ 1991).
11. Howard Morphy, Landscape and the Reproduction of the Ancestral Past, The Anthropology
of Landscape: Perspectives on Place and Space (Eric Hirsch and Michael O(cid:213)Hanlon eds., Clarendon
Press, Oxford 1995); Bruce Chatwin, Songlines (Random House, New York 1987).

how do you patent a landscape? 43

12. E.g., Steven Feld, Sound as a Symbolic System: The Kaluli Drum, The Varieties of Sensory Ex-
perience: A Sourcebook in the Anthropology of the Senses 79 (David Howes ed., University of Toronto
Press, Toronto 1991); Edward Schieffelin, The Sorrow of the Lonely and the Burning of the Dancers (St.
Martin(cid:213)s Press, New York 1976); Anya Peterson Royce, The Anthropology of Dance 192— 211 (Indi-
ana University Press, Bloomington 1977).
13. Mark L. Winston, The Biology of the Honey Bee 150— 168 (Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA 1987).
14. E.g., Robin McGrath, Maps as Metaphor; One Hundred Years of Inuit Cartography, 3 Inuit
Art Quarterly 6 (Spring 1988); Selwyn Dewdney, The Sacred Scrolls of the Southern Ojibway (Univer-
sity of Toronto Press, Toronto 1975); Hugh Brody, Maps and Dreams: Indians and the British Columbia
Frontier 34— 48 (Douglas & McIntyre, Vancouver 1981).
15. O. A. W. Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps (Cornell University Press, Ithaca 1985). Indigenous
peoples are entirely capable of converting time maps to rectilinear coordinates when required
to do so, as Brody, supra note 14, among others, has shown.
16. Dramatically recounted by the poet Lucan [Marcus Annaeus Lucanus] in his Latin epic of
the Roman civil war, Pharsalia 78— 79 (Robert Graves trans., Penguin Books 1956). See, gener-
ally, Nigel Pennick, Celtic Sacred Landscapes (Thames & Hudson, New York 1996).
17. Joseph G. Jorgensen, Land Is Cultural, So Is a Commodity: The Locus of Differences Among
Indians, Cowboys, Sod-Busters, and Environmentalists, 12 The Journal of Ethnic Studies 3 (1984).
18. I have published elsewhere on two of these legal systems: Russel L. Barsh, Back(cid:222)re from
Boldt: The Judicial Transformation of a Coast Salish Proprietary Fishery into a Commons, 4
Western Legal History 85 (1991); and Russel L. Barsh and Joe B. Marshall, Mi(cid:213)kmaw (Micmaq)
Constitutional Law, Encyclopedia of Native American Legal Traditions 192 (Bruce E. Johansen ed.,
Greenwood Press, Westport, CT 1998).
19. Barsh, Back(cid:222)re from Boldt, supra note 18; Wayne Suttles, Coast Salish Essays 15— 63 (Univer-
sity of Washington, Seattle 1987); Kalervo Oberg, The Social Economy of the Tlingit Indians, 55— 64
(University of Washington, Seattle 1973).
20. See similarly Nancy M. Williams, The Yolngu and Their Land: A System of Land Tenure and the Fight
for Its Recognition (Stanford University Press, Stanford 1986); Nancy M. Williams, A Boundary
to Cross: Observations of Yolngu Boundaries and Permission, in Resource Managers: North Amer-
ican and Australian Hunter-Gatherers 131 (Nancy M. Williams and Eugene S. Hunn eds., Westview
Press, Boulder, CO 1992).
21. Some bundles and pipes, as well as botanical and pharmaceutical knowledge, have also been
maintained by individual ceremonialists and healers who function, as it were, around the edges
of the societies. Similarly, see C. Den Bigelaar and M. A. Gold, The Use and Value of Multi-
ple Methods to Capture the Diversity of Endogenous Agroforestry Knowledge: An Example
from Rwanda, 30 Agroforestry Systems 263 (1995).
22. Compare the rotation of cargo within Maya society, Frank Cancian, Economics and Prestige in
a Maya Community: The Religious Cargo System in Zinacantan (Stanford University Press, Stanford
1965).
23. As stressed by Leroy Little Bear, Aboriginal Relationships to the Land and Resources, in Sa-
cred Lands: Aboriginal World Views, Claims, and Con(cid:223)icts 15 (Jill Oakes, Rick Riewe, Kathi Kinew and
Elaine Maloney eds., University of Alberta, Edmonton 1998).

44 russel lawrence barsh

24. Jos(cid:142) R. Mart(cid:146)nez Cobo, Study of the Problem of Discrimination Against Indigenous Populations: Vol-
ume  V:  Conclusions,  Proposals  and  Recommendations,  U.N.  Doc.  E/CN.4/Sub.2/1988/7/Add.4
(1987), at 16 [originally published in 1983; hereafter Mart(cid:146)nez Cobo, Study].
25. Erica-Irene Daes, Protection of the Heritage of Indigenous People: Preliminary Report, U.N. Doc.
E/CN.4/Sub.2/1994/31 (1994), at 3.
26. Daes, id. at 2— 3, drew considerably on the Kari-Oca and Mataatua Declarations.
27. This declaration has been published electronically by one of the workshop organizers, and
is available at GRAIN@igc.org.
28. Mensaje de la Coordinadora Ind(cid:146)gena Campesina de Agroforesteria Comunitaria Centroamericana con ocasi(cid:151)n
del D(cid:146)a Mundial del Ambiente, August 7, 1998 [author(cid:213)s translation].
29. UNESCO, The Protection of Movable Cultural Property I: Compendium of Legislative Texts 335, 336— 37
(UNESCO, Paris 1984).
30. Id. at 357.
31. Article 2(a) describes six categories of cultural sites, of which three are de(cid:222)ned in terms that
appear to limit them to dead and dying cultures: (cid:210)testimony to a civilization which has disap-
peared,(cid:211) (cid:210)illustrates a signi(cid:222)cant stage of history,(cid:211) (cid:210)representative of a culture which has be-
come vulnerable under the impact of irreversible change.(cid:211)
32. For background on the selection of this site, see George F. MacDonald, Ninstints Haida World
Heritage Site (University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver 1983).
33. Russel L. Barsh, Canada(cid:213)s Aboriginal Peoples: Social Integration or Disintegration? 14 Cana-
dian Journal of Native Studies 1, 5— 9 (1994).
34. Protected Areas in Our Modern World: Proceedings of a Workshop held as part of the IUCN World Con-
servation Congress held in Montreal, Canada, October 18 and 21, 1996 (Neil Munro ed., Parks Canada,
Halifax, Nova Scotia 1997).
35. Henry T. Lewis, Ecological and Technological Knowledge of Fire: Aborigines Versus Park
Rangers in Northern Australia, 91 American Anthropologist 940 (1989).
36. Stan Stevens, The Legacy of Yellowstone, in Conservation Through Cultural Survival: Indigenous
Peoples and Protected Areas 13 (Stan Stevens ed., Island Press, Washington, D.C. 1997); International
Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), Report of the Fourth Global Biodiversity Forum 1996
Canada 24— 29 (IUCN, Gland, Switzerland 1997).
37. UNESCO, Thinking Ahead: UNESCO and the Challenges of Tomorrow 282 (UNESCO, Paris
1977);  Final  Report  of  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  the  Human  Environment,  U.N.  Doc.  A/
CONF.48/14 (United Nations General Assembly, 27th Sess. 1972).
38. U.N. General Assembly Resolution 2997 (XXVII), Institutional and Financial Arrangements for
International Environmental Co-operation (December 15, 1972); the quoted text is from paragraph 11,
preamble.
39. UNESCO, Biosphere Reserves: The Seville Strategy and the Statutory Framework of the World Network 3
(UNESCO, Paris 1996).
40. Id. at 7.
41. Group of Experts on the International Protection of Expressions of Folklore by Intel-

how do you patent a landscape? 45

lectual Property, On the International Regulation of the (cid:210)Intellectual Property Aspects(cid:211) of Folklore, U.N.
Doc. UNESCO/WIPO/FOLK/GEI.1/2 (1984), at 1— 2 [hereinafter Group of Experts on
Folklore].
42. As reviewed by Erica-Irene Daes, Study on the Protection of the Cultural and Intellectual Property of
Indigenous Peoples, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/Sub.2/1993/28 (1993), at 32 [hereinafter Daes, Study]; the
present author served as Dr. Daes(cid:213)s consultant.
43. Article 15(4) of the Stockholm (1967) and Paris (1971) Final Acts; see Daes, Study, supra note
42, at 31; Group of Experts on Folkore, supra note 41, at 15.
44. Group of Experts on Folkore, supra note 41, at 16.
45. Article 1 of the Model Provisions, discussed critically by the Group of Experts on Folklore,
supra note 41, at 21— 23.
46. Id. at 23 (paragraph 84).
47. UNESCO and the Struggle Against Ethnocide: Declaration of San Jos(cid:142), December 1981 (UNESCO, Paris
n.d.) at 1, paragraph 3.
48. Id. at 2 (paragraph 6).
49. Article 3 of the convention, The Protection of Movable Cultural Property, supra note 29, at 337.
50. U.N. General Assembly Resolution 52/108, International Decade of the World(cid:213)s Indigenous People
(December 12, 1997), operative paragraph 3; this language has been included in each annual as-
sembly resolution on the decade since 1994.
51. See, e.g., DIVERSITAS: An International Programme of Biodiversity Science, Operational Plan 33— 34
(UNESCO, Paris 1996), which supports human-ecological and archaeological research on in-
digenous peoples by universities without formal linkages to any indigenous institutions.
52. See ILO, Indigenous Peoples: Living and Working Conditions of Aboriginal Populations in Independent
Countries (ILO, Geneva 1953).
53. ILO, Partial Revision of the Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention, 1957 (No. 107): Report VI(1),
International Labour Conference, 75th Session 44— 45 (ILO, Geneva 1988).
54. (cid:210)Land(cid:211) does not include minerals unless provided by national law; indigenous peoples have
the right to be consulted prior to any mining, to share in the bene(cid:222)ts of any mining project,
and to participate in managing the project, however (Article 15).
55. ILO, Policies and Development Branch: A Guide to Convention no. 169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
(ILO, Geneva July 1995).
56. Mart(cid:146)nez Cobo, Study, supra note 24, at 167 (paragraph 198) [emphasis supplied]; also at 39
(paragraph 513).
57. Russel L. Barsh, Indigenous Peoples and the UN Commission on Human Rights: A Case
of the Immovable Object and the Irresistible Force, 18 Human Rights Quarterly 782 (1996).
58. Id. at 802.
59. Daes, Study, supra note 42, at 8— 9 (paragraphs 24 and 31).
60. Erica-Irene Daes, Indigenous Peoples and Their Relationship to Land: Preliminary Working Paper, U.N.
Doc. E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/17 (1997), at 3— 6.

46 russel lawrence barsh

61. Daes, Study, supra note 42, at 31— 32 (paragraphs 132 and 135).
62. Daes, Protection of the Heritage of Indigenous People: Preliminary Report, supra note 25, at 3.
63. Daes, Study, supra note 42, at 41 (paragraph 177).
64.  Erica-Irene  Daes,  Protection  of  the  Heritage  of  Indigenous  People:  Final  Report,  U.N.  Doc.
E/CN.4/Sub.2/1995/26 (1995), at 9— 15.
65. Russel L. Barsh, Indigenous Peoples in the 1990s: From Object to Subject of International
Law? 7 Harvard Human Rights Journal 33, 45 (1994); as technical adviser to the coordinating body
for indigenous participants at UNCED, the International Indigenous Commission, the author
formed a very de(cid:222)nite impression of indigenous in(cid:223)uence.
66. The other major groups are women, farmers, youth, business, trade unions, scientists, and
nongovernmental organizations generally.
67. Report of the Workshop on the Ecosystem Approach, Lilongwe, Malawi, 26 —28 January 1998, U.N. Doc.
UNEP/CBD/COP/4/Inf.9 (1998).
68. This meeting was hosted by the United Kingdom at London, January 5— 7, 1998. Review of
the Operations of the Convention, London Workshop: Chairman(cid:213)s Conclusions, U.N. Doc. UNEP/CBD/
COP/4/Inf.2 (1998).
69. UNCED and the Biodiversity Convention recognize that longstanding communities of tra-
ditional farmers, (cid:222)shers, and pastoralists, while not necessarily (cid:210)indigenous(cid:211) in the sense that
term is currently used in the U.N. system, have often developed sustainable uses of living re-
sources and accumulated important knowledge of local ecosystems, as suggested in the text to
note 17, supra.
70.  Implementation  of  Article  8(J)  and  Related  Provisions:  Note  by  the  Executive  Secretary,  U.N.  Doc.
UNEP/CBD/COP/4/10 (1998), at 7.
71. Report of the Workshop on Traditional Knowledge and Biological Diversity, U.N. Doc. UNEP/CBD/
TKBD/1/3 (1997).
72. Fourth Conference of the Parties, Decision IV/9, Implementation of Article 8(j) and Related Pro-
visions (May 15, 1998).
73. Robert Weissman, A Long, Strange TRIPs: The Pharmaceutical Industry Drive to Har-
monize Global Intellectual Property Rules, and the Remaining WTO Legal Alternatives Avail-
able to Third World Countries, 17 University of Pennsylvania Journal of International Economic Law 1069
(1996); Intellectual Property Rights and Foreign Direct Investment, U.N. Doc. ST/CTC/SER.A/24
(New York 1993), at 23— 29.
74. Final Act of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations (WTO, Geneva 1994).
75. Erica-Irene Daes, Protection of the Heritage of Indigenous People: Supplemental Report, U.N. Doc.
E/CN.4/Sub.2/1996/22 (1996), at 11— 12. A recent European Union conference with repre-
sentatives of developing countries has called for (cid:210)respect for the . . . cultural and land rights(cid:211)
of indigenous peoples, as well as an amendment of the Lom(cid:142) Convention (governing European
overseas aid) to re(cid:223)ect article 8(j); African, Caribbean, Paci(cid:222)c(cid:209)European Union Joint Parliamentarian
Assembly, Brussels, 21—24 September 1998, available electronically from the European Union at
http://www.europarl.eu.int/dg2/acp/brux98.
76. Ironically, the government of India has thus far been unable to forge agreement between
its domestic industry and rural communities on the text of draft national legislation to protect

how do you patent a landscape? 47

community knowledge in (cid:222)elds such as plant varieties; Devinder Sharma, Turning a Blind Eye
to Biopiracy, Hindustani Times (August 14, 1998).
77. States also remain free generally to enact laws, notwithstanding the TRIPs Agreement, to (cid:210)pro-
tect public health and nutrition, and to promote the public interest in sectors of vital impor-
tance to their socio-economic and technological development(cid:211) (article 8).
78. Trade-secret protection has long been available to indigenous people in Australia; Foster v.
Mountford, 29 FLR 233 (Northern Territory Supreme Court 1976).
79. Biotrade documentation is entirely online and can be accessed at http://www.biotrade.org.
80. Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, Proposed American Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, OAS Doc. OEA/Ser/L/VI.II.95 Doc.6 (1997); see also 6 International Journal of
Cultural Property 356— 75 (1997) (with introduction by Siegfried Wiessner). Only Brazil and Ar-
gentina have expressed serious concerns about the ILO instrument that forms the model for
the OAS draft.
81. There is already in force a regional Convention on the Protection of the Archaeological and
Artistic Heritage of the American Nations (Convention of San Salvador, 1976), but with the
(cid:223)aws of the UNESCO convention: its effect is prospective, and requests for repatriation can
only be made by states. UNESCO, The Protection of Movable Cultural Property, supra note 11, at 370.
82. OAU Council of Ministers Document CM/2075 (LXVIII) Add.1.
83. Hilda Kuper and Leo Kuper, African Law: Adaptation and Development (University of California
Press, Berkeley 1965).
84. See, e.g., Anthony Hooper and R. Gerard Ward, Beyond the Breathing Space, Land, Custom,
and Practice in the South Paci(cid:222)c 250, 255 (R. Gerard Ward and Elizabeth Kingdon eds., Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 1995).
85.  Russel  L.  Barsh  and  Chantelle  Marlor,  Alternative  Paradigms:  Law  as  Power,  Law  as
Process, in Law in Society: A Canadian Reader (Nick Larsen ed., Harcourt Brace, Toronto, in press).
86. In article 78, moreover, Costa Rica invokes its authority under the TRIPs Agreement to ex-
empt animal and plant species and biological processes from conventional intellectual property
rules.
87. On scholars(cid:213) failure to appreciate the extent and complexity of spiritual ties to landscapes,
see Women, Rites and Sites: Aboriginal Women(cid:213)s Cultural Knowledge (Peggy Brock ed., Allen & Unwin,
Sydney 1989).
88. Mabo, A Judicial Revolution: The Aboriginal Land Rights Decision and Its Impact on Australian Law (M.
A. Stephenson and Suri Ratnapala eds., University of Queensland Press, St. Lucia 1993); The
Wik Case: Issues and Implications (Graham Hiley ed., Butterworths, Sydney 1997).
89. This is consistent with the analysis of the situation recently adopted by the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner, Michael Dodson, Native Title Report July
1994—June 1995 47— 49 (Australian Government Publishing Services, Canberra 1995).
90. See, e.g., J. Peter Brosius, Endangered Forest, Endangered People: Environmentalist Repre-
sentations of Indigenous Knowledge, 25 Human Ecology 47 (1997).
91. Erica-Irene Daes, Introductory Remarks of the Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission, Dr. Erica-Irene
Daes, typed speaking notes, at 3; see also Report of the Technical Meeting on the Protection of the Heritage of
Indigenous People, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/15 (1997).


