Counterfeit Art
John Henry Merryman*

[T]ruth, whose mother  is history,  ..."
Works  of  art  have  been  counterfeited  as  long  as  they  have
been collected.  ...  The conflict  between  supply  and  demand  ...
constantly  invites  and  stimulates  forgery  and  makes  of  it  a
lingering evil.2
We  are  afflicted  not  only  with  too  many  forgeries  but  also
perhaps  with  too many  disquisitions  about  forgery.3

Introduction

A Renaissance painting or a Greek pot or a Mayan stela is not only
a work  of art; it is a cultural  artifact,  one of a large,  heterogeneous
group  of  objects  that  are  valued  by  collectors,  acquired  by  and
shown  in museums and  studied  by scholars. Commonly  referred  to
as  'cultural  property',  'cultural  objects'  or  'cultural  heritage',  the
category includes things that have cultural value or importance apart
from  their  ornamental  or utilitarian .value. In  addition  to works of
art,  a  shortlist  would  include  archaeological  and  ethnographic  ob-
jects.  A  longer  list  would  include  much  more.4  A  cultural  object
embodies  or  expresses  or  evokes  some  aspect  of  the  culture  of  its
time  and  place.  There  is a  public  interest  in  the  learning  that  can
be derived  from  the  study  of  such  objects  and  the  enjoyment  that
can  be  derived  from  looking  at  them.5  Counterfeiters  subvert  that
interest.  They vandalize  the human  record.

Calling  the counterfeiter  a cultural  vandal  clashes  with  our  nor-
mally  relaxed, almost congenial  attitude  toward  such people. There
is a little outlaw in most of us, and  the counterfeiter  is a  beneficiary
of  the  tolerance  we  accord  to,  and  the  envy  or  admiration  many

Sweitzer  Professor  of  Law and  Cooperating  Professor  of Art,  Emeritus,  Stan-
ford  University.  I  am  indebted  to  Francis  A.  Allen,  Albert  E.  Elsen,  Andre
Emmerich,  Constance  Lowenthal,  Linda  F.  Pinkerton,  David  Rosenhan,  Eu-
gene  Victor  Thaw  and  Walter  0.  Weyrauch  for  criticism  and  suggestions  and
to  the  staffs  of  the  Stanford  University  Law  and  Art  libraries  for  invaluable
research  support.  Errors  of  fact,  judgment  and  taste  are  of  course  mine.
Copyright  1991  J.H.Merryman.

27

"Counterfeiters  ...
dalize  the  human
record."

John  Henry  Merryman

often  feel  for,  one who defies conventions and accepted  values.6 We
encourage such tolerance by inadequately accounting for the trouble
counterfeiters  make. Indeed,  the suggestion  that  they do  significant
harm  will  seem  surprising  to  many,  although  they  would  want  the
law  to  deal  sternly  with  forgers  of  commercial  paper  or  wills  or
counterfeiters  of money.

This article  is an  attempt  to  consider  the  serious  side of cultural
counterfeiting.7  We begin  by examining  a basic flaw  in the  attitude
many of us bring to the topic, an attitude that we find dramatically
displayed  in what we can call the van  Meegeren  Problem.

The  van  Meegeren  Problem

But to  the man  who  has  never  heard  of either  Vermeer  or van
Meegeren  and  who  stands  in  front  of  The Disciples  admiring
it,  it  can  make  no  difference  whether  he  is  told  that  it  is  a
seventeenth-century  Vermeer  or  a  twentieth-century  van  Mee-
geren  in the style of Vermeer.8
There is clearly something wrong with a person who asks 'What
is wrong with a  forgery?'9

The Dutch  painter  Han  van  Meegeren  became famous  after  World
War II for  the success of his counterfeits  of Vermeer and De Hoogh,
some  of  which  had  been  authenticated  by  established  experts  and
acquired  by  major  museums.10  He  has  come  to  symbolize  serious
art  counterfeiters:  people  who  combine  technical  skill,  care  in  the
choice  of  materials  and  familiarity  with  art  history  to  produce
convincing  imitations  of the work  of other  artists.

Van  Meegeren  became  famous  because  of  the  then  perceived"
persuasiveness of his counterfeit  Vermeers. Accused of collaborating
with the Nazis because he had sold a national treasure  —  a supposed
Vermeer entitled  'The Adultress' — to Hermann Goering during the
German  occupation  of The Netherlands, van  Meegeren's  objection
that  he should  be considered  a patriot  because  he had  deceived  the
eminent  Nazi  with  a  fake  was  generally  disbelieved.  As  a  test,  he
was supplied with the necessary materials and produced  a 'Vermeer'
that,  together  with  a  technical  inspection  of  his  other  confessed
forgeries,  convinced  the  court.12  New  discoveries  of  counterfeits
continue to occur as time passes and as cultural history, connoisseur-
ship and  technical  methods  of authentication  advance.13 The better
the counterfeit,  the  more difficult  the  discovery.  At  the  limit  is the
hypothetical  perfect  counterfeit  that  cannot  be  distinguished  from
the real thing.

Hence, the van Meegeren Problem: if the painting we are looking
at  is indistinguishable  from  an authentic  Vermeer, what  importance
does  the  fact  of  inauthenticity  have?  Isn't  the  perfect  counterfeit,

28

"...  van  Meegeren  ...
has come  to  symbolize
serious art  counterfeiters

"At the limit is the hypo-
thetical  perfect  counter-
feit  that  cannot  be dis-
tinguished  from  the  real
thing  ...  Hence,  the  van
Meegeren  Problem  ..."

"...  the van  Meegeren
Problem  is a  false  prob-
lem ... made to seem real
by  the accidental  con-
junction  of  three  dispa-
rate  influences.  One is
the work of art  populists

Counterfeit  Art

by  definition,  as  good  as  an  authentic  work?  And  if  it  is,  what
attitude  should  society  take  toward  the  counterfeiter?  What  is  the
harm? Why should  the counterfeiter  be treated  as a criminal? Why
should  the  museum  director,  dealer  or  collector  who  happily  buys
a  supposed  De  Chirico  be  unhappy  when  it  is  shown  to  be  a
counterfeit?  Why  does  the  market  discriminate  so sharply  between
authentic  works  and  counterfeits,  by  placing  a  far  lower  value  on
the  counterfeit,  once  it  is  so  identified?  Suppose  the  counterfeit  is
accepted as original by an unwary collector; why does bliss disappear
when  ignorance ends?

As  some  readers  will  readily  see,  and  as  I  shall  explain  further
below,  the  van  Meegeren  Problem  is  a  false  problem.  It  has  been
made  to  seem  real  by the accidental  conjunction  of three  disparate
influences.  One  is  found  in  the  work  of  art  populists,  of  whom
Professor  Banfield  is  an  extreme  example,14  who  see  the  concern
about authenticity as one expression of an undesirable and insincere
elitism  in the visual  arts, propagated  by corrupt  art  historians who
are  tools of  the monied class:

In  the United  States,  the profession  of art  historian  came into
being early in the present century  when J.P.Morgan  and  others
of  the  fabulously  rich  took  to  stocking  their  mansions  and
museums  with  the  art  treasures  of  Europe.  In  order  for  their
kind  of  collecting  to  be  a  workable  game,  there  had  to  be
umpires whose authority  all players in the game would  accept.
Bernard  Berenson,  working  with  Lord  Duveen,  was  the  first
and  most important  of these. Soon every major  collection  had
to  have  its  own  expert  capable  of  proving  that  a  work  long
thought  to  be  minor  was  really  major...  Not  surprisingly,
in view of what  they are trained  and  paid  to do, art  historians
are  often  more  sensitive  to  historical  than  to  artistic  values.
In  their  eyes  the  authenticity  of  a  work  is  of  supreme  impor-
tance.
To  a  large  extent,  the  art-interested  public  consists  of  college
graduates  who  have  learned  from  books  and  courses  by  art
historians.  Much  of  the  public  has  been  taught  to  see  art  as
part  of  the  history  of  culture,  rather  than  as  something  to  be
responded  to  aesthetically.  The  professional's  respect  for  the
authentic,  however  inartistic,  and  his  contempt  for  the  inau-
thentic, however artistic, have all too often  been communicated
to  his students  and  readers.15

That  is  an  astonishing  charge,  particularly  coming  from  a  fellow
academic.  Professor  Banfield  attacks  the  entire  discipline  of,  art
history, ignoring its distinguished  origins in Europe and  denigrating
the imposing  body  of serious scholarship  that  American  art  histor-
ians have  produced.

29

"...  people  who  senti-
mentalize  about  coun-
terfeiters  ... are a second
influence."

"The  third  influence
grows out  of  the  un-
surprising  tendency  of
aesthetic philosophers to
focus  on  aesthetic ques-
tions."

"Once  the  misunder-
standing  encouraged  by
these  influences  is re-
solved,  the  van  Mce-
gercn  Problem  evapor-
ates  ..."

John  Henry  Merryman

Romanticizers, people who sentimentalize16 about  counterfeiters,
are a second influence. There is an apparently inexhaustible popular
market for romanticizing books and articles by and about art fakers.
To name a  few: Tom  Keating,  The Fake's Progress  (1977) (Keating
is a self-confessed  art faker); Ann-Marie Stein, Three Picassos before
Breakfast (1973) (about  the exploits of convicted  faker  David  Stein,
by his wife); Clifford  Irving, Fake\ (1969) (this is a special case: Mr.
Irving,  who  wrote  this  book  about  Elmyr  de  Hory,  an  art  faker,
later  wrote  a  fake  biography  of  Howard  Hughes.  Thus  we have a
book  by a faker  about a faker;  it has sold a lot of copies.) Consider
the title of a book  by Charles Hamilton,  Great Forgers and Famous
Fakes (1980).  'Great?'  There  are  many  such  books.  They  play  on
the  van  Meegeren  Problem,  exalting  the  counterfeiter's  skill  and
motives,  ignoring  the  harm  counterfeits  do,  and  demanding  of  the
reader  what  is wrong with a good  counterfeit.

The  third  influence  grows  out  of  the  unsurprising  tendency  of
aesthetic philosophers  to  focus  on aesthetic questions.  Leaving his-
torical  concerns  to  others,  they  inquire  whether  a  well-made  copy
is not  aesthetically  the equivalent  of  the  original.17 This  allows  the
unwary  reader  to  infer  (and  some  unwary  aestheticians  to  imply)
that  authenticity  does  not  matter.

Once  the  misunderstanding  encouraged  by  these  influences  is
resolved, the van Meegeren Problem evaporates, though it leaves an
imposing  residue  of popular  misconceptions  about  and  consequent
social ambiguity toward the counterfeiter  and his work. The miscon-
ceptions  and  ambiguity  are  the  sources  of  a  set  of  real  social/legal
problems,  which  are  discussed  below.  First,  however,  let  us  take a
closer  look  at  van  Meegeren's  'Supper at Emmaus\  one of his most
noted  Vermeer  counterfeits.

The painting now hangs in the Boymans-van  Beuningen  Museum
in  Rotterdam,  a  gift  from  the  Dutch  collector  van  Beuningen,  a
successful  businessman who bought the painting from  van Meegeren
and  continued  to  insist  that  it  was  a  Vermeer  long  after  it  was
universally  attributed  to van Meegeren  by the art  world.  It  is not a
copy of an existing work  attributed  to Vermeer; it is a  composition
of the kind that Vermeer might have painted early in his career. The
subject  is  an  appropriate  one  in  light  of  what  is  known  about
Vermeer's  career,  and  the materials  used,  the  manner  of  execution
and  style  are  consistent  with  Vermeer's  work.  Thus  the  painting  is
historically, technically  and stylistically  plausible, and  since it is not
a copy, there is no original with which to compare it. Such 'original'
counterfeits18  present particularly difficult  problems  for  the authen-
ticator,  but  other  varieties  are also  troublesome.  Thus a  persuasive
copy  of  a  known  work  will, until  it  is definitively  shown  which  is
the original and which the copy, cast doubt on the original. Where it
cannot be conclusively shown which is which, the unsettled  question
arises again, and again. A famous example is the Leonardo painting

30

Counterfeit  Art

called  La  Belle Ferroniere,  in  the  Louvre.  Another  version  of  the
same picture in private hands was the subject  of the famous  case of
Halm v Duveen.*9 The owner, Mrs. Hahn, represented  that hers was
painted  by  Leonardo.  Duveen  said  that  it  was  not  and  that  the
original  was  in  the  Louvre.  Mrs.  Hahn  sued  Duveen  for  damages,
and  the  authenticity  of  Hahn's  version  was  accordingly  a  central
issue  unfortunately  left  unresolved  by  settlement  of  the  case.  The
Hahn  Belle is  still  around,  still  offered  as  a  genuine  Leonardo.20
False  attributions,  sometimes  achieved  by  replacing  the  lesser
figure's  signature  with  that  of the master  —  painting out  the signa-
ture of a lesser artist and forging  Rembrandt's name, for example  —
are another variation. Or the counterfeiter  may copy bits of authen-
tic works  and  combine  them  into  one  'pastiche'.  We could  use  the
terms 'fake',  'copy', 'forgery'  and  'pastiche' for  these varieties. They
are  not  exclusive  categories:  fakes  frequently  include  elements  of
pastiche;21 fakes, copies and  pastiches often  include forged  signatu-
res or monograms. When  they are of comparable  quality, a  forgery
or  a  pastiche  may  be  indistinguishable  in  effect  from  a  fake.  In
these  terms  The  Supper at  Enimaus would  be  a  'fake'.  The  term
'counterfeit'  refers  to any or  all of  them.

There  are  two  reasons  why a perfect  counterfeit  is inferior  to an
authentic  work.  The  first  has  to  do  with  the  relationship  between
knowledge  and  perception.  Suppose  we distinguish  between  'truth'
questions  and  'beauty'  questions  about  cultural  objects.  According
to  the  view  implicit  in  the  van  Meegeren  Problem,  the  'beauty'
questions are independent of authenticity; whether the van Meegeren
Supper at Emmaus is aesthetically significant  has nothing to do with
its authenticity  as a Vermeer.  Vermeer  was a great  master,  but  it is
reasonable  to suppose that  others might produce works of equal or
greater  aesthetic  quality.  Knowing  that  a  painting  is  by  Vermeer
does  not  add  to  its  inherent  quality,  just  as  knowing  that  it  is
not  by  Vermeer  leaves  the  object  unchanged.  Beauty  is  of  course
subjective,  and  styles and  standards change, but  the intrinsic quali-
ties  of  the  object  in  question  — the  painting  — are  unaffected.
Taking  this  view,  the  way  people  behave  (placing  a  high  value  on
authentic objects and disdaining quality counterfeits)  is inexplicable
and  unjustifiable.  This  is  the  simplest  form  of  the  'van  Meegeren
problem'.

Such  thinking  seriously  oversimplifies  matters.  Aesthetic  quality
does  not  reside  exclusively  in  the  object.  As  the  old  saw  has  it,
'beauty  is  in  the  eye  of  the  beholder'.  The  observer  perceives  and
evaluates  the work. There is no immaculate  perception.

The difference  between seeing or merely looking at a thing and
seeing  that it has certain  qualities is often  lost on aestheticians.
Their  view,  too  often,  is  that  we  need  to  bring  to  aesthetic
experience  no  concepts  whatever:  that  we  perceive  that  a

31

"There  are  two  reasons
why a perfect  counterfeit
is inferior  to  an  authen-
tic work. The first  has to
do  with  the  relationship
between  knowledge  and
perception."

"Aesthetic  quality  does
not  reside exclusively  in
the  object."

John  Henry  Merryman

painting is balanced or passionate, for example, by contemplat-
ing it with  an  open  but empty  mind. This  is absurd.22

"Discovery that the  The expectation that the work is a Vermeer affects  our way of seeing
ancj  evaluating  it. Discovery  that  the painting  is a fake  changes the
w ay  h  ig  p e r c e j v ed

painting is a fake 
changes the  way  it is per- 
ceived."

"...  the counterfeit  ...  is
an  objectified  falsehood.

[W]hen  they  find  that  the  work  of  art  they  have  acquired  is
'wrong',  or  at  least  questionable,  they  will  almost  always  tell
you  that  it seems to  'fall  to pieces'.
It  is most  striking,  in  fact,  how  often  very  different  collectors
use  this  same  phrase  to  describe  this  kind  of  disillusionment.
It  means  —  it  really  does  mean,  for  the  collectors  themselves
will  tell  you  so  — that  the  unwelcome  news  that  an  admired
work  of art  is a fake  can  affect  the actual  visual  perception  of
that work  by highly  trained  eyes.23

Recognition  that  the viewer  brings something  to  the act of percep-
tion  thus  subverts the van  Meegeren  Problem.24

The  problem  vanishes  entirely  if we approach  the  counterfeit  as
the object  of  'truth'  questions:  '[A] forgery  distorts  our  view of  art
history and  hence our view of other works of art...'25  By definition,
the  counterfeit  lacks  authenticity.  It  is  an  objectified  falsehood,
historically  distinguishable  from  the  Vermeer  it  purports  to  be be-
cause  Vermeer  did  not  make  it  or  authorize  it  to  be  made  or
supervise its making or accept it as a Vermeer. It is a van  Meegeren
and  authentically  plays its role in our cultural  history only as a van
Meegeren.  Together  with  other  van  Meegerens, it  forms  a  body of
work  that  can  be evaluated  in  art  historical  terms.  In  those  terms,
van  Meegeren  is remarkable  only  as a counterfeiter.  He  made no
other  cultural  contribution,  either  as an  innovater  or  as a  member
of  an  influential  school  or  movement.  Aside  from  his  success  in
imitating  the  work  of  Vermeer  and  others  his artistic  product  was
insignificant.

The  art  market  empirically  verifies  the  distinct  contributions  of
historical  and  aesthetic  considerations  to  society's  valuation  of
works  of  art;  both  are  usually  in  play.  A  Vermeer  offered  for  sale
as a Vermeer will bring a price representing both its aesthetic appeal
and  the  complex  of  values  placed  by  society  on  any  work  by
Vermeer. When a van Meegeren  successfully  posing as a Vermeer is
offered  for  sale, the same phenomenon  applies, and Vermeer values
come  into  play.  But  when  the  van  Meegeren  is  offered  as  a  van
Meegeren,  the  historical  judgments  applicable  to  a  Vermeer  no
longer apply, and  the market  reflects  this fact.  The statement  that:

Since the boom in art collecting in the nineteenth century there
has been a tendency  to equate  the financial  value of a work of
art  with  its aesthetic value.26

32

Counterfeit  Art

has  it  exactly  wrong.  Aesthetic  quality  is  not  irrelevant;  there  is
always  a  market  for  a  well-made,  beautiful  or  powerfully  moving
painting, and  a better  Vermeer will bring a higher  price  than  a bad
one.  But  the  worst  Vermeer  will  bring  a  far  higher  price  than  the
best  van  Meegeren. The market  strongly  favors  truth  over  beauty.
Truth  is also  favored  in  non-market  situations.  The  British  have
the  Elgin  Marbles  in  London,  and  the  Greek  government.agitates
for  their  return.  The  suggestion  that  well-made  copies would  serve
as well as the originals is rejected  by both  parties. The Greeks want
the originals, and the British want to keep them.27 The entire cultural
property  repatriation  movement28  would  evaporate  if  accurate  re-
productions would serve as well as originals. The illegal international
traffic  in cultural  objects  exists because nations want to  retain, and
collectors,  museums  and  scholars  —  and  hence dealers  —  want  to
acquire,  enjoy  and  study  originals.29  There  is  an  entire  museum
dedicated  to  replicas  of  great  works  of  art  in  Rome  (the  Museum
of  the  History  of  Roman  Civilization  in  EUR),  rooms full  of such
replicas  in the Victoria  and  Albert  Museum  in London  and  similar
collections  in other  museums. In an era  when museums are usually
crowded,  these  are  typically  empty  of  visitors.  People  want  to  see
the real  thing. 'Copies  are always second  best...'30

If we compare  the attitude  toward  works of art  with  other  kinds
of  cultural  property,  the  point  becomes  even  clearer.  Suppose  a
collector  buys a  letter  purportedly  written  by Thomas  Jefferson.  If
the letter is treated  as authentic, its. contents can  significantly  affect
our  understanding  of  American  history  during  the  formative  years
of  the  Republic.  It  is  a  valuable  historical  document,  however
pleasant  ('aesthetic')  or  unpleasant  its  contents  may  be. The  same
is  true  of  a  painting  by  Vermeer:  if  authentic,  it  is  a  valuable
document, a piece of our cultural history. So, too, of the manuscript
of an  undiscovered  story  by  Balzac or  a newly-found  violin  sonata
by  Mozart.  Even  if  these  works  are  not  themselves  peaks  in  the
creative careers of their composers, they are historically  significant.
The  question  of  authenticity  is  basic; if  they  are  real,  they  change
in some measure what  we know  of our  past.

The  van  Meegeren  Problem  can  be  made  to  seem  to  be  a  real
problem only by (1) restricting our attention  to the aesthetic quality
of  the  object  and  (2)  disregarding  the  relationship  of  perceived
authenticity  to  aesthetic  effect.  If  we admit  history  to  the  inquiry,
authenticity  assumes  primary  importance,  and  the  problem  van-
ishes.31 The well-made counterfeit  is not 'just as good as' the authen-
tic work. The best fake Picasso still is not a Picasso. One who insists
that  successful  counterfeits  are equivalent  to authentic works exalts
counterfeiters,  demeans  creativity  and  misses  the  point  of  cultural
history. Most readers would probably agree that these are significant
offences,  though  others  might  dismiss  them  as unduly  recondite  or
trivial. There is, however, another side to the van Meegeren problem:
counterfeits  make real  trouble  and  do  real  harm.

"...  the  worst  Vermeer
will bring  a  far  higher
price  than  the  best  van
Meegeren.  The  market
strongly  favors  truth
over  beauty."

"The  entire  cultural
property  repatriation
movement  would  evap-
orate  if accurate  repro-
ductions  would  serve  as
well as  originals."

"People  want  to  see the
real  thing."

"Even  if  ...  works  are
not  themselves  peaks in
the creative careers of
their  composers,  they
are  historically  signifi-
cant  ...  if they  are  real,
they  change  in  some
measure  what  are  know
of  our  past."

33

John  Henry  Merryman

The Bad That  Good  Counterfeits  Do

'Anyway,  what's  wrong with  a good  honest  forgery?'32

The  social  indictment  of  counterfeit  cultural  objects  contains  a
number  of  counts.  They  are  morally  offensive;  they  impair  the
search  for  truth;  they  skew  the  allocation  of  scarce  resources; they
misrepresent  the  artist;  and  they  are  convenient  instruments  of
fraud.  The  'better'  — i. e.  the  more  successful  — the  counterfeit,
the more  such  trouble  it makes.

Morality
The  immorality  of counterfeiting  cultural  objects,  or  anything else,
is obvious and needs little discussion. Deliberate deception for selfish
purposes is hardly an admirable activity. That works of art or other
cultural  objects  are  involved  is  only  incidental;  there  is  no  basic
difference  between  the  art  counterfeiter  and  others  who  set  out  to
deceive  and  defraud.  The  social judgment  of  immorality  embodied
in  the  criminal  law  of  forgery,  deceit  and  fraud  of  other  kinds
applies equally to culture counterfeiters.  (Some counterfeiters  would
appear  to  disagree.  Consider  Anne-Marie  Stein's  complaint  about
her art-forging  husband's  misfortunes:  'I do not  believe that  David
committed a crime serious enough to warrant his imprisonment here
for  a  year  and  a  half  and  two  more  imprisonments  in  France.  He
did  not  take anyone's  life, nor  had  he harmed  the hair  on  anyone's
body.  He  merely  took  people's  money.'  (emphasis  supplied).33
Clifford  Irving wrote that the art counterfeiter  de Hory insisted  that
he  was  not  a  criminal  since  he  had  not  stolen  from  the  poor  or
killed anyone, was not an extortionist  or a member of the  Mafia.)34
The  van  Meegeren  Problem  lies at  the  bottom  of  any  confusion
that  we  may  feel  about  the  morality  of  cultural  counterfeiting
because it diverts our attention  from  the importance of authenticity.
It is easy for  the populist  who advocates  wide circulation  of repro-
ductions  and  denigrates  the  concern  for  historical  authenticity  to
accept  counterfeits  as  merely  another  type  of  reproduction.  The
romantic/sentimentalist  excuses the faker  because he is a creator of
beautiful  things  and/or  a  crusader  against  the  hypocrisy  of  the  art
world.  To  the  aesthetic  philosopher  the  interesting  question  is
whether the counterfeit  is aesthetically successful;  the morality issue
does not  arise because authenticity  is not  a concern.

"The  immorality  of
counterfeiting  cultural
objects  ...  is deceives  ...
deliberate  deception  for
selfish purposes is hardly
an  admirable  activity."

"The  van  Meegeren
Problem  lies at  the  bot-
tom  of  any  confusion
that  we may  feel  about
the  morality  of  cultural
counterfeiting  ..."

Truth

... good  counterfeits  ...
confuse  and  misdirect
the  search  for  valid
learning."

The most  serious  harm  that  good  counterfeits  do  is to confuse  and
misdirect the search for valid learning. The counterfeit object  falsifies
history  and  misdirects  inquiry.  We care about  authenticity  because
we want  to  know  the  truth  about  ourselves  and  our  past,  to  know

34

Counterfeit  Art

how  earlier  societies  lived  their  lives and  expressed  their  values,  to
know  who  we  are  and  where  we  come  from.35  In  the  study  of
cultural  objects,  authenticity  is essential  to  validity.  It  is  the  same
for  all serious inquiry. As in science we seek validity and scorn  false
data  and  rigged  results,  so  in cultural  history  we seek  authenticity
and  denigrate  counterfeits.

Society  makes  a  substantial  investment  in  the  quest  for  cultural
truth:  the  thousands  of  museums  and  libraries  in  which  cultural
objects  are  preserved,  studied,  verified,  attributed  and  interpreted;
the  university  departments  of  anthropology,  archaeology,  art  and
history,  and  the  imposing  body  of  scholarship  that  they  produce
about,  or  based  on,  cultural  objects.  Consider,  for  example,
the  amount  of  talent,  scholarship  and  supporting  infrastructure
that  has  gone  into  restoration  of  the  Michelangelo  frescos  in
the  Sistine  Chapel  in  Rome.36  Or  consider  the  Rembrandt  Study
Project  which,  for  several  years,  has  engaged  a  group  of
distinguished  scholars  and  extensive  resources  in  an  effort 
to
assess  all  works  attributed 
to  Rembrandt  and  produce'  an
the  Rembrandt  corpus.37  Com-
authoritative  restatement  of 
parable,  if  less  elaborate,  enterprises  of  this  kind  are  constantly
going  on.  Truth  about  the  culture  is,  in  its  way,  as  important  to
humanity  as  truth  of  other  kinds  —  as  scientific  truth,  for
example.

Counterfeits  corrupt  the  stream  of  information  about  cultural
objects.  If we think  of  the culture  as a kind  of environment  —  the
cultural environment  —  then it is not fanciful  to call the counterfeiter
a polluter. Worse, he is a deliberate polluter, conscious and  uncon-
cerned.  Worse  yet,  his  pollutant  is  not,  like  the  emissions  from  a
coal-fired  power  plant,  the  by-product  of some useful  activity;  it is
his primary product. Counterfeit works of art are themselves authen-
tic  cultural  objects  whose  study  can  tell  us  something  about  their
producers and about ourselves. But until they are correctly identified
and  labeled  and  removed  from  commerce  they  can  only  mislead,
misinform,  misrepresent.

Resource  Allocation
Museum  and  art  historical  resources are  always limited. What  gets
acquired, displayed, conserved and studied is the result of a continu-
ous process  of  triage  in which  some objects  can  be favored  only  at
the expense of others. Counterfeit  objects distort the process. Money
used  to  buy  the  counterfeit  could  have  been  used  to  acquire  an
authentic  work  or  spent  on  some  supporting  good  or  service. The
fake painting that hangs in the museum fills exhibition space that an
authentic work left  in storage might have occupied. The inauthentic
object  given  conservation  treatment  uses  resources  that  would  be
better spent on genuine artifacts needing care. The time and learning

"...  corrupt  the  stream
of information  about
cultural  objects."

35

John  Henry  Merryman

"...  the brooding  threat
posed  by  ...  counterfeits
requires  that  scarce re-
sources  be spent  in con-
stantly  scrutinizing  ac-
quisitions  and  collec-
tions  ..."

spent in studying the fake could have been devoted  to other objects.
In  addition,  the brooding  threat  posed  by the existence of  counter-
feits requires that scarce resources be spent in constantly scrutinizing
acquisitions  and  collections  to detect  and  remove possible  counter-
feits.

Misrepresenting  the Artist
A  group  of  more  than  150 fake  Rodin  drawings  was  consigned  to
Sotheby Parke-Bernet,  a leading New York auction  house, in 1975.
They were authenticated  by a young scholar  from  Harvard,  trained
on the Rodin drawings in the Fogg  Museum, who commented  that
the  Sotheby  Rodins  displayed  the  same  qualities,  including  'poor
draftsmanship',  as  those  in  the  Fogg.  In  fact,  both  the  consigned
drawings  and  the  Fogg  examples  were  the work  of  Ernst  Durig, a
well-known  and  prolific  Rodin  faker.  In  this case  the  mistake  was
corrected  by the intervention  of a senior Rodin scholar, but  Diirig's
fakes  permeate  museum  collections  and  the offerings  of art  dealers
and  auctioneers  throughout  the  world,  misrepresenting  the  work
and  impairing  the reputation  of an  historically  important  artist.38

A  counterfeiter  seldom  adds  favorably  to  the  reputation  of  his
artist-victim,  almost  invariably  the  contrary,  and  in  any  case  the
counterfeiter  always  misrepresents  the  artist's  intentions  and  stan-
dards. The same 'personality  interest'  of the artist  that  is protected
by the 'right  of integrity'  is violated  by the counterfeiter.  (The right
of integrity, also called the right of respect, is an aspect of the moral
right of the artist. It protects the artist against alteration of his work
after  it  leaves  his  hands.)39  Like  those  who  alter  an  artist's  work,
those  who  fake  it  misrepresent  the  artist.  'The  single  forged
Rembrandt  painting  changes  the  whole  conception  of  Rembrandt
and  ...  certainly  not  for  the  better'.40

Fraud

There  remains  the  most  obvious  harm  of  all:  counterfeit  cultural
objects  are  instruments  of  fraud.  Most  are  created  in  order  to
deceive and defraud,  but even 'innocent' counterfeits  can, and  often
will, be so used. The same considerations  of justice and social order
that make deliberate  fraud  of other  kinds criminal  apply equally  to
fraud  through  the  medium  of  counterfeit  art.  Such  fraud  can  take
other forms than merely offering  the counterfeit for sale as authentic.
A  restorer  may  keep  the  original  and  return  a  counterfeit  to  the
owner; if the work  looks different  that  can  be explained  as a result
of  restoration  work.  Or  a  thief  might  postpone  discovery  of  the
theft  by  leaving  a  counterfeit  in  place  of  the  work  stolen.  This
possibility  that  'fakes  can  be used  for  theft  or the fraudulent  trans-
formation  of  authentic  objects'  has  led  UNESCO  to  urge  that
'measures must  be taken  to prevent  their  circulation'.41

"A counterfeiter  seldom
adds  favourably  to  the
reputation  of  his  artist-
victim  ... and in any case
...  always  misrepresents
the  artist's  intentions
and  standards."

"...  counterfeit  cultural
objects  are  instruments
of  fraud."

36

Counterfeit  Art

The  proposition  that  art  counterfeiters  do  significant  harm  will
come as no surprise to most readers. Still, the argument is incomplete
until we have seen the case for the other side. Do cultural counterfei-
ters do good as well as bad? A look at the  justifications/rationaliza-
tions  offered  for  what  counterfeiters  do  is  interesting,  has  specific
relevance  to  the  art  world,  and  reintroduces  the  van  Meegeren
Problem  in slightly more sophisticated  form.

The Counterfeiter's  Apologia

The combination  of populism, romance and narrow focus described
earlier  clouds  society's  view  of  the  nature  and  consequences  of  art
fraud.  It makes a culture [sic] hero of the counterfeiter,  conceals the
harm  counterfeits  do,  creates  ambiguity  in  public  policy  toward
counterfeiters  and  counterfeits,  and  leads to uncertain  enforcement
of  existing  law.  The  resulting  complaisance  and  confusion  are  en-
couraged  by  a  set  of  stock  ideas  used  by  counterfeiters  and  their
apologists  to  justify  what  they  do  and  divert  attention  from  the
trouble  they make.

The  commonest  element  in  the  apologia  pictures  the  counterfei-
ter's  victims  as  wealthy  collectors  and  pompous  experts.  In  this
scenario  the  counterfeiter  is  a  Robin  Hood  who  takes  from  the
undeserving rich and merrily exposes empty pretension. The scenario
has an  undeniable  appeal. The wealthy collector  who gets fooled  is
hardly  a  tragic  figure.  Popular  culture  admires  the  forger  who can
deceive  the  experts.  Van  Meegeren  arguably  performed  a  patriotic
act  when  he  sold  a  fake  Vermeer  to  Hermann  Goering  during  the
German  occupation  of  the  Netherlands  in  World  War  II.  It  is
difficult  to  feel  sympathy  for  people  who  seek  status  by  hanging
something with  a great artist's  name on it over the  fireplace.  There
is pretense and  posturing  in  the art  world,  and  'There  is something
which  appeals  to  the  anarchic  strain  in  all  of  us  about  the  "ex-
perts"  —  those pompous connoisseurs  are always putting us in our
places  —  being  taken  for  a ride'.42

This  sentimental  view  of  the  counterfeiter  ignores  the  fact  that
innocent  people who are  not experts or wealthy collectors or Nazis
also  get  defrauded.  Wealthy  collectors  are  in  fact  less  likely  to  be
victimized;  they  have easy  access  to  expert  advice  and  tend  to  buy
through  established  dealers and  auctioneers  who take care  in what
they offer  and  readily  accept  the  return  of questioned  works. Since
the quality  of most counterfeits  is low, experts seldom  are deceived
by them. The counterfeiter's  typical victim is an inexperienced collec-
tor.  This  fact  is  illustrated  by  the  Dali  print  scandals.  Whether
sold  over  the  telephone  or  in establishments  calling themselves  'art
galleries',  phoney  Dali  prints  that  are  really  nothing  but  photome-
chanical  reproductions  with  forged  signatures  and  deceptive  num-
bers  that  cost  the  seller  $25 to  $50 are  sold  in  large  numbers  to a

"...  the apologia  pic-
tures the  counterfeiters
victims as wealthy col-
lectors and  pompous ex-
perts."

"The counterfeiter's  typ-
ical victim is an inexperi-
enced  colletor."

37

John  Henry  Merryman

gullible  public  at  prices  as  high  as  $3000.  Such  works,  usually
promoted  as 'good  investments', in fact  have no secondary  market.
Dealers don't  want them and auction  houses refuse  to accept them.
No  one  with  even  a  slight  familiarity  with  the  art  world,  and
certainly  no 'wealthy  collector'  or 'expert', would  touch  them. Still,
until state and federal  authorities began to investigate and prosecute
these  clearly  fraudulent  enterprises  in  the  late  1980s,  the  amount
spent  by the uninformed  public on  fake  Dali  prints was in the tens
of millions of dollars a year.43

Dealers  are  another  villain  in  the  counterfeiter's  apologia.  Thus

Tom Keating:

As well  as  the  old  masters,  I  had  also  made  a  close  study  of
the  lives  and  work  of  the  French  Impressionists.  It  seemed
disgraceful  to  me how  many  of  them  had  died  in poverty. All
their lives they had  been exploited  by unscrupulous dealers and
then,  as  if  to  dishonour  their  memory,  these  same  dealers
continued  to  exploit  them  in  death.  I  was  determined  to  do
what I could  to avenge my brothers and  it was to this end  that
I decided  to turn  my hand  to Sexton  Blaking.44

The notion  that  faking  is justified  as revenge on dealers or  restorers
is difficult  to take seriously. Though  the accusation  that dealers are
exploiters  is  congenial  folklore  among  unsuccessful  artists,  it  lies
uneasily  in  the  mouth  of  an  exploitative  (exploiting  the  credulous
and  the gullible among  the art  public) counterfeiter.  Even if it were
true  that  the  Impressionists  died  poor  (they  didn't),  what  dealer
living  today  was  in  any  way  responsible?  In  the  contemporary  art
world, where some artists in their 30s are multimillionaires and have
'retrospective' exhibitions  in major  museums, often  as the result of
diligent  and  skilful  promotion  by  dealers,  the  characterization  of
dealers as exploiters of artists loses all meaning. Dealers would  not,
in any case, be the principal victims of Mr. Keating's revenge, which
would  instead  be borne  by the  innocent  art-buying  public.  Finally,
what  possible  benefit  is  there  to  the  dead  artist,  or  his  heirs,  in
counterfeiting  his  work?  How  does  misrepresenting  the  artist  by
making and circulating fakes accomplish anything beneficial  to him?
As shown  earlier,  fakes  hurt  the artist's  reputation.

Mr.  Keating's  book  also contains  this effort  by a  supporter:

Some people might argue  that  to work  in another  artist's style
automatically precludes originality or 'inspiration'.  But they do
so at their peril, for  the history of art is a history of borrowings
and  adaptations.  All  artists  lean  on  the  experience  and  achie-
vements of others and the work of different  artists is often  hard
to  tell  apart,  even  when  there  has  been  no conscious  effort  to
deceive...  The  word  'fake'  sets  up  highly  derogatory  vibra-
tions...  In  fact,  to  be  a  successful  'Sexton  Blaker'  you  must

"The  notion  that  faking
is justified  as revenge on
dealers  or  restorers is
difficult  to  take
seriously."

"How  does  misrep-
resenting  the  artist  by
making  and  circulating
fakes  accomplish  any-
thing beneficial  to him?"

38

Counterfeit  Art

have a technical facility which equals or nearly equals that of the
artist  you  are  copying;  moreover,  you  must  have  the  spiritual
sensitivity  to  assimilate,  and  to  some extent  share, his inspira-
tion. In other words, you must be an artist...  We allow [artists]
to stand,  as it were, outside society and  its mores. Now, if you
have  followed  my  argument  that  picture  fakers  are  artists, in
spite of  the negative connotation  of the word  'fake',  it  follows
that  they  too  stand  outside  society  and  should  not  be judged
by conventional  standards. Tom  Keating  is  ...  an  artist.45

There  are  several  interesting  fallacies  here.  First,  as  to  originality,
all  would  agree  that  artists  are  influenced  by  the  work  of  other
artists  and  that  the  history  of  art  informs  what  schooled  artists
produce  today. That,  however,  is true in all creative fields, whether
literature, music, dance, mathematics or theoretical  physics. But we
easily distinguish  the kind of 'influence'  Manet had on Picasso  from
his  'influence'  on  someone  who  fakes  his  work.  No  one  would
mistake Picasso's variations on  Manet's  Dejeuner sur Vherbe for  the
original,  or  any  other,  work  by  Manet.  The  more  an  artist's  work
truly  resembles,  and  is  accordingly  difficult  to  distinguish  from,
another's, the less interesting it is likely to be. The artist who survives
as a figure  in art  history does so on  the basis of his own distinctive
contribution,  not  on  the  similarity  of  his  works  to  those  of  other
artists.

A  related  assumption,  about  craft  as  the  measure  of  artistic
excellence, further  mars  the Keating  apologia.  Some degree  of skill
in  the  mechanics  of  drawing  and  in  handling  the  materials  of
painting or sculpture is necesssary for  the creation of visual art, just
as  vocabulary,  grammar  and  syntax  are  the  basic  equipment  of  a
writer.  To  be  a  competent  grammarian,  however,  does  not  make
one's  writing  literature.  So with  art;  craft  may  be  necessary,  but  it
is not sufficient.  Originality of conception  and of style, medium and
format,  plus  the  accumulation  of  a  body  of  highly  regarded  work,
are  the  marks  of  artistic  greatness  today.  The  related  assumptions
that  copying  is 'as  good  as'  creating  and  that  craft  is  the  mark  of
artistic  merit  merely  restate  the  van  Meegeren  Problem  in  slightly
different  form.  A painter  who accurately  copies a work  by  Matisse
has  no  more  shown  that  he  is  a  great  artist  than  a  writer  who
accurately  copies  Hamlet  has  shown  that  he  is  a  great  dramatist.
Faking  —  producing  a work  of  the sort  that  the  great  artist  might
have made  —  is a step above  mere copying,  but  it still  is imitation,
an  exercise  in  mere  craft.  We  respect  the  creative  act,  not  the
emulative  act.  The  confusion  about  craft  and  artistic  quality  is
illustrated  by  the  stock  figure  of  the  viewer  standing  in  front  of  a
minimalist  painting  by,  say,  Ellsworth  Kelly  who  says:  'My  kid
could  do that'.  A good  answer  is: 'After  the artist  showed  her what
to do, perhaps; before,  very unlikely'. Keating's fluency  in imitating
the work  of great  artists does not  make  him  great.

"The  more  an  artist's
work  truly  resembles  ...
another's,  theJless  inter-
esting  it  is likely  to be."

"To  be a  competent
grammarian  ...  does not
make one's  writing  liter-
ature.  So with  art;  craft
may  be  necessary,  but  it
is not  sufficient  ...  A
painter  who  accurately
copies a work  by  Ma-
tisse has no more shown
that  he is a  great  artist
than  a  writer  who  accu-
rately copies Hamlet  has
shown  that  he is a  great
dramatist."

39

John  Henry  Merryman

The  Keating  apologia  contains  another  idea,  that  artists  'stand
outside society and its mores' and 'should  not be judged  by conven-
tional standards'. There is of course a substantial history of thought
and  a body  of literature46 supporting  the idea  that  the rules should
be bent to permit the expression of genius. The same notion is palely
reflected  in the constitutional doctrine that otherwise obscene works
of  art  may  not  be  legally  repressed  if  they  have  'serious  artistic
value'.47  But  the  idea  behind  such  attitudes  is  that  'conventional
standards'  may  repress  creativity.  To use  such  reasoning  to  excuse
counterfeiters,  whose  work  is the  antithesis  of creativity,  would  be
perverse.

The motives  of art  counterfeiters  are sometimes complex. Vanity
may be a prominent  element, as Keating's and  Stein's flamboyance
shows. Joseph  Alsop writes  that:

[TJalented  art  fakers  are  seldom  content  with  money  alone.
When  their  works  succeed,  and  all  the  world  of  art  says  their
works are great, art  fakers  then  tend  to hanker  for  recognition
as great  themselves.48

Even  successful  artists may  become counterfeiters  out  of a  kind  of
vanity: Ernst Ludwig Kirchner predated some of his works, perhaps
to promote his position in history as an artistic innovator.49 Giorgio
De Chirico also predated  paintings and  may be the only artist  ever
judicially  found  to have counterfeited  his own work, but in his case
the motive seems to have been profit;  his early surrealist works had
a much stronger market than his later versions of similar subjects  —
a 1916 Piazza d'llalia was worth a great deal more than one painted
three  decades  later.  De  Chirico  was also  found  to  have  committed
what might be called 'reverse counterfeiting'  by declaring an authen-
tic work  to  be  false  (the  court,  relying on  the  testimony  of  experts
in preference  to the painter's  own  testimony,  found  the work genu-
ine).50 Other major  contemporary  artists are commonly  believed by
knowledgable people in the art world  to have pre-dated  later works
done  in  their  own  earlier  styles  to  cash  in  on  the  higher  market
value their earlier  works  command.

The principal  motive of art  counterfeiters,  in  fact,  is profit.  That
is as true of the Rockefeller  Collection51 as it is of de Hory, Keating,
Stein  and  van  Meegeren.  Other  motives  — revenge  on  society,
exposing  the  gullibility  of  experts  and  the  vanity  of  collectors,
protesting  against  the  commodification  of  art,  making  great  art
available  to  a  wider  public,  etc.  — are  at  best  secondary  motives
and  at  worst  disingenuous  rationalizations.  Art counterfeiting,  like
counterfeiting  of other kinds, offers  the opportunity  for easy  profits
and  is for  this reason  attractive.

If we examine  the various motives which may induce a person
to  make  artistic  counterfeits,  the  most  frequent  and  powerful

40

"Giorgio  de Chirico  ...
may  be  the only  artist
ever judicially  found  to
have counterfeited  his
own  work  ..."

"The principal motive of
art  counterfeiters  ...  is
profit."

"Some readers  ... will be
sobered  by  considering
the opinion  of Judge
Fein  in  State  v Wright
Hepburn  Webster Gal-
lery Ltd."

Counterfeit  Art

is,  no doubt,  the  hope  of financial reward  ...  even  the earliest
art  forgeries  known  to  us, those  of  ancient  Rome, were  made
with an  eye to financial gain.52

The secondary  motives  and  rationalizations  serve two purposes: as
self-justifications  and  self-image  builders  for  counterfeiters,  and  to
divert  attention  from  the  social  and  cultural  mischief  counterfeits
do.

The  'Forgeries  By  Stein'  Case

Some readers will have grown  impatient with this exposition. Why,
they  inquire,  should  so  much  effort  be  spent  to  refute  arguments
that are so transparently specious? They will be sobered by consider-
ing  the  opinion  of  Judge  Fein  in  State  v  Wright Hepburn  Webster
Gallery,  Ltd5i The case was an  attempt  by the New York  Attorney-
General  to  enjoin  the  sale  of  counterfeit  paintings  made  by  David
Stein.54  Stein  had  been  convicted  of  'counterfeiting  art  work  and
grand  larceny'  and  had  served  time  in  New  York.  Deported  to
France, he was convicted  and  imprisoned  for  selling art forgeries in
that  country.  While  in  prison  he  was  permitted  by  the  French
authorities  to continue  to produce paintings in the style of Chagall,
Matisse,  Picasso,  Braque  and  others,  provided  that  they  bore  his
own signature. A number  of those works were exhibited  for  sale by
defendant  gallery,  which  advertised  them  as  'Forgeries  By  Stein'.
The court rejected  the Attorney-General's  application  in an opinion
by Judge  Fein  that  includes the  following  statements:

Stein  ...  mastered  the  styles  of  such  great  artists  as  Chagall,
Picasso, Matisse, Braque, Klee, Miro, Cocteau  and  Rouault...
The court  is asked  to  [prevent]  this man  from  earning  a liveli-
hood  by utilizing his peculiar and unusual  talents. It cannot be
disputed  that  whatever  Stein's  motives,  he  is  an  artist...  His
work  in  perfecting  the  style  of  the  masters  may  properly  be
ascribed  to  that  special  talent  with  which  true  artists  are  un-
iquely endowed... In this context, perhaps consideration  should
be  given  to  Goethe's  query:  'People  are  always  talking  about
originality;  but  what  do  they  mean?  As  soon  as  we  are  born
the  world  begins  to  work  upon  us,  and  keeps  on  to  the  end.
What can we call ours, except energy, strength, will? If I could
give  an  account  of  what  I  owe  to  great  predecessors  and
contemporaries,  there  would  be  but  a  small  remainder'...  It
must be seriously doubted  whether the court, at the instance of
the State, should prevent conscious appropriation of knowledge
where no deception  of  the public is proven.

Perhaps  the  defendant  art  gallery  had  an  unusually  clever  and
persuasive  lawyer,  and  perhaps  the  Attorney-General's  case  was

41

"...  we find the judge
equating  simulation
with  creation  and  craft
with  artistic  excellence
...  The opion  exudes ad-
miration  for  the  coun-
terfeiter."

"There is something sim-
ple-minded  about  the
idea that counterfeits  are
harmless  if  they  do  not
bear  forged  signatures,
when  it  is not  the
authenticity of the signa-
ture  that  is in  question.
The  problem  is with  the
work  itself  ...."

John  Henry  Merryman

poorly presented. Judge Fein may have read and been carried  away
by  some  of  the  sentimental  literature  about  art  fakers.  We do  not
know  the  reasons,  but  this  is  the  only  published  US  decision  to
discuss  the  topic,  and  in  it  we  find  the judge  equating  simulation
with  creation  and  craft  with  artistic  excellence.  He  describes  Stein
as  having  'mastered'  and  'perfected'  the  styles  of  great  artists  and
as  having  'that  special  talent  with  which  true  artists  are  uniquely
endowed'. The opinion exudes admiration  for the counterfeiter.  The
mischief  these counterfeits  might  do  is brushed  aside  in the judge's
eagerness  to  protect  Stein's  right  to  'earn  a  living  by  utilizing  his
peculiar  and  unusual  talents'.

Judge  Fein  repeatedly  emphasized  that  the paintings  in  question,
though  intended  and  advertised  as  'forgeries'  of  Matisse,  Picasso
and  others,  did  not  bear  the  forged  signatures  of  those  artists  but
were instead initialed  'D.S.' The Attorney-General  argued  that these
initials  could  easily  be  replaced  by  forged  signatures  and  that  the
painting itself was the offending  object, since it could deceive incau-
tious and  inexperienced  collectors. Judge  Fein  responded:

However  fraudulent  or  criminal  his  past  transgressions  have
been,  they  cannot  militate  against  Stein's  right  as  an  artist  to
sell  his  own  works,  acknowledged  as  such...  The  signature  of
Stein on these paintings establishes there is no forgery...  Neither
this advertising  [the exhibition  was advertised  as 'Forgeries By
Stein'] nor  the possibility  or suspicion  that in the future  some-
one  may  remove  Stein's  name  and  substitute  the  name  or
signature  of one of the masters  is a  sufficient  basis  for finding
that  the  exhibition  and  sale  of  these  paintings  is  a  public
nuisance.55

In  a way, Judge  Fein's  statement  is another  expression  of  the  van
Meegeren  Problem.  There  is  something  simple-minded  about  the
idea  that  counterfeits  are  harmless  if  they  do  not  bear  forged
signatures, when it is not the authenticity  of the signature  that  is in
question.  The  problem  is with  the  work  itself;  whether  or  not  the
object  is  authentic  is  the  crucial  question.  Judge  Fein's  reasoning
would,  if  extended,  allow  counterfeit  $100  bills  to  circulate  if  the
counterfeiter  signed  them  with  her  own  name,  rather  than  that  of
the  Treasurer  of  the  United  States.  Forgery  of  signatures  is  only
one  form  of  counterfeiting,  and  we  have a  developed  body  of  law
to  deal  with  that.  Forgery  of  artists'  images  and  styles  to  produce
works that can pass as authentic is a different  and more troublesome
kind  of activity.  Like the  French, who allowed  Stein  to continue  to
produce  counterfeit  Matisses  while  in  prison  so  long  as  he  signed
them with  his own  name, Judge  Fein's attention  was diverted  from
the  question  of  counterfeit  art,  which  is  legally  novel  and  socially
interesting,  to  the  authenticity  of  signatures,  which  is familiar  and
of dubious  relevance.

42

"Counterfeit  works of
art  abound  ...  It is often
said  that  of  the  2,000
works  painted  by  Corot
in  his lifetime,  6,000  arc
in  the  United  States
alone."

"The art world is riddled
with imitations that vary
widely  in  two  important
particulars: (1) the inten-
tions of  those  who  pro-
duced  then  and  (2) the
ease with which they can
pass, or be made to pass,
as authentic."

Counterfeit  Art

The Ubiquity  Of Counterfeits:  A Taxonomy

Counterfeit  works of art  abound.  Their  extent  obviously cannot be
accurately  measured,  but  the  tendency  among  those  unfamiliar
with  the  art  market  is  to  underestimate  it.  Thomas  Hoving,  the
flamboyant  former  Director  of the  Metropolitan  Museum,  'estima-
tes  that  40  per  cent  of  the  art  on  the  market  today,  with  the
exception  of contemporary  works, is fake'.56  Consider  one  painter,
Ingres,  of  whom  'A  Paris  connoisseur  complained:  "In  a  single
month  I  have  been  shown  at  least  three  times  as  many  works  as
Ingres  can  possibly  have  painted.'"57  Corot  has  been  a  particular
victim  of  counterfeiters.  It  is  often  said  that  of  the  2,000  works
painted by Corot in his lifetime, 6,000 are in the United States alone.
Schiiller  reports  that  'No  less than  235 "Corots"  were exported  to
France  in  1888  from  a  single  Brussels  workshop'  and  'The  Berlin
art dealer Paul Cassirer reports that after  the war some two hundred
"Corots" were offered  him by soldiers on leave'.58 'A Dr. Jousseaune
boasted  of possessing between  two and  three thousand  drawings by
the master without  ever having  paid  more than  110 francs  each  for
them.'59  Utrillo's  market  is notoriously  fake-ridden:

The  Parisian  post-impressionist  master,  who  died  in  1955,
painted 2,000 works but there is growing evidence that as many
as 20,000 certificates  of authenticity  of Utrillo works have been
granted  [by French experts].60

There  are  thousands  of  fake  Rodin  sculptures  and  drawings.  The
number  of  counterfeit  'fine  prints'  is  of  course  much  larger;  one
company alone, Magui Publishers Inc., has been accused of produc-
ing at  least  22,000 of them  -  mostly counterfeit  Dalis.61

The  art  world  is riddled  with  imitations  that  vary  widely  in two
important  particulars:  (1)  the  intentions  of  those  who  produced
them and (2) the ease with which they can pass, or be made to pass,
as authentic. At one extreme are poster-quality  color  reproductions
of  paintings  of  the  kind  that  museum  and  other  bookstores  com-
monly sell. They are produced without guile and could  not be taken
by  a  reasonably  alert  person  to  be  originals.  They  are  harmless
reproductions.  At  the  opposite  extreme  are  works  made  with  the
intent  to  deceive  that  look  enough  like  the  real  thing  to  pass
inspection  by any but  the most expert and  skeptical  dealer,  curator
or collector.62  Between the extremes are a number of varieties. Here
are some typical  examples.

Photomechanical  Reproductions
There  is a substantial  industry  in making and  selling  reproductions
of  works  of  art  and  other  cultural  objects.  Most  commonly  the
reproduction  is  in  a  different  medium  on  a  different  support  than

43

"The  increasing  market
value of authentic  prints
by important  artists  has
naturally  led  to wide-
spread  production  of
this  kind  of  counterfeit
of prints  by, for  exam-
ple,  Picasso,  Miro  and
Chagall."

John  Henry  Merryman

the original  —  oil paintings on canvas are photomechanically repro-
duced  as  color  printing  on  paper,  for  example  — and  create  no
problem.  Such  reproductions  are  clearly  and  indelibly  distinguish-
able  from  the  originals.  Even  so,  unscrupulous  people  can  frame
and  offer  such reproductions as 'fine  prints', with or without  added
signatures and limited edition numbers, and some extremely gullible
people will pay 'fine  print'  prices for  them. The purchaser  need  not
be so gullible to be taken  in by a photomechanical  reproduction  of
a  work  that,  in  the  original,  is  itself  a  'fine  print',  since  both  are
made  by  printing  on  paper.  Since  prints  are  issued  in  multiple
form, a photomechanical  reproduction  with a forged  or  reproduced
signature  and  edition  number  cannot  easily  be  distinguished  from
an example from  the authentic edition. The increasing market value
of  authentic  prints  by  important  artists  has  naturally  led  to  wide-
spread  production  of  this  kind  of  counterfeit  of  prints  by,  for
example, Picasso, Miro and  Chagall.63

Exact  Reproductions

Some reproductions  emulate the original  not  only in the image but
in  the  medium.  Reproductions  on  paper  of  works  on  paper,  such
as  the  reproductions  of  Picasso,  Miro  and  Chagall  prints just  dis-
cussed, are one variety. Here are some others:

When is a fake not a fake? The answer, to the growing profit of
a number of market-wise artists and dealers, is when everybody
knows  it's  a  fake...  Daniel  Delamare,  a  34-year  old  Parisian,
decided  to open an entire gallery devoted  to exacting reproduc-
tions  of  the  great  masterpieces...  Delamare  has  already  sold
140 'legitimate copies', as he prefers  to call them...  Everything
down  to  the  size  and  the  frame  style  is  a  duplicate  of  the
original:  Delamare  interviewed  hundreds  of  artists  across
Europe  to  find  painters  who  could  not  only  produce  faithful
copies  but  who  would  also  be  able  to  retain  the  spirit  and
vitality  of the  original...
In an attempt to remove any residual taint of impropriety about
the  business  ...  Delamare  negotiates  directly  with  the  owners
of private collections  and  with  national  museums for  the  right
to  copy  specific  masterpieces  complete  with  authentic  signa-
ture...  The  price:  About  $10,000  to  $15,000,  more  for  larger
than  normal  works...  The  canvas  is  stamped  with  the  word
COPY  in large letters on  the  back.64

"Exotic  as it may  seem
to  some  ...  this  enter-
prise  is far  from
unique."

Exotic  as  it  may  seem  to  some  (what  may  seem  exotic  is not  that
there is a market for  such works, which meet a demand  for decorat-
ive  objects  of  certified  good  taste,  but  that  their  open  production
and  marketing  with  'authentic'  signatures  and  other  assurances  of
indistinguishability from  the originals is tolerated: the van Meegeren

44

Counterfeit  Art

Problem again.), this enterprise is far  from  unique. There are opera-
tions comparable to that of Mr. Delamare in Cremona, Italy, where
something calling itself the 'Museo dell'immaginario'  openly produ-
ces and  markets  copies  of  paintings  with  forged  signatures;65  Chi-
cago,  where  the  candidly  self-denominated  Forgery  of  the  Month,
Inc., once thrived;66  and  New York, where The  Rockefeller  Collec-
tion,  established  during  former  Governor  Nelson  Rockefeller's  life
to  sell  replicas  of works  in  his  personal  art  collection,  survived  his
death and, in the 1980s, maintained a boutique on 57th Street in New
York and  sold  through  the mail with widely distributed  catalogs. It
is a highly  visible example of  the practice  of publishing  and  selling
objects that are promoted as exact reproductions and that sometimes
include  signatures  and,  in  the  case  of  fine  prints,  numbers.  The
practice with reproductions  of sculptures is even more questionable.
Thus  Rodin's  Age  of  Bronze  is  offered  in  a  Nelson  Rockefeller
Collection catalog in a 'limited edition of 150 individually numbered
pieces'  and  another  Rodin,  Torso of  Adele, -in  a  'numbered  First
Edition limited to 250 pieces'.67 A bronze  Torso by Gaston  Lachaise
is  offered  in  'A  numbered  First  Edition  limited  to  350  pieces'.
First Editiorfi.  And  in  describing  a  replica  of  a  nineteenth  century
American  hand-carved  wood fish, the catalog states: 'To match  the
color  and  texture  of  the original, old  wood  has been  used'.68

Even museums enter the exact reproduction  business. In  1986 the
Palace  Museum  in  Beijing  began  selling  exact  reproductions  of
ancient  Chinese bronzes 'to  the exact scale of the originals  ...  using
alloys  of  the  same  metallurgical  composition  as  the  originals'.69
The  Museum  Store Association,  an  American  group, would  clearly
disapprove  such  a project.  Its Code of Ethics provides:

Their  [reproductions,  replicas  and  derived  products]  sale  in
museum  stores must  be carefully  regulated  because of the ease
with  which  they  may  be  misperceived  by  the  public...  All
reproductions and  replicas must be clearly and indelibly identi-
fied as such.  Advertising  which  implies  that  reproductions  are
in  fact  original  works  is  unethical,  misleading  and  in  some
instances  illegal.  Likewise  any  representation  which  suggests
that  the value of a reproduction  appreciates  is unacceptable.™

Though exact reproductions  are seldom truly exact in the sense that
a qualified  expert could not distinguish them, many are close enough
to  mislead  the  art-buying  and  art-viewing  public.  The  problem  is
particularly  acute with  bronze sculptures, whether casts made  from
the  original  models  or  molds  or  surmoulages  made  from  prior
casts.71

Study  Copies

Student  artists learn  by copying  the works of masters. The practice
is time-honored and the motivation benign. Still, the resulting copies,

45

"Even  museums  enter
the exact  reproduction
business."

John  Henry  Merryman

"The  more  persuasive
the copy  the greater  the
possibility  of  confusion
and  ease of  misuse."

if accurate, can  create confusion  and  invite  misrepresentation.  The
more  persuasive  the  copy  the  greater  the  possibility  of  confusion
and  ease of misuse. Museums  typically  impose  restrictions  on cop-
iers  — such  as  requiring  that  the  copy  be  significantly  larger  or
smaller than the original  —  in order to limit the trouble such copies
can  make.

Style Studies
Student  artists  also  frequently  learn  by  making  works  in  the  style
of admired masters. Thus, before he developed his own style, Arshile
Gorky  studiously  emulated  the  styles  of  Cezanne  and  Braque,
among  others,  producing  works  that  could  plausibly  have  been
attributed  to  them.72  Gorky  signed  these  works,  and  the  standard
catalog  raisonee  of  his  paintings  clearly  illustrates  and  identifies
them,  so  that  the  danger  that  they  will  successfully  pass  as  works
by Cezanne or Braque is reduced. There is a substantial  market  for
works  by  Gorky,  even  those  from  the  time  when  he  worked  in
others'  styles, which  tends  to  protect  their  identity  as  Gorkys.  But
where  the  student  is  not  herself  a  famous,  well-documented  artist
the  style  studies  she  produces  can,  if  well  made,  pass  as  works  by
the  master.  The  student  may  have  no  intention  to  deceive,  but  to
potential victims a skillful  style study is as misleading as a deliberate
fake.

Simulationist  Art
In  the  1980s  a  group  of  artists  variously  called  'simulationists'  or
'appropriators' thrived in New York.73 The best-known of them are
Mike  Bidlo, Sherry  Levine and  Elaine Sturtevant.  Bidlo had  a one-
man show at the Leo Castelli Gallery, until then the most  respected
of  contemporary  art  galleries,  in  1988. He  copies  works  by  other
artists, in the original dimensions and  media. Bidlo's works are not
interpretations or variations on themes; they are copies. The Castelli
show,  entitled  'Picasso's  Women',  consisted  of  copies  of  Picasso's
paintings  of women,  including  the  Demoiselles  d'Avignon.  Many  of
them  sold,  at  substantial  prices,  to  people  who  knew  they  were
buying  copies.  Sherrie  Levine  has  made  exact  reproductions  of
photographs  by  Walker  Evans  and  other  famous  photographers.
Elaine  Sturtevant  makes exact copies of drawings  and  paintings by
Jasper Johns, Roy Lichtenstein,  Frank  Stella, Claes Oldenburg and
Andy Warhol.74

Although their explanations of why what they do has independent
artistic  value  may  seem  abstruse75  and,  to  some,  disingenuous,76
these  artists'  intentions  with  respect  to  the  physical  objects  they
produce  are clear. Thus  Elaine  Sturtevant:

Leo: ...  [you] then  proceeded  to  try  to  do  paintings  by Jasper
or others. I think  it was as faithfully  as you could  do it?

"...  to  potential  victims
a skillful  style study is as
misleading  as  a  deliber-
ate  fake."

"...  their explanations of
why  what  they  do  has
independent  artistic
value may seem  abstruse
and,  to some, disingenu-
ous  ..."

46

Counterfeit  Art

Elaine:  Yes, as close as you  could.
Leo: The idea  was to do  them  as perfectly  as possible.
Elaine:  As exactly  as possible.
Leo: So  that  they  would  be  really,  if  you  didn't  know,  if you
looked  at  them  as  close  as  possible,  that  this  was  a  work  by
Oldenburg  or Jasper Johns  or Andy  Warhol.
Elaine: Yes.77

We can assume that when Sturtevant copies a Jasper Johns painting
she  intends  to  engage  in  a  significant  and  independent  process  of
making  art,  rather  than  merely  feeding  off  of  the  reputation  and
achievement  of a great artist.  It is clear, however, that  these profes-
sionally  produced  copies can  do  the same mischief  as expert copies
made with  the intent  to deceive. The difference  in intention  may be
real, but  it is not  visible to the viewer. One is reminded  of  Borges's
Pierre  Menard:

It  is  a  revelation  to  compare  Menard's  Don  Quixote  with
Cervantes'. The latter,  for  example, wrote:
'...truth,  whose  mother  is history,  rival  of  time, depository  of
deeds, witness of the past, exemplar and adviser to the present,
and  the  future's  counselor'.
Written  in  the  seventeenth  century,  written  by  the  'lay  genius'
Cervantes,  this enumeration  is a  mere  rhetorical  praise  of his-
tory.  Menard,  on  the other  hand, writes:
'...truth,  whose  mother  is history,  rival  of  time, depository  of
deeds, witness of the past, exemplar and adviser to the present,
and  the future's  counselor'.
The contrast  in style is vivid.78

The  Social  Response  To  Counterfeit  Art

We have  seen  one  side  of  the  social  response  to  counterfeit  art  in
the popular  tendency to glorify  fakers, caricature victims and ignore
the  bad  that  good  counterfeits  do.  Police,  prosecutors, jurors  and,
as shown  in  the 'Forgeries  by Stein' case,79 judges, share  this  tend-
ency.  This  gives  law enforcement  against  art  counterfeiting  an  un-
usually  casual  and  uninformed  character.  Success  in protecting  the
social and cultural  interests subverted  by counterfeit  art  depends at
bottom  on  public  recognition  of  what  those  interests  are  and  how
counterfeits  impair them. A better educated  art public might be less
romantic  about  counterfeiters  and  less easily  taken  in  by  the  more
obvious  forms  of  counterfeit  art.  It  should  also  more  effectively
enforce  the law against  art  counterfeiters,  to which  we now  turn.

The  Law
The  other  part  of  the  social  response  to cultural  counterfeiting  art
lies in the law to be applied against offenders.  Here realism counsels

47

"...  the  popular  tend-
ency  to  glorify  fakers,
caricature  victims  and
ignore  the  bad  that
counterfeits  do  ...  gives
law enforcement  against
art counterfeiting  an  un-
sually casual  and
uninformed  character."

"...  the most  carefully
designed  legal  effort  to
deal  with  the  counterfeit
problem will have only a
limited  impact."

John  Henry  Merryman

modest  aspirations;  the most carefully  designed  legal effort  to deal
with  the counterfeit  problem  will have only a limited  impact. There
is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  law  can  be  more  effective  at
eliminating  counterfeit  cultural  objects  than  it  is in eliminating  the
other  kinds  of  fraud  that  thrive  despite  widespread  public  disap-
proval  and clearly applicable criminal  provisions. There is, in addi-
tion, the danger that intrusive legal measures in the hands of zealous
police,  lawyers, judges  and juries  unfamiliar  with  the  territory  will
chill  artistic  creativity  and  impair  the  delicate  ecology  of  the  art
world. Within  the area  in which law can effectively  and  responsibly
deal  with  counterfeits,  however,  there  may  be  a  small  space  for
improvement.

Suppose  that  public  attitudes  toward  counterfeiters  change  and
the  problem  is  taken  seriously.  How  responsive  are  the  applicable
legal provisions?80  Looking first at  the criminal  law, three  kinds of
existing  statutes  might  apply:  criminal  simulation,  false  pretences
and  forgery.  A fourth  kind  of  statute,  found  in  the  laws  punishing
counterfeiters  of  US  securities,  coins  and  stamps  and  protecting
commercial goods against counterfeits, may also apply by analogy.81

Criminal  simulation
Model Penal Code s224.2, entitled  'Simulating Objects of Antiquity,
Rarity,  Etc.', provides:

A person  commits  a misdemeanor  if,  with  purpose  to  defraud
anyone  or  with  knowledge  that  he is facilitating  a fraud  to  be
perpetrated  by anyone, he makes, alters or utters any object so
that it appears to have value because of antiquity, rarity, source,
or authorship  which it does not  possess.82

Such  a  statute  is directly  and  specifically  applicable  to  counterfeit
cultural  objects  and  indeed  appears  to  have  been  drafted  to  deal
with  that  problem.83

False pretenses or  theft  by deception
One  who  makes  or  sells  counterfeit  cultural  objects  might  also
violate 'theft by deception' statutes. For example, Model Penal Code
s223.3 provides:

A person  is guilty  of  theft  if he purposely  obtains  property  of
another  by  deception.  A  person  deceives  if  he  purposely:  (1)
creates or reinforces  a false  impression,  including  false impres-
sions as to law, value, intention  or other  state of mind.

It  seems  clear  that  such  a  statute  could  reasonably  be  interpreted
to  apply  to  one  who  purposely  creates  a  false  impression  of  the
authenticity  of a work  of art  or other  cultural  object.

48

Counterfeit  Art

Forgery
The  Model  Penal  Code  defines  the  offense  of  forgery  in  Section
224.1 as  follows:

A  person  is  guilty  of  forgery  if,  with  purpose  to  defraud  or
injure  anyone, or with  knowledge that  he .is facilitating  a  fraud
or  injury  to be perpetrated  by anyone, the  actor:
(a)  alters any writing  of another  without  his authority;  or
(b)  makes, completes,  executes,  authenticates,  issues or  trans-
fers any writing so that it purports  to be the act of another
who  did  not  authorize  that  act,  or  to  have  been  executed
at  a  time  or  place  or  in  a  numbered  sequence  other  than
was  in.fact  the  case,  or  to  be  a copy  of  an  original  when
no such  original  existed; or

(c)  utters any writing which he knows to be forged  in a manner

specified  in paragraphs  (a) or (b).

'Writing'  includes  printing  or  any  other  method  of  recording
information.

Whether  a  work  of  art  would  qualify  as  a  'writing'  within  the
meaning  of  this  provision  is  not  clear.  The  drafters  of  the  Code
intended  that  the criminal  simulation  statute  set out  above (Model
Penal  Code  Section  224.2)  apply  to  forgery-like  offences  in  which
the  object  forged  could  not  qualify  as  a  writing.84  Still,  painting
and  sculpting  are  'method[s]  of  recording  information'.  Forging
another's  signature  to  a  work  should  of  course  clearly  qualify  as
forgery,  but  the  interesting  question  is  whether  the  work  itself,
without  a forged  signature, could  be so considered.85

Observe  how  the  offenses  are  graded  in  the  three  statutes.  The
Model  Penal  Code's  criminal  simulation  provision,  intended  to
apply  to  counterfeit  cultural  objects,  makes  the, offense  a  misde-
meanor,  without  reference  to  the  amount  or  value  involved.  Theft
by deception  is 'a  felony  of the third  degree if the amount  involved
exceeds $500...' and is otherwise a misdemeanor.  Most forgeries are
felonies. In short, counterfeiting  the culture is treated  as less socially
harmful  than  theft  by  deception  (over  $500)  and  most  kinds  of
forgery.  If  monetary  loss  is an  appropriate  measure,  it seems clear
that  counterfeit  art  often,  indeed  almost  always,  is  sold  for  more
than  $500. If we look  instead  to  some  broader  measure  of  relative
social harm, surely a successful  counterfeit  Monet painting or a fake
Matisse drawing is a greater offender  than many forged  commercial
instruments.  This  relative  trivialization  of  fhe  offense  of  cultural
counterfeiting  is  further  evidence  that  'the  bad  good  counterfeits
do'86 is generally  underestimated,  another  manifestation  of the van
Meegeren  Problem.

The Element  of  Intent
Each  of  the  three  statutes  includes  the  element  of  intent:  that  the
defendant  be  shown  to  have  had  the  intent  to  deceive  or  defraud.

49

"...  counterfeiting  the
culture  is treated  as less
socially  harmful  than
theft  by deception  (over
$500) and  most  kinds of
forgery."

"...  surely  a  successful
counterfeit  Monet
painting  or  a  fake  Ma-
tisse drawing is a greater
offender  than  many
forged  commercial  in-
struments."

John  Henry  Merryman

Absent  such blackness of heart,  the defendant  would  have commit-
ted  none  of  the  three  crimes.  Thus  a  van  Meegeren  could  make
excellent Vermeers without incurring criminal  liability so long as he
could  not  be  shown  to  intend  to  use  them  to  deceive  or  defraud
others.

Direct  proof  of  intent  to deceive  or  defraud  is difficult  to estab-
lish.87  It  can  be strongly  inferred  if the counterfeiter,  who  presum-
ably  knows  that  the  work  is  a  counterfeit,  misrepresents  it  as
authentic.  Intent  may  even  be  inferred  if  one  who  knows  that  the
work  is  not  authentic  sells  it  to  an  innocent  purchaser  without
indicating that  the work is not what it appears to be. To avoid such
inferences the art underworld has developed a standard disingenuous
division  of  labor  and  responsibility,  in  which  the  one  who  makes
the counterfeit  professes  the  innocent  intention  to  make  art  in  the
style of  an  admired  master,  with  no  thought  of deception,  and  the
accomplice who sells the work professes  to have believed  that it was
authentic.  'It  is  easy  for  the  faker  to  claim  he  had  no  knowledge
the  fakes  would  be  sold  as  originals.  It  is  easy  for  the  dealer  to
claim he thought  the works were authentic.'88

Other  facts  that  might  suggest  the  existence  of  fraudulent  intent
would include the use of old materials in making a plausible 'antique'
or a work in the style of an earlier master (contemporary  pigments,
canvas, frames,  etc.), artifically  ageing the work and, of coure, false
signatures, founders'  marks and  other  identifying  matters.  Still, the
accumulation  of such  facts  must  be imposing  in  order  to  establish,
beyond  a reasonable doubt, intent  to deceive or defraud.  By taking
minor precautions counterfeits can insulate themselves against crimi-
nal liability. Further, 'innocent' counterfeits, even though made with
no intent  to deceive or defraud,  pass as easily as 'guilty'  ones in the
art  market.  These  considerations  raise  the  question  whether  the
intent  requirement,  however  plausible  it  may  be  for  other  kinds of
crimes,  makes  sense  when  applied  to  counterfeit  art.  The  obvious
analogy is with the counterfeiting  of money, stamps and commercial
products.

"Federal  ... statutes that
protect  paper  money,
coins and  stamps  pena-
lize  counterfeiting
without  proof  of  intent
to deceive  or  defraud."

Counterfeiting  Money  and  Stamps
Federal  counterfeiting  statutes  that  protect  paper  money,89  coins90
and  stamps91  penalize  counterfeiting  without  proof  of  intent  to
deceive  or  defraud.  Judicial  decisions  confirm  convictions  under
these statutes:  '[T]he mere making  of  an  impression  in  the  likeness
of an obligation or security issued by the United States is a violation
of the statute without  proof  of unlawful  intention.'92

Artists  transcend  limits  and  resist  hardening  of  the  categories,
and  we  should  not  be  surprised  to  find  them  doing  things  that
challenge  such  statutes.  Thus,  in  Wagner  v Simon,93 an  artist  who
had  a  black  and  white  photographic  enlargment  (15 by  36 inches)
made  of  a  $20  bill  changed  the  image  by  (1)  replacing  the  oval

50

Counterfeit  Art

portrait  of  President  Jackson  with  a  portrait  of  President  Nixon;
(2)  replacing  the  words  'Federal  Reserve  Note'  with  the  words
'Inflationary  Note'; (3) replacing the numeral  '20' with  the numeral
'30';  (4)  replacing  the  word  'Twenty'  with  the  word  'Thirty';  (5)
replacing  the  statement,  'This  note  is  legal  tender  for  all  debts,
public  and  private'  with  the  statement,  'This  is legal  tender  for  all
debts, public and private incurred  by President Housing'; (6) replac-
ing the 'Series' date with the date '1973'; and (7) replacing the letter
in  the  Federal  Reserve  seal  with  a  teapot.  Then,  accompanied  by
counsel,  he  went  to  the  office  of  the  United  States  Secret  Service
for  an  opinion  on  the  work's  legality.  The. Secret  Service  Agents
seized it as contraband94  and advised Wagner that possession  of the
facsimile  was a violation  of  federal  counterfeiting  laws95 for  which
he  could  be  arrested,  though  they  did  not  arrest  him.  The  United
States  Attorney  confirmed  this  advice. Wagner  sued  for  the  return
of the seized work and a declaratory judgment  that it did not violate
federal  law.

The artist argued that he had no intent to counterfeit, to which the
court predictably replied that '[I]ntent in causing the reproduction to
be made is not a factor'. To the suggestion that the enlarged, altered,
black and white photograph  was hardly a 'likeness' of a $20 bill the
Court answered: 'Even with the modifications,  it is readily discerni-
ble  that  the  facsimile  is  a  photographic  enlargement  of  an  actual
Federal  Reserve  note.  The  Court  has  no  difficulty  in  finding  and
concluding  that  the  facsimile,  as  modified,  is a  likeness  within  the
meaning and  purview of section 474.'96 Finally, the Court held  that
the  statute  did  not  impair  plaintiffs  freedom  of  expression  under
the  First  Amendment,  finding  that  the  regulation  was  within  the
constitutional  authority  of  Congress,  protected  a  substantial  go-
vernmental  interest  unrelated  to  suppression  of  freedom  of expres-
sion, and the restriction on expression was no greater than necessary
to the furtherance  of that  interest.97

The  Wagner  decision  seems  extreme,  though  not  because  of  the
Court's  position  on  the  First  Amendment  question  or  because  it
found  intent  irrelevant.  What  seems  wrong  is  to  treat  something
that  no  one  could  possibly  mistake  for  a  genuine  $20  bill  as  a
counterfeit  $20  dollar  bill.98  Wagner's  work  was  black  and  white,
one-sided, enormously out of scale, and differed  in important textual
details  from  authentic  bills.  Where  was  the  harm?  Who  could  be
misled? Similar  questions  must  have dominated  the thinking  of the
English Jury  that  acquitted  the American  artist J.S.G.  Boggs of the
charge  of  counterfeiting  British  banknotes.99  Boggs's  drawings  of
banknotes are the same scale and color as the originals but are one-
sided  and  contain  deliberate  variations  in  detail  from  authentic
notes.  The  obverse  bears  his  signature  and  documentation  of  the
transaction  in  which  he  'spent'  the  drawing.100  At  the  trial  in  the
Old  Bailey,  despite  explicit  instructions  from  the judge  calling  for
conviction,  the jury  quickly  returned  a  verdict  of  not  guilty.  The

The artist argued  that he
had  no  intent  to  coun-
terfeit,  to  which  the
court  ...  replied  that
'[I]ntent  in causing  the
reproduction  to be made
is not  a  factor'."

51

John  Henry  Merryman

artist's  attractive  personality  and  evident  sincerity  probably  had
something  to  do  with  the jury's  action,  but  the  basic  difficulty  for
the  prosecution  was  that  Boggs's  drawings  could  not  be  mistaken
for  the real thing.

The  decisions  do  not  explain  why  the  counterfeiting  statutes
dispense with the intent requirement. The statement in Wagner that:
'It  cannot  be disputed  that  the  Government  has  a  very  substantial
interest  in  protecting  its  currency,  stamps  and  obligations  against
counterfeiting  activities'  was  addressed  to  the  First  Amendment
question.  It  is  also,  however,  a  plausible  basis  for  omitting  the
element of intent; the interest in the integrity of money and stamps,
whose  value depends  on  their  authenticity,  is so strong  that  imita-
tions should  be rigorously  prohibited.

The Analogy with Cultural  Objects

If  penal  statutes  aimed  at  counterfeiting  money  and  stamps  can
properly  omit  the element  of intent  to deceive or defraud,  then  the
argument  for  a  similar  approach  to  cultural  counterfeits  becomes
plausible.  Works  of  art,  for  example,  are  analogous  to  money  and
stamps: there is a public interest in their integrity; both  their histor-
ical  and  market  value  depend  on  their  authenticity.101  As  with
counterfeit  money,  the  social  harm  of  counterfeit  art  occurs when
the  false  painting  or  sculpture  or  fine  print  is  taken  for  real  by
another.  The  same  is  true  of  other  cultural  objects;  the  possibility
that the counterfeit,  even if innocently made, will be used to mislead
others makes even innocent works dangerous. If the purpose of the
penal  statute  is to  deter  socially  dangerous  activity,  then  it  should
apply  to  all  counterfeits,  including  those  made  without  intent  to
deceive or  defraud.

Private  Remedies

Cultural objects resemble money and stamps in another way. Unlike
commercial counterfeiting  (fake Apple computers, counterfeit  Gucci
bags),  in  which  producers  (Apple,  Gucci)  are  motivated  to  bring
judicial  actions  to  control  counterfeiters  in  order  to  protect  their
own  interests,  the  only  effective  legal  remedy  for  counterfeiting
works of art  is by way of public action. The cases in which  private
remedies would be used to control art counterfeiting are theoretically
interesting  but  practically  insignificant.  One  is  the  right  of  the
copyright  owner to  prohibit  unauthorized  copying. Its  effectiveness
requires that the work  of art  be copyrighted  (many are not),102 that
the  copyright  period  (life  of  the  artist  plus  fifty  years)  not  have
expired and that the copyright-holder  —  typically the artist  —  know
of the infringement  and  be motivated  to act. It  is also necessary, of
course,  that  the  counterfeit  be,  in  whole  or  in  part,  a  copy  rather

"Works  of art  ...  are
analogous to money and
stamps: there  is a  public
interest  in their integrity;
both  their  historical  and
market  value  depend  on
their  authenticity."

"...  the  only  effective
legal  remedy  for  coun-
terfeiting  works of art  is
by  way of  public
action."

52

Counterfeit  Art

than  a work  'in  the  style of  or  falsely  attributed  to  the  artist  who
made  the original.103

The moral  right,  though  not  as fully  developed  in the US as it is
in  some  European  nations,  might  also  provide  a  private  remedy
against  fakes  and  false  attributions  that  impaired  the artist's  'right
of  paternity'.  The  California  Art  Preservation  Act104  provides  that
'The artist  shall  retain  at all times the right to claim authorship, or,
for just  and  valid  reason,  to disclaim  authorship  of his or her work
of fine art'.  There  is  a  similar  provision  in  the  New  York  Artists'
Authorship  Rights  Act.105  Such  statutes,  although  now  enacted  in
nine states, have yet to provide  the basis for  significant  legal action
by  offended  artists,  and  there  is  general  agreement  that  a  federal
law is needed  to  provide  effective  protection  of the  artist's  right of
paternity.106 Such a law was enacted in late 1990,107 but neither it nor
the surviving (i. e., unpreempted by the federal statute) provisions of
state  laws seem  likely  to  have much  effect  on  the  production  of or
traffic  in  counterfeits.  The  artist  must  be  alive,108  aware  of  the
existence  of  the counterfeit  and  willing  to make  the effort  and  risk
the cost of legal action, a combination  of factors  that will not  often
occur. 109

It  is also  possible  that  the  owner  of  the  original  might,  with  the
aid  of  a  creative  lawyer,  be  able  to  devise  an  unfair  competition-
like cause  of  action  against  one-who  held  out  a  copy  or  a  fake  as
the original, but the probable remedy would be unlikely to encourage
such  an  action  by the  owner.110  Finally,  the buyer  of course  has a
civil  remedy  based  on express  or  implied  warranties  of  authenticity
against  the seller and, ultimately, against the counterfeiter,  if he can
find her and if she is collectible. In practice, the prospect of identify-
ing, locating and  executing an eventual judgment  against  the coun-
terfeiter  will  usually  be  thoroughly  discouraging.111  That  there  are
few reported  examples of such private actions against  counterfeiters
suggests  that  they offer  little promise of an effective  legal remedy.

The Analogy  to Commercial  Counterfeiting
Although  the  analogy  is otherwise  persuasive,  money  and  cultural
objects  differ  in  an  important  practical  way. When  a dealer  offers
a  work  of  art  or  antiquity  he  expects  the  prospective  buyer  to
examine  it  closely,  ask  questions,  take  time  to  deliberate,  do  re-
search,  perhaps  consult  an  expert.  When  the  buyer  pays,  however,
he  does  not  expect  the  seller  to  go  through  a  similar  process  to
establish  that  the  money  paid  is authentic.  People  seldom  examine
money  for  authenticity  unless  it  is 'collectible'  money  —  old coins,
for  example  — as  to  which  buyers  act  much  like  purchasers  of
works  of  art  or  antiques,  for  the  same  reasons.  One  function  of
reliable money is to expedite transactions by making such investiga-
tions  unnecessary.  This  difference  weakens  the  analogy  between
works of art and money and postage stamps and makes the analogy

53

"...  money  and  cultural
objects  differ  in  an  im-
portant  practical  way  ...
People seldom  examine
money  for  authenticity
unless it  is 'collectible'
money  ..."

"These  and  similar
enterprises  ...  know  ...
that  such  works  can  be
used by others to deceive
innocent  buyers.  The
may lack intent, but they
certainly  have
knowledge."

"Parents, do  not  raise
your  children  to  be
counterfeiters,  but  if
they  lean  that  way,  ad-
vise then  that  art  and
antiquities  counterfeit-
ing is safer  than  other
kinds (it also has greater
cachet)."

John  Henry  Merryman

with sales of commercial articles, where the opportunity  for  inspec-
tion  and  investigation  typically does exist, particularly  important.
In  laws  enacted  to  protect  trademarked  products112  and  Native
American  crafts113  the closest thing to an  intent  requirement  is that
the defendant  'knowingly'  or 'wilfully'  make or offer  goods bearing
a  false  trademark  or  falsely  purporting  to  be  produced  by  Native
Americans. While the distinction  between  knowledge  of falsity  and
intent  to  defraud  may  in  some cases  seem  more metaphysical  than
real, in practice the burden on the prosecution is significantly  lighter
if it need only establish  knowledge. The difference  can be shown by
considering  the  Delamare  and  Rockefeller  Collection  enterprises,
described  above.114 These and  similar enterprises explicitly  promote
their  merchandise  as copies, not  as authentic works, and  could  not
be charged  with  intent  to deceive those with whom  they deal. They
know, however, that the works they offer  closely resemble authentic
works.  Indeed,  they  emphasize  similarity  to  originals  in  their  ad-
vertising.  That  is  an  important  part  of  what  they  sell.  They  also
know,  as  anyone  at  all  familiar  with  the  market  knows,  that  such
works can  be used  by others  to deceive  innocent  buyers. They may
lack  intent,  but  they certainly  have knowledge.

In sum, the prosecution's burden in money, stamp and commercial
counterfeiting  prosecutions is measurably lighter than it is when the
work  counterfeited  is  a  cultural  object.  The  relative  unavailability
of  effective  private  remedies  in  cultural  counterfeiting  cases, when
added  to  the difficulty  of proving  intent  to defraud,  places  cultural
counterfeiters at a decided advantage over their commercial counter-
parts. And, as we have seen,115 violation of criminal simulation laws
is  commonly  treated  as  a  mere  misdemeanor,  while  violations  of
other  counterfeiting  statutes  and  related  criminal  provisions  (theft
by deceit and forgery) are typically felonies. The message is: Parents,
do not  raise your children  to be counterfeiters,  but  if they lean  that
way,  advise  them  that  art  and  antiquities  counterfeiting  is  safer
than  other  kinds  (it  also  has  greater  cachet). If  the  analogies  to
counterfeiting  money,  stamps,  and  commercial  articles  are  at  all
persuasive,  then  the continued  inclusion  of  intent  to defraud  as an
element  of the crime committed  by the faker,  whether  it is criminal
simulation,  forgery  or  theft  by deception,  seems  perverse.  There is
ample  legislative  authority  for  penal  action  based  on  mere  knowl-
edge.  Familiarity  with  the  art  market  suggests  that  making  and
passing  counterfeit  cultural  objects,  commonly  treated  as  a misde-
meanor,  is at  least  as socially  and  economically  damaging as  other
kinds of counterfeiting  offences  that are routinely treated as felonies.

A  Diffident  Proposal
The primary  purpose  of  the fraudulent  intent  requirement  in penal
statutes is to protect  morally innocent actions from  the legal penal-
ties  and  the  social  opprobrium  that  flow  from  characterization  as

54

Counterfeit  Art

'criminal'.  Even  if we agree  that  counterfeit  works  of art  are  anal-
ogous to counterfeit  money, stamps and commercial  objects,  it still
seems wrong  to  treat  morally  blameless conduct  as criminal. To be
acceptable,  a  proposed  penal  statute  would  have  to  deal  fairly
with  innocent  counterfeiters.  This  could  be  accomplished  by, first,
requiring  a  showing  that  the  alleged  counterfeit  work  could  plau-
sibly"6  pass  as  genuine  and,  second,  that  the  defendant  knew,  or
was  chargeable  with  knowledge,  that  the  work  appeared  to  be
something  it was not.

Suppose  the applicable  statute  reads as  follows:

Criminal Simulation of  Cultural Objects. A person  commits an
offense  if  he  knowingly  makes,  alters  or  utters  any  object  so
that it appears to have value because of antiquity, rarity, source
or  authorship  which  it does not  possess.117

That  statute  would  apply  to  deliberate  counterfeiters  and,  since
'knowingly'  has  replaced  'with  intent  to deceive or defraud',  would
make successful  prosecution of offenders  a more realistic possibility.
The statute could also apply, however, to the work of student cop-
iers, simulationists and  those who make and sell reproductions. As-
suming, as seems right, that we wish to protect some of those people
from  criminal liability, some refinement  is necessary, and  refinement
entails complication. For example, the hypothetical  statute could be
made inapplicable to copies that met four  criteria: (1) that the work
copied  be documented  in some generally accessible source (i. e. gen-
erally  accessible  to  collectors,  dealers,  museum  personnel  and
scholars  —  as, for  example, in a catalog raisonee or a leading mon-
ograph); (2) that  the copy vary  substantially,  in some apparent  and
indelible  way,  from  the documented  description  of  the original; (3)
that the copy not include marks of originality or authenticity, such as
the artist's signature or monogram, founders' marks, series numbers,
dealers' labels or other false indications of provenance, etc. and (4) in
the case of older  originals, that  the copier  not  use materials  of  that
period (old canvas, old paper, old frames, pigments that were then in
use but are not now used, etc.) or artificially age the work.

None of these requirements would seriously inconvenience the stu-
dent or teacher making study copies. The extent and variety of pub-
lished and documented works provides ample range for anyone inter-
ested  in  learning  by copying.  Variance from the original  cannot, of
course, be treated disingenuously. We have already seen that for  the
student  to  sign  her  own  name  to  the copy  does  not  sanitize  it;  the
signature can easily be erased or.painted out and another added. Nor
does writing or painting the information  that it is a copy on the back
of thesupport serve, since the canvas can be rebacked or the warning
message  effaced  in  other  ways.  It  is  not  difficult  to  alter  or  efface
founders' marks and other identifying  features of sculptural casts.

"A  person  commits  an
offense  if he  knowingly
makes, alters  or  utters
any  object  so  that  it ap-
pears  to  have  value be-
cause  of  antiquity,
rarity,  source  or  author-
ship  which  it does  not
possess."

"None  of  these  require-
ments  would  seriously
inconvenience  the stu-
dent  or  teacher  making
copies."

55

John  Henry  Merryman

There are two principal ways of satisfying  the injunction  that  the
copy  vary  obviously,  substantially  and  indelibly  from  the  original.
One  is  to  require  that  the  copy's  linear  dimensions  be  sufficiently
larger  or  smaller  than  those  of  the  original  to  warn  anyone  who
took  the  trouble  to  consult  the  [readily  available]  documentation
that  the copy was not the original. A second distinguishing  method
is  to  use  unmistakably  different  materials  (e.g.  paper  instead  of
canvas, cast bronze instead of welded iron, gouache rather than oil).
There  is  no  apparent  reason  why  an  innocent  copier  should  need
to reproduce  such indicia of authenticity  as the artist's  signature or
monogram, original  founders'  marks and  series numbers or use old
materials  or artificial  ageing processes in copying  older works.

Unlike copies, style studies (see discussion  note 72 supra and text)
present  a  difficult,  perhaps  an  insoluble,  problem.  A  student  who
produced  plausible works in the style of  Matisse would  violate the
proposed  statute  as  clearly  as  one  who  made  such  works  with  the
intent  to  pass  them  as  genuine.  Except  for  the  relatively  small
number  of artists whose entire output  is authoritatively  recorded in
catalogues raisonees  —  Dubuffet  and Picasso are examples of artists
for  whom  nearly  complete  documentation  exists  — there  is  no
simple  way  to  establish  that  a  plausible  work,  not  a  copy,  was  or
was  not  made  by  that  artist.  Neither  is  there  a  simple  way  to
distinguish  innocent  style studies  from  fakes,  but  style studies will,
and  should,  continue  to  be  made.  The  problem  appears  to  be
intractable.

Would  a  simulationist  have  difficulty  meeting  such  conditions?
The requirement  that  the original  be fully  documented  is not  likely
to  be  a  problem,  since  simulationists  usually  (always?)  copy  the
works  of  prominent  artists,  often  from  published  reproductions  in
catalogs  or  monographs  or  from  museum  postcards.  The  require-
ment of an apparent and indelible difference  from  the original might
lead  to a claim of infringement  of the artistic  freedom  protected  by
the First Amendment. To a judge who has been disabused of the van
Meegeren problem, however, that regulation, like the prohibition of
indicia  of originality  and  of artificial  ageing or  the deceptive use of
aged  materials,  would  appear  to  be  a  reasonable  'time,  place  and
manner'  limitation  on  artistic  freedom.118

"...  style studies  ...  pre-
sent  a  difficult,  perhaps
an  insoluble,  problem."

"...  simulationists  usu-
ally  (always?) copy  the
works  of  prominent  art-
ists,  often  from  pub-
lished  reproductions  ..."

Finally, how would the proposed statute affect  those in the repro-
duction business, which is an important source of income to museums,
galleries and  bookstores? The great  majority  of such  reproductions
would be unaffected,  since they create little danger of passing as origi-
nals. It is only disingenuous enterprises  like the Rockefeller  Collec-
tion's and Mr. Delamare's, which attempt  to reproduce the original
exactly in size, medium, color, support, and execution, with the inclu-
sion  of  signatures  and  other  indicia  of  authenticity,  that  would  be
impaired.  Our  hypothetical  statute would  apply  to  Mr.  Delamare's
paintings  and  to the surmoulages  of Rodin  sculptures  and  the high
fidelity  reproductions of prints and drawings marketed by the Rock-

56

Counterfeit Art

efeller  Collection  and similar productions  from  other  sources. Such
deliberate counterfeits would become illegal.

Although  such  a  statute  provides  a  potentially  more  effective
basis for criminally  prosecuting counterfeiters  of cultural  objects, it
is an  incomplete  solution.  Whether  it would  be widely  enacted  by
state  legislatures  or  by  Congress,  whether  if  enacted  it  would  be
energetically  enforced  by  police  and  prosecutors,  and  whether  it
would be appropriately  interpreted  and applied by courts and juries
all  are  uncertain.  In  any case,  more  effective  penal  action  against
art  counterfeiters  is only  one way of dealing with cultural  counter-
feits. Even if counterfeiters  were effectively  prosecuted, it would still
be  necessary  to do something  about  the disposal  problem:  what is
to  be done with  the counterfeit  work  itself,  the object  that,  so long
as  it remains  at  large, can mislead  and deceive. That  may, indeed,
be the more important  aspect of the problem.

"...  such  a statute  ... is
an  incomplete  solution
...  what  is to be done
with  the  counterfeit
work  itself,  the object
that,  so long as it re-
mains at large, can mis-
lead and deceive ... Once
created,  counterfeits
take on lives of their
own. They  ...  remain  at
large to pollute  the clear
stream  of cultural his-
tory, skew resource allo-
cation,  deceive pur-
chasers and misrepresent
the  creator."

The  Disposal  of  Counterfeits

Once created,  counterfeits  take  on lives of their  own. They  do not
die  natural  deaths  but  remain  at  large  to  pollute  the clear  stream
of  cultural  history,  skew  resource  allocation,  deceive  purchasers,
and  misrepresent  the  creator.  The  problem  is  clearly  stated  in  a
1971 'Report  on Disposition  of Fake  Art':119

There has been presented to this Committee by persons involved
in the administration of the arts and enforcement of the criminal
laws questions  relating to the confiscation,  continued  retention
by  law  enforcement  authorities  and  ultimate  disposition  of
concededly fake art...  Returning the piece to the owner conced-
edly  raises  the risk  that  future  potential  purchasers may  suffer
a similar fate. In justifying  a policy of confiscation,  law enforce-
ment  officials  assume  that  some  owner-seller  will  willfully  fail
to  disclose  the  object's  status...  Moreover,  it  is  argued  that
years hence, due to the passage of time and a rapidly expanding
art  market,  the  fake  status  may  have  become  obfuscated  by
continuous  commercial  transactions.  It  is thus  concluded  that
this result would occur despite the immediate owner's disclosure
that  the work  was a fake.120

This  well  states  the problem.  The Committee's  discussion  of what
to  do  about  it,  however,  is  perfunctory  and  superficial,  and  its
conclusion  is that  little can or should  be done. For example, on the
centrally  important  proposal  that  works found  to be counterfeit  be
confiscated,  the  Report  states:  '[T]he  Committee  is  opposed  to
confiscation...  [Rjisks  to  innocent  purchasers  do  exist  if  the  fake
object  is allowed  to re-enter  the art market.  However, in the Com-
mittee's  view,  the  equities  weigh  heavily  in  favor  of  the  deprived

57

"...  the  Report  neither
identifies  nor  discusses
the equities  to  which  it
refers."

"The  disposal  problem
arises  in  two  principal
ways.  In  the  more com-
mon  situation,  one  who
purchases  (or  is  offered)
work  from  a  dealer  or
auction  house  becomes
suspicious  about  its
authenticity  ..."

John  Henry  Merryman

owner.'121  This statement  is unsupported;  the Report  neither identi-
fies nor discusses  the equities  to which  it  refers.

The  Committee  also  considered  six  alternatives  to  confiscation:
(1)  Reliance  on  existing  law;  (2)  Marking  the  object  to  denote
its  fake  status;  (3)  Establishing  a  central  registry  of  fake  art;  (4)
Establishing  an  archive  of  fake  art;  (5)  Allowing  the  artist  or  his
estate  to  destroy  or  reclaim  the  fake;  and  (6). Issuance  of  a  court
order  to the present owner directing her not to resell or transfer  the
fake  without  full  disclosure. Its conclusion:

The  concept  of  a  central  register  is ambitious  but  possible.  It
is doubtful,  however,  whether  this  system  will  ever  effectively
reach  the  general  art-buying  public  in  a  way  that  provides
meaningful  protection.
[F]urther  statutory  coverage  is needed  which  includes  broader
and  more  stringent  penalty  provisions  for  knowingly  selling
fake art. One key question to be decided, if any marking system
is to  be  adopted  in  situations  where  notice  to  and  consent  by
the owner  as  to  subsequent  sale is not  appropriate,  is whether
or  not  to  deface  the  object;  use  of  a  removable  tag  does  not
appear  to  be  an  effective  solution.  As  the  center  for  the  art
market in the United  States, New York has particular  responsi-
bilities which are not being adequately met. These responsibilit-
ies will  necessarily  have to  be shared  by the  various  organiza-
tions which are concerned with creating, buying, selling, import-
ing and  exporting works  of fine art.122

In  short,  the  Committee  agreed  that  there was a  problem  here  but
threw  up its  hands. Was it  right  to do so?

The  disposal  problem  arises  in  two  principal  ways. In  the  more
common  situation,  one  who  purchases  (or  is offered)  work  from  a
dealer  or  auction  house  becomes  suspicious  about  authenticity,
consults  the  leading  expert  on  the  work  of  that  artist  and,  if  the
expert's  opinion  is  against  authenticity,  declines  to  buy  or,  if  she
has bought,  presents  the evidence  to  the seller. In  the normal  case,
where  the  seller  is  a  reputable  dealer  or  auction  house  and  the
expert's  opinion  is  respected  in  the  trade,  the  matter  is  amicably
settled:  the  seller  returns  the  purchase  price  to  the  buyer  and  the
buyer  returns  the  counterfeit  work  to  the  seller.  No  recourse  to
lawyers is necessary and no case goes to court. The buyer is relieved
to have avoided  buying a fake  or, if she bought, to have her money
back and  to be rid of an embarrassment.  The seller has lost the sale
and  now possesses a work  that  is a known counterfeit  —  known  at
least  to  the  buyer  and  the  expert,  and  probably  to  others.  What
does  the seller  do  with  it? The  immediate  seller  will  of course  turn
to his seller for relief, and so the chain of transactions unwinds until
a  link  is missing or  a prior  transferor  refuses  to accept  liability. At

58

"At some point  someone
is stuck  with  the coun-
terfeit  ...  In such cases it
is not  unusual  to find
that  the counterfeit  re-
appears  on  the  market
or  in  the collection  of a
charitable  institution

"Less  frequently  a  work
will be evidence in a civil
or  criminal  proceeding
in  which  its  counterfeit
status  is established  or
conceded."

Counterfeit  Art

some  point  someone  is  stuck  with  the  counterfeit.  That  person
decides what  to do with  the work; no public official  is aware of the
situation  or  in  a  position  to  affect  the  outcome.  In  such  cases  it is
not  unusual  to find  that  the counterfeit  reappears on  the market  or
in the collection  of a charitable  institution  that  accepted  it as a gift
without  being informed  that  it was false.123 Such cases present  little
opportunity  to exert  the  public interest  in  removing  the  counterfeit
from  circulation.

Less  frequently  a  work  will  be  evidence  in  a  criminal  or  civil
proceeding in which its counterfeit  status is established or conceded.
This situation  is significantly  different  in that  public officials  —  the
police,  the  prosecutor,  the judge  —  are  in  a  position  to  affect  the
decision  about  what  to  do  with  the  counterfeit.  The  case  provides
an opportunity  to assert the public interest in removing the counter-
feit  from  the market  or  neutralizing  its potential  for  harm  in some
other  way.

There  are  three  obvious  alternative  ways  of  dealing  with  the
counterfeit  work:  destruction,  impounding  and  sanitization.  Of
these,  destruction  is the  most  obvious  and  effective  course  but  has
the disadvantage of irreversibility. While most counterfeit works are
easily and  accurately  identified  as such, certainty  in such matters is
only  relative. The  uncertainty  runs  more  strongly  in  one  direction:
counterfeits  are  more  frequently  judged  to  be  genuine  than  vice
versa.  Still, the  probability  remains  that  authentic  works will occa-
sionally  be  called  counterfeit,  and  the  possibility  that  this  would
cause  the  mistaken  destruction  of  an  authentic  work  cannot  be
ignored.  A second  difficulty  is that  the  counterfeiter  may  turn  out
to  be an  important  figure  in  art  history,  like  Michelangelo,124  and
any work by such an artist should be preserved. Finally, the counter-
feit  may  in  fact  be an  authentic  work  that  has  been  misattributed,
perhaps retouched and with a forged  signature, that should, restored
and  properly  attributed,  be preserved.

Counterfeits  can  be removed  from  commerce in less drastic ways
by impounding  them  or  by placing  them  in study collections  in  art
museums.  The  museum  capacity  for  and  interest  in  such  study
collections  is, however,  limited.  Maintaining,  presumably  at  public
expense, an archive of cultural counterfeits  is the residual  impound-
ing  solution.  The  expense  of  establishing  and  maintaining  such  an
archive could  be substantial,  and  it would  seem irrational  to spend
resources  in  carefully  documenting  and  conserving  the  thousands
of obviously  counterfeit  Dali, Chagall  and  Miro  prints that,  at this
writing,  still  flood  the  market.  Surely  one example  from  each  such
'edition'  would  be  adequate.  The  rest  could  be  safely  destroyed.
Other classes of obvious counterfeits  with  no claim  to  preservation
could  also be destroyed,  so that  the archive was reserved  for  works
of dubious  but  uncertain  authenticity,  possible  art  historical  value,
etc. Thus the public archive of counterfeit  works would for  practical
reasons  have to  be combined  with  selective  destruction.

59

"Any  proposal  to de-
stroy  or  impound  coun-
terfeits  must  deal  with
the  owner's  property
interest  in  the work  ...
Compensation  is an  ob-
vious  possibility,  since
the value of the counter-
feit  as a  counterfeit,  is
likely  to  be  slight."

"The  idea  that  counter-
feits  could  be treated  or
marked  to  make  then
easily detectible  is  ...  at-
tractive  ... The  difficulty
... is that  any such  treat-
ment  or  mark,  once
known, can  be  reversed
or  effaced  or  otherwise
neutralized."

John  Henry  Merryman

Any proposal  to destroy  or impound  counterfeits  must deal with
the  owner's  property  interest  in  the  work.  One  who  has  paid  a
Matisse  price  for  a fake  Matisse  may  be reluctant  to  give it  up  for
destruction  or for  transfer  to a museum  or archive even  though she
knows that the work has slight monetary value as a known counter-
feit.  If it  is left  with  the owner  she will be tempted  to consign  it  to
a  dealer  or  place  it  at  auction  or  donate  it  to  a  charity  without
disclosing  its  counterfeit  character.  Compensation  is  an  obvious
possibility,  since  the  value  of  the  counterfeit,  as  a  counterfeit,  is
likely to be slight. The transaction  costs of determining  fair  market
value  in  a  contested  proceeding  can,  however,  be  substantial,  so
that  compensation  could  in practice  be an expensive alternative.

Would  compensation  to the counterfeit's  owner  be necessary? In
the case of counterfeit  money, as we have seen, confiscation  without
compensation  is  the  normal  procedure.125  Confiscation  is  also  a
standard  remedy  in  commercial  counterfeiting  statutes.126  If  the
social problem posed by counterfeit  cultural objects is, as previously
suggested, analogous to that presented by counterfeit money, stamps
and commercial articles, then the legislature's power to order confis-
cation would seem to follow.l27  Other nations confiscate  counterfeit
art,128 but there is no certainty that an American court would  reject
a constitutional  challenge to a confiscation  statute.

The  idea  that  counterfeits  could  be  treated  or  marked  to  make
them  easily  detectible  is  accordingly  attractive;  the  work  could  be
left  with  the  owner,  since  its  counterfeit  character  could  be estab-
lished by a specific, infallible process, and the possibility of deception
would  accordingly diminish  or disappear.  (If such a process existed
it  could  also  be  used  to  identify  innocent  copies,  style  studies, etc.
and greatly simplify  the counterfeit  art problem  in other ways.) The
difficulty  with  this  sensible  proposal  is that  any  such  treatment  or
mark,  once known, can  be reversed  or effaced  or otherwise  neutra-
lized.  That  statement  may  seem  extreme,  and  it  may  prove  to  be
incorrect,  but  knowledgeable  people  in  the  art  world  have  yet  to
identify  a  reliable  treating  or  marking  system.  Even  something  as
drastic  as  slashing  a  canvas  or  sawing  through  a  bronze  can  be
repaired well enough by a careful  restorer to convince all but experts.
High  technology  proposals  (embedding  a  minute  quantity  of  a
radioactive  substance  in  the  object;  adding  a  microdot  containing
identification  of  the  work  as  a  counterfeit)  are  no  more  likely  to
work.  Once  the  process  is known  —  as it  inevitably  will  be  —  the
radioactive  substance can  be found  and  removed;  the microdot can
be painted  over or otherwise  effaced.  Actually, such  treating/mark-
ing  proposals  might  increase  the  cost  and  difficulty  of  passing
previously  identified  counterfeits,  not a bad  thing in itself. Still, the
potential  for  misuse  of  the  technology  must  also  be  considered.
Suppose  that  the  temporary  possessor  of  an  authentic  work  —  a
restorer,  for  example  —  makes  and  keeps  for  himself  a  convincing
copy  and  treats  the  original  in  such  a  way  as  to  mark  it  invisibly

60

"Another strategy would
be to reduce the counter-
feit's  credibility  by
making  its lack  of
authenticity  known  in
the  art  world."

"These  are  not  mutually
exclusive courses  of ac-
tion  ..."

Counterfeit  Art

as  a  counterfeit  before  returning  it  to  the  owner.  The  possibilities
for  sophisticated  vandalism  are  also  increased  by  such  proposals:
think  of  the  trouble  a  clever  vandal  could  make  with  radioactive
spray  or  paste or  a few  microdots,  followed  by a letter  to  the local
newspaper.

Another  strategy  would  be  to  reduce  the counterfeit's  credibility
by  making  its  lack  of  authenticity  known  in  the  art  world.  This
could be accomplished by requiring publication of a photograph and
description, togetherwith  the circumstances of the determination of
inauthenticity,  in  a  widely  distributed  art  publication.  IFAR  Re-
ports,  published  by the  International  Foundation  for  Art  Research
in  New  York  is  an  obvious  candidate.  Such  publication  would
effectively  alert dealers, museum staff,  auction  house personnel and
knowledgeable  collectors.  If  the  system  were  developed  to  include
cumulative indexes it might serve other purposes  —  e.g., as a public
register  that  would  give  potential  acquirers,  including  dealers  and
auction  houses  acquiring  works  for  resale,  as  well  as  collectors,
constructive  notice of the work's  inauthenticity.

The  Social  Response  to  Cultural  Counterfeits:
A  Synthesis

We have examined  several  kinds  of  social  response  to  the  problem
of counterfeit  art:  criminal  prosecution  of counterfeiters  and  those
who knowingly pass counterfeits; private legal remedies; destruction
of  works  found  to  be  counterfeit;  donation  to  a  museum  study
collection;  impounding  in  a  public archive  of counterfeits;  treating
or  marking  the  work  as  a  counterfeit;  and  publication.  These  are
not  mutually  exclusive  courses  of  action;  one  would  wish  criminal
prosecutions  to  continue  independently  of  decisions  about  how  to
dispose of the works  themselves. As to disposal, the solution  might
best  be  left  to  the  decision-maker  in  the  case  in  which  the  work's
authenticity  was decided  or  conceded.  In  one case  the judge  might
give the defendant  a choice: allow the work  to be destroyed,  donate
it  to  a  willing  museum  or  a  public  archive,  or  pay  the  cost  of
publication.  In another  case the judge might, because  of the patent
inauthenticity  of the works involved  and  the clearly criminal  nature
of the defendant's  actions  —  e.g., fake Dali prints  —  simply require
destruction.

The  opportunity  for  such  a judicially  supervised  process  arises
only in criminal prosecutions of those who make or pass counterfeits
and  in civil actions in which a work's authenticity  is in issue. As we
have  seen,  these  are  relatively  rare  events.  Authenticity  is  more
frequently  questioned  in  private  circumstances  in  which  the  work,
even if found  to be false, will remain in private hands and  the event
will leave no residue of public information.  There clearly is a public

61

"In each case, the expert
is the centrally  impor-
tant  authority  determin-
ing  inauthenticity."

John  Henry  Merryman

interest  in  acquiring  and  appropriately  using  the  information  pro-
duced  in such  private  transactions. Consider  these cases:

Case 1. Dealer A becomes suspicious of a Franz Kline drawing
he  got  from  Dealer  B and  shows  it  to  the  leading  experts  on
Kline's work, who agree that  it is a fake.  Dealer  A returns  the
work  to  Dealer  B and  gets a  refund.
Case  2. Auctioneer  is  offered  a  group  of  Rodin  drawings  and
consults  the  leading  Rodin  expert,  who  identifies  them  as  the
work  of  Ernst  Diirig,  the  prolific  Rodin  faker.  Auctioneer
declines  the  consignment.
Case  3. Art  historian,  guest  curator  of  a  Gericault  exhibition,
concludes  that  a  work  from  a  private  collection  is  a  skillful
fake  and  excludes it from  the exhibition.

Dealer  B in  Case  1,  the  consignor  in  Case  2, and  the  collector  in
Case 3 all now know (if they did not already know) that their works
are, in the opinions of experts, false. One or the other of them might
decide to destroy her work or donate it to a museum study collection
as a counterfeit  or  publish  the facts  of the case.  But we should  not
be surprised if, instead, some of those works reappear on the market,
offered  as  genuine.  That  is  bound  to  occur  unless  there  is  some
readily available  public record  that  the work  has been  questioned.
In  each  case,  the  expert  is  the  centrally  important  authority
determining inauthenticity. Many experts care about art history and
the  reputation  of  the  artist  and  would,  in  principle,  favor  the
exposure  of  counterfeits  and  those  who  make  and  deal  in  them.
People  like  Dealer  A  in  Case  1 and  the  auctioneer  in  Case  2 also
have  an  interest  in  cleansing  the  market  of  counterfeits.  If  it were
convenient and costless for such people to publish the determination
of  inauthenticity,  those  counterfeits  would  be  effectively  removed
from  circulation.  There  are  three  reasons  why  that  does  not  often
happen.

First  is the  problem  of  incentive:  how could  the  expert  or  inter-
ested  party  be encouraged  to send a photograph  and description  of
the work  and  a statement  of inauthenticity  to the periodical? Some
inconvenience,  effort  and  expense  are  neccessarily  involved.  The
realities of human dynamics are on the side of inertia. Second, most
collectors,  dealers  and  experts  fear  that  if they  publicly  express an
opinion  on authenticity  they will be liable for damages in an action
by the  offended  owner.  Although  such  liability  exists only  if negli-
gence  or  malice  is  shown,129  an  angry  owner  may  still  sue;  the
winning defendant  will suffer  the inconvenience and aggravation  of
litigation,  and  he  (or  his  insurer)  will  have  to  pay  an  attorney.130
Many well-disposed people fear litigation and potential liability and
will accordingly  be reluctant  to speak  up.

Third, any system that encourages unilateral exposure of counter-
feits  by  private  persons  is  vulnerable  to  misuse.  Unlike  a judicial

62

Counterfeit  Art

action,  in which  the court  impartially  determines  authenticity  after
the  opportunity  for  proof  and  argument  by  interested  parties,  the
hypothetical  cases set out above include no system for  verifying  the
claim of inauthenticity.  Without  such  a system, unreliable  informa-
tion  supplied  by  people  with  dubious  motives  or  credentials  could
creep into the record, sabotaging both art history and the art market
by impugning  authentic works of  art.

These  difficulties  in  the  way  of  systematic  public  reporting  of
private  determinations  of  inauthenticity  are  imposing  and  may  be
insurmountable.  Some art  historians  will publish; dealers who have
been  burned,  or  almost  burned,  may  go  public;  but  they  will  be
exceptions. In  the usual case the only  residue of the episode will be
some  art  world  insider  gossip  shared  by  a  few  dealers,  experts
and  collectors.  Private determinations  of inauthenticity  will, on  the
whole,  remain  private.  This  fact  makes  it  even  more  important
that  public  findings  be  made  public  and  that,  where  appropriate,
counterfeit  works be destroyed  or permanently removed from  circu-
lation.

Conclusion

"Private  determinations
of inauthenticity  will, on
the whole,  remain  pri-
vate. This  fact  makes it
even  more  important
that  public findings be
made  public  and  that,
where  appropriate,
counterfeit  works  be de-
stroyed  or  permanently
removed  from  circu-
lation."

The  cultural  counterfeit  problem  illustrates  familiar  propositions
about  law and  society. One is that  laws imposing criminal  penalties
on actions that most people do not regard as seriously offensive  will
not be aggressively enforced  and rigorously applied. The complex of
attitudes  described  above  as  the  van  Meegeren  Problem  assures
counterfeiters  that prosecution  is unlikely, conviction uncertain  and
probable  sentences light.

The  significant  corollary  is  that  proposed  changes  in  the  law,
unaccompanied  by equivalent changes  in social  attitudes, will have
only a marginal effect  on cultural counterfeiting.  Widespread  enact-
ment  of  the  proposed  criminal  simulation  statute  discussed  above
would,  alone,  accomplish  little.  If  enactment  results  from  public
concern about counterfeits, then something significant  may be done.
But  it  is the change  in public  appreciation  of  the problem,  not  the
enactment  of yet another  statute,  that  makes  the main  difference.

Most  people  would  rightly  consider  counterfeit  cultural  objects
one of the lesser ills confronting, humanity,  far  less serious than,  for
example,  AIDS  or  the  drug  traffic  or  the  destruction  of  the  rain
forests  or  international  terrorism  or  the  Greenhouse  Effect  or  a
multitude of others. It would  be wrong  to overestimate  the relative
importance,  in  the  great  scheme  of  things,  of  the  work  of  a  Tom
Keating or an  Elmyr de Hory. The attitudes summed up in the Van
Meegeren  Problem,  however,  make  any  such  error  seem  remote.
There is little danger that  the state will turn its big guns on so small
a  target.  The equation  between  social  problem  and  social  response
is out  of balance,  but in the opposite  direction.

63

John  Henry  Merryman

The idea that cultural interests exist and call for  legal recognition
and  protection,  while  not  new,131  has  yet  to  receive  the  kind  of
sustained attention routinely given to more familiar economic, politi-
cal,  and  social  interests.  The  greater  public  attention  to  cultural
matters  in  the  United  States  since  the  end  of  World  War  II132
suggests  that  more people now care more about  such matters. This
article addresses those people. The basic message is  straightforward.
Counterfeit  cultural  objects  do  serious  harm,  harm  that  the  van
Meegeren Problem conceals behind a haze of sentimentality, misgu-
ided  populism  and  narrow  aesthetic  theory.  Art  counterfeiters  are
not  Robin  Hoods  or  social  critics  or  cultural  avengers.  They  are
opportunists  who are in it for  the money. It  seems absurd  that  our
law  should  deal  less  harshly  with  the  faker  of  Corot  paintings  or
Mayan  ceramics  than  with  the  counterfeiter  of  $100 bills  or  Gucci
handbags, when  the former  clearly does comparable  economic and
far  greater  cultural  mischief.  Society  can  more  effectively  protect
itself  against  art  counterfeiters  without  impairing  the  legitimate
interests of innocent copiers, appropriators and  reproducers. Coun-
terfeiters  should  be  deterred,  tried  and  punished,  but  it  is  at  least
equally important to destroy, impound or neutralize the false objects
themselves.

Finally,  the  question  is  not  merely  how  to  deal  with  counterfeit
cultural  objects,  though  I have tried  to show that  that  is an  impor-
tant  question  in itself. Counterfeits  are part  of a larger puzzle: how
to  deal  properly  with  the  variety  of  interrelated  cultural  property
questions  that  continually  arise and  call  for  public action.  There is
a  public  interest  in  the  conservation  of,  truth  about  and  access  to
cultural  objects.133  Eventually,  whether  through  the  accumulation
of ad hoc decisions or some more ambitious deliberative process or,
more  likely,  both,  we will  have  a  more  or  less comprehensive  and
coherent cultural property policy, in which protection  against those
who counterfeit  the culture will have a modest but significant  place.

Notes

1  Miguel  De Cervantes,  Don Quixote (Modern  Library  ed.  1949) p. 73.
2  Hans  Tietze,  Genuine  and False, London,  1948, pp. 16, 80; cited  herein  as

Tietze'.

3  Rudolf  Arnhem, 'On  Duplication',  in Denis Dutton  (Ed.),  The Forger's Art

(1983),  p. 232.

4  See,  for  example,  the  definition  of  'cultural  property'  in  Article  1 of  the
1970  UNESCO  Convention  on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Preventing
the  Illicit  Import,  Export  and  Transfer  of Ownership  of  Cultural  Property,
823  U.N.T.S. 231 (1972). The  U.S. Cultural  Property  Implementation  Act
of  1983,  96  Stat.  2350,  19  U.S.C.  §§2601 ff.,  incorporates  the  UNESCO
Convention  definition  of cultural  property.

5  This  rather  obvious  point  is  belabored  in  Merryman,  'The  Public  Interest
in Cultural  Property',  17 Cal. L. Rev. 339 (1989), cited  herein as 'The  Public
Interest'.

64

Counterfeit  Art

6  The  phenomenon  is  explored  in  Margaret  Gardiner,  'The  Art  Forger  as

Cultural  Hero" (student  paper  in  author's files, 1981).

7  For prior legal discussions see Crystal-Kirk,  'Forgery  Reforged:  Art-Faking
and  Commercial  Passing-Off  Since  1981',  49  Mod.  L.  Rev.  608  (1986);
Elsen  &  Merryman,  'Art  Replicas:  A  Question  of  Ethics',  ARTnews,  Feb.
1979,  p. 61;  Elsen with  Merryman,  'Legal  and  Illegal  Counterfeiting  of Art
in America',  in  The Penal Protection of  Works of Art  (Quaderni  di  Scienze
Criminali  1983) 53, cited  herein  as  'Elsen';  DuBoff,  'Controlling  the  Artful
1  Con:  Authentication  and  Regulation',  27 Hastings L.J.  973 (1976); Hodes,
'Fake  Art  and  the  Law',  27  Fed.  Bar. J.  11 (1967):  Houseman,  'Current
Practices  and  Problems  in  Combatting  Illegality  in  the  Art  Market',  12
Seton  Hall  L.  Rev.  506  (1982);  Karlen,  'Fakes,  Forgeries,  and  Expert
Opinions',  16 J.  Arts  Management  & Law,  5 (Fall  1986); Shientag,  'Some
Legal  Aspects  of Art  and  Fake  Art',  54  Women L. J.  23 (1968); Note,  'Art
Forgery:  The  Art  Market  and  Legal  Considerations',  7  Nova  L.J.  315
(1983); Comment, 'Current  Practices and  Problems in Combatting  Illegality
in  the Art  Market',  12 Seton  Hall L.  Rev. 506 (1982); Note, 'Legal  Control
of the  Fabrication  and  Marketing  of  Fake  Paintings',  24 Stan.  L.  Rev. 930
(1972);  Comment,  'Uniform  Commercial  Code  Warranty  Solutions  to  Art
Fraud  and  Forgery',  14  Wm. & Mary  L.  Rev. 409 (1972).
The  reader  interested  in  the  history  and/or  sociology  of  art  counterfeiting
or  in  the  works  and  lives  of  famous  counterfeiters  will  find  a  substantial
literature  of  uneven  quality.  The  best  and,  at  this  writing,  most  recent  of
them  is  Mark  Jones  (ed.),  Fake?  The  Art  of  Deception  (1990),  which
originated  as  the catalog  for  the  1990 exhibition  at  the  British  Museum.  It
contains  an  illustrated  (often  in  colour)  and  thoughtfully  annotated  list  of
notable counterfeits  from  all periods and  cultures, plus a number, of  unusu-
ally  informative  essays. Among  other  works  are: Tietze,  see Note  2 above;
Sepp  Schiiller,  Forgers, Dealers, Experts  (1959);  Joseph  Alsop,  The  Rare
Art  Traditions (1982);  Frank  Arnau,  The  Art  of  the  Faker  (1961);  Louis
Charles  Jean  Courajod,  Limitation  &  la  Contrafacon  des  Objets  d'Art
Antiques  (1889);  Adolph  Donath,  Wie  die  Kunstfdlscher Arbeiten  (1937);
Leo  M.  Drachsler  (Ed.), Forgery in Art  and the Law  (1956); W.R.  Gerald
(Ed.),  The Eye of  the  Beholder:  Fakes, Replicas and Alterations in American
Art  (1977);  David  L.  Goodrich,  Art  Fakes  in America  (1973),  Aspects  of
Art Forgery (1962); Ian  Haywood, Faking It: Art and the Politics of Forgery
(1987); Lawrence Jeppson,  The Fabulous Frauds: Fascinating Tales of Great
Art Forgeries (1970); James  Koobatian  (Comp.), Faking It: An International
Bibliography of Art  and Literary Forgeries (1983); Otto  Kurz, Fakes (2d ed.
1967);  Fritz  Mendax,  Art  Fakes  and  Forgeries (1955);  John  Fitzmaurice
Mills & John  M. Mansfield,  The Genuine Article: The Making and Unmask-
ing  of  Fakes  and  Forgeries (1982);  George  Savage,  Forgeries, Fakes and
Reproductions: A  Handbook for  the  Dealer and  Collector (1963);  Karina
Tiirr, Fdlschungen  Antiker  Plastik seit  1800  (1984); Christopher Wright, The
Art  of  the  Forger (1985).  For  a  recent  Marxist  discussion  see  MacLean,
'False  Images: On  the  Meaning  of Art  Forgery',  2 Law and Critique (1991)
("The  rise  of  artistic  individualism  and  difference  can  be  understood  as
following  from  the more general  social and  ideological conditions of aliena-
tion  which  were  a  necessary  part  of  the  development  of  the  capitalist
economic  structure  ...  A  society  which  is  in  many  of  its  conditions  false
can  only  expect  to  engender  false  images.").

8  Alfred  Lessing,  'What  is Wrong  with  a Forgery?'  in Denis  Dutton  (Ed.),

The Forger's Art:  Forgery and the Philosophy of Art  (1983).

65

John  Henry  Merryman

9  Francis  Sparshott,  The Disappointed Art  Lover, id. at 251.
10  For  book-length  discussions  of  van  Meegeren  see  Paul  B. Coremans, Van
Meegeren's Faked Vermeers andde  Hooghs, Amsterdam. 1949; John  Godley,
Van Meegeren:  Master  Forger  (1967);  Lord  Kilbracken,  Van Meegeren:
Master  Forger, New  York.  (1967). There  is a  good  brief  account  in  Hope
B.  Werness,  Han  van Meegeren fecit,  in  Denis  Dutton  (Ed),  The Forger's
Art  (1983). Werness cites  the extensive  literature  about  van  Meegeren.

11  As  time  passes  van  Meegeren's  Vermeers  look  less  convincing.  This  is
normal.  The  counterfeiter  is  a  captive  of  his  time,  producing  works  that
reflect  the  way  he  and  his contemporaries  perceive, construe  and  respond
to authentic  works  by  the artist  he simulates. Counterfeits  thus express  the
taste of the moment and become dated when tastes change. '[l]l is interesting
to  find  that  forged  paintings  are  easily  recognized  as  such  after  some
decades.  Van  Meegeren's  romantic  interpretation  of  Vermeer  can  now
be  easily  detected.'  Peter  Van  Mensch,  'Museums  and  Authenticities'  in
'International  Committee  for  Museology, Originals and  Substitutes  in  Mu-
seums'  (1985)  pp. 13,  17. To  a  similar  effect  see  Tietze,  Note  2 above,  at
pp. 55 — 6,  repeating  Mark  Twain's  remark  that  modern  copies  of  old
masterpieces  were  always  more  pleasant  to  look  at  than  the  masterpieces
themselves. Joseph  Alsop warns, however, that  the slogan  'no fake succeeds
for  more than  a generation  ...  is still very far  from  dependable  in all cases.'
Alsop,  'The  Faker's  Art',  N.Y.  Review of  Books, 23 October  1986, p. 25.

12  Werness, see Note  10 above, at  42 ff.  Van  Meegeren  escaped  conviction  on
the collaboration  count  but  was  found  guilty  of  fraud  and  forgery  (p. 49).
13  Establishing  that  a  work  is  or  is  not  authentic  varies  from  simple  to
extremely  difficult.  Often  the  question  of  authenticity  is  better  rephrased
as  one  of  attribution:  the work  is an  authentic  painting  by  some  sixteenth
century  Italian,  but  it  may  or  may  not  be  by  Leonardo.  The  notion  of
authenticity  itself  varies  from  one  kind  of  object  to  another,  as  shown  by
African  tribal  art,  for  example,  when  compared  with  Western  painting  or
sculpture.  See  the  articles  in  Volume  IX  of  African  Arts  (1975 — 76);  Jon-
athan  Adlai  Franklin,  'Hourglass  Syncretism:  The  Temporal  Factor  in
Ethnoart  Authentication'  (Thesis,  Stanford  University  Department  of
Anthropology,  1988).  More  generally  on  authentication  see  Stuart  James
Fleming,  Authenticity  in Art:  The  Scientific  Detection  of  Forgery  (1975);
Roger  H.  Marijnissen, Paintings: Genuine, Fraud, Fake:  Modern  Methods
of Examining Paintings (1985).

14  Edward  C.  Banfield,  The Democratic Muse (1984).
15  Id. at  153. The quoted  text  is a part  of  Banfield's  argument  in  favor  of  the
production  and  wide  distribution  of  'high-quality  reproductions'  of  works
of  art.  For  the  fuller  statement  see  his  Chapter  6.  Ian  Haywood  appears
to share  Banfield's  attitude, stating of art dealers, auctioneers and collectors
that: 'A safe way to ensure good  returns is to further  the cult of the original
artist,  to  convince  the  buyer  of  the  sheer  worth  of  a  unique,  original
production  of a famous mind.'  Ian  Haywood, Faking It: Art and the Politics
of  Forgery (1987)  p. 105.  Koestler  complains  of  elitism  and  snobbery  in
'The  Aesthetics  of  Snobbery',  Horizon,  Winter  1965,  p. 50.  There  is  a
less  invidious  but  otherwise  similar  populist  argument  in  favor  of  wide
distribution  of  exact  reproductions  in  Battin,  'Exact  Replication  in  the
Visual  Arts',  38 J.  Aesthetics  & Art  Criticism 153 (1979).

16  Jean  Chatelain  uses  the  expression  'sentimentalite  douteuse'  in  discussing
public  attitudes  toward  counterfeit  art  in  France  in  his  Oeuvres d'Art  et
Objets de Collection (Paris  1982) p. 264.

66

Counterfeit  Art

17  For  a  representative  collection  of  essays  see  Denis  Dutton  (Ed.),  The

Forger's Art:  Forgery and the Philosophy of Art (1983).

18  A common  variation  of the 'original' counterfeit  is a  rough  copy  or  sketch
of  an  authentic  work  that  is  passed  off  as  a  preliminary  study.  Private
communication  from  art  dealer  Andre  Emmerich,  26 September,  1989.

19  133 Misc. 871, 234 N.Y.Supp. 185 (Sup. Ct.  1929).
20  See Andrew  Decker;  The  Multi-Million  Dollar  Belle', ARTnews, Summer,
1985, p. 86. The  problem  of  the counterfeit  that  will not  die or  go away is
discussed  further  below.

21  According  to  art  dealer  Andre  Emmerich,  fakes  usually'include  elements
of  pastiche  because  counterfeiters  lack  the  artistic  vocabulary  to  produce
inventions typical  of the master and  are reduced  to copying and  combining
images  taken  from  authentic  works.

22  Sagoff,  'Historical  Authenticity',  12 Erkenntnis 83 (1978).
23  Alsop, 'The  Faker's  Art',  N.Y.Review  of  Books, 23 Ocotber,  1986, p. 25.

Cf.  Keats:  'Beauty  is  truth,  truth  beauty  ..."  {Ode  on  a  Grecian Urn).
Accepting  for  the  moment  that  'poets  are  the  unacknowledged  legislators
of  the  world'  (Shelley,  A  Defence of  Poetry),  this  bit  of  unacknowledged
legislation  seems ambiguous. I read it to confirm  that lack of truth  (authen-
ticity)  impairs  beauty,  though  it  is  open  to  the  contrasting  reading  that
beauty  supplies  its  own  truth,  which' should  thus  survive  any  difficulty
about  authenticity.

24  For  an  authoritative  discussion  of  the  relation  between  cognition  and

perception  see  U.  Neisser,  Cognition and Reality (1976).

25  Sparshott,  'The  Disappointed  Art  Lover',  in Denis  Dutton  (Ed.)  The For-
ger's Art: Forgery and the Philosophy of Art (1983) p. 249. Alsop, in making
the  same  point,  speaks  of  'the  historical  response,'  which  he  distinguishes
from  the  'pure  aesthetic'  response.  Alsop,  'The  Faker's  Art',  see  Note  23
above.

26  Haywood,  see Note  15 above,  p. 105.
27  For  discussions  of  the  Elgin  Marbles  see William  St. Clair,  Lord Elgin  and
the Marbles (rev. ed.  1983); Merryman, 'Thinking about  the Elgin  Marbles',
83M/e/».  L.  Rev. 1880(1985).

28  See  Nafziger,  'The  New  International  Framework  for  the  Return,  Restitu-
tion,  or  Forfeiture  of  Cultural  Property',  15  N.Y.U.J.Int.L.  &  Pol.  789
(1983).

29  See  Merryman,  'The  Retention  of  Cultural  Property',  21  U.C.  Davis  L.

Rev. 477 (1988).

30  Marianne  Bro-Jorgenson,  in 'International  Committee  for  Museology Sym-
posium: Originals and Substitutes in Museums', 157 (ICOFOM  Study Series
No.  8,1985).

31  Some may  object  that  this merely  replaces  the van  Meegeren  problem  with
a different  one: why do people place such importance on authenticity? That
question,  to  which  there  is  no  short  answer,  is  discussed  in  'The  Public
Interest',  see  Note  5 above.

32  Lovejoy,  in Jonathan  Gash's  Gold by  Gemini (Penguin  ed.  1988) p. 124.
33  Anne-Marie  Stein,  Three  Picassos  before  Breakfast:  Memoirs  of  an  Art

Forger's  Wife (1973)  p. 177.

34  Clifford  Irving, Fake:  The story  of Elmyr de Ho'ry,  the Greatest Art Forger

of Our  Time (1969)  pp.  119-120.

35  For  a  fuller  discussion  of  why  we care  about  cultural  property  at  all  and
of  the importance  of authenticity  to our concerns see 'The  Public  Interest',
see  Note  5 above.

67

John  Henry  Merryman

36  For  discussions  see  Carlo  Pietrangeli  (Ed.),  The  Sistine  Chapel: The  Art,
the History, and the Restoration (1986); Talley, 'Michelangelo  Rediscovered',
86  ARTnews  159  (Summer  1987);  Kathleen  Weil-Garris  Brandt,  Twenty-
five Questions  about  Michelangelo's  Sistine  Ceiling',  126 (n.s.)  Apollo 392
(December  1987).

37  The project  is described  in J. Bruyn et al., A Corpus of Rembrandt Paintings
(The Hague,  1982). For  a critical  discussion  of the project  and  its work  see
Talley, 'Connoisseurship  and  the  Methodology  of the  Rembrandt  Research
Project',  8 Int.  J.  Museum Management  & Curalorship 175 (1989).

38  Elsen, see Note  7 above, at  67 — 8.
39  The  right  of integrity  originated  in  France, has been  widely  adopted  in  the
civil  law  world  and  is  included  in  Article  6bis  of  the  Berne  Copyright
Convention.  At this writing it has been enacted,  though  with  varying  terms
and  degrees of protection  of  the artist,  in  nine states, and  a  federal  version
was enacted  in  1990. For a fuller  discussion  see Merryman  and  Elsen, Law,
Ethics and the  Visual Arts  (2d  Ed.  1987) pp. 143-75.

40  Tietze, see Note  2 above, at 73.
41  UNESCO,  Recommendation  for  the Protection  of Movable Cultural  Prop-

erty  (1978) art.  II.8.
Successful  counterfeits  may also dilute the market  value of authentic works
by increasing the number  of purchasable  objects  available to satisfy  a fixed
pool  of  collector  money.  The  confusion  created  by  counterfeits  can  drive
money  out  of  the  market  for  the  work  of  a  particular  artist  —  e.g.  Rodin
drawings  — and  thus  reduce  the  market  value  of  authentic  works.  These
market  effects  can  be  substantial,  but  they  fall  outside  the  scope  of  this
article.

42  Geraldine  Norman,  'Art  Trading  and  Art  Faking',  in  Tom  Keating,  The

Fake's Progress (1977) 261.

43  See Douglas McGill, 'Fake Art Prints: Big Business Getting  Bigger',  N.Y.Ti-
mes, 22 July,  1987, p. 1; July 23, 1987, Sec. B 1:2; Terry  Pristin, 'Net  Closes
around  Publisher  of  Dali  Copies',  San  Fran.  Chronicle, 21  July,  1989,  p.
E5; Andrew  Decker, 'Unlimited  Editions', ARTnews, Summer  1988, p. 138.
Although  reduced,  the  traffic  continues.  Visit  any  flashy  'art  gallery'  in  a
major city or resort area and show interest in Dali and watch what happens.
44  Tom Keating,  The Fake's Progress (1977) p. 79. 'Sexton Blaking' is Keating's

term  for  faking.
Compare  this variation,  aimed  at  restorers: '...I'd  been  to the Goya exhibi-
tion  at  the  Royal  Academy.  And  I'd  been  so  appalled  by  the  scandalous
way  that  some  of  them  had  been  restored  that  I decided  that  it  would  be
right  for  me  to  make  a  self-portrait  of  Goya  as  a  replacement.  It  was
presumptuous  of  me  I  know,  but  I could  think  of  no  better  way of  taking
my  revenge  on  those  savages  who  are  not  fit  to  clean  the  boots  of  the
masters,  let  alone  their  priceless  paintings.'  (p. 165)
Similar  efforts  to  characterize  the  counterfeiter  as  a  crusader  against  the
corruption  of  dealers  and  others  in  the  art  world  arc  set  out  in  Stein  and
Irving,  both  passim.

45  Geraldine  Norman,  'Art  Trading  and  Art  Faking',  in Tom  Keating,  The

Fake's Progress (1977)  197,  200-201.

46  For  example, Pierre  Louys' story,  'The Wearer  of  Purple',  in The  Collected

Works of  Pierre Louys  (1951), p. 535.

47  Miller v  California,  413  U.S. 15 (1973).
48  'The  Faker's  Art',  N.Y.  Review  of  Books,  23  October,  1986,  p. 25.  Tom
Keating's  eager  'confession'  and  assiduous  self-promotion  in  the  media  as
a  successful  counterfeiter  is perhaps  an  extreme  example.

68

Counterfeit  Art

49  Gordon,  'Kirchner  in  Dresden',  48 Art  Bulletin 335, 336 (1966); Donald  E.

Gordon,  Ernst Ludwig Kirchner (1968) p. 28.

50  The case is reported  in  II Foro  Italiano  1966, II, 513. These and  other  legal
incidents  in  the  life  of  a  litigious  artist  are  briefly  described  in  Delfino,
'Giorgio  De  Chirico  in  the  Courts'  (student  paper  in author's files, n.d.).

51  The  Rockefeller  Collection  is discussed  below  Notes  67 — 8 and  text.
52  Tietze, see Note  2 above  p. 9.
53  64  Misc. 2d  423, 314 N.Y.S. 2d  661 (Sup.  Ct.  1970).53.
54  For  his  wife's  account  of  Stein's  career  as  a  counterfeiter  see  Anne-Marie

Stein,  Three Picassos Before Breakfast (1973).

55  This conclusion  was  aproved  by  the  Committee  on  Art  of  the  Association
of  the  Bar  of  the  City  of  New  York  in  its  Report  on  Disposition  of  Fake
Art,  26  Record  591  (1971). The  Report  is discussed  below.55.

56  Topolnicki,  'The  Fine  Art  of  Fraud',  Money,  September  1986, p. 73. Hov-
ing's exception  for  contemporary  art  may be optimistic if one considers the
rampant  fakes  in  the market  for  prints by Chagall, Dali, Miro and  Picasso
and  the  money  to  be  made  by  successfully  faking  the  works  of  recently
deceased  contemporary  artists  like  Andy  Warhol.  Cf.  'Some  Warhol  Art-
works  May  Be  Forged',  S.F.Chronicle, 10 July,  1989,  p. 1;  'Peers,  Bogus
Brushstroke:  Is  It  Really  a  Matisse,  or  a  Forgery?',  Wall St.  J.  22  May,
1989, p.  Cl.

57  Schuller,  see  Note  7 above  p.  81.
58  Ibid, at 83.
59  Ibid. Dr.  Jousseaune  illustrates  another  aspect  of  the counterfeit  art  prob-
lem: some of  the  traffic  is sustained  by people  unrealistically  looking  for  a
bargain. The fact  that  the price is remarkably  low, rather than putting them
on  guard,  stirs  their  avarice.  The  cliche  that  'You  can't  cheat  an  honest
man'  applies  to  many  dubious  transactions  in  the  art  market,  as  in  other
markets.

60  'French  Scholar  Cites  Utrillo  Forgeries',  San Francisco  Chronicle, 15 Sep-

tember,  1989, p. El 1.

61  Terry Tristin,  'Net  Closes Around  Publisher  of  Dali Copies,  S.F.Chronicle',
21 July,  1989, p.  E6.  Magui  is  not  the  only  source  of  questioned  Dalis. If
counterfeit  Dali  prints  number  in  the  tens  of  thousands,  can  the  false
Chagalls,  Miros,  Picassos  and  others  be  far  behind?

62  Among  these  are  some  exotic  variants.  Thus  there  are  works  sold  by  the
estate  or  the  surviving  spouse  of  the  artist  as  lifetime  works  made  by  the
deceased  master,  though  in  fact  they  are  posthumous  fabrications  passed
off  as authentic. This is commonly  supposed  to be the case with works sold
as  authentic  by  the  widows  of  two  famous  twentieth  Century  French
painters. One even hears the argument  that,  under the French  law of moral
right,  the  surviving  spouse's  assertion  that  these  posthumously  created
works  are  authentic  cannot  be  legally challenged.  Another  example: some-
one  (the estate,  a  foundry,  a  collector)  in  possession  of  a  plaster  has casts
made and  sold as authentic, though  the sculptor is dead. See the discussions
of  problems  in  the sculpture  market  cited  below,  Note 71.

63  Fraudulent  practices in the 'fine  print' market are legion, and  the variations
are  too  numerous  to  describe  here.  The  practice  described  in  the  text  and
the  highly  publicised  Dali  print  scandals  of  the  1980s  are  merely  two
illustrations  of  what  lies  in  store  for  the  unwary  collector  or  'investor'
attracted  to the print  market.  See the discussions cited  above Note 43, and
Merryman  and  Elsen  525-542.

69

John  Henry  Merryman

64  'The  Fine  Art  of  Faking  It,  Respectably',  U.S.News &  World Report,  29
August/5  September,  1988,  p. 94.  For  a  similar  account  see  Ned  Geeslin
with  Cathy  Nolan,  'Paris  Copy  King  Danial  Delamare  Makes  a  Good
Impression(ist)',  Time,  11  April  1988,  p. 45.  There  are  reports  of  like
enterprises in Nicole Swengley, 'Old  Master' to Order,  The Times, 10 March,
1990 (about Susie Ray, each of whose copies is 'technically correct, executed
in oils on  the  sort  of canvas  used  for  the original,  and  mounted  in  a  frame
in  keeping  with  the  original');  'Bogus  Art  Stands  up  to  the  Fickle  Finger
of  Fake',  Chicago  Tribune, 26  June,  1988,  p. 21  (about  Michael  Britton,
who  appears  to  have  had  legal  advice:  'What's  to  keep  the  copyists  from
being  identified  as  forgers?  'A  fake  is  intended  to  defraud,'  says  Britton,
whereas  his paintings  are  intended  for  education  and  appreciation.').

65  It is described  in Lowenthal, 'Fake, Falso, Faux', IFAR  Reports, November
1987,  p. 3. Concluding  her  description  Ms.  Lowenthal  states:  'IFAR's  ex-
perience  allows  us  to  predict  that  in  some  secondary  sales  there  will  be
deceptions  and  that  real  heartache  will be caused  by  these  fakes.'  IFAR  is
the  acronym  for  the  International  Foundation  for  Art  Research,  a  non-
profit  organization  active in dealing with problems of art  theft  and  authen-
ticity.

66  This  operation,  which  has  since  gone  out  of  business  or  underground,  is

described  in  Stolen Art  Alert,  July  1983, p. 4.

67  Within  a  few  months  a  Rockefeller  Collection  Rodin  copy  was  offered  as
authentic  by a  Parisian  dealer with  the 'RC  mark  obscured  by shoe polish.
Personal  communication  from  Professor  Albert  E.  Elsen  to  the  author.

68  Quotations  are  from  an  undated  catalog:  'The  Nelson  Rockefeller  Collec-

tion  Compliments  of  Neiman-Marcus.'

69  Lowenthal,  'Limited  Edition'  Museum  Replicas  from  Beijing',  8  IFAR
Reports  No.  1 (January/February  1987) p. 3. The  report  adds  that  each  of
the bronzes was cast in a numbered  edition  of fifty, stamped  'on  the bottom
or  in  another  inconspicuous  place'  to  show  that  they  are  reproductions.
Jessica  Rawson,  Deputy  Keeper  of  Oriental  Antiquities  at  the  British
Museum,  which  has  a  set  of  the  bronzes,  is  quoted  in  the  same  article  as
saying  that  each  replica  is distinguished  from  the  original  by  the  presence
of  'some  foreign  material'  which  would  be  visible  in  an  X-ray.  Lowenthal
reports  a  number  of concerns  about  this project  and  concludes:  'However,
one  wonders  how  long  it  will  be  before  one  of  these  fine  replicas  is  sold
with  its marks  removed  to  an  unwary  collector  who  fails  to  X-ray  it.'

70  Museum  News, January-February  1982, p.  51.
71  For  fuller  discussions  of  the  sculptural  reproduction  problem  see  Elsen,
Note  above  7; Trustman,  'Abuses  in  the  Reproduction  of  Sculpture,  ART-
news, Summer  1981, p. 84; Hochfield, 'Flagrant Abuses, Pernicious Practices
and  Counterfeit  Sculpture  are  Widespread',  ARTnews,  November  1974,
p. 21.  Cf.  Elsen  and  Merryman,  'Art  Replicas:  A  Question  of  Ethics',
ARTnews, February  1979, p. 61; Merryman  and  Elsen,  Law, Ethics and the
visual Arts  5 4 3-  551 (1987).

72  This  problem  and  the  Gorky  example  were  suggested  to  the  author  by

Eugene Victor  Thaw  in  a  letter  of  11 September  1989.

73  See  Hayt-Atkins,  'Masterminding  Masterpieces',  IFAR  Reports,  January

1988, p. 3.

74  John  Carlin  thoughtfully  discusses  these  people  and  their  work  in  his
'Culture  Vultures:  Artistic  Appropriation  and  Intellectual  Property  Law',
13 Columbia-VLA  J.  of Law & the Arts  103 (1988). Carlin's emphasis is on
the copyright  and  trademark  law remedies available to those whose  images

70

Counterfeit  Art

are  'appropriated'  by  such  as  Bidlo,  Levine and  Sturtevant  and  the  role of
'fair  use'  in  preserving  space  for  artists'  creative  use  of  others'  images.
See  also  Wang,  '(Re)Reproductive  Rights:  Copyright  and  the  Postmodern
Artist',  14 Columbia-VLA  J.  L.  & the Arts  261 (1990).

75  Here  is a  fair  sample, all  referring  to  Elaine  Sturtevant's  work. Thus:

[S]he  was  the  first  to  reverse  the  modernist  direction  of  creative  flow —
not  from  idea  to  object,  but  from  object  to  idea  ...  and  did  it  by  putting
that  object  out  of view  —  by giving the viewer nothing  new to see . ..  only
that  which  he  had  seen  before...  /  tell  you,  the  woman  is  an  original...
Sturtevant's  work  was  new,  though  of  course  she  never  meant  it  to  be
original  ...  new-to-think,  yes  ...  new-to-feel,  yes  ...  but  never  new-to-see...
she  made  new  work  by  not  departing from  other  artists'  original  work.
Sturtevant's work  ... has to do with something beyond  the shop-worn notion
or originality...  She gets down  underneath  the surface  imitation  and  reveals
the  naked  truth  within,  (emphases  supplied).  Eugene  M.  Schwartz  and
Douglas  Davis,  A  Double-Take  on  Elaine  Sturtevant,  FILE  Magazine,
Xmas  '86 issue.
Herbert  Muschamp  associates  the artist  with:
...  a rupture  of our belief in such  ideas as authorship and  originality. There
was something  irresistibly  oxymoronic  about  this first copyist,  this original
unoriginal...  her  painstaking fidelity to  her  model...
Herbert  Muschamp,  Sturtevant,  in  Sturtevant  Drawings  1988 — 1965.  Bess
Cutler (1988).
Christian  Leigh  offers  this  insight:
Lichtenstein drawings  ...  were a research project  in genre styles of painting;
a  rendering  of  the  modes  of  expression  employed  throughout  the  ages  to
depict. Once removed, via Sturtevant,  they take on a meaning of their own.
They become a study  of  the depiction  of depiction.  Her art is hers and hers
alone, no matter  how seemingly dependent upon model, (emphasis  supplied)
(in Christian  Leigh, /  Teach You the Superman) And  then came this, woman,
who made th& biggest change of all: no change. Who made the. most original
move of all: no originality... Johns' daring in using a naked  flag becomes  —
in  Sturtevant  —  the daring  to  use a  naked  Johns  ...  Eugene  M.  Schwartz,
End Game). Post  End  Game.  ibid,  and  Stephen  Westfall  suggests  that:
Sturtevant  concentrates  on  making  extremely  accurate  replicas  of  actual
phenomena,  a  rendering  procedure  that  art  has  traditionally  concerned
itself with.  Instead  of painting  vases or  landscapes, however, she's  painting
art.  You  could  say  she's  selecting  her  subjects  from  a  textual  landscape
rather  than  a  primary,  natural  landscape.  Stephen  Westfall,  Elaine  Sturte-
vant  at  White  Columns,  Art  in America October  1986, p. 164.  ••
And  in  a  press  release  from  her dealer,  Bess Cutler,  the  following  appears:
Sturtevant  models  her  work  after  well-known  objects  of contemporary  art
such  as  a  Johns  flag.  These  objects  have  been  fully  consumed  by  the  art
system  and  have already  lived  a  full  public  life.  In  seeing a Johns  flag,  one
•no longer  sees it as only an  esthetic object,  but  as a  tamed  reservoir of  art-
history  and  market  values.  In producing an identical.flag, Sturtevant  shifts
the reference from  Johns to herself, giving the flag  afresh  perspective.  In this
new  context,  the  flag  becomes,  once  again,  controversial,  (emphasis  sup-
plied)  Sturtevant  Drawings at  Bess Cutler, 12 October,  1988.

76  'We're  in  this  double-speak  age  now  where  you've  got  words* like  'appro-
priation'  — they  don't  even  call  imitation  'imitation! anymore.  What  liars
specialize  in  is changing  the  word  for  the  thing, and  thereby  passing  it  off
as  legitimate.'  Solomon,  'On  the  Waterfront  with  Mark  di  Suvero', View,

71

John  Henry  Merryman

a  Supplement  to  The Journal of  Art,  October  (1990)  pp. 7,  9  (quoting  the
artist  Mark  di  Suvero).

77  Transcript  of an  interview  between  Leo Castelli, Elaine Sturtevant  and  Dan

Cameron,  3 October,  1987. Bess Cutler  Gallery,  New  York.

78  Jorge  Luis  Borges,  'Pierre  Menard,  Author  of  the  Quixote',  in Labyrinths

(1964)  pp. 36, 43.

79  See Note  53 above.
80  I discuss only  United  States  law in  this article,  but  similar  legal  difficulties
exist  in  other  nations  with  art  museums,  dealers,  auction  houses  and
collectors.  For a discussion  of  French  Law see Jean  Chatelain  &  Francoise
Chatelain,  (Euvres d'Art el Objets de Collection en Droit Francois  145—172,
213-232(1990).

81  Other possible forms of public action that are potentially effective  in dealing
with some kinds of counterfeits  —  particularly  phoney fine prints  —  include
prosecution  for  violation  of state  securities  laws (e.g. the Carol  Convertine
Galleries case in  New  York,  The ARTnewsletter, 23 December,  1986, p. 3),
administrative  action  by  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  (e.g.  the  Austin
Galleries  case,  The ARTnewsletter, 21 June,  1988 p. 3) and  state  consumer
protection  agencies  (e.g.  Wisconsin  where,  at  this  writing,  the  Attorney
General  proposes  to  issue  a  consumer  fraud  regulation  directed  at  art
galleries dealing  in  'fine  prints').

82  American  Law  Institute,  Model  Penal  Code  and  Commentaries:  Official
Draft  and  Revised  Comments,  with  Text of  Model  Penal  Code  as  adopted
at  the  1967 Annual  Meeting of the American  Law Institute  at  Washington,
D.C.  May  24,  1962  §224.2  (1980-).  Statutes  based  on  this  model  exist  in
several  states:  Ala.  Stat.  §13A-9-10;  Alaska  Stat.  §11.46.530;  Ariz.  Rev.
Stat.  Ann.  13-2004;  Ark. Code  Ann.  5 - 3 7 - 2 1 3;  Conn.  Gen.  Stat.  Ann.
53a-141;  Ky. Rev. Stat.  Ann. §516.110; Me. Stat. Title  17-A §705; N.J.Stat.
2O21-2;  N.Y.  Penal  Law  s  170.45; Ohio  Rev.  Code  Ann.  §2913.32; Tex.
Stat.  & Codes  Ann. Title  7 §32.22. 82.

83  'According  to  the  Report  of  the  Arizona  Criminal  Code  Commisssion  ...
the  criminal  simulation  statute  was  designed  to  address  "the  problems  of
forged  art  treasures  or  the  sale of  faked  antiques  or  rare  natural  objects."'
State  v Rea,  145 Ariz. 298, 701 P. 2d 6, 8 (1985). '[The criminal  simulation
statute]  extends  to  the  forgery  of  ancient  and  modern  works  of  art  ...'
Tawflk v State,  Tex. Crim.  App.,  643 S.W.  2d  127,  128 (1983).

84  '...it  should  be noted  that  Section  224.2 provides  coverage  against  forgery
of  'any  object'  other  than  a  writing.'  Model  Penal  Code,  Section  224.1,
Comment  3. In  State  v  Rea,  145 Ariz.  298,  701  P. 2d  6 (1985)  the  Court
held  that  forgery  and  criminal  simulation  were  distinct  offenses,  so  that
criminal  simulation  could  not  be  treated  as  a  lesser  included  offense  in  a
prosecution  for  forgery.

85  Although  there seem to be no American cases in point  there are two British
decisions. In  Regina v Closs, (1858) Dears & B. 460, in which the  defendant
had  the  signature  of  the  painter  John  Linnell  added  to  a  copy  of  one  of
LinnelPs paintings,  the Court  said:
A  forgery  must  be  of  some  document  or  writing;  and  this  was  merely  in
the  nature  of  a  mark  put  upon  the  painting  with  a  view  of  identifying  it,
and  was  no  more  than  if  the  painter  put  any  other  arbitrary  mark  as  a
recognition  of  the  picture  being his.
In  Regina v Douce, (1971)  Crim.L.Rev.  105, where  the  paintings  bore  the
signature  of  Edward  Seago,  a  charge  of  forgery  was  admitted  because:
'[T]he  signatures  made  all  the  difference  as  they  purported  to  tell  you

72

Counterfeit  Art

something  about  the  paintings.'  In  a  comment  on  Douce,  D.J.  Lamming
states:  'The  essence  of  the  forgery  in  both  Closs  and  Douce  was  the
painting  — on  its  own  the  signature  would  be  meaningless',  Ibid, at  106.
There  is  an  interesting  discussion  of  this  and  related  questions  in  Great
Britain, Law Commission, Report on Forgery and Counterfeit Currency (Law
Com.  No.  55, 1973), pp.  10-12.

86  See discussion  Notes  31 ff  and  text. 
87  See  Note,  'Legal  Control  of  the  Fabrication  and  Marketing  of  Fake

!•

Paintings',  24 Stan.L.Rev.  930 (1972).

88  Note,  'Art  Forgery:  The  Art  Market  and  Legal  Considerations',  7  Nova
L.J.  315,  329  (1983).  The  use  of  this  strategy  by  Elmyr  de  Hory  and  his
accomplices  is decribed  in  Clifford  Irving, Fake\
Compare  the discovery,  in  1987, that  highly  regarded  ceramic  figures  from
Vera  Cruz  said  to  date  from  600  to  900  AD  in  the  collections  of  major
museums  were made  by a  living  Mexican  sculpture  restorer,  Brigido  Lara.
Mr.  Lara  maintained  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  any  fraud,  'which
was  perpetrated  by  middlemen  who  obtained  the  pieces  and  passed  them
off  as  the  real  thing.'  Museum's  pre-Columbian  Artworks  Revealed  as
Copies  Made  in  1950's.  San  Jose  Mercury  News,  25  April,  1987,  p. 10A.
Douglas  C.  McGill,  'Sculptures  Could  be  Forgeries',  N.Y.Times  Arts  &
Entertainment Section,  20 May,  1987, p. 26. He insisted  that  the  sculptures
had  always  been  sold  to  tourists  and  art  collectors  and  dealers as  his own
original  works.  'He  later  learned,  he  said,  that  people  would  sometimes
buy  his' works,  doctor  them  to  appear  aged,  and  then  resell  them  as
authentic  pre-Columbian  sculpture.  But  he. never  condoned  this  activity.'

89  e.g.  18 U.S.C. §473. This statute punishes several related  offenses:  1) misuse
of plates made  for  the purpose  of printing  'any  obligation  or other  security
of  the  United  States';  2)  making  likenesses  of  such  plates;  3)  selling  or
importing  such  plates; 4) possession  of  such  plates  'with  intent  to  use...  or
suffer  the same  to  be  used  in  forging  or counterfeiting  any  such  obligation
or  other  security';  5)  possessing  counterfeit  obligation  or  other  security'
with  intent  to sell or  otherwise  use same'; 6) making  or  selling any  likeness
of  such  obligation  or  other  security; 7) possessing distinctive  paper  similar
to  that  'adopted  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  for  the  obligations  and
other  securities of the United  States.' Of the seven  types of offense  included
in  the statute,  only 4) and  5) include  any element  of  intent.

90  18  U.S.C.  §489  punishes  'Whoever...  makes  or...  possesses  with  intent  to
sell,  give  away,  or  in  any  other  manner  uses...  any  token,  disk,  or  device
inthe  likeness  or  similitude  as  to design, color  or  the inscription  thereon  of
any  of  the coins  of  the  United  States'.

91  18U.S.C§501  punishes a group of related offenses:  1) forging or  counterfeit-
ing  stamps;  2)  making,  printing,  using  or  selling  or  possessing  with  intent
to  use or  sell,  forged  or  counterfeited  stamps;  3) making,  knowingly  using
or  selling, or  possessing  with  intent  to  use or  sell paper  bearing  the.water-
mark  of any stamped  envelope or postal card; 4) making or printing  stamps
of  the  kind  authorized  by  the  Post  Office  Department  or  Postal  Service
without  authority;  5) delivering  such  stamps,  with  intent  to  defraud,  to  an
unauthorized  person.

92  Webb v  U.S.,  216  F.2d  151, 152 (1954). To  the  same effect  for  procuring  a
plate to be made, Michener v US,  170 F.2d 973 (1948). A comparable  result
is achieved when the court infers intent. Thus in a prosecution  for  possession
of a plate with  intent  to  use, intent  was inferred  from  possession. Michener
v  US,  157 F.2d  616 (1946), rev. on  other  grounds  331 U.S. 789 (1946). And

73

John  Henry  Merryman

in  a  subsequent  prosecution  for  procuring  a  plate  to  be  made  the  court
stated: 'The crime is complete with the plate is unlawfully  made or  procured
to  be  made...  The  intent  to  use  the  plate  unlawfully  is  not  a  necessary
ingredient  of the crime, but, even  so, the charge of intent  to unlawfully  use
it is implicit  in  the charge of  unlawfully  making.'  Michener v  US,  170 F.2d
973, 975 (1948). Cf.  Britt v  US, 391  F.2d  540 (1968); US v Green, 474  F.2d
1385 (1973), cert  den. 414  US 829 (19 ).
Justice  Brennan,  dissenting  in  Regan  v  Time,  Inc.  468  U.S. 641  (1984),
argued  that  the  absence  of  a  requirement  of  intent  to  deceive  or  defraud
in  18  U.S.C.  §474  impaired  Time's freedom  of  expression  under  the  First
Amendment.  Although  his dissent  was joined  by Justice  Marshall,  none of
the  other justices commented  on  the  matter.
In  Great  Britain,  under  the  Forgery  and  Counterfeiting  Act  1981  §14,
making  a  counterfeit  note  or  coin  intending  to  pass  it  as  genuine  is  an
offence  punishable  by  up  to  ten  years'  imprisonment,  while  making  a
counterfeit  note  or  coin  without  lawful  authority  or  excuse  (no  intent
specified)  invites  imprisonment  for  up  to  two  years.  -

93  412  F.Supp. 426 (D.C.W.D.Mo.  1974). The strength  of  Wagner as  a prece-
dent  is weakened  by  reservations  expressed  in dicta in  Regan v  Time, Inc.,
Note  92 above  at  p. 651, n8.

94  18  U.S.C.  §492  provides  for  forfeiture  of  counterfeits  or  'any  articles,
devices,  and  other  things  made,  possessed,  or  used...  or  any  material  or
apparatus  used  or  fitted  or  intended  to  be  used,  in  the  making  of  such
counterfeits,  articles,  devices  or  things,  found  in  the  possession  of  any
person  without  authority...'  Paragraph  3 of §492 permits  the  Secretary  of
the Treasury  to  remit  or  mitigate  the  forfeiture  only  if he finds that  it  'was
incurred  without  willful  negligence  or  without  any  intention  on  the part  of
the  petitioner  to  violate  the  law...  upon  such  terms  and  conditions  as  [the
Secretary] deems  reasonable  and just.'

95  Specifically,  18 U.S.C. §474.
96  The  statutory  scheme  permits  some  reproductions:  18  U.S.C.  §504  allows
black and white illustrations for 'philatelic, numismatic, educational,  histor-
ical,  or  newsworthy  purposes  in  articles,  books, journals,  newspapers,  or
albums'  if  the  linear  dimensions  of  such  illustrations  are  less  than  three-
fourths or more than  one and  one-half those of the original.' This provision
was the  focus  of  disagrement  between  Justice  White,  for  the majority,  and
Justice  Brennan,  dissenting,  in  Regan v  Time, Inc 468  U.S. 641 (1984).

97  The  Court's  First  Amendment  discussion  was  expressly  based  on  US  v

O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968).

98  Compare the reference to  Wagner as 'one arguably unconstitutional  applica-

tion  of the statute'  in  Regan v  Time, Inc., see Note  92 above  at  651, n8.

99  The case  is described  in  Lawrence  Weschler's  two-part  profile  of  Boggs in
the  New  Yorker  of  18  January,  1988,  p. 33  and  25  January,  1988,  p. 88.
Although  Boggs  regularly  shows  his  work  in  a  New  York  gallery  he  has
apparently  not  been  prosecuted  under  US  counterfeiting  laws.  Boggs  has
also produced  drawings of Swiss banknotes in Switzerland  without  interfer-
ence  by Swiss authorities.

100  Boggs's methods  of disposing  of his drawings  is an  important  aspect  of  his
work  and  is  described  at  length  by  Weschler.  Briefly,  Boggs  offers  the
drawings  at  face  value  in  exchange  for  goods  and  services  and  insists  on
receiving change.

101  The public importance  of authenticity  is developed  in 'The  Public  Interest',

see Note  5 above.

74

Counterfeit Art

102  Before the Copyright Act of 1976 and the legislation accompanying US acces-
sion to the Bern Copyright  Convention in 1989, the requirement of registra-
tion or placing a copyright notice on the work, plus the aesthetic and ideologi-
cal concerns of many artists, meant  that  most  works were not protected by
copyright. See Note, 'Courting the Artist with Copyright: The 1976 Copyright
Act', 24 Wayne L. Rev. 1685 (1978); Sheehan, 'Why Don't  Fine Artists Use
Copyright', 22 Bull. Copr. Soc. 242 (1975): Merryman and Elsen,  175ff.

103  On  the  ineffectiveness  of  copyright  as  a  remedy  against  counterfeiting
see  Nelson,  'Art  Forgery  and  Copyright  Law: Modifying  the  Originality
Requirement  to  Prevent  the  Forging  of  Artworks',  8  Cardozo  Arts  &
Entertainment L. J. 683 (1990).

104  California  Civil  Code §987.
105  New York  Arts & Cultural  Affairs  Law §14.55.
106  See Merryman  and  Elsen,  Law, Ethics  and the  Visual Arts  143 ff.  (2d ed

1987).

107  Title  VI of the Judicial  Improvements  Act of  1990, entitled:  Visual  Artists
Rights  Act  of  1990. It  provides  that:  'the  author  of  a  work  of  visual  art
shall  have  the right  to prevent  the use of his or her name as the author of
any  work  of  visual  art  which  he or  she did  not  create',  17 U.S.C. §106A
(a).

108  The  federal  law  protects  paternity  only  during  the  life  of  the  artist,  17

U.S.C. §106A (d).  108.

109  In California,  France and Germany, where versions of the artist's.resale pro-
ceeds  right  (droit de suite) exist, an interesting  question  arises, for one who
sells a counterfeit work. If he takes the position that it is genuine, then presum-
ably he owes the artist or her successors a part of the 'resale' price. He could
of course avoid  such payment  by showing that the work is counterfeit.  Paul
Katzenberger, 'The Penal Protection  of Copyright in Artistic Works and the
Practice of Prosecution in the Federal Republic of Germany', in International
Institute  of  Higher  Studies  in  Criminal  Sciences,  The Penal Protection of
Works of Art (Quaderni  di Scienze Criminali  1983) p. 315, 321. The resale
proceeds right is discussed in Merryman and Elsen 213 ff.

110  Compare  the result  in Factor v Stella, reproduced  in  Merryman  and Elsen
at  502 — 3,  in  which  the court  found  that  additional  copies  of  a  painting
(made, in this case, by the artist  himself)  violated  the artist's  obligation  to
the  owner  of the original  work,  but  that  the plaintiff  suffered  no resulting
provable  damage. 110.

111  Comment,  'Uniform  Commercial  Code  Warranty  Solutions  to  Art  Fraud

and  Forgery',  14 Wm.  & Mary  L.  Rev. 409 (1972).
112  15 U.S.C.A.  §§1051 ff.;  Cal. Bus. & Prof.  C. §14340;
113  18  U.S.C.  §1159;  Alaska  Stat.  '§§45.650.010 ff.;  Ariz,  Rev.  Stat.  Ann.
§§44-1231 ff.;  New  Mex. Stat.  Ann.  3 0 - 3 3 -3   to  3 0 - 3 3 - 8;   Col. Rev.
Stat.  Ann. §12-44.5.

114  See Note  67 and text  above.
115  See text  at Note  86 above.
116  The question  of plausibility  is difficult  and inescapable. In part  it depends
on  the  quality  of  the  counterfeit  work  and  in  part  on  the  standard  of
knowledge and perception  expected of the buyer. The same question  arises,
however,  under  existing  criminal  simulation  statutes.  Whether  an  object
'appears  to  have  value  because  of  antiquity,  rarity,  source  or  authorship
which  it  does  not  possess'  (Model  Penal  Code  §224.2,  discussed  above)
depends  on a judgment  about  whether  the simulated  object  resembles the
real  thing  (objective  plausibility)  and an assumption  about  the  probability

75

John  Henry  Merryman

that  people  of  varying  degrees  of  knowledge  and  discrimination  would  be
deceived  by it (subjective  plausibility).

117  This language  is adapted  from  that  of  Model  Penal  Code §224.2, discussed
above,  with  the  element  of  intent  replaced  by  knowledge.  A similar  result,
without  the necessity  for  any legislative action, could  be reached  by judicial
interpretation  of  the  part  of  Model  Penal  Code  §224.2  that  reads  'or  with
knowledge  that  he  is  facilitating  a  fraud  to  be  perpetrated  by  anyone'  to
apply  to enterprises  like those of Mr. Delamare  and  the Rockefeller  Collec-
tion.  That  was  not,  however,  the  meaning  intended  by  the  drafters;  see
Model  Penal  Code §224.1,  Comment  5.

118  On  the  constitutionally  permissable  'time,  place  and  manner'  limitations
on expression  under the First Amendment  see Melville B. Nimmer, Nimmer
on Freedom of Speech (1984) §§2.04, 4.03.

119  The  Report  (hereinafter  ABCNY  Report)  was  prepared  by  the  Committee
on  Art  of  the  Association  of  the  Bar  of  the  City  of  New  York  and  was
published  in 26  Record  591 (1971).

120  ABCNY  Report  591-2.
121  ABCNY  Report  598
122  ABCNY  Report  598-9
123  The  text  description  is  based  on  the  writer's  experience  in  the  art  market
and  on  conversations  with  dealers,  auction  house  personnel,  museum  per-
sonnel  and  collectors.

124  The story is told by Vasari that  Michelangelo made a marble sleeping cupid
and artificially  aged it so that  it could  be sold as an antique. Giorgio Vasari,
Lives of the Most  Eminent Painters, Sculptors and Architects, vol. 9 (London
1912-1915)  p. 12.

125  See discussion  at  Note  94 and  text  above.
126  See,  for  example,  the  Trademark  Counterfeiting  Act  of  1984,  15  USC
1051 ff.  Section  1116(d)(t)(a)  provides  for  seizure  of  counterfeit  objects,
section  1118  for  destruction.  State  law  contains  similar  provisions.  Thus
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code section  14340(b) authorizes seizure and  destruction
of counterfeit  commercial  articles.  U.S.C. Title  18 §2318(a)(d)  provides  for
confiscation  of counterfeit  records, and  Title  17 authorizes  confiscation  of
copyright  infringing  works  in  §§5O3(a)  &  (b)  and  506(a)(b).  Articles  em-
ployed  in  RICO violations may be confiscated  under Title  18 §1963(a). The
remedies  of  confiscation  and  destruction  are  available  in  civil  as  well  as
criminal  actions  under  both  statutes.

127  See the discussion  Notes  101 ff.  above  and  text.
128  In France the power of the police to seize counterfeits  (la saisie-contrefacon)
without  prior  judicial  authorization  puts  the  burden  of  sueing  to  recover
the  works  on  the  person  claiming  them.  Such  an  action  by  a  counterfeiter
or dealer-accomplice  is of course  unlikely, and  even an  innocent  party  may
decide  not  to  take  the  trouble  to  recover  something  devalued  by  being
labelled  counterfeit.  Various  French  laws applicable  to  counterfeit  art  also
expressly provide  for seizure and  destruction,  although  the innocent  owner
may  reclaim  them.  There  is an  excellent  discussion  in  Chatelain  271—280.
A  similar  rule  prevails  in  Italy  under  the  Law  of  20  November  1971, n.
1062, Art.  7.

129  Karlen,  'Fakes,  Forgeries and  Expert  Opinions',  16 J.  Arts  Management &
Law 5 (Fall  1986) is a  useful  discussion  of  the  liability  of experts.  See also
Bresler, 'Expert Opinions and  Liability', 254 Practicing Law Institute  Patent,
Copyright and  Trademark Institute  269  (1988);  Colin  &  Easby,  'Legal  As-

76

Counterfeit  Art

pects of  Forgery  and  Protection  of the Expert', 26 Bull, of the Metropolitan
Museum of Art  258 (1968);  Merryman  and  Elsen,  569 ff.

130  See, for example,  Travis v Sotheby  Parke Bernet, Inc., reproduced  in Merry-
man  and  Elsen, 571 —3,  for  an example of an  apparently  unfounded  action
of  this  kind.  Cf.  Mount  v  Sadik  et  ai,  No.  78  Civ.  2279  (WCC)
(D.C.S.D.N.Y.  1980) in which plaintiffs  record as authenticater  of disputed
paintings  and  seller  of  forged  John  Singer  Sargent  watercolors,  described
in an article in ARTnews by Sylvia  Hochfield,  became the basis of an  action
for  defamation.

131  The  first  wave  of  legal  interest  in  the  protection  of  cultural  property
occurred  in  the second  half  of  the nineteenth  century,  with  arts.  34 — 36 of
the  Lieber  Code  and  a  series  of  international  conferences  from  which
emerged  a  group  of  multilateral  conventions  ('The  Hague  Conventions')
that  included  special  provisions  protecting  cultural  property  from  the  acts
of belligerents during hostilities. The development  is summarized  in  Merry-
man,  'Two  Ways  of  Thinking  about  Cultural  Property',  80  Am.  J.  Int.  L.
831, 833-5  (1986). The Convention  for the Protection  of Cultural  Property
in  the  Event  of  Armed  Conflict  of  14  May,  1954,  249  U.N.T.S. 240,  is
presently  the  reigning  multilateral  convention  on  the  topic.  The  United
States,  to  its discredit,  has not  acceded  to  it.
The second  wave of international  interest  in the legal protection  of cultural
property  began  in  1933 but  achieved  real momentum  only after  World War
II and the establishment of the United Nations and UNESCO. The emphasis
during this development  has been  of two kinds: to protect cultural  property
against  loss  from  negligence,  ignorance  and  mismanagement  during  peace
time,  and  to  control  the  international  movement  of  stolen  and  illegally
exported  cultural  objects.  The  key  instrument  is  the  Convention  on  the
Means of Prohibiting and  Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and  Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property of 14 November,  1970, 823 U.N.T.S. 231.
The United  States, to its credit, is a party  —  indeed  the only major  cultural
property  importing  nation  to  have  acceded  to  the  Convention  at  this
writing.  The development  is described  in  'Two  Ways', at  242 ff.

132  Examples  would  include establishment  of the National  Endowment  for  the
Arts;  a  variety  of  state  and  federal  laws  protecting  historic  sites  and
monuments  and  archaeological  sites  and  objects;  the  proliferation  of  mu-
seums of all  kinds, particularly  in  Washington,  DC, which  has become one
of  the  great  museum  cities  of  the  world;  the  increased  legal  attention  to
artists'  rights, living and  working conditions  and  hazardous  materials; and
many others. See generally Merryman  and  Elsen, Law, Ethics and the  Visual
Arts  (2d ed  1987); Feldman,  Weil  and  Duke  Biederman,  Art  Law (1986).

133  See 'The  Public  Interest',  Note  5 above  at  355 ff.

77


