 International Journal of Cultural Property   (2014)   21:  445– 463 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2015 International Cultural Property Society 
 doi:10.1017/S0940739114000265 

              

    From Babylon to Baghdad: 
Cultural Heritage and Constitutional 
Law in the Republic of Iraq 
       Tess     Davis   *   

   

         Abstract:     The Constitution of the Republic of Iraq entered force in 2005, 
placing such “national treasures” as “antiquities, archeological sites, cultural 
buildings, manuscripts, and coins” under federal jurisdiction to be “managed 
in cooperation with the regions and governorates.” This provision may not 
immediately appear significant or controversial, but it is both. Federalism 
remains a heated and even deadly issue in Iraq, which is still balancing authority 
between its capital and other parts of the country. The Constitution’s handling 
of heritage—like its comparable treatment of oil and gas—therefore raises 
many questions. The answers to these have massive implications, as they not 
only determine who governs culture in Iraq but also could void much existing 
domestic law and unravel the country’s entire heritage management system. 
This study thus aims to clarify the Constitution’s treatment of antiquities and 
archaeology, resolving who controls one of Iraq’s most important historic, 
cultural, and economic resources.      

   INTRODUCTION 

 Few places are more linked to the law than Babylon, the stronghold of King Ham-
murabi, whose eponymous code is one of the oldest, and arguably most famous, 
known to history. Dating back to the 18th century  bce , the Code of Hammurabi 

  *  Scottish Centre for Crime and Justice Research ,  University of Glasgow . 
Email:  Tess.Davis@glasgow.ac.uk . 

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  :   The author wishes to thank Lisa Ackerman and the World Monuments 
Fund, whose work at Babylon first inspired this research, as well as Professors Ricardo Elia and 
Paul  Zimansky,  whose  guidance,  recommendations,  and  encouragement  proved  invaluable  in 
completing it. 

445

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

 446   

 TESS DAVIS

controlled  all  aspects  of  Babylonian  life,  from  business  and  trade  to  the  house-
hold to crime and punishment. Hammurabi promulgated his code throughout 
Mesopotamia, inscribing its provisions on public monuments, one of which—
a stele larger than a grown man—can still be admired at the Louvre Museum 
today.  1   

 Now,  several  millennia  after  Hammurabi’s  Code,  the  laws  governing  ancient 
Mesopotamia  no  longer  fit  on  a  single  slab.  The  Republic  of  Iraq—a  distant 
successor to Hammurabi’s kingdom—is struggling to preserve its past through a 
legal framework that includes international treaties, domestic legislation, and even 
constitutional provisions. Laws criminalize the looting of archaeological sites and 
trafficking of antiquities as well as regulate their study and management. Within 
the  past  decade,  the  country  has  overhauled  many  of  these  protections,  even  in 
times of invasion, occupation, and civil war.  2   

 The history of these recent measures is intertwined with that of Iraq itself (as 
is true of the country’s heritage law throughout the past century). On 18 November 
2002,  the  same  day  United  Nations  weapons  inspectors  returned  to  Baghdad, 
Antiquities  and  Heritage  Law  Number  55  of  2002  took  effect  and  modernized 
the  country’s  preservation  mandate.  3    The  next  year,  on  29  October  2003—not 
six months into the Iraq occupation by the Coalition Provisional Authority—the 
Ministry of Culture proposed that Babylon and the Marshlands of Mesopotamia 
be added to the Tentative List of the World Heritage Convention. These were the 
first of six postwar submissions, a “forecast” of sites to eventually be nominated 
for World Heritage Status.  4   Finally on 15 October 2005, the new Constitution of 
the Republic of Iraq came into force, pledging state backing for “cultural activities 
and institutions.”  5   More importantly, in Article 113 it also placed such “national 
treasures” as “antiquities, archeological sites, cultural buildings, manuscripts, 
and coins” under federal jurisdiction, but to be “managed in cooperation with 
the regions and governorates.” 

 Article 113 may not immediately appear significant, or contentious, but it is 
both. Federalism remains a heated and even deadly issue in Iraq, which in the 
wake of the 2005 Constitution, is fighting to balance authority between its capital 
and other parts of the country. On its face, the Constitution grants all powers to 
the  regions  and  governorates,  save  for  a  short  and  select  list  that  is  exclusive  to 
Baghdad. The latter does  not  include heritage or, more controversially, oil and gas. 
However, the Constitution appears to contradict itself elsewhere, by underscoring 
the national character of these very resources.  6   

 The Constitution’s handling of heritage—like its comparable treatment of oil 
and gas—therefore raises many questions. Who is ultimately responsible for Iraq’s 
archaeological sites and antiquities—and thus able to legislate them—the federal 
authorities or the regions and governorates? How is their “cooperation” to work in 
practice? And what happens if there is conflict between them? 

 The answers to these questions have massive implications, as they not only 
determine who governs culture in Iraq but additionally could void much existing 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ  

  447 

domestic law and even interfere with Iraq’s obligations under international law. 
Or they could, in short, unravel the country’s entire heritage management system. 
Indeed, disputes between Baghdad and the local authorities at Babylon, as well as 
the regional authorities in Kurdistan, portended such a worst-case scenario early on. 
 The stakes have only risen with recent events. In June 2014, Iraq’s long sim-
mering insurgency exploded with a new offensive by the Islamic State of Iraq and 
Syria (ISIS), a Sunni jihadist group too extreme even for Al Qaeda.  7   As ISIS stormed 
northern and western Iraq, fears grew that Baghdad itself would fall, prompting 
Kurdish calls for independence and threatening the entire federal system.  8   But at 
the time of this writing, ISIS is losing ground to an Iraqi and Kurdish counter-
offensive, supported by U.S. airstrikes. World leaders have also expressed opti-
mism that the departure of former Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki—a Shia accused 
of disenfranchising Iraq’s Sunnis to the point of revolt—could lead to “a peaceful 
transition  of  power,  based  on  democratic  elections,  …  a  first  in  modern  Iraq’s 
troubled history of kings, coups and dictatorships.”  9   

 It remains to be seen whether this optimism is warranted, but instead of derogating 
preservation to the background, the crisis has given it renewed urgency. As ISIS 
seeks to annihilate its enemies and all they hold sacred—including Sunnis who refuse 
to  subscribe  to  its  hardline  ideology—mass  executions  and  cultural  destruction 
have gone hand in hand. The militants infamously made international headlines 
after razing the Judeo-Christian Tomb of Jonah (and with it the Sunni mosque of 
the Prophet Younis) along with countless other graves and shrines.  10   They are also 
reportedly arming their cause with “millions” earned from antiquities looting and 
trafficking.  11   So with the threat of ISIS, heritage has become a matter of national 
security, making its protection more important than ever. 

 This article thus aims to clarify the 2005 Constitution’s treatment of heritage 
and resolve who controls one of the Republic of Iraq’s most important historic, 
cultural, and potentially economic resources. Because such an endeavor requires 
a basic knowledge of the document itself, as well as Iraqi legal principles, these 
are first introduced in theory and practice. The relevant constitutional law is then 
explored—in particular, the legislative history, text, placement, and implications 
of Article 113—within the wider domestic and international legal system. Finally, 
based on this analysis, the author holds that heritage should be treated as a federal 
power despite arguments to the contrary from the regions and governorates.   

 THE 2005 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ 

 The 2005 Constitution of the Republic of Iraq created the modern Iraqi state. This 
charter  was  a  remarkable  achievement,  but  it  has  yet  to  be  fully  implemented, 
resulting in one nation on paper and another in actuality.  12   Contradictions in the 
text have not been amended and gaps not filled. Key institutions are still unrealized. 
Given  such  instability,  this  article  does  not  attempt  to  present  a  snapshot  of 
Iraq at this moment, which may be outdated tomorrow. Instead, it outlines the 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

 448   

 TESS DAVIS

government  as  it  is  meant  to  be,  while  making  every  effort  to  indicate  when 
reality diverges. Such a legal overview may seem far removed from cultural resources 
management,  but  it  is  crucial  to  understanding  the  Constitution’s  treatment  of 
heritage and thus the practice of archaeology in Iraq. 

 The United States began planning for a new Iraqi constitution well before the 
fall of Saddam Hussein.  13   By October 2001, the U.S. State Department’s Bureau 
of  Near  Eastern  Affairs  had  established  the  Future  of  Iraq  (FOI)  Project,  which 
gathered together select Iraqi exiles to prepare for expected regime change.  14   They 
quickly prioritized the need for a new constitution in order to strengthen democracy 
and the rule of law.  15   Many months and $5 million dollars later, their recommen-
dations on this and numerous other topics resulted in a detailed report, spanning 
1,200 pages over 13 volumes.  16   

 In retrospect, the FOI report accurately predicted many of the challenges facing 
postwar Iraq and provided a comprehensive strategy for addressing them.  17   But 
due to personalities and politics within the U.S. government, it was largely ignored 
after the American invasion, which began on 19 March 2003 and toppled the 
regime of Saddam Hussein 21 days later.  18   Instead of following the FOI roadmap, 
the United States and its allies laid a new groundwork. They first established a 
transitional government, the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), which in turn 
appointed the Iraqi Governing Council (IGC) from domestic leaders and former 
exiles.  19   Working together, the CPA and IGC drafted the Law of Administration 
for  the  State  of  Iraq  for  the  Transitional  Period  (also  called  the  Transitional 
Administrative Law, or TAL), which was signed on 8 March 2004.  20   On 30 June 
2004, when the CPA and IGC officially transferred power to the new Iraqi Interim 
Government, the TAL became the country’s functioning constitution.  21   

 Iraq was still in need of a permanent constitution—and government—and the 
creation of these was soon the focus of the Iraqi Interim Government. It formed 
the Constitutional Drafting Committee (CDC), which was initially composed of 
members of the Transitional National Assembly, and later expanded.  22   But pro-
gress was slow, and work did not begin in earnest until June 2005.  23   

 Sections of the constitution were leaked in June and July, and by late August, 
a complete (but highly divisive) draft was presented.  24   Portions of the text were 
vigorously modified over the next weeks, revealing intense disagreements over key 
provisions, which continued right until the TAL’s deadline.  25   The finished draft 
was  then  officially  submitted  for  a  referendum  on  15  October  2005.  Despite 
continuing violence, and amid heavy security, the Iraqi people went to the polls in 
huge numbers. After 10 million votes and 10 days of counting, the electoral com-
mission announced the results. The new constitution had been approved by 79% 
of the voters.  26   

 The 2005 Constitution of the Republic of Iraq, characteristic of such charters, 
includes a preamble, fundamental principles, a bill of rights and liberties, the structure 
for a federal government, enumerated federal and regional powers, an amendment 
procedure, and transitional provisions. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ  

  449 

 It totals 144 articles. The very first establishes Iraq as a “single federal, inde-
pendent and fully sovereign state in which the system of government is republi-
can, representative, parliamentary, and democratic.” Within this framework, “The 
people are the source of authority and legitimacy,” which they exercise through 
the federal powers of the judiciary, executive, and legislature. These branches of 
government “exercise their competencies and tasks on the basis of the principle of 
separation of powers.”  27   

 The Constitution also provides for a broader federal system, including the capital, 
regions, and governorates, in addition to local administrations. Baghdad is the cap-
ital, and as of now, Kurdistan the only region.  28   The most numerous divisions are 
thus governorates not incorporated into a region.  29   These are themselves further 
carved into districts, subdistricts, and villages.  30   

 Iraq is still determining the balance of power between all these entities. The 
Constitution does enumerate competencies that are exclusive to the federal gov-
ernment and also those that it shares with the regional and governorate authorities. 
It reserves all others to the regions and governorates. 

 The Constitution concludes with transitional provisions, meant to smooth the cre-
ation of the new government, and provides for an amendment process.  31   According 
to Article 144, the very last, “This Constitution shall come into force after the approval 
of the people thereon in a general referendum, its publication in the Official Gazette, 
and the seating of the government that is formed pursuant to this Constitution.” 
As noted earlier, the Constitution was approved in a 15 October 2005 referendum, 
and then published in the Official Gazette on 28 December 2005. These steps paved 
the way for the new government, and more relevant to this study, its legal system.   

 THE LEGAL SYSTEM UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 

 The Republic of Iraq’s new legal system, along with the rest of the country’s 
government, remains in a state of flux. The first administration following the Con-
stitution could not instantly enact a whole new regime, so many earlier institutions 
and laws have remained in force, and they will continue until they are replaced by 
new ones or otherwise repealed. As a result, identifying governing legislation and 
how it should be applied is frequently difficult, and sometimes impossible. None-
theless, there are a number of key legal principles that hold true, on whose basis the 
rest of the justice framework is being developed. 

 Perhaps  most  important  of  these  is  the  complete  sovereignty  of  the  law.  Of 
all  law,  the  Constitution  is  the  “preeminent  and  supreme”  source  and  “shall  be 
binding in all parts of Iraq without exception.” Additionally, “No law that contra-
dicts [it] shall be enacted,” and “Any text in any regional constitutions or any other 
legal text that contradicts [it] shall be considered void.”  32   

 Not all other laws are created equal. In Iraq, as in most countries, the Constitu-
tion provides guidelines for a legal hierarchy. If laws conflict, these choice-of-law 
rules decide which should apply. 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

 450   

 TESS DAVIS

 As noted earlier, in case of conflict between the Constitution and any other law, 
the Constitution will prevail. A more complicated question is what happens when 
two federal laws, or two regional/governorate laws, or a federal and regional/
governorate law conflict. Regarding the latter, and in a sharp contrast from other 
federal systems, the regions and governorates apparently prevail in case of any dispute. 
The only exception concerns matters that are listed as exclusive to the federal gov-
ernment.  33   In many cases the interpretation of this principle is straightforward, but 
as will be discussed later, it has caused much debate regarding oil, gas, and heritage. 
 Another issue is what happens when a domestic law conflicts with an interna-
tional law.  34   The Constitution is firm that Iraq shall “respect its international obli-
gations,” which presumably includes treaties and other agreements that the country 
has entered, as well as  jus cogens  norms.  35   This is not empty language. According to 
U.S. observers of Iraq’s constitutional process, the document’s drafters “understood 
and embraced the legal and symbolic implications of including basic provisions in 
the text that reinforced [Iraq’s] commitment to international obligations.”  36   

 The Constitution also includes several provisions detailing how Iraq will enter 
such obligations. First, it gives the federal government exclusive authority in the 
realm of international affairs and law. This power includes “negotiating, signing, 
and ratifying international treaties and agreements.”  37   

 It fails to provide other guidance for how international law will fit into the Iraqi 
legal system. Iraq has traditionally followed the “dualist” theory of international 
law. According to this viewpoint—which is shared by the United Kingdom and the 
United States—international law must first be incorporated into Iraqi law before 
it can be enforced domestically.  38   Until this happens, it cannot be applied in the 
country’s courts or invoked by its citizens. Once an international law has been thus 
implemented, however, it would likely have precedence over other domestic law in 
case of dispute.   

 THE CONSTITUTION’S TREATMENT OF HERITAGE  

 Legislative History 

 More could be written about the Republic of Iraq’s legal system, but the preceding 
summary is sufficient to understand the 2005 Constitution’s treatment of archae-
ology and antiquities. As introduced above, this charter not only establishes the 
Iraqi government, but it also forms the foundation of the country’s heritage policy. 
Again, it does this by pledging state support for cultural activities and institutions 
and classifying select categories of objects and sites as “national treasures” under 
federal control, to be managed in cooperation with the regions and governorates. 
 Such provisions were not on the American radar during its prewar discussions, 
even though as early as late 2001, the United States had already started planning 
for a new Iraqi constitution and legal system. The FOI Project never convened 
a proposed working group on “Preserving Iraq’s Cultural Heritage,” and because 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ  

  451 

“the project’s existence remained essentially unknown to anyone from the cultural 
heritage community,” it received little if any input on cultural heritage matters.  39   
By fall 2002, archaeological organizations did launch an active campaign urging the 
United States to safeguard Iraq’s ancient sites and objects during the coming war, 
both from bombing and the looting sure to follow any conflict.  40   In early 2003, 
Pentagon officials also met with art collectors and curators from the American 
Council for Cultural Policy (ACCP), who echoed these same concerns.  41   

 However, archaeologists feared that the ACCP’s true goal was to instead relax 
antiquity export laws in postwar Iraq, which the organization’s treasurer seemingly 
confirmed in the press (although he later claimed that his remarks had been misin-
terpreted).  42   Either way, while the ACCP and archaeologists succeeded in alerting 
the United States to the dangers of bombing Iraq’s ancient sites, their influence 
apparently stopped there. After Saddam’s fall, the plunder of Iraq’s past was imme-
diate and catastrophic, as looters ravaged countless archaeological sites and even 
the Baghdad Museum itself. And the laws, during the transitional government at 
least, remained unchanged. 

 Indeed,  provisions  on  heritage  were  completely  absent  from  the  preliminary 
versions of the Constitution that emerged from the drafting commission in mid-
2005, an omission that concerned both Iraqi leaders and international advisors.  43   
Later that year, a 22 August 2005 draft did grant the federal government the 
authority  “to  regulate,  preserve  and  maintain  antiquities  and  the  archeological, 
cultural  and  educational  sites  and  the  historical  buildings  and  other  cultural 
assets,” but only concurrently with the regional governments.  44   While this language 
was better than nothing, according to one U.S. observer (who has not been publicly 
identified), it “would have jeopardized the federal government’s role in regulating 
this area by allowing regional governmental control of antiquities. Such a result 
could  have  made  impossible  the  federal  government’s  effort  to  comply  with 
international  agreements  on  antiquity  protection,  as  it  would  have  lacked  suffi-
cient means to fulfill its obligations.” 

 This August draft and later versions still failed to guarantee government support 
for Iraqi culture. During the last deliberations on 12 October 2005, such a clause was 
successfully championed by Nuri al-Maliki, a leading member of the Da’wa Party.  45   
It became Article 35, which reads, “The state shall promote cultural activities and 
institutions in a manner that befits the civilizational and cultural history of Iraq.” 

 At these same negotiations, the drafters also revised the existing reference to the 
federal administration of heritage, which had first appeared in the August draft. The 
amended version became Article 113 of the Constitution. The final text states in full:

  Article 113: Antiquities, archeological sites, cultural buildings, manuscripts, 
and coins shall be considered national treasures under the jurisdiction 
of the federal authorities, and shall be managed in cooperation with the 
regions and governorates, and this shall be regulated by law.  

  That was not, however, the debate’s end.   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

 452   

 TESS DAVIS

 Analysis of Article 113 

 Article 113 prompts many questions. Under its terms, who in Iraq is ultimately 
responsible for heritage: the federal authorities or the regions and governorates? In 
an attempt to resolve this uncertainty, one must further examine the implications, 
context, placement, and text of Article 113. 

 The  text  of  Article  113  is  unclear  if  not  outright  contradictory.  Again,  it  first 
designates cultural objects and sites as “national treasures under the jurisdiction 
of federal authorities,” and yet then it prescribes they “be managed in coopera-
tion with the regions and governorates.” The legal meaning of “cooperation”—the 
Arabic can also be translated as “collaboration”—is ambiguous. Does it require, as 
the basic definition suggests, that the federal authorities act jointly with the regions 
and governorates (as did the August draft of the Constitution, which made heritage 
a “concurrent” authority)? Or does it just oblige the federal authorities to consult, 
but act independently from, the regions and governorates? Or something else?  46   

 Article 113’s placement within the broader Constitution provides few answers. 
The provision is located in  Section 4 —“Powers of the Federal Government”—
which initially suggests that heritage should be a national authority. However, the 
purpose of this part was largely to  limit  the influence of Baghdad, as the legislative 
history and even text itself make clear.  47   

  Section 4  begins with Article 109, which makes the federal authorities broadly 
responsible  for  preserving  “the  unity,  integrity,  independence  and  sovereignty 
of Iraq.” Article 110 then enumerates those powers exclusive to Baghdad, inter 
alia, foreign affairs, national security, fiscal policy, citizenship, and water. Article 
114 eventually follows with those competencies shared between the federal and re-
gional authorities, such as customs, energy, environmental, health, and education 
policies.  48   

 Neither Article 110 nor 114 includes oil, gas, or heritage. These resources are 
addressed separately, in similar though not identical language, by Articles 111, 112, 
and 113.  49   Their position before the provisions on shared competencies, and after 
those on exclusive powers, has legal implications given Article 115 (the last in 
 Section 4 ):

  All powers not stipulated in the exclusive powers of the federal govern-
ment belong to the authorities of the regions and governorates that are 
not organized in a region. With regard to other powers shared between 
the  federal  government  and  the  regional  government,  priority  shall 
be given to the law of the regions and governorates not organized in 
a region in case of dispute.  50    

   Section 5 —“Powers of the Regions”—provides more clarification in Article 121(2):

  In case of a contradiction between regional and national legislation in 
respect to a matter outside the exclusive authorities of the federal govern-
ment, the regional power shall have the right to amend the application of 
the national legislation within that region.  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ  

  453 

  In light of Articles 115 and 121(2), Article 113 could be interpreted as granting 
the regions and governorates power over heritage (as well as oil and gas). This is 
because antiquities, archaeological sites, and so forth, are not in Article 110’s list 
of exclusive federal powers. Additionally, as plainly stated in Article 113, they are 
to be administered “in cooperation” with the regions and governorates. Since they 
are “not stipulated in the exclusive powers of the federal government,” Articles 115 
and 121(2) dictate they belong to the regions and governorates. Therefore, accord-
ing to this viewpoint, regional and governorate law would trump national in case 
of conflict. 

 On  the  other  hand,  a  strong  textual  argument  can  be  made  to  the  contrary, 
which is also supported by the legislative history. If the writers of the Constitu-
tion wanted heritage to be treated as a standard object of concurrent authority, for 
which regional and governorate law would prevail, presumably they would have 
listed it in Article 114. In fact, as noted above, an August version of the Consti-
tution did just that. But the drafters removed this wording, according to the pre-
viously quoted unidentified U.S. observer, for the very reason that it would have 
resulted in “regional governmental control of antiquities.”  51   They instead created 
Article 113—and placed it between Article 110 on exclusive federal authorities and 
Article 114 on shared powers—suggesting that, like oil and gas, heritage is an area 
that warrants individual treatment. 

 Article 113, as it stands alone, supports this explanation. It identifies cultural pieces 
and places as “national treasures,” the Arabic for which can also be translated as 
“national assets,” “national resources,” or “national wealth.”  52   All of these renderings 
affirm national ownership (which, as will be discussed below, has important legal 
implications.) Such a reading is strengthened by the subsequent declaration that heri-
tage shall be “under the jurisdiction of the federal authorities.” True, the Constitution 
also requires that it “be managed in cooperation with the regions and governorates,” 
but this stipulation alone does not lessen the federal or national quality of heritage. 
It may simply indicate that the federal government should welcome their input.   

 Implications 

 As  the  anonymous  U.S.  observer  also  noted,  this  interpretation  of  Article  113 
may  be  the  only  one  that  fulfills  Iraq’s  international  commitments  under  the 
various treaties to which it is a party, including the 1954 Hague Convention, the 
1970  UNESCO  Convention,  and  the  1972  World  Heritage  Convention.  These 
agreements require a cohesive state policy and action, which would be difficult to 
achieve if regional/ or governorate law trumped national law. Since Article 8 of the 
Constitution requires Iraq to meet its obligations under international law, assign-
ing the administration of heritage to the regions and governorates would not just 
be problematic, it could be unconstitutional.  53   

 Any other reading of Article 113 would also void much existing domestic legisla-
tion, potentially unraveling Iraq’s entire heritage management system. Other than 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

 454   

 TESS DAVIS

Articles 35 and 113, which just outline general principles relating to cultural 
resources, the Constitution leaves archaeology to be “regulated by law.” In practice, 
this “law” is Antiquities and Heritage Law No. 55 of 2002, which remains in force 
even though it predates the Constitution by three years.  54   

 Law No. 55 is Iraq’s most thorough legal effort to protect archaeological sites, 
antiquities,  historic  architecture,  and  the  like.  In  language  that  mirrors  the 
Constitution—or, rather, language mirrored by the Constitution—the law estab-
lishes state ownership of heritage by recognizing select objects and sites as “national 
treasures.”  55   This provision complements similar ones in Law No. 55’s predeces-
sors, Antiquity Law No. 59 of 1936, as amended by Law No. 120 of 1974 and Law 
No. 164 of 1975.  56   

 As previously mentioned, the history of Iraqi heritage law is intertwined with that 
of the country itself, and it warrants further study in its own right (however, since 
this legal history has little impact on the current governing law, this article addresses 
it only briefly). From classical and Biblical sources, the West had long known of 
Mesopotamia’s great past, but it was not until the 1800s that Europeans really began 
to explore, map, and excavate the region’s ancient sites. By the mid-19th century, 
the British and French were in a race to uncover buried treasures in what is now 
Iraq, creating a demand for antiquities that prompted locals to begin looting as well. 
As a result, thousands of objects were removed and traded overseas. The Ottoman 
Empire  attempted  to  crack  down  on  this  plunder  and  trafficking  with  a  series  of 
decrees in the late 1800s and early 1900s. These governed until after World War I, 
when the League of Nations created the British Mandate of Mesopotamia, under 
British authority. English archaeologist, explorer, and official Gertrude Bell—who 
was appointed director of the new Department of Antiquities—then wrote and suc-
cessfully lobbied for a new antiquities law that was adopted in 1924. Following Iraqi 
independence in 1932, this was replaced with Iraqi Antiquities Law No. 59 in 1936.  57   
 Iraq had thus recognized—and thrice reaffirmed—the state’s primacy over cultural 
resources for the seven decades leading up to its new Constitution. It is not alone in 
this approach. Gerstenblith notes that many “nations have enacted national owner-
ship laws since the nineteenth century for the dual purposes of preventing unfettered 
export  of  antiquities  and  of  protecting  archaeological  sites  in  which  antiquities  are 
buried.”  58   Source countries like Iraq have another incentive today: to repatriate objects 
that were looted and illegally removed from their borders. In both the United 
Kingdom  and  the  United  States—primary  destinations  for  illicit  art  from  Iraq  and 
elsewhere—courts have ruled that such laws, also called patrimony or vesting laws, 
“create ownership rights that are recognized even when such antiquities are removed 
from their country of discovery and are traded in foreign nations.”  59   Under this 
interpretation, “one who removes the antiquity without permission is a thief and 
the  antiquities  are  stolen  property,”  which  the  source  country  can  then  recover 
through the justice system.  60   Absent such an ownership law, however, Iraq would 
have few legal options for reclaiming its plundered art from the United Kingdom 
or the United States.  61   

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ  

  455 

 If the Constitution’s drafters had intended to reverse such an established Iraqi 
legal tradition at such great consequence—by surrendering a national authority to 
the regions and governorates—they could have done so unequivocally. Moreover, 
the Council of Representatives (which functions as Iraq’s main parliament) has not 
amended or repealed these provisions of Law No. 55, despite ample opportunity. 
Iraq’s leading archaeologist and cultural official, Dr. Donny George, had likewise 
declared heritage a federal power under the 2005 Constitution before his death in 
2011.  62   A December 2005 cable from the American Embassy in Baghdad notes that 
he “expressed satisfaction” to U.S. officials that Article 113 had brought “antiquities 
under central government control since, in his view, the provinces are not ready to 
manage their cultural sites on their own.”  63   

 Given these arguments, it is all but impossible to believe that the Constitution 
desires “national treasures” under federal jurisdiction to be controlled by the 
regions and governorates or their law. Admittedly, Articles 115 and 121(2) do 
suggest such a conclusion, but it is outweighed by the language, placement, and 
legislative history of Article 113. All of these factors strongly indicate that the 
federal authorities are ultimately responsible for heritage and therefore national 
law governs.  64      

 CONCLUSION 

 Any study of Iraqi heritage law must begin with the Constitution of the Republic 
of Iraq. This 2005 charter forms the backbone of the country’s policy. Article 35 
pledges  support  for  cultural  activities  and  institutions,  and  more  significantly, 
Article 113 designates select objects and sites as “national treasures” under federal 
jurisdiction to be managed with the regions and governorates. 

 As explained above, this language may be clear on paper, but is the opposite in 
practice. This is because the Constitution identifies federal powers, regional/
governorate powers, and shared powers. Unfortunately, oil, gas, and heritage are 
not  clearly  placed  in  either  category,  leaving  their  status  open  to  interpretation. 
Nonetheless,  Article  113’s  plain  text,  placement,  and  legislative  history  strongly 
indicate that heritage should be controlled by the federal government and its law. 
This is the only reading of Article 113 that will not void Iraq’s domestic legisla-
tion  and  will  fulfill  its  international  obligations,  which  is  required  by  the  2005 
Constitution. 

 This constitutional analysis is not just an academic exercise, as the debate over 
federalism continues with real-world consequences for Iraq and its heritage. Since 
 2008 , when Iraq regained control of its cultural resources, Baghdad’s relationship 
with  the  regions  and  governorates  has  progressively  disintegrated.  65    Rising  ten-
sions at the ancient Mesopotamian capital of Babylon have even played out in the 
 New  York  Times .  In  2009,  the   Times   reported  that  local  authorities  had  “seized 
control” of the site, openly challenging the State Board of Antiquities and Heritage 
(SBAH). The SBAH branded this takeover “unlawful,” but seemed unable to 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

 456   

 TESS DAVIS

prevent it. While maintaining its “legal authority over Babylon,” the SBAH’s acting 
director was forced to admit that in practice, “The federal government is weak.”  66   
In 2011, continuing disputes again made headlines, as federal and provincial offi-
cials clashed over whether to reopen Babylon to tourism and who should collect its 
admission fees.  67   

 Excavation permits are another flashpoint, pitting Baghdad against the region of 
Kurdistan. Law No. 55 grants the SBAH—and it alone—the authority to issue such 
licenses.  68   However, Kurdistan has been liberally granting permits itself, as work 
had been long stalled in the rest of the country. The “first archaeological excavation 
in Iraq outside of Kurdistan by any foreign team in a decade” only started in late 
2011.  69   Then just recently in 2013, the Iraq government made news by granting six 
additional permits to foreign teams from the Czech Republic, Italy, and the United 
Kingdom.  70   But with lingering uncertainty over the permit process, it is no wonder 
that looters are beating archaeologists in the race to excavate ancient Iraq. 

 As  referenced  in  the  introduction,  such  looting  has  now  become  a  matter  of 
national security, as credible reports emerge that ISIS is funding itself from Iraq’s 
plundered treasures. The archaeological importance of Iraq’s sites and antiquities 
thus cannot be overemphasized. National and international legislation could be a 
staunch guardian, protecting them from theft, development, and even war. However, 
Iraq’s heritage will only benefit from these many legal undertakings once such laws 
are properly understood, a process that begins with the Constitution. Only then 
can the country turn to the difficult task of enforcement. In the meantime, while 
the federal authorities are fighting with the regions and governorates, we must 
ask who is actually fighting to protect Iraq’s archaeology.     

  ENDNOTES 

  
 1  .   The Louvre praises this basalt stele as “a work of art, history, and literature,” adding almost 
as an afterthought, “and the most complete legal compendium of Antiquity.” While not the ancient 
Near East’s earliest known code—others from the Mesopotamian city-states of Ur (c. 2100  bce ) 
and  Isin  (c.  1930   bce )  preceded  it—the  Louvre  recognizes  it  as  “the  most  important.”  King 
Hammurabi  probably  erected  it  at  Sippar,  city  of  Shamash,  who  fittingly  was  the  god  of  justice. 
Scholars believe it stayed there until the 12th century  bce , when the Elamite King Shutruk-Nahhunte 
brought it to Susa, where it was prominently displayed on the acropolis. Archaeologist Jacques 
de Morgan uncovered it there in excavations from 1901–1902 ( www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/
law-code-hammurabi-king-babylon ).  
  
 2  .   Most of the laws discussed in this article were originally drafted in Arabic. Official translations 
of  Iraqi  legislation  are  uncommon,  and  while  unofficial  translations  are  more  frequent,  they  vary 
widely in quality. The author has identified translations when used and presented alternatives for 
keywords  and  phrases  when  necessary.  Nonetheless,  the  reader  should  keep  in  mind  that  exact 
renderings are seldom possible, and that the original Arabic text is controlling.  
  
No. 55, the author relied upon the translation by UNESCO.  
  
 4  .   According to the UNESCO World Heritage Center ( http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists ), 
a tentative list is “an inventory of those properties which each State Party intends to consider for 
nomination” for World Heritage Status. There are currently 1592 sites on the Tentative List from 

 3  .   Antiquities and Heritage Law, No. 55 (2002) ,  available at  www.iraqld.com  (Arabic). For Law 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ  

  457 

171  states;  11  of  these  were  submitted  by  Iraq  ( http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/state=iq ). 
Nimrud, the Ancient City of Nineveh, the Fortress of Al-Ukhaidar, Ur, and Wasit were all added in 
2000.  Babylon  ( http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/1837 )  and  the  Marshlands  of  Mesopotamia 
( http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/1838 ) then followed in 2003. Iraq has since placed the 
following on the Tentative List: Erbil Citadel (8 January 2010), the Site of Thilkifi (21 January 2010), 
Wadi Al-Salam Cemetery in Najaf (24 January 2011), and Amedy city (2 February 2011).  
  
 5  .   The full text of Article 35 reads: “The state shall promote cultural activities and institutions 
in a manner that befits the civilizational and cultural history of Iraq.” Const. art. 35 (2005) is 
available at  www.iraqld.com  (Arabic). For the Iraqi Constitution, the author relied on the widely 
accepted  UN  and  U.S.  translation,  which  was  published  on  26  January  2006.  Earlier  versions 
were released by the UN Office for Constitutional Support as well as the Associated Press, but 
they are now outdated due to later edits and additions to the Constitution. See Mallat,  Iraq: Guide to 
Law and Policy,  35.  
  
 6  .   Hiltermann et al. (“Iraq’s Federalism Quandary”) refer to federalism as the “one constant” 
behind the “unsettled struggle over power, territory and resources” that makes up Iraq’s “most omi-
nous” challenge today.  
 7  .   ISIS has also been known as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and after declaring 
  
itself a caliphate on 29 June 2014, is now simply referring to itself as the “Islamic State” (Adam 
Withnall, “Iraq Crisis: Isis Declares Its Territories a New Islamic State with ‘Restoration of Caliphate’ 
in  Middle  East,”   The  Independent ,  24  October  2014,   www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-
east/isis-declares-new-islamic-state-in-middle-east-with-abu-bakr-albaghdadi-as-emir-removing-
iraq-and-syria-from-its-name-9571374.html ).  
  
 8  .    As  a  result  of  the  ISIS  threat,  in  July  2014,  Kurdistan’s  President  Massud  Barzani  declared 
that an independence referendum would be held “within months” (Agence France Presse, “Kurdish 
Leader: We Will Vote for Independence Soon,”  Business Insider , 1 July, 2014,  www.businessinsider.
com/kurdish-leader-vote-for-independence-soon-2014-7 ).  
  
 9  .   According to the  New York Times , Maliki’s decision to relinquish power “came after days of 
negotiations with his former Shiite allies, who urged him to give up in the face of growing interna-
tional opposition to his rule and the sense among most Iraqi leaders that his removal was necessary 
to bring the country together as it fights against a growing insurgency led by ISIS” (Tim Arango, 
“Maliki Agrees to Relinquish Power in Iraq,”  The New York Times , 14 August 2014,  www.nytimes.
com/2014/08/15/world/middleeast/iraq-prime-minister-.html ).  
  
 10  .   The Tomb of Jonah’s destruction prompted the  Washington Post  to ask, “If [ISIS is] willing to 
destroy anything other religions—even other Muslims—hold sacred, what’s next?” (Justin Moyer, 
“After  Leveling  Iraq’s  Tomb  of  Jonah,  the  Islamic  State  Could  Destroy  ‘Anything  in  the  Bible,’” 
 The Washington Post , 25 July 2014,  www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2014/07/25/
after-leveling-iraqs-tomb-of-jonah-the-islamic-state-could-destroy-anything-in-the-bible ).  
  
 11  .   ISIS “reaped windfalls from smuggling all manner of raw materials pillaged from the crumbling 
state, as well as priceless antiquities from archaeological digs,” making a shocking $36 million 
from  just  one  region  in  Syria  alone  (Martin  Chulov,  “How  an  Arrest  in  Iraq  Revealed  ISIS’s 
$2bn  Jihadist  Network,”   The  Guardian ,  15  June  2014,   www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/15/
iraq-isis-arrest-jihadists-wealth-power ).  
  

 12  .   Mallat ( Iraq: Guide to Law and Policy , p. 32) reminds us that when

  considering the success or failure of the [Constitution] it is imperative to keep in mind the 
security context in which [it] was drafted. The Iraqi Constitution was written during a time 
when sectarian violence resulted in 62 deaths a day on average in Iraq. The insurgency had 
openly declared its opposition to the drafting of a constitution. Any and all members of 
the Transitional National Assembly (TNA), and particularly the Constitutional Drafting 
Committee (CDC), were under constant threat of assassination. On July 19, 2005, Mijbil 
‘Isa,  a  Sunni  member  of  the  CDC,  was  killed.  The  tense  atmosphere  created  conditions 
inimical to negotiation, dialogue and consensus among the competing sectarian groups 
represented in the CDC.  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

 458   

 TESS DAVIS

    
 13  .   As Fallows notes in his award-winning  Atlantic  report, “Blind into Baghdad,” on the U.S. occu-
pation of Iraq, “Concern about Saddam Hussein predated the 9/11 attacks and even the inauguration 
of George W. Bush.… But the intellectual case for regime change, argued during the Clinton years by 
some Democrats and notably by Paul Wolfowitz … shifted clearly toward operational planning after 
the destruction of the World Trade Center.”  
  
 14  .   According to Fallows (“Blind into Baghdad”), in “late October of 2001, while the U.S. military 
was conducting its rout of the Taliban from Afghanistan, the State Department had quietly begun 
its planning for the aftermath of a ‘transition’ in Iraq. At about the time of the ‘axis of evil’ speech, 
working groups within the department were putting together a list of postwar jobs and topics to be 
considered, and possible groups of experts to work on them. Thus was born the Future of Iraq 
project.” It was later moved to the Middle East Institute ( www.mei.edu ), which describes itself as 
“one of the preeminent centers for Middle East research in Washington, DC.”  
 15  .   From its very first session, the FOI Project’s Transitional Justice Working Group emphasized 
  
problems  with  the  current  Iraqi  Constitution  and  the  need  for  a  new  one  in  a  post-Saddam  Iraq 
(Transitional Justice Working Group, “Future of Iraq Project”).  
  
 16  .    Thousands  of  pages  of  original  documents  from  the  FOI  Project,  as  well  as  its  final  report, 
are  available  online  at  George  Washington  University  ( http://www2.gwu.edu/ ∼ nsarchiv/NSAEBB/
NSAEBB198 ). Fallows (“Blind into Baghdad”) noted the $5 million budget for the work was authorized 
by Congress in May 2002.  
  
 17  .   In the words of Fallows (“Blind into Baghdad”), “The [Bush] Administration will be admired 
in retrospect for how much knowledge it created about the challenge it was taking on. U.S. government 
predictions  about  postwar  Iraq’s  problems  have  proved  as  accurate  as  the  assessments  of  pre-war 
Iraq’s strategic threat have proved flawed.”  
  
 18  .   Those interested in learning more about the U.S. government’s reasons for disregarding the 
FOI Project are encouraged to read Fallow’s 2004 article “Blind into Baghdad” or his 2006 book of 
the same name.   
  
 19  .   These institutions were preceded by the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance, 
which the United States established on 20 January 2003 and replaced with the CPA on 6 May 2003. 
Mallat,  Iraq: Guide to Law and Policy , 28.  
  
available at  www.iraqld.com .  
  
 21  .   CPA and IGC officials drafted the TAL between January and March 2004. Even then, federalism 
was one the most divisive issues on the table. See Mallat,  Iraq: Guide to Law and Policy , 29. The issue pitted 
the Shia representatives (who favored a strong national government) against the Kurdish (who favored a 
strong regional government). Hiltermann et al. (“Iraq’s Federalism Quandary”) lament that while “this 
strife has gone through many phases,” it nonetheless continues to this day, in one incarnation or another.  
  
 22  .   For the most part, the Sunni community did not participate in the Transitional National 
Assembly  elections,  which  took  place  on  30  January  2005.  Mallat  ( Iraq:  Guide  to  Law  and  Policy , 
29–30) attributes this both to intimidation and a voluntary Sunni boycott. Consequently, the Shia 
United Iraqi Alliance and Kurdish Alliance together won 215 of 275 seats and the Sunnis only 17. As a 
result, only 3 of the original 55 members on the CDC were Sunnis, which all but completely excluded 
them from the constitutional drafting process. Due to much international pressure, on 16 June the 
CDC agreed to add another 15 Sunni members and 10 Sunni advisors. They were not able to take 
their seats until 5 July, however, which greatly delayed work on the Constitution.  
  
 23  .   Instead of the six-month drafting period provided for in the TAL, the CDC actually had closer 
to six weeks to draft Iraq’s Constitution, if it was to meet the TAL’s deadline of 1 August 2005. Even if 
not for the delay caused by the original lack of Sunni participation, “for several weeks after inception 
[the CDC] had neither premises, appropriate security, equipment, or staff. As a result of UN assistance, 
including assisting in negotiations for accommodation with the authorities, it was only in July that the 
CDC could be said to be in functional existence” (Mallat,  Iraq: Guide to Law and Policy , 30–31.  
  
 24  .   The “divisive referendum raised the prospect that the constitutional drafting process was 
not  uniting  the  country  but  helping  drive  it  further  apart”  (Dexter  Filkins,  Robert  F.  Worth, 

 20  .   The text of the Law of Administration for the State of Iraq for the Transitional Period (2004) is 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ  

  459 

Anne E. Kornblut, Abdul Razzaq al-Saeidy, and Khalid al-Ansary, “The Reach of War: Politics; Leaders 
in Iraq Sending Charter to Referendum,”  The New York Times , 29 August 2005,  http://query.nytimes.
com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C05E0D9113CF93AA1575BC0A9639C8B63&pagewanted=all ).  
 25  .   Deeks and Burton (“Iraq’s Constitution: A Drafting History,” 3), the legal adviser and deputy 
  
legal adviser, respectively, at the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad when the Constitution was being drafted, 
note in their legislative history of the document that a “fair number” of its articles “changed little, if 
at all” between the first and final drafts. In their firsthand account of the process, they identify seven 
areas that were indeed altered “repeatedly and significantly,” including those on “the allocation of 
power between federal and non-federal authorities” and “the powers of the regions.”  
  
 26  .   Edward Wong, “Final Tally Shows Iraqi Voters Approved New Constitution,”  The New York 
Times , 25 October 2005,  www.nytimes.com/2005/10/25/international/middleeast/25cnd-iraq.html?
ex=1287892800&en=4e00737c0063f04c&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss .  
 27  .   Const. arts. 5, 47, and Const. art. 47, respectively.  
  
  
 28  .   The Constitution also provides for a broader federal system, including the capital, regions, and 
governorates, in addition to local administrations (Article 116). Baghdad is the capital (Article 124), 
and as of now, Kurdistan the only region (Article 117).  
  

 29  .   According to the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID),

  The word “governorate,” rather than the word “province,” is a more accurate translation of 
the Arabic original (muhaafatha). The word is a derivative of the word (muhaafath), which 
is the person of the governor, and is itself derived from the root (hafatha), which means to 
preserve.… Use of the word “province” with its associations as an administrative unit in the 
Roman Empire connotes far more autonomy from the center than does the word muhaaf-
atha. Either word, “governorate” or “province,” however, is preferable to the word “state,” 
because that connotes a degree of sovereignty not enjoyed by the governorates in Iraq.  

  See USAID,  Law of Governorates Not Incorporated into a Region , 2.  

 
 30  .   Const. 122(1).  
  
 31  .   See generally, Const. arts. 133–144.  
  
 32  .   Const. art. 5, Const. art. 13(1), and Const. art. 13(2), respectively.  
  
 33  .   Const. art. 115.  
  
  
 34  .    First,  it  may  be  necessary  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  “international  law”  and  what  is  not. 
 Black’s Law Dictionary  (8th ed.) defines “international law” as “The legal system governing the 
relationship  between  nations;  more  modernly,  the  law  of  international  relations,  embracing  not 
only nations but also such participants as international organizations and individuals (such as those 
who evoke their human rights or commit war crimes).” An “international agreement” specifically is 
“a binding agreement under international law voluntarily entered into by sovereign states.” Other 
names for international agreements include treaties, conventions, or protocols. These different labels 
generally have no legal effect.  
  
 35  .   International law is premised on consent, so no country is bound by international law to which 
it has not consented, with the exception of “ jus cogens .”  Black’s Law Dictionary  (8th ed.) defines this 
as “a mandatory or peremptory norm of general international law accepted and recognized by the 
international community as a norm from which no derogation is permitted.” This category is very 
limited, and while there is no definitive list, it generally includes genocide, crimes against humanity, 
war crimes, maritime piracy, slavery, apartheid, and torture.  
  
  
  
national law upon ratification of a treaty or other agreement.  
  
 39  .   “Ominously,” given the subsequent looting of the Baghdad Museum, as well as archaeological 
sites  throughout  the  country,  this  was  one  of  three  FOI  working  groups  that  never  met  (Fallows, 
“Blind into Baghdad”). Rothfield ( The Rape of Mesopotamia , 27–28) expands upon the many reasons for 
this oversight, including the lack of cultural heritage experts in the FOI Project itself, as well as the overall 
secrecy surrounding the project’s operations, which prevented outside experts from contributing.  

 36  .   See Deeks and Burton, “Iraq’s Constitution: A Drafting History,” 39.  
 37  .   Const. art. 110(1).  
 38  .   In contrast, under the “monist” theory, international law is automatically implemented into 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

 460   

 TESS DAVIS

 45  .    These  quotations  are  also  taken  from  the  alleged  U.S.  Embassy  cable  ( The  Substance  of  the 

 44  .   Const. art. 112(sec. 8) (22 August 2005 draft), as reported by Deeks and Burton, “Iraq’s 

 40  .   Rothfield,  The Rape of Mesopotamia , 28.  
  
  
 41  .   The now defunct ACCP was founded in New York in 2002, but also had a strong presence in 
Washington, DC. Its members were influential and wealthy collectors, museum officials, and scholars. 
It described itself as a “public charity … dedicated to enhancing knowledge and understanding of 
issues and policies affecting the collecting of works of art by museums and private individuals” ( www.
culturalpolicycouncil.org ). According to Atwood ( Stealing History,  p. 267), however, its main goal 
was “to stop the proliferation of legal obstacles to the flow of antiquities into the United States.”  
 42  .   The ACCP’s treasurer, “a lawyer and collector named William Pearlstein, was quoted in news 
  
reports as saying he believed Iraq’s ‘retentionist’ policies on antiquities should be relaxed under a new, 
post-Saddam government and exports of antiquities liberalized. Coming as it did after the Pentagon 
meeting, Pearlstein’s comment suggested an unholy alliance between the U.S. government and dealers 
to allow a free-for-all of Iraqi antiquities exports, and it sent plenty of archaeologists and commen-
tators, particularly in the British press, into a netherworld of conspiracy theories” (Atwood,  Stealing 
History , 268). In a letter to  The Nation  (3 June 2003,  www.thenation.com/article/debating-looting# ), 
Pearlstein countered that the ACCP had never “discussed the question of reforming Iraqi law” with 
U.S. officials, nor had it “otherwise taken a position on the laws of Iraq or any other nation.” To the 
contrary, he said the sole purpose of the ACCP’s meeting was to stress “the need to strengthen the 
administration of archaeological sites after any war to prevent the kind of looting that occurred after 
the first Gulf War.”  
  
 43  .   According to a purported cable from the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad, “Leading Iraqi cultural 
figures [had] criticized the constitution for lacking a clear reference to Iraq’s heritage and to the need 
for state support of cultural institutions” ( The Substance of the Constitution Compromise ).  
  
Constitution: A Drafting History,” 62.  
  
Constitution Compromise ).  
  
worded provisions on oil and gas.  
  
 47  .    Section 4  “includes some of the most hotly contested issues” in the Constitution because it 
“reflects the broader struggle” between the Shia Alliance (which favored national control) and the 
Kurdish  Alliance  (which  favored  regional  control).  In  the  end,  the  Kurds  “obtained  significant 
concessions,” at Baghdad’s expense (Deeks and Burton, “Iraq’s Constitution: A Drafting History,” 53). 
Mallat ( Iraq: Guide to Law and Policy , 32) says this resulted in an “unusual degree of autonomy” for 
the  regions  and  governorates,  while  Deeks  and  Burton  (p.  67)  go  farther  by  admitting  that  a 
“significant criticism of the Constitution is that it deals a serious blow to federal power in Iraq.”  
  
 48  .   According to Brown ( The Final Draft of the Iraqi Constitution , 12–13), “by regional standards,” 
this list of exclusive federal powers is “remarkably short.” Additionally most of the competencies that 
are shared between the national government and the regions/governorates under the Iraqi Constitu-
tion are central powers in other Arab countries.  
  
 49  .   Mallat ( Iraq: Guide to Law and Policy,  81) feels this was a mistake, as these resources are “no less 
important than water in Iraq,” which is a federal power. According to an early UN translation of the 
Constitution ( Final Draft Iraqi Constitution ,  portal.unesco.org/ci/en/files/20704/11332732681iraqi_
constitution_en.pdf/iraqi_constitution_en.pdf ), these three provisions were all originally included in 
the same article.  
  
 50  .   Due to this provision, Mallat—quoting a December 2005 report by the UN Assistance Mission 
for Iraq—finds that “the exercise of [Iraq’s] shared competences is not really existent, as the regional 
overriding capacity provided for by the Constitution makes this concurrency unbalanced, at best” 
( Iraq: Guide to Law and Policy , 93).  
 51  .   See the purported U.S. Embassy cable ( The Substance of the Constitution Compromise ).  
  
  
 52  .    Article  1.1  states  that  Law  No.  55’s  purpose  is  “preserving  the  Antiquity  and  Heritage  [of] 
the Republic of Iraq [as a] substantial aspect of the National Wealth,” according to the UNESCO 
translation.  

 46  .   Brown ( The Final Draft of the Iraqi Constitution , 13) asked these same questions of the similarly 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ  

  461 

  
 53  .   The United States only has a “limited national ownership law” for antiquities (Gerstenblith, 
“Schultz and Barakat,” 24). However, the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution establishes that 
federal statutes and U.S. treaties are “the supreme law of the land,” and thus prevail in case of conflict 
with state law. Therefore, even absent a full national law granting the United States ownership of 
antiquities, federal heritage laws (and heritage treaties that have been implemented into federal law) 
are binding on the states. If the opposite were true, and state law reigned supreme, the United States 
could not enforce its national legislation or international obligations. Iraq would find itself in such an 
untenable position if its regional/governorate law indeed trumped national law on heritage.  
  
 54  .   Law No. 55 remains the country’s most thorough legal effort to protect archaeological sites, 
antiquities, and historic architecture. It contains 53 articles organized into six chapters, which address 
(1) the law’s objectives and means, (2) immoveable antiquities, (3) moveable antiquities, (4) heritage 
buildings, (5) archaeological excavations, and (6) penalties for violation. As its full title suggests, Law 
No. 55’s primary objective is to preserve Iraq’s antiquities and other heritage as “national treasures.” 
To achieve these broad aims, Law No. 55 assigns various functions to the government authorities, 
foremost of which is the State Board of Antiquities and Heritage (SBAH). Antiquities and Heritage Law, 
No. 55 (2002), available at  www.iraq-ild.org/LoadLawBook.aspx?SP=REF&SC=150220061057690&
Year=2002  (Arabic).  
  
 55  .   While not an official U.S. position, training materials funded by the Department of Defense 
(Law No. 55 for the Antiquities and Heritage of Iraq, 2002,  www.cemml.colostate.edu/cultural/09476/
iraq07enl.html ) do inform military personnel that Law No. 55 grants the Iraqi state ownership of the 
country’s archaeological sites and antiquities.  
  
 56  .   Gerstenblith (“Legal Damage Control”) also states that, “Iraq has had a national ownership 
[law] since 1936.” Antiquity Law, No. 59 (1936), as amended by Law No. 120 (1974) and Law No. 
164 (1975), art. 3 is available at  www.iraqld.com  (Arabic).  
  
 57  .    Vrdoljak,   International  Law,  Museums  and  the  Return  of  Cultural  Objects ,  86–87;  Stone  and 
Bajjaly,  The Destruction of Cultural Heritage in Iraq , 31–34; Langfield and Craith,  Cultural Diversity, 
Heritage, and Human Rights , 65–72.  
  
  
  
  
generally, Gerstenblith, “Schultz and Barakat.”  
  
 62  .   Before passing away in 2011, Dr. Donny George was the leading face of Iraqi archaeology, 
having earned international acclaim for his efforts to recover thousands of antiquities looted from 
the National Museum in Baghdad during the 2003 invasion. Afterwards, he became head of that 
institution, and then director of the SBAH. When security concerns forced him to leave the country in 
2006, he joined Stony Brook University in the United States as a visiting professor, where he worked 
until his death (Douglas Martin, “Donny George, Protector of Iraq’s Ancient Riches, Dies at 60,”  The 
New York Times , 14 March 2011,  www.nytimes.com/2011/03/15/world/middleeast/15george.html ).  
  
 63  .   Dr. George was director of the SBAH when he was reported to have made the statements in this 
cable ( Iraq’s State Board of Antiquities and Heritage ).  
  
reaching the same conclusion, on the oil and gas provisions.  
 65  .    The  “Agreement  between  the  United  States  of  America  and  the  Republic  of  Iraq  on  the 
  
Withdrawal  of  United  States  Forces  from  Iraq  and  the  Organization  of  Their  Activities  during 
Their  Temporary  Presence  in  Iraq”  is  available  in  full  at   http://graphics8.nytimes.com/packages/
pdf/world/20081119_SOFA_FINAL_AGREED_TEXT.pdf?scp=2&sq=security%20agreement%
20iraq&st=cse . Article 5.7 states that, “The United States Forces shall return to the Government of 
Iraq the agreed facilities and areas that have heritage, moral, and political significance and any non-
relocatable structures and assemblies on them that it had built, installed, or established, according 
to mechanisms, priorities, and a time period as mutually agreed by the Joint Committee, free of any 
debts or financial burdens.”  

 58  .   Gerstenblith, “Schultz and Barakat,” 21.  
 59  .   Ibid.  
 60  .   Ibid.  
 61  .   For a more detailed history of such ownership laws and their impact in UK and U.S. courts, see 

 64  .    See  Deeks  and  Burton  (“Iraq’s  Constitution:  A  Drafting  History”)  for  parallel  arguments, 

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

 462   

 TESS DAVIS

 67  .   Steven Lee Myers, “A Triage to Save Babylon,”  The New York Times , 2 January 2011,  www.

 66  .   Steven Lee Myers, “Babylon Ruins Reopen, to Controversy,”  The New York Times , 2 May 2009, 

  
 www.nytimes.com/2009/05/03/world/middleeast/03babylon.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1 .  
  
nytimes.com/2011/01/03/arts/03babylon.html?_r=2&ref=arts .  
  
 68  .    According  to  Chapter  5,  “Only  the  Antiquity  Authority  is  authorized  to  undertake  Excava-
tion for Antiquity in Iraq, it is entitled, herewith, to grant permissions to the scientific committees, 
scientists and the Iraqi, Arabic and foreign institutions, after the indication, of their archaeological 
capacity, scientific and financial sufficiency.” Article 4 defines “The Antiquity Authority” as “The 
State Board of Antiquities and Heritage.”  
  
 69  .   This excavation was led by Stony Brook University Professors Elizabeth Stone and Paul Zimansky 
at  the  site  of  Tell  Sakhariya  in  southern  Iraq  (“SBU  Faculty  Conduct  Archaeological  Excavations 
in Iraq,” press release, 2012 March 12,  http://commcgi.cc.stonybrook.edu/am2/publish/General_
University_News_2/SBU_Faculty_Conduct_Archaelogical_Excavations_in_Iraq.shtml#sthash.
qWsNfJNa.dpuf ).  
  
 70  .    All  these  permits  were  granted  for  excavations  in  southern  Iraq  (“Foreign  Archaeologists 
Return  to  Iraq,”   Archaeology ,  21  February  2013,   www.archaeology.org/news/588-130220-iraq-
foreign-archaeologists-return ).   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Atwood  ,   Roger  .  Stealing History: Tomb Raiders, Smugglers, and the Looting of the Ancient World . 
 New York :  St. Martin’s Press ,  2004 .  

    Brown  ,    Nathan  .   The  Final  Draft  of  the  Iraqi  Constitution:  Analysis  and  Commentary .   Washington, 
DC :  Carnegie Endowment for International Peace .  http://carnegieendowment.org/files/FinalDraft
Sept16.pdf  (16 September 2005).  

    Deeks  ,   Ashley  , and   Matthew     Burton  . “ Iraq’s Constitution: A Drafting History .”  Cornell International 
Law Journal   40  ( 2007 , Winter):  1 – 87 .  

    Fallows  ,   James  . “ Blind into Baghdad .”  The Atlantic .  www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2004/01/
blind-into-baghdad/302860  (1 January  2004 ).  

    Gerstenblith  ,   Patty  . “ Legal Damage Control for Iraq’s Looted Cultural Heritage: The Need for U.S. 
Import Restrictions .”  Jurist .  www.jurist.org/forum/gerstenblith1.php  (23 February  2004 ).  

    ——— . “  Schultz  and  Barakat : Universal Recognition of National Ownership of Antiquities .”  Art, 
Antiquity and Law   14 , no.  1  (April  2009 ):  21 – 48 .  

    Hiltermann  ,   Joost  ,   Sean     Kane  , and   Raad     Alkadiri  . “ Iraq’s Federalism Quandary .”  The National Interest . 
 www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/middle-east-north-africa/iraq-iran-gulf/iraq/op-eds/hiltermann-
iraqs-federalism-quandary.aspx  (28 February  2012 ).  

    Iraq’s State Board of Antiquities and Heritage  .  http://wikileaks.org/cable/2005/12/05BAGHDAD4968.
html  (13 December  2005 ).  

    Langfield  ,   Michael  ,   William     Logan  , and   Mairead Nic     Craith  , eds.  Cultural Diversity, Heritage, and 
Human Rights: Intersections in Theory and Practice .  New York :  Routledge ,  2010 .  

    Mallat  ,   Chibli  .  Iraq: Guide to Law and Policy .  New York :  Wolters Kluwer ,  2009 .  

    Rothfield  ,    Larry  .   The  Rape  of  Mesopotamia:  Behind  the  Looting  of  the  Baghdad  Museum .   Chicago : 
 Chicago University Press ,  2009 .  

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ  

  463 

    Stone  ,    Peter  ,  and    Joanne  Farchakh      Bajjaly  ,  eds.   The  Destruction  of  Cultural  Heritage  in  Iraq . 
 Woodbridge :  Boydell Press ,  2008 .  

    The Substance of the Constitution Compromise  .  wikileaks.org/cable/2005/10/05BAGHDAD4223.html  
(14 October  2005 ).  

   Transitional  Justice  Working  Group.  “Future  of  Iraq  Project.”  First  Session .   http://www2.gwu.
edu/ ∼ nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB198/20020709.pdf  (9–10 July  2002 ).  

   U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) .  Law of Governorates Not Incorporated into a 
Region: As Amended by Law 15 of 2012 and Footnoted .  Washington, DC :  USAID .  www.iraq-lg-law.
org/en/webfm_send/765  (March  2011 ).  

    Vrdoljak  ,    Ana  Filipa  .   International  Law,  Museums  and  the  Return  of  Cultural  Objects .   Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press ,  2006 .    

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 22:26:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739114000265


