    (2014)   21:  113– 142 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2014              Redressing Historic Wrongs, Returning 
Objects to Their Rightful Owners or 
Laundering Tainted Objects? 21st-Century 
UK Remedies for Nazi-Era Injustices 

       Charlotte     Woodhead    *            

 Abstract:     The United Kingdom’s Spoliation Advisory Panel hears claims for 
cultural objects held in museum collections of which their original owners 
lost possession during the Nazi era. The Panel aims to achieve “fair and just” 
solutions for the parties and was created in response to the strong impetus to 
return cultural objects lost by Jewish owners during the Nazi era. This article 
argues that understanding the rationale for this claims process and the choice 
of remedies is essential for achieving such just and fair solutions, specifically 
whether the Panel aims to redress the past injustices of Hitler’s tyranny, return 
objects to their “rightful owners,” or prevent the public’s unjust enrichment 
from access to objects “tainted” by their Nazi association. If it aims to return 
cultural objects to their rightful owners or to strip museums of unjust gains, it 
is only a small step to allowing moral claims by other claimant groups whose 
cultural objects reside in national museums.      

   INTRODUCTION 

 It is said that every picture tells a story, but one story certain pictures cannot tell is 
their Nazi-era history. As part of their systematic stripping of wealth and attempts 

  *  Warwick Law School ,  University of Warwick ,  UK . Email:  c.c.woodhead@warwick.ac.uk  

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  :   Thanks are due to the anonymous referees as well as to Professor Rebecca 
Probert, Professor Janet Ulph, Dr. Dawn Watkins, and Professor Alan Norrie for helpful comments 
on earlier versions of this article. Any errors or omissions are, of course, the author’s own. 

113

 114   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

at  cultural  domination,  the  Nazis  dispossessed  many  people,  in  particular  Jews, 
of valuable cultural objects.  1   The circumstances in which the original owners 
lost these cultural objects include Gestapo-led seizures, forced transfers and sales 
necessitated by extortionate tax demands, or the need to raise funds to flee perse-
cution. Even in the second decade of the 21st century, some pictures hanging on 
the walls of UK museums have such an unresolved story. Museums will often have 
acquired these objects in good faith, with no knowledge of their Nazi-era history; 
nevertheless, there is a widespread view that such objects should be returned to 
their prewar owners (or more commonly now to the heirs).  2   

 The  UK’s  Spoliation  Advisory  Panel  (“the  Panel”)  can  hear  claims  based  on 
moral grounds for these pictures and other cultural objects that were lost during 
the Nazi era even where limitation periods would otherwise bar a legal claim. In 
addition to having powers to recommend return or the payment of money, the 
Panel can recommend that a cultural object ought to stay in the museum collec-
tion, but that an account of the object’s Nazi-era history should be displayed along-
side it, thus telling the picture’s otherwise silent story. In recent years the Panel 
has heard claims for varied objects ranging from sketches by Peter Paul Rubens to 
pictures of Hampton Court Palace and monteiths in which to cool glasses. 

 The Panel aims to achieve “a solution which is fair and just both to the claimant 
and the institution”  3   by taking account of the “moral strength of the claimant’s 
case”  4   and any moral obligation of the possessor institution “taking into account 
in particular the circumstances of its acquisition of the object, and its knowledge at 
that juncture of the object’s provenance.”  5   

 In this article it is argued that one needs to appreciate the rationale for the 
Panel’s jurisdiction to better assist the achievement of fair and just solutions, 
and thus this article seeks to contribute to the wider aim of achieving such solu-
tions. The Panel’s establishment took place in an environment of seeking to provide 
justice for Holocaust survivors or for their heirs. However, the Panel’s jurisdiction 
is wider and covers all losses of cultural objects that took place during the Nazi 
era, even if unrelated to the Nazis’ actions. With this in mind, one should consider 
more closely the reason why such fair and just solutions are mandated specifically 
in response to Nazi-era claims, but not where claims are made for the return of 
cultural objects currently held in museums that were taken during colonial times 
or other wars. There are a number of different reasons why these extralegal just 
and fair solutions may have been facilitated. First, it may be to restore property to 
its “rightful” owner, in which case equally strong arguments can be advanced to 
facilitate the transfer from museums of cultural heritage objects that were taken 
from their owners during other wars or colonial times. Second, the rationale may 
be  premised  on  recompensing  the  victims  or  their  heirs  of  Hitler’s  atrocities  or 
to reassert Jewish culture within society; this effectively treats the cultural object 
as  a  tool  of  cultural  recompense.  6    Equally,  remedies  in  such  circumstances  may 
be a symbolic act, recognizing the past horrors and memorializing them.  7   Third, 
if it is accepted that museums and the public are tainted by an object’s Nazi-era 

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  115 

association, the Panel’s remedies are aimed simply at stripping museums of gains 
that were acquired as a result of someone having lost possession of cultural objects 
in  morally  questionable  circumstances,  and  which  are  therefore  unjust;  where  a 
remedy other than return is recommended, this might perhaps be seen as “laun-
dering” the object, thereby making the object more palatable for the public viewers 
of the object. This article starts by analyzing the rationale for establishing the Panel 
as a claims process. It then considers how far these rationale are reflected in the 
way in which the Panel reaches its recommendations. Finally, this article analyses 
the impact that these different rationale might have on the factors that the Panel 
should take into account when determining the moral strength of the claim and 
choosing which remedies to recommend. It is argued that if the Panel’s overall 
approach can be interpreted as returning cultural objects to their rightful owners 
or of stripping museums of an unjust gain then there is justification for arguing 
that similarly strong moral claims to other cultural objects in museums can be 
made out.   

 THE ROAD TO ESTABLISHING THE PANEL AND THE POWER OF 

MUSEUMS TO RETURN OBJECTS 

 The political impetus leading to the establishment of the Panel was clearly based 
on the need to respond to the specific problem of cultural objects of which their 
original Jewish owners (and other persecuted groups) were dispossessed by the 
Nazis. As early as 1943 the Allied countries reserved the right to declare invalid 
transactions  or  dealings  with  property  whether  amounting  to  “open  looting 
or plunder, or of transfers apparently legal in form, even if they purport to be 
voluntarily effected.”  8   Despite its wide remit, this instrument, known as the London 
Declaration, made specific reference to the forced purchase of works of art.  9   While 
the status of this instrument as internationally customary law has been doubted,  10   
it nevertheless demonstrates that the problem was acknowledged at an early stage 
and that there was a clear desire to respond to it. While the postwar efforts made by 
the Allies to reunite the original owners or their heirs with their lost objects,  11   
including the work of the Monuments Men, made significant inroads into the wide-
spread dispersal of such objects, they were not completely successful. Although the 
British Committee on the Preservation and Restitution of Works of Art, Archives 
and Other Material in Enemy Hands (The Macmillan Committee) was established 
in 1944, it was dissolved two years later because it believed that little could be done 
until the establishment of an International Restitution Committee.  12   Furthermore, 
many of the postwar restitution laws were limited in time,  13   although some claim-
ants did receive limited compensation from the German government.  14   

 Despite these efforts, cultural objects with disputed Nazi-era title were still dis-
played in some of the world’s major museums many years later.  15   However, litigation 
proved difficult for claimants in many European countries because of limitation 
statutes. In the United Kingdom the original owner’s legal title would have been 

 116   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

extinguished six years after an act of conversion (which gives rise to an action in 
the law of tort for the wrongful interference with goods).  16   Even if a claimant were 
able to surmount the limitation barrier, some claims involved sales forced by the 
circumstances of persecution (rather than direct physical pressure) and would not 
fit neatly within any existing legal action such as conversion or duress of persons 
or property; once again litigation was an imperfect means of achieving justice.  17   

 The end of the 20th century witnessed a significant revitalization of interest in 
claims related to Nazi persecution, not only those involving cultural objects, but 
also forced labor claims, claims on insurance policies, and claims for money that 
lay dormant in Swiss bank accounts.  18   The resurgence in claims for cultural objects 
was, in part, due to access to information previously sealed in Eastern European 
archives, increased academic study, and the international determination to bring 
this unresolved matter to a close.  19   

 International statements of principle were clearly aimed not at the general loss of 
cultural objects during the Second World War, but at those objects that were lost 
at the hands of the Nazis (and in some cases more specifically focused on those 
cultural objects of Jewish owners). One such statement of nonbinding principles 
(the Washington Conference Principles) concentrates on the need to identify “Nazi 
confiscated art,” to publish information about its whereabouts and to expeditiously 
achieve just and fair solutions.  20   The desire for return had preeminence, particu-
larly where “looted Jewish cultural property” was displayed in publically funded 
museums, and it was clearly envisaged that government action might involve the 
facilitation of legislative change by removing or extending limitation periods.  21   
Alternative dispute resolution procedures were clearly encouraged as a mechanism 
for facilitating return.  22   

 The United Kingdom’s National Museum Directors’ Conference (representing 
national  museums  23  )  published  a  statement  of  principles  and  proposed  action 
regarding the “spoliation of works of art by the Nazis and others during the Holocaust 
and World War II period”  24   and also coordinated the provenance reports that were 
undertaken by UK museum collections. The approach taken here was wider than 
either the Washington Conference Principles or the Council of Europe Resolution 
and covered “wrongful taking” rather than specifically looting or confiscation; con-
sequently, it took account of the varied means by which owners lost possession of 
their cultural objects, including forced sales and sales necessitated by persecution.  25   
In this atmosphere of seeking justice for those who had lost cultural objects because 
of the Nazi agenda, and as a means of fulfilling its international commitments,  26   
the Panel was formed in 2000, as were similar panels across Europe.  27   These panels 
now address claims in fora outside the traditional legal rules and where the moral 
strength of claims is key to achieving just and fair solutions. The Panel’s establish-
ment thereby fulfilled Principle 11 of the Washington Conference Principles, which 
called upon states to develop dispute resolution processes. 

 The  aim  of  establishing  a  Panel  with  the  narrow  jurisdiction  of  dealing  with 
Nazi-related Holocaust claims was clear from much of the discussion in Parliament 

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  117 

preceding and immediately subsequent to the Panel’s establishment and the National 
Museum Directors’ Conference’s provenance project. The discussion was couched 
in terms of “art that may have been looted from victims of Nazi persecution.”  28   The 
government’s position was that it was “working on the basis of the recommenda-
tions of the Washington conference on Holocaust-era assets”  29   and aimed “to facil-
itate a just resolution of claims made for cultural objects that may have been looted 
in the Nazi era.”  30   Further justification for the Panel and the subsequent power of 
transfer from national museums was that the Nazi misappropriation of cultural 
objects was of an unprecedented nature and scale,  31   carried out in a “methodical 
and systematic manner” directed at specific people,  32   and formed “an integral part 
of their attack on other races,”  33   such that resolution of these claims was essential 
to “close a chapter of history.”  34   The link between the dispossessions from Jewish 
owners and crimes against humanity has been used to justify the separate treatment 
of these claims from others involving cultural objects  35   and the establishment of 
special panels and legislation.  36   The introduction of such mechanisms to resolve 
disputes demonstrates a “privileging of Holocaust claims over those of other art-
theft victims,”  37   but this is acknowledged as potentially problematic for future groups 
who might call for legislation to facilitate return and who would need to “surpass 
Holocaust-paradigmatic  standards  of  suffering.”  38    Setting  an  obvious  hurdle  of 
moral turpitude that future claimants must surmount seems unpalatable, yet some 
direct comparisons have been made between the Nazi agenda and other horrific events, 
for example, “the nature and extent of the Nazi atrocities were quite exceptional—
orders of magnitude greater than the disasters of Bosnia and Rwanda.”  39   The bar 
seems to have been set, even though one can acknowledge that all of these repre-
hensible situations could justify specific treatment, taking claims outside the usual 
legal rules. Similarly, colonial oppression of indigenous cultures resulting in sacred 
objects and human remains being held by museum collections might also provide 
a basis on which to provide nonlegal solutions that circumvent the legal barriers to 
return. The original theft of such objects has been described as a form of genocide,  40   
and the continued decontextualization of these objects within museums can harm 
communities.  41   Repatriation claims have been described as “personal affronts 
or moral claims that survive from generation to generation”  42   that raise “ques-
tions of cultural identity and involve strong emotions”  43   and “ultimately come 
down to emotions and beliefs—not things.”  44   The act of repatriation itself can 
be empowering.  45   If provision were made for other repatriation claims, then this 
would give effect to elements of the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples,  which  requires  states  “to  provide  redress  through  effective  mecha-
nism, which may include restitution ... with respect to their cultural ... religious 
and spiritual property taken with their free, prior and informed consent or in vio-
lation of their laws, traditions and customs.”  46   This instrument goes further in the 
context of ceremonial objects and human remains and requires states “to enable 
the access and/or repatriation” of such things “through fair, transparent and effec-
tive mechanism developed in conjunction with indigenous peoples concerned.”  47   

 118   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

 Despite  these  strong  arguments  in  favor  of  providing  a  remedy  for  other 
dispossessions, in part based on the importance of the objects to cultural commu-
nities and the clear benefits of repatriation, the only exception in UK law to the 
statutory bar on transfer from national museum collections other than Nazi-era 
claims has been in the context of human remains.  48   Indeed, the approach generally 
has been to treat Nazi-era claims and human remains separately from other claims 
for cultural objects.  49   The influence of the Washington Conference Principles and 
arguably necessarily the focus on cultural objects lost  as a result of  the Nazis rather 
than simply lost during the Nazi-era extends beyond the rationale for establishing 
the Panel and permeates much of its work; this is clear in the context of the Panel’s 
Terms of Reference and its reports. The most significant influence on the substan-
tive jurisdiction of the Panel is in the Panel’s paramount purpose of achieving a fair 
and just solution for both parties,  50   which has its origins in Principles 8 and 9 and 
is a thread running through the Panel’s work. It became apparent that the statutory 
bars on transferring objects from national museum collections,  51   in place during 
the first nine years of the Panel’s existence, led “to unjust, unfair and sometimes 
downright ludicrous outcomes,”  52   such that a non-national museum could return 
an object to the prewar owner on the Panel’s recommendation, whereas a national 
museum  in  possession  of  an  object  lost  in  the  same  circumstances  could  not.  53   
Consequently, the Holocaust (Return of Cultural Objects) Act 2009 (“the 2009 
Act”) facilitated the just and fair resolution of all disputes regardless of the institu-
tion in which the object was housed and overcame this impediment to achieving 
just and fair solutions by permitting national museums to return cultural objects 
to the heirs of their prewar owners. More specific reliance on the Washington 
Conference Principles by the Panel is found in the context of making allowances 
for the difficulties of evidence many years after the events; the Panel’s Terms of 
Reference acknowledge this difficulty, but direct reference has been made to the 
Washington Conference Principles in reports where the claim raised challenging 
evidential questions.  54   

 Having  taken  the  Washington  Conference  Principles  as  its  guiding  light,  the 
Panel’s Terms of Reference are wider not only in terms of the  types  of dispos-
session that it deals with (i.e., not only confiscations properly so-called) but also 
in terms of the  cause  of dispossession (whether or not Nazi-related). Therefore the 
Panel’s primary function is to consider claims relating to people who lost posses-
sion of cultural objects during the Nazi era (1933–45) where such objects are now 
held in UK national collections or other museums or galleries established for the 
public benefit.  55   The Panel may hear private claims where both parties agree.  56   The 
phrase “lost possession” clearly anticipates the varied means by which the original 
owners lost their cultural objects and extends beyond the Washington Conference 
and Council of Europe definitions of “Nazi confiscated art” and “looted Jewish 
cultural property” to “forced sale[s], sale[s] at an undervalue and otherwise.”  57   In 
this regard the Panel has acknowledged the influence of the Inter-Allied Declara-
tion in several reports; these included situations where sales were necessitated by 

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  119 

the circumstances of persecution rather than the direct intervention of the Nazis   58   
and to fulfil extortionate taxation demands levied on some owners solely because 
they were Jewish.  59   However, the more controversial widening of its ambit beyond 
the earlier statements of principles is the extension to all cases of cultural objects 
lost during the Nazi era and thereby “privileges”  60   claims for those cultural objects 
lost during that time rather than solely losses caused by Nazi persecution. There 
is no clear justification for this extension in any of the parliamentary discussions 
in advance of the Panel’s establishment. Indeed, criticisms have been levied at the 
lack of full consultation leading up to this.  61   If, as O’Donnell suggests, there is 
a metaphorical bar,  62   the Panel, by extending its jurisdiction to other claims for 
cultural objects lost during this time, has allowed potential claimants to pass the 
bar of the suffering associated with the Holocaust and to have standing as claim-
ants in the moral claims process that is the Panel. The Panel, therefore, “not without 
some  hesitation”  concluded  that  it  had  jurisdiction  in  the  case  involving  the 
Beneventan Missal  63   (a 12th-century manuscript) where the unknown act by 
which the claimant lost possession of the manuscript appeared likely to have 
occurred during 1933–1945.  64   Here there was no obvious Nazi connotation, and 
it  seems  that  the  manuscript  was  lost  in  the  aftermath  of  a  bombing  campaign 
or during the requisition by the Allies of the building in which the manuscript was 
housed.  65    The  2006  DCMS  Consultation  on  prospective  legislation  clearly  envis-
aged a statute with a narrower remit; it had identified the problem of potentially 
applying to all losses of cultural objects that occurred during the Nazi Era if future 
legislation used the same approach as the Panel’s Terms of Reference.  66   The writers 
of  the  Consultation  paper  proposed  for  discussion  a  separate  statute  dealing 
specifically with the Beneventan Missal in the event of support from consultation 
respondents for a power to cover that particular transfer. Nevertheless, the scope 
of the 2009 Act, which started its legislative life as a Private Members’ Bill, simi-
larly reflects the Panel’s jurisdiction despite the word “Holocaust” in the act’s title. 
Consequently, it has the potential to cover cultural objects taken from any country 
during the Nazi era, but in circumstances wholly unrelated to the Nazi agenda.  67   
Somewhat ironically, the first return under the power in  section 2  of the 2009 Act 
was for the Beneventan Missal;  68   consequently, the act that was so strongly justified 
on the basis of the scale and nature of the Nazi persecution of the Jews was used 
to return an object that was, arguably, more likely to have been stolen by an Allied 
soldier or someone else in Benevento than it was by the Nazis. There was certainly 
no hint of Nazi persecution of the claimants in that claim. Both the Panel’s juris-
diction and the 2009 Act’s scope shift the focus away from the Nazi agenda and 
towards the more general confusion of war, something that could apply equally 
to other wartime losses such as in the Balkans as well as to colonial dispossessions. 
While  the  responses  to  the  2006 Consultation revealed some support for specific 
provision  for  the  Beneventan  Missal,  it  was  by  no  means  clear  that  there  was 
widespread support from the respondents for such a power to extend to all losses 
of cultural objects between 1933 and 1945. By providing a mechanism by which a just 

 120   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

and fair solution can be achieved, Parliament, intentionally or unintentionally, has 
privileged any claim for cultural objects taken during this period over equally (if not 
stronger) claims that arise in colonial times or during other conflicts. Parliament has 
therefore widened the jurisdictional focus to loss of property itself, rather than the 
circumstance of the loss (i.e., as a result of the actions of the Nazis); with this in mind, 
it is extremely difficult to justify why other claims against national museums arising 
at times other than 1933–1945 should not be heard and acceded to.  

 What Is the Rationale for Providing a Mechanism for Deviating 
from the Legal Status Quo? 

 This section explores the principal bases on which provision was made for a 
deviation from the legal status quo whereby museums are presumed to retain their 
collections intact for future generations.  69   To this end, the concepts of “rightful 
owners,” “unjust enrichment,” and the notion of righting past wrongs will be 
explored. 

 Claims made against national museums for the return of other disputed cultural 
objects have not been met with the same level of parliamentary support that was 
seen for the establishment of the Spoliation Advisory Panel and the introduction 
of the 2009 Act. A clear demonstration of this was the failure of a Private Members’ 
Bill  that  was  introduced  at  the  same  time  as  the  bill  that  later  became  the  2009 
Act.  70   The British Museum Act 1963 (Amendment) Bill would only have applied 
to the British Museum and the Natural History Museum; however, the bill’s originator 
clearly acknowledged that his primary aim was to facilitate the transfer of the Par-
thenon Marbles to Greece. Indeed, he said that “I can think of only one set of objects 
to which it can realistically relate”  71   and made no mention of the Maqdala Treasure, 
sacred Ethiopian Tabots located in the British Museum’s collection, which had 
been described by the Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee as one of the 
clearest examples of where a museum should give effect to a moral claim.  72   

 A central rationale for providing the Panel and the power of transfer under the 
2009 Act seems to be the desire to right the past wrongs of the Nazis. Therefore, 
having acknowledged the unprecedented scale and scope of the horrors of the Nazi 
persecution, the government recognized its duties to “play their part in righting 
these historic wrongs” and “to ensure that questions of ownership of works of art 
arising from the terrible events of the Nazi era are resolved.”  73   The establishment 
of the Panel was a means of fulfilling these duties.  74   The second step to achieve 
just and fair solutions, by facilitating a power to return objects from museums, was 
therefore  something  that  the  United  Kingdom  could  do  as  “a  right-thinking 
country”  to  ensure  that  it  would  never  again  “allow  that  kind  of  injustice  to 
be perpetrated, either in the name of democracy or of humanity.”  75   This wide 
aspirational statement meant that even though it was acknowledged in the parlia-
mentary debates that the 2009 Act might only be used on a handful of occasions, 
the importance of the symbolic gesture of providing a means of returning objects 

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  121 

to  prewar  owners  was  seen  as  vitally  important  76    to  “show  a  clear  commitment 
from our national museums to return any object that has been found to have been 
looted during the Nazi period.”  77   

 There is seemingly a close link between the horrors of war (with a corresponding 
willingness to correct the historic wrongs caused by the Nazis) and the notion of 
returning cultural objects to their “rightful owners.” Entitlement of current heirs 
to some form of redress could therefore be based on a historical entitlement.  78   
Thompson is likely to classify the notion of returning cultural objects to their 
rightful owners as a legalistic approach or “reparation as restoration”  79   and the 
notion of redressing past wrongs as “theological”  80   or more specifically “repara-
tion as reconciliation” that is obligation dependent.  81   

 Occasionally, the concept of “rightful owner” has been expressed at the parlia-
mentary level and in select committees in the context of the work of the Panel  82   
and the power to transfer.  83   In the debates on the 2009 Act the “overriding, horror, 
cruelty and depravity” of the Holocaust  84   was emphasized to such a degree that 
“both sides of the House would support any form of restitution.”  85   This suggests 
that the act can be justified on the basis of the particular nature of the suffering 
at this time, but this seems to be closely associated with the notion of returning 
property to its “rightful owner,” because shortly after acknowledging the horrors 
of the Holocaust, Hugh Robertson MP then acknowledged that “Plunder and loot-
ing are as old as war itself, and it is right that we should do everything to prevent 
it and, if we cannot, to restore objects to their rightful place when possible.”  86   The 
phrase “plunder and looting” seems to be used here in a wider context than solely 
Holocaust-related claims and could be used to support arguments made for the 
return of many other cultural objects that were taken during similar circumstances. 
Despite this point being made, the bill to facilitate the transfer of objects from the 
British Museum mentioned above, which was introduced at the same time as that 
of the 2009 Act, failed at an early procedural stage.  87   The specialized nature of the 
Nazi-era looting was therefore privileged over comparable claims to looted objects 
taken during other times of war or unequal power relations and which might have 
been covered by the act, for example, the Maqdala Treasure.  88   

 When dealing with the ownership of cultural objects, the “rightful owner” is usu-
ally synonymous with the legal owner; indeed, the phrase “rightful owner” usually 
signifies the person who has a valid legal claim to property.  89   However, in the con-
text of Nazi-related dispossessions, this phrase has come to be used to mean what 
is right, just, or virtuous to do. Therefore, even though an original owner’s legal 
title may have been extinguished by a limitation statute and the current possessor 
may have lawful possession, the particular circumstances in which the object was 
lost (and possibly the circumstances in which it was acquired by a museum) could 
mean that he or she can still be regarded in a moral sense as the owner. This notion 
has developed in the context of museums that are encouraged by their professional 
bodies not to acquire objects unless they are satisfied that they can obtain “valid 
title” to them.   90   Simply having evidence of legal title to an object is not necessarily 

 122   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

indicative  of  valid  title,  91    which  focuses  on  morally  justified  entitlement.  92    This 
acknowledgment  of  the  questionable  moral  status  of  the  object  is  reflected  in  the 
recognition at the parliamentary level and in select committees of “rightful owners,” 
which was discussed above. The International Council of Museums’ (ICOM’s) con-
cept of valid title therefore demonstrates the strong feeling against public collections 
housing objects to which they have legal title, but to which their title is morally dubious. 
The  display  and  profiting  from  Nazi-era  looted  art  as  well  as  other  stolen  art  is 
seen as contrary to the public trust  93   and can negatively impact on the inclusive 
nature of museums in terms of the duties they owe to a variety of different stake-
holders.  94   It is clear that the public trusts museums as institutions  95   and there is 
international legal recognition that museums should act in accordance with moral 
principles;  96   this is seen in practice in the guise of professional codes of ethics that 
govern museums  97   and guidelines that have been introduced dealing specifically 
with Nazi-era cultural objects.  98   Furthermore, the fact that museums benefit from 
public funding contributes to the inappropriateness of displaying looted art, and 
institutions  that  receive  government  funds  are  expected  to  return  looted  Jewish 
cultural property.  99   

 A museum currently in possession of a cultural object that was lost by its owner 
as a result of the Nazis’ actions is benefiting from that original act of dispossession, 
even if it did not directly cause the dispossession. The benefit could be regarded 
as unjust on the basis that the current enjoyment by the museum and the viewing 
public is derived from the wrong that befell the original owner. Analogies have 
therefore been drawn with the common law concept of unjust enrichment.  100   While 
it may be useful to consider the approach to claims for Nazi-era cultural objects 
from  the  viewpoint  of  the  gain  that  is  enjoyed  by  the  respondent,  rather  than 
the loss to the claimant, and legal principles may be useful to provide guidance 
for the Panel,  101   nevertheless it is unclear exactly on what basis the unjust enrich-
ment would be established, as there are various possibilities. Unjust enrichment is 
a causative element  102   that will lead to the response of restitution.  103   The relevant 
unjust  factor  could  be  interpreted  as  based  on  the  dispossession  of  the  original 
owner in circumstances akin to duress; however, here the situation would not be 
directly analogous to a finding of duress that would permit one of the contractual 
parties to set the contract aside.  104   Alternatively, the unjust factor could be based 
on some broader public policy basis  105   such that it justified restitution, although 
no such ground currently exists in law in these circumstances. Another approach 
would be to treat restitution as being based on the enduring title to the object (here a 
moral entitlement as the rightful owner, rather than the legal title). Yet another view 
might be that return is the restitutionary response to a wrong. However, even though 
the current possessors of the objects are several steps removed from the original 
wrongdoers, and the viewing public not at all blameworthy for the original dis-
possession or the acquisition of the object, it may be argued that the public is 
unjustly  enriched  at  the  expense  of  the  dispossessed  owners  or  their  heirs.  In 
light of this uncertainty, it is argued here that the usefulness of the analogy with 

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  123 

the legal notion of unjust enrichment lies less with the detail of the concept at 
common law and more with approach of the courts in focusing on the unjust 
gain to the respondent that was acquired as a result of past wrongs (even if the 
respondent was not directly involved in them), rather than focusing on the loss 
suffered by the claimant. 

 A very strong expression of unjust enrichment was made during the parliamen-
tary debates on the 2009 Act, when it was suggested that an artwork with an unre-
solved Nazi-era history can taint the viewer with the surrounding injustice:

  The  spectator  cannot  look  at  [looted  art]  without  seeing  the  pain  and 
betrayal that led it to be situated there in a national museum. It taints the 
spectators who knowingly take advantage of the presence of the picture 
there and it speaks to them of loss and war, not creativity and insight.  106    

  In this view, the tainted aura of the object affects the viewers and makes them com-
plicit in the immoral act that befell the original owner; the public’s enjoyment of 
the object derives from the museum’s unjust enrichment, and so it also amounts 
to unjust enrichment. This tainting seemingly occurs regardless of whether the 
institution  was  at  fault  in  acquiring  the  object  (in  terms  of  whether  it  had  per-
formed the requisite provenance checks). It seems that identification of the object 
as potentially looted (presumably through the more recent provenance projects) 
crystallizes the tainting process in the sense that tainting of the public is dependent 
on knowledge since otherwise the viewer would not know of the pain or betrayal 
to be affected by it.  107   As this speech was made in the context of the parliamentary 
debates on the inability of national museums to return Nazi-era cultural objects, it 
is probable that Baroness Deech (in the quotation above) was referring to the pre-
2010 situation where an  ex gratia  payment could be made but where return was 
impossible, rather than referring to the tainting of spectators where no recompense 
had  been  made  at  all.  However,  it  might  be  argued  that  in  situations  where  the 
Panel recommends the display of an account of the object’s history and an  ex gratia  
payment, the symbolic recognition of the history and the tangible recompense of 
the monetary sum effectively launder the object and thus it ceases to be tainted. 
Many  of  the  arguments  in  favor  of  the  2009  Act  centered  on  the  need  to  avoid 
remedial inconsistencies between claimants and the injustice of only being able to 
recommend money rather than return.  108   This seems to acknowledge implicitly the 
goal of the Washington Conference Principles of just and fair solutions across the 
board. However, in Panel recommendations where the cultural object was retained 
by the respondents and the claimants were paid  ex gratia  sums, the parties both 
agreed to this resolution in view of the statutory bars.  109   Indeed, claimants may 
consider monetary recompense rather than return of the cultural object to be a 
satisfactory resolution of the dispute; this can be seen in respect of further objects 
originally owned by Arthur Feldmann. Despite the applicability of the 2009 Act, 
in 2013, the Feldmann heirs and the British Museum (without seeking the advice 
of the Panel) agreed that the British Museum would make an  ex gratia  payment to 

 124   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

the heirs, thereby ensuring that the drawing in question remained in the museum 
“to be enjoyed by visitors and scholars.”  110   If claimants are content that justice has 
been done, then presumably visitors to a museum would no longer be tainted by 
viewing these cultural objects. 

 On the one hand, it seems that the dislike of benefiting from tainted cultural 
objects can be translated into an aim to strip the respondents of this gain, par-
ticularly when the museum failed to perform adequate provenance checks. This 
focuses much more on the gain to the museum, rather than the loss to the orig-
inal owner. Return of the object would satisfy this imperative. On the other hand, 
a reason for seeking to achieve just and fair solutions could be to launder the 
tainted object, thus rendering it more palatable for the viewer, by making either 
a monetary payment to the claimants or displaying an account of the object’s 
Nazi-era history. Laundering thereby puts an end to any unjust enrichment of the 
public. However, it is unrealistic to treat the rationale of the Panel’s remedies and 
the 2009 Act as based solely on the notion that the process serves to launder the 
tainted object since this focuses far more on the respondent and the public than 
on the claimant’s moral claim, which reflects neither the Panel’s approach nor the 
background  documentation.  The  Panel  appears  to  be  concerned  with  achieving 
justice for claimants, rather than simply disgorging benefits purely on the basis that 
there has been a benefit rather than a continuing entitlement of the rightful owner. 
Disgorging benefits or laundering objects seems, at most, to be a secondary reason 
for recommending remedies and may simply be an indirect effect of the remedial 
processes rather than a central aim.    

 THE PANEL’S APPROACH—NO DIRECT LINK WITH THE FOUNDING 

RATIONALE 

 Despite the strong rationale set out for the formation of the Panel, it is difficult to 
see the particular recommendations being based squarely on any one of these ratio-
nales. Instead, the decisions have tended to be based more generally on achieving 
a just and fair solution in response to an appropriately strong moral claim in line 
with the Panel’s Terms of Reference and the Washington Conference Principles 
and have not referred to the underlying rationale to which they seek to give effect 
through the use of just and fair solutions. Nevertheless, it is argued in this article 
that these rationales necessarily influence how to frame, or achieve, the just and fair 
solutions sought by the panel. 

 It is difficult to interpret the successful claim of the Benevento Chapter as a recom-
mendation based on the rationale of providing redress for the Nazis’ past wrongs, 
since the circumstances of that dispossession were wholly unrelated to persecution 
by the Nazis. There appears to have been a past wrong of some kind, in terms of 
an apparent dispossession that was more than likely unlawful.  111   However, similar 
wrongs have happened concerning other cultural objects currently in museums, 
yet no comparable panel exists to resolve claims relating to them. Referring back 

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  125 

to the original rationale for the Panel, it would seem that the Panel’s recommen-
dation in this case is more readily interpreted as one based on returning property 
to rightful owners of the manuscript. Alternatively, the recommendation could 
be interpreted as being based on the need to strip the museum of an unjust gain; 
this gain would be unjust not only because the original owner was wrongfully 
dispossessed of the manuscript, but also because the respondent acquired the 
manuscript  in  circumstances  where  there  were  doubts  about  its  provenance. 
Focusing on the former consideration first, the rationale of “rightful owner” must 
presuppose an original entitlement to the object by the original owner, who can be 
followed down the generations to the claimant. In the  British Library/Benevento 
claim , this was unproblematic because here the institutional claimant was the 
original owner who had lost possession of the manuscript. What needed to be 
established  was  whether  or  not  the  original  owner  retained  ownership  until  the 
act of dispossession. The exact timing of the dispossession was unclear, and so the 
Panel relied heavily on circumstantial evidence that the manuscript was owned 
by  the  claimant  between  1933  and  1945,  during  which  time  it  went  missing  in 
the confusion of war.  112   This approach might be interpreted as indicating that the 
claimant continued to be the “rightful owner” in a moral sense and justified the 
Panel’s recommended remedy. 

 Since the notion of “rightful owner” is used in a moral rather than legal context, it 
seems logical to assume that if one is to conclude that a person’s moral entitlement should 
trump an otherwise legal entitlement, the relative moral positions of the parties should 
be weighed in the balance. The  British Library/Benevento claim  and the  Tate Gallery/
Constable claim  are the only recommendations in which the level of the respondent’s 
provenance checks has been found to be wanting.  113   The respondent’s lack of scru-
pulousness when acquiring the object could therefore be interpreted as diminishing 
any moral entitlement that it might otherwise have had, were it to have acquired 
the manuscript in good faith. This could therefore strengthen the claimant’s status 
as the “rightful owner” and consequently might lead to the conclusion that return 
is necessary to achieve the appropriate just and fair solution. Similarly, the insuf-
ficient provenance checks could also strengthen the argument that the viewers 
would be tainted by the manuscript’s continued display in the British Library. The 
viewers’ complicity would be greater in a situation where they had knowledge not 
only that the object had been looted but also that the institution had acquired it in 
circumstances where there was a suspicion that it might have been looted. This case 
could therefore also be analyzed on the basis that the British Library was unjustly 
enriched by the past wrongs of the dispossession and the acquisition, and so this 
justified stripping it of an unjust benefit to prevent the tainting of the viewers. This 
does, though, assume that all looted art should be treated in this way, rather than 
just that taken directly or indirectly by the Nazis. Whether one interprets the 
Panel’s recommendation in the  British Library/Benevento claim  on the basis of 
returning objects to their rightful owners or on stripping a museum of its unjust 
gains, this recommendation could be used  as justification  for  a widening of  the 

 126   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

power to transfer cultural objects from national museum collections to other cate-
gories such as those taken during colonial times. 

 Two categories of decisions by the Panel will now be discussed. The first category 
consists of those recommendations involving a rather forensic analysis of possible 
allowances and deductions from the market value. It is argued that these can be 
interpreted as being made on the basis of a rationale of returning objects to their 
rightful owners or, rather, providing monetary payment to reflect this loss of prop-
erty. These effectively rest on some notion of historical entitlement.  114   The second 
category  consists  of  recommendations  in  which  the  Panel  takes  a  more  broad-
brush approach to quantification and which might be seen as reflecting a holistic use 
of remedies to redress the Nazis’ past wrongs and to achieve broader justice, with less 
concern about potential overcompensation of claimants. This latter approach taken 
by the Panel might be more akin to reconciliatory justice.  115   

 The  first  category  of  claims  can  be  seen  in  the  context  of  recommendations 
where an  ex gratia  payment has been awarded of a sum initially based on the mar-
ket value attributable to the object and then altered to reflect certain deductions 
and allowances. First, deductions are made to reflect the hypothetical expenditure 
that  the  claimant  would  otherwise  have  had  to  incur  had  he  or  she  owned  the 
object between the Nazi era and the time of the claim. These have included sums to 
reflect the conservation work that the respondent had undertaken,  116   the ongoing 
insurance costs,  117   and the sellers’ commission payable by the claimants were they 
to have sold the object, realizing it as an asset.  118   Second, allowances are made to 
account for the public benefit that has been derived, and will continue to be derived, 
from the object’s public display and access.  119   This latter category can be interpreted 
as reflecting the desire to prevent the museum’s (or the public’s) continued unjust 
enrichment at the expense of the claimant.  120   While the Panel obtains expert valua-
tions to arrive at the market price, the allowances and deductions it then makes are 
not fully particularized in the Panel’s reports since there is no reference to specific 
evidence about the costs of these over the years. However, it is clear that the Panel 
seeks to avoid either the unjust enrichment of the respondent or of the claimant 
as a result of any recommended remedies. Further evidence of the latter is clear 
from the reluctance of the Panel to award return where (a) a claimant has already 
received compensation that can be attributable to the object’s loss (even if relatively 
modest in nature) and (b) where the sum received at a sale forced by the circum-
stances of persecution was nevertheless a fair one reflective of the object’s value.  121   
In these circumstances the Panel recommended the display of an account of the 
object’s history next to it when it is publicly displayed, in preference to return of the 
object,  122   because return had the potential to doubly recompensed the claimants.  123   
In contrast, in the same heirs’ successful Dutch claim, the Advisory Committee did 
not treat the German compensation as “unjustified enrichment,” considering any 
repayment of the compensation as a matter between the German government and 
claimants.  124   Furthermore, the Dutch Committee considered it likely that Glaser 
would have used the proceeds of the sale to fund his escape from persecution.  125   

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  127 

The United Kingdom’s Panel’s rather forensic approach in the  Courtauld/Glaser 
claim , concentrating on the avoidance of overcompensation of the claimants for 
the loss of property could be interpreted as treating the claim as one that focused on 
who was the object’s rightful owner.  126   Seemingly, in this case, the Panel treated 
the  Courtauld  as the rightful owner because the Glaser family had already received 
“modest” compensation a 1959 settlement of German proceedings  127   and a rea-
sonable sum when the paintings were sold in 1933. 

 The Panel’s rather forensic approach can be contrasted with some of its other 
recommendations where it did not make such deductions and allowances in  ex gratia  
payments or where it chose to overcompensate by recommending return. In the 
 British Museum/Rothberger claim , a deduction was made to reflect the insurance 
premiums that would have been paid, but not one corresponding to the sellers’ 
commission.  128   Similarly, in that claim, no allowance was made for the public 
benefit derived from this, despite the object being “an object of considerable 
importance” to the British Museum.  129   While ultimately the lack of a deduction 
and the addition of an allowance probably cancel each other out, nevertheless 
this much more holistic approach to quantification sits less easily with the notion 
of seeking to compensate a rightful owner in terms of recompensing the loss of 
property and seems more akin to a general approach of righting the past wrongs 
of the Nazis. 

 Where return is recommended, no payment is required from the claimant to 
reflect the savings of conservation or insurance costs that the claimant would other-
wise have incurred (although equally no allowance for the public benefit is made 
in addition  130  ). The absence of any power to recommend such a payment contrasts 
with the decree establishing the Dutch Committee, which permits the committee 
to recommend that the applicant pay a sum of money to the owner on return  131   or 
that return is “subject to further provision.”  132   The UK Panel’s inability to make 
such  a  deduction  has  the  potential  to  lead  to  double  recovery,  since  a  claimant 
could recover the object (worth its full market value) but would also benefit from 
not having paid towards insurance and other costs.  133   In fact, were the Respon-
dent Council to have returned the painting in the  Glasgow CC claim  in accordance 
with  the  Panel’s  recommendation,  the  claimants  would  have  received  double 
recompense by virtue of the fact that in addition to the return of the painting 
(which  they  could  have  realized  as  an  asset  by  selling  it)  they  had  previously 
received (a) the “more than generous” auction price,  134   (b) a small amount of 
compensation, and (c) the benefit of not having to have paid any insurance pre-
miums and conservation costs. This seems to treat remedies as redressing past 
injustices and as a symbolic act, rather than providing recompense to the rightful 
owner  because  monetary  loss  would  have  been  minimal  and  yet  return  would 
overcompensate.  135   

 It seems inconsistent to make deductions from  ex gratia  payments but not to 
make similar arrangements on return; the claimant in the latter case is still in the 
position of being able to sell the object and to realize its full market value. In fact, 

 128   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

he or she may receive a higher price at auction than that received following a recom-
mendation by the Panel, since the Panel starts with conservative valuations rather 
than “high saleroom estimates,”  136   adopts a middle ground between those, and then 
makes any appropriate allowances and deductions to that sum. Auction sale prices 
might be heightened owing to the publicity surrounding the return. Prior to the 2009 
Act coming into force, when transfer was prohibited from certain institutions and 
claimants were therefore restricted to monetary recompense, making deductions 
from  ex gratia  payments could be seen as causing a double injustice. Not only were 
claimants not granted their preferred remedy, but the monetary award was reduced 
to take account of payments that they would have made, but which would not have 
been taken into account in instances where return was permitted. The current role 
played by  ex gratia  payments might be diminished because all English public 
museums are now equally placed to transfer cultural objects taken during the Nazi 
era, at least until the setting of the sun on claims in 2019.  137   Nevertheless, it is clear 
that in some cases claimants will be satisfied with an  ex gratia  payment in the knowl-
edge that the public can continue to benefit from the object, as was the case in 
the Feldmann heirs’ recent decision to accept an  ex gratia  payment directly from the 
British Museum (see discussion above). In more recent cases the Panel has been pre-
pared to focus more on the moral severity of the act of dispossession and recommend 
an account of the object’s history to avoid the double recompense that might result 
from return.  138   Having said that, it would remain open to the Panel to recommend a 
small  ex gratia  payment as a token financial gesture to remedy past injustices.   

 DO SOME REMEDIES BETTER REFLECT ONE RATIONALE THAN 

ANOTHER? 

 Physical return of a cultural object is frequently seen as the primary objective of claim-
ants, and there seems to be a presumption in favor of return in debates surrounding the 
Panel’s claims process as well as to a small extent in some of the earlier decisions of the 
Panel.  139   It has been suggested that the key purpose of the Panel ought to be return,  140   
and the previous absence of legislation permitting national museums to return objects 
undermined the authority and credibility of the Panel.  141   Furthermore, the Council 
of Europe treats return as a presumption in the case of publicly funded institutions, 
requiring compensation only where restitution has been made impossible.  142   

 The notion of returning objects to their rightful owners presupposes the need 
for  return  itself  (although,  as  discussed  above,  where  the  statute  prevented  this 
then  ex gratia  payments were made instead), and where payments are made, these 
tend to reflect (or equate as far as possible to) the loss of property. Therefore, if the 
purpose of remedies is about restoring property to its rightful owner, then a pre-
sumption in favor of return seems justified, even though it may occasionally result 
in an element of overcompensation. 

 The  concept  of  return  of  cultural  objects  that  were  lost  in  circumstances 
directly  or  indirectly  related  to  the  Nazis  has  been  justified  on  several  bases. 

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  129 

It plays an instrumental role first as “reconciliatory transitional justice,”  143   in part 
by restoring dignity to the Jewish community,  144   and second because of the objects’ 
special status as cultural objects which will have sentimental value to the claimants.  145   
O’Donnell suggests that where restitution takes place, “although the restituted object 
may be a relic of the past, it reifies, and allows for the veneration of a culture which 
tyranny sought to make disappear.”  146   In this way, return permits the telling of the 
narrative;  147   however, the most effective means by which the narrative of the Nazi era 
history is recorded and told is arguably where the Panel recommends what Palmer 
has called “commemorative ... action”  148   in the form of the display of an account of 
the history next to the object.  149   It could be said that where a museum has returned 
an object to its prewar owner, the public recognition of past injustices will not neces-
sarily go further than the publication of the report and the attendant press coverage. 
An account of the history can therefore more widely contribute to the Holocaust 
memorial because while “explanatory labels ... and provenance notes may not 
compensate for harm done ... they humbly recognize tainted possession.”  150   This 
recognition of tainted possession might in turn launder the object. The Panel has 
not recommended such a display when an object is restored to the claimant. The 
absence of an object that was previously in a national museum collection and the 
display of an account of its departure could serve an equally important role in recog-
nizing past injustices. It could therefore contribute to the wider historical memory 
regarding the Nazi persecution of the Jews. The Terms of Reference do not provide 
for this because the remedies now appear to be phrased as “either ... or.” Indeed, this 
changed phrasing makes it questionable whether an account of the object’s history can 
now be awarded in conjunction with an  ex gratia  payment. Thompson suggests that 
it is an acknowledgment of the wrong that is frequently needed in order to reestablish 
“relations of respect,” and this therefore provides reconciliatory reparation;  151   it can 
be seen as the “moral dimension” to reparation.  152   With this in mind, it appears that 
an account of an object’s provenance can play a tangible role as a remedy. 

 It has been suggested by those who represent Jewish restitution claimants that 
an account of the object’s history on its own “would be most inappropriate as a 
sole remedy.”  153   Nevertheless, as discussed above, the Panel has used this remedy 
to recommend the public recording of past injustices in circumstances where indi-
vidual claimants would otherwise receive a windfall, perceived as potential “double 
recompense”  154   or where they had already been “justly and fairly compensated.”  155   
This remedy does not directly compensate a claimant for the loss of the physical 
object; however, in instances where an account has been recommended, the origi-
nal owners (or the heirs) had already received monetary compensation either from 
a previous claim or from the original sale.  156   Therefore the Panel’s remedy focuses 
more on the intangible element of the claim and the recognition of the past wrongs 
imposed by the Nazis. In this way, the commemorative nature of an account of the 
object’s history is arguably firmly based on the rationale of recognizing past Nazi 
injustices. The more cynical view might be that at the same time, this act serves to 
launder the otherwise tainted object, making it more palatable for the viewer who 

 130   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

is no longer complicit in the ill deeds of the past. Either way, the commemorative 
account of the history may serve as a educative device, to inform the public of the 
widespread dispossessions that took place during the Nazi era. 

 Despite the arguments used to justify the Panel’s existence and the favoring of 
return as a remedy based on the strong link between claimants and the objects that 
were lost as a result of the Nazis, the Panel has not analyzed this relationship in any 
of the claims before it.  157   The Panel has recommended return even where there was 
no sentimental link between the owners and the objects because the painting was 
owned by the gallery of which the claimants were shareholders.  158   On occasion, a 
claimant may have no particular sentimental attachment to the object and is likely 
to sell it immediately following transfer from the museum, particularly where there 
are multiple heirs who cannot enjoy the object concurrently. In such a situation, 
there is an argument for saying that the Panel should balance this information with 
the public benefit that might be derived from the object. On the whole, the Panel 
focuses more heavily on the fairness to the claimants, in terms of the strength of 
their claims, without considering any public benefit that might be lost were a major 
cultural object to be transferred from a museum, particularly when it was not at 
fault in its provenance checks when it acquired the object. 

 There may be a significant, identifiable, public benefit to maintaining a cultural 
object for public viewing, particularly where the claimant seeks return because he or 
she hopes to sell it to a buyer who would pay more than any  ex gratia  payment rec-
ommended by the panel.  159   In these circumstances, there is a strong argument for the 
payment of money or an account of the object’s history rather than return, because 
the object will in any event be realized as an asset once restored to the claimant, so 
money  is  clearly  a  sufficient  remedy,  and  arguably,  past  wrongs  can  be  redressed 
more publicly by an account of the history. Bearing in mind the Panel’s paramount 
purpose of achieving a just and fair solution, not only for the claimant but also the 
respondent, this seems logical. The Panel certainly has a wide discretion in deciding 
remedies, and this could extend to considering the claimant’s intentions postreturn. 
 Hitherto,  none  of  the  Panel’s  recommendations  has  justified  retention  of  an 
important cultural object and an  ex gratia  payment on the basis of a strong public 
benefit to retaining it within the public collection.  160   Arguably, UK public benefit 
would be lost if there were a possibility that (a) on its return, the object would be kept 
in private without public access or (b) it might be exported abroad. In the former 
situation, it would be difficult to justify retention solely because the potential trans-
feree (who would later be the owner) decided to keep the object in private. There is 
no general obligation on private owners of culturally important objects to publically 
display them, and so it would be difficult to indirectly impose one here.  161   In the 
latter situation, the public benefit in retaining the object would be strong where 
a cultural object was of national importance (thereby satisfying the Waverley 
Criteria  162  ), such that in the usual course of things the granting of an export license 
would be deferred to allow an opportunity for UK institutions to raise a sum 
equivalent to the market price to retain the object within the country.  163   

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  131 

 According to the Select Committee, despite merits to solutions facilitating conti-
nued public access to cultural objects, this public access consideration “must be seen as 
subordinate to the interests and wishes of the rightful owner.”  164   However, where there 
is clear evidence that a claimant will sell the object and it will be lost to the UK public 
through export, this could justify at least a right of preemption of the object such that 
when an owner does offer it for sale, the respondent museum would have a right of 
first refusal.  165   This might be preferable to an  ex gratia  payment if the physical return of 
the object is interpreted as an important symbolic act for the claimants;  166   it gives the 
claimants the opportunity to decide what happens to the object. It is this freedom of 
choice that is preeminent for many claims by the heirs of Nazi era.  167   The recent Dutch 
claims involving the heirs of Richard Semmel show that return may be recommended 
where the claimants’ emotional and moral interests in having the object returned to 
them outweighed the interests of the museum,  168   but not where the museum had a 
stronger interest in retaining the object and making it available to the public.  169   These 
claims therefore demonstrate that the public benefit may take priority over the inte-
rests of the claimants, where the emotional link is less strong. Here the claimants were 
not family members, never knew Semmel, and had no recollections of the paintings in 
dispute.  170   The discussion now turns, therefore, to the importance the Panel attaches to 
the relationship between claimants and original dispossessed owners.   

 ARE JUST AND FAIR SOLUTIONS WEAKENED BY MORE DISTANT 

FAMILIAL RELATIONSHIPS? 

 The Panel has not questioned the standing of claimants in terms of their relationship 
to the original owner and has been content to hear claims from distant relatives.  171   
By looking at the link between the claimant and the original owner through the series 
of bequests (which appears to be the approach of the Panel  172  ), the focus seems to be 
on returning the objects to their rightful owner. In effect, this treats the claimants as 
having derived any entitlement by means of succession, and therefore the heir to the 
estate could be a descendant of a friend of the original owner, rather than a family 
member. However, the further one moves down the chain of succession, the further 
away the heir is from the original owner and the likelihood that the object would have 
stayed in the family would fall.  173   Therefore, over time, the successful achievement of 
returning the object to the rightful owner (in any moral sense) would be diminished. 
Even if the aim of the Panel’s remedies is the broader goal of remedying past injus-
tices, then where the claimants are very distant relatives, for example, by marriage, 
the remedies of return or financial recompense are again perhaps a less effective 
means of achieving this aim.  174   In such circumstances it may be more appropriate to 
recommend the display of an account of the history, since this becomes part of the 
Holocaust memorial. Rosenthal has expressed the following view:

  Of  course,  what  happened  in  the  Nazi  period  was  unspeakable  in  its 
awfulness.... I believe, however, that grandchildren or distant relations 

 132   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

of people who had works of art or property taken away by the Nazis do 
not now have an inalienable right to ownership, at the beginning of the 
21st century.  175    

  He  prefaced  his  comments  by  saying  that  his  own  relatives  suffered  at  the 
hands  of  the  Nazis,  but  said  that  the  stain  of  what  the  Nazis  did  “cannot  be 
cleansed by the restitution of master works from museums. After all, neither 
Rembrandt nor Klimt were responsible for those political crimes.”  176   The 2009 
Act has a 10-year sunset clause,  177   which will naturally bring to an end claims 
for the return of Nazi-era cultural objects from national museums, although it 
is unclear whether the Panel, as a forum for dispute resolution, will continue 
its work after that date. The sunset clause was justified on the basis that it gives 
sufficient time to facilitate claims, but that it gives the museums some long-term 
certainty.  178   

 It  would  seem  that  whether  the  remedies  seek  to  return  cultural  objects  to 
their rightful owners or to provide redress for the Nazis’ past wrongs, the nature 
of the relationship between the claimant and the original victim might well be 
important to achieve either of these aims. It might seem callous to discuss issues 
of succession in a legalistic way, considering the atrocities that befell the original 
owners of these objects. However, when calculating  ex gratia  payments, the Panel 
already deducts hypothetical costs from the market value. It is therefore not so 
far removed from this to determine the effective “standing” of claimants and link 
this to the appropriateness of remedies. Indeed, as discussed above, in the recent 
Dutch claim of the heirs of Richard Semmel, the lack of a familial link weakened 
those claims where there was a strong public benefit to retaining the paintings.  179   
The more remote a claimant is from the original owner, the less likely the claim-
ants would be to inherit the object as it may have otherwise been transferred.  180   
Waldron suggests that:

  Entitlements that fade with time, counterfactuals that are impossible to 
verify,  injustices  that  are  overtaken  by  circumstances—all  this  is  a  bit 
distant,  I’m  afraid  from  the  simple  conviction  that,  if  something  was 
wrongly taken, it must be right to give it back.  181    

  However, it should be remembered that the work of the Panel and the 2009 Act 
are exceptions to the general rule that the governing bodies of museums have a 
duty to keep museum collections intact  182   and that transfer from them should 
not take place save in the most limited of circumstances.  183   The processes that 
facilitate transfer in the context of Nazi-era claims “invert the typical deaccession 
framework.”  184   Given that the procedure of the Panel is to mitigate the harsh-
ness of the effects of the limitation periods thereby circumventing these rules for 
this narrow category of dispossessions, the Panel is tasked with making a moral 
judgment about the heirs’ entitlement to receive property to which they have no 
strict legal entitlement. Therefore, particularly in the context of a claim where 
the respondent is a private rather than public collection, the claimants’ status, 

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  133 

measured  by  their  connection  with  the  prewar  owner,  is  particularly  relevant 
when weighing the moral considerations since any recommendation would have 
the potential to affect individual private property rights.   

 CONCLUSION 

 While the panel was clearly founded on the basis of righting the past wrongs 
caused by the Nazis and returning objects to their rightful owners, the panel’s recom-
mendations do not always fall in line with these founding rationales. A clearer 
focus on which of these two rationales a recommendation is based would serve 
to better inform just and fair solutions so that claimants are neither over- nor 
undercompensated. If the aim is to return property to its rightful owner, then 
much more consideration needs to be given to the relative position of the respon-
dent and the public benefit that may be derived from continued access to the 
object in a public collection. The, at times, broad-brush approach to quantification 
would suggest that the aim is to right the wrongs of the past and to provide wider 
restorative justice for the actions of the Nazis, but this is not so where claims 
are unrelated to the Nazis, such as the  British Library/Benevento claim . Here, it 
seems that the justification of the remedy focuses on returning cultural objects 
to their “rightful owners” or stripping the respondent of an unjust gain. The instances 
where more detailed calculations have been made suggest a clear focus on com-
pensating the otherwise rightful owner for the loss suffered. However, sugges-
tions of the need to avoid museums being unjustly enriched by tainted objects 
have again received some recognition in the public benefit allowance made in 
one claim and acknowledged in another, but have been ignored in some claims 
altogether. 

 In light of the public’s strong trust in museums, and the important public role 
that  museums  play  in  society,  if  an  object  is  transferred  from  a  collection,  then 
there needs to be clear justification for the decision. This can be achieved by linking 
the just and fair solutions more clearly to the founding rationale, thereby making 
clear the justification for the moral basis of each claim.  185   

 By  recommending  return  in  the  case  of  the  Beneventan  Missal,  the  Panel 
(and Parliament through the enactment of the 2009 Act) has opened the door, 
just  a  crack,  to  the  possibility  of  returning  cultural  objects  to  their  rightful 
owners  in  the  absence  of  any  overarching  need  to  remedy  past  injustices  for 
Nazi persecution. There may well then be scope for widening the door a little 
further to give effect to other similarly strong moral claims if the UK statutes 
prohibiting return from national museums were amended. It seems, therefore, 
that  future  claimants  would  not  necessarily  need  to  surmount  the  barrier  of 
showing that their suffering was worse or equivalent to that suffered during the 
Holocaust, but that they too are the rightful owners of cultural objects now in 
possession of a museum and that a fair and just response would be to provide 
them with a remedy.     

 134   

  ENDNOTES 

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

 7  .   Cotler, “The Holocaust, ‘Thefticide’ and Restitution,” 623.  
 8  .   Inter-Allied Declaration against Acts of Dispossession Committed in Territories under Enemy 

 15  .   See Feliciano,  The Lost Museum .  
 16  .   Limitation Act 1939, sec. 3(2).  
 17  .   See, generally, Cotler, “The Holocaust, ‘Thefticide’ and Restitution”; Palmer,  Museums and the 

 9  .   Inter-Allied Declaration, Declaration 4.  
 10  .   O’Donnell, “The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art,” 60.  
 11  .   Palmer,  Museums and the Holocaust,  118; Kurtz, “The End of the War,” 114. See, generally, 

 1  .   See, generally, Nicholas,  The Rape of Europa , and Feliciano,  The Lost Museum .  
  
 2  .   House of Commons Library, “Holocaust (Return of Cultural Objects) Bill,” 2.  
  
  
 3  .    Spoliation  Advisory  Panel  Terms  of  Reference,   https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/78037/SAP-report-BM-HC1839.pdf  (accessed 6 December 2013) 
[hereinafter SAP ToR], [3].  
 4  .   SAP ToR, [12(e)].  
  
 5  .   SAP ToR, [12(g)].  
  
  
 6  .   In the United States, several academics have indicated that one of the roles of “cultural property 
law” may be to facilitate remedying past wrongs: Carpenter et al., “In Defense of Property,” 1033; 
Fincham, “The Distinctiveness of Property and Heritage,” 684.  
  
  
Occupation or Control, London, 5 January 1943.  
  
  
  
Edsel and Witter,  Monuments Men .  
  
 12  .    Attorney-General v. The Trustees of the British Museum  [2005] Ch 397, [11].  
  
 13  .   Palmer,  Museums and the Holocaust,  119.  
  
 14  .   This can be seen in various claims before the Panel, e.g.,  Report of the Spoliation Advisory Panel 
in Respect of Eight Drawings Now in the Possession of the Samuel Courtauld Trust  (2009 HC 757) [here-
inafter  Courtauld/Glaser claim ] and  Report of the Spoliation Advisory Panel in respect of a Painting Now 
in the Possession of Glasgow City Council  (2004 HC 10) [hereinafter  Glasgow  CC  claim ].  
  
  
  
Holocaust,  49.  
  
Justice .  
  
Chapter 9, “The Barbarians of Culture” in Eizenstat,  Imperfect Justice .  
  
 20  .   Washington Conference Principles adopted at the Washington Conference on Holocaust Era 
assets by more than 40 nations. This statement of principles was followed by the  Vilnius  and  Terezin 
Forum Declarations .  
  
  
  
ference,  Loans between National and Non-national Museums .  
  
  
  
Nazi-Confiscated Art .  
  
 27  .   For example, the Commission pour l’indemnisation des victims de spoliations (France) and 
the Adviescommissie Restitutieverzoeken Cultuurgoederen en Tweede Wereldoorlog (Netherlands).  
  
  
  
  
Property,” 193.  
  

 28  .   Andrew Dismore MP, Hansard HC vol 345 col 13, 28 February 2000.  
 29  .   Lord McIntosh of Haringey, Hansard HL vol 612 col 16, 11 May 2000.  
 30  .   Alan Howarth MP, Hansard HC vol 348 col 255W, 13 April 2000.  
 31  .   DCMS,  Restitution of Objects Spoliated in the Nazi-Era , [1.2]; Select Committee, “Cultural 

 24  .   National Museum Directors’ Conference,  Statement of Principles .  
 25  .   See Nicholas,  The Rape of Europa,  39; Palmer,  Museums and the Holocaust , 4.  
 26  .   Through the Washington Conference on Holocaust Era Assets,  Principles with Respect to 

 21  .   CoE Resolution 1205, [13(a)].  
 22  .   CoE Resolution 1205, [16].  
 23  .   Those governed by statute and in receipt of public funding: National Museum Directors’ Con-

 19  .    Select  Committee  on  Culture,  Media  and  Sport,  “Cultural  Property,”  [179].  See,  generally, 

 18  .   See Bazyler and Alford, “Introduction” in  Holocaust Restitution ; the preface in Bazyler,  Holocaust 

 32  .   Feliciano, “The Great Cultural Robbery,” 165.  

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  135 

 46  .   United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (adopted 13 September 2007) 

 41  .   Simpson,  Making Representations,  200.  
 42  .   Shapiro, “Repatriation: A Modest Proposal,” 100. Here Shapiro uses the term to mean “the 

 33  .   DCMS,  Restitution of Objects Spoliated in the Nazi-Era , 8.  
 34  .   Lembit  Öpik  MP,  Public  Bill  Committee,  “Holocaust  (Stolen  Art)  Restitution  Bill,”  HC 

 35  .   Paterson, “Resolving Material Culture Disputes,” 160.  
 36  .   For example, the Spoliation Advisory Panel and the Holocaust (Return of Cultural Objects) 

 43  .   Shapiro, “Repatriation: A Modest Proposal,” 105.  
 44  .   Shapiro, “Repatriation: A Modest Proposal,” 105.  
 45  .   Pickering, “Despatches from the Front Line?” 168. ICOM requires its members to “be prepared 

 37  .   O’Donnell, “The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art,” 70.  
 38  .   O’Donnell, “The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art,” 71.  
 39  .   Earl Attlee, Hansard HL vol 712 col 911, 10 July 2009.  
 40  .   Atkinson, “The Meanings and Values of Repatriation,” 15. See, generally, MacDonald, “Daring 

  
  
(2008-09), col 14.  
  
  
Act 2009 and the comparable European panels set out above.  
  
  
  
  
to Compare.”  
  
  
claim for cultural property as a country’s patrimony, a people’s or community’s heritage” (at 96).  
  
  
  
to initiate dialogues for the return of cultural property” ( ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums,  [6.2]).  
  
61/295 2008, art. 11(2).  
 47  .   United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, art. 12(2).  
  
 48  .   Human Tissue Act 2004, sec. 47.  
  
  
 49  .   In the case of human remains, the nature of them being the remains of actual human beings, 
rather than artefacts, Select Committee, “Cultural Property,” [163]; and in the case of Nazi Era claims, 
the unprecedented scale and nature of the dispossessions and the link with the Nazis’ racist ideology, 
Select Committee, “Cultural Property,” [168] and [172].  
  
  
larly restricted.  
  
 52  .   Andrew Dismore MP, Hansard HC vol 492 col 1166, 15 May 2009.  
  
 53  .   See, for example, the  Report of the Spoliation Advisory Panel in Respect of Three Pieces of Porcelain 
Now in the Possession of the British Museum London and the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge  (2008 
HC 602) [hereinafter  British Museum/Rothberger claim and Fitzwilliam/Rothberger claim ]; the  Report 
of  the  Spoliation  Advisory  Panel  in  Respect  of  Three  Drawings  Now  in  the  Possession  of  the  Courtauld 
Institute of Art  (2007 HC 200) [hereinafter  Courtauld/Feldmann claim ]; and the  Report of the Spoliation 
Advisory Panel in Respect of Four Drawings Now in the Possession of the British Museum  (2006 HC 1052) 
[hereinafter  British Museum/Feldmann claim ].  
  
 54  .   SAP ToR 15(d);  Report of the Spoliation Advisory Panel in Respect of a Painting Now in the 
Possession of the Tate Gallery  (2001 HC 111) [hereinafter  Tate Gallery claim ], [20]. See Woodhead, 
“Nazi Era Spoliation,” 181.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Committee, “Cultural Property,” 42.  
  
  
Possession of the British Library  (2005 HC 406) [hereinafter  British Library/Benevento claim (1) ].  
  

 55  .   SAP ToR, [1].  
 56  .   SAP ToR, [6].  
 57  .   SAP ToR, [12(c)].  
 58  .    Tate Gallery claim , [42].  
 59  .    Glasgow CC claim , [9].  
 60  .   See O’Donnell, “The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art,” 70.  
 61  .    Commission  for  Looted  Art  in  Europe,  Memorandum,  vol.  2,  Minutes  of  Evidence;  Select 

 62  .   O’Donnell, “The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art,” 71 (discussed above).  
 63  .    Report of the Spoliation Advisory Panel in Respect of a 12th Century Manuscript Now in the 

 50  .   SAP ToR, [11].  
 51  .   For example, British Museum Act 1963, sec. 3(4). Other English national museums are simi-

 64  .    British Library/Benevento claim (1) , [2].  

 136   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

 70  .   British Museum Act 1963 (Amendment) Bill HC Bill (2008-2009). A similar bill failed in 1983, 

 71  .   Andrew Dismore MP, Hansard HC vol 492 col 1174, 15 May 2009.  
 72  .   Select Committee, “Cultural Objects,” [58].  
 73  .   Alan Howarth MP, Hansard HC vol 261 col 340W, 18 January 2001.  
 74  .   Alan Howarth 2001.  
 75  .   Lembit Öpik MP, Public Bill Committee, col 14.  
 76  .   John Wittingdale MP Hansard HC vol 494 col 1046, 26 June 2009.  
 77  .   Edward Vaizey MP Hansard HC vol 494 col 1047, 26 June 2009.  
 78  .   See Nozick,  Anarchy, State, and Utopia,  152.  
 79  .   Thompson,  Taking Responsibility for the Past,  46 and 47.  
 80  .   Thompson,  Taking Responsibility for the Past,  46.  
 81  .   Thompson,  Taking Responsibility for the Past,  47.  
 82  .   Select Committee, “Cultural Property,” [193].  
 83  .   Andrew Dismore MP, Hansard HC vol 492 cols 1165, 1168, 15 May 2009 and Lord Janner, 

 65  .    British Library/Benevento claim (1) , [50.2] and [52].  
  
 66  .   DCMS,  Restitution of Objects Spoliated in the Nazi-Era , [3.12].  
  
  
 67  .   Since a prerequisite for the museum’s power of transfer is that a panel designated by the Secretary 
of  State  to  consider  claims  must  first  recommend  the  transfer;  see  Holocaust  (Return  of  Cultural 
Objects) Act 2009, 2(2). The Spoliation Advisory Panel is the panel designated under this provision 
and therefore the scope of its Terms of Reference apply with regard to the application of the Act.  
  
 68  .    Report of the Spoliation Advisory Panel in Respect of a Renewed Claim by the Metropolitan Chapter 
of Benevento for the Return of the Beneventan Missal Now in the Possession of the British Library  (2010 
HC 448) [hereinafter  British Library/Benevento claim (2) ].  
  
 69  .   Department of National Heritage,  Treasures in Trust , [3.2]. Such claims have been described as 
“invert[ing] the typical deaccession framework” (Range, “Deaccessioning and Its Costs in the Holo-
caust Art Context,” 664).  
  
British Museum Act 1963 (Amendment) Bill HL Bill (1982-1983).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Hansard HL vol 712 col 903, 10 July 2009.  
 84  .   Hugh Robertson MP Hansard HC vol 492 col 1168, 15 May 2009.  
  
 85  .   Hugh Robertson 2009.  
  
 86  .   Hugh Robertson 2009.  
  
 87  .   British Museum Act 1963 (Amendment) Bill HC Bill (2008-2009).  
  
 88  .   Select Committee, “Cultural Objects,” [58].  
  
  
 89  .   According to the  Oxford English Dictionary  (OED): rightful,  adj., n., and adv .—meaning 2 a. 
“Of a person: having a legal claim; legitimately entitled to property, position or status; holding by 
right or custom,”  OED online ,  www.oed.com .  
 90  .   ICOM,  ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums , [2.2].  
  
 91  .   ICOM,  ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums .  
  
  
 92  .    Similarly,  the  UK  Museums  Association’s  acquisitions  guidance  states  that  museums,  when 
acquiring objects for their permanent collections, should consider “the moral rights of individuals, groups, 
societies or peoples to hold the item” (Museums Association Ethics Committee,  Ethical Guidelines , [3.9]).  
 93  .   Goldstein and Weitz, “Claim by Museums of Public Trusteeship,” 216 (in the United States).  
  
 94  .   Woodhead, “Moral Claims,” 6.  
  
  
 95  .   Museums Association,  Britain Thinks , 26.  
  
 96  .   UNESCO, Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, UNTS 
231, Preamble.  
  
Guidelines .  
  
  
    100  .   Palmer, “Spoliation and Holocaust-Related Cultural Objects,” 10.  
    101  .   Palmer, “Spoliation and Holocaust-Related Cultural Objects,” 10.  

 98  .   National Museum Directors’ Conference,  Statement of Principles .  
 99  .   CoE Resolution, [12].  

 97  .   ICOM,  ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums ; Museums Association Ethics Committee,  Ethical 

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  137 

    102  .   Birks,  Unjust Enrichment,  4.  
    103  .   Birks,  Unjust Enrichment,  11.  
    104  .   See Goff and Jones,  The Law of Restitution,  chapter 10.  
    105  .   See, for example, Goff and Jones,  The Law of Restitution,  1–60.  
    106  .   Baroness Deech, Hansard HL vol 712 cols 907–908, 10 July 2009.  
    107  .   Although, arguably, the public might still be unjustly enriched even in the absence of knowl-
edge of the benefit.  
    108  .   See, generally, Woodhead, “Nazi Era Spoliation.”  
    109  .   Specifically the  Fitzwilliam/Rothberger ,  British Museum/Rothberger ,  Courtauld/Feldmann , and 
 British Museum/Feldmann claims .  
    110  .    British  Museum,  “Spoliation  Case  Settled,”  press  release,   https://www.britishmuseum.org/
about_us/news_and_press/press_releases/2013/spoliation_case_settled.aspx  (accessed 1 December 2013).  
    111  .    British Museum/Benevento claim (1) , [52].  
    112  .    British Museum/Benevento claim (1) .  
    113  .    British Museum/Benevento claim (1) , [69.2].  Report of the Spoliation Advisory Panel in respect of 
an oil painting by John Constable, ‘Beaching A Boat, Brighton’, now in the possession of the Tate Gallery  
(2014 HC 1016) [hereinafter  Tate Gallery/Constable claim ] [49]-[52].  
    114  .   See Nozick,  Anarchy, State, and Utopia,  152. Compare with Thompson,  Taking Responsibility 
for the Past,  153.  
    115  .   See, generally, Thompson,  Taking Responsibility for the Past,  who treats the aim of reparation as 
being reconciliation and argues that it is based on current obligations and usually involves apologies 
and acknowledging the wrongs themselves.  
    116  .    Tate Gallery claim , [62]. See Palmer, “Spoliation and Holocaust-Related Cultural Objects,” 11.  
    117  .    Tate Gallery claim , [62]; this was mentioned in the context of the  Glasgow CC claim , [28], although 
the Panel recommended return, despite the eventual payment of an  ex gratia  payment by the City Council.  
    118  .    Tate Gallery claim , [62];  Glasgow CC claim , [28].  
    119  .    Tate Gallery claim , [64].  
    120  .   Palmer, “Spoliation and Holocaust-Related Cultural Objects,” 10.  
    121  .   Specifically in the  Courtauld/Glaser claim , [41]; the  Report of the Spoliation Advisory Panel in 
Respect of 14 Clocks and Watches Now in the Possession of the British Museum  (2012 HC 1839) [here-
inafter  British Museum/Koch claim ], [22]. See, generally, Woodhead, “Nazi Era Spoliation,” 185.  
    122  .    Courtauld/Glaser claim , [47]. See also  British Museum/Koch claim , [27].  
    123  .    Courtauld/Glaser claim , [43]. See Woodhead, “Nazi Era Spoliation,” 185, principle 14.  
    124  .   Advisory  Committee  on  the  Assessment  of  Restitution  Applications,  “Recommendation 
Regarding Glaser,” [9].  
    125  .   Advisory  Committee  on  the  Assessment  of  Restitution  Applications,  “Recommendation 
Regarding Glaser,” [9]. The Dutch approach is only to require the repayment of any sale proceeds 
if there is evidence showing that the prewar owner had been able to freely spend those proceeds; see 
Ekkart Committee, “Recommendations for the Restitution of Works of Art, 13.  
    126  .   More recently in the  Tate Gallery/Constable claim , the Panel recommended return on condi-
tion that the claimant pay back to the German government earlier compensation payable in respect 
of the painting: [54], [55] and [60].  
    127  .    Courtauld/Glaser claim , [43].  
    128  .    British Museum/Rothberger claim , [20].  
    129  .    British Museum/Rothberger claim , [6].  
    130  .   Palmer has queried whether this might be made in addition to return (“Spoliation and Holo-
caust-Related Cultural Objects,” 11). See more recently the  Tate Gallery/Constable claim  [60].  
    131  .   Dutch Regulations on binding recommendation procedure under Article 2 of the Decree Estab-
lishing the Advisory Committee on the Assessment of Restitution Applications, art. 12(b); see Advisory 
Committee on the Assessment of Restitution Applications, “Procedure in Binding Opinion Cases.”  
    132  .   Dutch Decree, art. 12(c); see Advisory Committee on the Assessment of Restitution Applica-
tions, “Procedure in Binding Opinion Cases.”  

 138   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

    133  .   This shows that no account is taken of the claimant’s incontrovertible benefit resulting from any 
conservation work. See Goff and Jones,  The Law of Restitution , 1–24, in the context of the law of unjust 
enrichment. Under section 6 of the Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977, it is possible to adjust the 
damages to reflect the increase in value attributable to work undertaken in the mistaken, but honest belief 
that he has title to the goods.  
    134  .    Glasgow CC claim , [28].  
    135  .   Note that the Panel will not return on purely symbolic grounds:  Tate Gallery/Constable claim  [43].  
    136  .    Tate Gallery claim , [55]. See Woodhead, “Nazi Era Spoliation,” 190.  
    137  .   Holocaust (Return of Cultural Objects) Act 2009, sec. 4(7).  
    138  .    Courtauld/Glaser  and  British Museum/Koch claims .  
    139  .   See Woodhead, “Nazi Era Spoliation,” 188.  
    140  .   Select Committee, “Cultural Property,” [188].  
    141  .   Commission for Looted Art in Europe, Memorandum, vol. 2, Minutes of Evidence, 202; Select 
Committee, “Cultural Property,” [21].  
    142  .   CoE Resolution 1205, [12].  
    143  .   O’Donnell, “The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art,” 50.  
    144  .   Cotler, “The Holocaust, ‘Thefticide’ and Restitution,” 623.  
    145  .   Select Committee, “Cultural Property,” [188]; Commission for Looted Art in Europe, Memo-
randum, vol. 2, Minutes of Evidence. But note  Tate Gallery/Constable claim  [45].  
    146  .   O’Donnell, “The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art,” 56.  
    147  .   O’Donnell, “The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art,” 55.  
    148  .   Palmer, “Spoliation and Holocaust-Related Cultural Objects,” 6.  
    149  .   This includes provision for special reference to be made to the claimant’s interest therein: SAP 
ToR, [16(d)].  
    150  .   O’Donnell, “The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art,” 78.  
    151  .   Thompson,  Taking Responsibility for the Past,  48.  
    152  .   Thompson,  Taking Responsibility for the Past,  68.  
    153  .   Commission for Looted Art in Europe, Memorandum, vol. 2, Minutes of Evidence.  
    154  .    Courtauld/Glaser claim , [43].  
    155  .    British Museum/Koch claim , [25].  
    156  .   In contrast, in the Netherlands, this remedy has been used where the museum had a greater 
interest  in  retaining  the  cultural  object  for  its  collection  and  for  the  “museum-going  members  of 
the public” than the claimant had in reclaiming it; see Advisory Committee on the Assessment of 
Restitution Applications, “Binding Opinion Regarding the Dispute about the Return of the Painting 
Madonna and Child with Wild Roses,” [7.6] and [7.7]; Advisory Committee on the Assessment of 
Restitution Applications, “Binding Opinion in the Dispute on Restitution of the Painting Entitled 
 Christ and the Samaritan Woman at the Well ,” [7.7] and [7.8].  
    157  .   See Woodhead, “Nazi Era Spoliation,” 182. See  Tate Gallery/Constable claim  [45].  
    158  .    Glasgow CC claim . See Palmer, “Spoliation and Holocaust-Related Cultural Objects,” 11.  
    159  .    The  market  value  is  used  by  the  Panel  as  a  starting  point  when  assessing  the  level  of  any 
 ex gratia  payment, although deductions and allowances will often be made.  
    160  .   Public benefit has, however, been relevant when calculating  ex gratia  payments.  
    161  .   The only situation in the United Kingdom in which an owner is under a duty to provide public 
access to a cultural object is where the owner has received a taxation benefit under the conditional 
exemption scheme under the Inheritance Tax Act 1984, sec. 30. See, generally, HM Revenue & 
Customs,  Capital Taxation and the National Heritage ,  http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/inheritancetax/
conditionalexemption.pdf  (2011; accessed 6 December 2013).  
    162  .   Used by the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural 
Interest; UK Arts Council,  UK Export Licensing for Cultural Goods,  3.  
    163  .   See, generally, Clare and Turnor, “The Export Licensing Rules in the United Kingdom”; Wang, 
“Whose Responsibility?”  
    164  .   Select Committee, “Cultural Property,” [193].  

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  139 

    165  .   Rights of preemption in respect of important cultural objects exist, for example, in Italian Law 
as detailed in  Beyeler v. Italy  (2001) 33 EHRR 52.  
    166  .   Cotler suggests that “while restitution can never restore these lives, it can seek to restore their 
dignity” (“The Holocaust, ‘Thefticide’ and Restitution,” 623). See also Waldron, “Superseding Historic 
Injustice,” 6.  
    167  .    This  can  be  seen  in  repatriation  claims  generally  as  meaning  about  the  return  of  authority, 
Pickering, “Despatches from the Front Line?,” 171.  
    168  .   Advisory Committee on the Assessment of Restitution Applications, “Binding Opinion in the 
Dispute on Restitution of the Painting  Landing Stage ,” [7.6].  
    169  .    Advisory  Committee  on  the  Assessment  of  Restitution  Applications,  “Binding  Opinion  Re-
garding the Dispute about the Return of the Painting Madonna and Child with Wild Roses,” [7.6]; 
“Binding Opinion in the Dispute on Restitution of the Painting Entitled  Christ and the Samaritan 
Woman at the Well ,” [7.7].  
    170  .    Advisory  Committee  on  the  Assessment  of  Restitution  Applications,  “Binding  Opinion 
Regarding the Dispute about the Return of the Painting Madonna and Child with Wild Roses,” [7.6]; 
“Binding Opinion in the Dispute on Restitution of the Painting Entitled  Christ and the Samaritan 
Woman at the Well ,” [7.7].  
    171  .   For example,  Courtauld/Glaser claim .  
    172  .   Woodhead, “Nazi Era Spoliation,” 177.  
    173  .   In the context of redressing historic injustices, Waldron identifies the difficulties encountered 
with “counterfactual speculation” (“Redressing Historic Injustice,” 144). See also Thompson,  Taking 
Responsibility for the Past , 112.  
    174  .   See Woodhead, “Nazi Era Spoliation,” 177.  
    175  .   Norman Rosenthal, “The Time Has Come for a Statute of Limitations,”  The Art Newspaper,  
issue 197, December 2008.  
    176  .   Rosenthal, “The Time Has Come.”  
    177  .   Holocaust (Return of Cultural Objects) Act 2009, sec. 4(7).  
    178  .   Andrew Dismore MP Hansard HC vol 494 col 1046, 26 June 2009.  
    179  .    Advisory  Committee  on  the  Assessment  of  Restitution  Applications,  “Binding  Opinion 
Regarding the Dispute about the Return of the Painting Madonna and Child with Wild Roses,” [7.6]; 
“Binding Opinion in the Dispute on Restitution of the Painting Entitled  Christ and the Samaritan 
Woman at the Well ,” [7.7].  
    180  .    Several  reports  highlight  the  tendency  of  wealthy  European  families  to  refrain  from  selling 
objects from their collections, e.g.,  British Museum/Rothberger claim , [7]. Nevertheless, sometimes 
financial circumstances do necessitate sales: e.g., Dr. Feldmann consigned various drawings to auc-
tion prior to the act of spoliation itself ( British Museum/Feldmann claim , [12];  Courtauld/Feldmann 
claim , [7]).  
    181  .   Waldron, “Redressing Historic Injustice,” 160.  
    182  .   Department of National Heritage,  Treasures in Trust , [3.2].  
    183  .   For example, British Museum Act 1963, sec. 3(4); National Heritage Act 1983 secs. 6, 14, and 
20 and Museums and Galleries Act 1992, sec. 4.  
    184  .   Range, “Deaccessioning and Its Costs in the Holocaust Art Context,” 664.  
    185  .   See also Woodhead, “Nazi Era Spoliation,” which sets out an argument for the development of 
substantive principles by which the Panel could make its future recommendations without undermin-
ing the need to respond to the individuality of claims. This therefore ensures consistency of approach 
and outcome, particularly where allowances and deductions are made to  ex gratia  payments.   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

   Advisory Committee on the Assessment of Restitution Applications for Items of Cultural Value and 
the  Second  World  War .   “Binding  Opinion  in  the  Dispute  on  Restitution  of  the  Painting  Entitled 
 Christ and the Samaritan Woman at the Well  by Bernardo Strozzi from the Estate of Richard Semmel, 

 140   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

Currently Owned by Museum de Fundatie.” Case Number RC 3.128 .  http://www.restitutiecommis-
sie.nl/en/recommendations/recommendation_rc_3128.html   (25  April  2013;  accessed  16  January 
 2014 .  

    ——— .  “Binding Opinion in the Dispute on Restitution of the Painting  The Landing Stage  by van 
Maarten Fransz van der Hulst from the Estate of Richard Semmel, Currently Owned by Stichting 
Kunstbezit en Oudheden Groninger Museum. Case Number RC 3.126 .  http://www.restitutiecommissie.
nl/en/recommendations/recommendation_rc_3126.html  (25 April 2013; accessed 16 January  2014 .  

    ——— .  “Binding Opinion Regarding the Dispute about the Return of the Painting Madonna and 
Child with Wild Roses by Jan van Scorel from the Collection of Richard Semmel, Currently in the 
Possession of Utrecht City Council.” Case Number RC 3.131 .  http://www.restitutiecommissie.
nl/en/recommendations/recommendation_rc_3131.html   (25  April  2013;  accessed  16  January 
 2014 ).  

    ——— .  “Procedure in Binding Opinion Cases.”   http://www.restitutiecommissie.nl/en/procedure_
in_binding_opinion_cases.html  (accessed 3 December  2013 ).  

    ——— .  “Recommendation Regarding Glaser.” Case Number RC 1.99 .  http://www.restitutiecommissie.nl/
en/recommendations/recommendation_199.html  (4 October 2010; accessed 1 December  2013 ).  

    Atkinson  ,   Henry  . “ The Meanings and Values of Repatriation .”  The Long Way Home: The Meaning and 
Values of Repatriation , edited by   Paul     Turnbull   and   Michael     Pickering  ,  15 – 19 .  New York :  Berghahn 
Books ,  2010 .  

    Bator  ,   Paul M  .  International Trade in Art .  London :  University of Chicago Press ,  1983 .  

    Bazyler  ,    M.  J  .   Holocaust  Justice:  The  Battle  for  Restitution  in  America’s  Courts .   London :   New  York 
University Press ,  2003 .  

    Bazyler  ,   M. J.  , and   R. P.     Alford  , eds.  Holocaust Restitution: Perspectives on the Litigation and Its Legacy . 
 London :  New York University Press ,  2006 .  

    Birks  ,   P  .  Unjust Enrichment ,  2 nd ed.  Oxford :  Clarendon Law Series, Oxford University Press ,  2005 .  

    Carpenter  ,   Kristen A.  ,   Sonia K.     Katyal  , and   Angela R.     Riley  . “ In Defense of Property .”  Yale Law Jour-
nal   118  ( 2009 ):  1022 –25.  

    Clare  ,   Maurice  , and   Richard     Turnor  . “ The Export Licensing Rules in the United Kingdom and the 
Waverley Criteria .”     1  ( 1992 ):  273 –96.  

   Commission for Looted Art in Europe .  Terezin Declaration on Holocaust Era Assets and Related Issues . 
 http://www.holocausteraassets.eu/en/news-archive/detail/terezin-declaration/   (June  2009;  accessed 
22 March  2013 ).  

    ——— .  Vilnius Forum Declaration .  http://www.lootedartcommission.com/vilnius-forum  (October 
2000; accessed 22 March  2013 ).  

    Cotler  ,    Irwin  .  “ The  Holocaust,  ‘Thefticide’  and  Restitution:  A  Legal  Perspective .”   Cardozo  Law 
Review   20  ( 1998 ):  601 –23.  

   Council of Europe (CoE) Resolution 1205 on Looted Jewish Cultural Property , November  1999 .  

   Department for Culture, Media, and Sport (DCMS) .  Restitution of Objects Spoliated in the Nazi-Era: 
A Consultation Document .  London :  Department for Culture, Media and Sport ,  2006 .  

21ST CENTURY REMEDIES FOR NAZI-ERA INJUSTICES    

  141 

   Department of National Heritage .  Treasures in Trust: A Review of Museum Policy .  London :  Department 
of National Heritage ,  1996 .  

    Edsel  ,   Robert M.  , and   Brett     Witter  .  The Monuments Men: Allied Heros, Nazi Thieves, and the Greatest 
Treasure Hunt in History .  London :  Preface ,  2009 .  

    Eizenstat  ,   S. E  .  Imperfect Justice: Looted Assets, Slave Labor and the Unfinished Business of World War 
II .  New York :  Public Affairs ,  2003 .  

   Ekkart  Committee .   “Recommendations  Regarding  the  Restitution  of  Works  of  Art.”  The  Hague, 
The Netherlands: Supervisory Committee, Origins Unknown .  http://www.herkomstgezocht.nl/eng/
rapportage/index.html  (April 2001: accessed 1 December  2013 ).  

    Feliciano  ,    Hector  .  “ The  Great  Cultural  Robbery:  The  Plunder  of  Jewish-Owned  Art .”  In 
 The Plunder of Jewish Property during the Holocaust , edited by   A.     Beker  .  Houndmills ,  164 – 176 . 
 Palgrave ,  2001 .  

    ——— .  The Lost Museum: The Nazi Conspiracy to Steal the World’s Greatest Works of Art .  New York : 
 Basic Books ,  1997 .  

    Fincham  ,   Derek  . “ The Distinctiveness of Property and Heritage .”  Penn State Law Review   115  ( 2011 ): 
 641 –84.  

    Goff  ,   Robert  , and   Gareth     Jones  .  The Law of Restitution ,  7 th ed.  London :  Sweet & Maxwell ,  2007 .  

    Goldstein  ,   Charles A.  , and   Yael     Weitz  . “ Claim by Museums of Public Trusteeship and Their Response 
to Restitution Claims: A Self-Serving Attempt to keep Holocaust-Looted Art .”  Art Antiquity and Law  
 16  ( 2011 ):  215 – 224 .  

   House of Commons Library .  “Holocaust (Return of Cultural Objects) Bill: Committee Stage Report.” 
Bill No. 111, Research Paper 09/59, UK Parliament , 23 June  2009 .  

   International Council of Museums (ICOM) .  ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums .  Paris :  ICOM ,  2013 .  

    Kurtz  ,   Michael J  . “ The End of the War and the Occupation of Germany, 1944–52. Laws and Conven-
tions Enacted to Counter German Appropriations: The Allied Control Council .” In  The Spoils of War , 
edited by   Elizabeth     Simpson  ,  112 – 116 .  New York :  Abrams ,  1997 .  

    MacDonald  ,   David B  . “ Daring to Compare: The Debate about a Maori ‘Holocaust’ in New Zealand .” 
 Journal of Genocide Research   5 , no.  3  ( 2003 ):  383 – 403 .  

   Museums Association .  Britain Thinks: Public Perceptions of—and Attitudes to—the Purposes of 
Museums in Society .  London :  Museums Association ,  2013 .  

   Museums Association Ethics Committee .  Ethical Guidelines 1: Acquisition: Guidance on the Ethics and 
Practicalities of Acquisition ,  2 nd ed.  London :  Museums Association .  http://www.museumsassociation.
org/download?id=11114  (2004; accessed 16 January  2014 ).  

   National Museums Directors’ Conference .  Loans between National and Non-national Museums: New 
Standards and Practical Guidelines .  London :  National Museum Directors’ Conference ,  2003 .  

    ——— .  Statement of Principles and Proposed Actions on Spoliation of Works during the Holocaust and 
World War II Period .  London :  National Museum Directors’ Conference ,  1998 .  

    Nicholas  ,   Lynn  .  The Rape of Europa .  London :  Macmillan ,  1994 .  

 142   

 CHARLOTTE WOODHEAD

    Nozick  ,   Robert  .  Anarchy, State, and Utopia .  Oxford :  Basil Blackwell ,  1974 .  

    O’Donnell  ,   Thérèse  . “ The Restitution of Holocaust Looted Art and Transitional Justice: The Perfect 
Storm or the Raft of Medusa? ”  European Journal of International Law   22  ( 2011 ):  49 – 80 .  

    Palmer  ,   Norman  .  Museums and the Holocaust .  Leicester :  IAL ,  2000 .  

    ——— . “ Spoliation and Holocaust-Related Cultural Objects: Legal and Ethical Models for the Reso-
lution of Claims .”  Art Antiquity and Law   12  ( 2007 ):  1 – 16 .  

    Paterson  ,   Robert K  . “ Resolving Material Culture Disputes: Human Rights, Property Rights and Crimes 
against Humanity .”  Willamette Journal of International Law and Dispute Resolution   14  ( 2006 ):  155 –74.  

    Pickering  ,    Michael  .  “ Despatches  from  the  Front  Line?  Museum  Experiences  in  Applied  Repatria-
tion .” In  The Long Way Home: The Meaning and Values of Repatriation , edited by   Paul     Turnbull   and 
  Michael     Pickering  ,  163 – 174 .  New York :  Berghahn Books ,  2010 .  

    Prott  ,    Lyndel  V  .  “ International  Control  of  Illicit  Movement  of  the  Cultural  Heritage:  The  1970 
UNESCO Convention and Some Possible Alternatives .”  Syracuse International Law and Commerce   10  
( 1983 ):  333 –51.  

    Range  ,   Daniel  . “ Deaccessioning and Its Costs in the Holocaust Art Context: The United States and 
Great Britain .”  Texas International Law Journal   39  (2003– 2004 ):  655 –73.  

   Select Committee on Culture, Media and Sport .  “Cultural Objects: Developments since 2000.” First 
Report, HC 59, 2003–2004 .  

    ——— .  “Cultural Property: Return and Illicit Trade.” Seventh Report, HC 371-I, 1999–2000 .  

    Simpson  ,   Moira G  .  Making Representations: Museums in the Post-Colonial Era , rev. ed.  Routledge : 
 London ,  2001 .  

    Thompson  ,   Janna  .  Taking Responsibility for the Past: Reparation and Historical Justice .  Cambridge : 
 Polity ,  2002 .  

   UK Arts Council .  UK Export Licensing for Cultural Goods: Procedures and Guidance for Exporters of 
Works of Art and Other Cultural Goods .  London :  UK Arts Council ,  2012 .  

   UNESCO .  Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer 
of Ownership of Cultural Property, Paris, adopted 14 November 1970; entered into force 24 April   1972 .  

    Waldron  ,   Jeremy  . “ Redressing Historic Injustice .”  University of Toronto Law Journal  52 ( 2002 ): 135–59.  

    ——— . “ Superseding Historic Injustice .”  Ethics   103  ( 1992 )  4 – 28 .  

    Wang  ,   Vivian F  . “ Whose Responsibility? The Waverley System, Past and Present .”  International Jour-
nal of Cultural Property   15  ( 2008 ):  227 –69.  

   Washington  Conference  on  Holocaust-Era  Assets .   Principles  with  Respect  to  Nazi-Confiscated  Art . 
 http://www.state.gov/p/eur/rt/hlcst/122038.htm  (accessed 22 April  2014 ).  

    Woodhead  ,   Charlotte  . “ Moral Claims against Museums .”  International Journal of the Inclusive 
Museum   2 , no.  2  ( 2009 ):  1 – 12 .  

    ——— . “ Nazi Era Spoliation: Establishing Procedural and Substantive Principles .”  Art Antiquity and 
Law   18  ( 2013 ):  167 –92.      


