The Export Licensing Rules
in the United Kingdom and the
Waverley  Criteria
Clare Maurice* and  Richard  Tumor*

(or  'one  of those  quaint
old  British  rituals,  like
Morris  dancing  on  the
green  ...)

In  the seventeenth,  eighteenth  and  nineteenth centuries British  col-
lectors scoured  the world  for  works of art, antiquities  and  artifacts
and  formed  our great national collections, both private and  public.
With  Britain's  declining  economic  fortunes  in  the  twentieth  cen-
tury,  however,  the  situation  reversed.  The  outflow  of  works  of  art
has  been  a  matter  of  public  concern  and  never  more  so  than  at
present.  In  this  article  we  describe  how  the  problem  came  to  be
recognised,  the  current  system  of  export  controls  and  its  origins.
We go on to discuss some of the more important  problems with  the
current  system,  and  some  of  the proposals  for  reform  currently  in
circulation.

1  History up to the Second World War

The  need  to  control  the  export  of  cultural  objects  was  first  recog-
nised  in  the UK  at  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century.  British
collections had become the prey of American and German  collectors
and  it  was  realised  that  British  private  collections  were  being  de-
pleted and their contents sold abroad  at prices in excess of  anything
which UK  public collections could  afford.

In  response  to  this  concern,  the  National  Art-Collections  Fund
was established  in  1903 to help UK  national  and  provincial  collec-
tions to acquire  objects  that  they could  not  afford  themselves.  The
Fund  was  a  voluntary  organisation  which  has  always  relied  on
money  raised  privately.  Since  1905, when  the  fund  acquired  Velaz-
quez's  'Rokeby  Venus'  for  the National  Gallery  in  London,  it  has
helped to save over ten thousand  works of art for  the  nation.

In  1911 the Trustees of the National  Gallery  set up a  Committee
of Trustees chaired  by Earl Curzon, to enquire into the retention  of

*  Partners  in  the  firm  of  Allen  and  Overy,  London.  Richard  Tumor  is  a
vicechairman  of  the  Cultural  Property  Law  Committee  of  the  International
Bar Association  (Section  on  General  Practice).

273

Clare Maurice and  Richard  Tumor

important  pictures in the UK.  The  Committee discovered  that  over
500  important  paintings  had  been  sold  out  of  the  UK  within  the
previous  few  years,  including  50  Rembrandts,  11 Holbeins  and  29
Gainsboroughs.  The  Committee  made  its  final  report  in  December
1913,  concluding  that  although  pictures  from  private  collections
were  being  exported  at  an  alarming  rate,  it  was  inadvisable  to
restrict  or prohibit  the export  of works  of art  or  to place an  export
duty  on  them.  The  Committee  did,  however,  make  a  number  of
recommendations  designed  to  keep  such  important  works of  art  in
the UK  by helping national  collections  to  purchase  them.

The outbreak  of the First  World War prevented  any action being
taken on the recommendations made by the Curzon  Committee but
the  problem  of  rapid  export  of  important  works  of  art  continued
to trouble both  the public and  the trustees  of  the National  Gallery.
In  1917 an  appeal  signed  by a  number  of distinguished  people was
circulated  to  all members  of  Parliament.  The  proposal  called  for  a
duty of 25% to be levied on exports of paintings, prints and drawings
not produced  within  50 years of the date of export.  Proceeds of the
duty would  accrue  to the  National  Gallery.  However,  the  proposal
was not  supported  by  Parliament.

In  1919  the  National  Gallery  Trustees  set  up  a  further  sub-
committee  to  review  the  Curzon  Committee's  recommendations.
This Committee rejected  the imposition  of an  export duty on works
of art,  but  recommended  a  tax  of  1 %  or  2%  on  all  sales of works
of art by means of a stamp duty. This proposal  was rejected  by the
Chancellor  of the  Exchequer  in  1921 and  again  in 1922.

As  a  result  of  these  representations  the  'Paramount  List'  was
introduced  in  1922. The list, which was changed  from  time to time,
itemised  a  few  outstanding  pictures.  If  an  item  on  the  list  was  in
danger of being sold abroad, the Treasury undertook  to recommend
Parliament  to  vote  a  reasonable  sum  of  money  for  its  purchase.
Two  of  the  paintings  in  the  Paramount  List  were  subsequently
acquired  for  the  nation.

In  1926 a  Private  Members  Bill was  introduced  into  Parliament
which would  have given the Commissioner  of  Works, acting on the
advice  of  Board  of  Arts  and  Historic  Buildings,  power  to  make
orders prohibiting the export of certain objects except under licence.
The  bill did  not  get  beyond  its first  reading.

2  The Second World War: The Powers  Introduced  and

Their  Use

The  Import,  Export  and  Customs  Powers  (Defence)  Act  1939 was
originally  enacted  as emergency  legislation  for  the  purpose  of con-
trolling  the  export  of  goods  in  order  to  conserve  the  wartime
resources  of  the country.  The  Defence  (Finance)  Regulations  were
also passed in 1939. These regulations were the first exchange control

274

Export Licensing Rules in the UK

measure  and  were  designed  not  to  restrict  exports  but  to  ensure
that,  when  goods  were  exported  outside  the  sterling  area,  they
earned  their  proper  quota  of  foreign  exchange.  In  1940,  antiques
and works of art were brought under the system of export  licensing
control. The legislation  on export  licensing was intended  to  remain
in  force  until  an  Order  in  Council  declared  that  the  emergency
which occasioned  the passing of the  1939 Act had  come  to an  end,
but  it still remains  in force  today.

It  was  gradually  realised  that  these  powers  could  be  used  to
prevent  the  loss  of  national  treasures,  as  well  as  for  their  original
economic purpose. In 1944 the Parliamentary Secretary to the Board
of Trade said  the following  in a Parliamentary  debate:

In the case of pictures and portraits anything  ... of any intrinsic
value at all is always brought to the notice of both the National
Gallery  and  the  National  Portrait  Gallery.  If  they  raise  any
doubt,  automatically  the  licence  is  not  granted;  there  is  no
question  of  proving  a  case,  they  have  only  to  say  'we  do  not
think  that  this  is a  proper  thing  to  export'  and  straight  away
that  licence is not  granted.1

Despite  this draconian  approach,  the  system  was initially  operated
in a  reasonable  manner,  and  for  a number  of years  there were few
applications that could not be settled amicably between the exporter
and  heritage  interests.  Once  trade  had  revived  after  the war,  how-
ever, the devaluation  of the pound  made it increasingly difficult  for
national  collections  to  bid  for  works  of  art  against  international
buyers.  There  were  a  number  of  controversial  cases  where  owners
were  refused  licences  without  any  corresponding  purchase  offer
from  a  national  institution.  This  caused  considerable  controversy
and  questions were raised about  the impartiality  of the directors of
national  collections who advised  the Board  of Trade on whether  or
not  to grant  licences.

In  1949, therefore, a Reviewing Committee was set up to consider
cases  in  which  exporters  appealed  after  refusal  of  a  licence.  The
committee  consisted  of  the  Treasury  chairman,  representatives  of
the Board of Trade and Foreign Office  and a number of representa-
tives  from  galleries  and  museums.  The  Committee  was  to  ensure
that  account was taken  of all considerations  before  a final decision
was made about  any particular  application.

Despite the Reviewing Committee's remit being extended to cover
all licence application refusals, not just appeals by the exporter, and
also  despite  the  increase  of  the  number  of  independent  advisers
on  the  committee,  the  problems  continued.  Eventually,  in  1950, a
Committee  chaired  by Viscount  Waverley  was appointed  to  report
into  the export  of works of art  generally. The report  of  that  Com-
mittee is the foundation  of the system  still operating  today.

275

Clare Maurice and Richard Tumor

3  The Waverley  Report2

The  Waverley  Committee  reported  in  1952  and  no  study  of  the
subject  would  be  complete  without  considering  its  report  in  some
detail.  It  remains  the  most  comprehensive  review  of  the  subject
available  and  its  recommendations  have  formed  the  basis  of  the
British  system  of  controls  for  nearly 40 years.

3.1  Criticisms  of  the  Pre-1952  System
First, the report identifies a number of defects in the pre-1952 system
of export  controls.3

The  Committee  felt  the  system  to  be uncertain,  unfair  and  arbi-
trary. It was uncertain,  since the nature of the system meant it only
operated  at  the  very  last  stage,  that  is  after  the  object  had  been
sold.  It  was  not  until  that  stage  that  anyone  knew  for  certain
whether  or  not  export  of  the  item  would  be  allowed.  Owners  and
dealers  did  not  know  whether  it would  be safe  to  put  an  object  up
for  auction  to  the highest  bidder  or whether  the object  should  only
be put  up  for  sale  privately  in  the UK.  If  an  owner  entered  into  a
contract with a foreign  buyer it was possible that they may not have
been  able  to  honour  it.  Owners  therefore  ran  the  risk  of  wasting
time  and  money  on  interesting  foreign  buyers  in  purchasing  the
object  and  foreign  buyers  might  find  that  they  had  spent  time
inspecting  the  object  and  raising  funds  for  the  purchase  to  no
purpose.

Another  cause  of  uncertainty  was  the  fact  that  different  experts
consulted  did  not  always  take  the  same  view  of  an  object,  and
sometimes  applied  different  criteria.  It  was  said  that  some  of  the
objects which were refused  licences for export should not have been
regarded  as  national  treasures.  Sometimes  an  object  might  be  on
the market for a considerable period, without any national collection
bothering to express an interest in making a purchase until it became
apparent  that  it might  be  exported.

The system was said to be unfair, because owners selling particular
objects  were  often  forced  to  accept  a  lower  price  because  of  the
refusal  to grant an export licence where an overseas buyer had made
an offer.  This was particularly  resented by owners of historic homes
whose  sole  reserve  for  meeting  their  heavy  financial  commitments
was a collection  of  art  treasures.

The Committee also felt  that the system had a prejudicial effect  on
trade relations  with  other  countries,  and  in particular  on  London's
position  as  a  centre  of  the  world  art  trade.  A  dealer  might  have
spent  time  and  money  purchasing  an  item,  for  example  for  an
American  client,  but  if the  application  for  a licence was refused  the
dealer might  be left  with  the object  on his hands and  might also be
in danger of losing his client. This resulted from  the lack of certainty
about  the  eventual  completion  of  the  transaction.  It  was  felt  that

276

Export  Licensing Rules in the UK

London  was losing its role as a centre  of  world  art  trade  and  that
collections  were  no  longer  being  sent  from  abroad  to  London  for
sale owing to the risk of export  licences being  refused.

The system was also criticised as suffering from over centralisation
and causing a large amount of work, often  to little purpose. Provin-
cial  institutions  were  not  being  consulted  and  objects  which  they
would  have  liked  to  acquire  were being  sold  abroad.  The  London
advisers, for their part, felt that they should not be given responsibil-
ity  for  the interests  of  the whole country.  Making  applications  for
export  licences  was  time  consuming  for  art  dealers,  the  Board  of
Trade  and  the government's  expert  advisers alike.  For  example, in
1950  there  were  nearly  16,500  applications.  Of  these,  2,100  were
referred  to  experts,  who  often  found  that  the  descriptions  of  the
articles given  in the licence applications  were false  and  misleading.
In some cases experts had  to travel great distances in order  to view
the  objects.

The system was also imposing  heavy  responsibilities  on  customs
officers,  who ultimately  had  to prevent  illegal exports  and imports.
They were responsible for  checking that  the item  actually  exported
was the item referred  to in the licence, and  for judging whether any
item  without  a  licence  fell  within  the  value  and  age  limits  applied
at  that  time.

Finally,  the  Committee  considered  that  the  system  was  on  the
whole ineffective  as a means of conserving national treasures. It was
suspected  that  there  was  some  leakage  in  the  system  of  export
control  and  that  some  items  were  being  exported  without  going
through  the  proper  channels.  Many  people  took  the  view  that,
despite  the  small  number  of  licences  that  had  been  refused,  many
objects  which  they  considered  to  be  of  utmost  importance  had
already  been exported  from  the UK.

The Waverley  Committee  drew  three  main  conclusions  from  the

study of the pre-1952 system of control:4

(1)  That  export  control  was  best  applied  to  a  small  number  of
objects  of high importance. The Committee felt  that the system
became  progressively  less  effective  and  more  irksome  as  the
number  of objects under control  increased.

(2)  That great uncertainty  and unfairness  resulted  from  the lack of

a clear  statement  of policy and  safeguards.

(3)  That  the operation  of the system  of control  at  such a late stage
in the procedure caused frustration  and disappointment to those
concerned.

3.2  The Case for  Control  and  the Essential  Safeguard
The  Committee  then  went  on  to  consider  whether  a  system  of
controls  was  desirable  at  all,  and  concluded  that  it  was.5  A  large
number  of witnesses, representing  museums, owners, the trade  and

277

Clare Maurice and  Richard  Tumor

other  interested  parties,  were  interviewed  and  there  was  almost
unanimous  support  for  the  view  that  there  were  some  treasures
which  ought  to  remain  in the United  Kingdom.

It  was  thought  that  a  system  of  export  control  was necessary  in
order to give national  institutions  an opportunity  to buy  important
objects.  In  some  cases  the  existence  of  an  object  had  not  been
realised  until  an  export  licence  was applied  for  and  the  object  was
brought  to  the  attention  of  experts.  In  other  cases,  experts  had
always known about the object and its significance  but only became
aware  of  the  danger  that  it  might  be  exported  when  an  export
licence was applied  for.

A  system  of  export  control  was  also  thought  to  give  public
collections  time  to  consider  the  case  and  fund  a  purchase  where
appropriate.

However,  the Committee  stressed  above all that  the owner  of an
object of national heritage who was refused a licence must be assured
of  an  offer  to  purchase  the  item  at  a  fair  price.6  Although  it  was
thought that the State should be able to forbid  the export of objects
which it considered items of national importance, it was also thought
that particular  individuals should not be treated unfairly  as a result.
It is this essential  safeguard  which has lead to the Waverley  system
being widely admired around the world as fair to the nation, owners
and  exporters alike.

It  was  recognised  by  the  Committee  that  the  extent  to  which
national  treasures  could  be safeguarded  depended  mainly  on  addi-
tional  funds  being  made  available  to  national  collections  to  enable
them to purchase national treasures. It is this dependence on  funding
which has in practice proved to be the system's main weakness, and
which may ultimately cause its  downfall.

3.3  The Scope and  Extent of  Control and  the Waverley  Criteria
The  Committee  considered  what  sort  of  objects  should  be  subject
to  control.7  They  recognised  that,  if  the system was to  be  effective
it  must  be  workable,  and  this  meant  limiting  the  sheer  volume  of
objects  to be the subject  of control.

The following  objective  tests were thought  to be  helpful:

(1)  Age Limits  —  it was thought  that no object  less than  100 years

old  should  be referred  for  special scrutiny.

(2)  Monetary  Limits  —  the  pre-existing  system  had  in  practice
involved  a  threshold  of  value  below  which  a  licence  was  not
required,  and  this was thought  to be a sensible way of  straining
out  of  the  system  all  but  the  more  important  items.  However,
it was recognised that value was not necessarily the only measure
of importance, and that some items (e.g., manuscripts and arch-
ives) should  not be subject  to  these limits.

(3)  Time  Limits  — the  Committee  wished  to  give  trade  as  much
freedom  as  possible,  and  noted  that  licences had  recently  been

278

Export  Licensing Rules in the UK

K .4

One of a  pair  of  George
II  lacquer  open  arm-
chairs  acquired  by  the
Victoria and  Albert  Mu-
seum  in  London  having
satisfied  the second  of
the Waverly  Criteria.
Courtesy of the  Board of
Trustees  of the  V & A.

refused  for  items  only  recently  brought  into  the country.  They
concluded  that  the  only  practicable  way  of  dealing  with  re-
exports  was  to  select  a  length  of  time  during  which  an  object
must  have  been  in  the  country  before  becoming  subject  to
control. They concluded that the period of 50 years, then equiva-
lent to two generations, was appropriate. It was thought  that a
special exception  should  be made  for  objects  deposited  on  loan
from  abroad  for  a longer  period.

279

Clare Maurice and Richard Tumor

The  Committee  emphatically  rejected  the  notion  that  the  country
of  origin  of  an  object  should  be a  relevant criterion.  Objects  could
be  of  national  importance  owing  to  their  aesthetic  and  cultural
qualities and historical or sentimental associations with the country,
even if they  had  originated  elsewhere.

The  Committee  then  considered  how to judge  whether  an  object
is  of  national  importance,  and  outlined  three  subjective  criteria  in
the form of questions which those responsible should ask themselves
when  considering  whether  to  grant  a  licence.8  These  criteria  are
known  as  'the  Waverley  Criteria',  and  remain  a key element  in  the
system of export  controls. They are as follows:

(1)  Is  the  Object  so  Closely  Associated  with  Our  History  and

National  Life  that  its Departure  would  be a  Misfortune?

Obvious examples  referred  to were the Domesday  Book and  Henry
VIII's  armour.  Even  items  originating  from  abroad,  like the Velaz-
quez portraits  given  to  Wellington  by the  King of  Spain, would  be
caught.

(2)  Is  the Object  of Outstanding  Aesthetic  Importance?
Examples given  included  the Elgin  Marbles in the British  Museum.

(3)  Is the Object  of Outstanding  Significance  for the Study of Some

Particular  Branch  of  Art, Learning  or  History?

One example  given was  the  original  Davey  safety  lamps.  Historical
collections might  also  be  covered.

It was recognised  that  some items might fair within all three criteria
and,  indeed,  be outstanding  examples of each. These should  be the
subject  of  special  efforts  to  acquire  them  for  the  nation.  Others
might  satisfy  only  one  of  the criteria, and might be regarded as less
than  outstanding  items,  in  which  case  lower  priority  might  be
demanded.

The  Committee  then  considered  the application  of  these  rules  to
a number  of special cases; of these the treatment  of documents  and
archives received  the most  detailed consideration.9 Many  (including
one  member  of  the  Committee,  the  historian  Professor  Galbraith)
thought  that  there  should  be  power  to  forbid  the  export  of  any
archives. The majority  of the Committee, however, concluded  that,
while documents and  archives should be subject to control whatever
their  value,  owners  should  be  assured  of  an  offer  to  purchase  at  a
reasonable  price  where  an  export  licence  was withheld.  Moreover,
copies  should  always  be  made  and  deposited  somewhere  appropri-
ate.  Since  copies  could  be  made,  it  was  concluded  that  there  was
no  need  to  prevent  the  export  of  manuscripts  less  than  100  years
old.

280

Export Licensing Rules in the UK

'Family  Bereavement'
by  David  Bomberg  was
found  to satisfy  the third
of  the Waverly  Criteria
and  was purchased  by
the Tate Gallery  in  Lon-
don.  Picture Credit:  The
Tate  Gallery.

3.4  Valuation  and  Funding
The  Committee's  recommendation  that,  where export  is prevented,
the  owner  must  be  assured  of  a  reasonable  purchase  offer,  forced
it to consider  what would  be a reasonable  offer  for  this purpose.

It  was concluded  that  the  fair  price  to  be adopted  should  be the
market  price,  which  meant  the  price  in  the  international  market.10
The price must be fair  to the purchasing institution  (i.e., usually the
tax  payer)  and  the  owner  alike.  Sometimes  specific  offers  would
have been received for an item before the application was made and
would  help to  establish  the international  market  value of  the item.
However, it was recognised that offers were unlikely to be forthcom-
ing in cases where it was realised at the outset that an export licence
was  likely  to  be  withheld.  In  such  cases,  it  was  thought  that  the
market  value  must  be  arrived  at  by  taking  account  of  past  offers
for  that  object,  for  similar  or  comparable  objects  (if  any),  market
trends  and  all  the many  other  factors.  It  was recommended  that  a

281

Clare Maurice and Richard Tumor

list  of  impartial  valuation  experts should  be drawn  up, who would
consider  and  research  difficult  cases and  advise the reviewing com-
mittee.

The  Committee  also  considered  the  appropriate  way  of  funding
purchases.11 It  rejected  special taxes on sales of works of art, owing
to  the  difficulties  and  expense  of collection  and  the damage  to  the
market.  Furthermore,  such  taxes  were  contrary  to  the  principle
of  a  central  exchequer  which  receives  all  revenues  and  funds  all
expenditure.  It  also  rejected  the  concept  of  a  central  fund  for  art
purchases,  which  would  be  inflexible  and  difficult  to  subject  to
detailed  Parliamentary  control.  Rather,  the  Committee  advocated
the  increase  of  purchase  grants  made  to  suitable  institutions  and  a
willingness  to  make special  grants  for  outstanding items.

3.5  The  Recommended  Machinery
The Committee considered what administrative arrangements would
be necessary  to  give effect  to  the recommendations  for  a system of
export  control.12 Its recommendations  form  the basis of  the proce-
dures  in place  today.

The  Committee  recommended  that  applications  for  export  licen-
ces should  continue to be referred  for  advice to recognised advisers.
Experts contemplating refusing a licence should bring the case before
the  Reviewing  Committee.  The  Reviewing  Committee's job  should
be to consider whether  to support  the expert's view. In  appropriate
cases, and in consultation  with the owner and interested  purchasing
institutions,  the  Committee should  put  in train  the negotiations  for
sale of the item  and any necessary fund  raising ventures and, where
necessary, refer  the matter to an independent valuer. In the few cases
where the owner refused  to negotiate, the Reviewing Committee was
to  consider  whether  to  refuse  a licence.

The  Committee  found  it  difficult  to  decide  whether  a  system  of
advance  rulings  should  be implemented.  Obviously  they  recognised
that  such  a  system  would  be  in  the  interests  of  purchasers  and
owners  and  would  help  avoid  frustration  and  any  waste  of  time,
money and  effort  caused by a licence application  not being granted.
However,  they  were  of  the  opinion  that  advance  rulings  should
never be given except  on the authority  of the Reviewing  Committee
and  that  such  rulings  should  only  be  given  to  the  owner  or  his
agent.

The  Committee  recommended  that  the  procedure  for  decisions
on  the  export  licence  application  should  be  kept  as  informal  as
possible. Efforts  should be made to reach agreed decisions wherever
possible. The adviser recommending the review of the licence should
not  sit on  the  Committee  but  should  appear  before  the  Committee
to  state  his  case. The  owner,  dealer  or  exporter  who  was  applying
for the export licence should have a right to attend or be represented
before the Committee. It was also recommended that the Committee

282

Export Licensing Rules in the UK

should  sit  in  private  and  not  make  public  the  reasons  for  its deci-
sions. However, the Committee recommended  that an annual report
should be submitted to the Chancellor, since the public were entitled
to know what was going on. The report could give brief  particulars
of the way in which the system had worked during the year and  the
guiding  principles  adopted.  The  Committee  also  recommended  the
creation of an Advisory Council which should include a wide number
of  representatives  and  which  should  meet  on  occasions  to  discuss
matters  of  common  interest  and  the  operation  of  the  system  as  a
whole. The Council would be able to advise on whether the appropri-
ate  standards  were  being  adopted  for  the  different  categories  of
objects  and  to  give  the  provincial  institutions  and  the  trade  an
opportunity  to  make  their  views  known.  The  Committee  felt  that
the  chairman  of  the  Reviewing  Committee  should  be chairman  of
the Advisory Council and  they also listed other people who should
be entitled to attend on the Advisory Council. These people included
representatives from  national and provincial museums, galleries and
other  institutions.

4  The Current  System of  Controls

The Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence) Act 1939 confers
on the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry the power by order
to  make  such  provisions  as  he  thinks  'expedient  for  prohibiting  or
regulating  ...  the  exportation  from  the  United  Kingdom  ...  of  all
goods ...\13 The current statutory instrument is the Export of Goods
(Control)  Order  1989/2376  as  amended  which  came  into  effect  on
14th  February  1990. A three  tier  structure  exists  to  administer  the
system:  the  Secretary  of  State  at  the  Department  of  Trade  and
Industry,  or  'DTP,  has  the  ultimate  power  to  give  or  withhold
licences. He is advised by the Minister for the Arts who is responsible
for  the Office  of Arts and  Libraries. The Minister is in turn assisted
by  the  Reviewing  Committee  on  Export  of  Works  of  Art  which
considers  particular  applications.

5  When is a Licence Required?

The  1989  statutory  instrument  sets  out  a  very  vague  category  for
which  a  licence  is  required.14  That  category  is  entitled  'Antiques',
being:  'Any  goods  manufactured  or  produced  more  than  50 years
before  the  date  of  exportation'.  Since  such  a  prohibition  would
catch  all  manner  of  relatively  worthless  objects  the  Open  General
Export Licence, or 'OGEL', was instituted  which permits the export
of  certain  goods  without  a  licence.  The  categories  of  goods  and
their  value  limits  are  changed  from  time  to  time.  The  OGEL  in
force  at  the time of writing came into force  on  1st December  1990.

283

Clare Maurice and Richard Tumor

The  following  objects  require  a  specific  licence  and  cannot  rely

on  the  OGEL:

(1)  any  archaeological  item  of  whatever  value, recovered  from  the
soil, the bed of an area of water or the sea bed in UK  territorial
waters  (unless it  has been  buried  for  less than  50 years); or

(2)  any  photographic  positive  or  negative  more  than  50 years  old

and  valued  at £500  or more; or

(3)  any manuscript or document more than 50 years old of any value
including  any  architectural,  scientific  or  engineering  drawings
produced  by hand;  or

(4)  a  British  historical  portrait  more  than  50 years  old  and  valued
at  £6,000  or  more.  A  portrait  valued  at  between  £6,000  and
£30,000  may  be  exempted  from  export  control  if  the  principal
of the National Portrait Gallery or the Scottish National Portrait
Gallery  has certified  that  it is not  of national  importance;  or

(5)  any  painting  in  oil  or  tempera  medium  (other  than  a  portrait
of  a  British  historical  personage)  more  than  50  years  old  the
value  of which  is  more than  £100,000; or

(6)  any  firearms,  arms  or  armour  manufactured  or produced  more
than  50 years but  less than  100 years before the date of exporta-
tion, the value of  which is more than £6,000; or if manufactured
more than  100 years ago, the value of which is £30,000 or more;
or

(7)  any  other  work  of art,  antique or collectors' item more than 50

years  old  and  valued  at £30,000 or more.

An article of clothing or footwear,  or any article manufactured  from
textiles  and  textiles  in  the  length  or  piece  (other  than  tapestry  or
carpet)  valued  at  between  £6,000  and  £30,000  may  be  exempted
from  control  if  the  Director  of  the  Victoria  and  Albert  Museum
certifies  it  is not  of national  importance.

A licence is granted automatically where evidence can be produced
that an item has been imported into the UK within the last 50 years.
Sotheby's  and  Christie's  can  issue  what  is  known  as  an  Open
Individual  Export  Licence  but  only  where  the  goods  have  been
imported  into  the UK  within  the last  50 years  and  they  (Sotheby's
and  Christie's)  are  arranging  for  shipping  and  export  of  the  works
of  art  themselves. Otherwise, each item  is individually  assessed.

6  The  Procedure

An  application  for  an  Export  Licence  is  made  to  the  DTI.  In
spite  of  promises,  it  has still  not  been  revised.  A  black  and  white
photograph  must  accompany  the application  form.

If  an  object  has  been  imported  into  the  UK  within  the  last  50
years an  export licence will normally  be granted  automatically.  The

284

Export Licensing Rules in the UK

applicant  will  need  to  supply  proof  that  the  item  was  imported
within  the  last  50  years.  In  all  other  cases  the  DTI  will  pass  the
application  to  an  appropriate  expert  from  one  of  the  national
galleries or museums to consider whether or not the application  for
an export licence should be granted. If the expert has no objections,
the licence will be granted. However, if the expert feels that the item
is an important item of national heritage he may object to its export
on one or more of the Waverley  Criteria.

If the expert adviser objects,  the case will then be remitted  to  the
Reviewing  Committee  on  Export  of Works of Art.  The  Committee
is non-statutory  and comprises members appointed  by the Minister
of Arts.

Initially  the  applicant's  contact  is with  the  DTI,  from  which  he
learns  that  the  application  will  be  considered  by  the  Reviewing
Committee.  Since the Committee does not  meet  on a regular basis,
but  rather  as  required,  an  applicant  then  has  to  wait  to  be  told
when the meeting will take place. This information  comes from  the
Secretary  of  the  Reviewing  Committee  who  is a  civil  servant.  The
applicant receives a helpful pro forma  letter identifying  the Commit-
tee's policy on deferrals  of licences, value, exhibition  and  publicity.
The applicant is cordially asked to present in advance of the meeting
a  written  statement  in  support  of  the  application  with  reference  to
the  three  Waverley  Criteria  together  with  photographs  and  any
relevant information, in particular supporting documentary evidence
about  price.  The  applicant  must  also  arrange  for  the  object  to  be
brought  to  the  meeting  and  be  ready  to  inform  the  Committee
whether the object  may  be exhibited.

He  is  then  reassured  that  'the  meetings  of  the  Reviewing  Com-

mittee are held  in a relatively  informal  manner  ...'

At  the  same  time  as  the  applicant  is  preparing  his  paper  in
support of the export, the Expert Adviser will be preparing a written
objection.  The  papers  are exchanged  in  advance  of  the meeting  so
that  both  sides have the chance to consider  the other's  arguments.
At  the  hearing  the  Reviewing  Committee  will  listen  to  the  argu-
ments  from  both  parties  and  will  also  consult  the  independent
assessors who will have been invited  to attend. These assessors will
have  a  particular  qualification.  For  example,  if  the  applicant  is
seeking to export  a Constable  one would  expect  to  see three of  the
recognised  experts  on  Constable,  whether  in  academic  life  or  from
the national galleries, being invited to join as independent assessors.
The  Committee  and  the  assessors  will  take  the  opportunity  of
looking at the object. The applicant and the Expert Adviser are then
invited  to withdraw so that  the Committee can consider the verdict.
If  the  expert's  objection  is  rejected,  the  Committee  will  recom-
mend  to  the  Minister  for  the  Arts  that  the  licence  be  granted
immediately.  If  the  expert's  objection  is  sustained  the  Committee
will recommend  to the Minister  that the licence should  be withheld.
If  the  Minister  agrees, he  will  pass  on  the  recommendation  to  the

285

Clare Maurice and  Richard  Turnor

Secretary of State for Trade and Industry  who ultimately makes the
decision.

Where the Minister's recommendation  is that  a licence should be
withheld,  the Secretary  of State will generally  defer  the decision  on
whether  or  not  to  grant  a  licence  in  order  to  enable  a  public
collection  to  raise  the funds  necessary  to  purchase  the  object  for  a
fair value, assessed where necessary in consultation with an indepen-
dent  valuer.  A  deferral  may  be  made  even  though  it  appears  that
the  price is  apparently  beyond  the  purchasing  capacity  of a  public
collection,  in  the  hope  that  the  necessary  funds  can  be raised.  The
Secretary  of  State  recently extended  the procedures  to  allow  offers
by  private  owners  to be taken  into  account  in deciding whether  to
allow an export licence, and  this controversial  subject  is considered
in more detail below.

It  is  recognised  that  it  is unfair  to  deprive  new  owners  of  their
acquisition  for  an  unnecessarily  long  period.  A  licence  application
can  be  deferred  for  a  period  of,  for  example,  six  months  with  a
review after  one or two months to see whether any efforts  are being
made  by a national  collection  (or anyone else) to  raise  funds.

An  applicant  is  not  obliged  to  accept  any  offer  made  at  a  fair
market value, but if he does not accept, a licence will not be issued.

7  Current  Issues and  Shortcomings  of the System

The  British  system  is  widely  regarded  by  exporters  and  heritage
interests  alike  as  being  relatively  fair:  the  principles  upon  which
the  Committee  evaluate  works  of  art  are  well  known  and  largely
undisputed  and  a  fair  hearing  is given  to  both  sides. Nevertheless,
there  are  shortcomings,  and  the system's  future  is now  the  subject
of detailed  review.

7.1  Funding
As  noted  above  the  Waverley  Committee  stressed  the  dependance
of the system on funding.  Unless adequate funds  are made available
to  purchasing  institutions  the  entire  system  breaks  down  and  the
lack of funds is by far the most difficult  problem faced by the system
today.

The  DTI  collates  all the information  relating  to  applications  for
export licences and the figures are produced annually in the Review-
ing  Committee  report.  In  the  12 month  period  1st July  1990 —30th
June 1991 a total of 5,138 applications for individual export licences
were received by the DTI (one application may cover several items).
7,992  items  were  granted  an  export  licence  after  reference  to  the
expert advisers and the total value of those items was £643,089,110.
For  the preceding  12 month  period  in  1989 — 90, the  total  number

286

Export Licensing Rules in the UK

of export  licences granted  after  reference  to the expert advisers was
5,481, the items having a total value of £721,511,955.

The  number  of  cases  referred  to  the  Reviewing  Committee,  be-
cause  the  appropriate  expert  adviser  had  objected  to  the  proposed
export  of the object  concerned  on grounds  of national  importance,
is relatively few. During the period  1990—91 a total of 38 cases were
considered  by the Reviewing Committee. Of these, 27 proceeded  to
the hearing stage. In 18 of the 27 cases, the export licence application
was deferred  for  a period. In  8 of those 27 cases, with a total  value
of £3,196,975, the items concerned  were not  subsequently  exported
having  been  bought  in  by  national  collections.  For  the  periods
1987-88  and  1988-89  the total value of works not exported  after
a deferral was over £10,000,000 in both cases, so that there has been
a dramatic decrease in the value of works of art where negotiations
with the national  institutions  are  successful.

On  the  other  hand,  in  6 of  the  27 cases dealt  with  in  1990-91,
with a total value of £22,897,550, a licence for export was eventually
granted because no public collection came forward with the required
funds  to  buy the  object.

Curiously,  the  number  of  cases  referred  to  the  Reviewing  Com-

mittee has remained  relatively  constant  over the last four  years.

The problem is easily identified: the last five reports of the Review-
ing  Committee  have  all  expressed  grave  concern  at  the  lack  of
adequate  funding  for  the  purchase  of  important  items  of  national
heritage. When the Reviewing Committee recently interviewed mem-
bers of the advisory council, all without exception stressed  the need
to make adequate funds  available to  retain  key heritage  objects.15

Even  before  1985, only  about  half  of  all  objects  for  which  the
grant  of a licence for  export was deferred  were ultimately  acquired
by public collections. Furthermore, the annual purchase grants made
to  UK  national  museums  and  galleries  by  the  Government  have
only been increased slightly since 1985. The national purchase grant
for  the  period  1985 — 86 was  £8.5  million  and  on  7th  November,
1991  the  Minister  for  Arts  announced  that  the  purchase  grant  for
1992—93 would  remain  the  same  as  for  the  last  two  years  at  just
over  £9  million.  The  purchase  grant  is  to  be  frozen  at  this  figure
until  1994—95. Art  prices  on  the  open  market  have  on  the  other
hand  risen  dramatically  over  the  last  few  years.  The  Badminton
Cabinet  on  its  own  would  have  absorbed  most  of  the  1990—91
purchase  grant.

The last resort for assistance is to the National Heritage Memorial
Fund  which receives a grant from  the Government, which is jointly
funded  by the Office  of  Arts and  Libraries  and  the  Department  of
the  Environment.  For  the  period  1985 — 86 the  grant  made  to  the
National  Heritage  Memorial  Fund  was £3 million,  but  this  figure
has  been increased  over  the years and  the  total  grant  for  1991—92
is £12 million. The Office  of Arts and  Libraries is contributing £5.5

287

Clare Maurice and Richard Turner

million  to the total  grant in this financial  year but this figure is also
to  remain  frozen  until  1994 — 95.

Such  serious  underfunding  leads  the  Reviewing  Committee  to
describe  the appearance  of a  major  heritage object  before  it as 'one
of  those  quaint  old  British  rituals,  like  Morris  dancing  on  the
green,  a  harmless  custom,  the  original  purpose  of  which  is almost
forgotten'.16

The Reviewing Committee estimates  that £7.6 million a year over
the  last  six  years  would  have  been  sufficient  to  retain  all  the  key
heritage  objects  at  risk  of  export.  For  the future,  and  allowing  for
escalation  of  prices, it  recommends  that  an  annual  average  sum of
£15 — 20  million  overall  should  be  made  available  for  purchase
grants, together with special grants for  special cases like the contents
of a home or a key collection.17 There is no sign that the Government
will heed  this advice.

7.2  The  Future:  Listing
Rather,  on  1st July,  1991 the  former  Minister  for  Arts  the  Rt  Hon
Tim  Renton  MP  wrote  to  Jonathan  Scott,  the  Chairman  of  the
Reviewing  Committee,  asking  for  advice  from  the  Committee  on
the future  of the Waverley  system  and  in  particular:

(i)  whether  you  see  any  possible  improvements  to  the Wave-

rley  system, bearing  in  mind  constraints  on  expenditure;

(ii)  whether  the Waverley  system  should  be replaced;
(iii)  and  if the Waverley  system were to be replaced,  in part or
in  whole,  how  could  this  best  be  done  — for  example,
through  an  export  list  or  by  any  other  means  that  your
Committee  feels  appropriate.18

The Committee  reported  in October  1991 in a document entitled  'A
Review  of  the Current  System  of  Controls  on  the Export  of Works
of Art'.19 This document  reviews the possibility of establishing a list
of items prohibited  from  export  in  some detail, taking into account
the system in other European countries  and the constraints imposed
on  EEC members  by the Treaty  of  Rome.

The  Committee  found  itself  caught  on  the  horns  of  a  dilemma.
On  the  one hand  it was concerned  to protect  the most  pre-eminent
objects  of cultural  heritage  from  export.  On  the  other  hand,  it was
deeply concerned  about  the consequences  of  having a 'banned  list',
particularly  since  providing  full  compensation  for  private  owners
would  be  impracticable,  and  bearing  in  mind  the  likely  effect  on
private  owners  and  their  historic  houses.  The  report  notes  that  the
members  of  the  Advisory  Council  consulted  (including  representa-
tives  of  museums  and  galleries,  the  National  Heritage  Memorial
Fund  and  the National  Art-Collections  Fund) were virtually unani-
mous  in  opposing  the  introduction  of  a  list  in  any  form,  with  or

288

Export Licensing Rules in the  UK

without  compensation.  It  also  notes  that  the  Waverley  system  is
strongly  supported  by  private  owners,  museums  and  the  art  trade
and  that  the  amount  of  funding  needed  to  rehabilitate  the  system
and avoid  the need  of listing is not  great.

However,  the  report  then  reluctantly  concludes  that,  in  'the  ex-
treme circumstance' that  further  funds  are not available to rehabili-
tate  the  system,  the  Committee  would  support  a  system  for  listing
without compensation. The report suggests tentatively and conserva-
tively  that  such  a  list might  extend  to,  say,  2,000  of  the  most  pre-
eminent  objects  in  private  ownership  (excluding  the  property  of
bodies like schools, colleges and churches). The list of items  banned
from export would operate in conjunction with the existing Waverley
system.

The Press Notice issued by the Office of Arts and Libraries hardly
does  the  report justice  when  it  describes  the  'main  conclusions'  of
the report as being that  'Britain could draw up a list of  outstanding
heritage  items  which  would  not  be  allowed  to  leave  the  country',
that 'export prohibition for the listed items would carry no compen-
sation  for  existing  or  future  owners'  and  that  'this  highly  selective
listing  could  operate  alongside  the  Waverley  system',  even  though
it is noted  that  the Committee would  only support  a listing  system
in the context  of a continued  freeze.20

This  reluctant  support  by  the  Reviewing  Committee  is  unfortu-
nate. Supporting a listing system in the context of a continued  freeze
only  helps  to  conceal  the  root  cause  of  the whole  problem,  which
is the  parsimonious  and  short-sighted  attitude  of  the  Government
to  funding  the  protection  of  the  national  heritage.  Listing  without
compensation  is  an  unacceptable  price  to  pay  for  preserving  the
nation's  cultural  heritage, especially  as there is a  workable  alterna-
tive. It is therefore  regrettable  that  the  Committee  did  not  make  it
clear  to  the  Government  that  listing  without  compensation  is  not
an acceptable option, and that the only fair option is to provide the
required  funds  to make  the existing  system  work.

The Committee's report refers to the argument that, if the imposi-
tion of planning controls on landowners is acceptable, the listing of
works  of  art  prohibited  from  export  without  compensation  is  also
acceptable,  but  the  comparison  is  invalid.  There  is  no  practicable
alternative  to  planning  controls  if  unacceptable  land  use  is  to  be
prevented, but  the Reviewing Committee itself draws attention  to  a
very  acceptable,  and  affordable,  alternative  to  listing  of  works  of
art  —  the provision of the necessary sum for purchase grants which
can  only  be  regarded  as  very  modest  in  the  context  of  protecting
the  nation's  heritage.  Such  an  invasion  of  the  rights  of  private
property can  surely not  be justified  by the desire of the Treasury  to
save perhaps £15 — 20 million a year.

When  the  Minister  announced  the  publication  of  the  report  on
3rd  December  1981, he  reassured  the  public  that  he  had  an  open

289

Clare Maurice and Richard  Tumor

mind and stated his intention  to consult  -widely.21 However, concern
about  the  future  was  increased  when  he  simultaneously  suggested
another option  —  that the Secretary of State for Trade and  Industry
might, in a few rare and outstanding cases, use his existing executive
powers  to  refuse  an  export  licence  even  where  no  compensating
offer  had  been  received  from  a  public  or  private  British  source.22
Such  a  system would  return  to  the  dark  ages  of  the  Second  World
War,  and  would  throw  up  all  the  problems  which  the  Waverley
Committee  considered  forty  years  ago.  There  are  questions  about
the legality of such an approach  and  the  Reviewing Committee has
itself expressed  the view that  the  use  of  the existing powers in such
a manner would cause such concern  about  a judicial review that the
powers are unlikely  to  be  invoked.23

7.3  Legislative and  Administrative  Structure
It  seems extraordinary  to  those  unfamiliar  with  the system  that the
export  of  works  of  art  should  be  regulated  by  the  DTI,  and  that
the  Reviewing  Committee  should  report  to  the  Minister  of  Arts  at
the Office  of Arts and Libraries who in his turn makes recommenda-
tions to  the  Secretary  of  State for  Trade  and  Industry.

It  is time that  'the Arts' generally  were recognised  as being more
important  in  the  scheme  of  things.  Millions  of  tourists  pour  into
the  UK  each  year  to  visit  our  museums  and  great  houses  and  to
enjoy all manner of performing  arts which could loosely be grouped
together  under  the  heading  'the  Arts'.  If  a  new  ministry  could  be
established,  due  recognition  would  at  long  last  be  given  to  those
who work  so hard  in this field.

The Reviewing Committee  has itself described  as an anomaly  the
current  system  whereby  the  review  of  the  export  of  works  of  art
should, owing to an  accident  of wartime  legislation, come  officially
under  the  DTI  with  the  Minister  for  the  Arts  only  in  an  advisory
function.  It  recommends  that  the  whole  process  of  licensing  and
review  should  be  concentrated  under  the  Office  of  Arts  and  Li-
braries.24

At  the  same  time  a clear  legislative  framework  should  be estab-
lished  with  recognised  limits  on  ministerial  power.  Mr  Ridley's
announcement  of  a  system  of  private  offers  on  2nd  March  1990,
directed  at  the application  to  export  Canova's  'Three  Graces'  then
at  an  advanced  stage,  is  an  example  of  the  extraordinary  way  in
which executive powers can be used to 'move the goalposts' midway
through an application  if there are inadequate legislative safeguards.
The introduction  of a proper  legislative  framework  is also urged by
the  Reviewing  Committee.25  It  is  extraordinary  that  the  legislative
basis of the system is to  be found  in  a  52 year  old  statute  designed
to prevent  trading  with  the enemy  where procedures can  be altered
without  warning  by ministerial  order.

290

Export  Licensing Rules in the UK

7.4  Private  Offers
When  Mr  Ridley  announced  on 2nd  March,  1990 in the middle of
the  application  to  export  Canova's  'Three  Graces',  that  he  would
now  take  into  account  offers  to  buy  an  object  from  any  source,
public or private, when assessing whether  to issue an export licence
or  not,  many  were taken  by  surprise.  The  statement  seemed  to  be
a  hasty  response  to  a  pressing  and  increasingly  political  problem,
rather  than  a considered  change.

Before  March  1990 it was implicit  that  any  offer  to purchase  an
item, where a licence to export had been deferred,  would come from
a  public institution.  The  theme  of  the  Waverley  Report  in  relation
to  valuation  and  finance  was  the  price  that  the  British  tax  payer
should  be paying  and  how could  the  funds  could  be  raised  by the
Exchequer.26

The  new system  has  also  been criticised  by  the  Reviewing Com-
mittee which fears that  this policy may distort  the market  by deter-
ring UK  buyers from  bidding at  auction  (in the expectation  that  a
decision on the licence application would  be deferred  if an  overseas
buyer was successful  and they could make an offer  at that stage) or
by  deterring  overseas  buyers  (who  resent  the  uncertainties  intro-
duced  by  the  proposals).  It  may  be  preferable  for  an  object  to  go
to  a  foreign  national  museum  where  it  will  be  available  for  study
and  not  to be retained  by an uncooperative private owner. There is
also  concern  that  the  amendment  may  allow  opportunistic  dealers
to  snap  up  very  important  items  at  low  prices  with  a  view  to
subsequent  sustained  effort  to  obtain  an  export  licence. The  Com-
mittee  has  therefore  proposed  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should
insist  that  a  measure  of  public  access  is given  by  a  private  buyer
who has  benefited  from  these new rules in purchasing  an  object  of
national  heritage,  and  that  a  minimum  period  of  at  least  20 years
access  to  be  given.  The  Committee  is  also  concerned  about  the
conditions in which important items will be kept by private owners
and  has  recommended  that  a  private  buyer  be  required  to  give
certain undertakings about the conditions in which a heritage object
will  be  kept  so  as  to  prevent  any  deterioration.  It  is also  thought
to be essential that a purchaser of a set of objects  should  undertake
to preserve the collection  as a unity.27

More recently, the Committee has stressed the 'potential for good'
of  the  new  system  if  private  buyers  are  only  allowed  to  purchase
heritage  objects  subject  to  pre-agreed  terms as  to  access, conserva-
tion and  so on. It is even suggested  that  such objects might be used
by private buyers as a form  of tax reserve  certificate.28

From  the point  of view of the exporter  the system of offers  from
private  sources seems to provide  little comfort  as  to  the  bona  fides
of  the  offeror.  If  an  offer  is received  from  a  public  institution  the
owner can be sure that the funds  are readily available, but how can
the owner be so confident  in relation to an individual? It seems only

291

Clare Maurice and Richard Tumor

fair  to  the  owners that  the Secretary  of State should  only  take  into
consideration  'serious  offers'  and  that  to  qualify  as  'serious'  the
money  should  be  deposited  so  that  the  owner  can  be  sure  it  is
available.  Furthermore,  having  made an  offer,  thus  frustrating  the
export  licence  application, it seems only fair that the offeror  cannot
then  renege,  for  example,  on  the  grounds  that  there  has  been  a
collapse  of  the  art  market  or  that  the  conditions  imposed  by  the
Secretary  of  State are too  harsh.

7.5  Fair  Market  Value
The  Committee  have  on  a  number  of  occasions  rejected  the  value
placed  on  an  item  by  the  applicant,  generally  as  a  result  of  a
challenge  from  the expert  advisers.29

If  the  parties  disagree  on  the  price  the  practice  is  then  for  an
independent  valuation  to be prepared  by an expert mutually  agreed
between  the  applicant  and  the  expert  adviser.  The problem  here is
that  valuation  is such a subjective  issue: one man's  'absurd  lump of
chilled  erotica'30  is to  another  a  'ravishingly  beautiful  [statue]  and
could  melt  the hearts  of  the most philistine'.31

The  valuation  can in theory  be accepted  or rejected  by the appli-
cant,  but  if  he  rejects  it  where  does  this  leave  him?  The  valuation
can  then  be  imposed  upon  him  by  the  Committee,  which  hardly
seems  fair.  He  then  has  only  one  alternative:  either  he  withdraws
his  application  or  he  must  proceed  at  what  he  feels  is  an  'unfair'
price.

The Reviewing Committee favours  the idea of using three valuers
as expert  advisers  for  each  case,32 but  unfairness  could  still arise if
reliance is placed  on experts as such.

Perhaps  it  would  be fairer  for  the gallery opposing to appoint  its
own  valuer  and  for  him  to negotiate with the applicant.  Only  if no
agreement  could  be  reached  should  another  expert  be  appointed
and  this time  he should act as arbitrator  rather than expert.  Market
price  is  after  all  only  the  price  that  someone  is  willing  to  pay  for
an  object  and  the price at  which  the other  is willing to sell.

7.6  Indefinite  Stop  Procedure
Before  1986,  if  an  owner  had  refused  to  sell  an  object  to  a  public
institution  which  had  raised  funds  to  match  the  price  specified  by
the  Reviewing  Committee,  an  'indefinite  stop'  was  placed  on  that
object  for  10 years. No application  for export would  be entertained
within  this  period.  However,  in  1986, legal  opinion  was given  that
refusal  by the  Secretary  of State to consider any further  application
was  unlawful.  An  owner  could  therefore  re-apply  for  a  licence
repeatedly  until  a museum or gallery was worn down and  no longer
able  to  find  the  necessary  funds.

292

Export Licensing Rules in the UK

A policy statement by the Minister for Arts on  15th March, 1990
endeavoured  to clarify  the position: if an owner who has previously
refused  an offer  from  a public collection  reapplies for  a licence, and
if  there  has  been  no  change  of  circumstances  since  the  previous
application  'to  justify  approval  of  the  export',  the  Minister  will
normally  recommend  that  a  licence  be refused  without  a period  of
deferral.  Therefore, if the only change in the application  is that  the
price is substantially higher than when the original offer was declined
and there is no matching offer  at  the higher price, a licence will not
be granted  automatically.

What  is  not  clear  from  this  policy  statement  is  what  change  of
circumstances  the  Minister  envisages.  How  wide can  this  be? Is  it
sufficient  for there to be a change of owner e.g., through inheritance?
The Reviewing Committee interpret  this to mean a change in 'herit-
age status' of  the object, which  would  seem considerably  narrower
than  the  Minister's  statement.33  Presumably  only  matters  such  as
reattribution  of the object,  as a result  of further  scholarship, or  the
discovery  of evidence casting  doubt  on  its authenticity,  would  am-
ount  to a change in 'heritage  status'.

More clarification  in this area would  be  helpful.

7.7  1992 and  the EEC
Whatever  the  system  in  existence,  with  or  without  the  changes
advocated  above,  ultimately  its  operation  depends  on  policing  by
the Customs  & Excise, who check  goods leaving the country.  With
the proposed  abolition of customs barriers within the EEC in 1992,
the machinery for policing the movement of works of art within the
community will cease to exist.

This raises a number of intractable issues. Should the UK continue
to operate its system of controls in relation  to  objects  which are  to
be  taken  to  another  country  in  the  Community,  even  if evasion  is
impossible to police? Should  member  states agree to the free move-
ment  of  objects  within  the  Community  and,  if  so,  what  system
should be adopted  to prevent objects leaving the Community? Is the
harmonisation  of laws on export control within the EEC feasible? If
not,  to  what  extent  should  the  UK  authorities  enforce  the  export
controls of another  EEC country? How can these authorities  know
whether  or  not  an  item  has  been  brought  to  their  country  from
another  EEC country?

These  problems  are  outside  the  scope  of  this  article, but  remain

the subject  of intense debate.34

8  Conclusion

The national  heritage is widely, and rightly, regarded  as something
to  be  cherished  and  preserved  for  future  generations.  There  must
therefore  be a  system  of  export  controls,  and  it  must  be  effective.

293

Clare Maurice and  Richard  Tumor

It  is  therefore  very  much  to  be  hoped  that  the  Government  and
legislature will build  on the sound foundations  laid by the Waverley
Committee  by  providing  a  proper  legislative  framework  for  the
Waverley  system  and  equipping  it with the funds  needed  to make it
effective  again.

Unfortunately,  the  provision  of purchase grants is clearly at  'the
very  bottom  of  the  back  page  of  the  Government's  list  of  priorit-
ies',35  and  the  Minister's  announcement  on  7th  November,  1991
that  purchase  grants  are  to  continue  to  be frozen  gives little cause
to  hope  that  this  policy  will  be  changed.  In  all  the  circumstances,
it is all too easy to conclude that there is no alternative to the listing
of works  of  art  prohibited  from  export  altogether.

While  this  conclusion  may  suit  the  Government's  intentions,  it
misses  the  point.  The  Waverley  system  is  widely  supported  and
can  be  made  effective  again  for  a  very  modest  price.  It  would  be
irresponsible  to  abandon  the fundamental  principles of  the  system,
by  introducing  a  banned  list  or  by  extending  the  use  of  arbitrary
powers,  simply  in  order  to avoid  paying that  modest price.

Notes

1  Hansard,  House  of  Commons,  O.R.  Col. 1173.
2  Report  of  the  Committee  on  the  Export  of  Works  of Art  etc.,  1952, known

as  'the  Waverley  Report'.

3  Waverley  Report,  Section  II  (paragraphs  65 to 97).
4  Waverley  Report,  paragraph  96.
5  Waverley  Report,  paragraphs  121 to  124.
6  Waverley  Report,  paragraphs  125 and  126.
7  Waverley  Report,  Section  V (paragraphs  159 to 217).
8  Waverley  Report,  paragraph  187.
9  Waverley  Report,  Section  VI  (paragraphs  218 to  239).
10  Waverley  Report,  paragraphs  241  to  247
11  Waverley  Report,  paragraphs  253 to 268.
12  Waverley  Report,  Section  VIII  (paragraphs  271 to 300).
13  Import,  Export  and  Customs  Powers  (Defence)  Act  1939 section  1.
14  The  Export  of  Goods  (Control)  Order  1989/2376 Schedule  1, Part  1, Group

B.

15  Reviewing Committee  on  the Export  of Works of Art  Report  to the  Minister
for  the  Arts  entitled  'A  Review  of  the  Current  System  of  Controls  on  the
Export  of Works  of  Art'  dated  October  1981, paragraph  5.

16  Report  of  the  Reviewing  Committee  for  1990/91  paragraph  10.
17  'A  Review  of  the  Current  System  of  Controls  on  the  Export  of  Works  of

Art',  paragraph  63.
18  Ibid.,  Appendix  1.
19  Ibid.
20  Office  of  Arts  and  Libraries  Press  Notice  70/91 dated  3rd  December 1991.
21  Ibid.
22  Ibid.
23  'Review  of  the  Current  System  of  Controls  on  the  Export  of Works of  Art',

October  1991, paragraph  79.

294

Export Licensing Rules in the UK

24  Ibid,  paragraph  77.
25  'Review  of  the Current  System  of  Controls  in  the  Export  of  Works  of  Art',

October  1991, paragraphs  78 and  79.

26  The role of private individuals is referred  to in paragraph 269 of the Waverley

Report  headed  'The Importance  of  Voluntary  Effort':
In  making  these  recommendations  a  factor  in  our  minds  is the  importance
of  doing  nothing  that  might  weaken  the  incentive  to  voluntary  and  local
effort.  Anxious  as  we are  to  see objects  saved  from  export  and  our  public
collections  built  up,  we do  not  think  that  this  objective  should  be  achieved
solely  by  the  expenditure  of  the  taxpayer's  money.  Others  must  play  their
part.  We fear  that  the  establishment  of  a  large  central  fund,  in  particular,
would tend to lead  to the gradual drying-up of subscriptions to the  National
Art-Collections  Fund  and  the  other  bodies  concerned,  and  to  the  whole
burden  falling  eventually  on  public  funds.  Our  recommendations  are  de-
signed  to ensure  that  it  is shared.  It  will  only  be when  an  object  cannot  be
purchased  by a collection  from  its own augmented  resources with  assistance
possibly from  the National Art-Collections Fund or some other similar body,
that the Reviewing Committee will consider the case and make an appropriate
recommendation  to  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.

It  seems  to  be  envisaged  that  'the  collection'  will  acquire  the  object,
perhaps  with  funds  being  given  to  it  by  a  third  party,  not  that  private
individuals would  be the  purchasers.

27  Report  of the  Reviewing Committee  for  1989-90,  paragraphs  11 to 31.
28  'Review of the Current  System of Controls  on  the Export  of Works  of  Art',

October  1991, paragraphs  102 to  104.

29  The  authority  for  this  action  appears  to  be  that  the  Waverley  Committee

recommended:
'In  our  view  the  aim  must  be  to  adopt  the  market  price  wherever  the
conditions admit of a genuine and  reasonable market  price being arrived  at;
in  other  cases  to  fix  a  price  that  is  fair  to  both  parties,  i. e.  the  owner  and
the  taxpayer.  It  must  not  be  so  low  as  to  do  injustice  to  the  one;  it  must
not  be so high as to give ground  for  the  suspicion  that  the taxpayer  is being
mulcted.  It  follows  that  any  system  of  price  fixing  that  is adopted  must  be
relied upon to work  fairly  both ways, and  be such as to satisfy  all  concerned
that justice  is being done', (paragraph  246).

30  Brian  Sewell writing in  the Evening Standard,  1st February  1990.
31  Reviewing Committee  Report  1989-1990,  paragraph  53.
32  'Review of the Current  System of  Controls  on  the  Export  of Works of  Art',

October  1991, paragraph  92.

33  Reviewing Committee  Report  1989-90,  paragraph  34.
34  See further  Joanna  Goyder's  updating  essay  on  'Free  Movement  of  Goods

and  the European  Community'  on  p. 403 of  this issue.
35  Reviewing Committee  Report  1990—91, paragraph  8.

295


