The  1995 UNIDROIT
Convention  on  Stolen or Illegally
Exported  Cultural  Objects:
The Role of  International
Arbitration*
Emily  Sidorsky**

Summary

Great  efforts  have  been  made by  representatives  of  a multitude  of
countries  to  rectify  the  situation  currently  confronting  parties,
whether they be private individuals or states, that seek the return of
stolen  or illegally  exported cultural  objects. The organization UNI-
DROIT  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  that  effort.  In June  of  1995,
representatives of over seventy  states met in Rome and adopted the
UNIDROIT  Convention  on  Stolen  or  Illegally  Exported  Cultural
Objects.  The  UNIDROIT  Convention  will  enter  into  force  as  it  is
ratified by individual states.

The UNIDROIT Convention provides a claimant of a Contracting
State with the option of using arbitration to settle  its dispute. Until
now,  there  has  been  little  discussion  of  the  advantages  that inter-
national arbitration can bring to this domain. This article focuses on
the benefits  of international  arbitration  in facilitating  the resolution
of cultural property disputes.  It presents an in-depth analysis of the
text of the  UNIDROIT Convention  in the context  of existing regu-
lations  in this  area.  It then examines  three  different  approaches to
international arbitration. These models serve to highlight the particu-
lar characteristics of this dispute resolution mechanism that make it
ideally suited to cultural property disputes.

••  Associate, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom. The views expressed her-
ein  are those  of the author alone and do not necessarily  reflect  those  of the
firm mentioned above.

The author would  like to thank  Judith  A.  Freedberg of  the T.M.C.  Asser
Institute  in  the  Hague  and  Professor  Hans  Smit  of  Columbia  University
School  of Law.

19

Emily  Sidorsky

Introduction

In  1923 the government of France sent a twenty-one year old student
of the Ecole  des  Langues  Orientates  to French-controlled  Indochina
to  record  outstanding  examples  of  ancient  Khmer  architecture.1
Rather than simply  recording what he  saw, however, the young man
seized  the  opportunity  to use  his  official  status as a cover to carry
out the clandestine export of stone carvings to France. He  organized
a group to search the jungle  near Angkor, Cambodia,  for the temple
known  as Bantea-Srei,  or the  "Citadel of Women," dating from the
tenth to fourteenth  centuries.

Arriving there, they cut from the temple walls  seven richly decor-
ated and well  preserved stones together weighing over one ton. Sub-
sequently,  they  were  arrested in Phnom  Penh on board a boat  with
their cache and charged with theft  and the desecration of the historic
monument.  One of the  men  charged,  and the mastermind  of the
scheme,  was  none other than Andre Malraux.2

In his defense,  Malraux contended that the temple had been aban-
doned  property,  so that he should  be permitted to keep  the  objects
that he had expended the skill  and energy  to retrieve.3  Furthermore,
he  asserted that  the removal  of the  artifacts  was  in the best  interest
of  "culture" if the  concept  was  properly  understood.  His  definition
of  culture,  or specifically  of the  cultural  group, did not adhere to
national  boundaries  but  extended  across all borders.  Therefore, he
argued that by rescuing the objects, he had allowed them to be better
preserved  and to be made  available  to a wider  audience.4  Malraux
lost  his case,5  but the transnational  view  of culture  which  he  ad-
vanced  in this context  is still  important  and  influential.6

The  complex  political,  cultural  and  ideological  issues  that  have
arisen in controversies  involving  the return of cultural  property are,
however,  only  the backdrop of this  article.7  Its purpose is to deter-
mine  an optimal  legal  and procedural  framework  for  the  resolution
of disputes  involving  stolen or illegally  exported cultural  objects.

Efforts  to achieve  the  return of cultural  objects  are  recorded as
early  as the  late  Roman  republic,  with  Cicero's  prosecution  of the
Roman  governor,  Verres, in 70 B.C.  for the  plundering of cultural
objects from citizens  in the province of Sicily.8  Today,  illegal  com-
merce  in cultural  property  is expanding  rapidly,  due  in part to  the
freedom with which national  borders are crossed, to improved com-
munications,  and to the extraordinary  rise  in the value  of cultural
objects.9  Although  there  are  numerous  instances  of parties  volun-
tarily returning objects to their "rightful" owners, these cases are not
the  norm.10  Rather,  determining  the  identity  of the  rightful  owner,
the  culture  which  the  object  represents,  and  the  significance  of the
object to that culture, are all  issues that frequently result in the com-
mencement of litigation  by one of the parties.

The  outcome  of litigated  disputes,  however,  has often  been far
from  satisfactory."  The  parties  to these  disputes  are often  one  or
more states and a private individual  or enterprise. Thus, the issue of

20

Unidroit  Convention and International  Arbitration

the sovereign immunity of the state party may  arise in the  course of the
litigation, further complicating the resolution of these disputes. Only
recently has international arbitration emerged as  a potentially superior
mechanism for resolving the complex disputes that arise when parties
attempt to reclaim illegally exported or stolen cultural objects.

The benefits that international  arbitration can bring to the cultural
property  domain  will  be the  focus  of this article.  The article  is or-
ganized in three parts. Part I provides a broad overview  of the cur-
rent  regulatory  framework  in this  area  and  describes  the develop-
ment and content of the  most recent and ambitious effort  to develop
an international treaty to facilitate the settlement of cultural property
disputes, namely the  UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally
Exported  Cultural  Objects  (the  "UNIDROIT  Convention").12  A
Diplomatic  Conference  convened in Rome in June of  1995 to con-
sider the adoption of the draft UNIDROIT Convention on the Inter-
national  Return of Stolen or Illegally  Exported Cultural Objects. At
the  conclusion  of  extensive  deliberations  by  the  representatives at
the Diplomatic  Conference,  the text of the  UNIDROIT  Convention
was adopted in  Rome on June 24,  1995.l3  Part I will  examine this
text in detail.

Part II, while recognizing the promise the UNIDROIT Convention
holds to effect  a positive  change  in this field, will  discuss  possible
shortcomings in certain of its provisions and the potential  for inter-
national arbitration to address these concerns.14 An analysis  follows
of the  advantages of international  arbitration over court litigation in
this context.

Part  III  will  examine  three  existing  systems  of,  or  approaches
towards, arbitration as possible models for the settlement of cultural
property  disputes.  The models  are: (1)  the  International  Centre  for
the  Settlement  of  Investment  Disputes  ("ICSID");15  (2)  the  Resol-
ution adopted by the Institute of International Law at its Santiago de
Compostela Session, September 5-13,1989, on Arbitration between
States,  State  Enterprises  or  State  Entities  and  Foreign  Enterprises
(the "Santiago de Compostela Resolution")16; and (3) the Permanent
Court  of  Arbitration  Optional  Rules  for  Arbitrating  Disputes  Be-
tween  Two  Parties  of  Which  Only  One  is  a  State  (the  "Rules").17
These  models  have  considerable  potential  for  fashioning  an  inter-
national  arbitration solution to the problem of cultural property dis-
putes. The question remains, however, a complex one. As this article
will argue, it is the complexities characterizing cultural property dis-
putes  that  make  the  disputes  ideally  suited  to  resolution  by  inter-
national arbitration.

The  UNIDROIT Convention

The Existing  Regulatory  Framework
There  are currently  three noteworthy  multinational  regulatory  docu-
ments in force  that affect  the cultural  property  domain: (1) The  1954

21

Emily  Sidorsky

Hague  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Cultural  Property  in  the
Event of Armed Conflict  (the "1954  Hague Convention");18 (2) the
1970  UNESCO  Convention  on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Pre-
venting the Illicit  Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cul-
tural  Property  (the  "UNESCO  Convention");19  and,  on  a  regional
European  scale, (3) the  European  Council  Regulation  on the Export
of Cultural Goods and the European Council Directive on the Return
of  Cultural  Objects  Unlawfully  Removed  from  the  Territory  of  a
Member  State  (the  "Council  Regulation"  and  the  "Council  Di-
rective").20

The  1954  Hague  Convention. The  primary  focus  in  this  domain,
prior  to  the  enormous  growth  in  the  international  art  market,  had
been on the protection of cultural property during wartime. The pur-
pose of the  1954 Hague Convention,  which  followed  earlier  Hague
Conventions  of  1899 and  1907, was to protect  cultural  heritage  for
the  benefit  of people  of  all  nationalities.21  It  is the  principal  treaty
in force  today governing  the protection  of property  in wartime.22

The UNESCO Convention. In  1970, a committee  of the United Na-
tions  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization  ("UN-
ESCO")  drafted  the  UNESCO  Convention  to  address  the  problem
of  illicit  import,  export  and  sale  of  cultural  property  in  times  of
peace.23  It  is currently  the most  influential  document  in this area.24
The major  provisions of the UNESCO Convention  provide that na-
tionals of countries  that  are members of the Convention  are  forbid-
den  from  importing  goods  stolen  from  a  museum,  a  religious  or
secular  public  monument  or  similar  institution,  provided  the  prop-
erty  in dispute is listed  in the inventory  of  such  institution.25  In the
case  of  goods  that  are  illegally  exported,  the  importing  nation  is
required to act to recover the goods and return them to the requesting
State,  provided  the  bona fide  purchaser  receives  "just  compen-
sation."26 The treaty  further  provides that an export  certificate  must
accompany  all goods that are subject  to the treaty upon their export
from the country of origin.27

The Council Regulation and Directive. The UNESCO  Convention's
emphasis  on  the  enforcement  of  export  controls  became  difficult,
however, in light of the unification  of the European Community into
a  Common  Market.  The  signing  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  in  1992
signalled  the creation  of an internal  border-free  market.28 The study
begun  by  the  European  Commission  in  1989  to  address  concerns
over trade  in cultural  property  in light of the unification  resulted in
the  issuance  of  the  Council  Regulation  and  Directive  in  March  of
1993.29

A principal  tenet of the Maastricht Treaty  is that all  commodities
are  to  move  freely,  subject  only  to  the  exceptions  carved  out  in
Article 36 of the Treaty  Establishing the  European  Economic Com-
munity  (the  "EEC  Treaty").30  The  Article  36  exception  is  limited

22

Unidroit  Convention  and  International  Arbitration

to  "national  treasures  possessing  artistic,  historic  or  archeological
value."31  The Council  Regulation establishes  a licensing  system for
the export of cultural goods outside of the Community and the Coun-
cil  Directive  outlines  provisions  for  the  restitution  of  illegally  ex-
ported goods within the Community.

The  Council  Regulation  provides  that  cultural  goods  that  fall
within  its  parameters  shall  be  accompanied  by  an  export  license,
commonly  referred  to as a "passport," upon their export  outside of
the Community.32  It contains an overriding provision, however, that
"the export license  may be refused  . . . where the cultural goods in
question  are covered  by  legislation  protecting  national  treasures of
artistic,  historical  or archeological  value  in the  Member  State con-
cerned."33 The movement of an  object within the Community  is not
restricted.34  However,  if  the  good  has  been  imported  from  a third
country it must be accompanied by a "passport" upon export. Signif-
icantly, no restrictions are placed upon the issuing authority to inves-
tigate the lawfulness of the import from a non-Member State.35

The  Council  Directive  provides  for  the  restitution  of  a cultural
good  unlawfully  removed  from  one  Member  State to  another. The
Council  Directive establishes a mechanism  for the return of the ob-
jects to another Member State,36 a statute of limitations within which
claims can be brought37  and a provision  for  the award of compen-
sation.38

The  Council  Regulation  and  Directive  constitute  the  current
framework  in operation within the European Community,39 yet their
ability to impede the traffic  in stolen and illegally exported cultural
property  is  debatable.  Criticism  has  been  made  of  the  drafiing  of
specific provisions, for example the definition of "cultural object."40
Doubts  have  also been  raised  over  whether the  export  licensing
system outlined  in the Council  Regulation  is  feasible.  Some of the
questions  raised  are  whether  authorities  will  be  able  to  accurately
determine (1) what falls within the definition  of "national treasure,"
(2)  what  is  the  country  of  origin  and  (3)  when  cultural  goods  of
foreign  origin are involved,  whether national  authorities will  act in
a sufficiently  diligent manner to protect the goods.41

On a broader  level,  there  is  apprehension  that the  imposition  of
greater restrictions within the European Community,  in comparison
with those  in force  in other countries, will  simply divert the market
to those other countries.42 It has been suggested that increased regu-
lation  of  the  art  market  will  drive  more  cultural  objects  into  the
black market.43 How such a regional treaty, and others like it,44 will
work with the UNIDROIT Convention which, if ratified by the vari-
ous  nations  would  be  world-wide  in  scope,  is  open  to  question.45
Some  commentators  have  argued that  the  Council  Regulation  and
Directive would be superfluous  if the  UNIDROIT Convention were
to be ratified by the nations  affected.46

Despite  the drawbacks  of the  Council  Regulation  and  Directive,
their  importance  lies,  in  this  context,  in  their  influence  upon  the

23

Emily Sidorsky

drafting  of  the  UNIDR01T  Convention.47  These  instruments  were
not, however, the impetus  for the  UNIDROIT  Convention.  Rather,
several years prior to the time when the European Commission be-
gan to study the problem as it related to the European Community,
UNESCO  became  interested  in  UNlDROIT's  draft  Uniform  Law
on  the  Acquisition  in  Good  Faith  of  Corporeal  Movables  of  1974
("LUAB"),48  in the hope that it might shed some light on the prob-
lems UNESCO was encountering dealing with movables in the cul-
tural property domain.49
Problems with the UNESCO Convention.  Implementation of the UN-
ESCO Convention has proven difficult.  Although a large number of
nations eventually joined the UNESCO Convention (now in force in
over 80 countries) the majority of the important art market nations50
declined  to become  party  to the  Convention.51  Art market nations
often differ dramatically from source nations in the degree to which
they would like to control the export and import of cultural property.
Among other concerns, some of the principal art market nations were
fearful  that the broad, amorphous definition of "cultural property" in
Article One of the UNESCO Convention, would impede legitimate
commerce.  The  art  market  nations1  unwillingness  to join  crippled
the ability of the UNESCO Convention to operate effectively.

A  further difficulty  of  the UNESCO  Convention  is  that it relies
upon Member States to recognize  the export  provisions of  the for-
eign  country.  This directly  conflicts  with  the traditional  reluctance
of most countries to enforce  the public,  as opposed to the private,
laws of another country.52 Further contributing to the  ineffectiveness
of the  UNESCO  Convention  is the provision  in Article  7(b)(ii) re-
quiring the return of any object that falls within its parameters and
payment  of  "just  compensation" if  it  should be  in  the  hands  of a
bonafide purchaser. This provision runs counter to the national laws
of many participants in the UNESCO Convention, thus inhibiting its
enforcement.  It was  chiefly  on  account  of  the  difficulties  encoun-
tered with this provision,  a question  of  private  law, that UNESCO
asked UNIDROIT to conduct a study in this area in order to develop
a set of rules to complement the UNESCO Convention.53

Developing the UNIDROIT Convention.  UNIDROIT began by com-
missioning an expert study on the international protection of cultural
property,  which  was  followed  by  a  second  study  focusing  particu-
larly on private law issues governing the transfer of title to cultural
property.54  Subsequently,  a series  of  meetings  (in  December  1988,
April  1989, and January  1990) was held by a study group under the
direction of the Governing Council of UNIDROIT, to develop a text
of  a  preliminary  draft  Convention  on  the  return  of  cultural  prop-
erty.55 These meetings resulted  in the preliminary draft Convention
on  Stolen  or Illegally  Exported Cultural  Objects.56 The text of the
preliminary  draft  Convention was revised at four subsequent meet-
ings  held  in  Rome (May  1991, January  1992,  February  1993  and
September-October  1993). The text that resulted from the fourth ses-

24

Unidroit Convention  and International  Arbitration

sion,  the  draft  UNIDROIT  Convention  on  the  Return of  Stolen or
Illegally  Exported  Cultural  Objects,57  dated  October  8,  1993,  was
submitted  at a Diplomatic  Conference  in  Rome,  Italy  from  June 7
to  24  of  1995.  Representatives  of  70  states,  as  well  as  observers
from  eight additional  states and various intergovernmental  and non-
governmental  organizations  and  associations,  participated  in  the
Conference.58 The text that resulted from the deliberations that took
place at the Convention was adopted by the Conference on June 23,
1995 and opened for signature at the closing  session of the Confer-
ence  the next day.  As of  December  1,  1995,  it  has been  signed by
twelve  nations,  two  of  which,  France  and  Italy,  are  major art-im-
porting  nations.  Other  signatories  are:  Burkina  Faso,  Cambodia,
Cote d'lvoire,  Croatia,  Finland, Georgia, Guinea,  Hungary, Lithua-
nia and Zambia. The Convention will remain open for signature until
June 30,  1996.  It was also opened for accession  on June 24,  1995.
The ratification of five member States is necessary to make the Con-
vention  operational.  It  will  only  be  operational,  however,  among
those countries that ratify it.

The  Text of the UNIDROIT Convention
The UNIDROIT Convention  is structured in five chapters:

Chapter I sets  forth  the  scope of  the Convention; Chapter II de-
fines  the  rules  governing  the  restitution  of  stolen  cultural  objects;
Chapter III discusses a separate set of rules governing the return of
illegally  exported cultural  objects; Chapter IV contains the general
provisions governing the appropriate jurisdiction  and procedure for
both types  of  claims;  and Chapter V  includes final provisions. An
Annex  lists  the  categories  from  which  cultural  objects  that are in-
cluded in the scope of the Convention are drawn.

The  UNIDROIT  Convention  is  to  apply  to  "claims  of  an inter-
national  character" for  the  purpose  of  (a)  the  restitution  of  stolen
cultural objects, or (b) the return of certain illegally exported cultural
objects.59  A  clear  distinction  is  made  in the  structure of  the UNI-
DROIT  Convention  between  cultural  objects  that  are  stolen  and
those that are illegally exported.

With respect to stolen  objects, the issue  was raised at the Diplo-
matic Conference as to whether the draft Convention, by stating that
it applied  to  "claims of  an international  character  for (a)  the resti-
tution of stolen cultural objects removed from the territory of a Con-
tracting State"  (emphasis added) covered the situation where a cul-
tural object was stolen from a non-Contracting State and then trans-
ferred to a Contracting  State.60 There was disagreement  among the
representatives as to whether a non-Contracting  State should benefit
from  the Convention without incurring any of the burdens of ratify-
ing it. However, the representatives  ultimately  decided to eliminate
the  latter part of  the phrase.  Accordingly,  the Convention  is appli-
cable  to  all  stolen  cultural  objects  belonging  to  the  heritage  of a
Contracting State regardless of their source.

25

Emily Sidorsky

The situation  with respect  to illegally  exported cultural  objects  is
not  as  broad  as  in  the  stolen  goods  context.  Only  those  cultural
objects  that  are  "removed  from  the territory  of  a Contracting  State
contrary  to  its  law  regulating  the  export  of  cultural  objects  for  the
purpose of protecting  its cultural  heritage" are covered by the Con-
vention.61

Chapter  I, Article 2 defines  cultural  property  to include those ob-
jects "which,  on religious or secular grounds, are of importance  for
archeology, prehistory, history, literature, art or science," and belong
to one of the categories  listed  in the Annex.62 The definition  of the
concept  of  "cultural  object"  was  a  subject  of  considerable  debate
throughout  the drafting  process.

The Restitution of Stolen Cultural Objects. The most significant  de-
parture  the  UNIDROIT  Convention  makes  from  past  attempts  to
address the problem of the restitution  of stolen cultural objects  is in
its provision that "the possessor of a cultural  object  which has been
stolen shall return it."63 The UNIDROIT Convention adopts the pro-
vision requiring the return of all stolen cultural  objects, whether the
purchase  was  bona  fide,  as  defined  under  local  law,  or  not.  This
reflects  the  common  law  rule  protecting  the  original  owner's  right
to the object  over the right  of a bona fide purchaser.  It represents a
dramatic departure from  the civil  law rule that typically protects the
rights of a bona fide purchaser over the rights of the original  owner
after  a certain period of time.64

Article  3(2) relates specifically  to the problem  of objects that  are
"unlawfully  excavated or lawfully  excavated but unlawfully  retained
when consistent  with the law of the State where the excavation took
place." It states that such objects  are to be "considered  stolen." This
provision was a source of considerable disagreement among the rep-
resentatives  at  the  Diplomatic  Conference.65  Some  representatives
favored  the suppression  of this provision  in  its entirety. Others  ex-
pressed  the  view  that  it  more  properly  belonged  in  Chapter  III  of
the Convention and that there was no need to single out this category
of cultural  objects  from  others.  Still others considered  it redundant,
and hence potentially confusing,  in light of the fact that most count-
ries have internal  laws covering this situation. Other  representatives
felt  very  strongly  that  it was important,  because  of  the  seriousness
of  the  situation  with  respect  to  illegal  excavations, that  the  idea  of
unlawful  excavations should be assimilated  with the idea of  theft.66
In the end, the majority  of the representatives voted to retain Article
3(2).67

Article 3(3) deals with the difficult  problem of defining the statute
of  limitations during which  claims  for the return  of objects may  be
brought and when the relevant time period begins to run. Recogniz-
ing the need  to balance the  interests  of the purchaser  with those of
the  original  owner,  the  relevant  time  frames  were  the  subject  of
considerable  debate.68  The decision  was  made  to provide  a  shorter

26

Unidroit  Convention  and  International  Arbitration

statute  of  limitations  period  (three  years)  from  when  the  claimant
"knew  the  location  of  the  object  and  the  identity  of  its  possessor"
and  a  longer  period  (fifty  years)  from  the  time  of  the  theft,  if  the
claimant  lacked  such  knowledge.69

The  UNIDROIT  Convention  establishes  a  separate,  longer  time
period  during  which  claims  for  objects  stolen  from  "an  identified
monument or archeological  site, or belonging to a public  collection"
can be brought.70  In a  shift  from  the draft  UNIDROIT  Convention,
the current  text  of the UNIDROIT  Convention  provides that  claims
relating  to  such  cultural  objects  "shall  not  be  subject  to  time  limi-
tations" other  than  the  three year  period  typically  assigned  to other
cultural  objects.71  However,  a  Contracting  State  has  the  option  of
proposing  that  a  time  limit  of  75  years  or  longer  shall  apply  to  a
claim  in  its  own  or  another  Contracting  State, provided  it  declares
that this  is to be the case at the time  it becomes bound by  the Con-
vention.72

The  definition  of  "public  collection,"  and whether  in  fact  such a
definition  should  be  included  in  the  UNIDROIT  Convention,  was
also  widely  discussed  at  the  Diplomatic  Conference  because  of  the
diverging  conceptions  of this term.  Some representatives  were con-
cerned  that  the  definition  of  "public  collection"  in  the  draft  UNI-
DROIT  Convention  was  overly  broad.73  Others  were  in  favor  of
deleting  the  provision,  out  of  fear  that  it  might  be  impossible  to
arrive  at  a consensus  on  the definition  of  the  term.74  At  the end  of
the  deliberations,  however,  the  majority  of  representatives  were  in
favor  of retaining  a specific  provision  on "public  collections."75

The UNIDROIT  Convention  provides that the possessor who ex-
ercises "due  diligence" when  acquiring  an object  is entitled  to  "fair
and reasonable compensation" at the time of restitution.76 In the case
of stolen  objects, the possessor bears the burden of establishing  that
he  or  she  acted  with  the  requisite  "due  diligence."77  Provided  the
claimant  is able  to  satisfy  this burden,  the  UNIDROIT  Convention
states  that  "the  person  who  transferred  the  cultural  object  to  the
possessor, or any prior transferor"  should, if possible, be the person
to  shoulder  the  burden  of  paying  the  compensation  to  the  dispos-
sessed  owner.

The UNIDROIT Convention describes the factors the adjudicatory
authority  is to consider  in  making  its determination  with  respect  to
the claimant's demand  for the return of the object.  These include:

the circumstances  of the acquisition,  including  the character of
the parties, the price paid, whether the possessor consulted any
reasonably accessible register of stolen cultural objects, and any
other  relevant  information  and  documentation  which  it  could
reasonably  have obtained, and whether  the possessor  consulted
accessible  agencies  or  took  any  other  step  that  a  reasonable
person  would have taken  in the circumstances.78

27

Emily  Sidorsky

The UNIDROIT  Convention does not specify  a standard, such as
the price paid or the commercial  value of the object as a method  for
resolving the issue of what constitutes "fair  and reasonable compen-
sation."79  It also does not provide a more subjective standard  which
might  be an  appropriate  measure  for  valuing ritual or  ethnographic
objects.

The Return of Illegally Exported Cultural Objects. Article  5  is the
central provision  of Chapter III of the UNIDROIT Convention gov-
erning  the return  of  illegally  exported  cultural  objects.80  According
to this provision, it is incumbent  upon the court or other  competent
authority of the requested  State to adjudicate  the claim made by the
requesting  State that its export  laws have been broken, and to order
the return of the object  to the requesting  State.

This provision  is significant  in that  it requires  states to recognize
the  public  laws of  other  states.  Because  this  is an  exception  to the
norm,81 the delegations made an effort  to define  what objects  would
fall within the parameters of this part of the UNIDROIT Convention
with a greater degree of specificity  than in the case of stolen objects.
Thus,  in  contrast  to  the  provisions  governing  the  return  of  stolen
objects,  the  UNIDROIT  Convention  provides  that  in  the  case  of
illegally  exported  objects,  certain  criteria  must  be  satisfied  by  the
requesting  State  before  the  obligations  of  Article  5(1)  shall  be  en-
forced.82  It is important to note that the criteria listed in Article 5(3)
are alternative rather than cumulative and, therefore,  if the claimant
is able to satisfactorily  establish  that  any  one of them  has been  im-
paired,  the  object  must  be  returned.83  Furthermore,  the  list  is  not
exhaustive.84 The definition  of what constitutes an object of "signifi-
cant cultural  importance" is left  open.85

In addition, the UNIDROIT Convention requires that requests  for
the return of an object must be accompanied by information  pertinent
to the  claim.86  The  statute  of  limitations  period  during  which  a re-
questing State can make its claim is currently the same in the case of
illegally exported cultural objects as it is in the case of stolen goods.87
Article 6 of the draft  UNIDROIT Convention  had provided  a de-
fense  to the enforcement  of the Convention  in situations  where the
requested  State  could  establish  that  it  had  a  "closer  connection"  to
the  cultural  object  than  the  requesting  State.88  This  provision  was
deleted in its entirety  from  the text of the current Convention  at the
Diplomatic Conference.  Several representatives were concerned that
such  a provision  would  afford  states  not  in  favor  of  certain  of  the
UNIDROIT  Convention  provisions  the  latitude  to  assert  that  such
provisions  ran  counter  to  its  public  policy,  thereby  circumventing
the application  of the Convention.89  It was also disfavored  because
it left  what was viewed  by some delegations as a cultural  and not a
legal  question to the discretion  of a national  adjudicatory  authority.
Furthermore, it was believed that  it might encourage the removal  of
objects  by  individuals  who  for  patriotic  motives  claim  a  closer  tie
to an  object.90

28

Unidroit  Convention  and  International  Arbitration

As  in  the  case  of  stolen  objects,  the  UNIDROIT  Convention
requires that the requesting  State  may  be required  to pay  the pos-
sessor "fair and reasonable compensation" for illegally exported ob-
jects  that  it  reclaims,  unless  the  possessor  knew,  or  should  have
known when acquiring the object, that it was illegally exported.91

However, unlike  in the stolen goods context,  there is no require-
ment  in  the  illegal  export  situation  that  the  possessor  be  able  to
"prove that it exercised due diligence  when acquiring the object."92
The issue  of  which  party bears the burden of  establishing  the pos-
sessor's knowledge of the illegal  export of the object is to be deter-
mined by national law.

The UNIDROIT Convention states that the absence of an export
certificate,  where  the  Contracting  State  has  instituted  a  system  of
export certificates, can serve as an indication that the purchaser had
notice  of the object's illegal  export and therefore  should be denied
compensation.93  Other  options,  such  as  the  transfer  of  ownership
against payment, are available to the possessor,  with the requesting
State's  permission,  in place  of  the  payment  of  compensation.94  In
all  cases, the cost of the return of  the object  is  to be borne  by the
requesting State.95

Article  7  provides  that  if  the  export  of  the  object  is  no  longer
illegal  at the  time  at which  the  return  is  requested,  it  need  not be
returned.96  Additional  exceptions  are made  for  an  object  that was
exported during the  lifetime  of the person who created it or within
a period of fifty years following  the death of that person,97  except
in the case  where  an object  was  made by  a member  of  a tribal or
indigenous  community  for  traditional  or  ritual  use  and  the  object
will be returned to that community.98

Chapter  IV,  entitled  General  Provisions,  addresses  the  funda-
mental procedural issues relating to the return of a contested object.
Article  8(1)  adopts  the  lex situs  rule,  namely  that  a claim  can  be
brought before  the court where the cultural object  is located.99 The
adoption of the  new situs represents a departure from  the standard
prevalent in civil law systems.100 This provision stipulates, however,
that the  choice  of  this  situs  is  "in  addition  to  the  courts  or other
competent  authorities otherwise  having jurisdiction  under the rules
in force in Contracting States."

The UNIDROIT Convention does not deal with conflicts  of juris-
diction  questions,  specifically  the  recognition  and  enforcement  of
judgments.101  It relies  instead on multilateral or bilateral  treaties to
govern  these  issues.  Further,  the  inclusion  of  such  provisions  was
not considered essential  in this context because granting jurisdiction
to the courts where the object was located would allow such courts
to enforce  a resulting judgment.  Thus, provided the claimant plead
its  case  in  the  country  where  the  object  was  located,  it  would  no
longer need to seek recognition of a decision in a foreign country.102
Article  8(2)  makes  explicit  reference  to  the  possibility  of  arbi-
tration. It states that "the parties may also agree to submit the dispute

29

Emily  Sidorsky

to any court  or other competent  authority or to arbitration."103  Arti-
cle  8(3)  also  allows  a  claimant  the  option  of  relying  on  the  pro-
visional or protective measures in force  in the state where the object
is located, even  if the claim is brought  in a different  jurisdiction.104
Article 9 provides that parties should not interpret the UNIDROIT
Convention  to  restrict  the  options  available  to  them  for  handling
their  disputes.  Rather,  a  Contracting  State  is  at  liberty,  but  is  not
obligated,105  to apply  existing  local  rules so long as  they are more
favorable  to the restitution or return of a  stolen or illegally exported
object  than  those  currently  provided  in  the  UNIDROIT  Con-
vention.106

The  issue  of  whether  or  not  the  UNIDROIT  Convention  should
apply  retroactively  was  deemed  by  many  of  the  representatives  at
the  Diplomatic  Conference  to  be  an  issue  of  great  concern.107  An
earlier version  of the UNIDROIT  Convention, the preliminary  draft
Convention,  explicitly  stated  that  the  Convention  should  not  have
retroactive  application.108  The  deletion  of  this  provision  from  the
draft  UNIDROIT  Convention,  based  upon  the  belief  held  by  some
delegations  that  the same  result  could  be achieved  implicitly  under
the  Vienna  Convention  on  the  Law  of  Treaties,  was  a  source  of
contention.109  The text  of  the  UNIDROIT  Convention  that was ad-
opted  in  Rome contains  a  provision,  Article  10, that  makes  it clear
that  it  is  not  to  apply  retroactively.110  However,  in  order  to  avoid
limiting a claimant's opportunity for recourse in those countries that
have  more  expansive  legislation  than  envisaged  under  the  UNI-
DROIT Convention, Article  10(3) provides that a claimant, whether
a State or a person, can have recourse outside of the  Convention  for
the  restitution  or  return  of  a  cultural  object  stolen  or  illegally  ex-
ported before  the Convention  entered  into  force."1

Chapter  V,  entitled  Final  Provisions,  contains  eleven  articles.
Chief  among these  are the  articles  that: describes  the procedure  by
which  the  Convention  shall  be  ratified,  accepted  or  approved  by
those  states  that  are  interested  in  doing  so;112  provides  the  oppor-
tunity  for  a state that  belongs  to an organization  of  economic inte-
gration  or a  regional  body  to declare  it will  apply  its  internal  rules
instead  of  the  UNIDROIT  Convention;"3  allows  countries  with
more  than  one  terrritorial  unit  to  have  certain  units  opt  out  of  the
UNIDROIT  Convention  without  affecting  the  status  of  other  terri-
torial  units;"4 provides that only those reservations that are author-
ized  by the Convention  are  allowed;"5  and  states  that  the Conven-
tion  can  be  denounced  by  any  state  party  that  chooses  to do  so at
any time after  it enters  into force  in that  state.116

Commentary  on the UNIDROIT  Convention

Points of Controversy
Although  there  is  optimism  that  the  UNIDROIT  Convention  will
prove more effective  at addressing the problems encountered  in the

30

Unidroit Convention  and International  Arbitration

cultural property domain than previous legislation  has been, it is not
without its shortcomings. In the case of the UNIDROIT Convention,
the shortcomings may result from the effort  to resolve  in one docu-
ment  disputes  that  involve  two  different  areas  of  law  -  the  resti-
tution  of  stolen  cultural  property,  which  is  typically  a question  of
private law, and the illegal  export  of such  property, which  involves
public law."7

These two areas of law typically  result  in different  types of con-
ventions.118  Conventions  dealing  with  public  law typically  provide
only  a  general  framework  and  leave  it  to  the  particular  states  to
apply their national laws to implement the convention. This is often
done  to  avoid  conflict  between  nations  as to  particular provisions,
thereby  encouraging  countries  to  participate  in  the  convention.  In
the case of conventions governing private law, however, the norm is
to provide  more specific  provisions,  in order to achieve  uniformity
in the application and outcome of the proceedings. Thus, inherent in
the  UNIDROIT  Convention  is  a  tension  between  the  need  to  be
general  with  regard  to  public  law  issues  and  the  need  to  be  as
specific  as  possible  with  regard  to  the  fundamental  private  law
issues.

The split  between  public  and private  law  issues  is  also  manifest
in the structure  of  the  UNIDROIT  Convention.  As mentioned pre-
viously,  the return of  stolen goods  is handled  in a separate chapter
(Chapter II) from that governing the return of illegally exported cul-
tural  objects  (Chapter  III). All  of  the other provisions  of  the UNI-
DROIT  Convention  apply  to  both  areas.  The  result  of  attempting
to  cover  such  a wide,  and  in  many  respects  distinct,  set  of  topics
simultaneously  is  that  the  provisions  tend  to  be  overly  vague  and
broad. This is particularly  true of the definition  of "cultural object"
in Chapter I, Article 2. Because of the complexities involved in the
determination  of  the  issues  surrounding  claims  involving  illegally
exported  goods,  it  might  be  preferable  to give  a narrow  reading to
the definition  of "cultural object." In the case of stolen goods, how-
ever,  it might be desirable to adopt a more expansive definition,  as
trafficking  in stolen  cultural  objects  is accepted as a more  self-evi-
dent wrong.119

The  UNIDROIT  Convention  attempts to establish  a uniform  set
of  rules  to  be  applied  whether  the  Contracting  State  adheres  to a
common  law or a civil  law  system.  In practice,  however, this uni-
formity may break down in the application of these rules, depending
on the national law of the Contracting State where the claim is heard.
For  instance,  if  the judge  hearing  the  claim  is  not  accustomed  to
providing  "fair  and  reasonable  compensation"  in  claims  involving
cultural property, he or she may be reluctant to do so. The provision
in Chapter  IV,  Article  9,  allows  a Contracting  State  to apply  local
rules  in place  of  the Convention  if  they  are more  favorable  to the
restitution  or the  return of  the  stolen  or illegally  exported  cultural
object than those provided in the Convention. This provision makes

31

Emily Sidorsky

it  possible  for a country  to not require  the payment  of "fair  and
reasonable  compensation" to the  possessor.120  Thus, the  application
of  this  provision  will  depend  upon  the  legal  system  in force  in the
jurisdiction  where the claim  is heard.

Furthermore,  the definitions  of several  of the  key terms  in  the
UNIDROIT Convention  are left to the discretion of the adjudicatory
authority  hearing  the  claim.  Although  this  is not  in itself  problem-
atic,  the uniformity  in application  of the  UNIDROIT  Convention
could be compromised as a result of differing  interpretations of  key
terms depending upon the jurisdiction  where the claim is heard. Al-
though  the Convention  attempts  to define  the requisite  "due  dili-
gence" by enumerating relevant factors to be examined, this decision
is  open  to interpretation.  Furthermore,  the determination  of  what
constitutes  "fair  and  reasonable  compensation"  is  left  to the  dis-
cretion of the adjudicatory  authority hearing the  claim.121

Because  special  consideration  is to be given to restitution  in  the
case  of objects  stolen  from  a "public  collection,"  the  definition of
this term carries great significance  for the possessor, and was felt by
some  delegations to be overly  vague.122  Perhaps of greater concern
is the  potential  for varied  interpretation  of those terms that are cen-
tral  to the UNIDROIT  Convention  but are left  undefined.  This is
particularly  true  of terms  such  as "stolen," "possessor,"123  "claim-
ant," "theft" and "illegal  export."124

Other  difficulties  with  the UNIDROIT  Convention  exist  in  the
provisions relating to the illegal export of cultural goods. The resol-
ution  of whether  an  object  is of "significant  cultural  importance,"
is  a determination  that  is open  to subjective  interpretation.125  The
representatives at the Diplomatic Conference  conceded that many of
these  key  terms  are  ambiguous.  At  the  risk of encouraging  partici-
pation, the UNIDROIT  Convention  sacrifices  uniformity.  However,
such sacrifices may be inevitable in any attempt to produce an inter-
national  instrument  acceptable  to a broad  range  of countries  on  a
subject of such  scope  and complexity.

The Arbitration  Advantage
Given  the potential  deficiencies  noted in the preceding  section, and
the  substantial  degree of controversy  in this  area,126 a strong argu-
ment  can  be made  that  the  settlement of cultural  property  disputes
in a fair  and  efficient  manner  could be facilitated  by the  establish-
ment  of a dispute  resolution  framework.  Arbitration  already  exists
as an alternative procedure to litigation  in the  UNIDROIT  Conven-
tion and  in the enacted Council  Directive.127

The primary benefits to be derived from arbitration in this context
are threefold: (1) the non-national quality of the forum could provide
neutrality; (2) the appointment of arbitrators could provide expertise;
and  (3) the rules  and  regulations  of the  arbitration  process  could
increase the speed and efficiency  of the proceeding and reduce over-
all  costs.

32

Unidroit  Convention  and  International  Arbitration

Two other important benefits of arbitration led the delegations to
the  draft  UNIDROIT  Convention  to  state  that  "recourse  to  arbi-
tration  in  relation to  claims  for the restitution  or return of cultural
objects under the Convention should not only be allowed but encour-
aged."128 First, they considered the respect of strict confidentiality a
favorable  feature.  Second,  they  asserted  that  problems  of  enforce-
ment were likely  to be reduced because  the consent  of both parties
was  required  in  order  to  initiate  an  arbitration  proceeding.  This
would allow for the settlement in a single proceeding of disputes that
in litigation often involve several court actions in different countries.
Support for arbitration in this context has been consistent. Perhaps
because  of  "quasi-unanimity"  for  its  inclusion  as  an alternative  to
court  litigation  in  the  draft  UNIDROIT  Convention,  it  was  not a
major focus of the  representatives' discussions.129  However, the po-
tential  role of  arbitration in the settlement  of cultural  property dis-
putes  has  been  discussed,  on  occassion,  both  outside  of  the  draft
UNIDROIT Convention context,130 and inside.

Although  not  specifying  an  international  arbitral  tribunal,  the
suggestion  was  made  by  several  representatives  at  the  Diplomatic
Conference  in favor of  "an  international  tribunal or advisory body"
either  in  relation  solely  to  Article  8  [Article  9  of  the  draft  UNI-
DROIT Convention] or more generally to the whole Convention.131
It  was  considered  desirable  by  some  in  order  to  provide  uniform
application  of  the  Convention.132  Other  representatives  disagreed,
stating that they considered the establishment of  an  international tri-
bunal to oversee the application of the future Convention "somewhat
exaggerated, especially in light of possible difficulties and the means
available."133

The  discussion  of  Article  8(2),  [Article  9(2)  of  the  draft  UNI-
DROIT Convention] engendered other comments with respect to ar-
bitration.  One  representative  suggested  that  arbitration  should  be
"supported" as it might facilitate the resolution of what he regarded
as a potential problem in the application of the  UNIDROIT Conven-
tion, namely the issue of state immunity. The suggestion  was made
that a statement providing for arbitration in the UNIDROIT Conven-
tion  might  suffice  to  constitute  an agreement  to  arbitrate  between
two  state  parties.  This  might  resolve  the  potential  problem  of  en-
forcement and recognition  where states that are not parties to either
the  New  York or the  Panama  Convention,  on  the  Recognition  and
Enforcement of  Foreign Arbitral Awards, assert claims of sovereign
immunity.134

The use of  arbitration in the context of the UNIDROIT Conven-
tion,  although  not  heavily  discussed,  is  not  a  recent  development.
As early as the preliminary draft Convention, local experts from both
Germany  and  Switzerland  expressed  a belief  that  a broader use  of
arbitration  would  facilitate  the  fair  settlement  of  cultural  property
disputes.135  A  strong  argument  can  be  made  that  the  use  of  arbi-
tration  would  facilitate  the  settlement  of  cultural  property  disputes

33

Emily  Sidorsky

and  would  thereby  allow  the  UNIDROIT  Convention  to realize  its
full  potential.

The Neutrality Advantage. As discussed  in Part  I, the framework  of
the UNIDROIT Convention  offers  two different  methods of achiev-
ing the  return  of cultural  property  depending  on whether  the goods
were  stolen  or were illegally  exported.  In the  case of  stolen  goods,
the  possessor  of  a  stolen  object  is  required  to  return  it  (Art.  3(1)).
The  court  of  the  requested  State  has  no  discretion  at  this juncture.
This  is  not  the  case,  however,  with  regard  to  illegally  exported
goods. Here, the requested  State must return an object  if it is asked
to do so by the  requesting  State and  the object  in question  satisfies
any of the criteria enumerated  in Article 5(3) or the claimant  is able
to establish  that  the object  is of "significant  cultural  importance" to
it.136

The potential  for bias is inherent in the judge's determination with
respect to Article 5(3). The criteria enumerated  in Article 5(3) to aid
the court  in making  its  determination  are  subjective.  This determi-
nation  becomes  even  more  problematic,  however,  by  virtue  of  the
provision  in  Article  8(1)  granting jurisdiction  to  the  court  or  other
competent  authorities  of  the  Contracting  State  where  the  object  is
located.  Although  this  is  not  the  exclusive  forum,  (Art.  8(1))  it  is
likely to be the forum  selected.137 This raises the possibility  that the
requesting State must present  its claim before  a foreign  court  of the
jurisdiction  where  the  object  is  located.  As  a  result,  the  determi-
nation  in  Article  5(3)  must  be  performed  by  a  court  with  perhaps
the  strongest  incentive  to  favor  the defendants.138  The potential  for
bias reinforces  the need for an impartial, non-national  forum  for the
settlement  of  these  disputes.139  An  international  arbitration  forum
could  provide the requisite  neutrality.

As discussed  above, an argument can be made that the term "cul-
tural object," as defined  in Chapter I, Art. 2 of the UNIDROIT Con-
vention, is overly vague.140 As a result, even the threshold evaluation
of  whether  or  not  the  dispute  falls  within  the  scope  of  the  UNI-
DROIT  Convention  may  benefit  from  the  impartial  analysis  of  a
neutral  body.  While  the  broad  definition  of  "cultural  object"  is re-
stricted in the case of illegally  exported goods to those which are of
"significant  cultural  importance," there  is still  the potential  for bias
to affect  this  determination.

Arbitration  may  have an advantage  over litigated disputes  in that
it  can  offer  such  a  neutral  setting.  The  parties  are  free  to  select
arbitrators]  of  any  nationality,  and  may  stipulate  that  no  arbitrator
will  be a  national  of a  country  with  an  interest  in  the  dispute. The
parties  are  also  free,  depending  on  the  particular  model  of  arbi-
tration, to determine the law to be applied in the arbitral proceeding.

The Expertise advantage.  The  ability  of  the  parties  to  select  arbi-
trators,  in  addition  to having  benefits  in  the area of neutrality,  also
offers  the potential for particular expertise. The expertise of the arbi-

34

Unidroit Convention  and international  Arbitration

trators selected by the parties may be a crucial  element in fairly  and
properly  evaluating  the  issues  mentioned  in  the  discussion  of  the
neutrality advantage above. Moreover, selection of an arbitrator with
a known expertise in the area of dispute, particularly if the arbitrators
are chosen  from  a  list  of expert  arbitrators, may  give  weight  to the
findings  and  may  minimize  the  likelihood  of  inconsistent  determi-
nations.

In addition to the definitional  benefits, expert arbitrators may  offer
at  least  three  benefits  over  the  current  system.  These  include  (1)
consistency  in  the  determination  of  whether  a  purchase  was  bona
fide  when  made;  (2)  a  more  accurate  system  for  the  determination
of  "fair  and  reasonable  compensation;"  and  (3)  increased  certainty
in the market  in cultural  property  generally.

The first  advantage that a body of expert arbitrators could offer  is
that  it would allow  a set of consistent  rules to develop in the estab-
lishment of an internationally  accepted definition  of a bona fide pur-
chaser.  Previous  attempts  to  develop  a  satisfactory  solution  to  the
unique  issues  in  the  cultural  property  area  have  been  plagued  by
inconsistent  determinations  by  various  countries  of  whether  or  not
the  possessor  acted  in  good  faith  (bona  fide)  when  acquiring  the
object. Common law jurisdictions and civil law systems have widely
different  attitudes  about  what  constitutes  a  good  faith  acquisition.
Even among civil  law systems, the standards vary.

The UNIDROIT Convention  stresses that the typical common law
rule  is  to  be  applied  by  requiring  the  possessor  of  a  stolen  object
unconditionally  to  return  it  to the  claimant  (Art.  3(1)). Article  4(4)
states a set of standards by which adjudicators  can measure whether
"due diligence" was in fact exercised by the possessor. Nonetheless,
establishing  consistent  interpretations  of these  standards  in jurisdic-
tions  that  have  a long  tradition  of  very  different  backgrounds  as  to
the  definition  of  a  bona  fide  purchase  is  apt  to  be  difficult.  Arbi-
trators  possessing  an  expertise  in  this  area  will  help  to  ensure  that
such  determinations  are  made  in a more consistent  and thus poten-
tially  fairer  fashion.

Second, establishing an expertise  in this area may help in making
the  determination  of  what  constitutes  "fair  and reasonable  compen-
sation." This determination  is often  difficult,  as cultural objects  often
pass through  a chain of purchasers  and the value typically  escalates
through  each  succeeding  purchase.  Furthermore,  an  object  may  be
worth a different  amount  to the possessor on a subjective  basis than
it  is  to  others  on  an  objective  basis.  Arbitration  has  already  been
used  by certain  countries  to determine  the value  of an  object  when
it has been  damaged  but  not  destroyed  or  where  the  object  has not
been  valued  prior  to  its  loss  and there  is reason  to believe  that  the
parties will contest  the value of the  object.141

The  idea  of  a  specialized  body  devoted  to  a  particular  subject
is  not  alien  to  arbitration.  Arbitration  rules  and  proceedings  have
increasingly  been  applied  in  specialized  areas  of  the  law.  Maritime

35

Emily Sidorsky

claims, investment  disputes, joint  ventures,  transfers  of  technology,
and  intellectual  property, are just  some of the specialized  areas that
have benefited  from  the availability  of a body of arbitrators with an
expertise  in  their  respective  fields.  The  area  of  cultural  property
seems  ideally  suited  to join their ranks.

Third, greater certainty  in the market  is important because one of
the  factors  presently  plaguing  legitimate  buyers  and  sellers  is  that
they  are  reluctant  to  act  in  a  climate  of  uncertainty  which  could
result  in their  losing  the  object  or being  subject  to  long and  costly
litigation  proceedings  over the object's  true  provenance.142 The  in-
creased consistency of decisions that can result from  arbitration may
at the same time discourage  illicit  art traffic.  If,  as is believed to be
the case, the black market relies upon laundering stolen and illegally
exported objects through countries with laws favorable to their inter-
ests, then  the existence  of  a  body  of experts  who are  familiar  with
prior dispositions  of similar cases and are aware of the  implications
of such decisions, may  help to eliminate  this problem.  Greater cer-
tainty  and predictability  in the outcome  of controversies  may  result
in an increase  in the legitimate trade of art.

The Efficiency and Reduced  Cost Advantage. The  benefits  of  arbi-
tration  in addressing  the problem  of bias and the need  for  expertise
in  claims  for  the  restitution  of  illegally  exported  cultural  objects
have been  stated above. Arbitration  offers  advantages in the context
of  stolen  goods  as well,  especially  where both  parties  are  states  or
public  institutions  represented  by national  governments.143  It is fre-
quently the case  in cultural  property disputes that the parties are so
constituted. Arbitration  in this context may have considerable advan-
tages  over  litigation,  which  is  traditionally  more  costly  and  more
time consuming  than a comparable  arbitration  proceeding.

Even  if  the  parties  do  not  resort  to  arbitration  for  the  settlement
of their dispute initially, in the case of disputes involving a state and
a private party, it is possible that the case will be settled out of court
after  a lengthy and costly litigation proceeding. Therefore,  it may be
efficient  from  the  standpoint  of  both  the  litigants  and  the  relevant
courts to dispense entirely  with  the litigation  aspect of the proceed-
ing and to conduct the matter in an arbitration forum  from the outset.
Thus, if an arbitration center were to be established,  similar perhaps
to  that  recently  established  in  the  intellectual  property  arena,144  it
might  result  in speedier  resolution  and less expense.

Another  advantage  of arbitration  which  applies equally  to claims
involving  stolen  goods and illegally exported cultural objects  is that
it would alleviate  the burden  that the draft  UNIDROIT  Convention
would  create  in  the  court  systems.  The  establishment  of  an  arbi-
tration  center  which  would  offer  administrative  services  and  pro-
cedural  rules  designed  for  use  in  any  legal  system,  leaving  to  the
parties to autonomously choose the law, language and location where
the arbitration  would be held, would free  local courts of the burden

36

Unidroit Convention  and  International  Arbitration

of administering  such claims.  In addition to the benefits  of reduced
cost and efficiency  on the part of the  parties involved in the dispute,
the use of arbitration could reduce expenditures by the governments
of the countries that anticipate an increase  in activity  in their court
systems as a result of the  UNIDROIT Convention.145

Three  Models of International  Arbitration

Three models of international  arbitration currently  in operation will
be examined  in order to develop  insight  into an appropriate  model
for an international arbitration mechanism suitable for the resolution
of cultural property disputes. The first of these, the format and rules
of the  International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID),  will  be  explored  as  an  example  of  an  institutional  arbi-
tration solution.  ICSID deals exclusively  with disputes between pri-
vate  investors  and  state  entities,  provided  the  host  state  and  the
national  state of the  foreign  investor have each become party to the
ICSID  Convention.  Thus,  the  arbitral  regime  flows  from  binding
treaty obligations assumed by states adopting the ICSID Convention.
Disputes  in  the  cultural  property  domain  tend  to  involve  claims
brought by a state entity  attempting to recover an object of  signifi-
cance to its cultural patrimony from a private individual. Therefore,
ICSID serves as a useful  model.

The second, the Santiago de Compostela Resolution, will serve as
an  example  of  an  international  arbitration  model  that  is  non-insti-
tutional. The non-national,  delocalized aspect of the  Resolution rec-
ommendations  are relevant  in  the context  of  cultural  property dis-
putes  because  such  disputes  often  generate  controversies  with  the
potential  for bias or partiality to effect  their disposition.

The  third,  the  Optional  Rules  for  Arbitrating  Disputes  between
Two Parties of  Which Only One  is a State (the "Rules"), is  an ex-
ample  of  a  set  of  rules  that  could  be  adopted  by  an  international
arbitration center specializing  in the  settlement  of cultural property
disputes. Although  similar in concept to the ICSID rules, the Rules
offer the parties involved greater flexibility  and autonomy.

The Rules are based on the Arbitration Rules which were drafted
in  1976  by the  United  Nations Commission  on  International  Trade
Law  (UNCITRAL).  The rules are relevant  in the cultural  property
context, however, in the way  in which they  depart from the UNCI-
TRAL model. By providing that an agreement to arbitrate under the
Rules constitutes a decision to waive any sovereign immunity claims
that a State might otherwise  raise, the  Rules adequately  address an
issue,  i. e.,  that  of  sovereign  immunity,  which  is  raised  in cultural
property disputes.

ICSID: An Institutional Model
ICSID is a public  international  organization established  by a multi-
lateral treaty, the  1965 Convention on the Settlement of  Investment

37

Emily  Sidorsky 

• 

•

Disputes  between  States and Nationals of Other  States  (the  "ICSID
Convention").146  ICSID  is the  only  arbitral  institution  specifically
tailored to the settlement of disputes between foreign  private parties
and a state.  Principal  conditions  to the  use  of ICSID  are  that  both
the state  party and the  state of which  the  private party is a national
must have ratified the Convention,147  and that the parties consent in
writing to  submit their dispute to ICSID arbitration.

ICSID was designed to provide a neutral  forum  for dispute  resol-
ution, which by offering  neutrality, and accordingly  greater certainty
and predictability,  would  lead to the  encouragement  of foreign  pri-
vate investment.148  In addition to the benefit of neutrality, the appeal
of  institutional  arbitration  is generally  considered  to be threefold:
(1) a stable organizational  framework  for the arbitration, (2) a speci-
alized  staff  with  training  and  expertise  in the  field,  and  (3) a  set
of  procedural  rules  that  facilitates  the handling  of the  arbitration
proceeding in an efficient  manner.149 It is also argued that an  effec-
tive  procedural  framework  will  increase  the  likelihood  of a  court's
recognition  of the  arbitral  award  by enhancing  confidence  in  the
neutrality  and fairness of the proceeding.

A  fundamental  premise  of the  ICSID  system  is that  it relies on
the adherence by  states to  procedural  rules to which they  have sub-
mitted by ratifying  the ICSID Convention. The ICSID Rules of Pro-
cedure  for Arbitration  Proceedings  (the "Arbitration  Rules")  govern
the procedural  aspects of the arbitration  proceeding and a supervis-
ory authority and an appointing body ensure that the parties properly
conform to the Arbitration Rules. The autonomy of the parties, how-
ever, is still respected  in the choice of substantive law. Article  42(1)
of  the  ICSID  Convention  states  that  the arbitration  tribunal  shall
decide the dispute "in accordance  with such rules of law  as may be
provided by the parties." The default  provision of Article 42(1) pro-
vides  that "[i]n  the  absence of...  [a party] agreement,  the Tribunal
shall  apply  the law of the  Contracting  State  party  to the dispute
(including  its rules  regarding  conflicts  of laws)  and  such  rules of
international  law as may be applicable." The law of the Contracting
state  party is given  preference  in the  default  provision  so as to en-
courage  states to become a party to the  ICSID Convention.

A  framework  similar to the  one  adopted by ICSID  might be im-
plemented if the states ratifying the UNIDROIT Convention were to
agree to submit their disputes to an institutional  arbitral  system. The
establishment of procedural  arbitration rules along the lines of those
set forth in the ICSID Convention could be adopted. The conflict of
laws  rules  could  also  follow  those  dictated  by the  ICSID  Conven-
tion, although the law of the private party could also be given prefer-
ence  if the  policies  underlying  the UNIDROIT  Convention  favor
this approach.

An issue that arises in the context  of the  UNIDROIT  Convention
that is, by definition, not dealt with by the ICSID Convention is the
choice of substantive  law  where  the parties to the dispute  are  both

38

Unidroit  Convention  and  International  Arbitration

states.  In  this case,  traditional  conflict  of  law  rules  could  apply,  or
preference  could be given  to the law of either the state asserting, or
defending,  a claim.

Regardless  of  whether  the  arbitral  institution  established  to  im-
plement  the  UNIDROIT  Convention  were  to  adopt  the  Model
Clauses  of  the  ICSID  Convention  verbatim  or  modifies  them  to
some degree, the adoption of a self contained set of regulations gov-
erning  all  aspects  of  the  proceeding  could  provide  the  UNIDROIT
Convention  with  greater  clarity.  This  is  particularly  important  in
light of Article 9(1) of the UNIDROIT  Convention, which  provides
each Member State the option of "applying any rules more  favorable
to the restitution or the return  of stolen or illegally exported  cultural
object  than  provided  for  by  this  Convention."  The  possibility  for
signatory  States to provide a different,  and potentially harsher mech-
anism than exists under the UNIDROIT Convention  is preserved. A
clear  provision  of  the  procedural  rules  and  substantive  governing
law  to  be  applied  in  advance  in  an  institutional  arbitration  frame-
work  could  resolve  any  ambiguity  surrounding  this  provision.  The
availability  of  an  institutional  arbitral  framework  similar  to  ICSID
could also settle the problem of the inherent imbalance between  the
requesting  State's  interest  and that of the requested  State  by  reason
of  the  different  burdens  placed  upon  the  entities.  The  greater  neu-
trality  and  certainty  that  the  ICSID  regime  brings to the  settlement
of  investment  disputes,  and  the  resulting  enhancement  of  investor
activity,  could  apply  to  the  return  of  stolen  and  illegally  exported
cultural  objects.  Greater  consumer  confidence  in  the  return  of  ob-
jects which are stolen or illegally exported and in the fairness of the
proceeding  should  a dispute  arise could  result  in an increase  in  free
trade  in art.

The Santiago de Compostela Resolution

The  Institute of  International  Law, an organization  founded  in  1873
for  the  purpose  of  offering  the  recommendations  of  distinguished
jurists on various areas of law in order to advance international  law,
met  in Santiago de Compostela  in  September  of  1989 for  its sixty-
third  session. There, members  of the  Institute  adopted  a  Resolution
entitled "Arbitration between States, State Enterprises, or State Enti-
ties,  and  Foreign  Enterprises."150  The  intention  of  the  Santiago  de
Compostela Resolution was to provide suggestions as to how to best
ensure that arbitral  tribunals effectively  handle disputes  involving a
state  and  a  private  party.  It  is  not  focused  on  the  recognition  and
enforcement  of  arbitral  awards  nor  is it concerned  with  the compo-
sition  of the arbitration  tribunal.  It  defers  on these  issues to "appli-
cable  provisions of  international  treaties." Thus,  its  intention  is not
to supplant  existing treaties but to supplement  them with  guidelines
as  to  how  best  to  effectively  conduct  an  arbitration  in  which  the
parties are a mix of foreign  private parties and  state entities.

39

Emily  Sidorsky

The  fact  that  the  Institute  of  International  Law  recognized  the
appropriateness  of  arbitration  for  the  settlement  of  disputes  involv-
ing state  parties  and  private  parties  is  in  itself  significant.  Looking
beyond  this  salient  feature,  certain  specific  provisions  of the  Santi-
ago  de  Compostela  Resolution  shed  light  on  the  way  in  which  it
departs from  past rules in order better to tailor the arbitration  for the
effective  resolution  of  disputes  between  governments  and  foreign
private parties in an efficient  and principled  fashion.

The Santiago de Compostela Resolution establishes, first and fore-
most,  that  the arbitration  agreement  is to be given complete  prefer-
ence over all  other considerations,  subject  only to the stipulation  in
Article  2  that  the  arbitrators  cannot  disregard  "principles  of  inter-
national  public  policy  as  to  which  a  broad  consensus  has  emerged
in the international community." Article  1 states, in part, that "[arbi-
trators derive their authority and powers from  the parties' agreement
providing  for  arbitration."  This  Article,  in conjunction  with  Article
6, which provides that "[t]he parties have full autonomy to determine
the procedural  and substantive  rules and principles that are to apply
in  the  arbitration..."  makes  clear  that  the  arbitration  proceeding  is
divorced  from  any  national  legal  system.151  Rather,  the  authority
of  the  arbitrators  derives  from  the  premise  that  those  engaged  in
international  commerce  and economic discourse  should be allowed
to  establish  rules  for  the  settlement  of  their  disputes  that  are  not
dependent  upon the laws of a particular  sovereign.152

Article  3  of  the  Santiago  de  Compostela  Resolution  sets  forth
basic  provisions  to  govern  the arbitration.153  The  substantive  rules
of law to be applied in the arbitration  proceeding, when the validity
of the agreement  to arbitrate  is challenged,  are described  in Article
4.  The  provision  allows  for  the  tribunal  to  select  from  among  the
following:

the  law chosen  by the parties, the  law  indicated  by the  system
of  private  international  law  stipulated  by  the  parties,  general
principles  of  public  or  private  international  law,  general  prin-
ciples of international  arbitration, or the law that would  be ap-
plied by the courts of the territory  in which the tribunal has its
seat.154

It  provides  further,  that  "[i]n  making  this  selection,  the  tribunal
shall  be  guided  in  every  case  by  the  principle  in favorem  validit-
atis."155  Thus, as in the case of the procedural  rules, the substantive
rules  applied  by  the  tribunal  can  be  devoid  of  reference  to  the
national  laws of the parties  involved  in the dispute.

Certain  provisions of the  Santiago  de Compostela  Resolution  di-
rectly  relate  to  the  presence  of  a  governmental  entity  as  a party  to
the dispute. Article  5 provides that, "[a]  State, a  state enterprise, or
a state entity  cannot  invoke  incapacity to arbitrate  in order to resist
arbitration  to which it has agreed." Article 7 states that "[a]greement

40

Unidroit  Convention  and  International  Arbitration

by a state enterprise to arbitrate does not imply consent by the State
to  be  a party  to  the  arbitration."  Article  9  disallows  a  defense  of
sovereign  immunity: "Denial  of the tribunal's jurisdiction  based on
a State's sovereign  status is not admissible  in arbitration between a
State,  a  state  enterprise,  or a  state  entity,  on  the  one  hand,  and a
foreign enterprise, on the other."156

As these provisions  indicate,  the  Santiago de Compostela  Resol-
ution  is aimed  specifically  at those  disputes  involving  a public and
a  private  party.157  Yet,  the  philosophy  underlying  the  Resolution,
namely that the arbitration shall be delocalized and non-national, has
applicability  to arbitration generally.158  The trend to move from the
seat  of  the arbitration  governing  the rules of  the proceeding  to the
arbitration  agreement  acting  as the  controlling  element  could  have
significant  implications  in the  UNIDROIT  Convention  context, re-
gardless  of  the  nature  of  the  parties  involved  (/. e.  whether  State-
State or State-private party). The parties agreement to arbitrate their
dispute,  according  to  Article  8(2)  of  the  UNIDROIT  Convention,
could be construed  as a step which thereby divorces the conduct of
the proceeding  from a national legal  system. The delocalization and
non-national  quality  of  the  proceeding  would,  as  discussed  pre-
viously, provide a degree of neutrality which is essential  to the suc-
cessful  resolution of disputes in this domain.

The  second,  and  related,  aspect  of  the  Santiago  de  Compostela
Resolution that has implications for how an arbitral forum might be
constituted  in the UNIDROIT context  is that the adjudicatory auth-
ority  of  the  arbitrators  does  not  derive  from  a  particular  national
sovereign.  Again, this aspect of the Santiago de Compostela  Resol-
ution could apply regardless of the nature of the parties involved in
the dispute. Only in the rare instance where the arbitration agreement
that the parties have entered into would induce an arbitrator to viol-
ate a principle  of  international  public policy  to which a broad con-
census  has  emerged,  can  the  arbitrator  ignore  the  parties'  agree-
ment.159  Thus,  in  the  UNIDROIT  context,  this  might  resolve  the
hesitation certain countries may have towards the UNIDROIT Con-
vention arising from the possibility  that, should they be in the pos-
ition  of  being  a requesting  State,  the  dispute  may  be  settled  by a
court or other competent authority of a country (the requested State)
with  a less  stringent  attitude  towards  export  prohibitions  than that
held  by  the  requesting  State.  Although  Article  9(1)  of  the  UNI-
DROIT Convention allows a Contracting  State to apply rules more
favorable to the restitution or return of the  object than that provided
in  the  Convention,  the  potential  for  nationalist  bias  to  affect  the
system because of the  mechanism provided for the return of objects
in Article 5 makes the idea of a non-national, delocalized arbitration
proceeding applicable in this context as well.

Third, the fact that sovereign immunity is not available under the
Santiago de Compostela  Resolution as a defense  to the Contracting
State  in  an  arbitration  between  a  state  and  a  foreign  private  en-

41

Emily  Sidorsky

terprise  has  important  implications  for  the  applicability  of  a  similar
framework  in  the  context  of  the  UNIDROIT  Convention.  Many  of
the disputes relating to cultural property  involve a state and a private
party.  Whereas  a state might  try to plead  sovereign  immunity  in the
local  court  that  has jurisdiction  over  a  dispute,  in  an  international
arbitral  tribunal  such  a  claim  of  immunity from jurisdiction  would
typically  not be upheld.  Furthermore, the increasing tendency  by the
national  courts  responsible  for the enforcement  of  an arbitral  award
is  to  recognize  that  the  agreement  to  arbitrate  itself  constitutes  a
waiver of  sovereign  immunity.160  The Santiago de Compostela  Res-
olution offers  a useful  model  of an approach towards the  settlement
of disputes between governmental  entities and foreign private parties
that is different  from that offered  by the  ICSID example.  Both mod-
els  share  a  central  thesis,  namely  the  effort  to  arrive  at  principles
governing  disputes  involving  international  mixed  parties  that  will
lead  to  an  efficient,  fair  resolution  of  these  disputes.  It  is  in  this
regard that they  serve as important role models  for the  development
of  such  a  mechanism  in  the  context  of  the  resolution  of  cultural
property  disputes.

The Permanent  Court  of Arbitration  Optional  Rules for  Arbitration
Disputes  Between  Two Parties  of  Which Only  One  is  a  State
The  Permanent  Court  of  Arbitration  in  the  Hague  enacted  a  set  of
rules, effective  July 6,  1993, entitled, "Optional  Rules for Arbitrating
Disputes  Between  Two  Parties of  Which  Only  One  is  a  State" (the
"Rules").  The  Rules  are based  on  the  Arbitration  Rules  which  were
formulated  by  the  United  Nations  Commission  on  International
Trade  Law  (UNCITRAL)  in  1976.161  The  UNCITRAL  Arbitration
Rules  were  originally  intended  for  use  in  ad  hoc  proceedings,  al-
though over time they have been adopted increasingly in institutional
situations  as  well.

The  Rules  are  ideally  suited  to  adoption  in  the  context  of  the
settlement  of  cultural  property  disputes.  Ad  hoc  arbitration  has tra-
ditionally  been  favored  by  state  entities  over  an  institutional  for-
mat.162  Although  the  ICSID  model  retains  its  significance  in  this
context,  as  it  is  the  only  institutional  model  formulated  specifically
for the settlement of disputes involving private parties and state enti-
ties,  the  Rules  possess  certain  advantages  over  the  ICSID  model
because  the  specialized  nature  of  the  ICSID  regime  means  that  its
scope  is narrower.

The  Rules  also  possess  certain  advantages  over  the  Santiago  de
Compostela  Resolution  described  above.  First, the Rules offer  a pro-
cedural  framework  to  facilitate  the  establishment  of  an  arbitration
tribunal and, if the parties wish, they may also explicitly provide  for
a  waiver  of  sovereign  immunity  from  execution.163  It  is  also  more
expansive  in  its  treatment  than  the  Santiago  de  Compostela  Resol-
ution,  which  does  not  deal  with  the  approach  that  a  national  court
should take when the enforcement  of an  arbitration judgment  is pre-
42

Unidroit  Convention  and  International  Arbitration

sented before it, but rather defers to existing treaties for this purpose.
Thus,  the  Rules  have  a  much  broader  applicability  than  does  the
Santiago de Compostela  Resolution.

Second, the  Rules provide  for  flexibility  and party  autonomy. In
contrast  with  the  ICSID  model,  which  requires  that  both  the  state
party and the state of which the private party is a national must have
ratified the ICSID Convention, the Rules are available for use by all
states  and  their  entities  and  enterprises,  and  are  not  restricted  to
disputes in which the state is a party to either The Hague Convention
on the  Pacific  Settlement  of  International  Disputes  of  1899  or that
of  1907.164  In addition, there is no requirement  like the one particu-
lar to  ICSID  that  the  controversy  be  an investment  dispute.  These
differences  greatly expand the scope  of applicability  of these Rules
as compared with the ICSID model.

In addition,  the  Rules  emphasize  flexibility  and party autonomy
by virtue of two other provisions: (1) the choice of arbitrators is not
limited to persons who are listed as members of the Permanent Court
of Arbitration165 and (2) the parties have complete freedom to agree
upon any individual  or institution  to be the appointing authority.166
This  is,  again,  a distinct  difference  from  the  format  of  the  ICSID
model,  which  provides  for  a  designated  supervisory  authority  and
appointing  body  specific  to  its  institution.  The  informality  of  the
Rules, as compared to those prescribed by the ICSID Convention, is
likely  to  contribute  to  a wider  range  of  nations  being  receptive  to
the use of an  arbitral procedure.167

The  flexibility  that  the  Rules  offer  enhances  the  likelihood  that
parties of diverse nationalities, and state entities in particular, would
be amenable  to utilizing  these  Rules.  The  Secretary-General  of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration is available to facilitate the proceed-
ings  and the International  Bureau of the  Permanent Court of Arbi-
tration offers  administrative support services and administers the ar-
chives  of  the  arbitration.168  The  availability  of  a  specialized  staff
and a repository of information  provides a stable framework for the
arbitration  proceeding.  Unlike  the  situation  designed  by  ICSID,
however, the parties are not obliged  to avail  themselves  of the ser-
vices,  nor  is  the  place  of  arbitration  itself  designated.169  The  fact
that  the  seat  of  the  proceedings  is  not  tied  to  a  specific  locale  is
likely to widen the applicability  of the Rules, even though the arbi-
tration proceeding will nonetheless be subject to national procedural
law.

The Rules depart in certain respects from the UNCITRAL model
on  which  they  are  based  in  order  to  adapt  the  Rules  to  disputes
between mixed parties. First, the Rules provides that although "[t]he
periods of time fixed by the arbitral tribunal  ...  should  not exceed
forty-five  days  ...  the arbitral tribunal may set longer time limits or
extend the time limits if it concludes that either is justified."170 This
is significant  for disputes involving  state entities. One of the preva-
lent complaints raised by arbitrators experienced in international ar-
bitration involving  state parties is that the time periods allowed are

43

Emily Sidorsky

unreasonable.171  Second,  they  provide  that  agreement  to  arbitrate
under the Rules constitutes a waiver of any sovereign immunity  from
jurisdiction  claims.172  This  change  from  the  UNCITRAL  model
makes the Rules particularly well suited to the settlement of disputes
involving  state entities. The Rules also provide  that the parties may
elect explicitly  to provide  for  a waiver of sovereign  immunity from
execution by adopting  an  optional  provision.173  Thus, the Rules  go
beyond that which is provided  in the Santiago de Compostela Resol-
ution  which,  although  it directly  addresses  the  sovereign  immunity
issue,  only  explicitly  provides  for  sovereign  immunity  from  juris-
diction.114

The Rules anticipate the difficulties  that are likely  to arise in dis-
putes  involving parties  of unequal  power, namely  a state entity  and
a  private  party.  By providing  for  the waiver of sovereign  immunity
from  jurisdiction,  and  by  optional  agreement,  from  execution,  the
Rules  depart  significantly  from  the  ICSID  system.  Articles  53, 54
and 55 of the ICSID Convention, which govern the recognition  and
enforcement  of  an  award  under  this  system,  provide,  respectively,
that (1) the award  rendered  shall be binding on the parties, (2) each
Contracting State shall recognize the award, and (3) despite the obli-
gation  on  the  Contracting  State,  the  provisions  shall  not  derogate
from  the  law  of  that  state  on  sovereign  immunity  from  execution.
Thus,  although  the  system  is  insulated  from  national  law  with  re-
spect to the proceedings and the awards, the recognition and enforce-
ment of these awards requires an interface  between the international
law and  the  municipal  law of  the  particular  state  involved.175  As a
result, the effectiveness  of the ICSID system is seriously  impaired.
The  drafters  of  the  ICSID  system  were  aware  of  the  difficulty
that the absence of  a  provision  for enforcement  of the award would
engender.  They  were  also  aware, however,  of  the  traditional  reluc-
tance of state entities to forsake  the sovereign  immunity claim. Be-
cause the state entity must ratify  the Convention  in order for it to be
effective,  the drafters  declined  to  include the provision.  The Rules,
however,  do  not  require  the  ratification  by  the  state  entity.  As  a
result,  the  drafters  of  the  Rules  did  not  feel  similarly  constrained.
This resulted  in the adoption  of provisions  regarding  sovereign  im-
munity  defenses  that  are  preferable  to  those  in  existence  in  the
ICSID system.

A  third  significant  respect  in  which  the  Rules  depart  from  the
ICSID  model  is  in  the  Rules'  provisions  for  "Interim  Measures  of
Protection." This is particularly relevant in the cultural property con-
text, as the conservation of the objects pending the resolution of the
controversy  is  often  a  salient  feature  of  the  dispute.  In  the  ICSID
regime, the exclusivity of the ICSID tribunal procedures raises ques-
tions  as  to the  availability  of  protective  orders, such  as  attachment
of  the  objects  in  dispute,  from  the  local  courts.  An  amendment  to
Rule  39  of  the  ICSID  Rules,  adopted  in  1985, does  provide  that  a
party  may  agree  to  allow  recourse  to  national  courts  for  interim
measures  of  protection. The parties, however,  must  elect  this dero-

44

Unidroit Convention  and  International  Arbitration

gation. Yet it is frequently  the case, due to either a  lack of  foresight
or bargaining power, that  they  fail  to do  so.176

The Rules, on the other hand, expressly provide that, "[a] request
for  interim  measures  addressed  by  any  party  to  a judicial  authority
shall not be deemed  incompatible with the agreement to arbitrate, or
as a waiver  of that  agreement."177  Arbitrators  are  typically  not  able
to order attachment  of the object,  especially  in the case of  movable
objects,  as  such  a  request  involves  a  third  party  to  the  arbitration
agreement.  It is usually  only the national  courts, which  can utilize a
state's  enforcement  mechanism,  that  possess  such  a power.178  As a
result,  this  provision  is  significant  in  the  cultural  property  context,
as  it  allows  for  the  protection  of  the  object  in  dispute  by  a  court
ordered  measure,  if  the  interim  measure  for  protection  ordered  by
the arbitral  tribunal  is deemed  insufficient  by the parties.179

It is premature  to gauge the  success of the  Rules promulgated  by
the Permanent Court of Arbitration. Yet the potential for the adoption
of a similar  set of provisions  for  the  settlement  of cultural  property
disputes  involving  mixed parties is great.

Conclusion

The foregoing  discussion  highlights  the benefits  of international  ar-
bitration in the context of the  resolution of cultural property disputes.
The UNIDROIT  Convention  has the potential  to effect  a  significant
improvement  in this domain. The possible role arbitration could play
in this area has not been fully  explored  outside of the discussion  by
governmental  experts  and  other  commentators  on  the  Convention.
As this article  has tried  to establish,  it would  be beneficial  to  focus
attention  on  arbitration  as  a  superior  mechanism  to  facilitate  the
handling of such disputes.

Notes

*  An  earlier  version  of  this  article  appeared  in  THE  AMERICAN  REVIEW  OF
INTERNATIONAL  ARBITRATION, published  by  The  Parker School  of Foreign
and Comparative Law, Columbia University, 4 (4)  AM.  REV.  INT'L  ARB. 475
(1993).

1  See  JEANETTE GREENFIELD, THE  RETURN  OF CULTURAL  TREASURES 282  -  86

(1989),  for an account of this incident.

2  Malraux  was  to  become  the  celebrated  French  novelist  and  the  author  of
such critical  studies as  MUSEUM  WITHOUT  WALLS (Stuart Gilbert & Francis
Price  trans.,  1967)  and  THE  TWILIGHT  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE  (Stuart  Gilbert
trans.,  1950). Considered  to be a leading  art theoretician,  Malraux  was ap-
pointed by the French government as the French Minister of Cultural  Affairs
in the  1960's.

3  The court in Saigon did not accept Malraux's defense. As a result of a treaty
entered  into  by  France  and  Siam  in  1907,  France  became  the  recognized

45

Emily Sidorsky

owner of all historic monuments in the region. In 1908, the temple had been
classified  as a historic monument.

4  Interestingly, Malraux's argument in favor of a broader definition  of cultural
heritage was advanced by another French theoretician, Quartieme de Quincy,
more than a century  earlier, for reasons exactly  opposite  to his.  De Quincy
believed that a broad conception of culture necessitated the return of cultural
objects that Napoleon had taken from other European nations.  He wrote:

It is as a member of this universal  republic  of arts and sciences  and not
as an inhabitant of this or that  nation, that  I shall discuss the concern  of
all  parts and the preservation  of the whole.  What is this concern? It is a
concern  for civilization,  for perfecting  the means of attaining  happiness
and reason: in a word, for the improvement of the human race. Everything
that can build toward this end belongs to all peoples; no one of them has
the right to appropriate for itself, or to dispose of it arbitrarily  ...

Charles de Visscher,  International Protection of  Works of Art and Historic
Monuments, 3590 U.S.  DEP'T  ST.  PUB.  823, 824 (1949) {quoting Quartieme
de Quincy, Lettres au general Miranda sur le prejudice qu 'occasionairaient
aux arts et a la science le deplacement des monuments de I 'art de I 'Italie,  le
demembrement de ses collections et la spoilation de ses collections, galeries,
musees, etc. (1796)), quoted in Gael  M. Graham, Protection and Reversion
of  Cultural Property:  Issues of  Definition and Justification, 21  (3)  INT'L
LAW.  755,758(1987).

5  The  court  sentenced  Malraux  to  three  years  imprisonment  and  prohibited
him from entering certain areas for five years. The charges were reduced on
appeal  to a suspended  sentence of one year due to the testimony by leading
French authors on his behalf.

6  See Paul  M. Bator, An Essay on the International  Trade in Art, 34  STAN.  L.
REV.  275,  309  (1982),  for  the  view  that,  despite  the  central  importance  of
preservation, national patrimony  should not be defined so as to encourage a
nation  to  retain  all  of  its  art.  See  John  Henry  Merryman,  Two Ways of
Thinking about Cultural Property, 80 AM. J. INT'L L. 831, 846 (1986) [here-
inafter Merryman, CULTURAL  PROPERTY], for a discussion of the distinction
between "cultural internationalism" and "cultural nationalism" and the com-
ment  that  cultural  nationalism  appears  to  be  the  attitude  preferred  by  the
majority of countries today. See also John Henry Merryman, Text and Subtext
in the International Art Trade, in 3 INTERNATIONAL ART TRADE AND LAW 457,
462 (Martine Briat & Judith A. Freedberg eds.,  1991). Merryman is opposed
to the cultural  nationalist point of view, describing  it as "romantic national-
ism." He writes: "The romantic nationalist subtext has outlived its utility and
today serves the cause of blind retentionism  ...  Together, preservation, truth
and access offer an alternative and preferable basis for policy

7  For instance,  the ongoing  debate  over  whether cultural  treasures  that  have
been  removed  in the  past,  sometimes  centuries  earlier,  should  be returned,
will  not  be  discussed.  For a discussion  of  this  topic  see  e.g.  GREENFIELD,
supra note  1, at  10-46,  for a detailed discussion  of the return by Denmark
to  Iceland  in  1971  of  two  extremely  valuable  medieval  manuscripts,  the
Flateyjarbok (the  Book  of  Flat-Island)  and  the  Codex Regius (the  King's
Volume),  which  Denmark  had  removed from its  former  colony  250  years
earlier.

The most celebrated example of the ongoing debate as to whether objects
removed  centuries earlier should  be returned involves  the "Elgin Marbles."
Lord  Elgin, while  serving as the  British Ambassador to Constantinople, re-
moved  them from Greece  while  it  was part of  the Ottoman  Empire  in the

46

Unidroit Convention  and International  Arbitration

early  nineteenth  century.  After  much  discussion,  the  British  Parliament
passed an Act in  1816 "To Vest the Elgin Collection of Ancient  Marbles and
Sculptures  in  the  Trustees  of  the  British  Museum," where  they  remain  on
display  to this day. The notoriety  of this example  has  led  to the coining  of
the  French word "Elginisme,"  to describe  generally  the taking of a cultural
object. A full account can be found in GREENFIELD, supra note  1, at 47-105.
The  incident  is  further  memorialized  in  a  condemnation  of  the  British
action by  Lord Byron in his poem "Childe  Harold's Pilgrimage." He wrote:

Cold as the crags upon his native coast,
His mind as barren as his heart is hard.
Is he whose head conceived,  whose  hand prepared.
Aught to displace Athena's poor remains.

Tell  not the deed to blushing  Europe's ears:
The ocean queen, the free  Britannia, bears
The last poor plunder from a bleeding land.

Lord  Byron,  "Childe  Harold's  Pilgrimage,"  Canto  the  Second,  XII,  XIII
(1812), cited in Bator, supra note 6, at 277 n.2.

8  MARCUS  TULLIUS  CICERO,  THE  VERRINE  ORATIONS,  (IN  C.  VERREM  ACTIO
II),  Book  IV  (Harvard  University  Press,  trans.,  L.H.G.  Greenwood  1935),
cited  in  LYNDEL  V.  PROTT  &  PATRICK  J.  O'KEEFE,  3  LAW  AND  THE  CUL-
TURAL  HERITAGE:  MOVEMENT 803 (1989). See also  TITUS LIVIUS,  FROM THE
FOUNDING  OF THE  CITY  (AB  URBE  CONDITA),  Book  XXI (Harvard Univer-
sity  Press, trans., B. O. Foster  1929), describing Hannibal's seizure of many
valuable cultural objects in the war he waged with the Carthaginians against
Rome, cited in Graham, supra note 4, at 756 n. 1.

9  See,  UNIDROIT,  DIPLOMATIC  CONFERENCE  FOR  THE  ADOPTION  OF  THE
DRAFT  UNIDROIT  CONVENTION  ON  THE  INTERNATIONAL  RETURN  OF
STOLEN OR  ILLEGALLY  EXPORTED CULTURAL  OBJECTS:  TEXT OF THE DRAFT
CONVENTION  WITH  EXPLANATORY  REPORT,  UNIDROIT  1994,  Conf.  8/3,
(Dec.  20,  1994)  (Original:  French)  (hereinafter  "UNIDROIT  Explanatory
Report  1994"), at 8. See also the Draft UNIDROIT Convention on the Inter-
national  Return of Stolen or Illegally  Exported Cultural Objects, as resulted
from the fourth session  of the  UNIDROIT Committee  of governmental  ex-
perts on the international  protection  of cultural  property,  Rome, Sept. 29  -
Oct. 8,1993,  UNIDROIT,  COMMITTEE OF GOVERNMENTAL  EXPERTS ON THE
INTERNATIONAL  PROTECTION  OF  CULTURAL  PROPERTY,  App. 
IV,  UNI-
DROIT  1994, Study  LXX  -  Doc. 48  (Original:  French) [hereinafter  "draft
UNIDROIT Convention"] for the identical text of the draft UMIDROIT Con-
vention.

The name UNIDROIT stands for the International  Institute for the Unifi-
cation  of  Private  Law,  an  organization  based  in  Rome,  Italy.  UNIDROIT
was  founded  in  1926,  at the  instigation  of  the  League  of  Nations,  to serve
as  an  independent  body  devoted  to  improving  the  harmonization  of  inter-
national laws.

It  is  frequently  contended  that  there  is  a  close  link  between  traffic  in
cultural  property and organized crime, see e.g. Judith Church, Evolving Un-
ited States  Case Law on Cultural Property  Disputes, 2  INT'L J.  CULTURAL
PROP.  47,  62  n.l  (1993)),  citing.  James  Walsh,  It's a  Steal:  The Worlds
Cultural Heritage is  Being Looted by  Thieves Who  Often Have  Ties to Or-
ganized  Crime and Even get  Help From the Art World,  TIME, Nov. 25, 1991,
at 86. Although this may be true, see  e.g.  Michael  Janofsky,  Fake Bank Set
Up  by  U.S. Agents Snares Drug-Money Launderers,  N.Y.  TIMES,  Dec.  17

47

Emily  Sidorsky

1994, at Al, chronicling the recent sting operation conducted by U.S. agents
of  money  laundering  by Cali  drug cartel  and members  of organized  crime
in  Italy  that resulted  in the  recovery  of  Picasso's  "Head  of  the  Beggar," a
1904  watercolor.  Rubens'  "St.  Paul" and painting by  Sir Joshua Reynolds,
it is perhaps the case that such instances, although newsworthy, do not repre-
sent a significant  proportion of the cultural objects traded illicitly.

10  See Jeannette Greenfield,  The Return of Cultural Property, in 60  ANTIQUITY,

Mar. 1986, 29-35  for a list of examples of voluntary restitution by different
nations.  Among  the more  notable  instances  were the  return to  Ethiopia  of
the  throne  of  Emperor  Menelek  II  from  Italy  in  1982  and  the  return of  a
large  collection  of  pre-Columbian  ceramics  to  Ecuador  after  their  illegal
export to Italy was discovered  in 1983.

The  restitution  of  objects by  museums  is also  prevalent,  e.g.,  the return
by the  Brooklyn  Museum of a stolen stela fragment  to Guatemala  in  1973;
the return by the Newark  Museum of a fifth century A.D. mosaic from the
ancient city of Apamea to the Syrian Department of Antiquities in  1974; the
return by the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, Texas, of the Siva Nataraja
statue to India after its illegal provenance was discovered in  1979; the return
by the M.H. de Young Memorial Museum in San Francisco, California,  of a
large  collection  of  pre-Columbian  murals  dating from 400-700  A.D.,  to
Mexico  in  1986; and the  return by  the  Voderasiatisches  Museum  in Berlin
of  more than 7,000  cuneiform  tablets dating from  the  Hittite  Empire,  1799
to  1200 B.C., to Turkey in  1987.

Also significant  is the return of objects held by private individuals to their
country of origin.  In  1973, the Afo-A-Kom,  a wooden carving sacred to the
royal  family of the Kom in Cameroon, was discovered  in a Dartmouth Col-
lege  Art  Exhibit  on  loan from a  New  York  art  dealer.  It  was  returned  to
Cameroon shortly after this discovery.

11  See PROTT & O'KEEFE, supra note 8, at 624-25,  616-20, respectively. The
decisions  in Attorney General  of New Zealand v. Ortiz, [1982]  I Q.B.  349;
revd.  [1982] 3 W.L.R.  571  (C.A.); [1983] 2 W.L.R.  809 (H.L)  and Wink-
worth  v. Christie, Manson & Woods, Ltd., [1980]  1 Ch. 496, serve to illus-
trate the unfortunate outcome that can result from the resolution of disputes
under the current  framework.

In Ortiz, the  New  Zealand  government  sought  the  return of  five  Maori
carved  panels.  In  1972, a descendant  of  the  Maori  tribe,  Manukonga,  dug
five  panels  out  of  a swamp  which  had been  buried  there  by  the  Taranaki
tribesmen  in  the  !82O's-3O's  when  they  had  been  forced  off  the  land.  He
sold them to an English dealer who, in turn, took them to New York without
an  export  permit,  and  sold  them  to  a  Swiss  collector  and  resident,  Ortiz.
Ortiz kept the panels in Switzerland for five years (the requisite period under
Swiss law in order for good title to pass), whereupon he attempted to auction
them at Sotheby's  in  London.  The panels  were recognized  by  a New Zea-
lander in a televised advertisement  for the upcoming sale at Sotheby's. The
New Zealand government then made an effort  to stop the sale and have the
panels returned.

Litigation commenced in London in  1982. The New Zealand government
claimed  that the panels should  be returned to  it on the basis of a provision
(§  12(2)) of the New Zealand Historic Articles Act of  1962. The Act required
that  "[a]n  historic  article  knowingly  exported  ...  shall  be  forfeited  to  Her
Majesty." [New Zealand did not want to assert an ownership claim, as this
would  only  have  complicated  the  issue  by  engendering  a  controversy  be-
tween  Manukonga,  the  excavator  of  the  Maori  art, and the Taranaki  tribe,

48

Unidroit Convention and International  Arbitration

which  had  originally  buried  the  artifacts.  Under New  Zealand  law,  such a
claim would need to be settled in a Maori land court.]

The outcome of the case rested upon the court's interpretation of the term
"forfeiture."  The  defendant  contended  that  the  goods  had  not  been  "for-
feited" but  were  merely  "liable  to  forfeiture,"  as "forfeiture,"  according  to
the subsequently enacted Customs Act of 1966, required that the goods be se-
ized by  the  New  Zealand  government.  The  New  Zealand  government  con-
tended that forfeiture was automatic upon the illegal export of the goods. The
lower court granted a decision in favor of the New Zealand government. On
appeal, however, both higher courts reversed, allowing the panels to be sold.

In Winkworth, a collection of netsuke, Japanese miniature ivory carvings,
was  stolen  from  a  British  citizen,  Winkworth,  and  taken  to  Italy  where  it
was purchased by the Marchese Paolo Da Pozzo. The goods were then deliv-
ered by the Marchese to Christie's in England to be auctioned on his behalf.
Winkworth brought suit in London to attempt to recover his stolen property
and to claim the proceeds of those items that had already been sold.

The Italian Civil  Code, Art.  1153, provides  that so  long  as the purchase
is made "in good faith at the moment of consignment," ownership is properly
transferred.  Thus,  according  to  Italian  law,  the  Marchese  Da  Pozzo  was a
bonafide  purchaser.  Under  British  law,  it is not possible  for a purchaser to
obtain  good  title  if  the  goods  have  previously  been  stolen.  Therefore,  if
British law applied, Winkworth would have been able to reclaim his goods.
The  British  courts  ruled against  Winkworth,  however,  because  they deter-
mined  that  Italian  law  must  govern  according  to the  principle  of  lex situs
(the law of the country where the property is situated at the time of the last
transaction).  Winkworth dropped  the case  following  the  determination that
Italian law would govern.

12  See  Final  Act  of the  Diplomatic  Conference  for the  Adoption  of the  Draft
UNIDROIT  Convention  on  the  International  Return  of  Stolen  or  Illegally
Exported Cultural Objects, Appendix:  UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or
Illegally Exported Cultural Objects (hereinafter  "UNIDROIT Convention"),
June 24,  1995.

The  full  text of the UNIDROIT  Convention  is  reprinted in 51  THE  ART

NEWSPAPER,  Sept.  1995, at 28, and this Journal  infra at  155.

13  These deliberations  were  recorded in the  Summary  Records of the Confer-
ence.  UNIDROIT  1995, Conf.  8/S.R.  1-5  (June  10-24,  1995)  (Original:
English/French);  the  Summary  Records  of  the  Committee  of  the  Whole,
UNIDROIT  1995,  Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  1-19  (June  13-23,  1995)  (Original:
English/French);  and the  Report  of  the  Final  Clauses  Committee,  Conf.  8/
C.2/Doc.  1 (June  23,  1995)  (Original:  English/French).  These  documents
were provided to the author courtesy of UNIDROIT Secretariat prior to their
final correction and official  publication.

14  The responses given by local  experts of various nationalities to a question-
naire addressing  an  early  version  of the  draft  UNIDROIT  Convention,  the
preliminary  draft  Convention  on  Stolen  or  Illegally  Exported  Cultural Ob-
jects  [hereinafter  "the  preliminary  draft  Convention"],  provide  a  basis  for
these contentions. Their commentary offers  valuable insights into the poten-
tial  role  arbitration  could  play  in the  settling  of  cultural  property  disputes.
See  Martine  Briat  &  Judith  A.  Freedberg,  Editors'  Foreword to  4  INTER-
NATIONAL  ART  TRADE AND  LAW, at v ( Martine Briat & Judith A. Freedberg
eds.,  1993)  [hereinafter  Briat  &  Freedberg]. The  questionnaire  was  devel-
oped in  1991 by the Institute of International Business Law and Practice and
by  members  of  its  Council.  The  National  Reports,  along  with  the General
Reports, were written by local experts in response to the questionnaire asking

49

Emily  Sidorsky

them to express their opinion on the strengths and weaknesses of the prelimi-
nary  draft  Convention.  These  were  presented  at  the  Fourth  International
Symposium  on  International  Sales  of  Works  of  Art,  entitled  "The  Legal
Aspects of International Trade in Art," in Madrid, Feb.  12-14,  1992.

For the text of  the preliminary  draft  Convention, see,  UNIDROIT  1990,
Study LXX  -  Doc.  19, reprinted in Lyndel  V. Prott, The Preliminary Draft
Convention on  Stolen or  Illegally Exported Cultural Objects,  41  I.C.L.Q.
160,  168-70(1992).

15  The  1965  Convention  on  the  Settlement  of  Investment  Disputes  between
States  and  Nationals  of  Other  States,  17  U.S.T.  1270  (1966),  575
U.N.T.S.  159, reprinted in Doc. ICSID/15,1CSID  Basic Documents  11 (Jan.
1985).

16  Arbitration between  States, State  Enterprises, or State Entities, and Foreign
Enterprises, reprinted in 5 ICSID REV. -  FOR.  INV. L. J. 139 (1990),  16 Y.B.
COMM.  ARB.  236(1991).

17  See 19 Y.B. COMM. ARB.  338 (1994) for The Permanent Court of Arbitration
Optional  Rules for Arbitrating  Disputes between two  Parties of which  only
one  is  a  State,  July  6,  1993.  They  are  also  available from the  Permanent
Court  of  Arbitration,  Peace  Palace,  Carnegieplein  2,  2517  KJ The  Hague,
The Netherlands.

Id.  at  313  for  The  Permanent  Court  of  Arbitration  Optional  Rules  for
Arbitrating  Disputes  between  two  States,  Oct.  20,  1992,  reprinted  in  32
I.L.M.  572(1993).

18  Convention  for the  Protection  of  Cultural  Property  in the  Event  of Armed

Conflict,  May  14,  1954, 249 U.N.T.S. 215.

19  Convention  on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Preventing  the  Illicit  Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural  Property, Nov.  14,  1970, 823
U.N.T.S. 231, reprinted in  10 I.L.M. 289 (1971).

20  Council  Directive  93/7/EEC  on the  Return of Cultural  Objects  Unlawfully
Removed from the Territory of a Member State, 1993 O.J. (L 74) 74; Council
Regulation 3911/92/EEC on the Export of Cultural Goods, 1992 O.J. (L 395)
1.  Both are reprinted in 3  ETUDES  EN  DROIT  DE  L'ART/  LA  LIBRE  CIRCU-
LATION  DES  COLLECTIONS  D'OWETS  D'ART  (STUDIES  IN  ART  LAW/  THE
FREE CIRCULATION  OF ART  COLLECTIONS) (Quentin Byme-Sutton  & Marc-
Andre Renold eds.,  1993) 217  [hereinafter  Byme-Sutton & Renold].

21  See supra, note  18. The Preamble to the  1954 Hague Convention states, that
"damage  to  cultural  property  belonging  to  any  people  whatsoever  means
damage to the cultural  heritage of all  mankind, since each people makes its
contribution to the culture of the world."

22  There was considerable discussion at the Diplomatic Conference, particularly
by representatives from Croatia, Kuwait and the United States, as to whether
the UNIDROIT Convention should address the issue of cultural objects ac-
quired  in periods of armed conflict.  Ultimately, the decision was made not
to introduce  a separate provision  on this subject  in the Convention  so  late
in the drafting  process.  However, it is still  possible  that such objects might
be covered by the UNIDROIT Convention as drafted. See UNIDROIT  1995,
Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  I, at  11-12  and Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  12, at 8-9,  supra note
13.

23  See generally Graham, supra note 4, for a thorough discussion  of the treat-
ment of cultural property before the creation of UNESCO in  1947 and there-
after.

24  See  PROTT & O'KEEFE, supra note  8, at 726-801  for further discussion  of

the UNESCO Convention.

50

Unidroit Convention and International  Arbitration

25  See the UNESCO Convention, supra note  19, Art. 7, para, (b), cl. (i).
26  Id. Art. 7, para, (b), cl. (ii).
27  Id. Art. 6.
28  See the  Treaty  on  European  Union,  Feb.  7,  1992  O.J.  (C  224)  1,  [1992] I
C.M.L.R.  719,  reprinted  in  31  I.L.M.  247  (1992)  [hereinafter  Maastricht
Treaty].  The  twelve  Member  States  to  sign  the  Treaty  were  Belgium,
Denmark,  France, the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany, Greece,  Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom.

29  See generally  Byme-Sutton  &  Renold, supra  note  20.  See also  Victoria J.
Vitrano, Comments: Protecting Cultural Objects in an Internal Border-Free
EC:  The EC Directive and Regulation for  the Protection and Return of Cul-
tural Objects,  17  FORDHAM  INT'L.  L.J.  1164 (1994); see  also  Francois Ri-
gaux,  The Protection of Cultural Heritage: Aspects of EEC Law, 109  MEDE-
DEUNGEN  VAN  DE  NEDERLANDSE  VERENIGING  VOOR  INTERNATIONAAL
RECHT 69-97  (Nov.  1994).

30  See TREATY  ESTABUSHING  THE EUROPEAN  ECONOMIC COMMUNITY, [herein-
after  EEC  TREATY]  Mar. 25,  1957, 298  U.N.T.S. 3  (1958),  as  amended by
Single European Act,  1987 O.J. (L  169)  1. The provisions regarding the free
movement of goods are found  in Arts. 30-34  of the  EEC TREATY.

31  See  EEC  TREATY,  Art.  36.

See Council Regulation 3911/92/EEC, supra note 20, Annex, "Categories
of Cultural Objects covered by Article  1," 1992 O.J. (L 395) 4  for the defi-
nition  of  cultural  object;  see  Council  Directive  93/7/EEC,  supra  note  20,
Art.  1, para. (1),  1993 O.J. (L74) 75 for the definition  of cultural object, and
Annex, "Categories referred to in the second  indent of Article  1(1) to which
objects classified  as 'national treasures' within the meaning of Article 36 of
the Treaty must belong to in order to qualify  for return under the Directive,"
1993 O.J. (L74) 78.

32  See Council  Regulation 3911/92/EEC, supra note 20, Art. 2, para. (I),  1992
O.J.  (L  395)  I.  It states,  that "[t]he export  of cultural  goods  outside  of the
customs  territory  of  the Community  shall  be  subject  to the  presentation  of
an export license."

Id. Art. 2, para. (2),  1992 O.J. (L395)  1 - 2.  It states "[t]he export license
shall  be  issued  at  the  request  of  the  person  concerned:  -  by  a competent
authority of the Member State in whose territory the cultural object in ques-
tion  ...  is located."

Each  Member State  is  responsible  for establishing  authorities competent
to issue an export  license. Id. Art. 3, para. (1),  1992 O.J.  (L395) 2. It states
"Member States  shall  furnish  the Commission  with a list  of  the authorities
empowered to issue export licenses  for cultural goods." The Council  Regu-
lation has no retroactive application.  Thus, cultural  objects which  were not
"lawfully  and  definitively  located"  in  a  Member  State  prior to  January  1,
1993  are not  required to be accompanied  by an export  license.  Id. Art. 2,
para. (2), subpara.  1, first  indent,  1992 O.J. (L395)  1.

33  Id. Art. 2, para. (2), subpara. 4,  1992 O.J.  (L395) 2.
34  Id. Art. 2, para. (3),  1992 O.J. (L395) 2.  It states 4'[t]he export license  shall

be valid throughout the Community."

35  Id. Art. 2, para. (2), subpara. 2,  1992 O.J.  (L395) 2.  However,  if the object
has previously been dispatched from a Member State and it is subsequently
reimported from a country outside the Member States, the authorities of the
country  that reimports the goods  are required  to  investigate  the  lawfulness
of the prior dispatch from the Member State.

36  See  Council  Directive,  93/7/EEC  supra  note  20,  Arts.  2,  4 - 6,  1993  O.J.
(L74)  75-76.  Art. 4  indicates the procedure to be  followed  in a restitution

51

Emily Sidorsky

proceeding.  First,  the  national  authorities  of  the requested Member  State,
upon  the application  of  the  requesting  Member  State,  must  try to  find  the
specified object. (Art. 4, para. (1)). Second, it is incumbent upon the Member
State  to  notify  another  Member  State  if  it finds what  it believes  to  be an
unlawfully  removed  object  within  its  territory  (Art.  4,  para.  (2)).  Third,  it
must  enable  the  competent  authorities  of  the  requesting  Member  State  to
conduct  an  inquiry  (Art. 4,  para. (3))  and it  must protect  the object  in  the
interim  (Art. 4,  paras. (4)  and (5)).  Lastly, the competent  authorities of the
requested  Member State may, upon the approval  of the requesting  Member
State and the possessor  or holder,  submit the dispute to an arbitration pro-
ceeding (Art. 4, para. (6)).

The  Directive  further provides  that  if the dispute  is  resolved  in  a court
proceeding  as  opposed  to  an arbitral  forum,  the requesting Member  State
shall  initiate  proceedings  in the  court  of the requested Member State (Art.
5) and shall notify other Member States of the proceeding (Art. 6).

37  Id. Art. 7, para. (1), 1993 O.J. (L74) 76. It provides, that the "return proceed-
ings ...  may not be brought more than one year after the requesting Member
State became aware of the location of the cultural object and of the identity
of its possessor or holder."

Furthermore,  it states that "[s]uch proceedings  may, at all  events, not be
brought more than 30 years after the object was unlawfully removed ..." Id.
This time  limit  is extended  to  75  years  in the case  of objects  forming part
of public collections and in the case of certain ecclesiastical  goods. Id.

38  Id. Art.  9,  1993  O.J.  (L74)  76.  It provides  that  the competent  court of  the
requested  Member State shall award the possessor fair compensation  if it is
satisfied  that  the  possessor  exercised  "due  care  and attention  in  acquiring
the object." Although the Directive provides that compensation is to be paid
by the requesting  Member State, the burden of proof to determine  whether
the requisite due care was exercised  shall be governed by the legislation  of
the requested Member State.

39  See Rigaux, supra  note  29,  at 70.  Prior to  the  Maastricht  Treaty, this area
was regulated by The European Convention on offenses relating to Cultural
Property, June 23,1985, European Treaty Series No. 119, Council of Europe,
Strasbourg,  1985.

40  Id. at 79. The scope of the Council  Directive does not coincide exactly with
the coverage  of  the Council  Regulation  -  some  objects  falling  within  the
parameters  of  one  and  not  the  other.  See  supra  note  31,  for  the relevant
provisions governing the definition  of "cultural object."

The Council  Directive's  definition  of  "cultural  object" differs  from  that
of the Council  Regulation (the "Annex"). Article  1, para. (1) of the Council
Directive states:

(a)  an  object  which  is  classified,  before  or  after  its  unlawful removal
from  the territory of a Member State, among the national  treasures pos-
sessing artistic, historic or archeological  value, under national  legislation
or  administrative  procedures  within  the  meaning  of  Article  36  of  the
Treaty
and
(b)  belongs  to  one  of  the  categories  listed  in  the  Annex  or  does  not
belong to one of those categories but forms an integral  part of  -  public
collections  listed  in  the  inventories  of  museums,  archives  or  libraries'
conservation  collections  ...  [or]  the  inventories  of  ecclesiastical  insti-
tutions (emphasis added).

52

Unidroit Convention and International  Arbitration

Thus,  four  categories  of  cultural  goods  arise  as a result of  the  interplay
between  the  definition  of  "cultural  object"  in  these  two  documents.  First,
those objects which are only subject to restitution proceedings because they
fall  within  the definition  of  "national  treasures" and  otherwise  satisfy  Art.
I,  para.  (1),  cl.  (b)  but  which  are  not  listed  as  belonging  to  one  of  the
categories  in the  Annex  and therefore  fall  outside  the scope  of  the Council
Regulation.  Second,  those  to  which  both  the  Council  Regulation  and  the
Directive apply as they are listed in the Annex and are encompassed  within
the definition  of "national treasures." Third, those to which only the Council
Regulation  applies as they  are listed  in the Annex  but fail  to satisfy  Art.  1,
para. (1), cl. (a) of the Council  Directive; and lastly, those objects to which
neither provision  applies  as they  do  not  fall  within the categories  listed  in
the  Annex  and  do  not  otherwise  satisfy  Art.  1,  para.  (1)  of  the  Council
Directive.

41  See  Byrne-Sutton  &  Renold,  supra  note  20,  at  13-14.  See  also  Rigaux,
supra note 29, at 83-85.  To illustrate the difficulty of characterizing a "trea-
sure" as a "national" one,  Rigaux  offers  as examples  "a Chinese jar, epoch
Yuan, deemed  a  national  treasure  by  the  French,  and  a  Velasquez  picture
presented by the King of Spain to the Duke of Wellington, deemed a national
treasure by the United Kingdom."

Rigaux also raises the issue of the difficulty  surrounding efforts  to deter-
mine an artist's nationality. He queries: "Has one to separate in Van Gogh's
career a  Dutch  from  a  French  period  or  in  Picasso's,  a Catalonian  from  a
French  one?" Although  not  specifically  addressing  the  export  authorities'
discretion or lack thereof,  Rigaux notes the complexities involved in making
such determinations, citing Jeanneret v. Vichy, 693  F.2d 259 (2d Cir.  1982)
(Matisse  painting  illegally  exported  from  Italy  was  deemed  to  be  not  an
Italian "national" treasure and furthermore, was not even  a "treasure"). Id.
42  Whether this concern is justifiable is questionable as it is unclear what count-
ries would  be  able to  fill  the positions  previously  held by  the members  of
the European market.

43  See Byrne-Sutton  & Renold, supra note 20, at 12.
44  Also  of  relevance  on  a regional  level  is  the  Scheme  for  the  Protection  of
Cultural  Heritage  within  the  Commonwealth,  Commonwealth  Secretariat,
London, adopted  in  Mauritius, Nov.  1993. It provides  for the protection  of
cultural property within the countries of the Commonwealth against exports
in contravention of their national  laws. See UNIDROIT Explanatory Report
1994, supra note 9, at 10.

45  See  UNIDROIT  Convention,  supra  note  12, Ch.  IV,  Art.  9,  para. (1)  and
discussion  thereof,  infra (previous  Ch.  V,  Art  10 of  the  draft  UNIDROIT
Convention).  Art. 9 states:

(1)  Nothing  in  this  Convention  shall  prevent  a  Contracting  State  from
applying ant rules more favourable to the restitution or the return of stolen
or illegally exported cultural objects than provided for by this Convention.

See also  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. V, Art.  13. It states:

(1)  This  Convention  does  not  affect  any  international  instrument  by
which  any  Contracting  State  is  legally  bound  and  which  contains  pro-
visions on matters governed by this Convention, unless a contrary declar-
ation is made by the States bound to such instrument.
(2)  Any Contracting  State  may enter into agreements  with  one or more
Contracting States, with a view to improving the application of this Con-
vention  in  their mutual  relations.  The  State  which  have  concluded  such
an agreement shall transmit a copy to the depositary.

53

Emily Sidorsky 

•

(3)  In their relations with each other. Contracting State which are Mem-
bers of organisations of economic  integration or regional  bodies may de-
clare that they will apply the internal rules of these organisations or bodies
and will not therefore apply as between these States the provisions of this
Convention the scope of application of which coincides with that of those
rules.

46  See Pierre  A.  Lalive,  Comment,  in Byrne-Sutton  & Renold, supra note 20,
at  128.  Lalive  questions  specifically  the  need  for  the  Council  Directive  in
light of the draft  UNIDROIT Convention.

47  See UNIDROIT Explanatory  Report  1994, supra note 9, at  10. It states:

While  fully  aware of the purely regional  scope of these  instruments, the
committee of governmental  experts sought to draw on those initiatives as
the solutions adopted in them represented a compromise between different
interests which, on a narrower scale, were the same as those of the States
participating  in the work of UNIDROIT.

48  Draft Convention providing a Uniform  Law on the acquisition of Corporeal

Movables, (LUAB  1974) UNIDROIT  1975, Study XLV  -  Doc. 48.

49  UNIDROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994, supra note 9, at 6, citing the Report
on the  65th  session  of  the Governing  Council  of  UNIDROIT,  UNIDROIT
1986, CD.  65  -  Doc.  18, at 24.

50  An art market  nation,  as  opposed  to a  source  nation,  is  one  in  which  the
demand for art exceeds the supply. See Merryman, Cultural Property, supra
note  6,  at 832.  The major art market nations include the countries that ac-
tively encourage the movement  of cultural goods through their countries by
offering  expertise  in evaluating  and selling such goods.  The art market na-
tions  include:  Australia, Canada,  France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland,  the
United Kingdom and the United States.

51  To date, the only  art market nations to adopt the UNESCO Convention are
Australia, Canada, and the United States. The United States, however, is the
only one of these which plays a major role in the art market.

In order to give effect  to the UNESCO Convention  in the United States,
it was considered necessary to adopt detailed legislation. Thirteen years after
the  UNESCO  Convention  was  drafted  in  its final form,  the  United  States
enacted  the  Cultural  Property  Implementation  Act,  19  U.S.C.S.  §2601
(1983). It allows for the return of a cultural object if the item concerned has
previously  been  specifically  identified  in  the  inventory  of  the  institution
claiming  its restitution.  The United  States will  also enter into a bilateral or
multilateral  agreement  with  a  state  that  seeks  its aid,  upon  a showing that
United  States  action  is  required  to  deter a serious  situation  of  pillage.  (19
U.S.C.  § 2606(cX2))  The  state  requesting  assistance  must take steps of  its
own to protect its cultural patrimony and the United States must be satisfied
that the  restrictions,  if  implemented,  would  be  of  "substantial  benefit." To
date,  the  United  States  Information  Agency  has  issued  restrictions  on  the
importation of certain goods from El Salvador, Guatemala, Bolivia, Peru and
Mali.

An  alternative  avenue  for  the  recovery  of  stolen  property  is  available
in  the  United  States  through  the  National  Stolen  Property  Act,  18  U.S.C.
§§ 2311 - 18  (1978) (hereinafter NSPA). The NSPA was used to recover pre-
Columbian  artifacts  stolen  and  transported  through  interstate commerce  in
the  United  States in United  States v. McLain, 545  F.2d 988  (5th Cir.  1977)
and in United States v. Hollinshead, 495  F.2d  1154 (9th Cir.  1974).

54

Unidroit Convention  and  International  Arbitration

52  See Ortiz,  [1984] A.C.I  at 20 d-e, cited in Thomas W. Percoraro, Choice of
Law in Litigation to Recover National Cultural Property: Efforts at Harmon-
ization in Private  International Law, 31  VX. J.  INT'L  L.  1,  11 n.45  (1990),
for  the  proposition  that  courts  will  more  readily  enforce  contract  or  tort
claims brought by private parties than they will  those brought by state par-
ties. The court in Ortiz states:

This  suit  by  a  foreign  state  to  enforce  its  laws  is  to  be  distinguished
altogether  from  a suit between  private  firms  or individuals  which  raises
a question  as to whether a contract has been broken  by  one or the other
or whether a wrong has been done by one to the other. In such a suit our
courts will  recognize the existence  of the laws of a foreign state.

53  See UNIDROIT  Explanatory Report  1994, supra note 9, at 6; See also Lyn-
del  V.  Prott, Chief,  UNESCO  International  Standards  Section, Explanatory
Note,  UNIDROIT  Draft  Convention  of  Stolen  and  Illegally  Exported Cul-
tural  Objects,  Oct.  18,  1993.  She  offers  three  principal  motivations  for
UNESCO's request of UNIDROIT:

(1)  The  1970 UNESCO Convention raised several  private law issues (the
predominant  one  concerning  the  protection  of  the  bona  fide  purchaser
according  to  different  national  legal  systems)  which  UNESCO  felt
UNIDROIT was better able to resolve;
(2)  some  States  criticized  the  drafting  of  the  UNESCO  Convention  as
ambiguous  and  hence  unclear  as  to  what  obligations  were  required  of
countries and when they applied; and
(3)  some  States  felt  that the scope  of  the application  of the  Convention
was  unclear and if  given  too broad a reading  would  interfere  too  much
in the legal trade in cultural objects.

54  See  Gerte  Reichelt,  International  Protection  of  Cultural  Property,  UNI-
DROIT  1986,  Study  LXX  -  Doc.  1, reprinted  in.  UNIFORM  LAW  REVIEW
43  (1985).  Gerte  Reichelt,  Second  Study  Requested from  UNIDROIT by
UNESCO on the International Protection of Cultural Property with Particu-
lar Reference to Private Law Affecting the Transfer of Title to Cultural Prop-
erty  in the Light also  of  the Comments Received  on  the First Study, UNI-
DROIT  1988, Study  LXX  -  Doc. 4.

55  See  UNIDROIT  1988, Study  LXX  -  Doc.  3. This contains  the initial pre-
liminary draft Convention, as submitted by the Austrian member of the UNI-
DROIT Governing Council,  Mr. Roland Loewe.

See UNIDROIT  1989,  Study  LXX  -  Doc.  10, UNIDROIT  1989, Study
LXX  -  Doc.  14, and UNIDROIT  1990, Study LXX  -  Doc.  18, for a report
on these three meetings.

56  See supra note 14.
57  See supra note 9.
58  Representatives from the  following  countries  participated: the  Republic  of
Albania; the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria; the Republic of Ang-
ola; the Argentine Republic; Australia; the Republic of Austria; the Republic
of Belarus; the Kingdom of Belgium; the Republic of Bolivia; the Federative
Republic of Brazil; the Republic of Bulgaria; Burkina Faso; the Kingdom of
Cambodia;  the  Republic  of  Cameroon;  Canada;  the  People's  Republic  of
China; the Republic of Colombia; the Republic of Cote d'lvoire; the Repub-
lic of Croatia; the Republic of Cyprus; the Czech  Republic; the Kingdom of
Denmark; the Republic of Ecuador; the Arab Republic of Egypt; the Republic

55

Emily  Sidorsky

of Finland; the French Republic; the Republic of Georgia; the Federal Repub-
lic  of  Germany;  the  Republic  of  Guinea;  the  Hellenic  Republic;  the  Holy
See;  the  Republic  of  Hungary; the  Republic  of  India; the  Islamic  Republic
of  Iran; Ireland; the  State  of  Israel;  the  Italian  Republic;  Japan; the  State
of  Kuwait; the  Socialist  People's  Libyan  Arab Jamahiriya; the  Republic  of
Lithuania;  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxembourg;  the  Republic  of  Malta;  the
United  Mexican  States; the  Kingdom  of  Morocco; the  Union of  Myanmar;
the Kingdom of the Netherlands; the Federal Republic of Nigeria; the King-
dom of Norway; the Islamic Republic of Pakistan; the Republic of Paraguay;
the  Republic  of  Peru; the  Republic  of  Poland; the  Portugese  Republic; the
Republic  of Korea; Romania; the Russian  Federation; the Republic  of Slov-
enia; the Republic  of South Africa; the  Kingdom of Spain; the Kingdom  of
Sweden; the  Swiss  Confederation;  the  Kingdom  of Thailand; the  Republic
of Tunisia; the Republic of Turkey; Ukraine; the United  Kingdom of Britain
and Northern Ireland; the United States of America; the Republic of Yemen;
and the Republic of Zambia.

Observers included representatives from the following States: the Repub-
lic  of  Bosnia-Herzegovina;  the  Republic  of  Ghana;  the  Republic  of  Gua-
temala; the  Republic  of  Honduras; the  Hashemite  Kingdom  of  Jordan; the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; the Syrian Arab Republic; the Republic of Vene-
zuela.

The following  intergovernmental  organizations  sent observers: the Com-
mission of the European Communities; the Council  of Europe; the Council
of the European Union; the Hague Conference on Private International Law;
the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and the Restoration
of Cultural Property; the International Criminal Police Organisation; and the
United Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and Cultural Organization.

The following  non-governmental  organizations  sent observers: the Inter-
national Association of Lawyers; the International Bar Association; the Inter-
national  Council  on  Archives;  the  International  Law  Association;  and  the
International  Union of Latin Notariat.

The International Association of Dealers in Ancient Art and the Sovereign

Military Order of Malta also sent observers to the Conference.

59  See UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. I, Art. 1.
60  Draft  UNIDROIT  Convention,  supra  note  9,  Ch.  I,  Art.  1, para.  (a).  See

UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  1, supra note  13, at 7.

61  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. I, Art.  1, para. (b).
62  The definition  of "cultural  object" is  less expansive  than in the draft UNI-
DROIT Convention. Various representatives  were eager to tighten the defi-
nition out of  fears  that an overly broad definition  might inhibit states from
ratifying  the Convention.

Previously, the definition  had referred to cultural  objects "such as" those
listed  in  Article  1 of  the  1970  UNESCO  Convention  definition.  See,  UN-
ESCO, U.N. Doc.  l6C/Res./38 (1970). The words "such as" were eliminated
from  the  final  text  to  make  clear  that  the  the  definition  contained  in  the
UNIDROIT Convention  is  intended to be exclusive.  All  specific references
to the  1970 UNESCO Convention  have been eliminated. However, the UN-
ESCO definition is incorporated into the Annex of the UNIDROIT Conven-
tion. The Annex  lists the following categories:

(a)  Rare collections and specimens of fauna, minerals and anatomy, and
objects of paleontological  interest;

56

Unidroit Convention and International  Arbitration

(b)  Property relating to history, including the history of science and tech-
nology  and  military  and  social  history,  to  the  life  of  national  leaders,
thinkers, scientists and artists and to events of national  importance;
(c)  Products  of  archeological  excavations  (including  regular  and  clan-
destine) or of archeological  discoveries;
(d)  Elements  of  artistic  or  historical  monuments  or  archeological  sites
which have been dismembered;
(e)  Antiquities  more  than  one  hundred  years  old,  such  as  inscriptions,
coins and engraved seals;
(0  Objects of ethnological  interest;
(g)  Property of artistic interest,  such as:

(i)  pictures,  paintings  and  drawings  produced  entirely  by  hand  on
any  support  and  in  any  materials  (excluding  industrial  designs  and
manufactured articles decorated by hand);
(ii)  original works of statuary art and sculpture  in any material;
(iii)  original engravings, prints and lithographs;
(iv)  original artistic assemblages and montages  in any material;

(h)  Rare manuscripts  and  incunabula,  old  books, documents  and  publi-
cations  of  special  interest  (historical,  artistic,  scientific,  literary,  etc.)
singly or in collections;
(i)  Postage, revenue and similar stamps, singly  or in collections;
(j)  Archives,  including  sound,  photographic  and  cinematographic  ar-
chives;
(k)  Articles  of  furniture  more  than  one  hundred  years  old  and  musical
instruments.

63  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. II, Art. 3, para. (1).
64  See,  e.g.,  in  France,  the  purchaser  is  protected  (i. e.  is  deemed  bona  fide)
after  a period  of  three  years  (C.  Civ.  Art.  2279  (Fr.));  in  Switzerland,  the
purchaser is protected after a five  year period (Schweizerisches Zivilgesetz-
buch, Title 24, Art. 934 (Switz.)); and in  Italy, the  purchaser has good  title
to the object  immediately  (CODICE  CIVILE,  Art.  1153. (It.)).

65  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf.  8/C.1/S.R.2, supra note  13, at  6-10.
66  Id. at  7 - 8.
67  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  16, supra note  13, at 4.
68  See  UNIDROIT  1995, Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  2,  supra  note  13, at  10-14.  See

also  UNIDROIT Explanatory  Report  1994, supra note 9, at  17-18.

69  Earlier suggestions  of  one  year  and  30  years,  respectively,  were  rejected.
The  shorter  one-year  time  period  in  instances  where  the  claimant  has the
requisite knowledge was rejected despite arguments that it would reduce the
likelihood  of  stale  claims being  brought and lead to greater legal  certainty.
See  UNIDROIT  1995,  Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  2,  supra  note  13, at  10-14.  See
also  UNIDROIT Explanatory  Report  1994 supra note 9, at 18.

One of the arguments in favor of having a longer period in excess of 30
years  is that in many of the recently  litigated cases, the period that elapsed
between  the  object's  disappearance  and  the  claimant's  filing  of  his  or her
claim has exceeded 30 years. See, e.g.,  Stiftskirche-Domgemeinde  of Qued-
linburg  v.  Meador,  No.  CA3-90-1440-D  (N.D.  Texas,  filed  June  18,  1990)
(45 years); DeWeerth v. Baldinger, 836 F.2d 103 (2d Cir.  1987), cert, denied,
486 U.S.  1056 (1988), 38 F.3d  1266 (2d Cir.  1994) (38 years); United States
v. Herce, 334  F.Supp.  Ill  (S.D.N.Y.  1971) (35 years).

Another change from the draft  UNIDROIT Convention is the deletion of
the term calling  for the commencement  of  the statute  of  limitations  period

57

Emily Sidorsky

from the time  the possessor  "ought  reasonably  to have known the  location
of  the object  and the  identity of  its possessor."  Draft  UNIDRO1T Conven-
tion, supra note 9, Art. 3, para. (3). Various representatives expressed reser-
vations about the inclusion of this phrase at the Diplomatic Conference. They
argued that  it was too broad in scope  and created the difficulty  of  defining
"reasonable knowledge." See UNIDR01T Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  2, supra note 13,
at  10. The decision  to delete this phrase in the final text of the UNIDROIT
Convention potentially makes this provision more favorable to the claimant
as  the  clock  does  not  begin  to  run  until  the  claimant  "knew," rather then
when it "ought to have known."

70  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. II, Art. 3, para. 4.
71  Id  See also  UNIDROIT  1995, Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  3, supra note  13, at  2 - 8.
Some representatives  voiced a concern that by providing that there were to
be  no  time  limitations  for  asserting  claims  concerning  cultural  objects  in
"public collections," the UNIDROIT Convention  went beyond the situation
currently existing in many countries' national legal systems. Therefore, there
might be a reluctance on the part of such countries to ratify the Convention.
The  draft  UNIDROIT  Convention  stated  that "an object  belonging  to a
public collection of a Contracting State [shall not be subject to prescription]
[shall  be  brought  within  a  time  limit  of  [75]  years]."  Draft  UNIDROIT
Convention, supra  note  9,  Art. 3,  para. 4.  The  brackets  reflected  the inde-
cision surrounding portions of this provision. See also UNIDROIT Explana-
tory Report  1994, supra note 9, at  18-19.

72  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. II, Art, 3, paras. 5 and 6.
73  See, UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  3, supra note  13, at 7.
74  Id  at 5.
75  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  3, supra note  13, at 8.

UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. II, Art. 3, para. 7. It provides:
a 'public collection' consists of a group of inventoried or otherwise ident-
ified  cultural objects owned by:
(a)  a Contracting State;
(b)  a regional  or  local  authority  of  a Contracting  State:  (c)  a  religious
institution  in a Contracting  State; or (d) an institution that is  established
for an essentially cultural, education or scientific purpose in a Contracting
State and is recognized  in that State as serving the public interest.

A separate paragraph, Art. 3, para. (8), indicates that a "sacred or commu-
nally important cultural object belonging to and used by a tribal or indigen-
ous community in a Contracting State as part of that community tradition or
ritual  use shall  be subject to the same time limitation as those applicable to
public collections."

See draft UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. II, art. 3, para. (4),

for the earlier definition  of "public collection."

76  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. II, Art. 4, para. (1). It states:

(1)  The possessor of a stolen cultural object required to return it shall be
entitled,  at the time  of  its restitution,  to payment of  fair and reasonable
compensation provided that the possessor neither knew nor ought reason-
ably to have known that the object was stolen and can prove that it exer-
cised due diligence  when acquiring the object.

Id  Ch. V, Art. 9, para. (1). This clause provides that the Convention does
not "prevent  a Contracting  State from applying  any rules  more  favourable

58

Unidroit Convention  and International  Arbitration

to  the  restitution  or the  return  of  stolen  or  illegally  exported  objects  than
provided  for by th[e] Convention." Thus, there  is no obligation  on  the part
of  a country  that  has  a common  law  system,  which  traditionally  does  not
require the payment of compensation to a purchaser of a stolen object, even
a bona fide  one, to modify  its existing system. See UNIDROIT  Explanatory
Report  1994, supra note 9, at 20.

77  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  5, supra note  13, at 2. Some repre-
sentatives at the Diplomatic Conference questioned the wisdom of providing
for this shift in the burden of proof in Art. 4, para. (1) with respect to stolen
cultural objects.

78  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch.  II, Art. 4, para. (4).
79  See  UNIDROIT  1995,  Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  5,  supra  note  13,  at  2 - 3.  Some
representatives at the Diplomatic Conference  were in favor of amending the
text of Art. 4(1) to make it clear that the compensation to be paid should be
either the  value of the object  or the price actually  paid,  whichever  was the
lower.  Others  disagreed  with  this  idea,  arguing  that  it  deprived  art  dealers
involved  in legitimate transactions the value of their bargains. Other repre-
sentatives  suggested that the full  market  value  should  be the only  standard
used. Still others disagreed with the entire principle of compensation, on the
ground  that this requirement  would  make  it more  difficult  for  members  of
third world countires to reclaim their cultural objects.

80  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. Ill, Art. 5, paras. (1) and (2). It

provides:

(1)  A Contracting  State may request  the court or other competent auth-
ority of another Contracting  State to order the return of a cultural object
illegally  exported from the territory of the requesting State.
(2)  A cultural object which has been temporarily exported from the terri-
tory of the requesting  State,  for purposes such as exhibition, research or
restoration, under a permit issued according to its law regulating its export
for  the  purpose  of  protecting  its  cultural  heritage  and  not  returned  in
accordance  with the terms  of  that permit  shall  be deemed  to  have  been
illegally exported.

Art.  5,  para.  (1)  of  the  draft  UNIDROIT  Convention  had  listed  three
separate  categories  ((a)  through  (c))  of  situations  in  which  the  return  of
illegally  exported  cultural  objects  would  be  appropriate.  The  decision  of
whether  or  not  clause  (c),  relating  to  the  excavation  of  cultural  objects,
should be retained, or whether or not it properly belonged  in Chapter III of
the Convention, generated a considerable amount of discussion at the Diplo-
matic  Conference.  See,  UNIDROIT  1995,  Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  5,  supra  note
13, at 7-12.  Ultimately, a majority  of the representatives voted  in favor of
retaining  the  substance  of  draft  UNIDROIT  Convention,  Art.  5(1 Xc).  See
UNIDROIT  1995, Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  17, supra note  13, at 8.

81  But see  UNIDROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994,  supra  note  9,  at  23, citing
Switzerland's  Private International  Law Statute, Dec.  18,  1987, Art.  19, [re-
printed  in 29  I.L.M.  1244 (1990)], as an example of the increasing trend in
both the  statutes  and case  law  of  some  countries  "to be  more  generous  in
taking into consideration  the mandatory rules of law of another State."

82  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. Ill, Art. 5, para. (3).  It states:

(3)  The  court  or other competent  authority  of  the  State  addressed  shall
order the return of an illegally  exported cultural  object  if the requesting

59

Emily Sidorsky

State establishes that the removal  of the object from its territory  signifi-
cantly  impairs one or more of the following interests:

(a)  the physical  preservation of the object or its context;
(b)  the integrity of a complex object;
(c)  the  preservation  or information  of,  for  example,  a  scientific  or
historical  character;
(d)  the traditional or ritual use of the object by a tribal or indigenous
community;

or establishes that the object is of significant  cultural  importance  for the
requesting State.
The  inclusion  of  these  criteria  was  also  a response  to  the  fact  that  the
legislation in many states does not reflect a concern with the question of the
illicit traffic  of exported cultural objects to the same degree as it does  with
respect to stolen objects. See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf.  8/C.l/  S.R.  5,  supra
note  13, at 13.

83  See UNIDROIT  Explanatory Report  1994, supra note 9, at 25.
84  Id. at 25-26.  See also  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. V, Art.
9,  para. (1)  of  the  UNIDROIT  Convention.  It allows  a state  to  apply  any
rules in its national  legislation  more favorable  to the return of  illegally  ex-
ported cultural objects than provided for by the Convention.

85  The  draft  UNIDROIT  Convention  had referred  to  objects  of  "outstanding
cultural  importance" as opposed  to the present language of objects of "sig-
nificant  cultural  importance." Draft  UNIDROIT  Convention, supra  note  9,
Art. 5, para. (2). The exact terminology to be used in this provision  was the
source  of  considerable  discussion  among  the  representatives  at the  Diplo-
matic Conference.  Some representatives indicated that it would be crucial  to
their countries' decision  whether or not to ratify  the  Convention  that  such
adjectives  be retained as  they  serve  to  limit  the  scope  of  the  Convention.
See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  6, supra note  13, at 5.

The draft  UNIDROIT Convention,  like  the present  Convention,  did  not
specify the factors to be considered by an adjudicator in determining whether
or not an object was "outstanding." The suggestion was made, however, that
"the  outstanding  cultural  importance  of  the object  for the  requesting  State
should  be  measured  against  the  extent  and wealth  of  its  heritage,  be  it  in
public or private hands, and the rarity of the object." UNIDROIT  Explana-
tory  Report  1994, supra note 9, at 26.

86  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. Ill, Art. 5, para. (4).
87  Id. Ch. Ill, Art. 5, para. (5).
88  Draft  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note 9, Art. 6, para. (1).
89  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  7, supra note  13, at 9-12.
90  See UNIDROIT Explanatory  Report  1994, supra note 9, at 27.
91  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. HI, Art. 6, para. (1).
92  UNIDROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994, supra  note  9,  at  30  notes  that  this
difference  is due to the fact that a large number of delegations thought that
"the stigma attaching to theft ought not to be transposed to illegally exported
cultural objects."

93  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. Ill, Art. 6, para. (2).
94  Id. Ch. Ill, Art. 6,  para. (3).
95  Id. Ch. Ill, Art. 6,  para. (4).
96  Id. Ch. Ill, Art. 7,  para. (1), cl. (a).
97  Id. Ch. Ill, Art. 7, para. (1), cl. (b).
98  Id. Ch. Ill, Art. 7, para. (2).

60

Unidroit Convention and International  Arbitration

99  Id. Ch. IV, Art. 8, para. (1). The preliminary draft  Convention, supra note
14,  Art.  9,  para.  (1),  [current  Art.  8,  para.  (1)],  provided  an  additional
alternative  forum  for  a  claim  to  be  brought  where  the  possessor  of  the
cultural  object  had his habitual  residence.  This  alternative  was  deleted  in
the draft  UNIDROIT Convention  text. See  UNIDROIT  1994, Study  LXX
-  Doc. 48, supra note 9, at 53.

100  Georges A.L. Droz, Memoir* sur le Projel de Convention d  Unidroit sur le
Retour  International des  Biens  Culturels  Voles ou  Illicitement Exportes,
109  MEDEDELINGEN  VAN  DE  NEDERLANDSE  VERENDIGINC  VOOR  INTER-
NATIONAAL RECHT 47, 56 (Nov.  1994). Droz refers to the EEC Convention
on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
Matters, Sept. 27,  1968,1262  U.N.T.S.  153 (hereinafter the "Brussels Con-
vention") and the EEC Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement  of
Judgments in Civil and Commercial  Matters, Sept.  16,  1988,  1988 O.J. (L
319) 9 (hereinafter the "Lugano Convention") as examples of Conventions
which do not consider the location of the movable property to warrant the
grant of jurisdiction, but instead apply general principles regarding the con-
flict  of laws.

101  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R. 9, supra note  13, at 3. It was con-
sidered  inappropriate  to introduce  a conflict  of law rule on the  law appli-
cable  in light of the substantive nature of the UNIDROIT Convention.

See  also  UNIDROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994,  supra  note  9,  at  31.
Some representatives noted that provisions governing enforcement and rec-
ognition  of judgments  are  rarely  found  in  private  law  instruments  with a
global reach and therefore felt the inclusion of such provisions might render
the draft UNIDROIT Convention unacceptable to many countries unaccus-
tomed to such provisions.

102  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R. 9, supra note  13, at 3.
103  UNIDROIT  Convention,  supra  note  9,  Ch.  IV,  Art.  8,  para.  2. See  UNI-
DROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994,  supra  note 9,  at  53  noting  the  "quasi-
unanimity  in  favor of  arbitration." See  also  Droz, supra  note  100, at  56.
He notes  that  this  provision  complies  with  the  spirit  of  the  Brussels  and
Lugano Conventions.

104  UNIDROIT  Convention,  supra  note  12,  Ch.  IV,  Art.  8,  para.  (3).  This
provision is based on Art. 24 of the Brussels Convention. See UNIDROIT
Explanatory  Report  1994, supra note 9, at 32.

105  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. IV, Art. 9, para. (2). It states:
This  article  [referring  to  Art.  9,  para.  (1)]  shall  not  be  interpreted  as
creating  an obligation  to recognise  or enforce  a decision  of  a court or
other competent authority of another Contracting State that departs from
the provisions of this Convention.

106  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Ch. IV, Art. 9, para. (1).
107  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  12, supra note  13. at  2 - 7.
108  Preliminary draft Convention, supra note  14, Ch. V, Art.  10. It states:

This Convention shall apply only when a cultural object has been stolen,
or removed from the territory of a Contracting  State contrary to its ex-
port legislation, after the entry into force of the Convention...

109  Vienna  Convention  on  the  Law  of  Treaties,  May  23,  1969,  1155
U.N.T.S. 331,  Art.  100. See  UNIDROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994. supra
note  9,  at  33.  Some  representatives  indicated  that  it would  be  impossible
for their countries to accept the draft  UNIDROIT Convention  if it were to
have retroactive application out of fear that this would expose the museum
collections in their countries to challenge.

61

Emily Sidorsky

110  UNIDROIT Convention, supra note  12, Art.  10. It states:

(1)  The provisions of Chapter II shall  apply only  in rspect of a cultural
object that is stolen after this Convention enters into force  in respect  of
the State where the claim is brought, provided that:

(a)  the object  was  stolen  from  the territory of  a Contracting  State
after the entry into force  of the Convention  for that State; or
(b)  the object  is  located  in a Contracting  State after the entry  into
force of the Convention  for that State.

(2)  The provisions of Chapter III shall apply only in respect of a cultural
object  that  is  illegally  exported  after  this Convention  enters  into  force
for the requesting State as well as the State where the request is brought.

111  Id. Ch. IV, Art.  10, para. (3).  It states:

(3)  This Convention  does  not  in any  way  legitimise  any  illegal  trans-
action  of  whatever  nature  which  has  taken  place  before  the  entry  into
force  of this Convention  or which  is excluded  under paragraphs (1)  or
(2) of this article, nor limit any right of a State or other person to make
a claim under remedies available outside the framework  of this Conven-
tion  for  the  restitution  or return of a cultural  object  stolen  or  illegally
exported before the entry  into force of this Convention.

112 Id. Ch. V, Art. 11, Art. 12, and Art. 21.
113 Id. Ch. V, Art. 13.
114 W . C h.  V, Art. 14.
115 Id. Ch. V, Art. 18.
116  Id. Ch. V, Art.  19. All of the provisions in Chapter V are adoptions of the
text  of  the  draft  Final  Provisions  (with  the exceptions  of  draft  Final  Pro-
visions  Arts.  C  and  F)  of  the  draft  UNIDROIT  Convention.  They  were
renumbered at the Diplomatic Conference and now form part of the text of
the UNIDROIT Convention.

117  See Droz, supra note  100, at 47 (Fr.) and at 58 (Engl. summ.).
118  See  Harold  S.  Burman,  Executive  Director,  Office  of  the  Legal  Adviser,
United  States  Department  of  State,  Memorandum,  Dec.  5,  1991, Issues
raised by  the draft  UNIDROIT Convention  on International Protection of
Cultural Property; Report of the first meeting of government delegations;
Preparation of U.S.  positions for  the second UNIDROIT meeting January
20.  1992. at  16. Burman discusses the differences  between public and pri-
vate law conventions.

119  See Droz, supra note  100. at 48-49  (Fr.) and at 58 (Engl. summ.). See also
UNIDROIT Explanatory Report  1994, supra note 9, at 15. In discussing the
draft UNIDROIT Convention, some representatives were in favor of adopt-
ing two separate  definitions  of the term because of the different  regard in
which these two offenses are held. It was decided that this would introduce
an unnecessary  level  of complication. Another suggestion  was to establish
a  minimum  value on  the  cultural  objects  to which the Convention  would
apply and establish differing  minimum levels depending on the category  of
the  object.  A  further  proposal  was  to  leave  the  decision  of  whether  the
cultural  object  fell  within the scope  of the Convention  to the national  law
of  each  Contracting  State.  This  idea  was  rejected  on  the  ground  that  it
would undermine the UNIDROIT Convention's objective to be as uniform
as possible.

120  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf.  8/C.I/S.R.  9, supra note  13, at 7. One of the
representatives at the Diplomatic Conference observed that the UNIDROIT

62

Unidroit Convention and International  Arbitration

Convention  is not designed to make changes  in national  legal  systems that
already provide for the return of stolen cultural objects without payment of
compensation to the possessor.  The Convention provisions are intended to
be understood as establishing a floor.

121  See  UNIDROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994, supra  note 9,  at  20,  indicating
that  the  representatives  preferred  to  leave  the  determination  of  "fair  and
reasonable compensation" to the discretion of the judge hearing the claim,
indicating  that  it  has  been  standard  in public  international  law  for judges
to make such determinations  of commercial  value. This interpretation  was
subject  to  criticism,  however,  at  the  Diplomatic  Conference.  See  UNI-
DROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  4, supra note  13, at 3,4.

122  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  3, supra note  13, at 3. A  represen-
tative at the Diplomatic Conference criticized the definition  of "public col-
lection" as being "far too broad." Another remarked that "the definition  of
public collection as it appeared in the draft was too vague to justify  special
protection  for cultural  objects  belonging  to this  category  under the  future
Convention, as it contained terms that were far too ambiguous."

123  See  UNIDROIT  1995,  Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  2,  supra  note  13,  at  4,  for  the
suggestion  that  the  word  "possessor"  should  be  replaced  with  the  word
"holder."  Another representative recommended  replacing  the  term  "pos-
sessor" with  the  term "owner," while others  favored  a more  precise  defi-
nition of  the  term. See also  UNIDROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994,  supra
note 9, at  16-17.

But see  UNIDROIT  1995  Conf.  8/C.l/S.R.  4,  supra  note  13,  at  5.  A
representative at the Diplomatic Conference  made the following  comment:
a self-contained  definition  of the idea of possessor in this draft Conven-
tion  should  be  abandoned  ...  [as] one  of  the  fundamental  ideas  in the
elaboration of this draft Convention was to minimise as much as possible
self-contained  definitions  because  of  the diversity  of  the  legal  systems
of the States participating in this conference.

124  See,  UNIDROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994, supra  note 9,  at  15.  It  reports
that  a number  of  delegations  requested  definitions  of  these  terms,  "fears
being  expressed  ...  that  there  would  in  their  absence  be  a  risk  of  each
Contracting  State  applying  its  national  definition  of  such  terms  which
would run counter to the aim of uniformity."

But see  UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R.  2, supra note  13, at 5. One
representative  at  the  Diplomatic  Conference  commented  that,  "the  study
group quickly  realised that  it  was  impossible  for  its members  to agree on
an overall  set of  uniform regulations, in conformity  with  legal  systems  of
all the States, and also on such terminology as 'thief/  'possessor/  'owner,'
'quality,'  [and] 'recourse.'...  it was an illusion  to believe  that reaching an
agreement  was possible  with regard to defining  the notions of  'possessor'
or 'theft*  or 'claimant.'"

125  See UNIDROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994, supra note 9, at 26. The text of
the UNIDROIT  Convention  substituted  the word  "significant"  in place  of
the  previous  term  "outstanding."  The  comment  expressed  in  the  UNI-
DROIT  Explanatory  Report  1994  with  respect  to  the  term  "outstanding
cultural importance" could seemingly apply equally to the term "significant
cultural  importance." It states:

[s]o  as  to  ensure  consistency  in  drafting  with  other  provisions  of  the
draft  and so as to  leave to the judge  a certain degree  of discretion, the
text lays down no criteria to determine the importance of the object.

63

Emily Sidorsky

126  See Alexandra  Peers, Gates Purchase Tops a  Tepid Art  Year,  WALL  ST.  J.,
Jan.  3,  1995, at R35, forecasting that "[Repatriation promises to be the hot
issue  of the decade in the art world  ..." Other recent events,  such as  the
discovery of a "major trove" of Impressionist paintings held in the Hermi-
tage  Museum since the end of  World War 11, have generated a great  deal
of  controversy,  See John  Russell,  Hermitage Reveals It Hid  Trove of  Im-
pressionist Art,  N.Y. TIMES, Oct. 4,1994, at Al; Alexandra Peers, Art World
is  Unnerved by  Cries for  Return of  War  Booty, WALL  ST. J., Feb. 16, 1995,
at Cl;  Steven  Erlanger,  Russia Reveals More Art  Taken from  Nazis, N.Y.
TIMES,  Feb.  28,  1995,  at  Al  (Pushkin  Museum  of  Fine  Art  trove);  Rod
MacLeish,  The  Art  and the  Glory:  The Lost Masterpieces of the Hermitage,
VANITY  FAIR,  Mar.  1995,  at  125.

See also 51  THE ART NEWSPAPER, supra note 13, at 26-29  for a collec-
tion of articles on the UNIDROIT Convention.  Some of the articles are in
favor of the ratification of the Convention, others are against.

127  Council  Directive  93/7/EEC, supra note  20,  1993  O.J.  (L74)  75-76  Art.

4,  para. 6.  It provides:

Member States' central authorities shall cooperate and promote consul-
tation between the Member  States' competent national  authorities.  The
latter shall  in particular:

*  * •

6. act as intermediary  between the possessor and/or holder and the
requesting  Member  State  with  regard  to  return.  To this  end,  the
competent authorities  ...  may  ...  first  facilitate  the implementation
of  an arbitration procedure,  in accordance  with the  national  legis-
lation of the requested  State and provided that the requesting  State
and the possessor or holder give their formal approval.

The UNIDROIT  Convention,  supra note  12, Art.  8, para. (2)  provides
Contracting States the option of using arbitration. It states that, "[t]he par-
ties may also agree to submit the dispute to  ...  arbitration."

Thus, the potential for arbitration is not limited to the UNIDROIT Con-

vention but is relevant to other regulatory frameworks as well.
128  See UNIDROIT Explanatory  Report  1994, supra note 9, at 32.
129  See UNIDROIT  1994, Study LXX-Doc. 48, supra note 9, at 53.
130  See Lyndel  V.  Prott, Principles for  the settlement of contemporary claims
to cultural property displaced during World  War  II,  Symposium, The Spoils
of  War,  New  York,  Jan.  19-21,  1995,  sponsored  by  the  Bard  Graduate
Center  for  Studies  in  the  Decorative  Arts.  Prott,  offering  suggestions  to
resolve the impasse between Russia and Germany over the fate of cultural
property  displaced  during  and  after  World  War  II,  proposed  that  states
should first attempt to settle their disputes by resorting to bilateral or multi-
lateral  agreements.  Failing the success of  these  agreements,  she  proposed
resort to arbitration. Lastly, she suggested the possibility  of submitting the
dispute  to  mediation,  which  she  said  could  be performed  by  a UNESCO
committee.  See also  Laura Leivick,  Return Art Stolen During  Wars,  Now,
WALL  ST.  J.  Feb.  16.  1995,  at  A12.

See also  Stephen  K.. Urice, Claims to ownership of the  "treasures," id.
He  stated  that  the  German  government  had  indicated  its  willingness  to
submit the  dispute  surrounding  the fate  of the 'Treasure  of  Priam," a re-
nowned collection of archeological artifacts originally  excavated by Hein-
rich Schliemann  from  the  second  city  of  Troy,  which  was  subsequently
removed from Germany by Russia during World War II, to an international
court of arbitration or before the International  Court of Justice.

131  See UNIDROIT  1995, Conf. 8/C.l/S.R. 9, supra note  13, at 3 - 4.

64

Unidroit Convention  and International  Arbitration

132  Id. at 4. One representative  suggested the  International  Court of Justice as
a potential  forum for the settlement of disputes involving state parties under
Chapter III.

133  Id. at 4.
134  Id. at 4.
135  See Reinhard MuBgnug, Germany National Report on Topic  1. The Regulat-
ory Framework for  the Free International Circulation of Objects of Art, in
Briat  &  Freedberg,  supra  note  14,  at  68,  for  the  view  that  "[t]he  wide
margins that Arts. 5(3) [current Art. 5(2)] and 6 of the Draft  leave open for
interpretation  could  be  more  easily  accepted  if  these  articles  were  to  be
applied by an independent and impartial court of arbitration."

See  also  Quentin  Byrne-Sutton  &  Marc-Andre  Renold,  Switzerland

National Report, id. at  103 for the following  comment:

It is preferable  that a sole  specialized  authority  makes the decisions on
the demands  for restitution. This would  perhaps be  an  ideal  terrain  for
international  arbitration  which  permits  the parties  to  choose  arbitrators
who are specialized and 'detached' from the national judicial order. One
can well  imagine  the  creation  of a  specialized  arbitration  procedure  as
is the case,  for example, in the field of maritime law. (trans, by author).
136  The  burden  is  on  the  requesting  State  to  prove  that  the  removal  of  the
object from its territory significantly  impairs one or more of the enumerated
criteria in Art. 5(3) before  the requested  State must order its return.

See MuBgnug, supra note  135, at 68.  He raises the contention  that this
system  places too much of the burden on the requesting  State.  He argues
for  reversing  the  burden  of  proof  so  that  there  is  a presumption  that  the
good would be returned absent a showing by the requested State that it had
a  superior  interest  in  the  object  in  dispute.  Even  with  this  modification,
however,  he  believes  that  arbitration  offers  the  only  suitable  means  to
achieve  an absolutely  fair balance between  the  interests  of  the  requesting
State and the requested State.

137  For example, if an object were located in Country A but the defendant were
in  Country  B  and  the  rules  concerning jurisdiction  in  force  in  the  Con-
tracting  States provided  that the  location  of  the  defendant  was  a  suitable
ground for the assertion of jurisdiction, the claimant  could bring his claim
in Country B rather than where the object were located.

The reason  that the courts of the  state  where  the object  was  located  is
likely  to  be  selected  by  the  claimant  is  that  it  means  that  a  "successful
claim  for  the restitution  or return of  a stolen  or illegally  exported  objects
would  be  directly  enforceable  without  the  need  to  have  recourse  to  the
courts of a second State" for enforcement.  This is regarded as a significant
innovation  in  the  area of  cultural  property.  See  UNIDROIT  Explanatory
Report  1994, supra note 9, at 32.

138  See MuBgnug, supra  note  135, at 69. He raises the following contention:

[According to Art. 9, [current Art. 8] claims addressed against a German
possessor  are to be pursued before  the German courts. But the German
government  will  have  to  take  into  consideration  that the  vague  uncer-
tainty of Arts. 5(2) [current Art. 5(3)] and 6 [deleted in the current text]
of the  Draft  does not appear too encouraging  in regard to the situation
of Germany as a requesting State which has to pursue its return claims
before  foreign  courts or even  before  the authorities of  a foreign  State.
Therefore, if asked, I would warn against the ratification  unless the Con-
vention provides for an impartial arbitration  ...

65

Emily  Sidorsky

139  Id. at 68  for the argument that although the restitution claim  in the case  of
stolen  goods  (Ch.  II)  could  be  handled  by  the  national  courts,  ("Legal
objections  might  be put aside  with  the  consideration  that  the  Convention
does  not aim at a return of am  illegally  exported object, but only those  of
'outstanding cultural  importance'. On the whole, objects illegally  exported
in Germany,  therefore,  will  only  have to  be returned to the  State of  their
origin  if  in  Germany  they  would  be  subject  to  an  export  prohibition  as
well."),  in  the  case  of  illegally  exported  objects  (Ch.  HI),  he  notes  that
there is a "concern that the national courts and authorities might overvalue
their  own  nation's  interests.  Therefore,  Chapter  III needs  an  international
court of arbitration."

140  Id. at 68.  He believes that the qualification  that the object be of "outstand-
ing cultural  significance"  [draft  UN1DROIT Convention,  Art. 5(2)] should
be moved forward to Ch. I, Art. 2, where it would apply in the stolen good
context as well,  so that it "corrects the excessively  broad definition  of the
term 'cultural  object.'"

141  See  PROTT &  O'KEEFE,  supra  note  8,  at  196.  Both the  United  States and
the United Kingdom have arbitration systems for making this determination
as to valuation. This is particularly  relevant in the context of valuing items
where  the good  is  loaned  as part of a travelling  exhibition.  In the  United
States, the Arts and  Artifacts  Indemnity  Act of  1975,  20  U.S.C.S.  §§ 971
et  seq.  (1975),  provides  for an arbitration  proceeding  which  is  conducted
by  two appraisers and an  umpire.  Each  party appoints  its  own appraiser,
and  the  appraisers  in  turn  appoint  the  umpire.  If  the  appraisers  can  not
agree  on  the  value  to  be  awarded,  the  umpire  makes  a final  and binding
determination.  See Indemnity  Under the Arts and Artifacts  Indemnity  Act,
41  Fed. Reg.  29,386  (1976). The  Federal Council  on the Arts and the Hu-
manities  issues a Certificate  for  Indemnity  that provides  for arbitration  if
agreed to by all the parties. The Arts and Artifacts Indemnity Act stipulates
that the cost of each appraiser is to be paid by the party who hires him or
her and that all other costs of the proceeding  should be shared equally by
the parties.

The  United  Kingdom  system  is governed by the Indemnity  Agreements
for  Bodies  Funded  by  the Office  of  Arts and  Libraries, the Scottish  Edu-
cation  Department  and  the  Welsh  Office  Education  Department  (1985).
According to this system, the costs of the entire proceeding are paid by the
owner if he or she is unsuccessful  or by public funds if the owner's appeal
as to the proper valuation  of the damaged or lost item is  successful.

142  Two  recent  high  profile  cases  are  Republic  of  Lebanon  v.  Sotheby's, No.
3790/90 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. Nov. 4,  1993) and Republic of Turkey v. The Metro-
politan  Museum of Art, 762 F. Supp. 44 (S.D.N.Y.  1990).

Republic of Lebanon  involved  the claim  of ownership by the Marquess
of Northampton (a U.K. citizen) to a collection of  14 pieces of late Roman
silver,  known  as  the  Sevso  Treasure,  which  he  purchased  on  advice  of
Sotheby's from a  Lebanese dealer and a Yugoslavian-born  coin merchant.
Lebanon, Yugoslavia (now Croatia) and Hungary filed suit claiming owner-
ship of the objects. Lebanon subsequently  withdrew from the case and the
New York State Supreme Court recently ruled that neither Croatia or Hun-
gary  had  proved  to  the court's  satisfaction  its  claim  to ownership. Thus,
despite  doubts  as to  its provenance,  Northampton's  claim  to the Treasure
and his right to sell  it were  upheld. See David  D'Arcy, Lord Northampton
Wins  by  Default  -  For the Moment,  4  THE  ART  NEWSPAPER,  Dec.  1993,
at 4. He points out that the value of the Sevso Treasure has declined because

66

Unidroit Convention and International  Arbitration

of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  its provenance  and the threat  of  ongoing
litigation  facing  a potential  buyer  of the Treasure.  See also  Republic  of
Croatia  v. Trustee of the  Marquess  of Northampton  1987 Settlement, No.
50810-50816 (N.Y. App. Div., April 21, 1994), reported in  N.Y.L.J., April
25,  1994, at 26.

In  Republic of  Turkey,  Turkey  sought  to recover  artifacts  in  the  pos-

session  of the Metropolitan  Museum of Art. Turkey  asserted that the arti-
facts were excavated  from burial mounds in the Ushak region of Turkey in
1966  and exported  to the United  States  in contravention  of Turkish law.
Turkey claimed that under Turkish law it owns all artifacts found in Turkey.
Subsequently,  The Metropolitan  Museum  returned  the artifacts  to Turkey.
See Alexandra A. Montagu, Recent Cases on the Recovery of Stolen Art  -
The Tug of  War  Between Owners and Good  Faith Purchasers Continues,
18:1-2  COLUM.-VLA  J.L  & ARTS 75, 86-87  (1994).

143  See MuBgnug, supra note  135, at 68. The reasons he offers  for the establish-
ment of an  international  court of arbitration  in this context  are speed and
the reduced cost of the proceedings as compared  with litigation.

See  also  PROTT  AND  O'KEEFE,  supra  note  8,  at  196. They  offer the
following comment on the use of arbitration where a state party is involved:
Arbitration is used as a dispute settlement  mechanism  in many  ... mat-
ters  involving  States  and, although  it has defects,  in general  it works
very  well.  It is important  that  provision  be made  for some  method of
settling  disputes  and arbitration  is  particularly  suitable  for those  with
international  elements.

144  Arbitration  Center,  World  Intellectual  Property  Organization,  Geneva,

Switzerland.

145  Removing the cases from the national court system to an arbitration center
may  also  offer  advantages  from  a  foreign  relations  standpoint.  Cultural
property disputes often  raise issues sensitive to governments and they may
prefer that such claims are removed to a neutral  location.

146  The ICSID Convention was formulated  in 1965 by the Executive  Directors

of the World Bank in Washington, D.C.

147  As of March  1, 1995, 115 countries had become Contracting  States and an
additional  16 had signed the Convention but not yet ratified  it; See List of
Contracting  State and Signatories of the Washington Convention  1965, 20
Y.B.  COMM.  ARB.  1077  (1995).

Also  worth noting  are the Rules  Governing  the Additional  Facility for
the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of ICSID, Sept. 1978
(hereinafter  "the Additional  Facility  Rules"),  DOCUMENT  ICSID/11  AD-
DITIONAL  FACILITY  FOR THE ADMINISTRATION  OF  CONCILIATION,  ARBI-
TRATION  AND  FACT-FINDING  PROCEEDINGS, June  1979, which can be used
for  certain types of proceedings  between  foreign  nationals and states that
fall  outside the scope of the ICSID Convention.

148  See John T. Schmidt, Arbitration  Under the Auspices of the International
Centre for  Settlement of Investment Disputes  (ICSID): Implications of  the
Decision on Jurisdiction in Alcoa Minerals of Jamaica, Inc. v. Government
of  Jamaica,  17  HARV.  INT'L.  L.J. 90,  104 (1976)  as cited  in  STEPHEN J.
TOOPE,  MIXED  INTERNATIONAL  ARBITRATION 221  n. 10 (1990)  for the idea
that a neutral  forum  will  increase  the likelihood of the investor  achieving
"easy access to the decisional  forum, [and the] opportunity to air the merits
of a claim" by divorcing the forum from the control of the  host state. This
will  in turn increase  investor activity.

149  See Tbopt, supra note  148, at 200.

67

Emily  Sidorsky 

•

150  For  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  Santiago  de  Compostela  Resolution,  See
generally  Arthur T.  von  Mehren, Arbitration Between States and Foreign
Enterprises:  The  Significance of the Institute of International Law's Santi-
ago  de  Compostela Resolution, 5  ICSID  REV.-FOR.  INV.  L.  J. at  54.  See
also Arthur T. von Mehren, Institute of International Law -  Resolution on
Arbitration between States. State Enterprises or State Entities and Foreign
Enterprises.  Explanatory  Note,  (hereinafter  "Von  Mehren  Explanatory
Note")  16 Y.B. COMM.  ARB.  233 (1991).

151  The language of Article 6 of the  Santiago de Compostela  Resolution which
follows describes the complete  fireedom of contract afforded  to the parties
in selecting the law to govern their arbitrable disputes.  It states:

In  particular,  (1)  a  different  source  may  be  chosen  for  the  rules  and
principles  applicable  to  each  issue  that  arises  and  (2)  these  rules  and
principles may be derived  from different  national legal  systems as well
as  from  non-national  sources  such  as  principles  of  international  law,
general principles of law, and the usages of international  commerce.

152  A  major  distinction  of  the  Santiago  de  Compostela  Resolution  from  the
Amsterdam  Resolution on Arbitration  in Private International  Law (Resol-
ution on "L 'Arbitrage en droit international prive" adopted at the Institute's
Forty-Eighth Session, Amsterdam,  1957) is the delocalization of the  arbitral
proceeding  from  the  seat  of  its proceeding.  Under the  Amsterdam  Resol-
ution, although the parties had the discretion to choose where the arbitration
tribunal  would sit, the  law of the seat that was selected governed the pro-
ceeding.  Under the  Santiago  de  Compostela  Resolution,  by  contrast,  it  is
the arbitration agreement  which controls.

153  The  "general  principles" that  apply  in  Article  3,  "[ujnless  the  arbitration
agreement  provides  otherwise," include the  following:  the  separability  of
the  arbitration  agreement  from  the  legal  relationship  to  which  it refers;
Kompetenz-Kompetenz; rules allowing  for the continuation of the proceed-
ing despite a party's obstructionist measures; the ability to remove the arbi-
tration proceeding to a different  venue; and the ability to continue the pro-
ceeding should an arbitrator engage in obstructionist tactics.

154  Santiago de Compostela  Resolution, Article 4.
155  Id.
156  See  STEPHEN  M.  SCHWEBEL,  INTERNATIONAL  ARBITRATION:  THREE  SALI-
ENT  PROBLEMS  122-25  (1987)  for a discussion of the inadmissibility  of a
plea  of  sovereign  immunity  as  a  bar to  the jurisdiction  of  arbitrators  in
international arbitral tribunals; See also, Georges Delaume, State Contracts
and Transnational Arbitration 75 AM. J. INT'L  L. 784, 786 (1981), as cited
in  SCHWEBEL,  id. at  125 n.140.  Schwebel  also refers to the discussion by
Dr.  J.  Gillis  Wetter  of  Sole!  Boneh  International  Ltd.  (Israel)  and  Water
Resources  Development  International  (Israel)  v.  the  Republic  of  Uganda
and  National  Housing  and  Construction  Corporation  of  Uganda  (ICC)
(1974) in support of this proposition, and to J. Gillis Wetter, Pleas of Sover-
eign  Immunity and Act  of  Sovereignty before  International  Arbitral Tri-
bunals 2 J.  INT'L.  ARB.  7,  9-10  (1985); See also  TOOPE, supra note  148,
at  139-40. He states that "the submission of a state to arbitration is treated
as an implicit  waiver of jurisdictional  immunity."

Problems  of recognition and enforcement  of the arbitral  award  remain
in certain legal  systems. Id. at  144-45.  But see The United States Foreign
Sovereign  Immunities  Act  (1976),  28  U.S.C.  § 1610(1)  (Supp. 1982),  28
U.S.C.  § 1605(aK6)  (amended  1988)  (hereinafter  "FSIA"),  for  the  prin-

68

Unidroit Convention and  International  Arbitration

ciple, adopted by other countries as well, that a state may not assert a claim
of  sovereign  immunity  to  frustrate  an  arbitration  agreement  which  it  has
entered  into  with  a  private  party.  It  provides  that  there  is  no  immunity
available  to a state in any action:

to enforce an agreement made by the foreign state with or for the benefit
of a private  party to  submit to arbitration  all  or any  differences  which
have arisen between the parties with respect to a defined  legal  relation-
ship, whether contractual  or not, concerning  a subject matter capable  of
settlement by arbitration under the laws of the United States, or to con-
firm an award made pursuant to such an agreement...  (emphasis added).

See also  Switzerland  International  Private  Law  Statute, supra  note 81,

Ch.  12.

157  The Preamble of the Santiago de Compostela Resolution specifically states:
[W]hile there are many principles that apply to international arbitrations
in general, this Resolution also draws attention to other principles which
are of special importance to arbitrations between States, state enterprises,
or state entities,  on the one  hand, and foreign  enterprises,  on the other
...  [and notes] further that this Resolution has in view only the authority
and duties of arbitrators in arbitrations between States, state enterprises,
or state entities, on the one hand, and foreign enterprises, on the other...
(emphasis added).

158  See  Von  Mehren  Explanatory  Note, supra note  150, at 235-36.  He notes
that of special  importance in this regard is the principle that arbitrators are
"not free to  invoke  I'ordre public  or lois  imperatives  in  disregard  of  the
arbitration agreement." This had relevance in the draft UNIDROIT Conven-
tion context as some delegations to the Convention perceived the possibility
of  a  country  invoking  I'ordre public  as  the  rationale  for  the  inclusion  of
Article 6(1). See UNIDROIT Explanatory Report  1994, supra note 9, at 27.
However, Article 6(1) was deleted from the final  text of the Convention.

159  Santiago de Compostela  Resolution,  Art. 2.
160  See TOOPE, supra note  148, at  146-50.  He cites the leading American case
in support of this proposition, Ipitrade International  S.A.  v. Federal Repub-
lic  of  Nigeria,  465  F.Supp. 824  (D.D.C.  1978) (State's  agreement  to arbi-
trate  under  ICC  Rules  constitutes  a  waiver  of  sovereign  immunity  under
United States legislation). Although there are cases which have held to the
contrary,  the predominant  position  of cases  in Australia,  France,  Holland,
Sweden  and  Switzerland  is  to  recognize  an  implicit  waiver  of  sovereign
immunity  as  extending  to  the  enforcement  and  execution  of  the  arbitral
award. The Australian Foreign States Immunities Act  1985, reprinted in 25
I.L.M. 715 (1986), § 17(2), makes this waiver of immunity explicit.  It pro-
vides that where the state has submitted to arbitration, "the foreign State is
not immune in a proceeding concerning the recognition as binding for any
purpose,  or  for  the  enforcement,  of  an award  made  pursuant  to the  arbi-
tration, wherever the award was made." Furthermore, the Act (§ 30) author-
izes the Australian  courts to order enforcement  of  the award. See also  D.
W. Bowett, Contemporary Developments in Legal Techniques in the Settle-
ment of  Disputes,  HAGUE  RECUEIL  169,  220  (1983),  as  cited  in.  TOOPE,
supra note  148, at  148 n.206. See also  SCHWEBEL supra note  156, at  124.
He  cites  Georges  R.  Delaume,  State  Contracts  and  Transnational  Arbi-
tration,  75  AM.  J.  INT'L  L.  784,  786-87  (1981)  in  support  of  this  same
proposition.

69

Emily  Sidorsky

161  The  recently  enacted  Rules  supersede  an  earlier  set  of  rules  which  were
designed to handle disputes of this type, the "1962 Rules of Arbitration and
Conciliation  for Settlement of  International  Disputes  Between Two Parties
of Which Only One is a State."

162  See TOOPE, supra note  148, at 204 n. 15. Toope contends that states have a
tendency  to distrust  institutional  frameworks,  preferring ad  hoc arbitration
instead.  He cites  Benteler v.  Belgian  State  (Nov.  18,  1983), reprinted in I
J.INT'L.  ARB.  184 (1984); and Hellas  International  Co.  for Garments  S.A.
v. The  Greek  State  (Jan.  18,  1982), reprinted in  10 Y.B.  COMM.  ARB.  34
(1985), in support of this proposition.

163  See  Rules, Art.  1, para.  (2)  and the  Model  Arbitration  Clauses  for  use  in
connection  with  the  Permanent  Court  of  Arbitration  Optional  Rules  for
Arbitrating  Disputes  Between  Two  Parties  of Which  Only  One is  a State,
para. 5 (hereinafter  "Future Disputes clause").

164  But see The Additional Facility Rules of the ICSID Convention, supra note
147, which expand the situations in which resort to the ICSID regime might
be available  to  interested  parties.  The  Additional  Facility  Rules authorize
the  ICSID Center to administer  proceedings  which  fall  outside  the  scope
of the ICSID Convention  in the following  situations:

(a)  ...  for the settlement of investment  disputes between parties one of
which is not a Contracting  State or a national  of a Contracting State;
(b)  ...  between parties at least one of which is a Contracting State or a
national of a Contracting State for the settlement of disputes that do not
directly arise out of an investment; and
(c)  fact-finding  proceedings.

165  Rules, Art. 8,  para. (3) provides  that, "[i]n appointing  arbitrators pursuant
to these Rules, the parties and the appointing authority are free to designate
persons who are not members of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The
Hague."

A possible disadvantage of this method of selecting arbitrators as a poss-
ible  model  for the  UNIDROIT Convention  is that  it  would  not provide a
pool  of  specialized  arbitrators  with  an  expertise  in  the  cultural  property
area.

166  Rules, Art. 5.  It provides that if the parties have not agreed that there shall
be a sole  arbitrator, then three arbitrators shall  be appointed. The appoint-
ment  of  arbitrators  is  discussed  in  Arts.  6-8.  The  sole  arbitrator  is  ap-
pointed either by agreement  of the parties, or by the appointing  authority
agreed  to by the parties, or failing  that, by  request  of either party, by the
Secretary-General  of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague (Art.
6,  para.  (2)).  Thus,  although  there  is  flexibility,  the  services  of  the  Sec-
retary-General  of the  Permanent Court of  Arbitration are available to pre-
vent the breakdown of the proceedings. Art. 6, para. (4) specifically  alludes
to the necessity of appointing as independent and impartial an arbitrator as
possible.  It provides:

In making the appointment  [of the sole  arbitrator], the appointing auth-
ority shall have regard to such considerations as are likely to secure the
appointment  of  an  independent  and  impartial  arbitrator  and  shall  take
into  account  as  well  the  advisability  of  appointing  an  arbitrator  of  a
nationality other than the nationalities of the parties.

167  See  TOOPE  supra  note  148,  at  202-203.  Toope  makes  the  point  that  a
difficulty  with  institutional  arbitration  is that  its codified  procedures con-

70

Unidroit Convention and International  Arbitration

tribute to the inflexibility  of the  dispute  resolution  process.  This  tends to
alienate non-western  countries from resorting to arbitration.  He writes:

The increasing formalism  of arbitral  procedure that seems to follow the
creation  of  institutions  may in  fact  hamper  the resolution  of  disputes
where developing state are involved because the emphasis upon  rigorous
procedural rules may not allow  for sufficient  sensitivity to political con-
cerns and cultural  discontinuities.
But see  4  ICC  INT'L  CT. ARB.  BULLETIN  1, at 4  (May  1993).  Statistics
compiled  by the ICC indicate  that  in the ten year period  from  1983-92,
parties  from 93 different  countries participated  in ICC arbitrations.  Parties
from Western  Europe  accounted  for 57% of  this  pool  but the remainder
was  composed  of parties  from the Asia-Pacific  region  and from Central
and Eastern Europe.

168  Rules, Art.  l.para. (4).
169  Rules,  Art.  16, para.  (I)  provides  the following  rules  as to the place of

arbitration:

Unless  the parties  have  agreed  upon  the place  where the arbitration is
to be held, such place shall be The Hague, The Netherlands. If the parties
agree that the arbitration  shall be held at a place other than The  Hague,
the International  Bureau shall  inform the parties and the arbitral tribunal
whether it is willing to provide the secretariat and registrar services...

170  Rules, Art.  23.
171  See  ALAN  REDFERN  &  MARTIN  HUNTER,  LAW AND PRACTICE OF INTER-
NATIONAL  COMMERCIAL  ARBITRATION  at 39 (1986),  for the premise  that,
"[t]he  time  limits  laid  down  by institutional  rules  usually  fail  to take ac-
count of the time which a state or state entity needs to obtain approval of
important decisions, through its own official  channels.1'

172  Rules, Art.  1, para. (2) provides:

Agreement  by  a  party  to  arbitration  under  these  Rules  constitutes  a
waiver of any right of sovereign  immunity  from jurisdiction,  in respect
of the  dispute  in question, to which  such  party might  otherwise  be en-
titled.  A  waiver  of  immunity  relating  to the  execution  of an arbitral
award must be explicitly  expressed.

173  See Future Disputes clause, supra note  163. It provides:

This agreement to arbitrate constitutes a waiver of any right to sovereign
immunity  to which  a party might  otherwise  be entitled  with  respect to
the enforcement of any award rendered by an arbitral tribunal constituted
pursuant to this agreement.

174  See supra note 156.
175  See The Report of the  Executive  Directors  of the  World  Bank, Comment
on Art. 55, Doc. ICS1D/2, para. 43, as cited  in Aron  Broches, Convention
on the Settlement of Investment  Disputes  Between  States and Nationals of
Other States of  1965, Explanatory Notes and Survey of its  Application. 18
Y.B.  COMM.  ARB.  627,  704  (1993).

It states:
The doctrine  of sovereign  immunity  may prevent  the forced  execution
in a  State  of judgments  obtained  against  foreign  States  or against the
state in which execution is sought. Article 54 requires Contracting States
to  equate  an award  rendered  pursuant  to the Convention  with  a  final
judgment of its own courts.  It does not require them to go beyond that
and to undertake  forced  execution  of awards  rendered  pursuant  to the
Convention in cases in which final judgments could not be executed.

71

Emily Sidorsky

Broches cites  LETCO v.  Liberia, 650  F.Supp. 73 (1986) as an example
of  an  instance  where  the jurisdiction  of  the  U.S.  court  over  the  foreign
State was upheld but the execution of the  ICSID award was not enforced.
The assets were deemed  by the court  to be sovereign  and not commercial
assets and therefore  not covered by the Foreign Sovereign  Immunities Act
exception from immunity of execution of assets used for commercial activi-
ties. Id. at 704-05.

See  also  TOOPE  supra  note  148,  at  246-49  for  a  discussion  of  this
subject. The author cites Judgement of June 6,  1981 (Benvenuti & Bonfant
Co. v. Government of the People's Republic of Congo), Cour d'appel (Fr),
reprinted in 20  I.L.M.  878  (1981),  as  an example  of  a situation  where a
sovereign  immunity defense  was upheld against execution  of the award.

176  See  TOOPK,  supra note  148, at  190-96,  and at 237-238  for a discussion
of the issue  of interim  measures of protection  in the context  of the  ICSID
system as well as in that of other arbitral systems.

177  Rules, Art. 26, para. (3).
178  See  TOOPE, supra  note  148, at  192-95.  Although  there  is a body  of  U.S.
case  law  which  holds  that  if a  dispute  is  to  go  to arbitration,  the  courts
are precluded  from  granting any provisional  measures, including  ordering
attachment of the goods, the tendency  in both the U.S. and in Europe is to
allow courts to pre-arbitration attachments.

179  Rules, Art. 26, para. (1) provides:

Unless the parties agree  otherwise,  the  arbitral  tribunal  may, at the re-
quest  of either party,  take any  interim  measures  it deems  necessary  to
preserve the respective rights of either party or in respect of the subject-
matter of the dispute,  including measures for conservation of the goods
forming the subject-matter in dispute such as ordering their deposit with
a third person or the sale of perishable goods.
Art.  26,  para.  (2)  provides,  that "[s]uch  interim  measure maybe estab-
lished in the form of an interim award. The arbitral tribunal shall be entitled
to require security  for the costs of such measures."

72


