International Journal of Cultural Property (2005) 12:40–61. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2005 International Cultural Property Society
/
DOI: 10.1017

S0940739105050010

Heritage Trouble: Recent Work on the
Protection of Intangible Cultural Property
Michael F. Brown*

Abstract: A major factor driving contemporary concerns about the fate of
intangible cultural property is the rise of the Information Society, which has
proven adept at stripping information from the cultural contexts that give it
meaning. Efforts to preserve intangible heritage have tended to follow
Information Society models by proposing that heritage be inventoried, then
removed from the public domain and returned to the exclusive control of its
putative creators. This essay reviews recent scholarly work and policy initiatives
related to intangible cultural property, with an eye toward identifying their
merits and flaws. It argues for a more ecological perspective, one that takes
account of the unpredictable quality of information flows as well as the costs of
attempting to manage them. Also explored are some of the difficult, unanswered
questions about whether all intangible cultural heritage is equally worthy of
protection.

When comparing today’s discussions of cultural property with those taking place
only two decades ago, one is immediately struck by the radical broadening of the
field’s scope. Prior to the early 1980s, “cultural property” was invoked largely to
denote portable works of art and architectural monuments that embodied the his-
tory and identity of particular peoples or nation-states.Today the expression is applied
to things as disparate in their scale and characteristics as human remains, art genres,
and regional landscapes. Indigenous-rights advocates have gone so far as to identify
biological species (as distinct from plant or animal populations) as items of cultural
or intellectual property.1 Even though the most sweeping of these cultural-property
claims stand little chance of garnering support from policy-makers and the general

*Department of Anthropology and Sociology, Williams College. Email: mbrown@williams.edu

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This article benefited greatly from the thoughtful criticism of Alexander
Bauer, Stuart Kirsch, John H. Merryman, Daniel Shapiro, and Madhavi Sunder, for which I am grateful.
Any errors of fact or interpretation are my own.

40

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

41

public, the mere fact that they are made speaks eloquently about the spirit of our
times.

The force that John Henry Merryman refers to as “cultural internationalism”
emerged in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in response to concerns
about the destruction of cultural treasures in wartime. What drove efforts to protect
cultural property was an emerging conviction that, as the Hague Convention of
1954 put it,“damage to cultural property belonging to any people whatsoever means
damage to the cultural heritage of all mankind, since each people makes its contri-
bution to the culture of the world.”2 By the 1970s, however, growing interest in
folkloric traditions, especially those of the world’s indigenous peoples, prompted
discussion about whether a focus on monuments and portable art was too narrow
and, by implication, ethnocentric. Many of the cultural treasures of indigenous and
peasant societies are found in oral traditions and public events of one sort or another,
and the significance of these intangible, performative resources often outweighs that
of material culture. Surely, it was argued, these merit the same consideration as
cathedrals and archaeological sites.

In tandem with a marked expansion of scope there has arisen a tendency to sub-
stitute the expression“cultural heritage”for cultural property. This shift, by no means
consistent or complete, signals growing doubt about the universality of Western
notions of property and widespread recognition that culture cannot be reduced to
an inventory of objects without marginalizing its most important features.3 The
dematerialization of heritage–the rising salience of stories, designs, musical forms,
and information in discussions of heritage protection–offers the prospect of more
comprehensive management of traditional cultural productions, yet it also creates
daunting complexities for policy-makers.

This article reviews recent work in the area of heritage protection, with partic-
ular emphasis on books, essays, and policy documents published since 2000 that
focus on intangible cultural property. I write as an anthropologist who only recently
has begun to grapple with the sophisticated debates on cultural property offered
by art historians, museum professionals, and legal scholars, many of whom have
been thinking about these questions for decades. I have experienced a newcomer’s
thrill when encountering the dazzling erudition of the field’s leading figures as
well as a newcomer’s perplexity at the narrowness with which certain influential
arguments are formulated. It is impossible to survey the emerging literature with-
out noticing that some of the assumptions which undergird debates on cultural
property fail to serve the field’s expanding ambitions. What made perfect sense
when debate focused primarily on the fate of paintings, churches, and archaeolog-
ical sites becomes questionable when applied to other kinds of cultural productions.
Much as early work in cultural property led scholars to rethink the meaning of
property, so work on intangible cultural heritage must remain attentive to the broader
significance of information, including the practical, political, and moral impact of its
proposed regulation. Information answers to its own rules. Most conspicuously, it
can reside in an infinite number of places simultaneously. The homelessness of infor-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

42

MICHAEL F. BROWN

mation undermines the distinction between real and counterfeit, just as it weakens
the bonds that tie units of information together in meaningful systems.4

My goal in the present essay is to identify the roots of what can be defined loosely
as “heritage trouble”—that is, diffuse global anxiety about the movement of infor-
mation among different cultures—and to assess proposed strategies for responding
to it. I shall underscore the virtues of thinking about information ecologically, as a
total system of mutually influencing relationships and forces.5 Ecological thinking is
characterized by holism and awareness of interconnections. It recognizes that the
management of complex systems demands attention not to one variable but to many,
and that there will always be uncertainty about how changes in individual variables
affect the whole.6 An ecological approach to intangible cultural property resists the
siren call of monolithic solutions, exhorting instead that we consider all compo-
nents of the information ecosystem when contemplating reforms in any of its sub-
systems. Unfortunately, the nature of modern advocacy work leads many of those
involved in heritage protection to keep their sights fixed narrowly on the goal of
defending intangible culture, however defined. The resulting proposals may ignore
how that laudable objective amplifies, conflicts with, or otherwise reshapes infor-
mation policies elsewhere in society.7

BACKGROUND: THE RISE OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY

Public discussions of intangible cultural heritage that began in the 1990s were
shaped by a cluster of interrelated social forces. Arguably the most important was
the rise of what has been variously labeled the “Information Society,” the “Infor-
mation Age,” the “Knowledge Economy,” or, most recently, the “Network Society.”
The latter appellation is associated with the work of Manuel Castells, who in a
series of influential books and articles has argued that new information technol-
ogies have transformed global society just as radically as the Industrial Revolution
changed the nineteenth-century world. In a summary assessment of his theory of
the Network Society, Castells identifies its three major effects: (1) the creation of
new economies based on information rather than on the manufacture of material
goods; (2) the globalization of corporations and public institutions, with a corre-
sponding shift in power away from the traditional nation-state; and (3) the forg-
ing of new networks that, among other things, reconfigure labor relations, politics,
and economic activity.8

There are reasons to be skeptical of Castells’ sweeping claims, not the least of
which is that the United States, presumably the apotheosis of the Network Society,
continues to spend more on old-fashioned durable goods and energy resources,
now largely imported from other countries, than it generates in information exports,
suggesting that this new economy may not be as sustainable as its prophets believe.9
Nevertheless, the work of Castells and like-minded social theorists brings into focus
trends whose importance is beyond dispute. These include the phenomenon of glob-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

43

alization in its multiple manifestations and the meteoric rise of intellectual property
rights (IPR) as a matter of global contention.

Globalization has become a convenient scapegoat for anything that seems unjust
or disorienting about contemporary life. Yet all but the most intransigent globo-
phobes admit that its effects are not entirely negative. The salience of intangible
cultural property as a matter of worldwide concern, as well as the ability of advocacy
groups to muster international support for heritage protection, are both examples
of globalization’s positive effects. There is little question, however, that the intrusion
of cosmopolitan news and entertainment media into even the most isolated out-
posts of humanity has evoked anxiety in many quarters. Citizens fear that their
languages, traditional practices, and values are being subverted by cultural influ-
ences originating elsewhere, mostly in the developed West. Time itself is thus trans-
formed from a local phenomenon to a global one, pushed by 24-hour news reporting
and nonstop trading in world financial markets. These factors have led to demands
that the movement of alien images and information be regulated in the interests of
local cultural integrity. In Europe and the United States, a juggernaut of media con-
solidation has given rise to fears that artistic creativity and the expression of diverse
viewpoints are seriously imperiled.10

Academic opinion in the past decade has steadily shifted from an indulgent view
of cultural mixing, characterized by appreciation for its charming ironies and post-
modern playfulness, to a more critical stance emphasizing the extent to which the
global flows of culture may threaten a community’s sense of its own authenticity. A
rare dissent is registered by the economist Tyler Cowen, whose book Creative Destruc-
tion reviews the evidence and concludes that global monopolies and imported tech-
nologies often promote local creativity by creating lucrative markets for innovative,
high-quality artistic productions. Examples include Tuvan throat singing from Mon-
golia, local interest in which has been stimulated by sales of recordings abroad and
a recent American feature film, and the colorful cotton molas produced by the Kuna
people of Panama, a synthetic art form that combined a tradition of bark painting
with sewing techniques and materials acquired from Europeans.11 Neither a simple-
minded defense of free trade nor an antiglobalization screed, Cowen’s book offers a
nuanced assessment of the positive and negative impacts of cultural flows, including
their power to generate new forms of local authenticity.

More is at stake than authenticity in the contemporary crisis of cultural heritage.
By its nature, the Information Society undermines social norms and institutions,
thus magnifying the importance of culture, defined narrowly as a set of values and
moral commitments. Cultural identity itself may become, as the anthropologist
Simon Harrison has observed, a scarce resource to be defended as another form of
property, either personal or collective. Heritage, the retrospective expression of cul-
ture, is likewise transformed into a highly politicized commodity.12

Meanwhile, the rising economic importance of information has served to mag-
nify the value of IPR. Copyrights, patents, trademarks, and trade secrets have become
keys to prosperity in an era when controlling prototypes is at least as profitable as

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

44

MICHAEL F. BROWN

actually replicating them.13 Global markets require global regimes of control to pro-
tect IPR, hence the TRIPs (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property) agreement
and similar legal instruments that have become a target of globalization’s many crit-
ics. More significant than efforts to expand the reach of IPR in space (through agree-
ments such as TRIPs) and in time (through industry’s never-ending campaign to
lengthen the terms of copyrights and patents) is the dramatic broadening of what is
held to be intellectual property in the first instance. Software engineering and bio-
technology have opened new panoramas for the assertion of IPR, including gene
sequences, life-forms, and the manipulation of information in databases. These social
forces have converged to incite a moral panic about intellectual property and its
impact on the political, cultural, and economic life of societies everywhere.

CULTURAL APPROPRIATION IN THE CONTEXT

OF INFORMATION SOCIETIES

An unsettling characteristic of the Information Society is its power to strip the small-
est bits of performative content (i.e., information, in the Batesonian sense of “a
difference that makes a difference”) from their value-context and then use technol-
ogy to put these bits to work, typically with the goal of realizing a profit. This ability
to pluck images, sounds, and practices from their original setting and relocate them
elsewhere has received various labels, the broadest being “cultural appropriation.”
Questions of cultural appropriation have given rise to a wave of work assessing the
movement of cultural elements from the politically weak to the politically strong.
The reverse process, appropriation of cultural products by the weak (e.g., the flam-
boyant violation of copyrights on popular music and film common in the develop-
ing world) is either ignored entirely or celebrated as an act of cultural resistance.14
Cultural appropriation is held to be wrong for two main reasons. First, it is dis-
respectful of the cultural values of the source community, which rarely has sanc-
tioned the imitation of its creations by outsiders. Second, it subjects that community
to material harm, either by denying it legitimate economic benefits or by undermin-
ing shared understandings essential to its social health.

Respect is notoriously difficult to guarantee by legislative means, even if minority
communities can be afforded legal safeguards to protect them from overt discrim-
ination. For this reason, critiques of cultural appropriation gravitate to the question
of material damages, with an eye toward the promotion of legal reforms that would
compensate communities for such harms and, better still, prevent them from hap-
pening in the first place. The goal of rectifying civil wrongs thrusts heritage protec-
tion into the provinces of intellectual property and tort law. It is therefore hardly
surprising that legal scholars have done much of the heavy lifting in debates about
cultural ownership.15

A typical article on law and intangible heritage goes something like this. The author
notes the injustices arising from the ability of outsiders to alienate elements of tra-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

45

ditional knowledge or expressive culture at will, largely because folklore is legally
defined as residing in the public domain, where it is accessible to all. There is then a
review of ways that existing intellectual property law might be modified to encom-
pass folklore and traditional knowledge—say, by making it subject to trade-secrets
statutes, broadening the definition of trademark, or by inventing marks of authen-
ticity for folkloric products. This is followed by a systematic survey of other areas of
law that might offer additional protections: land titling, antidefamation statutes and
notions of group libel, historic-preservation law, civil-rights law, legislation man-
dating the repatriation of human remains and sacred objects, and international
human-rights protocols. The prototype article closes by observing that none of these
legal strategies fit the circumstances of intangible heritage particularly well and that
it probably makes sense to create new sui generis regulatory regimes to meet the
specific needs of traditional communities, especially indigenous ones.16

Anthropologists, who have also been prominent contributors to cultural-property
debates, share the progressive sentiments that motivate legal scholarship on cultural
protection, but they often express uneasiness about law’s received categories. Most
social anthropologists, in fact, have never met a category they weren’t prepared to
deconstruct—or, as the expression goes, to “problematize.” From this habit of mind
arises the impulse to reject the commodification inherent in the very notion of cul-
tural property and to express doubts about the way the culture concept in general is
represented in international forums such as UNESCO. Objections to granting cul-
ture transcendent legal status stress the concept’s tendency to freeze social life in
time, to imagine stable boundaries where none exist, and to attribute to social groups
(especially indigenous ones) a vague, even mystical otherness. These familiar argu-
ments reflect an underlying resentment that anthropology’s concept of culture was
hijacked by global policymakers just as many anthropologists were preparing to
abandon it.17

In the most recent work, however, scholars are moving beyond the critique of
culture to a more pragmatic appreciation of the concept’s utility. Bruce Robbins and
Elsa Stamatopoulou urge anthropologists to get past their fear of “theoretical incor-
rectness” and recognize that pursuit of cultural rights offers the advantage of help-
ing indigenous peoples achieve a degree of self-determination without directly
challenging the territorial integrity of the nation-state.They view the culture concept’s
vagueness as an asset rather than as a liability.18

Anthropologists may be making peace with culture, but they are also beginning to
question the validity and political implications of “the indigenous” as a category of
people. In North and South America, indigenousness is easy to define, at least in
principle: it refers to the descendants of the New World’s original inhabitants.
(Because of generations of intermarriage and cultural blending, however, the ques-
tion of which individuals qualify as indigenous remains irksome.) In regions such as
South Asia and Africa, in contrast, claims of prior occupation may be extremely
divisive in political arenas already plagued by violence and instability. The rise of
indigenism and the special rights that it typically advances—to say nothing of the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

46

MICHAEL F. BROWN

romance and primal authenticity with which native culture is imbued in the popu-
lar imagination—have made it increasingly attractive to claim, or reclaim, an indig-
enous identity. Debates about indigenous identities seem destined to intensify in the
coming years.19

In legal scholarship, initial enthusiasm about prospects for modifying intellectual
property laws to protect intangible heritage seems to be cooling. The most recent
work is characterized by greater skepticism about the utility of IPR law, recognition
of the value of legal flexibility, and an openness to alternative formulations. One of
the most persistent alternatives, dating back to the path-breaking work of Darrell
Posey and Graham Dutfield in the mid-1990s, insists that indigenous cultures must
be seen as total social systems in which land, the natural environment, social prac-
tices, and traditional knowledge form a seamless whole. Expressing sentiments sim-
ilar to Posey and Dutfield’s, Russel L. Barsh declares that for indigenous peoples
“knowledge is indistinguishable from land and culture,” an observation that Barsh
uses to argue against piecemeal, reductionist legal strategies of cultural protection.20
At a high level of abstraction, Barsh’s observation is surely correct. Still, I’ve yet to
meet an indigenous person incapable of telling the difference between, say, a moun-
tain and a ritual, even if the two are linked symbolically.What Barsh means by knowl-
edge is really closer to wisdom, understanding permeated by moral meaning. The
gap between “data” on the one hand and “wisdom” on the other is the crux of the
conflict between Information Societies and folkloric ones. As the anthropologist
Marilyn Strathern observes, “The market thus disembeds what is usable, whereas
the thrust of the indigenous IPR movement is to re-embed, re-contextualize, indig-
enous ownership in indigenous traditional culture. Tradition, we may remark, is an
embedding concept.”21

Although the speed and pervasiveness of this disembedding are surely new, the
reduction of sacred wholes to their component parts has been with us since the
Enlightenment. And since the Enlightenment, antireductionists have come forward
to oppose the analytical dismantling of whatever has arrested the attention of sci-
entists and humanist intellectuals: sacred texts, the human body, works of art, or the
speciation of the planet’s flora and fauna. When President George W. Bush imple-
ments a policy that limits research involving embryonic stem cells, he is taking a
similarly antireductive stance—in this case, by refusing to allow unrestricted access
to cells that may have originated in a human fetus, which Bush and others insist
must be seen as a sacred whole rather than as a morally neutral aggregation of tissues.
This observation should not be interpreted as a defense of current information
practices or criticism of efforts to restrict exploitation of indigenous knowledge. It is
simply to note that the rejection of categorical distinctions is a time-honored tactic
for setting one group apart from others. It may serve a useful purpose—for instance,
by challenging the views of policymakers who gravitate too readily toward conven-
tional categories (“art,”“biological knowledge,”“monument,”“property”) that may
mean something quite different, or be meaningless altogether, for particular com-
munities. But in a world organized around the parsing of differences, insistence that

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

47

no distinctions are legitimate presents a formidable obstacle to legal reform. It makes
a compelling sound bite but contributes little to the cause of intercultural dialogue.
In the case of indigenous-rights policies, the claim that land and culture are indis-
tinguishable also casts a shadow over the aspirations of those indigenous peoples
who lack a traditional land base but maintain commitments to native values.

Less sweeping in their claims, but more subtly subversive in their implications, are
emerging ethnographic studies of views of cultural ownership in specific places, as
distinct from the abstract and often romanticized depictions of traditional owner-
ship practices that typically dominate policy discussions in multilateral organiza-
tions such as UNESCO. Many of these studies come from Papua New Guinea, a
region that has turned exchange relations into an art form. In one such study, James
Leach shows that for the people of Papua New Guinea’s Rai Coast, elements of cul-
ture are seen as more useful and productive in circulation than when returned to
their source. These customary practices and beliefs challenge UNESCO’s view that
the default setting for human communities is an overwhelming desire to possess and
control cultural property. For Leach’s Rai Coast interlocutors, repatriation severs
relationships instead of strengthening them. The case illustrates how matters that
seem relatively simple from afar reveal surprising complexities on the ground.22

INFORMATION SOCIETY SOLUTIONS TO INFORMATION

SOCIETY PROBLEMS?

A significant landmark in global efforts to protect traditional knowledge and cul-
tural productions is UNESCO’s adoption of the Convention for the Safeguarding of
the Intangible Cultural Heritage (CSICH) at the organization’s 32nd General Con-
ference in 2003. The convention calls for a range of measures “aimed at ensuring the
viability of the intangible cultural heritage, including the identification, documen-
tation, research, preservation, protection, promotion, enhancement, transmission,
particularly through formal and non-formal education, as well as the revitalization
of the various aspects of such heritage.”23

The CSICH should be seen in the context of UNESCO’s broader efforts to pro-
mote global information democracy while at the same time validating the right of
nations to defend their cultures against unwanted external influence. The most con-
troversial measure under consideration is a draft treaty, usually referred to as the
Convention on Cultural Diversity, that proposes to defend local cultures by validat-
ing the right of member states to control the importation of alien cultural products,
including books, films, and recorded music. Such a policy is vigorously opposed by
the world’s largest media corporations, disproportionately based in the United States,
who denounce it as a threat to free expression and an unwelcome restraint of trade.24
If implemented, UNESCO’s cultural diversity convention would register its most
immediate impact on national media industries. In contrast, the CSICH is directed
primarily to preindustrial, folkloric traditions.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

48

MICHAEL F. BROWN

One of the ironies of the CSICH is that its language and administrative strategies
are patterned on the very Information Society practices they are ostensibly trying to
counter. The convention portrays intangible heritage as an objectified resource ame-
nable to modern management techniques. In such a legalistic vision, heritage can-
not be protected until it is thoroughly documented. Hence the CSICH’s call for
preparation of “one or more inventories of the intangible cultural heritage present
in [each nation’s] territory.” The scale of the required list-making beggars the imag-
ination, especially for large or conspicuously multiethnic states such as Russia, China,
India, and Canada, to say nothing of Papua New Guinea, and Peru. The policy is
oddly reminiscent of early anthropology, which was driven by the conviction that
primitive cultures should be documented in their entirety—from basketry tech-
niques and healing arts to kinship systems and religious beliefs—because their extinc-
tion was inevitable. The discipline long ago concluded that documentation has only
a modest role in the preservation of culture. To think otherwise is to make the classic
error of mistaking a map for the territory it represents. So although there is nothing
obviously harmful about the CSICH’s ambitious program of cultural documenta-
tion, one struggles to imagine how it will protect cultures as living, dynamic systems.
Perhaps it is enough that the convention ratifies the importance of folkloric cultures
by putting the status of local knowledge on the world’s agenda as an issue worthy of
attention.25

The CSICH has inspired a handful of national campaigns to use electronic
resources to combat the loss of local traditions. India, for example, has announced
plans to “carry out extensive documentation of intangible heritage to provide the
preservation of each expression of heritage by making exhaustive inventories and
storing them electronically for the future.” Unfortunately, there is reason to doubt
that such technocratic and top-down approaches to heritage protection have much
to offer. First, experts in library science and data management are beginning to
confront the startling fragility of electronic records. Digital media degrade far faster
than was once recognized. Worse still, the technologies required to read them change
so rapidly that within a decade or two many records are orphaned, made unread-
able because no one possesses the obsolete equipment required to access them.
Second, the Internet and other intrusions of the Information Society have pushed
many native peoples toward greater secrecy. The notion that knowledge must be
recorded by outsiders in order to save it from loss is impossible to reconcile with
the inward-looking, protective turn now observed in many indigenous communi-
ties. This shift in the direction of secrecy drives indigenous demands for the
“repatriation of information”—that is, the return (and, in rare cases, the destruc-
tion) of ethnographic texts and images that communities wish to see removed
from the public domain on the grounds that the knowledge documented in these
materials should never have been public in the first place. Even when specific indig-
enous communities do not actively endorse greater secrecy, they are increasingly
fearful that documentation of their intangible heritage will not protect it but sim-
ply facilitate its exploitation, thus giving the notion of “heritage protection” an

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

49

Orwellian connotation. Their preferred strategy is, as one anthropologist has put
it, “security through obscurity.”26

A more promising Information Society tactic has been adopted by the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, both of which now sponsor online “prior art databases,” to
which India and China are prominent contributors. The idea behind the databases
is to publish traditional pharmacopoeias and thereby prevent patent applicants who
draw on them from claiming they have discovered something novel. Whether the
prior-art approach can prevail over the indigenous move toward greater secrecy
remains to be seen.27

LESSONS, QUESTIONS, PROSPECTS

Weighty questions remain unresolved in global discussions about intangible cul-
tural heritage. One concerns the balance between heritage as a resource for all of
humanity and as something that properly belongs to, and remains controlled by, its
communities of origin. Most major policy documents on this subject begin by declar-
ing that folklore and traditional knowledge are the common heritage of all human-
kind. They then outline schemes that would effectively remove much of this
knowledge from the global commons and privatize it in the communities where it is
thought to have arisen, and where it may be considered communal property. In a
discussion of similar tensions in the world of tangible cultural property, John Mer-
ryman distinguishes between cultural internationalists and cultural nationalists, the
latter holding that items of cultural heritage properly reside in their communities or
nations of origin. The internationalist side of the debate has been most recently
voiced in the controversial Declaration on the Importance and Value of Universal
Museums issued by directors of some of the world’s most important art museums.
There is little doubt, however, that cultural nationalists are in the ascendancy today.28
The contradiction between rhetorical appeals to notions of common human her-
itage and policies designed to slow the movement of traditional knowledge into the
public domain is addressed in a recent essay by the legal scholar and anthropologist
Rosemary Coombe, long an incisive commentator on issues of intellectual property
and the global ecology of information.Coombe observes that the lively public domain
sought by cultural internationalists can only prosper if minority cultures survive the
current process of globalization. A cultural public domain, she asserts, depends on
responsibilities as well as rights. Such responsibilities would include repudiation of
“takings of cultural goods” that “create cultural, social and political harms to peo-
ples for whom cultural forms are more tightly interwoven with specific forms of
subsistence in local lifeworlds of meaning.” Without a better balance of openness
and discretion, in other words, the cultural public domain could be reduced to an
ideal devoid of content. This illustrates an aspect of what Tyler Cowen calls the
“paradox of diversity.” “[T]he world as a whole may be more diverse,” he writes, “if

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

50

MICHAEL F. BROWN

some societies refuse to accept diversity as a value. Those cultures will continue to
generate highly unique creations, given their status as cultural outliers.” Conversely,
generalized diversity may produce greater uniformity because of the cultural blend-
ing that it inevitably produces.29

Coombe’s powerful argument for more aggressive sequestration of traditional
knowledge leads inevitably to another unresolved question in these debates: Is this
best accomplished through modifications of existing law, or should the global com-
munity craft sui generis regimes to do the job? The case-study material presented in
Coombe’s essay suggests that the creative use of legal mechanisms already in place can
accomplish a great deal. Despite more than a decade of calls for sui generis alterna-
tives, relatively few proposals have been laid out in a detailed way, I suspect because
when committed to formal language their many flaws are readily apparent.An exam-
ple is offered by the legal scholar Susan Scafidi, who has proposed a new category of
copyright-like protections for “cultural products” such as ethnic festivals.30 Scafidi’s
novel proposal is convincing until one begins to imagine the administrative appa-
ratus that would be necessary to implement it on a national or global scale. In com-
mon with many such ideas floated in international forums, it seems sublimely
detached from the practical circumstances of tribal and peasant communities in much
of the developing world, who find themselves at the margins of modern communi-
cations and, more to the point, the rule of law. Given the zero-sum nature of budgets
at the national and international levels, we must ask whether funds spent on the cre-
ation of complex schemes of cultural protection, which are typically administered by
nonindigenous elites, might be more responsibly invested in programs that directly
benefit target communities. At any rate, considerations of practicality and adminis-
trative overhead need to be brought into discussions of novel regimes of cultural pro-
tection, just as “transaction costs” must be assessed by governments considering the
increasingly expansive forms of intellectual property proposed by industry.

Also rarely discussed is how the world community should respond to intangible
heritage that is inconsistent with emerging global moral and ethical norms. What
are we to make of the complaint that, for instance, the global ban on commercial
whaling is ethnocentric and destructive of traditional Japanese cuisine and Japanese
heritage in general? Similar questions have long taken center stage in debates about
multiculturalism and democracy, but they are increasingly framed in terms of
“rights to heritage,” thus piggybacking on public enthusiasm for heritage in its
multiple forms.31 At present, debates about how one reconciles divergent values in
pluralist societies intersect only rarely with proposals for the preservation of intan-
gible heritage. Nevertheless, collisions of discrepant values are inevitable. The Orange
Order’s annual marching rituals in Northern Ireland come immediately to mind.
Advocates for these customs deploy the same rhetoric used by defenders of heritage
elsewhere. The parades, for instance, are described as the “culture, tradition, and
heritage of Ulster Protestants” and “a powerful symbol of their freedom to express
their culture.”32 Yet given their harmful impact in a volatile political situation, to
say nothing of their glorification of centuries of colonial oppression, do they merit

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

51

formal recognition and protection? Readers can doubtless think of similarly trou-
bling examples from their own region or cultural community.

Equally challenging is the question of who controls the representation of a com-
munity’s heritage, especially if de facto ownership of heritage, intangible or other-
wise, becomes enshrined in formal law.33 To a considerable extent this debate turns
on what one defines as the optimal balance of individual and cultural rights, a com-
plex philosophical issue beyond the scope of this essay. Suffice to say that an overly
broad interpretation of group rights to heritage can lead to situations in which mar-
ginalized members of cultural communities (women, gays and lesbians, religious
apostates, political dissidents) find themselves silenced by the power of a majority to
represent its values and practices to the world at large. The authoritarian potential of
cultural rights is easily overstated, of course, and it should not be seen as nullifying
their potential value. But any move in the direction of cultural rights requires con-
stant attention to the relationship of the few to the many, of the core values of a
cultural community to the internal resistances that give all societies a dynamic polit-
ical life and ensure their ability to respond successfully to change.34

INFORMATION ECOLOGY REVISITED

If we look at the information ecosystem in its totality (see Figure 1), it is obvious that
heritage-protection efforts have largely been focused on the IP Domain–specifically,
the possible extension of the rights of the IP Domain to traditional communities,
which ideally would be complemented by more restricted access for private indus-
try. This is justified but by no means unproblematic. It is easy to declare that intan-
gible cultural property now enjoys protections analogous to copyright or patent. It
is another matter to determine what qualifies as intangible culture in the first place
and then to devise cost-effective mechanisms to protect it. The contemporary her-
itage crisis invites sweeping claims of cultural ownership that have little basis in fact.
In an ethnographic study of American Neo-pagans, for example, Sabina Magliocco
mentions that in 1993 neo-pagan groups were denounced by Lakota Indian elders:
“Members of the Lakota delegation [to an international gathering of religious lead-
ers] assumed that certain Pagan practices such as worshipping in a circle, invoking
the four directions, and purifying with burning herbs were imitations of Native
American practice, whereas in fact these particular practices developed indepen-
dently in Europe, an example of polygenesis [independent invention].”35

Efforts to regulate “traditional” expressive culture are bound to have a chilling
effect on fair use and artistic expression, especially given the constantly changing,
entirely negotiable content of heritage. Free expression is not a social good that
trumps every other, of course. Neither is it a right that we should jettison casually.An
ecological approach to the IP Domain requires that we maintain a legal high-wire
act: balancing the sometimes opposed goals of heritage preservation and the values
of an open society.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

52

MICHAEL F. BROWN

FIGURE 1.
field, “The Public and Private Domains,” 286)

Intangible cultural heritage and the information ecosystem (after Graham Dut-

Subject to more limited consideration, at least thus far, is the public domain
and the ways it might be reinvented to promote cultural diversity at the global
level. A handful of innovative approaches are worthy of note. The California-
based organization Creative Commons, a pioneer in the creation of voluntaristic
alternatives to copyright, is working on plans to create a framework for the shar-
ing of scientific databases that will also respect indigenous canons of confidenti-
ality. The Creative Commons is explicitly advancing a vision of a broadened rather
than a more restrictive public domain, which admittedly is difficult to square with
indigenous concerns about the preservation of knowledge in its original context.
But the organization’s inventiveness may inspire other groups actively seeking alter-
natives to existing IPR practices. At the opposite end of the public domain spec-
trum, but equally intriguing, are efforts to bolster protections for the “Secret-
Sacred” zone of the information ecosystem by creating indigenous archives or
“keeping places” to secure intangible heritage under conditions of confidentiality
consistent with local norms. Because such norms may be illiberal from the per-
spective of democratic values, however, they raise formidable questions that will
be resolved only after vigorous debate and a fair amount of compromise.36

An important strategy for survival in situations of ecological stress is cross-
breeding or hybridity. New circumstances may require new regulatory approaches.
Yet perhaps because hybridity has come to be seen as part of the problem rather than
part of the solution, much discussion has focused on whether customary law offers
a viable alternative to western IPR concepts. This is appealing because of its conso-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

53

nance with a politics of ethnic sovereignty. One must ask, though, whether the world
will be a better place if we replace one expansive, flawed, ethnocentric system by a
thicket of small-scale, flawed, ethnocentric systems whose sole virtue is that local
communities are familiar with them. Even sympathetic observers acknowledge that
wholesale acceptance of customary law would force large multicultural states to deal
with dozens or even hundreds of legal systems on a daily basis. Such an explosion of
legal diversity would impose an immense administrative burden and conflict with
the liberal democratic principle (admittedly, more often declared than realized in
fact) that all citizens should be subject to the same laws.37

An alternative to formal recognition of customary law is the development of hybrid
approaches that interweave elements of western law and local, traditional rules for
the circulation of knowledge. Drawing on ideas originating in Papua New Guinea,
Marilyn Strathern provides examples of what such hybrid approaches might look
like, and we have reason to hope that similarly imaginative thinking will arise else-
where. The much-cited Bulun Bulun decision in Australia (Bulun Bulun and
Milpurrurru v. R & T Textiles, 1998) may be a harbinger of change because it acknowl-
edges that Aboriginal clan communities have specific fiduciary rights in religious art
that must be reckoned with outside their communities, although these rights do not
legally qualify as joint authorship.38 The preponderance of evidence strongly sug-
gests that the best prospects for legal hybridity are at the local rather than the global
level, although schemes that work well in one local context are likely to spread to
others in an organic way as new approaches to authorship, ownership, and the cir-
culation of cultural resources become familiar to wider publics.

In keeping with a holistic perspective, I close with a final question that expands
the analytical frame beyond the information ecosystem. My query is inspired by a
provocative essay on human rights by the political philosopher Wendy Brown.Human
rights are important, Brown says, but are they “the most that can be hoped for at this
point in history?” Might not an unrelenting focus on human rights stand in the way
of more far-reaching possibilities for making the world a better place? Human rights
advocacy, Brown avers, “is a politics and it organizes political space, often with the
aim of monopolizing it.”39

Similarly unsparing questions must be asked about our current enthusiasm for
the management of intangible cultural property. Heritage preservation is, or should
be, a means to the end of fostering societies in which minority communities have a
voice in decisions about their future and where they can attain the same prosperity
available to everyone else, should they choose to do so. Cultural heritage is impor-
tant to their well-being, but it is not the only issue that merits attention. What about
public health, education, and self-government? As the legal scholar Michael H. Davis
asks, can massive cultural appropriation of the intangible cultural heritage of indig-
enous peoples be treated as an autonomous issue, or does it follow more or less
inevitably from the power difference between small-scale societies and the world’s
industrial giants? If the latter, then will new laws regarding folklore and traditional
knowledge make much of a difference?40

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

54

MICHAEL F. BROWN

When confronted by the ambitious schemes now emerging on the heritage-
protection front—proposals that illuminate with remarkable fidelity Max Weber’s
vision of a world driven by bureaucratic logic and a compulsion to rationalize—one
sometimes wonders whether all the legal creativity risks missing the point. For if
global cultural diversity is preserved on digital recording devices while the people
who gave rise to this artistry and knowledge have disappeared, then efforts to pre-
serve intangible heritage will be judged a failure. That unhappy prospect should
always be kept in mind as we consider comprehensive plans that presume to manage
the intellectual and artistic achievements of the world’s most vulnerable societies.

ENDNOTES

1. On the insistence that Australia’s native species are the intellectual property of Aboriginal Aus-
tralians, see “Aboriginals up in Arms over Symbols, The Australian, 29 January 2002, 2, accessed via
Lexis-Nexis. On landscape as indigenous intellectual and cultural property, see Ross Barnett, “Sacred
Sights,” The Australian, 5 March 2004, 14, accessed via Lexis-Nexis; on the heritage status of places
construed more broadly, an indispensable recent work is Thomas F. King, Places That Count. The status
of history and prehistory as intellectual or cultural properties is taken up in George P. Nicholas and
Kelly P. Bannister, “Copyrighting the Past?”

2. Quoted in John Henry Merryman,“Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property,” 836. Use-
ful sources for historical and theoretical background on international efforts to protect indigenous
heritage include S. James Anaya, Indigenous Peoples in International Law, and Lawrence Rosen, “The
Right to Be Different.” On the question of whether privately held art should be seen as public cultural
property, an important work is Joseph L. Sax, Playing Darts with a Rembrandt.

3. See especially Lyndel V. Prott and Patrick J. O’Keefe, “‘Cultural Heritage’ or ‘Cultural Prop-
erty?’” Although Prott and O’Keefe’s arguments for using “cultural heritage” in preference to
“cultural property” are persuasive, the latter’s inscription in law and international treaties makes it
an unavoidable element of contemporary debate. A concise comparison of definitions of cultural
property has been posted on the Internet by the Department of Arts Policy and Management, City
/
/
University of London, at ,www.city.ac.uk
cult-def.html. accessed 24 June 2004. Two recent
artspol
essays that explore the implications of the now-conventional juxtaposition of culture and property
are Michael Rowlands, “Cultural Rights and Wrongs,” and Michael F. Brown, “Heritage as Property.”
For an explanation of the many difficulties that attend the concept of “cultural heritage,” see Janet
Blake, “On Defining the Cultural Heritage.”

4. An engaging survey of the effects of our ability to reproduce images, texts, and sounds at will is

Hillel Schwartz, The Culture of the Copy.

5. To the best of my knowledge, the concept of “information ecology” has remained underdevel-
oped, although it is increasingly used in library science and among knowledge-management consul-
tants in business contexts. See, for example, Thomas H. Davenport, Information Ecology.

6. These issues are explored, with particular reference the management of business information, in

Davenport, Information Ecology, 28–45.

7. Stuart Kirsch and others have argued that a second major factor promoting anxiety about cul-
tural heritage is the global diffusion of western property models. For details, see Kirsch, “Property
Limits.”

8. Castells offers a concise summary of these themes in the essay “Materials for an Exploratory

Theory of the Network Society.”

9. For a vigorous critique of the work of Castells and like-minded social theorists, see Christopher

May, The Information Society.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

55

10. On information’s transformation of time and space, see Paul Virilio, The Information Bomb,113.
Works that consider the impact of monopoly control of global media include Peter Drahos and John
Braithwaite, Information Feudalism; Lawrence Lessig, Free Culture; Kembrew McLeod, Owning Cul-
ture; and Siva Vaidhyanathan, Copyrights and Copywrongs.

11. Tyler Cowen, Creative Destruction, 24–33,
12. Simon Harrison, “Identity as a Scarce Resource.” On the impact of the Information Society on

culture, see especially Scott Lash, Critique of Information, 26–27.

13. Lash, op. cit., 81–82.
14. My allusion to the work of Gregory Bateson draws on his essay, “Form, Substance, and Differ-
ence,” in Steps to an Ecology of Mind, 453. The literature on cultural appropriation is too vast to inven-
tory here. Two influential works that bring together a range of perspectives and case-study material are
Rosemary J. Coombe, The Cultural Life of Intellectual Properties, and Bruce Ziff and Pratima V. Rao,
eds., Borrowed Power. More recent essay-length works that explore different aspects of appropriation
include S. Michelle Erasmus, “Repatriating Words”; Thomas Heyd, “Rock Art Aesthetics and Cultural
Appropriation”; Peter Shand,“Scenes from the Colonial Catwalk”; Rebecca Tsosie,“Reclaiming Native
Stories”; and James O. Young, “The Ethics of Cultural Appropriation.”

15. Studies of heritage protection and IPR published since 2000 by legal scholars include Rachael
Grad,“Indigenous Rights and Intellectual Property Law”; William J. Hapiuk, Jr.,“Of Kitsch and Kachi-
nas”; Sarah Harding, “Defining Traditional Knowledge”; Terri Janke, “Minding Culture”; Amina Para
Matlon,“Safeguarding Native American Sacred Art by Partnering Tribal Law and Equity”; Owen Mor-
gan,“Protecting Indigenous Signs and Trade Marks”; James D. Nason,“Traditional Property and Mod-
ern Laws”; Gelvina Rodriguez Stevenson, “Trade Secrets”; Coenraad J. Visser, “Making Intellectual
Property Laws Work for Traditional Knowledge”; and Daniel Wüger,“Prevention of Misappropriation
of Intangible Cultural Heritage Through Intellectual Property Laws.” For sheer comprehensiveness of
legal research, Silke von Lewinski, ed., Indigenous Heritage and Intellectual Property has few peers.

16. Recent contributions from fields other than law include Michael F. Brown, Who Owns Native
Culture?; Elizabeth Coleman, “Aboriginal Art and Identity”; Stuart Kirsch, “Lost Worlds”; Mary Riley,
ed., Indigenous Intellectual Property Rights; and Peter Seitel, ed., Safeguarding Traditional Cultures.

17. Among many recent forays into the debate about culture are Jane K. Cowan, Marie-Bénédicte
Dembour, and Richard A. Wilson, “Introduction,” in Culture and Rights; Thomas Hylland Eriksen,
“Between Universalism and Relativism”; Clifford Geertz, Available Light, 68–88; and Peter J. M. Nas,
“Masterpieces of Oral and Intangible Heritage.” For a study of how notions of indigenous culture play
out in a bioprospecting controversy, see Shane Greene, “Indigenous People Incorporated?”

18. Bruce Robbins and Elsa Stamatopoulou, “Reflections on Culture and Cultural Rights,” espe-
cially 422 and 426. Various anthropologists have come to similar conclusions, although by different
analytical routes. See, for example, James Clifford, “Indigenous Articulations,” and the essays in Erich
Kasten, ed., Properties of Culture–Culture as Property.

19. For an assessment of the global indigenous-rights movement, see Ronald Niezen, The Origins of
Indigenism. Recent critiques of the notion of indigenousness include John R. Bowen,“Should We Have
a Universal Concept of ‘Indigenous Peoples’ Rights?’” and Adam Kuper, “The Return of the Native.”
20. Work raising doubts about IPR approaches includes Sarah Harding,“Cultural Property and the
Limitations of Preservation,” and Stephen D. Osborne, “Protecting Tribal Stories.” My allusion to the
work of Darrell A. Posey and Graham Dutfield refers to Beyond Intellectual Property. The passage by
Russel Barsh is from “How Do You Patent a Landscape?” 40.
21. Marilyn Strathern, Property, Substance, and Effect, 167.
22. James Leach,“Owning Creativity”; see also Jacob L.Simet,“Copyrighting Traditional Tolai Knowl-
edge?”; Marilyn Strathern,“Multiple Perspectives on Intellectual Property”; and the essays in Lawrence
Kalinoe and James Leach, eds., Rationales of Ownership.

23. Article 2, section 3.
24. On the proposed cultural diversity convention, see Peter Ford,“Global Pushback Against‘Titanic’
Culture,” Christian Science Monitor, 20 October 2003, 1. Ironically, at least some media critics in the
United States are beginning to complain that globalizing media have undermined the quality of Amer-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

56

MICHAEL F. BROWN

ican arts and culture as well. See David Kipen, “Offshoring the Audience,” for an assessment of how
pressures to make movies that sell as well abroad as in the U.S. now militate against screenplays that
address uniquely American experiences and dilemmas.

25. The passage quoted from the CSICH is from Article 12, section 1. I express my reservations
about the CSICH in greater detail in “Safeguarding the Intangible.” My essay prompted a thoughtful
rejoinder from Richard Kurin, director of the Smithsonian Center for Folklife and Cultural Heri-
tage, who participated actively in UNESCO debates about the specific language of the CSICH.
Although acknowledging the convention’s flaws, Kurin argues that the CSICH will have a construc-
tive effect because it asserts that “the practice of one’s culture is a human right” and confirms that
“all cultures give purpose and meaning to lives and thus deserve to be safeguarded.” See Kurin,
“Tangible Progress.”

26. Information on India’s heritage protection plan is from Akshaya Mukul, “Government’s Intan-
gible Heritage Plan,” Times of India, 2 October 2003, ,www.timesofindia.com., accessed 26 Octo-
ber 2003. On the fragility of digital records, see Alexander Stille, “Are we losing our memory?” The
practical, legal, and ethical issues surrounding group secrecy, are discussed in Brown, Who Owns
Native Culture? 27–42, and Harding, “Cultural Secrecy and the Protection of Cultural Property.” The
expression “security through obscurity” comes from Eric C. Kansa, personal communication.

27. World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), “Portal of Online Databases and Registries
/
/
/
/
/
of Traditional Knowledge and Genetic Resources”,www.wipo.int
index.html
tkportal
databases
en
tk
Geneva., accessed 28 July 2004; American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS),“Tra-
/
ditional Ecological Knowledge Prior Art Database” ,ip.aaas.org
tekindex.nsf Washington, DC.,
accessed 28 July 2004.

28. John Henry Merryman, “Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property,” especially 846. The
difficulty of reconciling the universal and local ownership of cultural heritage is explored in Blake,“On
Defining the Cultural Heritage.” The Declaration on the Importance and Value of Universal Museums
was issued in 2002, and copies are available in multiple sources on the Internet.

29. Rosemary J. Coombe, “Fear, Hope, and Longing for the Future of Authorship and a Revitalized
Public Domain in Global Regimes of Intellectual Property,” 1185; Cowen, Creative Destruction, 146.

30. Susan Scafidi, “Intellectual Property and Cultural Products.”
31. Calvin Sims,“Japan, Feasting on Whale, Sniffs at‘Culinary Imperialism’ of U.S,”New York Times,
10 August 2000, A1. A Japanese dentist quoted in the article remarks,“As a child, we ate miso soup with
whale meat every New Year’s Eve. It was a centuries-old tradition in my village. You can’t imagine how
precious this soup is to me right now.” In comments on an earlier draft of this paper, Stuart Kirsch
pointed out that the renewal of traditional whaling among the Makah Indians of Washington State is
justified in language similar to that of advocates for Japanese whaling. He wondered why I do not
mention the Makah case in the same paragraph. He makes a valid point, although I would insist that
the scale of whaling in the two cases is so different that the Makah merit different treatment.

32. See, for instance, the website entitled “Protestant Parades in Northern Ireland,” ,www.
/
parades_culture_tradtion.html., accessed 26 July 2004. One of the few
ulsterloyal.freeservers.com
works that addresses awkward conflicts about the nature and value of “heritage” is Robert Shannan
Peckham, ed., Rethinking Heritage. For observations on the politics of remembering and forgetting, see
David Lowenthal, The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History.

33. An essay that sounds a cautionary note in this regard is Madhavi Sunder, “Intellectual Property

and Identity Politics.” See also her “Cultural Dissent.”

34. For a vigorous defense of cultural rights, see Bruce Robbins and Elsa Stamatopoulou, “Reflec-
tions on Culture and Cultural Rights.” In contrast, the political scientist Brian Barry, in Culture and
Equality, argues that most important collective rights are adequately encompassed, and with fewer
risks to individual freedom, by a broad interpretation of liberal theories about individuals’ right of free
association. A centrist position not unsympathetic to cultural rights but sensitive to their potential
problems is argued in Lawrence G. Sager, “The Free Exercise of Culture.”

35. Two key works that come closest to following an ecological approach to information rights are
James Boyle, Shamans, Software, and Spleens, and Rosemary J. Coombe, The Cultural Life of Intellectual

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

57

Properties. Also notable for its holism is Graham Dutfield, “The Public and Private Domains.” On
Lakota claims of ownership of religious practices, see Sabina Magliocco, Witching Culture, 234.

36. Creative Commons provides background information on its history and goals in its website,
,www.creativecommons.org.. A statement by the College of Indigenous Aboriginal Peoples of New
South Wales, Australia, explains that part of its mission is to serve as a “keeping place for the safe
protection of Indigenous Intellectual and Cultural Property and the advancement of shared scholar-
/
ship with Bundjalung Elders” ,www.dev.scu.edu.au

ciap., accessed 28 July 2004.

schools

/

37. Silke von Lewinski, “Final Considerations,” in S. von Lewinski, ed., Indigenous Heritage and
Intellectual Property, 386–387, regarding the difficulties of recognizing customary law in pluralist states.
38. See especially Strathern’s Property, Substance, and Effect, 179–203, as well as Dutfield,“The Pub-
lic and Private Domains,” 289, and Kirsch,“Property Limits.” The Bulun Bulun case is formally known
as Bulun Bulun and Muilpurrurru v. R & T Textiles Pty Ltd [1998] 1082 FCA (3 Sept. 1998).

39. Wendy Brown, “‘The Most We Can Hope for . . .’.”
40. Michael H. Davis, “Some Realism About Indigenism.”

BIBLIOGRAPHY

American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). Traditional Ecological Knowledge Prior
/
Art Database. 28 July 2004 ,ip.aaas.org

tekindex.nsf..

Anaya, S. James. Indigenous Peoples in International Law. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Barry, Brian. Culture and Equality. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2001.

Barsh, Russel L.“How Do You Patent a Landscape? The Perils of Dichotomizing Cultural and Intellec-
tual Property.” International Journal of Cultural Property 8, no. 1 (1999): 14–47.

Bateson, Gregory. Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine, 1972.

Blake, Janet. “On Defining the Cultural Heritage.” International and Comparative Law Quarterly 49
(2000): 61–85.

Bowen, John R. “Should We Have a Universal Concept of ‘Indigenous Peoples’ Rights?’ Ethnicity and
Essentialism in the Twenty-First Century.” Anthropology Today 16, no. 4 (August 2000): 12–16.

Boyle, James. Shamans, Software, and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information Society.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996.

Brown, Michael F. Who Owns Native Culture? Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003.

———. “Safeguarding the Intangible.” Center for Arts and Culture, Washington, D.C. <http://www.
culturalcommons.org/comment-print.cfm?ID=12>, accessed 27 August 2004.

———. “Heritage as Property.” In Property in Question: Value Transformation in the Global Economy,
edited by Katherine Verdery and Caroline Humphrey. Oxford: Berg, 2004., 49–68.

Brown, Wendy. “’The Most We Can Hope for . . .’: Human Rights and the Politics of Fatalism.” South
Atlantic Quarterly 103, no. 2-3 (2004): 451–463.

Castells, Manuel. “Materials for an Exploratory Theory of the Network Society.” British Journal of
Sociology 51, no. 1 (2000): 5–24.

Clifford, James. “Indigenous Articulations.” The Contemporary Pacific 13, no. 2 (2001): 468–490.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

58

MICHAEL F. BROWN

Coleman, Elizabeth. “Aboriginal Art and Identity: Crossing the Border of Law’s Imagination.” Journal
of Political Philosophy 12, no. 1 (2004): 20–40.

Coombe, Rosemary J. The Cultural Life of Intellectual Properties: Authorship, Appropriation, and the
Law. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1998.

———. “Fear, Hope, and Longing for the Future of Authorship and a Revitalized Public Domain in
Global Regimes of Intellectual Property.” DePaul Law Revew 53 (2003): 1171–1191.

Cowen, Tyler. Creative Destruction: How Globalization is Changing the World’s Cultures. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 2002.

Davenport, Thomas H. Information Ecology: Mastering the Information and Knowledge Environment.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.

Davis, Michael H. “Some Realism About Indigenism.” Cardozo Journal of International and Compara-
tive Law 11, no. 3 (2003): 815–830.

Drahos, Peter, with John Braithwaite. Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge Economy? New
York: The New Press, 2003.

Dutfield, Graham.“The Public and Private Domains: Intellectual Property Rights in Traditional Knowl-
edge.” Science Communication 21 (2000): 274–295.

Erasmus, S. Michelle. “Repatriating Words: Local Knowledge in a Global Context.” American Indian
Quarterly 26, no. 2 (2002): 286–307.

Eriksen, Thomas Hylland.“Between Universalism and Relativism: A Critique of the UNESCO Concept
of Culture.” In Culture and Rights: Anthropological Perspectives, edited by Jane K. Cowan, Marie-
Bénédicte Dembour, and Richard A. Wilson, 127–148. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Geertz, Clifford. Available Light: Anthropological Reflections on Philosophical Topics. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 2000.

Grad, Rachael. “Indigenous Rights and Intellectual Property Law: A Comparison of the United States
and Australia.” Duke Journal of Comparative and International Law 13, no. 1 (2003): 203–231.

Greene, Shane. “Indigenous People Incorporated? Culture as Politics, Culture as Property in Pharma-
ceutical Bioprospecting.” Current Anthropology 45, no. 2 (2004): 211–237.

Hapiuk, William J., Jr. “Of Kitsch and Kachinas: A Critical Analysis of the Indian Arts and Crafts Act of
1990.” Stanford Law Review 53 (2001): 1009–1075.

Harding, Sarah.“Cultural Secrecy and the Protection of Cultural Property.”In Topics in Cultural Resource
Law, 69–78. Washington, DC: Society for American Archaeology, 2000.

———. “Cultural Property and the Limitations of Preservation.” Law and Policy 25, no. 1 (2003):
17–36.

———. “Defining Traditional Knowledge–Lessons from Cultural Property.” Cardozo Journal of Inter-
national and Comparative Law 11, no. 2 (2003): 511–518.

Harrison, Simon. “Identity as a Scarce Resource.” Social Anthropology 7, no. 3 (1999): 239–251.

Heyd, Thomas. “Rock Art Aesthetics and Cultural Appropriation.” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 61, no. 1 (2003): 37–46.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

59

Janke, Terri. “Minding Culture: Case Studies in Intellectual Property and Traditional Cultural Expres-
sion,” ,www.wipo.int
finalstudy.pdf. (2003).
Accessed 20 July 2004

/
minding-culture

cultural

studies

studies

en

tk

/

/

/

/

/

/

Kalinoe, Lawrence, and James Leach, eds. Rationales of Ownership: Ethnographic Studies of Transactions
and Claims to Ownership in Contemporary Papua New Guinea. New Delhi: UBS Publishers’ Distribu-
tors Ltd., 2001.

Kasten, Erich, ed. Properties of Culture–Culture as Property: Pathways to Reform in Post-Soviet Siberia.
Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag, 2004.

King, Thomas F. Places That Count: Traditional Cultural Properties in Cultural Resource Management.
Walnut Creek, Cal.: AltaMira Press, 2003.

Kipen, David. “Offshoring the Audience.” Atlantic Monthly (Boston), June 2004, 115–120.

Kirsch, Stuart.“Lost Worlds: Environmental Disaster,‘Cultural Loss,’ and the Law.” Current Anthropol-
ogy 42, no. 2 (2001): 167–198.

———. “Property Limits: Debates on the Body, Nature and Culture.” In Transactions and Creations:
Property Debates and the Stimulus of Melanesia, edited by Eric Hirsch and Marilyn Stathern, 21–39.
New York: Berghahn Books, 2004.

Kuper, Adam. “The Return of the Native.” Current Anthropology 44, no. 3 (2003): 389–402.

Kurin, Richard. “Tangible Progress.” Center for Arts and Culture, Washington, D.C. <http://www.
culturalcommons.org/kurin.htm>, accessed 27 August 2004.

Lash, Scott. Critique of Information. London: Sage Publications, 2002.

Leach, James. “Owning Creativity: Cultural Property and the Efficacy of Custom on the Rai Coast of
Papua New Guinea.” Journal of Material Culture 8, no. 2 (2003): 123–144.

Lessig, Lawrence. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and
Control Creativity. New York: Penguin, 2004.

Lowenthal, David. The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998.

Magliocco, Sabina. Witching Culture: Folklore and Neo-Paganism in America. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press, 2004.

Matlon, Amina Para. “Safeguarding Native American Sacred Art by Partnering Tribal Law and Equity:
An Exploratory Case Study Applying the Bulun Bulun Equity to Navajo Sandpainting.” Columbia Jour-
nal of Law and the Arts 27 (2004): 211–247.

/
May, Christopher. The Information Society: A Sceptical View. Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press
2002.

Blackwell,

McLeod, Kembrew. Owning Culture: Authorship, Ownership, and Intellectual Property Law. New York:
Peter Lang, 2001.

Merryman, John Henry. “Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property.” American Journal of Inter-
national Law 80 (1986): 831–853.

Morgan, Owen. “Protecting Indigenous Signs and Trade Marks: The New Zealand Experience.” Intel-
lectual Property Quarterly 1, no. Winter (2004): 58–84.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

60

MICHAEL F. BROWN

Nas, Peter J. M.“Masterpieces of Oral and Intangible Heritage.” Current Anthropology 43, no. 1 (2003):
139–148.

Nason, James D.“Traditional Property and Modern Laws: The Need for Native American Community
Intellectual Property Rights Legislation.” Stanford Law and Policy Review 12, no. 2 (2001): 255–266.

Nicholas, George P., and Kelly P. Bannister. “Copyrighting the Past? Emerging Intellectual Property
Rights Issues in Archaeology.” Current Anthropology 45, no. 3 (2004): 327–350.

Niezen, Ronald. The Origins of Indigenism: Human Rights and the Politics of Identity. Berkeley, Cal.:
University of California Press, 2003.

Osborne, Stephen D. “Protecting Tribal Stories: The Perils of Propertization.” American Indian Law
Review 28 (2003): 203–236.

Peckham, Robert Shannan, ed. Rethinking Heritage: Cultures and Politics in Europe. London: I.B. Taurus,
2003.

Posey, Darrell A., and Graham Dutfield. Beyond Intellectual Property: Toward Traditional Resource Rights
for Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre,
1996.

Prott, Lyndel V., and Patrick J. O’Keefe.“‘Cultural Heritage’ or ‘Cultural Property?’”International Jour-
nal of Cultural Property 1 (1992): 307–320.

Riley, Mary, ed. Indigenous Intellectual Property Rights: Legal Obstacles and Innovative Solutions. Lan-
ham, Md.: AltaMira Press, 2004.

Robbins, Bruce, and Elsa Stamatopoulou.“Reflections on Culture and Cultural Rights.” South Atlantic
/
Quarterly 103, no. 2

3 (2004): 419–434.

Rosen, Lawrence.“The Right to be Different: Indigenous Peoples and the Quest for a Unified Theory.”
Yale Law Journal 107, no. 1 (October 1997): 227–259.

Rowlands, Michael. “Cultural Rights and Wrongs: Uses of the Concept of Property.” In Property in
Question: Value Transformation in the Global Economy, edited by Katherine Verdery and Caroline Hum-
phrey, 207–226. Oxford: Berg, 2004.

Sager, Lawrence G.“The Free Exercise of Culture: Some Doubts and Distinctions.”In Engaging Cultural
Differences: The Multicultural Challenge in Liberal Democracies, edited by Richard Shweder, Martha
Minow, and Hazel Rose Markus, 165–176. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2002.

Sax, Joseph L. Playing Darts with a Rembrandt: Public and Private Rights in Cultural Treasures. Ann
Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Press, 1999.

Scafidi, Susan. “Intellectual Property and Cultural Products.” Boston University Law Review 81 (2001):
793–842.

Schwartz, Hillel. The Culture of the Copy: Striking Likenesses, Unreasonable Facsimiles. New York: Zone
Books, 1996.

Seitel, Peter, ed. Safeguarding Traditional Cultures: A Global Assessment. Washington, D.C.: Center for
Folklife and Cultural Heritage, Smithsonian Institution, 2001.

Shand, Peter.“Scenes from the Colonial Catwalk: Cultural Appropriation, Intellectual Property Rights,
and Fashion.” Cultural Analysis 3 (2002): 47–88.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010

HERITAGE TROUBLE

61

Simet, Jacob L. “Copyrighting Traditional Tolai Knowledge?” In Protection of Intellectual, Biological,
and Cultural Property in Papua New Guinea, edited by Kathy Whimp and Mark Busse, 62–80. Canberra:
/
Asia Pacific Press

Conservation Melanesia, 2000.

Stevenson, Gelvina Rodriguez. “Trade Secrets: The Secret to Protecting Indigenous Ethnobiological
(Medicinal) Knowledge.” New York University Journal of International Law and Politics 32 (2000):
1119–1174.

Stille, Alexander.“Are We Losing Our Memory? or the Museum of Obsolete Technology.” In The Future
of the Past, 299–310. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2002.

Strathern, Marilyn. “Multiple Perspectives on Intellectual Property.” In Protection of Intellectual, Bio-
logical, and Cultural Property in Papua New Guinea, edited by Kathy Whimp and Mark Busse, 47–61.
Canberra, 2000.

———. Property, Substance and Effect: Anthropological Essays on Persons and Things. London: Athlone
Press, 1999.

Sunder, Madhavi. “Intellectual Property and Identity Politics: Playing with Fire.” Journal of Gender,
Race, and Justice 4, no. No. 1 (2000): 69–98.

———. “Cultural Dissent.” Stanford Law Review 54, no. 3 (2001): 495–567.

Tsosie, Rebecca.“Reclaiming Native Stories: An Essay on Cultural Appropriation and Cultural Rights.”
Arizona State Law Journal 34 (2002): 299–358.

Vaidhyanathan, Siva. Copyrights and Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How It Threatens
Creativity. New York: New York University Press, 2001.

Virilio, Paul. The Information Bomb. London: Verso, 2000.

Visser, Coenraad J.“Making Intellectual Property Laws Work for Traditional Knowledge.”In Poor People’s
Knowledge: Promoting Intellectual Property in Developing Countries, edited by J. Michael Finger and
/
Philip Schuler, 207–240. Washington, D.C.: World Bank

Oxford University Press, 2004.

von Lewinski, Silke, ed. Indigenous Heritage and Intellectual Property: Genetic Resources, Traditional
Knowledge and Folklore. The Hague: Kluwer, 2004.

Wüger, Daniel.“Prevention of Misappropriation of Intangible Cultural Heritage Through Intellectual
Property Laws.” In Poor People’s Knowledge: Promoting Intellectual Property in Developing Countries,
edited by J. Michael Finger and Philip Schuler, 183–206. Washington, D.C.: World Bank
Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2004.

/

Young, James O. “The Ethics of Cultural Appropriation.” Dalhousie Review 80 (2000): 301–316.

Ziff, Bruce, and Pratima V. Rao, eds. Borrowed Power: Essays on Cultural Appropriation. New Bruns-
wick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1997.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:41:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739105050010


