Who  has  a  Right  to  Historic
Wrecks  and  Wreckage?
Sarah Dromgoole* and Nicholas Gaskell**

1  Introduction

In  order  to  provide  effective  legal  protection  for  the cultural  herit-
age, it is necessary  to know who has what  rights to, or interests in,
material of cultural value. The largest part of the underwater cultural
heritage  —  wrecks and wreckage  —  is subject  to  some very special
rules  in  this  regard.  This article will  therefore  examine  the  various
proprietary  and  possessory  interests  which  exist  in  wreck,  along
with some of the restrictions or limitations imposed on them.1 These
interests and restrictions have been established and developed in the
UK  by  Admiralty  and  common  law  over  many  centuries  and —
since the nineteenth century  —  have to some extent been recognised
and  protected  by  statute.  Most  of  the  law  has  developed  to  deal
with  commercial  interests,  although  an  increasing  focus  is  being
placed  on  the interests of those concerned  for  the cultural heritage.
Interest in wreck law has grown along with the dramatic increases
in technology that have enabled  the discovery of ships long thought
lost,  such  as  the  Titanic.  In  addition  to  the  interest  generated
by  sport  divers,  commercial  recovery  enterprises  have  flourished,
particularly  off  the  US  coasts.  As  well  as  exotic  Spanish  treasure
ships, there are hundreds of private merchant ships which were sunk
during World Wars I and  II  of no commercial  worth  in  themselves
but  with  non-perishable  cargoes  of  considerable  value.  Cargoes
which are sought after  include nickel, copper, aluminium, platinum,
tin  and  lead.  There  are  also  more  mundane  cargoes  which  are
proving  attractive  to  commercial  divers,  including  coal, jute  and
teak.  Since some nineteenth  and  twentieth  century  vessels may be
considered  of  historical  importance,2  it  is  clear  that  situations  of
conflict  may  emerge  between  those  interested  in  the  commercial
value  of  the  vessel's  cargo,  and  those  interested  in  the  historical
value  of the vessel itself and  its contents.

*  Lecturer  in  Law, University  of  Leicester.
**  Reader  in  Maritime  Law, University  of  Southampton.

217

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

1.1  Definitions  of'Wreck'
The term 'wreck' has many different  meanings. In common parlance
it  tends  to  mean  a  vessel  washed  up  on  the  coast,  or  a  sunken
vessel.3 In  legal commentaries it  may refer  to either  wreccum maris,
i. e. material  washed ashore  after  shipwreck, or to adventurae maris,
i. e. material  still at  sea; or  to  both.4 There are also many  statutory
definitions.  The term  'wreck'  for  the purposes of Part IX of the UK
Merchant  Shipping  Act  1894, which  deals  with wreck  and  salvage,
includes  jetsam,  flotsam,  lagan5  and  derelict6  found  in  or  on  the
shores  of  the sea  or any  tidal  water.7 This definition  is much  wider
than  that  at  Admiralty  law  which  defines  wreck  as  property  cast
ashore  within  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide  after  shipwreck,  i. e.
wreccum maris.8  In  fact,  the  Act  seems  to  have  been  intended  to
include  under  one  term  prerogative  rights  pertaining  to  land,  i. e.
the right to  wreccum maris,9  and  those constituting droits of admir-
alty, i. e. the right to adventurae maris.m  The term also encompasses
aircraft11  and  hovercraft.12  By contrast,  the New Zealand  Shipping
and  Seamen  Act  1952  defines  'wreck'  to  include:  '[a]ny  ship  or
aircraft  which is abandoned,  stranded  or in distress at sea or in any
river  or  lake  or  other  inland  water,  or any  equipments  or cargo  or
other  articles  belonging  to  or  separated  from  any  such  ship  or
aircraft  which  is lost  at  sea  or  in  any  river  or  lake  or  other  inland
water'.13 As Davies points out,14  this is a less restricted and complex
definition  than  the  corresponding  UK  provision.  The  US  Aban-
doned  Shipwreck  Act  of  1987  defines  'shipwreck'  very  simply  as
meaning  'a  vessel  or  wreck,  its  cargo  and  other  contents'.15  This
article will consider wreck  in  a similarly wide sense, so as to encom-
pass  all  property  cast  ashore  or  remaining  at  sea  after  a  marine
casualty,  including  the  hull  of  the  vessel,  together  with  its  fixtures
and  fittings  and  the  contents  of  the  vessel,  including  cargo  and
personal  possessions  of  passengers  and crew.

1.2  International  Law  and  Wrecks
Wrecks may  be located  in waters  all over the world  and  any consi-
deration  of  interests  in  them  cannot  fail  to  take  account  of  their
status in public  and  private  international  law.16

First  of  all,  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  rights  of  any
coastal  state.  So far  as  territorial  waters are concerned,  it  seems to
be accepted that the coastal  state has the power to regulate activities
connected  with wreck within  its waters. Thus, it can pass legislation
restricting  the  extent  to  which  persons  may  exercise  rights  over
wrecks.17  In  the  UK  Protection  of  Wrecks  Act  1973, for  instance,
the  Secretary  of  State  is  given  power  to  designate  historic  or
dangerous  wrecks  of  any  nationality  in  UK  waters  and  to  prevent
any  kind  of  activity  in  relation  to  them.  Even  the  owners  of  an
historic  wreck  can  be  stopped  from  exercising  their  rights  to  dive

218

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

on, or remove property.  In  the Protection  of  Military  Remains Act
198618 similar powers are given to create war graves around military
vessels. In  one  case it  was  stated  that  the  Crown,  as  owner  of  the
subsoil of territorial waters, would be able to remove a wreck which
sank  through  negligence and  caused  an  obstruction.19

States  have  also  exercised  residuary  rights  of  ownership  over
unclaimed  wreck found  within their territorial waters20 or, perhaps,
brought  within  them.21  Where  a  claim  to  ownership  of  a  vessel is
alleged,  for  example  where  there  is  an  issue  concerning  abandon-
ment,22 the most generally accepted view is that the law to be applied
is the law of the flag  of the ship.23 There are also issues relating  to
ownership of the cargo on the vessel, or the effects  of the passengers
and crew. The nationalities of these persons may be numerous, even
supposing they can be traced.24 In a case of doubt  as to nationality,
it is submitted  that  a court  should  apply  the law of  the flag  of  the
carrying  vessel  rather  than  the  law  of  the  forum.25  Arguably,  the
cargo has a closer connection with the vessel, from which there may
also be practical  difficulties  in extricating  it.

There may be cases where wooden  ships have become so disinte-
grated  that their contents might be said to form  part of the subsoil.
In  Elwes v Brigg Gas Company26 a  2,000  year  old  ship was  buried
on land close to a river. Chitty J. discussed  whether the boat  ought
to  be  considered  as  a  mineral,  as  part  of  the  soil  in  which  it  was
embedded,27  or  as  a  chattel.  O'Connell11 states  that  the  boat  was
held  to be a mineral. This is presumably  a transcription  error,  as it
was  held,  obiter  only,  that  the  boat  was  not  a  mineral.  The judge
seemed  more  inclined  to  hold  that  the  boat  remained  a  chattel,
rather than becoming part of the soil, as it had preserved its original
character.  In  any event, it  was not  necessary  for  him to decide  the
issue as the  legal questions  really concerned  the interpretation  of a
lease. The  better  approach  would  be  to  consider  wrecks  and  their
contents  as chattels wherever  they are  identifiable.29

The  importance  of  the  law  of  the flag seems  to  have  been  over-
looked  in  many  cases,  such  as  those  involving  treasure  found  off
the coasts  of  the US30  and  the  assumption  has  often  been  that  the
only relevant  law is that  of the forum.31  Where there are doubts as
to the law of the flag, it would  also  be possible to consider  the law
of  the  salvor  or finder.32 This  is perhaps  less attractive,  because of
the possibility  that  treasure  hunters  could  be  seen  to  manipulate  a
court by 'flag shopping', i. e. by choosing vessels of a flag state with
a convenient law of finding, or by reregistering there. There are also
difficulties  in  assigning  a  single  nationality  to  a  salvor  when  there
is a multi-national joint venture. On balance it would avoid conflicts
if  the  main  choice  were  between  the  law  of  the flag or  that  of  the
forum.33

There is more uncertainty  concerning  rights over wrecks situated
outside territorial waters. There is no doubt that some states claimed
to  exercise  sovereign  rights  over  abandoned  wrecks  found  on,  or

219

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

below,  the  high  seas  and  brought  back  within  territorial  waters.34
In so far as such a claim  emphasises the ordinary rights of a coastal
state  to  regulate  property  within  its waters,  it  is unexceptional.  It
would seem to go beyond  modern notions of territorial sovereignty35
to allow such a state to claim rights while the property is still outside
national  waters.36 There  is no reason  why one state  should  have a
claim  to  ownership  of  abandoned  property  which  has  never  had
any  connection  with  that  state,  for  example,  a  foreign  registered
vessel. Should  it have any residual rights in international  law where
the  original  owner  cannot  be  traced,  where  there  has  been  no
abandonment,37  but  the  owner  was a  national  of  the  state  or the
ship was registered  there? It would seem much more likely for courts
in  common  law countries  to  apply  the law of  finding  and  not  to
recognise  such  remote  state  rights. The position  would  presumably
be different  if,  in its national  law, the state had enacted  legislation
giving itself rights  over  all unclaimed  wreck that had formerly  been
owned  by its nationals.38

A  more  recent  phenomenon,  in  terms  of  the  history  of  wreck
law, has been  the development  of international  law concerning the
continental  shelf,  the  contiguous  zone,  the  deep  seabed  and  the
exclusive economic zone  (EEZ).39 The 1958 Geneva Convention on
the Continental  Shelf, Article 2(1),40 allows coastal states to exercise
sovereign rights on the continental shelf for the purpose of exploring
it and 'exploiting  its natural  resources'. Article 2(4) of the Conven-
tion  defines  natural  resources  to  include  mineral  and  other  non-
living resources. It is probably  correct to say that a wreck of a ship
is not a  natural  resource,41  although  it is possible to see arguments
that  a  cargo  of  ore, which  may be all that  is left  of a  wreck,  is a
valuable  non-living  resource.  Gold  bullion  is a little  more  difficult
to  think  of as natural,  although  gold  is a  base metal.  However, in
neither  case  can it  really  be said  that  they  are the resources  of the
seabed,  like  manganese  nodules,  as  they  have  been  brought  there
artificially  by man. Underwater  cultural  property can be said to be
a  resource  in  that  it  is  a  non-renewable  source  of  archaeological
and  historical  information,42  but it is not a natural  resource  of the
continental  shelf  and  therefore  is  not  within  the  definition.  The
point  is important  both  because  states may wish to regulate  wreck
hunting  activities and because  they might wish to claim  abandoned
wreck for  themselves.

There are examples  of  states controlling  the exploitation  of anti-
quities on the continental shelf,43 but it seems from the International
Law  Commission's  explanatory  comments  on the draft  1958  Con-
vention that it was 'clearly understood  that the rights in question do
not cover objects such as wrecked ships and their cargoes (including
bullion) lying on the seabed  or covered by the sand of the subsoil'.44
In  hearings  to consider  the Abandoned  Shipwreck  Act of  1987, the
US Department  of State  strongly objected to the assertion of federal
title  to  shipwrecks  on  the  outer  continental  shelf,  beyond  state

220

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

boundaries,  as  this  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  1958  Conven-
tion.45 However, a state could pass legislation protecting the marine
resources  generally,  or  to  create  safety  zones  around  oil  platforms
(as allowed by the Convention), which would enable it indirectly  to
restrict diving  operations.46 Similarly, it  seems to  be in  order for  a
state  to  create  war  graves  around  its  own  sunken  vessels  on  the
seabed,  at  least  so  far  as  offences  are  only  created  for  its  own
nationals.47 It may be that customary international law would more
easily  support  the  notion  that  states  might  be  able  to  legislate  to
preserve antiquities on the continental  shelf  than  to enable them  to
assert  title.48

The UN  Convention  on  the  Law of the Sea  1982 Part  V created
the  concept  of  the  200,  mile  EEZ.  Article  56  provides  that  the
coastal state has sovereign rights over natural  resources, as with the
continental  shelf,  but  also  'with  regard  to  other  activities  for  the
economic  exploitation  and  exploration  of  the zone'. Where  a  state
has declared  an exclusive economic zone, it could  claim  to exercise
ownership  over abandoned  shipwrecks  that  are considered  of com-
mercial, rather  than historical, significance. The argument would be
that  recovering a cargo of copper  ore was an  activity  for  economic
exploitation.  It  might  be  thought  that  shipwrecks  were  not  really
within  the  purposes  of  the  article,  which  itself  gives  instances  of
economic exploitation  and exploration  as 'the production  of energy
from  the  water,  currents  and  winds'.  Again,  it  is  difficult  to  fit  a
shipwreck  into this scheme, concerned  as it is with resources which
are  of  the  zone  and  not  brought  into  it.49  The  provision  would
certainly  not  seem  to  give  rights  in  relation  to  wrecks  which  have
only  a historical  significance,  although  many  artefacts  of  historical
value will also be of commercial value.50

Two  other  provisions  of  the  1982  Law  of  the  Sea  Convention
should also be mentioned. First, Article 303 of the 1982 Convention
recognises  the  rights  of  the  coastal  state  to  control  removal  of
archaeological  and  historical  objects  (such  as  historic  shipwrecks)
from within its contiguous zone. However, Article 303(3) specifically
preserves  the  rights  of  identifiable  owners,  the  law  of  salvage  or
other  rules  of  admiralty,  or  laws  and  practices  with  respect  to
cultural  exchanges.51  Secondly,  the  1982  Convention  created  the
Area, i. e. that part of the seabed under the high seas, outside  other
zones. Activities in the Area were stated  in Article  140 to be for  the
benefit  of mankind  as a whole. Article  149 provides that all  objects
of an historical and archaeological  nature found  in the Area should
be so treated, 'particular  regard being paid to the preferential  rights
of the State or country of origin, or the State of cultural origin, or the
State  of  archaeological  and  historical  origin'.52  Given  the  political
controversy  about  the  establishment  of  an  International  Seabed
Authority,  the  practical  effects  of  Article  149  may  be  limited  for
some time. The important point is that the international community
is coming  to  realise  that  the  subject  of  wrecks  is  not  one  that  can

221

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah  Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

only  be  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  traditional  maritime
law, with its emphasis on commercial rights. International rules will
increasingly  recognise  the  public  rights  of  states  over  wreck,  but
clearly  identifiable  private  rights  should  still  be  respected,  unless
abandoned.53

1.3  The  Receiver  of Wreck  Service

In  the UK  the main body of statute law relating to wreck is now
found  in  Part  IX  of  the  Merchant  Shipping  Act  1894,54  although
other  provisions  are  scattered  around  the  statute  book.  Much  of
the statutory  material is in need of revision  and consolidation, as it
has  failed  to  keep  pace  with  developments  in  law  and  modern
diving practice. Moreover, provisions designed to prevent nineteenth
century  plunderers are not  really appropriate  to the preservation  of
archaeological  remains.

The 1894 statutory provisions, which establish a receiver of wreck
service  to  administer  the  handling  and  disposal  of  wreck,55  were
framed  at  a  time  when  the  majority  of  vessels were  still  propelled
by  sail  and  there  were  only minimal  aids  to  navigation.  Casualties
to  ships  on  the coast  were far  more  numerous  than  they  are  today
and  the  1894  provisions  were  passed  to  deal  in  particular  with  a
pressing  problem  of  the  time:  namely,  the  traditional  plunder  of
distressed vessels by coastal communities. The provisions were there-
fore  primarily  concerned  with  the  safe-keeping  and  disposal  of
property  from  vessels in distress  or  recently  wrecked  and  not  from
vessels which had been lying on the seabed for a considerable period
of  time, possibly  for  centuries.

Until  1  January  1993,  receivers  were  mainly  officers  of  HM
Customs and  Excise, distributed on a district basis around  the coast
of  the  UK.  Since  1 January  1993,  with  the  reorganisation  of  the
Customs  Service  owing  to  the  creation  of  the  Single  European
Market,  the  network  of receivers was replaced  by a single  appoint-
ment in  the Department  of Transport's  Marine Directorate  and  the
receivership  duties are now  operated  centrally.

Under  the  Merchant  Shipping  Act  1894, where  any person finds
or takes possession of wreck within the limits of the UK, he must:  —

'(a) If he is the owner thereof, give notice to the receiver of the
district  stating  that  he  has  found  or  taken  possession  of  the
same,  and  describing  the  marks  by  which  the  same  may  be
recognised; (b) If he is not the owner thereof, as soon as possible
deliver  the same to the receiver  of  the  district.'56

This  provision  has  been  extended  to  cover  wreck  found  or  taken
possession  of outside the limits of the UK  and  brought within such
limits.57  The  requirement  for  reporting  of  wreck  is  designed  to

222

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

prevent  an  improper  detention  of  the  property  and  to  enable  the
receiver to establish  legal entitlement  to  the wreck.

The  receiver  must  advertise  wreck  that  has  been  brought  ashore
in  the  UK  in  order  to  inform  potential  claimants  of  the  find,
including the original  owner or someone with a right deriving  from
the  original  owner.58  If  the  wreck  is  of  value,  the  receiver  must
notify  the Secretary at  Lloyd's  in case an  insurer  wishes to exercise
rights  of ownership.59 The owner of any wreck in the possession  of
the receiver must establish  its claim to the wreck within a period of
one year from  the time when the wreck first came into the receiver's
possession.60 The owner must  'establish his claim to the  satisfaction
of  the  receiver',  although  this  may  not  necessarily  be easy  and  the
owner  must also pay  any  salvage  or expenses due in respect  of  the
wreck.  If  no  claim  to  the  wreck  is established  within  the  one  year
period,  the  wreck  will  be  treated  as  unclaimed  and  title  may  well
vest in the Crown.61 In the case of unclaimed wreck, the Act provides
that  the  receiver  shall  sell  the  wreck  and  (after  deducting  fees,62
expenses, and such amount  of salvage as the Secretary of State may
determine) pay the proceeds for  the benefit  of the Crown. Thus, the
discoverer  of  a  wreck  brought  within  the  UK  knows  that  it  will
always  be entitled  to  a  salvage  reward.  Ultimately,  the  calculation
of  that  reward  will be a matter  for  the court.  In  practice,  as far  as
unclaimed  'historic'  wreck  is  concerned,  the  salvor  will  usually
receive 100% of the net proceeds of any sale, less receivers' expenses,
or the wreck will be returned  to  the salvor in lieu of salvage with a
charge being made for  any expenses  incurred.63

The  system  for  reporting  and  disposal  of  wreck  laid  out  in  the
1894 Act  has  in  fact  largely  fallen  into  disuse.  In  1989 there  were
18 reports of finds made  to  the receiver service; in  1990, 25. Of the
25  items  of  wreck  reported  in  1990,  21  had  no  value  and  were
disposed  of  immediately  by  the  receiver.64  The  four  other  cases
involved  a  small  pleasure  craft  broken  free  from  its  moorings,  a
marine engine, a coil of rope and  one  item from  an  historic wreck.
In  1991  there  were  approximately  ten  reports  of  wreck.  Although
the  receiver  of  wreck  service  covers  modern  wreck,  in  practice  its
services in this respect are rarely called upon.  Corporate  ownership
of  modern  ships,  organised  salvage  facilities  and  the  existence  of
the Coastguard able to co-ordinate search-and-rescue activities have
largely  removed  the  need  for  receivers  of  wreck  where  there  are
recent casualties.65 As far  as 'historic' wreck is concerned, it is clear
that  the  1894 system  is as much  honoured  in  the  breach  as it  is in
the observance. Recoveries from  wreck sites designated and licensed
under the Protection of Wrecks Act 197366 are reported on an annual
basis and are not included in the figures given above. However, there
are  thousands  of  other  wrecks  — of  various  ages  — around  the
shores of the UK and, with a conservative estimate of 70,000 British
sport divers, it is clear that only a very small proportion of recoveries

223

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah  Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

are  being  reported.  The  recent  centralisation  of  the  receivership
within the Department of Transport appears to represent a deliberate
winding  down  of  the service.

2  Proprietary  Interests

A  variety  of  persons  might  acquire  ownership  rights  over a wreck,
but  the  most  difficult  issue  is  often  to  decide  when,  if  at  all,  they
may  have  abandoned  their  rights.67  The  rights  of  insurers  present
particular  problems  and  will be considered  separately.68

2.1  Ownership

2.1.1  Methods  of acquiring  ownership
As with  all other forms of property, there are many ways of acquir-
ing  ownership  of wreck. The  obvious means is through  succession,
either personally, for example a descendant of a passenger on board
a  Dutch  East  Indiaman  has  claimed  their  personal  possessions;  or
corporately,  for  example  the  Dutch  Ministry  of  Finance  is heir  to
the Dutch East India Company.69 The purchase of ownership rights
is  another  obvious  method,  an  interesting  example  being  that  of  a
vessel which lies in the mud flats of the River Hamble in Hampshire.
She  is believed  to  be the  Grace  Dieu, the  biggest  ship  ever built  in
England  at  the  time  of  her  construction  in  1416,70  although  her
identity has not been proved beyond doubt. If she is the Grace Dieu,
then  she  would  have  been  one  of  the  most  important  vessels  in
Henry  V's  navy  and  therefore  a  Crown  vessel.  If  this  is  the  case,
ownership  may  have remained  with  the  Crown.  In  the light  of  this
possibility, in 1970 the Ministry of Defence (MOD), acting on behalf
of the Crown, transferred  all such right, title or interest as the Crown
may have had in the wreck to the University of Southampton, acting
on behalf of the Society for Nautical Research, for the nominal sum
of  £5.71  Other  methods of acquisition  are through  subrogation,  for
example  the Lutine;12 and through donation, for example the Tudor
warship  Mary  Rose13 was donated  by the  MOD  to  the  Mary  Rose
Trust.74  Salvors may acquire property in lieu of a salvage award, or
in  some  jurisdictions  through  the  law  of  finding.75  The  Crown
obtains  ownership  rights  to  unclaimed  wreck76  and  states may ac-
quire  property  through  confiscatory  provisions,  for  example  all
German  property  in Norway  as  at  9 May  1945 was  taken  over by
the  Norwegian  government,  including  wrecked  German  warships
and merchant ships off the Norwegian coast.77 Another, more theor-
etical, method  of acquisition might be through accretion. A number
of  ancient wrecks have been found  on  land which was once part of
the  seabed  or  a river floor.78

224

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

2.1.2  Establishing owner's  identity
Prima  facie,  the  strongest  interest  in wreck  is the proprietary  right
of the owner, however  that  right may have been acquired.  In  order
to establish an ownership claim, it is necessary, first, to discover the
identity  of the original owner (and possibly a chain of successors in
title) and,  secondly, to establish  that  the ownership rights have not
in  some way  been  lost.  Claims  to  vessels and  their  contents  which
were wrecked  since the middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  are  likely
to  be made quite  frequently  and  established  with greater  ease  than
claims  to  earlier  wrecks.  There  are  two  reasons  for  this.  First,  a
great part  of this period is within living memory and, secondly, the
Salvage  Association79  maintains  records  dating  back  to  1860  of
vessels lost and  claims made. When a potential  salvor  expresses an
interest  in  salving a wreck,  the  Salvage Association  will  endeavour
to discover the existence of any commercial (particularly  insurance)
interests. For example, many vessels lost during the two World Wars
may have been insured or reinsured for war risks by the government.
There is an office  in the DTp which liaises with the Salvage Associ-
ation  and  the  war  risks  insurers  and  handles  inquiries  about  the
sale  of  government-owned  wrecks  and  cargoes.80  There  are  thirty
volumes of World War I 'Shipping Losses' and detailed files contain-
ing information  about  World War II  settlements.81

It is not impossible under UK  law for  the lawful  successors of an
original  owner  to claim their  property  centuries  later  and  the  hulls
of several historic wrecks in UK territorial waters have been claimed
by foreign  governments.  For  example, the  ownership  of  the  Dutch
East  Indiamen,  the  Geldermalsen,*2  the  Amsterdam^  and  the  de
Leifde^  has  been  legally  established  by  the  Dutch  Ministry  of
Finance, as heir to the Dutch  East India Company.85 In theory, the
same  principle  applies  to  the  cargo  and  personal  possessions  on
board  a  wreck,  but  in  practice  the  original  owners  of  such  items
can  rarely  be  identified  so  there  are  far  fewer  claims  by  modern
descendants  to this property. This distinction  between  the hull of a
vessel, and the cargo and personal possessions on board is illustrated
by the case of the passenger liner Lusitania. In  1982 items of general
cargo  and  personal  property  were raised  from  this liner  which  had
been  torpedoed  by  the  German  Navy  in  1915.  She  had  sunk  12
miles  off  the  Irish  coast  and  outside  British  or  Irish  territorial
waters.  Nonetheless,  the  items  raised  were  brought  ashore  in  the
UK.  Ownership  of  the vessel  herself,  and  her  fixtures  and  fittings,
was  not  disputed.86  The  cargo  and  personal  possessions  were  a
different  matter  owing to  the  number  of interests involved  and  the
difficulty  of  proving  ownership.  For  these  reasons,  following  the
one year claim period provided by the Merchant Shipping Act 1894,
these  items  remained  unclaimed  by  the  original  owners  or  their
successors.87 If such difficulties  are found  in establishing  ownership
of property  lost in  1915, clearly  the position  with respect  to  earlier

225

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

wreck must be even more uncertain. However, claims to such wreck
are known, for  example that  of Baron  Bentinck  of Gorssel, descen-
dant  of  a  passenger  on  board  the  Dutch  East  Indiaman Hollandia
which  sank  in  1743, who declared  his interest  in a copper-gilt  shoe
buckle  and  silver cutlery bearing  his family  arms.88

2.1.3  Government  ownership
Governments,  like any  other  body  or  individual,  acquire  property
rights in a variety of ways, for example through 'inheritance', subro-
gation  of  rights  through  reinsurance,  and  confiscatory  provisions.
As far as 'inheritance' is concerned, in the UK the MOD exercises  —
on  behalf  of  the  Crown  —  rights  of  title  over  all  British  warships
and  other  ships  on non-commercial  service  wherever  they  lie until
such time as a public announcement is made.89 A number of impor-
tant  historic  wrecks  are included  in  this  category,  for  example  the
Mary  Rose. Before the Mary Rose rescue project  began in 1979, the
MOD  regularly  and  readily  sold  its  rights  to  historic  wrecks  to
anyone  who  applied.90  In  general,  even  today,  the  policy  is  much
the same. The decision on whether or not a wreck is sold or licensed
is made on a case-by-case basis, depending on the value of the wreck
or  its  cargo,  both financially and  historically,  and  on  the  motives
of the intending  purchaser.  If the wreck  or cargo are to be sold  for
financial gain,  the MOD will charge a flat  fee plus a percentage of
the proceeds. If the purchaser's interest is historical  or archaeologi-
cal  only,  then  the  MOD  will  charge  a  flat  fee.  In  the  case  of  the
Mary  Rose  and  one  or  two  other  important  historic  vessels,  the
MOD  has been persuaded  to give the vessel by Deed of Transfer  to
a  reputable  archaeological  group  to  hold  on  trust  for  the  general
public.  The  English  warship  Anne,  which  sank  in  1690  off  East
Sussex is one such vessel. The Deed of Transfer,  dated  10 June 1983,
transferred  to  a charitable trust called  the Nautical  Museums Trust
Ltd. every part  of the vessel and all that had  since 1974 been raised
from  her  and  all  that  was situated  in  her  immediate  vicinity  (save
personal  effects  not  belonging  to  the  Crown).  The  transfer  took
place  'upon  trust  to  raise in  whole  or  in  part  (so  far  as  the  Trust
may in its absolute discretion determine) to preserve and to display
same  for  all  time  in a  museum  or  museums  for  the  education  and
benefit  of  the  public'.  Material  subject  to  the  trust  may  only  be
disposed  of with the consent of the Secretary of State, although  the
Trust  is  given  power  to  make  loans  of  such  items  for  any  period
not  exceeding five years.91

The  government  also  has  interests  in  about  5,000  vessels  lost
during the two World Wars, mainly through paying out on war risk
insurance. Except where there has been loss of life, these wrecks are
available  for  sale  from  the  DTp.  Such  purchase  entitles  the  owner
to  dive  on  the  wreck, but it  may  be a  term  of  the contract  of  sale
that  the cargo  must  be left  undisturbed.92

226

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

Some  East  Indiamen  are  reputed  to  have  great  value,  such  as
the  wreck  of  the  Grosvenor,  lost  off  South  Africa  in  1782.93  The
Government  of  India  Act  1858 section 39 (since repealed) vested  in
the Crown  the  'monies, stores, goods, chattels and  other...personal
estate'  of  the  East  India  Company  'to  be  applied  and  disposed
of...for  the  purposes  of  the  government  of  India'.  Section  40 gave
the Secretary  of  State in  Council  power  to dispose of the  property.
The  precise  effect  of  the wording  has  given  rise  to  some  doubt,  as
it is unclear whether it applied  to all the Company's wrecks, or only
to  those  in  UK  waters.  Further,  the  Crown  almost  seems  to  have
been impressed  with  a statutory  trust,  as the proceeds  of any finds
would have to be used for the benefit of India. Following the Indian
Independence  Act  1947  the  property  rights  and  interests  of  the
former  colony were divided  between  India and Pakistan. It  appears
that  the  governments  of  India  and  Pakistan  —  amongst  others —
dispute  British  title. So far,  the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
(FCO)  has  been  reluctant  to  claim  property  in  the  Company's
wrecks,  partly,  perhaps,  in  order  to  avoid  international  friction.
Nevertheless, it seems to be the government view that some property
in  the UK  did  remain  with  the  Crown  after  independence,  such  as
the India Office  Library, and  that wreck  rights, if they exist, would
probably  be  subject  to  the  administrative  control  of  a  relevant
Department  such as Environment,  or National  Heritage.

Difficulties  are more  likely  to arise where  the vessel is located  in
the  territorial  waters  of  a  coastal  state,  which  may  assert  that  the
wreck  has  been  abandoned.  Certainly,  it  appears  that  the  MOD
would  claim  ownership  of all  sunken  British  warships  anywhere  in
the world unless they had  been disposed  of by the MOD's  Director
of Sales (Disposals). The Secretary  of State would  hope for  the co-
operation  of foreign  governments in respect of wrecks lying in their
territorial  waters  and  in  return  would  provide  protection  for  the
wrecks  of  foreign  naval  ships  lying  in  UK  waters.  However,  there
is a  British  ship, sunk  in  Bombay  during  World  War  II  with  lend-
lease gold,  part  of  which  was  British,  part  American.  The  govern-
ment  wanted  to  arrange  for  salvage  operations  in  which  the  gold
was returned  to  its  original  owners,  but  the  Indian  authorities  are
apparently  claiming an  interest.

The US  too  faced  difficulties  when  it  attempted  to  assert  title  to
the CSS Alabama, a Confederate  raider, which sank  seven miles off
the Normandy  coast  in  1864 and  was  discovered  in  1984. The  US
government  based  its  claim  to  the  ship  on  two  grounds.  First,  by
right of capture because the captain of the Alabama had surrendered
his vessel to the USS Kearsage, which then took constructive posses-
sion  of  the  Alabama before  she  sank.94  Secondly,  by  virtue  of  the
fact  that  the  US  is  successor  to  all  the  rights  and  property  of
the  Confederate  government.95  The  French  government  initially
questioned  the  US  government's  assertion  of  ownership,  claiming
that  the vessel and  its contents  were French  property  because  they

227

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

were  located  in  French  territorial  waters.96  In  1989,  the  French
government  conceded  that  the  US  had  title  to  the  vessel  and  its
contents.97

In  1986 the stern  section  of the British warship HMS Birkenhead
was  the  subject  of  salvage  operations  in  the  territorial  waters  of
South  Africa.  The  Birkenhead was  carrying  troops  when  she  sank
in  1852  and  there  was  speculation  that  she  had  on  board  a  large
number  of  gold  sovereigns  for  the purpose  of  paying  the  troops.98
The vessel is of special historical and sentimental value to the British
because of  the action  of the soldiers in standing  to attention  on the
sinking  vessel  to  allow  all  the women  and  children  on  board  to be
saved  in the  lifeboats.99

In  1983  the  South  African  National  Monuments  Council  issued
a  permit  to  a  salvage  syndicate  and  at  the  same  time  declared  the
Birkenhead & national monument.100 It was the syndicate who found
the missing stern section in 1984. Its discovery led to an exchange of
correspondence between the British and South African  governments
disputing  ownership  of  the  wreck.  Both  were  clearly  interested  in
the  gold  reputedly  on  board,  but  the  British  government  was also
concerned  to ensure  that any human remains were left  undisturbed.
Despite  some  newspaper  reports  that  the  Admiralty  had  sold  the
hull by public auction soon after  the disaster, the British government
claimed  ownership  of  the  wreck  on  the  ground  that  it  was  the
practice  of  the  UK  to  maintain  its  rights  and  interest  in  British
warships  wherever  they  may  lie until  such  time as  abandonment  is
announced  by  the  British  government.  The  South  African  govern-
ment,  on  the  other  hand,  refused  to  recognise  the British  assertion,
claiming  that  there  were  no  international  conventions  or  agree-
ments  —  to  which  South  Africa  was a party  —  which  provided  for
the  claims  of  foreign  states  to  wrecks  in  other  states'  territorial
waters. The South African  government therefore itself claimed own-
ership  of  the  wreck.  It  also  claimed  that  the  MOD  could  neither
authorise nor deny salvage rights on South African  National Monu-
ments,  nor  could  it  restrict  diving  in  South  African  waters.  The
dispute was resolved  by an exchange of notes in  1989.101 The terms
of the agreement resulting from  the exchange of notes included that
the South African  government should seek to ensure that the salvors
treat  with  respect,  human  remains  discovered  at  the  site  and  that
the  gold  (after  deduction  of  salvage)  would  be  shared  equally  be-
tween  the  British  and  South  African  governments.  A  number  of
gold sovereigns were found during the 1986 salvage attempts, but the
operations were hampered by bad weather and dangerous conditions
and, by  the  time of  the agreement  in  1989, had  been  suspended.

The  Netherlands  and  Australia  have  also  reached  an  agreement
regarding  the  wrecks  of  Dutch  East  Indiamen  off  the  coast  of
Australia.  Under  the  agreement  the Netherlands  has transferred  to
Australia  '...all  its right,  title and interest in and  to wrecked vessels
of  the  VOC  lying  on  or  off  the  coast  of  the  State  of  Western

228

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

Australia...' in return for Australia recognising that the Netherlands
has an interest  in articles  recovered  from  these vessels.102

As well as claiming ownership of Dutch East Indiamen, the Dutch
have  also  claimed  ownership  of  the  Lutine (whose  bell  now  hangs
at Lloyd's). She was a 32-gun frigate  which had originally  belonged
to  the  French,  but  had  been  captured  by  the  English  and  claimed
as a  prize  of  war.  While  sailing  under  the  English  flag  with  specie
valued  at  £1 million,  she was wrecked  off  the Netherlands  in  1799
and  again  claimed  as  a  prize,  this  time  by  the  Dutch.  The  specie
was  insured  at  Lloyd's,  which  paid  out  in  full  on  the  claim.  The
conflict  which arose between  Lloyd's and  the Dutch government  as
to  who  was  the  rightful  owner  of  the  specie  was  resolved  in  1857
when  they  came  to  an  arrangement  whereby  Lloyd's  received  half
of the amount  recovered.103

In  contrast  to  the  Dutch,  the  Spanish  have  been  more  reserved
about  stating  their  claims  to  ancient  wrecks  of  Spanish  origin.  In
the  case  of  the  Armada  galleon  Girona, which  was  discovered  in
1967  off  the  Northern  Irish  coast,  the  vessel  had  been  engaged  at
war  with  the  British  when  it  sank  and  was  therefore  considered  a
prize.  For  this  reason,  the  Spanish  did  not  make  a  claim.  In  May
1985, another vessel thought  to be part of the Spanish Armada was
found, this time off the coast of the Republic of Ireland.104 Although
rights to material  brought  ashore  have still to be settled,  it  appears
that  the Spanish, although again showing an interest, did not  make
a claim.  In  the case  of  Spanish  vessels found  off  the  US coast,  for
example the Nuestra Senora de Atocha and  other  galleons  wrecked
off  Florida,  the  Spanish  government  have  also  made  no  claim:
instead  the  US  federal  government,  states  and  salvors  fought  for
rights to the wrecks.105

Some states become owners of wreck by virtue of legislation  that
gives  them  confiscatory  or  residuary  powers.  In  most  cases  that
legislation  will  have  been  enacted  for  the  purpose  of  protecting
historically important wrecks. For example, in Spain a statute dated
24  December  1962,106  provides  that  the  State  of  Spain  acquires
ownership  of  any  vessel  which  is  sunk,  salved  or  found  when  its
owner  does  not  exercise  his  or  her  right  within  three  years  of  the
vessel  sinking. The Abandoned  Wreck  Law  of  the  Cayman  Islands
provides that wreck which has 'remained continuously upon  the sea
bed  within  the  limits  of  the  islands  for  a  period  of  50  years  and
upwards before  being brought  to shore' belongs to the state.107 The
legislation  establishes two useful  presumptions:  —

'All  wreck  found  in  the  possession  of  any  person  within  the
islands  shall  be deemed  to  be abandoned  wreck  until  the con-
trary  is proved  to the satisfaction  of a Magistrate  or  the Com-
missioner  of  Wreck  and  any  person  found  in  possession  of
abandoned  wreck shall  be presumed  to have brought  it  ashore

229

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

unless  he  has  some  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  manner  in
which  it came into  his possession.'108

In  Finland  a  1963 Act on  historic relics provides  that  the state has
title to all movable property  on board  wrecks over 100 years old.109
The  Danish  Law  Concerning  the  Protection  of  Historic  Wreckage
dated 31 May  1963 provides for state ownership of wrecks over 150
years  old  where  no  owner  can  be  found.110  The  US  Abandoned
Shipwreck  Act  of  1987 vests  title in  the federal  government  to  any
abandoned  shipwreck  found  in or  on  public  lands  of  the  US, e.g.
underwater  national  parks. It also asserts US title to certain classes
of abandoned  shipwrecks in  state waters and  transfers  such  title to
the  states  within  whose  waters  they lie.111 Such confiscatory  meas-
ures may cause legal problems. For example, they may conflict with
constitutional  protections against interference  with rights of private
property  and  there  may  also  be  a  problem  where  a  state  tries  to
divest a  foreigner  of ownership.112

2.1.4  Personal  possessions  and human  remains
When  a  vessel  sinks,  there  is often  great  loss  of  life.  It  will  follow
that  the estates  of  the deceased will be entitled  to exercise rights of
ownership  over  their  personal  possessions.  Human  remains  can
exceptionally  be  found  several  hundred  years  after  a  sinking,  de-
pending  on  the  site  of  a  wreck,  for  example  human  remains  are
present  on  the  seventeenth  century  warship  recently  discovered  off
the coast  of  Scotland.113  Relatives are naturally  sensitive about  the
remains  of  their  loved  ones  and  may  often  be  alarmed  at  salvage
operations  which  might  be destructive.  It  does  not  appear  that  the
relatives  or  the  personal  representatives  have  clearly  recognised
rights at common law to require that a wreck and its human contents
be  raised,  or  to  restrict  or  prohibit  salvage  operations  and  the
question  of  the  existence  of  rights  over  the  bodies  themselves  pre-
sents  even  more  difficult  problems.  A  deliberate  burial  at  sea  is
probably  regulated,  in  the  UK,  by  the  Food  and  Environment
Protection Act 1985 Part II,114 but it is doubtful  if the Act can apply
to a declaration  by a relative that a body in a wreck shall be treated
as 'buried'  at  sea.

It  is  often  said  that  the  law  recognises  no  property  in  a  dead
body.115 However, this assumption has been questioned, both in law
and  principle,116 although  not  in the context  of wreck  law. If  there
is  property  in  human  remains  a  number  of  consequences  would
follow.  First,  a  finder  (or,  possibly, a  landowner  in  whose  soil  the
body  is  affixed)117  could  become  the  effective  owner  of  an  aban-
doned unidentifiable  body118 and would  be able to sell the remains.
Secondly,  it  would  be assumed  that  the personal  representatives of
the  deceased  would  normally  become  the  owners  and  entitled  to
bring  actions  for  trespass,  claiming  an  injunction  to  stop  diving

230

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

operations which interfered  with the body119 and, perhaps, damages
for  emotional  stress.120  Indeed,  it  is  arguable  that  in  relation  to  a
recent death  the  personal  representatives  would  already  be entitled
to the right to possess a body with a view to burial.121 It is submitted
that  the  personal  representatives  should  have  a  right  of  action  to
prevent  an  unreasonable  interference  with  bodies  by  salvors,  but
there would be formidable problems (i) over identification,  (ii) where
some  personal  representatives  consented  to  diving  operations,  (iii)
where  any  intereference  by  salvors  would  be  incidental  to  the  re-
moval of cargo. A court could refuse an injunction, and give nominal
damages, where  the  salvage  operations  were  to  be conducted  care-
fully  and  with  respect.  It  would  certainly  be more  satisfactory  for
the matter  to  be dealt with  by legislation.

It  is  often  said  that  a  ship  sunk  in  war  time  is  a  war  grave.122
Before  1986 such  statements  had  to  be treated  with  great  caution,
as  it  does  not  appear  that  they  had  any  precise  legal  basis  and
government  departments  may  have  used  the  expression  to  deter
unwanted  diving  activities.  In  theory,  there  is  no  reason  why  an
owner of a wreck, such as the Crown in respect of a warship, could
not  exercise  its  proprietary  rights  to  forbid  salvage  operations,
although  there  are  difficult  questions  concerning  the  possessory
rights  of  a  salvor.123  The  MOD  regularly  receives  and  refuses  re-
quests to dive on the remains of HMS  Repulse and  HMS  Prince of
Wales, which  were  sunk  in  1941  off  the  coast  of  what  was  then
Malaya  and  rest  in  comparatively  accessible  waters.  Navy  divers
periodically  replace  White  Ensigns  attached  by  rigid  steel  wires  to
the propeller  shafts  of each vessel,124 indicating not only respect  for
the  840 men  lost,  but  also  a  manifest  intention  to  retain  rights  —
both  of possession  and  ownership.

It  was  and  still  is  UK  government  practice  only  to  sell  wrecks,
or  arrange  salvage  contracts,  where  there  will  be  no  interference
with  remains or where strict  diving conditions are set out.  A  major
controversy was caused during the 1982 salvage of HMS Edinburgh,
which sank in 1942, when divers reportedly showed a lack of respect
for remains, for example by putting chemical lights in skulls to startle
other  divers.125  Partly  in  response  to  the  uproar  from  veterans'
associations,  the  Protection  of  Military  Remains  Act  1986  was
passed. In essence, the Act allows the Secretary of State to designate
vessels  and  aircraft  wrecked  while  engaged  on  military  service  on
or after  4 August  1914 (the outbreak  of World War I). There is also
power  to  designate  sites  of  a  sinking  or  stranding,  if less  than  200
years  has  elapsed.126  Various  offences  may  be  committed,  such  as
tampering  with  remains. Although  the Act extends to  international
waters,  offences  can  only  be  committed  by  British  citizens,  or  on
board  British  controlled  ships.127 Although  the drafting  of  the Act
is convoluted, its aim is clearly to create war graves and is consistent
with  international  law. It  does not  apply  to merchant  vessels, how-
ever, unless under section 9(2) they are being used  'for  the purposes

231

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah  Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

of  the armed  forces'.  This definition  would  seem  to  include  troop-
carrying  vessels  and  naval  auxiliaries,  but  may  cause  difficulties
when deciding whether it extends to vessels on charter to the govern-
ment to carry food. It is submitted that a broad interpretation should
be applied, so as to include commercial ships carrying produce that
may  have  been  used  by  the  armed  forces  as  opposed  to  civilians.
The  government  may  have  been  reluctant  to  see  the  Act  extended
to  merchant  ships  because  of  the  interference  with  commercial
interests,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  some  human  remains  are
entitled  to more  respect  than  others.128 The existence of a common
law  action,  as  outlined  above, would  assist, but  it  would  be  better
to extend  the coverage of the  1986 Act.

2.2  Abandonment  of Rights
Once  the  identity  of  the  original  owner  is  established,  the  next
question that must be asked is: has the owner abandoned  its owner-
ship rights? The ordinary, plain meaning of the word  'abandonment'
is to give up control or possession of, in this case, a vessel, epitomised
by  the cry  'Abandon  ship!'  In  giving  this order,  the master  usually
intends simply to abandon possession  in the face of imminent peril,
rather  than  to abandon  the ownership rights in the vessel. The legal
term  'derelict'  used in salvage  law129 is usually  taken  to  mean  that
the  vessel  has  been  abandoned  at  sea  by  the  master  and  crew,
without  intention  of returning to her (sine animo revertendi) or hope
of  recovery  (sine spe recuperandi).  It  does  not  necessarily  involve
the loss of the owner's property  in the vessel.130 It is now  regarded
as  axiomatic  that  title to  a vessel and  its contents  remains  intact if
the crew  has  been  compelled  to abandon  the vessel, or  has died  as
a  result  of  a  shipwreck.131  The  fact  that  a  vessel  is a  legal  derelict
does not necessarily make her res nullius, i. e. ownerless.132 It is clear
that  physical  abandonment  alone  is  not  enough  for  the  owner  to
lose its  property  rights  in  the  vessel  and  there  must  be  some  form
of  positive  intention,  or  animus derelinquendi,  on  its  part  to  relin-
quish  rights of  ownership.133

There seems to be no legal reason why persons cannot voluntarily
divest  themselves  of  their  rights  in  wreck,134  as  opposed  to  their
liabilities, but  there seems to  be little advantage  to  be gained  by so
doing.  According  to  Goode,135  the  'holder  of  an  indefeasible  title
cannot shuffle  it off by abandonment,  as the law does not recognise
a  situation  in  which  property  can  be  without  an  owner'.  It  is
submitted, with respect that, so far as wreck law is concerned,  there
is no  reason  why  an express  abandonment  should  not  be  effective,
except  in  so  far  as  it seeks  to  avoid  liabilities.136 The  real  problem
concerns  'implied  abandonment'  and how far  an intention  to aban-
don  can  be  inferred  from  inaction.  It  would  simply  be  unrealistic
to suppose that long lost wrecks with no identifiable owner, or those
whose  owners  (such as states)  had  asserted  no rights  for  centuries,

232

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

should not be considered  as res nullius. It might seem to be a matter
of common  sense to assume that property  in a 2,000 year old  boat,
even  if  not  abandoned  when  first  left,  had  for  centuries  been  lost
or  barred.137

So, there appear  to be two requirements for  the abandonment of
property  rights:  first,  the  physical  relinquishment  of  possession  or
control over the vessel and, secondly, an intention  to relinquish  the
rights  of  ownership.  The  second  element  is  obviously  far  more
difficult  to  ascertain  and  proof  of  such  intention  must  usually  be
inferred  from  the  surrounding  circumstances.  For  example,  where
a  wreck  is lying  neglected  on  a  beach,  after  the  lapse  of  a  certain
period of time it may be possible to conclude that  ownership rights
have been abandoned.  However, where a ship is sunk in deep water
and  salvage  has  been  impossible  or  commercially  unviable,  and
perhaps too the exact position  of the wreck is unknown, the owner
has no choice in the matter and  —  unless there has been an express
declaration  —  it is difficult  to argue that there is a positive intention
to relinquish  rights.138

Although  there is some academic support  for  the suggestion  that
the  owner's  title  is  not  perpetual  and  will  diminish  with  time  and
eventually  lapse altogether,139  there appears  to be no direct  English
authority  to  support  this view. In  The Tubantia,m  Sir Henry  Duke
P.  found  that  there  was  'no  proof  or  presumption  sufficient  to
convince me that  the owners of the vessel, or the cargo in question,
have lost whatever  rights they originally  had', where the vessel had
sunk  only  eight  years  previously.  Apart  from  indicating  that  such
a  short  period  of  time  will  not  result  in  abandonment,  the judge
surely  inferred  that  such proof  could  in  theory  have been  brought.
Certainly the view of many insurers seems to be that title to a wreck
never  lapses  through  mere  inactivity,  even where  hope  of  recovery
had  been  given  up.141  However,  in  The Lusitania142  Sheen  J.  ap-
peared  to  lend  some  support  to  the  idea  that  rights  could  be  lost
through  effluxion  of time: 'So far  as the owners of the contents are
concerned, it is a necessary inference  from  the agreed facts and from
the  lapse of  67  years  before  any  attempt  was  made  to  salve the
contents that  the  owners  of  the  contents  abandoned  their  prop-
erty.'143  However,  there  was  also  a  lapse  of  67  years  before  any
attempt  was  made  to  salve  the  vessel  and  yet  the  court  accepted
that  the underwriters  had  acquired  legal  title  to  it  after  paying  out
for  the  actual  loss  and  that  they  remained  the  owners  at  the  time
the  case  was  heard.  Therefore,  the  time  lapse,  of  itself,  could  not
be a conclusive factor in determining whether the property had been
abandoned. What in fact was probably conclusive here was that the
owners  of  the  vessel  had  appeared  before  the court  to  claim  their
property,  while  the  owners  of  the  cargo  and  personal  possessions
had  not  done  so.144  The  lapse  of  time  was  therefore  a  factor,  but
not  the  only  one,  taken  into  account  in  deciding  that  the  owners
had  intended  to  abandon  their  property.

233

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

In Simon v Taylor,Hi although  the effluxion  of time issue was not
raised by counsel or mentioned in the judgment, the Singapore High
Court  recognised  the German  Federal  Republic  as  owner  of  a  U-
boat  which  had  sunk  28  years  earlier.146  However,  in  Robinson v
Western Australian Museum,147 Stephen  J.  appeared  to  accept  that
in some circumstances it was possible that  the mere passing of time
without  any  attempt  to  assert  possession  may  be  treated  as  the
abandonment  of  title,  although  it  is  significant  that  he  was  not
prepared  to  find  that  this  was  the  necessary  result  on  the  facts  of
the  case  before  him,  which  involved  the  Gilt Dragon, wrecked  in
1656.  He  found  that,  had  it  not  been  for  legislation  divesting  the
owner  of  rights, it would  have  belonged  to  the  successor  in title of
the  Dutch  East  India  Company.148  In  another  case  concerning  a
German  U-boat, which came before  the Norwegian  Supreme  Court
in  1970,149 Eckhoff  J. stated:  -

'It  is  possible  that  an  owner's  inactivity  over  a  long  period,
taking into account the circumstances, can be a sufficient  reason
for  considering  that  the  proprietary  right  to  a  wrecked  vessel
has  been  relinquished.  If  so,  this  must  depend  on  a  total
evaluation  of  the  circumstances  after  the  shipwreck,  and  a
balancing  of  the  owner's  interest,  on  the  one  hand,  against  a
potential  appropriator's  interest,  on  the  other.  I  agree...that
inactivity  over  a  certain  number  of  years  cannot  in  itself  be
conclusive.'

When the Confederate raider, CSS Alabama, was located by French
divers  off  the  coast  of Cherbourg  in  1984, the  US  —  claiming  as
successor  to  the  Confederate  States of America  —  asserted  title. In
doing so, it followed  'its longstanding position  that title to warships
is  not  lost  in  the  absence  of  capture  or  abandonment,  and  that
abandonment  could  not  be  implied  merely  by  the  long  passage  of
time'.150 A finding  that the US  had  not abandoned  the Alabama or
its  appurtenances  was also  the  basis of the decision  in  US v Stein-
metz15i  that the US had title to the ship's bell rather than an antique
dealer who  had  bought the bell in  Britain.

It is submitted  that it is entirely realistic to conclude from  all the
evidence,  including  the passage  of  time,  that  ownership  has  been
abandoned.  However,  a  court  should  be  careful  not  to  look  to
inactivity alone and should take into account all the circumstances.
The  length  of  time would  be relevant,  as would  the  identity  of  the
original  owner.  A  state  owner  of  a  warship  or  commercial  vessel
might be expected to retain an interest longer than  a private owner,
if only  because  it  is more likely  to  have the physical, financial  and
political means to assert rights.152 A corporate owner might be more
likely to retain an interest than  an individual owner, if only because
its reason to exist will usually be financial  and also it might be easier
in  the  future  for  it to trace a  line  of succession  than  an  individual,

234

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

where  proof  of  succession  might  be  difficult  after  a  couple  of
generations.  The  position  of  the  wreck  may  be  relevant.  If  it  is
situated in an easily accessible position  and  nothing is done, it may
be easier to imply an abandonment  than if it was lost in the middle
of  the  oceans.  It  is  submitted  that  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  a
statutory  code  or  presumption  to  be  established  setting  precise
periods  after  which property  is deemed  to be  abandoned.153

It  is interesting  to  note  the method  used  by  the  US in its Aban-
doned  Shipwreck  Act of  1987. Under  the Act the US asserts title to
certain  abandoned  shipwrecks  and  then  transfers  that  title  to  the
state in or on whose submerged lands the shipwreck  is located. The
word  'abandoned'  is not specifically  defined  in the Act but section 2
provides  that  states  have  responsibility  for  management  of  certain
abandoned  shipwrecks  'which have been deserted  and  to which the
owner  has  relinquished  ownership  rights  with  no  retention'.  The
legislative history  apparently  notes that, with  the exception  of war-
ships  and  other  public  vessels,  abandonment  may  be  implied  or
inferred  in those instances when an owner has not made a claim of
possession  or  any control  over  the wreck.154 Abandonment  of war-
ships and other public vessels requires an affirmative  act of abandon-
ment  on the part  of the sovereign  nation  holding title.155

Insurers'  Interests

2.3 
2.3.1  Notice  of  abandonment
Under marine insurance law there may be a question  as to whether
an  owner  'abandons'  its  rights  in  a  wreck  to  its  insurers,  but  care
must be taken as to the use made of the expression in the insurance
context.  In  the case  of  an  actual  total  loss, the  underwriters  —  by
paying out for a total loss  —  are thereby subrogated  to all the rights
and remedies of the assured in the vessel or other insured property.156
On settlement,  they become entitled  to take over the interest  of the
shipowner  in  whatever  may  remain  of  the  vessel,  for  example  the
benefit  of any salvage or the proceeds of sale of any wreck.157 There
is  a  clear  inference  from  the  wording  of  section 79  of  the  Marine
Insurance Act 1906, which states that the underwriters are 'entitled'
to  take  over  the  rights  of  ownership,  that  unless  the  underwriters
elect to exercise  their  rights, they are not  forced  to  accept  them.

Where the total  loss of a vessel appears unavoidable,  or where it
is not  commercially  viable  to  preserve  a  vessel  from  total  loss, the
owners  may  'abandon'  the vessel  to  the  underwriter,  treat  the  loss
as  if  it  were  an  actual  total  loss158  and  thereby  be  indemnified  in
full.  To be able  to  claim  for  a  'constructive'  total  loss a  'notice  of
abandonment'  is necessary,159 whereby  the owners voluntarily  cede
their  entire  interest  in  the  vessel  to  the  underwriter.  Under  the
Marine  Insurance  Act  1906, '[w]here  there  is a  valid  abandonment
the  insurer  is  entitled  to  take  over  the  interest  of  the  assured  in

235

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

whatever may remain of the subject-matter  insured, and all proprie-
tary  rights incidental  thereto.'160

However,  the  insurer,  although  entitled  to  take  over  the  interest
of the  assured,  is under no obligation  to do  so and  in practice it is
usual  for  hull  underwriters  not  to  accept  notice  of  abandonment,
because  the  hull  may  be  of  little  commercial  value  and  liabilities,
for  example,  for  oil pollution  and  obstruction  to  navigation,  are
unpredictable.  Where  there  is a  valuable  cargo,  insurers  are  more
keen  to  exercise  rights.  If underwriters  take  over  abandoned  prop-
erty, for example, a sunken cargo of gold bullion, it does not become
res nullius simply because it is at the bottom of the sea. In one case
it  was  said  that:  '[s]o long  as  the  underwriters  had  not  abandoned
[the bullion] I think it was their property and remained their property
even  though  it  was not  actually  accessible  to  them  at  the  time.'161
However,  this was a case where the Salvage Association had  signed
a  salvage contract  only  ten months  after  the sinking  and  the cargo
raising  operations  started  within  four  years  of  the casualty.  None-
theless, underwriters were still exercising claims over the gold  from
the Lutine  139 years after  she sank.

The acceptance  of an  abandonment  by the insurer may be either
express,  or  implied  from  conduct.  The  mere  silence  of  the  insurer
after  notice  is  not  an  acceptance.162  In  order  for  acceptance  to  be
implied  from  conduct,  it  is  necessary  for  the  underwriters  to  do
certain  acts which  are consistent  only with  the exercise of  rights of
ownership.  It  is unclear  what  conduct  is sufficient,  but  certainly  it
would  seem that  the sale of lifeboats  or other  items brought  ashore
would  be  enough.163  It  is  also  unclear  how  soon  after  the  loss
ownership  must  be asserted  before  it  'lapses',  or  how  often  in  a
given  period  of  time  ownership  must  be  asserted.  However,  once
there  has  been  the necessary  conduct,  even  if  the  insurers  did  not
in  fact  intend  to  accept  the  abandonment,  they  will  be  estopped
from  denying  acceptance.164

What  if,  as is the usual practice, the underwriter  does not  accept
the notice of abandonment? In other words, what is the real meaning
of  'abandonment'  in this  context?  Does  the  property  become  res
nullius, or  does  the owner  retain  his  rights?  In  Boston  Corporation
v  France, Fenwick and Co.,165  Bailhache  J.  inclined  to  the  former
view.166 However,  Atkinson J.  has said  that:  —

'...by  a  notice of  abandonment  the  assured  merely  makes  an
offer, which remains executory unless and until it is accepted.'167

The better  view  is that  an  unaccepted  notice of abandonment  does
not deprive the owner of property and  that abandonment  by notice
is not  necessarily  abandonment  'to  all the world'.168  It is submitted
that  notice  of  abandonment  is  some  evidence  of  abandonment  of
ownership,169  but  it is in  no  way decisive: by itself,  it  may  not  be

236

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

enough,  but  it may be if combined  with  another  factor  such as the
passage of time. A shipowner may show an intention not to abandon
even  after  giving notice of  abandonment.170

2.3.2  Title of underwriter  to sue
It is clear that underwriters would have to prove title and show that
they  had  exercised  their  rights  before  they  could  make  a claim.  In
the  Columbus America case,171 the  Superintendent  of  Insurance  for
the  State  of  New  York  and  the  Salvage  Association  attempted  to
assert  a  claim  to  gold  in  an  1857 wreck  on  behalf  of  a  number  of
insurance  companies  that  no  longer  existed.  News  reports  at  the
time  listed  Lloyd's  as  an  insurer  and  the  Salvage  Association  also
claimed  to  act  as  successor  to  the  individual  Lloyd's  underwriters.
However,  the  court  was  not  presented  with  what  it  considered  as
proper  documents  assigning  the  claims  and  appears,  in  respect  of
the  Salvage Association,  to  have denied  its title to sue.172

Presumably,  most company  members of  the  Institute  of  London
Underwriters can  trace their succession  from  corporate  forerunners
who  accepted  a  line  on  a  slip  100  years  ago.  The  Charter  of  the
Salvage Association allows it to act on behalf of unknown commer-
cial interests, but  it is not clear  on whose  behalf  any proceeds may
be  held.  More  difficult  is  the  position  of  Lloyd's  underwriters.
The  general  theory  of  insurance  at  Lloyd's  is  that  each  individual
underwriter,  i. e.  each  name  on  a  slip,  is  entitled  to  exercise  the
rights  given  in  the  Marine  Insurance  Act  1906. After  the  death  of
an  underwriter,  or  for  example  after  100  years  when  they  are  all
dead,  who  is  entitled  to  sue  and  claim  rights  of  ownership?  Is  it
technically  the heirs  of  the  individuals,  or  can  Lloyd's  act  in some
way as agent? The difficulty  is if none, or only  some, of  the under-
writers  can  be  traced.  Inquiries  at  Lloyd's  indicate  that  there  may
be  no  simple  answer  to  this  point,  as  most  attention  has  been
focussed  on  the  continuing  liabilities  of  underwriters,  rather  than
their  rights.

The  famous  case  of  the  Lutinem  would  seem  to  provide  some
answers. She sank in 1799 off Holland with over £1 million in specie
insured  at Lloyd's. Some recovery work was undertaken  at the time
before  siltation  prevented  further  work.  In  1815, after  the  end  of
the  Napoleonic  Wars, a  Dutch  salvor  worked  on  the  wreck  for  40
years.  Between  1857  and  1861  arrangements  were  made  between
Lloyd's  and  the Dutch  government  whereby  Lloyd's  would  receive
half of the amounts  recovered. According to Lay, 'as the individual
underwriters  to  whom  the  salvage  properly  belonged  were  by  this
time all dead,  a Special  Act of Parliament  was passed  allowing  the
Society  of  Lloyd's  as  distinct  from  individual  members,  to  take
possession  of  any  goods  on  condition  that  the  Society  should  pay
any proved  claims that might be put  forward  by persons entitled  to
a  share  in  the  property.'174  The  relevant  provision,  still  in  force,  is

237

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah  Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

section 35 of  the  Lloyd's Act  1871, which allows  Lloyd's  to join  in
the  salving  of  the  Lutine  and  'hold,  receive  and  apply  for  that
purpose  so much  of the money  to  be received  by means  of salving
therefrom...and  the net money produced  thereby...shall  be applied
for purposes connected with shipping or marine  insurance'  (emphasis
added) according  to a scheme to be confirmed  by Order in Council
'after  or  subject  to  such  public  notice  to  claimants  of  any  part
of  the  money  as  aforesaid  to  come  in,  and  such  investigation  of
claims...and  such  reservation  of  rights  (if  any),  as  the  Board  of
Trade think fit'. The fact that such a provision was thought necessary
indicates  that  Lloyd's would  probably  not  have  any  right  to  claim
on  behalf  of  such  untraceable  underwriters  in  the  absence  of  an
equivalent  statutory  sanction.175  It  would  seem  to  follow  that,  in
the absence of some other agreement or assignment, the rights over
the  insured  property  could  only  be  exercised  by  the  heirs  of  the
individual  names.  If  that  is  right,  the  tracing  problems  could  be
horrendous.

As the  number  of individual  names increased,176  it became  more
convenient  for  them  not  to  underwrite  their  own  risks,  but  to
appoint  agents  to  act on  their behalf. This arrangement  often  took
the  form  of  an  underwriter  acting  for  a  syndicate  of  names.  In
respect  of  syndicate underwriting,  the  individual  names  still  retain
full  liabilities  under  the  policy,  but  it  will  be  necessary  to  analyse
the agency agreement between the members and the agents involved.
The current Members' Agent's Agreement177 has detailed provisions
dealing  with  death  and  bankruptcy  of  a  member.  Clause  14.2  of
Schedule  3 (the  Managing  Agent's  Agreement)  states  that  in  such
cases, the profit  or loss of a given year shall be apportioned  propor-
tionately  amongst  the  other  members  of  the  syndicate.  It  would
seem  that  such  a  provision  might  entitle  the  other  members  of  the
syndicate  to  claim  the  benefit  of  Lutine  type  recoveries,  but  there
might still be problems in proving succession  from  syndicates exist-
ing  100 years ago.

In  the  case  of  old  wrecks,  proof  that  the  insurers  have  asserted
ownership rights by conduct may also be very difficult.  One example
of  the  problems  which  may  arise  concerns  the  liner  Titanic which
sank  in  1912  and  whose  location  on  the  seabed  was discovered  in
1985. The hull, fixtures and  fittings  were insured  for £1 million  and
the insurance claim made by White  Star  Line, the registered  owner
of  the  liner,178  for  the actual  total  loss was met  in  full.  There were
70 signatories on the Lloyd's slip underwriting the risk of loss, some
of  which  represented  several  underwriters.  A few  of  the  signatures
are indecipherable  and most  of the interests represented  are  appar-
ently unidentifiable. Indemnity Marine Insurance, now the Commer-
cial  Union,  was  the  main  underwriter  of  the  vessel's  hull,  even
though  it  was  liable  for  only  7.5%  of  the  total  insured.179  It  is
unclear  whether  or  not  Indemnity  Marine  or  Commercial  Union
ever asserted  their rights over the Titanic.m  In any event, ownership

238

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

may  still  vest,  wholly  or  partly,  in  the  original  owner,  White  Star,
or  its successors in title.181

Another  famous  liner, the Lusitania, was the subject  of a salvage
operation  leading  to High  Court  litigation  in  1985.182 As far  as the
hull, machinery,  fittings  and  other  goods  originally  owned  by  Cu-
nard were concerned, it was agreed that the war risks insurer, which
had  paid  out  for  a  total  loss,  'thereby  acquired  legal  title  to  the
ship'.183  It  must  be  assumed  that  the  insurer  (or  reinsurer)184  had
asserted  its  rights  of ownership  over  the  vessel, although  the  point
was not  in issue.

2.3.3  Loss of right  to  take over  property
Where an underwriter has taken over the insured property, the issue
of  express  or  implied  abandonment  is  the  same  for  it  as  for  any
owner.  However,  it  is  not  quite  clear  in  what  circumstances,  if  at
all,  the  insurer  loses  its  right  to  take  over  the  wreck  under  sec-
tions 63(1)  and  79(1)  of  the  Marine  Insurance  Act  1906.  Can  the
insurer  waive  this  right,  expressly  or  by  implication,  or  by  the
effluxion  of time? Is there  a time limit within which  the right  must
be exercised? The point appears to be open, but it is submitted  that
there  is  no  reason  why  the  insurer  should  not  be  able  to  make  a
clear election, for  example in writing to the assured, that  it declines
irrevocably  to  exercise  the  right.  On  ordinary  principles,  such  an
unequivocal  election  should  be  binding.185  The  Act  lays  down  no
time  limit  in  which  the  insurer  must  exercise  the  option,  although
it might  seem surprising  if this could  be done many years after  the
casualty.  Nevertheless,  it  is  submitted  that  there  is  nothing  in  the
Act to prevent  the insurer  so doing provided, first, the assured  still
has  an  'interest'  to  take  over  and,  secondly,  there is no conduct of
the insurer  that  could  be deemed as a waiver  of its rights.

An  insurer  that  wanted  to  have  the  best  of  both  worlds  might
seek expressly  to  reserve  its rights  to  take  over  the wreck.  It  could
then avoid the liabilities of an owner, for example for wreck-raising,
while waiting to see whether the wreck increased in value or became
salvable. Such  action  would certainly  be evidence that  would  rebut
an  immediate  intention  to  waive  rights  under  the  Act,  but  it  is
difficult  to  argue  that  it  would  have  the  effect  of  preserving  the
insurer's  rights  under  the  Act  indefinitely.  It  is submitted  that  the
rights  may  still  be  subject  to  the  principle  of  waiver  by  conduct,
although  it would  be more difficult  to prove  such a waiver  than in
cases where there was no express  reservation.

2.3.4  Reinsurance  and war  risks
Many  marine risks will  be  reinsured  and  it  is possible  that  under-
writers may have reinsured a particularly valuable ship or its cargo,
either  as to a part  of its value or (exceptionally)  its whole. Perhaps

239

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

the  most  relevant  reinsurance  issue  in  relation  to  wreck  concerns
war risks. During wartime the Crown often requisitions British ships
under  its  prerogative  powers.  It  may  also  charter  tonnage  from
friendly  states. As the commercial insurance market alone would be
unable  to  bear  the risk  of  massive  war  losses, the  Crown  has  had
to  assist  by  acting as a  war  risks  reinsurer.  Thus,  on  4  May  1940
the Ministry of Shipping sent a circular letter on New Arrangements
for War Risks Cover on Requisitioned Ships, setting out the govern-
ment  Tonnage  Replacement  Scheme  whereby  requisitioned  vessels
would  be  chartered  on  terms  that  they  were  insured  with  a  listed
Group  of War  Risks Associations, with  the government  paying  the
premiums. The Associations would  be reinsured  by the  Ministry of
Shipping  under  a  Reinsurance  Agreement  of  22  September  1939.
The ordinary  marine policies which still applied would exclude war
risks and  so there may be issues as to whether sinkings were caused
by  'marine'  or  'war'  risks.186  This,  in  turn,  will  lead  to  difficult
questions as to the ownership of wrecks and as to which commercial
underwriter  (or  the Crown)  can  exercise  the  right  to  take  over  the
wreck under  the Marine Insurance  Act 1906.

One question  is whether the reinsurer  has any right to  take over
the wreck  under  the 1906 Act where the insurer has settled a claim.
Under  the Act, it  is not  entirely clear  if the reinsurer  is entitled  (as
against  the insured owner) to exercise in its own name the insurer's
right  to  take  over  the  property  on  the  insurer  paying  for  a  loss.
Presumably,  the reinsurer is entitled under the principle of subroga-
tion  to  require  the insurer  to  take  over  the  wreck  and  to  stand  in
its shoes if it refuses  to do  so.187

3  Crown  Rights to Unclaimed  Wreck

In  addition  to  cases  where  a  state  has  an  ordinary  proprietary
interest  to  a  wreck,  for  example  to  a  warship,  it  may  also  have  a
prerogative  right  to wreck.

3.1  History  and  Development
Early  maritime  law  appeared  to  have  been  more  concerned  with
issues  of  general  average,  contribution  and  the jettison  of  goods,
than  issues  of  ownership  of,  and  other  interests in,  sunken wrecks,
or  those washed  up on the shore. Nevertheless, it seemed  to  be the
case under early Roman law that goods cast ashore after  shipwreck
were still considered  to belong to their original owner and were not
considered  to be res nullius.m  It appears that the state did not claim
a wrecked ship, or anything cast ashore after  shipwreck, but instead
restored  such  property  to  its  owner.189  Any  other  person  taking
such  goods was considered  to  be a thief.190

240

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

Later,  with  the  onset  of  the  Dark  Ages, the  rights  of  the  owner
were subjugated  to those of the local feudal  lord  and  it became the
custom  of such lords to  seize the wreckage of ships washed ashore.
It  seems  likely  that  the  lords  claimed  to  themselves  coastal  rights
originally claimed by the common people: in ancient seafaring tradi-
tion  there  was  a  belief  that  the  coastal  population  had  a  legal
right  to  wreck  washed  ashore.191 In  any  event,  the  'feudal  right  of
shipwreck'192  appears  to  have  flourished  during  the  Middle  Ages.
This situation  seems to have been the case all over  Europe because
it  appears  that  'the  Church,  Emperor,  Kings  and  Republics'  all
made  efforts  to  suppress  the  custom.193  These  efforts  included  the
Crown jealously claiming for  itself the rights of the feudal lord and,
in time, these rights became a royal  prerogative.

As already  noted,194  the  statutory  definition  of  the word  'wreck'
covers two different  types of property under Admiralty and common
law.  Maritime  property  cast  upon  the  land  after  shipwreck  was
classed  as  'wreccum maris', while  such  property  remaining  at  sea
after  shipwreck  was  known  as  'adventurae  marts'. The  Crown  had
a right to wreccum maris as part  of its land jurisdiction.  Adventurae
maris,  on  the  other  hand,  passed  to  the  Crown  as  a  droit  of
admiralty.  The  distinction  was  expressed  by  Sir  John  Nichol  in
/?v  Forty-nine  Casks  of  Brandy195:  —

'"Wreccum  maris"  is  not  such  in  legal  acceptation,  until  it
comes ashore,  until  it  is within  the  land jurisdiction;  whilst  at
sea, it belongs to the King in his office  of Admiralty, as derelict,
flotsam,  jetsam,  or  ligan...if  the  article  be  floating,  it  belongs
to the sea; it is not "wreccum maris" but "flotsam";  if it become
fixed to  the  land,  though  there  may  be  some  tide  remaining
round it, it may be considered as "wreccum maris" but it having
merely touched  the ground, and  being again floating  about, its
character  will  depend  upon  its  state  at  the  time  it  was  seized
and  secured  into  possession;  whether,  for  instance,  the  person
who  seized  it,  as  a  salvor,  was  in  a  boat,  or  wading,  or
swimming.'

Adventurae maris originally appeared to have belonged to the finder,
rather than the Crown, if the owner could not be found;196 wreccum
maris was taken to belong to the Crown at an earlier stage. Initially,
the  Crown  was  entitled  to  all  wrecks  which  came  to  shore,197  but
in  1236  Henry  III  laid  down  a  rule,  the  influence  of  which —
according  to Sanborn  —  was felt  for  over  500 years. This rule was
enacted  in  1275  by  Edward  I.  The  Statute  of  Westminster  I,198
provides:  —

'Concerning  Wreck  of the  Sea, it is agreed,  that  where a  Man,
a  Dog,  or  a  Cat  escape  alive  out  of  the  Ship,  that  such  Ship
nor Barge, or any Thing within them, shall not adjudged Wreck;

241

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

but  the  Goods shall be saved  and  kept...so  that  if any  sue  for
those  Goods, and can prove that  they were his...within  a Year
and  a  Day,  they shall be restored  to  him...'.199

This rule restored  some of the rights of the owner, but had  unfortu-
nate consequences  for some crewmen  and  ship's  pets! Nonetheless,
as  Braekhus  points out,200  the rule  had  a  rational  basis in  that,  for
many centuries, the owners of the ship and the cargo would usually
accompany  the  vessel  on  its  voyages.  Therefore,  if  they  did  not
survive  the  wreck,  there  was  no-one  to  claim  it.  Presumably,  the
rights  of  successors  in  title  were  not  taken  into  account  because
they  may  have  been  in far  off  lands.  The  period  of  a  year  and  a
day  ran  from  the  time of seizure.201

When  the  right  to adventurae  maris did  fall  to  the  Crown,  there
still appears  to  have been a distinction  in the treatment  of the  two
types  of property.  According to  Hale,202 the property  of  the owner
of  adventurae  maris was, once  seized  by  the  King's  officer,  wholly
divested;203  there  was no  period  — such  as  that  laid  down  in  the
Statute  of  Westminster  I for  wreccum  maris — in which  the  owner
could  claim  the  property.

The rule laid down by Edward I, or at least its common interpreta-
tion,  was  not  finally  challenged  until  1771  when  Lord  Mansfield
held204  that  even  though  no  living  thing  escaped  from  the  wreck,
the property  in  the goods continued  to  remain  in the  owner.  Lord
Mansfield's 
interpretation  of  the  provision  in  the  Statute  of
Westminster  appears  to have  been  governed  by policy  reasons. He
stated  that:  —

'...no  case  is  produced,  either  at  common  law,  or  on  the
construction  of  [the Statute  of  Westminster]  to  prove  that  the
goods  were  forfeited,  because  no  dog,  or  cat  or  other  animal
came  alive  to  shore. I  will  therefore  presume,  that  there  never
was any  such determination;  and  that no case could  have been
determined  so  contrary  to  the  principles  of  law, justice,  and
humanity.  The very idea of it is shocking.'

He  stated  that  the  Statute  was  made  in  favour  of  the  owner  and
should  not  be  construed  otherwise.  Also,  its  provision  was  nega-
tively, rather  than  positively  phrased  and  meant  that  the escape of
a  dog or cat,  or  other animal was a medium  of proof,  whereby  the
ownership  of  the  goods  may  be  known.  He  felt  that  it  did  not
contain  the  contrary,  positive, provision  'that  if  neither  man,  dog,
or  cat,  etc.  escape  alive, [the wreck] shall  belong  to  the  King'.  His
rationale was  that  '[i]f the owner of the dog or cat, or other  animal
was  known,  the  presumption  of  the  goods  belonging  to  the  same
person,  would  be  equally  strong,  whether  the  animal  was  alive  or
dead.'  Only if,  after  a reasonable  time had  been allowed,  no owner
could  be discovered,  would  the  goods  belong  to  the King.  Various

242

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

charters  and  statutes205  then  restricted  the  right  of  the  Crown  to
both  wreccum  maris and  adventurae  maris to  which  no  owner  had
established  legal title within  a period  of a  year.206

Initially the Crown did not concede any of its rights to the  finder.
By  the  reign  of  Edward  I,  however,  when  it  was  realised  that
valuable finds were  being concealed,  the  Crown  conceded  one-half
of  the  find  to  the  finder  as  an  encouragement  to  declare  finds.207
According  to  Marsden,208  'sometimes  [the  finder]  paid  into  court
half  the appraised  value; sometimes he kept  half  of the nets, casks,
or  other  goods, where  they  were divisible,  and  delivered  the  other
half  to  the  officer  of  the  Crown'.  By  1836, the  right  of  the  finder
had  been reduced  to  one-third.209

3.2  Statutory  Basis
More  recently,  the  Crown's  rights  to  unclaimed  wreck  have  been
placed on a statutory footing by the Merchant Shipping Act 1894.210
Section  523 provides  that  all unclaimed  wreck  found  in  'Her  Maj-
esty's dominions' belongs to the Crown, except where it is found  in
places where the right  to  wreck  has been  granted  to other  persons.
The grant of rights to wreck by the Crown  —  which occurred  before
it was provided  for  by statute  —  was used as a means of bestowing
favours  and  these  manorial  and  other  rights  still  survive.211  For
example, a past monarch ceded the Crown's rights in the Whitstable
area on the Thames estuary  to a local manorial  lord and his succes-
sors are now entitled to personal possessions on board the 'Pudding
Pan' wreck, a Roman  ship known  to be lying in the area.212 Where
no  owner claims wreck  in the possession  of the receiver within  one
year  and  no  other  claim  has  been  made  to  it  by  a  person  entitled
through  royal grant,  section 525 provides that the receiver shall sell
the wreck and  —  after  deducting  his fees, expenses, and  salvage  —
pay  the proceeds  for  the benefit  of  the  Crown.213

The question  before  the Admiralty Court  in  The Lusitania2U was
whether  or  not  the  Crown  had  a  right  to  unclaimed  wreck  found
in international waters. As noted earlier, the Lusitania sank  12 miles
off the Irish coast, outside British or Irish territorial waters. In 1982
various items of general cargo and  personal  property  of passengers
and  crew  were  salved  from  the  wreck  and  brought  ashore  in  the
UK.  After  the  expiry  of  the  one  year  statutory  claim  period,  they
remained  unclaimed  by  the  original  owners  or  their  successors.
Sheen J.  had  to determine whether  the salvors or  the Crown  had a
better  title  to  these  unclaimed  items.  The  duty  to  report  wreck
found  in the Merchant  Shipping Act 1894 section 518 had originally
applied  only  to  wreck  found  or  taken  possession  of  within  UK
territorial  limits,215  but  section 72  of  the  Merchant  Shipping  Act
1906  extended  this  provision  to  apply  to  wreck  found  or  taken
possession  of  outside  UK  limits  but  later  brought  within  those
limits. Therefore,  under  the extended  Merchant  Shipping Act 1894,

243

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah  Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

it  was  only  when  such  wreck  had  been  brought  within  UK  limits,
that  there  was  a  duty  on  the  person  in  possession  to  deliver  it  to
the nearest  receiver. As there was no duty upon  salvors of wreck in
international  waters actually  to bring such wreck within UK  limits,
Sheen  J.  held  that  the  Crown  could  have  no  right  to  such  wreck
under  the Act.

Whether  the  Crown  has  never  had  a  right  to  such  wreck  is
arguable.  Towards the end  of  the seventeenth  century,  Hale  stated:
'The  right  of  flotson,  jetson,  and  lagon,  and  other  sea-estrayes,  if
they  are  taken  up  in  the  wide  ocean,  they  belong  to  the  taker  of
them, if the owner cannot be known. But if they be taken up within
the  narrow  seas,...they  do  belong...to  the  king,...'.216  However,
Marsden217  stated  that  there  was  'no  trace'  of  the  distinction  sug-
gested by Hale and that it had never been recognised by the Admir-
alty.218  According  to Nash  too,219 before  1854 a droit  of  admiralty
was recognised in respect of all wreck, wherever found. An authority
for  this view is R v Property Derelict220 in which the Crown's claim
to  property  found  derelict  near  Madeira  was  upheld.221  Indeed,
Sheen J. in The Lusitania believed that this case supported an alleged
droit outside UK dominions.222 However, he also concluded that:  —

'There can be no doubt that before  1894 the Crown was entitled
to  unclaimed  wreck  found  in  the  territorial  sea  of  the  United
Kingdom as a droit of Admiralty. It is at least doubtful  whether
such  a  droit  was  recognised  in  respect  of  wreck  found  else-
where.'223

There may have been doubts, but the balance of authority  seems to
point  to the existence of such rights. Sheen J., however, was  forced
to the conclusion that a consolidating statute had removed any such
pre-existing  Crown  rights.  It  is submitted  that  his  decision  on  the
interpretation  of  the  extended  Act  is,  at  best,  unfortunate  and  is
still  very  much  open for  the  higher  courts  to  reverse. The  wording
was  capable  of  the meaning  asserted  by  the  Crown  and  it  would
have  been  better  to allow  the  Crown  to  exercise  rights  over  such
property  and  to  reward  the finder accordingly  under  salvage rules.
In this way, where the wreck consisted of historically or archaeologi-
cally  important  artefacts,  the  state  could  exercise  control  so  as  to
ensure appropriate conservation  and  disposal.

The  practical  effect  of  Sheen  J.'s  decision,  if  correct,  is  that
recoverers  of  wreck  found  in  international  waters  and  brought
within the UK  will have title to it which is good against all but  the
true  owner.  The  wreck  will  be held  by  the  receiver  for  a  period  of
one year: if no valid claims are made to it during that period  it will
be returned to the salvor. In other words, the maxim 'finders keepers'
will  apply.  The  decision  should  encourage  recoverers  undertaking
operations in international waters to bring wreck ashore in the UK,
but  it  should  be emphasised  that  the  salvor will only be entitled  to

244

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

that  part  of  the  wreck  which  remains  unclaimed.  This  will  not
normally  include  the  hull,  machinery  and  other  property  which
belonged  to  the  vessel's  owner  because  such  owners  will  often  be
readily identifiable. Therefore, although greater incentive is provided
by  the  decision  for  salvors  to  bring  wreck  found  in  international
waters  into  the  UK,  the  legal  position  in  other  countries  may  still
be more favourable  to salvors.224

4  Salvors'  Rights

Having considered  the rights of the original  owners of wrecks, their
successors  in  title  and  the  Crown,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the
legal interests of salvors  in respect  of wrecked  property  which  they
have endeavoured  to save.

4.1  Salvage  Principles
A  maritime  salvage  service  is  capable  of  creating  rights  in  the
property  salved in a way that  could  not  happen  on land.  Although
it  may  be  possible  to  argue  that  there  should  be  a  restitutionary
remedy for saving land-based  property,225 the general view has been
that  the  land  'salvor'  obtains  neither  a  personal  cause  of  action
against the owner of property saved, nor any rights over the property
itself.226  Where  there  have  been  all  the  elements  of  a  successful
maritime  salvage  the  salvor  has  an  action  in personam against  the
owner  of  the  salved  property227  but,  more  importantly,  is  also
entitled  to a maritime  lien over it.

A  salvage  reward  can  be  claimed  where  a  salvor  voluntarily
succeeds  in  saving  maritime  property228  which  is in  danger  on  the
high seas or in tidal waters.229 The reward, calculated by taking into
account  a large number  of factors,  is available  on a  'no cure  —  no
pay'  basis  and  can  never  exceed  the  value  of  the  property  saved.
The  reward  is  payable  by  each  interest  salved  according  to  the
proportion  its salved  value  bears  to  the whole. Thus, a salvor  of  a
wrecked  ship  (having  a  salved  value  of  $100,000)  along  with  its
cargo (having a salved value of $900,000) will be able to claim 90%
of any  reward  directly  from  the cargo interests.

The  right  to  a  reward  is  not  dependent  on  contract.230  It  arises
out of the jurisdiction exercised by the Admiralty Court and operates
as an  independent  principle  of maritime  law,231  now  recognised  by
international  conventions.232  The  underlying  public  policy  factor
that  has influenced  the development  of  the  law has been  the  desire
to encourage  salvors to assist  others whose lives or  property  are in
distress. For  this reason  salvors have been granted  rights which  are
extensive  both  in  relation  to  the  owner  of  the  salved  property  and
other  claimants  who  might  wish  to  enforce  debts  in  respect  of  the
property.  Evidently,  this  policy  factor  would  have  less  force  in

245

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas  Gaskell

respect  of  wrecks  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea, where  no  lives were at
risk,  although  it  is still  arguable  that  the  property  is at  risk  in  the
sense of being permanently  lost  to  its owners.

4.2  The  Salvors'  Maritime  Lien
The principal  weapon  available  to the salvor is the maritime lien.233
This  is  an  inchoate  privileged  right  granted  over  the  salved  prop-
erty234 which may be perfected  by an  action in rem in the Admiralty
Court  of  the  Queen's  Bench  Division  of  the  High  Court.235  The
salved  property  can  be  arrested  and  ultimately  sold  in  order  to
provide  security  for  the  salvor's  claim.  A  maritime  lien  does  not
depend  on  possession,  but  will  travel  with  the  salved  property
even  into  the  hands  of  a  bona  fide  purchaser  for  value.236  The
preponderant  opinion,  at  least academically,  is that a maritime lien
is  a  substantive  right,  rather  than  a  procedural  means  of  asserting
a claim,237 although there is a controversial  3:2 decision of the Privy
Council  to  the  contrary.238

Most  legal  systems  would  accord  a  maritime  lien  the  highest
priority  over  other  claims.239 A salvage  maritime  lien will normally
take priority over pre-existing  liens,  as the actions of the salvor will
have  preserved  the  property  which  would  otherwise  have  been
unavailable  to  any  preferred  creditors.240  One  consequence  of  this
justification  is  that  a  later  salvage  lien  will  take  priority  over  an
earlier  salvage  lien  — a  reversal  of  the  normal  principle  that  liens
of  the  same  kind  would  usually  rank  in  the  order  in  which  they
arose.  The  salvors'  rights  will  be  extinguished  two  years  after  the
services were  rendered.241

It  is  difficult  to  consider  the  maritime  lien  separately  from  the
action  in rem, but  the  rights  that  the  lien  gives  to  a  salvor  (which
are not  necessarily  created  by  agreement)  can  be very  effective.

4.3  Salvors' Possessory  Interests
In addition  to the rights granted  by having a maritime lien, a salvor
may  independently  be  able  to  exercise  rights  of  possession  over  a
wreck.242  In  Cossman v  West243  the  Privy  Council  emphasised  the
distinction  between  the  case  where  a  ship  was  technically  a  'derel-
ict'  —  where it was abandoned  by its master and crew without hope
of  recovery  or  intention  to  return  to  it244  —  and  that  where it was
still in the control of its master. In the latter case, the master remains
in possession  of the ship and  can make decisions as to its operation,
for  example  whether  to  accept  the  services of other  salvors. Where
the master  has  temporarily  left  the  ship, the  salvors  'are  bound  on
the master's returning and claiming charge of the vessel to give it up
to him'.245 In the former case, the salvors who first take possession of
the ship 'have the entire and  absolute possession  and control  of the
vessel,  and  no  one  can  interfere  with  them  except  in  the  case  of

246

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

manifest  incompetence'.246  The  issue may  be important  in the con-
text of subsequent attempts by the owner to exercise rights to control
the  salvage  operations247  and  where  there  are  contests  between
competing  salvors.248

Historic Wrecks

4.3.1  Possession  against  owner
The assumption  in  Cossman  v  West1*9  is that  a  salvor  of  a  derelict
has  exclusive  possession  until  paid,  even  against  the  owner.  The
decision  actually concerns  the question  of when a vessel becomes a
total  loss  under  an  insurance  policy  and  the  issue  of  whether  the
owner would  be entitled  to possession  was not  directly  raised.  It is
submitted  that  the  decision  ought  not  to  be considered  as  binding
on  this point.250  Braekhus,  in  a seminal  article, was of  the  opinion
that  the  owner's  right  to  make  decisions  about  salvage  should  be
the same whether  the vessel was abandoned  or  not.251

The  position  is  easier  where  there  has  been  misconduct  of  the
salvor. The UK  has never specifically  enacted  Article  3 of the  1910
Salvage  Convention  which  removes  the  right  to  salvage  remunera-
tion  where  there  has  been  an  express  and  reasonable  prohibition
'on  the  part  of  the  vessel'.252  The  Article  does  not  make  it  clear
whether  it  would  apply  in  the  case  of  a  derelict.  Article  19 of  the
1989  Salvage  Convention  is  similarly  worded  but  in  slightly  wider
terms, referring  to such a prohibition coming from  the owner of the
salved property (presumably whether the vessel is technically derelict
or  not).  It  may  be  that  there  is  a  'reasonable  prohibition'  by  an
owner  out  of  possession  even  where  there  is  no  'manifest  incom-
petence'. Indeed, the expression  'manifest  incompetence', as used in
Cossman  v  West, is usually  applied  in the context  of a  competition
between  salvors,  rather  than  as  a  limitation  on  the  rights  of  an
owner.  The  difficult  question  is where  an  owner  wants  to  resume
possession  in  circumstances  where  there  is  no  real  criticism  of  the
salvor,  as  to  do  so  might  seem  to  undermine  the  salvor's  security
where it  is not  possible  to perfect  it through  an  action  in rem.2Si  It
is submitted  that  the best approach  is to allow the owner to resume
possession,  by  itself  or  through  its  agents,  but  to  preserve  any
salvage claims of  the first salvor.254

4.3.2  Competing  salvors
Where  there  are  salvors  competing  over  a  derelict,  the  first  salvor
is entitled  to protect  its possessory  rights by using the normal  civil
law  remedies,  for  example  by  seeking  damages  or  an  injunction.
The effectiveness  of an injunction,  in particular,  will depend  on  the
extent  to which the second  salvor  is legally or practically  amenable
to the control  of the court.  The  High  Court  has  been  held  to  have
jurisdiction in respect of injurious  acts on the high seas, for example
where  one  salvor  dispossesses  another.255  The  crucial  question  is

247

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

often  to  establish  whether  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  acts  of  the
first  salvor  in  relation  to  the  wreck  are  sufficient  to  constitute
possession.  This  is a  question  of  fact  and  degree  in  each  case.  In
order to establish that they are in possession of a derelict the salvors
must  show  'firstly,  that  they  have  animus possidendi,  and  secondly,
that  they  have  exercised  such  use  and  occupation  as  is  reasonably
practicable  having  regard  to  the  subject  matter  of  the  derelict,  its
location,  and  the practice  of  salvors'.256

A  leading  case  is  The  Tubantia.251 A  Dutch  vessel,  rumoured  to
contain  over £2 million in gold,  sank in 1916 in international waters
in  the  North  Sea258  to  a  depth  of  about  120 feet.  The  first  salvors
found  the  wreck  and  in  the  1922  and  1923  diving  seasons  began
operations.  These  involved  keeping divers  and  vessels at  the scene,
the  mooring  of  buoys  over  the  wreck  and  the  positioning  of  plant
and equipment around  the vessel which was likely to be swept away.
Holes were cut  in  the  ship  and  obstructions  removed.  The weather
allowed  only about  eight  minutes  per  day in the holds and  only 25
days were available in 1923. The second salvors arrived in July 1923
and claimed  the right to join in  the salvage operation and  interfered
in  the work  of  the  first  salvors.  The latter  claimed  a declaration  as
to  their  possessory  rights,  an  injunction  to  restrain  interference  by
the  second  salvors and  damages.

The judge  relied on  Pollock  and  Wright's Possession  in the  Com-
mon  Law  to  make  a  number  of  inquiries  in  order  to  establish
possession.  These  included  the  following:  'what  are  the  kinds  of
physical  control  and  use  of  which  the  things  in  question  were
practically  capable? Could  physical control  be applied  to the res as
a  whole?  Was  there  a  complete  taking?  Was  the  [first  salvor's]
occupation  sufficient  for  practical  purposes  to  exclude  strangers
from  interfering  with  the  property?  Was  there  the  animus  possi-
dendi?259  Taking  the evidence  as a  whole, the judge concluded  that
the  first  salvors  were  in  possession  at  the  relevant  time  and  it  is
interesting  to  consider  some  of  his  reasons.  The  first  salvors  did
with  the  wreck  what  a  purchaser  would  prudently  have  done  and,
if  the  owners  themselves  had  put  themselves  in  the  same  position
as the first salvors, the owners would  have been held to be in actual
possession. The big difficulty  with the first salvors' case was proving
possession  of  something  that  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  and
which  could  only  be  entered  in fine weather  and  for  short  periods
of  time.  It  might  have  been  possible  to  argue  that  the  vessel  was
incapable  of  possession  for  these  reasons,  or  that  it  was  only pos-
sessed  for  short  periods  of  time. However,  the judge  was  reluctant
to  come  to  such  a  conclusion  as  this  would  have  discouraged
enterprise.  Instead,  he  was  prepared  to  find  that  the  first  salvors
were  in  effective  control  of  the  whole  wreck  and  in  a  position  to
prevent  useful  work  by  newcomers.  The  court  was  influenced  by
the conduct  of the second  salvors, who had merely taken advantage
of  the  enterprise  of  the  first  salvors  in  finding  the  wreck.  It  was

248

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

important  that  the  first  salvors  could  demonstrate  that  they  were
taking  such  steps  as  were  possible  to  exploit  the  wreck.  It  would
have been different  if there had  been manifest  incompetence by the
first salvors and it seems clear that  —  where the first salvors cannot
demonstrate  possession  — there  is  no  salvage  remedy  to  protect
them from  a competing salvor using their knowledge of the location
of  the  wreck.  The  remedy  of  injunction  was  available  for  a  high-
handed  and  deliberate  trespass  and  damages  were  recoverable  (if
proved) for  the wilful  prevention of the completion of an  enterprise
capable  of  producing  profit.  The  court  was  unwilling  to  grant  a
declaration  of  possessory  rights,  partly  because  such  rights  are
necessarily  'of  a limited  and perhaps  transitory  kind'.

In  1924,  with  huge  numbers  of  ships  still  on  the  seabed  after
World  War  I  sinkings,  it  is easy  to  see  that  the  court  would  want
to encourage 'bold and costly work... of great public importance'.260
The same policy considerations might not apply in the  1990s where
salvors  were  competing  over  a  wreck  which  had  historical  or  ar-
chaeological  significance.261  Although  there may  be little to choose
between  two treasure hunters, it may be that  a second  salvor could
demonstrate  that  it  was more  likely  to  carry  out  operations which
would preserve the archaelogical value of the wreck. It is submitted
that  if  the  first  salvor  was  using  'smash  and  grab'  techniques,  a
court  would  be entitled  to  award  possession  to  the  second  salvor,
either  because it could  require a high degree of proof  of possession
by  the  first  salvor,  or  because  the  first  salvor  would  be  guilty  of
'manifest  incompetence',  taken  at its widest.

Nevertheless,  the  principles  in  The  Tubantia  have  been  followed
more  recently  in  The  Association and  The  Romney262  where  the
MOD  granted  separate  diving  rights  to  two  persons  in  respect  of
four  naval  vessels  which  sank  off  the  Scilly  Isles  in  1707. A  third
person claimed  to salve the wrecks and  denied  any possessory title.
At  the  interlocutory  stage  the  first  person  was  able  to  satisfy  the
court  as  to  possession,  which  consisted  of  continuous  buoying  in
1967 — 69 and work during every possible day in the diving seasons.
However,  an  interlocutory  injunction  was  refused  on  a  balance of
convenience263 as the  third  person  claimed  that  it  was an  associate
of  the  second  person  and  entitled  under  the  MOD  agreement  to
work  on  the  wreck.  There  were  difficult  questions  of  contractual
interpretation  and  of fact:  moreover,  damages would  have been an
adequate  remedy.264

The  first  salvors  in  The  Tubantia  and  The Association and The
Romney had  done  all  they could  to  exercise  possession.  It  may be
that as diving techniques develop, so may the nature of the activities
necessary  to  constitute  possession.  The  latest  remotely  operated
vehicles (ROVs) and  submersibles are capable of mapping, marking
out  and  attaching  buoys. In  a  recent  US  case,265 a judge  has been
prepared to find that in the deep ocean, 'exercise of effective  control
is achieved  not  through  physical  presence  of  a human  being at  the

249

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

ocean  bottom',  but instead  through  a combination  of  four  factors:
(i)  locating  the  object  searched  for,  (ii)  real  time  imaging  of  the
object,  (iii)  placement  or  the  capability  to  place  teleoperated  or
robotic manipulators on or near the object (capable of manipulating
it as directed  by human  beings exercising control  from  the  surface),
(iv) present  intent  to control  (including deliberately  not  disturbing)
the  location  of  the object.  The  latter  he described  as  'telepresence'
and  'telepossession'.266  While  the  law  must  develop,  it  might  be
thought  that  such an approach comes close to giving protection  for
discovering  the  location  of  the  wreck,  rather  than  for  exercising
possession.  The  better  view  is  that  mere discovery  does  not  give a
right  to possession.267 It  should not be forgotten  that the discoverer
might  claim  a  generous  salvage  reward  for  assisting  in  the  saving
of  the  property.  Possession  by  remote  control  should  be  possible,
but  there  must  be  more  than  the  mere  capacity  or  intention  to
possess.268

4.4  Interests  under Salvage or  Raising  Contracts
Although salvage operations to a vessel may be performed  consensu-
ally,  it  is  the  performance  of  successful  services  that  gives  rise  to
the  salvage  reward  rather  than  the  fact  of  agreement.  However,  it
is  legally  possible,  and  commercially  normal,  to  agree  a  salvage
contract,269 although the fact that the owner agrees to the operations
does  not  necessarily  result in  a contract.270

It may be that  the owners of the property engage a contractor  to
raise a wreck  under an ordinary  contract  for  work  and  labour,  i. e.
not  a  'no  cure-no  pay'  contract  but  one  for  a  lump  sum,  or  at  a
daily  rate.  In  such circumstances  the contractor  is not  a salvor  and
has  no  maritime  lien  over  the  raised  property,  unless,  perhaps,  it
has  exceeded  what  was  required  under  the  contract  and  thereby
become  a  salvor.271 Nor  will  there  be a possessory  lien at  common
law272 or  a  right  against  non-parties  to the  contract.273

When owners or underwriters grant permission for diving opera-
tions to  take place to raise valuable cargoes, it is usual  for  percent-
ages  to  be  agreed  in advance.  In  these percentage  deals  the precise
circumstances  of  the contract  must  still be  examined  to  see  if  it is
on  a  'no  cure-no  pay' basis. If so, there could  be a salvage service.
In  the period  immediately  after  World War  II,  it  was common  for
the  government  to  agree  with  contractors  that  valuable  cargoes
would be split 20% for the contractor and 80% for the government.
Today, it is more likely that  the contractors will make an  offer  that
will  vary  according  to  the  difficulty  and  expense  of  the  intended
operation.  They  may  be  required  to  pay,  say  £1000  for  diving
rights  for  two  years, with  a  percentage  of finds to  be  agreed  after
competitive  tender.  For  general  commercial  cargoes,  other  than
bullion,  a contractor might  be expected to  pay the insurer  5 — 10%
of the net proceeds, after  the deduction of all costs.274 It should  not

250

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

be  ignored  that  it  is enormously  expensive,  and  risky,  to  set  up  a
recovery  operation.  The  agreement  for  salving  the  431  gold  bars,
worth  over  £40  million,  recovered  from  HMS  Edinburgh  was  that
37.2% went to the USSR, 17.8% to Britain and 45% to the salvor.275
Where a contractor  does have a wreck-raising contract  from  the
owner, there may be difficult  questions as to whether it can supersede
a  salvor  who  was first in  possession.  The  rights  may  depend  upon
whether  the  owner  itself  could  have  dispossessed  the  salvor.  The
difficulty  for  the latter is in knowing whether  the contractor, or the
owner,  does  have  the  legal  right  to  regain  possession.  The  issue
might  have to  be settled in court  to avoid conflict  at  the site.276

4.5  Salvage Conventions  and Wreck
It has been important at various times internationally  to distinguish
between  the  saving  of  a  vessel  which  was manned,  one  which  had
been left  by its crew and  one which had  sunk  to  the bottom  of the
sea.277 Continental systems of law, such as those in France and Italy,
distinguished between salvage and assistance, the former applying to
services to a vessel which had been left  by the crew. The distinctions
were  often  important  in  deciding  the  entitlement  of  the  salvor  in
respect  of  the  property  recovered.  Fixed  proportions  of  one-third,
or eight-tenths, of the things salved could be claimed, depending on
the categorisation. In England, the concept of derelict was important
in  deciding  the  residual  rights  of  the  Crown.278  Where  no  owner
appeared  the  property  passed  to  the  Crown,  but  it  was  apparently
the  settled  practice  of  the  Court  of  Admiralty  to  give  a  moiety  to
the  finders  as  salvors.279  Later  the  amount  became  discretionary
and  English  law  ceased  to  make  a  formal  distinction  between  the
salvage of vessels, floating, manned  or wrecked.

The Salvage Convention  1910, Article  1 abolished  internationally
any  distinction  between  salvage  and  assistance  and  adopted  the
broad  English  notion  of  salvage.  It  has  generally  been  assumed  in
English  law  that  a  ship  and  its cargo  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  are
still subject to danger, one of the prerequisites of a salvage service.280
In  other  systems  it  may  be argued  that  vessels  lose their  character
of  being  maritime  property  once  they  have  sunk  so  that  salvage
rules  cease  to  apply.281  The  Salvage  Convention  1989  unfortu-
nately282 makes no mention  of sunken vessels or their cargoes in its
Article  1 definitions  of 'vessel' or 'property'  which can be salved. It
is  submitted  that  there  is  no  doubt  on  the  wording  of  Article  1,
taking  into  account  the  travaux  preparatoires,  that  salvage  can  be
claimed  under  the  Convention  whether  services  are  performed  to
floating or  sunken  vessels or cargo.283 It  is likely  that  the  UK  will
ratify  the  1989 Salvage Convention,  but  the Convention  still leaves
national  courts  to  decide  whether  property  on  the  seabed  is  in
danger.284  If there is no danger,  the recoverer will presumably  only
be entitled  to bring  a claim  based  in  contract.285

251

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

4.6  Salvage and  Finding
The assumption of the 1989 Salvage Convention is that, unless states
exercise  a  reservation  in  respect  of  'maritime  cultural  property',  it
will  be  normal  to  apply  the  salvage  rules  to  wreck,  including  the
giving  of  a maritime  lien  to  the  salvor.286  Salvage  law  presupposes
that  the  salvor  does  not  become  the  owner  of  salved  property,
but  has  an  interest  in  it  secured  by  a  maritime  lien.  The  salvage
remuneration  is  calculated  according  to  many  factors,287  but  can
never exceed the salved value. The salvor will be awarded a propor-
tion  of  the  salved  value  and  the  owner  will  be  entitled  to  the
remainder  (for  example  where  the  property  has  been  sold).  In
some  cases,  national  legislation  will  make  the  state  the  owner  of
abandoned  property,  but  the  notions  of salvage will still prevail.288
However,  if  there  is  no  known  owner,  or  if  an  identifiable  owner
has  abandoned  ownership,  expressly  or  impliedly,  the  recoverer  of
wreck  may  be able to  claim  as a finder.289

At first glance, it may seem uncontentious that a discoverer should
be entitled  to claim  property  not claimed  by anyone  else. The well-
known  finding  cases, 290  such  as  Parker  v  British  Airways  Board,291
recognise  that  a  number  of  persons might  have a  right  to claim an
interest  in  lost  goods,  including  the  occupier  of  land,  although  the
finder  may  have  a  greater  interest  than  all  but  the  true  owner.
However, cases such as  The Lusitania292 can only encourage treasure
hunters.  At  one  time  this  activity  may  have  been  thought  of  as  a
worthwhile  endeavour  by  entrepreneurs,  but  today  there  is greater
recognition  of  the  need  in  many  cases  for  properly  conducted  ar-
chaeological  survey  and  excavation.  The problem  over  the  applica-
tion of the law of finding or  the law of salvage has been particularly
prominent in litigation in the  US over ships containing vast amounts
of  bullion  which  were  wrecked  off  US coasts. The  legal  issues can
only  be  outlined  here,293  but  two cases  are particularly  illustrative:
Treasure  Salvors  Inc  v  The  Unidentified,  Wrecked  And  Abandoned
Sailing  Vessel29*  and  Columbus  America  Discovery  Group  v  The
Unidentified,  Wrecked  And  Abandoned  Sailing  Vessel.295  There  ap-
pears to have been a division  of opinion between the courts and the
leading  American  author,  Norris.296  Norris  was  very  reluctant  to
apply  the law of finds in the  context  of wreck, preferring  to rely on
the  rules  of  salvage.297  By contrast,  the courts  have  been  prepared
to reject  the theory  that  title  to such property can never be lost and
have applied  the law of  finds.298  In  Treasure Salvors it was accepted
that  'in  extraordinary  cases,  such  as  this  one,  where  the  property
has  been  lost  or  abandoned  for  a  very  long  period...the  maritime
law  of  finds  supplements  the  possessory  interest  normally  granted
to  a  salvor  and  vests  title  by  occupancy  in one who discovers such
abandoned  property  and  reduces it into possession'.299 In Columbus
America, abandonment  was  held, at first instance, to be a  question
of  fact,  a  voluntary  relinquishment  of  a  right,  consideration  being

252

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

given to 'the property, the time, place and circumstances, the actions
and  conduct  of  the parties, the  opportunity  or  expectancy  of reco-
very, and  all other  facts  and  circumstances.'300

In  the  Treasure  Salvors case,  the  Nuestra  Senora de  Atocha,  a
Spanish  galleon,  was  en  route  for  Spain,  with  a  cargo  of  bullion
(worth  perhaps  $250 million) exploited  from  the mines of  the New
World,  when  she  sank  in  1622 in  a  hurricane  off  Florida,  on  the
continental shelf but outside US territorial waters. After an expendi-
ture  of  some  $2 million  and  much  trouble,  the  plaintiffs  retrieved
gold,  silver,  artefacts  and  armaments  valued  at  $6  million  and
claimed  these as finders.  The US intervened and  claimed  ownership
of  the  vessel,  but  lost.  The  court  applied  the  law  of  finds  rather
than  the law of salvage. The Court  of Appeals (5 Cir) affirmed  the
judgment,  but  refused  to  hold  that  the  plaintiffs  had  exclusive  title
as against other claimants who were not before  the court.301  It  did,
however, consider  it to stretch  a 'fiction  to  absurd  lengths' to  treat
a wrecked  vessel whose very location  had  been lost for  centuries as
though  its  owner  existed.  The  court  also  rejected  the  claim  of  the
US  government  based  on  an  alleged  inheritance  of  the  English
prerogative  power  which  was  apparently  assumed  to  exist302  over
unclaimed  wreck  found  on  the high seas.

The decision  on finding  is perhaps unsurprising,  given that  there
was no claim  by the  original  owner  Spain  or  any  South  American
country.  However,  it  can  be  inferred  that  the  court  would  have
rejected  such  a  claim  on  the  abandonment  ground.  If  it  is  legally
possible  to  abandon  property303  then  this  case  —  with  a  350 year
period of inactivity  —  would be one of the strongest.304 The difficulty
is whether  to apply  the finding principle  to more modern wrecks.

In  Columbus  America  Discovery  Group  v  The  Unidentified,
Wrecked And  Abandoned Sailing  Vessel,205  the  steamer  SS Central
America,  reputedly  carrying  gold  miners  with  a  fortune  in  gold,
sank  in  1857  after  encountering  a  hurricane  160  miles  east  of
Charleston.  The plaintiffs  were a company  that  had  spent  13 years
of  study  and  over  $10 million  in  finding  the  wreck  and  its  cargo.
In  1987 they applied  to  the court, claiming ownership  as finders  or
a liberal salvage reward, and an injunction  to prevent others interfer-
ing  in  recovery.  Various  other  claimants  joined  suit,  including  (i)
the trustees of Columbia University (who claimed  the plaintiffs  had
used information  belonging to them, such as sonar records) and (ii)
a list of 38 insurance companies in the UK  and US (which claimed
they  had  paid  out  on  cargo  insurance  policies).  The  claim  of  the
trustees  (presumably  for  salvage)  was dismissed  as  they  had  failed
to prove  that  any  information  was used, or that  it helped  to  locate
the  wreck.306  The  claim  of  the  insurance  companies  is  far  more
important.  The  problem  for  the companies  was that  there were no
copies  of  any  insurance  policies,  invoices  for  shipments,  bills  of
lading,  bills  of  exchange,  proofs  of  loss,  amounts  paid,  or  other
records. The insurance companies instead had to rely on contempor-

253

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

ary newpaper  articles to show that  some gold was insured by them,
but  it  seems  that  there  were many  conflicts  in  the  various  reports.
The judge at first instance, Kellam D.J., apparently held (i) that not
all  the  insurance  claimants  could  even  prove  that  they  had  title  to
sue,  as  some  of  the  companies  were  now  defunct,307  (ii)  that  the
insurers  could  not  prove  exactly  which  cargo  had  been  insured,
(iii) that  the  insurers  had  in  any  event  abandoned  any  claim  they
might  have  had.  On appeal,  it seems to  have been  assumed  by  the
majority  that  the  trial  judge  had  decided  that  the  insurers  had
proved  a  prima  facie  case of  ownership  and  that  the  only  relevant
issue was abandonment. The reasoning of the first instance decision
is  not  always  easy  to  follow,  but  the  additional  grounds,  given
above, do  seem to have been  taken into  account.308

The factors  that Kellam D.J.  found  to be important,  particularly
in  showing  abandonment  by  the  insurers,  were  (a)  the  absence  of
any documentation, (b) the failure of insurers to retain any records,
given  the  practice  of  destroying  documents  only  if  a  subrogated
claim  was  not  expected,  and  the  absence  of  any  evidence  that
documents  were  accidentally  destroyed,  (c)  that  evidence  existed
that  some insurers had kept some records for over 100 years, (d) the
contemporary  evidence  that  some passengers carrying  considerable
quantities  of  gold  were  uninsured,  (e)  the  fact  that  locating  and
recovering  the wreck were beyond  any  known  abilities in  1857 and
for  some  100 years thereafter,  (f)  the  failure  of  any  insurer  or  the
Salvage  Association  to  attempt  to  locate  or  recover  the  wreck  in
the  last  20 years  when  techniques  became  available,  (g) the  length
of  time  that  had  elapsed,  (h)  the  absence  of  any  of  the  gold  being
listed as an asset of the insurance companies for  taxation  purposes.
The reasons need to be examined closely. Kellam D.J. disregarded
the contentions of the insurers that they had never signed documents
abandoning  rights, never publicly  abandoned  them and had  always
claimed to own the gold. Although the judge dismissed the insurers'
assertion  that  they would  be  unlikely  ever  to  renounce  title  to  so
valuable  a non-perishable cargo, it is submitted  with respect  that  it
does  have  force.  With  a  cargo  of  gold  the  insurer  would  have  no
reason  whatsoever  to  want  to  abandon  ownership.  The  position
might  be different  in respect  of cargoes or  hulls which could  cause
liabilities. The absence  of documentation  (a) — (c) is at best equivo-
cal,  given  the  passage  of  time  and  does  not  necessarily  point  to
abandonment  alone.309 On appeal,  the majority  of  the court  found
that Kellam D.J. had been wrong in concluding that the documenta-
tion  had  been  deliberately  destroyed  and  that  this  was  a  crucial
factor  in deciding that  there had  been deliberate abandonment.  He
had inferred  from  the present practice of destroying stale documents
that  the  absence  of  documentation  in  the  case  must  point  to  an
intention  to  abandon  title  at  some  time  in  the  past.  The  majority
decision on appeal is surely right in refusing  to draw such a conclu-
sion, as the evidence would  certainly  be equivocal.

254

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

Likewise, a failure  to undertake salvage operations (e) — (0 would
point  simply  to  a calculation  that  the efforts  might  not  succeed.310
The point  about company  accounts would  need precise evidence as
to  the  practice  of  insurers  but  it  seems  unlikely  that  such  remote
prospects  of  recovery would  have  been  included  in accounts, given
the state of knowledge and technology at the time. Indeed, to include
might  well  have  been  misleading  to  shareholders.311  The  lapse  of
time  (g)  is  certainly  relevant,  but  will  always  be  arbitrary,  in  the
absence of a statutory  definition.  The fact  that  so much  endeavour
was displayed by the finders is a reason for giving them an exception-
ally  generous  salvage  reward,  but  a  court  is not  necessarily  forced
to conclude that  the insurers' wariness of exercising similar endeav-
our  is  evidence  of  abandonment.  It  does  not  appear  that  Kellam
D.J.,  or  the  Fourth  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals,  addressed  the  issue
as  to  whether  the  insurers  had  ever  taken  over  the  cargo  under
marine insurance  law or whether  these rights  had  been  waived.312

It  is  submitted  that  there  is  no  reason  why  the  insurers'  claims
could  not have succeeded, provided  they could produce clear docu-
mentary  evidence  that  (i)  they  had  title  to  sue  and  (ii)  that  the
policies precisely covered the goods recovered. The real problem  for
the insurers was the weakness of their case on these two points. The
absence  of  the  documentary  evidence,  coupled  with  the  fact  that
some  portion  of  the  cargo  was  certainly  uninsured,  must  have
presented  enormous  difficulties  to  the  claim  unless  the  courts  are
prepared  to  adopt  some  principle  of  apportionment  of  proceeds
rateably  amongst  the various  insurers  of  admixed  cargo. The find-
ings,  both  on  abandonment  and  on  the  documentary  evidence,
would  have  been  a  severe  blow  to  attempts  by  insurers  to  assert
rights  over wreck. The decision  on  appeal  is to be welcomed,  in so
far as it indicates a reluctance to hold that insurers have abandoned
title (and thereby  to apply  the law of finds) except with  the clearest
evidence.  However,  a  Petition  for  Rehearing  en bane, seeking  to
reargue  the case  before  all  nine  Judges  of  the  Circuit,  was filed in
September  1992.

The  US  cases  disclose  a  professional  finding  industry  (with  a
thriving  market  in  assignable  rights,  interests  and  information)
which  the US courts  have  been  willing  to  favour,  at  least  until  the
recent appeal decision in Columbus America.  'The law acts to  afford
protection  to  persons  who  actually  endeavour  to  return  lost  or
abandoned  goods as an  incentive  to undertake  such expensive  and
risky  ventures'.313  The  robust  view  taken  by  the  US  courts  does
have the merit of providing comparatively  simple solutions to com-
plex cases, for  the  fewer  ownership  claims  that  are  recognised,  the
easier  it  is  to  arrange  recovery  operations  and  to  distribute  the
proceeds. However, it must be questioned whether the comparatively
unrestrained  endeavours  of  such  an  industry  is  the  most  desirable
system to allow. The existence, and recognition, of a wider underly-

255

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

ing  state  or  public right  would  have the merit  of enabling  material
of  archaeological  or  historical  interest  to  be  made  available  for
research  and  public  education  and  enjoyment.314  Indeed,  in  the
Abandoned  Shipwreck  Act  of  1987  the  USA  has  recognised  such
wider educational and historical  interests by declaring ownership of
certain  abandoned  wrecks  in  or  on  the submerged  lands  of  a  state
and  then  transferring  these  to  the  relevant  state.315  The  law  of
salvage  and  finds  are  disapplied  in  these  waters  in  respect  of  such
wrecks,  but  will  still  be  applicable  to  some  shipwrecks  on  those
lands316  and  to  most  wrecks  beyond  the  three  mile  limit.  It  is
interesting  to  note  that  rejected  drafts  would  have  extended  the
scope  of  the  Act  to  the  continental  shelf  and  would  have  specified
wrecks over  100 years  old.

5  Conclusions

An  underlying  question  of  principle  is which  legal  rules  should  be
applied  to  the  competing  interests  that  might  arise  in  relation  to
wrecks? There are undoubtedly  public and  international317  interests
that  must  be  protected,  for  example,  where  the  wreck  constitutes
(i)  a  historic  or  cultural  relic,  or  (ii)  a  grave  containing  human
remains. These can be catered  for  by specific  legislation, such as  —
in  the  UK  — the  Merchant  Shipping  Act  1894, the  Protection  of
Wrecks Act  1973 and  the Protection  of Military  Remains Act 1986.
The  trend  in  international  law  is  to  allow  states to regulate  wrecks
when the property involved is maritime cultural property of archaeo-
logical  and  historical  interest  and  is  situated  on  the  seabed.318  In
the UK  the  1894, 1973 and  1986 Acts constitute  a  regime of sorts,
but  there  is  a  need  for  a  modern  codification.319  There  is  every
reason  for  submitting  that,  whether  or  not  the  decision  in  The
Lusitania is right,320  it would  be  better if the fullest  possible  advan-
tage  was  taken  of  the  position  under  international  law  to  assert
state  rights  in  respect  of  wreck  found  on  the  continental  shelf,  or
on the high  seas and  brought  within  the UK.321  Admittedly,  such a
provision  might  encourage  forum  shopping,  but  that  is  no  reason
to  refrain  from  putting  UK  law  on a sounder  basis. Moreover,  the
Crown  should  exercise its  rights  in a more  sensitive way.322

At  present,  the  commercial  interests  of  salvors,  treasure  seekers
and  auctioneers  are  treated  as  paramount,  whereas  there is a need
to  recognise  and  give due  weight  to  broader  cultural  interests. Too
much  damage  has  been  caused  by  allowing  unrestrained  treasure
recovery,  but  failure  to  reward  finders  or  recoverers  can  result  in
them concealing their discoveries. It would be unrealistic to suppose
that governments are going to provide new funds to pay for rewards.
Where  possible,  a  clear  distinction  should  be  made  between  ships
and  cargoes  which  have  only  a  commercial  value  (for  example,

256

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

where  a  modern  ship  sinks  while carrying  an  expensive  ore  cargo)
and  those  which  may  have  some  historical  or  cultural  value.323  In
the case of the latter, the rights of states324 would be better  protected
by  not  applying  the  law  of  finding,  but  by  recognising  persisting
rights  of  ownership,  with  residual  state  rights  of  ownership  where
the nationality of the original owner is known or can be  surmised.325
It  would  then  be  necessary  to  decide  whether  to  apply  a  modified
law of salvage in respect  of strangers who  'save' property  from  the
wreck.  Archaeologists  maintain  that  in  some  cases  it  may  be  far
better  to  leave  a  time  capsule  in situ,  rather  than  disturb  it,  and
that  the  law  of  salvage  merely  encourages  unscientific  removal.326
Realism  again  dictates,  however,  that  there will  be  no  government
funding  for  any  wreck  policing  service  and  that  commercial  and
amateur  divers327 will continue  to explore and  exploit  wrecks.

The  major  problem  that  still  needs  to  be  addressed  by  salvors
and  archaeologists  is that  of  ownership. At present, it  is  extremely
difficult  to  decide  who  has  ownership  rights  and  in  what  circum-
stances  their  rights  are  lost.  While  it  is  proper  to  recognise  wider
interests,  there  is  perhaps  an  increasing  tendency  to  discount  the
rights  of  the  original  owners  (and their  insurers), even  where  these
persons are clearly  identifiable.

Is  there  a  sensible  regime  that  will  satisfy  some  or  all  of  these
competing  interests? There are a number  of reform  proposals,  with
varying  degrees  of  radicality,  that  could  be  considered  nationally
and  internationally.  At  the  very  least,  it  is  submitted  that,  apart
from  recognising that the widest possible Crown  (i. e. public)  rights
should  be  asserted,  legislation  should  provide  a  clear  code  for
dealing with  ownership. The legislation  could  set out  principles  on
which ownership issues can be decided. It could create a  presumption
as to abandonment  of ownership  after  a given period  of  time.  This
date  will  inevitably  be  an  arbitrary  one,  but  it  is suggested  that  a
period  of  100 years  from  the date of  the wreck  would  suffice.328  A
phasing-in period might be needed in order to give notice, especially
to  foreign  interests,  that  rights  could  be  lost  through  inaction.
Perhaps  the subject  of wreck  is now ripe for  an  international  Con-
vention  that  will  deal  not  only  with  the  cultural  interests,  as  with
the  1985  draft  European  Convention  on  the  Protection  of  the
Underwater  Cultural  Heritage,  but  also  with  commercial  issues.329
A comprehensive international convention covering commercial  and
cultural interests that was in force might be preferable to  the contin-
ued  uncertainties  about  the  rights  of  states  and  individuals,330  but
it is easy to expect too much of conventions and  to forget  how  long
it  takes  to  achieve  international  agreement  and  implementation.
There will rightly be little support  for  a time-consuming  diplomatic
process  that  is  doomed  to  failure.  It  might  be  more  realistic  to
encourage  national  or regional initiatives to give better  guidance  to
all those interested  in wreck.

257

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

Notes

1  This  article  derives  from  work  undertaken  by  the  authors  for  a  chapter
entitled  'Interests  in  Wreck'  in  Palmer  and  McKendrick  (eds.)  Interests  in
Goods (1993,  Lloyd's of  London  Press), chapter  13.
State rights  of  intervention  in  relation  to  wrecks  are  discussed,  ibid.,  at  3.2.
2  The youngest  vessel designated  under the UK  Protection  of Wrecks Act 1973
on  account  of  its  'historical,  archaeological  or  artistic  importance'  is  the
Iona  II,  a  passenger  ferry  lost  in  1864.  The  reason  for  her  designation  was
that  she  represents a one-off  design  for  a  fast  passenger  ferry  for  the  Clyde
and  is  also  a  good  example  of  an  early  Federal  blockade  runner.  Under
the  Australian  Commonwealth  Historic  Shipwrecks  Act  1976  a  number  of
twentieth  century  wrecks  have  been  declared  'historic'  and  in  fact  the  first
wreck  declared  as an 'historic  wreck'  under  that  Act  was  that  of  a Japanese
submarine  which  was sunk  in  1942 by  the  Royal  Australian  Navy: J Amess,
'Operation  of  the  Commonwealth  Historic  Shipwrecks  Act',  in Proceedings
of  the  Second  Southern  Hemisphere  Conference  on  Maritime  Archaeology
(1983).  See also  the  Columbus America case, 4.6  below.

3  'A  vessel  broken,  ruined,  or  totally  disabled  by  being  driven  on  rocks, cast
ashore,  or  stranded;  a wrecked  or  helpless  ship;  the  ruins  or  hulk  of  such':
Oxford  English Dictionary (2nd  edn.,  1989).

4  For  further  discussion  of  these  terms, see 3.1  below.
5  In  Cargo ex  Schiller [1877] 2 PD  145 it was held, citing  Att.  Gen. v Sir Henry
Constable  [1601]  5 Co  Rep  106,  that  'flotsam,  is  when  a  ship  is  sunk  or
otherwise  perished,  and  the goods  float  on  the  sea.  Jetsam,  is when  the ship
is  in  danger  of  being  sunk,  and  to  lighten  the  ship  the  goods  are  cast  into
the  sea,  and  afterwards,  notwithstanding,  the  ship  perish.  Lagan...is  when
the  goods  which  are so  cast  into  the  sea,  and  afterwards  the  ship  perishes,
and  such  goods  are so heavy  that  they  sink  to  the  bottom...'.

6  For  the  meaning  of 'derelict',  see 2.2  below.
7  Merchant  Shipping  Act  1894,  s.510(1).  The  origin  of  this  section  was  the
Merchant  Shipping Act  1854 s.2. The  1854  Act  was  a  consolidating  statute.
The  earlier  Wreck  and  Salvage  Act  1846  had  no  definition  of  wreck.  The
breadth  of  the  area  is  unclear  from  the  statutory  wording.  What  exactly
does  'found  in  or  on  the  shores  of  the  sea'  mean?  Does  it  mean  'found  in
the  sea,  or  on  the shores  of  the  sea',  or  'found  in  the  shores  of  the  sea,  or
on  the  shores  of  the  sea'?  The  two  interpretations  would  lead  to  quite
different  results.  In  practice  the  phrase  has  been  taken  to  mean  property
found  in  territorial  waters  or  on  the  foreshore.

8  For  example,  see Att.  Gen.  v  Sir  Henry  Constable  [1601] 5 Co  Rep  106,  'if
any  [flotsam,  lagan  or jetsam]  by  the  sea  be  put  upon  the  land,  then  they
shall  be  said  wreck'.  See  also  R.  v  Forty-nine  Casks  of  Brandy  (1836)  3
Hagg  Adm  257  in  which  Sir  John  Nicholl  cites  Blackstone:  'It  is  to  be
observed...that  in  order  to  constitute  a  legal  wreck,  the  goods  must  come
to  land;  if  they  continue  at  sea,  the  law  distinguishes  them  by  the  uncouth
appellations  of  jetsam,  flotsam,  and  ligan.  These  three  are,  therefore,  ac-
counted  so  far  a  distinct  thing  from  the  former,  that  by  the  King's  grant  to
a  man  of wrecks, things jetsam,  flotsam,  and  ligan  will  not  pass'. (Bl.  Com.
vol.  1, 290, 292).

9  See further  3.1 below. See also  S. Lillington,  'Wreck  or Wreccum  Mans? The

Lusitania" [1987] LMCLQ 267.

10  See  3.1  below  for  further  details.  See  Halsbury's  Laws  (4th  edn.),  Vol. 43,
para.  1008  and  R.  Marsden,  'Admiralty  Droits  and  Salvage  — Gas Float

258

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

Whitton,  No.IF  (1899)  LX  LQR  353,  at  p. 354.  Droits  also  included,  for
example, sea-marker  buoys, and  wines and  spirits anchored  for  safe-keeping
to  the  sea  bottom  by  smugglers.

11  Aircraft  (Wrecks  and  Salvage)  Order  (1938),  Art.  2(b)  (S  R  &  O  1938,

No. 136).

12  Hovercraft  (Application  of  Enactments)  Order  1972  (SI  1972,  No.  971),

Art.8(l).

13  New  Zealand  Shipping  and  Seamen  Act  1952, s.348(2).
14  P. Davies,  'Wrecks on  the New  Zealand  Coast'  [1983] NZLJ  202 at  p. 205.
15  The  term  'wreck'  itself  is not  defined.
16  These issues can only be touched upon  here, but see further,  I. Shearer (ed.),
D.  O'Connell, The International Law of the Sea (1984) pp. 911-918; L. Prott,
P.  O'Keefe,  Law  and  the  Cultural  Heritage,  Vol.  I  (1984),  pp. 89-107;
L. Van  Meurs,  'Legal  Aspects  of  Marine  Archaeological  Research', Special
Publication of  the  Institute  of  Marine  Law,  University of  Cape  Town, No. I
(1985);  B.  Allen,  'Coastal  State  Control  over  Historic  Wrecks  Situated  on
the Continental Shelf as Defined  in Art.76 of the Law of the Sea Convention
1982', Special Publication of the Institute  of Marine Law,  University of Cape
Town, No.14 (1991).

17  The  UK  position  is certainly  that  a  foreign  vessel engaged  in  salvage  work
in  territorial  waters  cannot,  by  analogy,  claim  to  be  exercising  innocent
rights  of passage.

18  See further,  4.1  below.
19  Per  Phillimore  L. J.  in  The  Putbus  [1969]  P  136,  at  p. 155.  See  also  G.

Marston,  The Marginal Seabed (1981), p. 203.

20  This  is  now  usually  confirmed  by  statute,  see  the  Merchant  Shipping  Act
1894,  s.523;  the  US  Abandoned  Shipwreck  Act  of  1987,  s.6;  others  are
mentioned  in  O'Connell,  op.  cit.,  p. 918;  Prott  and  O'Keefe,  op.  cit.,
pp.  192-194.

21  See the discussion  on  The Lusitania [1986] QB 384, at  3.2 below.
22  See 2.2 below.
23  See  O'Connell, op.  cit.,  p. 911,  Allen,  op.  cit.,  p. 14.  Where  an  'ownerless'
vessel  is  situated  in  the  waters  of  a  coastal  state  it  seems  probable,  as  a
matter  of  principle, that  the  rights  of  the  flag  state  to  ownership would  not
be as strong  as those  of  the coastal  state.

24  See further,  2.1.2 below. Consider also the nationality  of the insurers (if they
have rights, 2.3 below) and  any subsequent  purchasers of interests in wrecks.
25  Although  in  some  cases  it  may  be  possible  to  argue  that  a  wreck  has close
cultural  or  historical  connections  to  the  coastal  state,  see  Van  Meurs,  op.
cit., p. 62.

26  (1886) 33 Ch  D  562.
27  It  is  interesting  that  the  US  Abandoned  Shipwreck  Act  of  1987  expressly
applies  to  shipwrecks  'embedded'  in  the  submerged  lands  of  a  state  or
coraline  formations.

28  Op. cit., p. 914,  f.n.314.
29  See  Van  Meurs,  op.  cit.,  pp. 40—41  and  cf.  the  approach  taken  in  Klein v
Unidentified,  Wrecked and  Abandoned  Sailing  Vessel 569  F.2d  330  (5  Cir,
1985), J. Prisbe, 'Law Determining Ownership of Wreck in the United  States'
[1987] 1 LMCLQ  267. The  Court  held  that  as  the eighteenth  century  wreck
had  become  embedded  in  the  soil  of  the  territorial  sea,  it  belonged  to  the
USA,  not  the  finder  (and  see 4.6 below).

30  See 4.6 below and  e.g.,  Treasure Salvors Inc v The Unidentified, Wrecked and

Abandoned Sailing  Vessel [1981]  AMC  1857,  Columbus America Discovery

259

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

Group v The Unidentified,  Wrecked and Abandoned Sailing Vessel [1989] AMC
1955,  [1990]  AMC  2409, (1992)  337  LMLN  1; the  Klein case  [1985]  AMC
2970,  at  p. 2974,  and  D.  Owen,  'Some  legal  troubles  with  treasure'  (1985)
16  JMLC  139.  B. Alexander,  'Treasure  salvage  beyond  the  territorial  sea'
(1989) 20 JMLC  1, argues for widest jurisdiction to be accepted by admiralty
courts  over  wreck  and  this  is  in  accordance  with  the  approach  of  the
Admiralty  Court  in England.

31  See e.g.  The  Tubantia [1924] P 78 and  Supreme Court  Act  1981  s.20.
32  Allen,  op.  cit.,  pp. 17, 28  would  seem  to  suggest  that  where  a  wreck  which
belonged  to an identifiable  owner was abandoned  so as to become res nullius,
the  law  of  the  finder  should  apply.  Of  course,  one  would  need  to  refer  to
the  law  of  the  original  flag  to  see whether  it  recognised  the  abandonment.
It is only where the nationality  or flag  is unidentifiable  that  the choice arises
between  the  law  of the site, the  forum  or  the finder.

33  See also  O'Connell, op. cit.,  p. 914. If  the  only  choice  was  between  the  law
of the  site (certainly where the wreck  was on the continental  shelf)  and  that
of  the  finder,  it  would probably  be better  to prefer  the latter,  Allen, op. cit.,
p. 17.

34  Cf.  O'Connell, op. cit., pp. 914—8 and  see 3.2 below, for  a discussion  about
droits  of  admiralty  as exercised  in  cases  such  as  The  Thetis  (1835)  3  Hagg
Adm  228 and  not  applied  in  The Lusitania  [1986] QB 384.

35  Cf.  The  Franconia: R  v  Keyn  (1876)  2  Ex  D  53,  analysed  at  length  in

O'Connell, op. cit., p. 93 et seq.

36  Cf.  The Tubantia [1924] P 78, at pp. 8 6 -7  and O'Connell, op. cit., pp. 917-8.
37  See 2.2  below.
38  There  are  examples  of such  claims  by  states, e.g.  the  Government  of  India
Act  1858  s.39,  concerning  the  East  India  Company,  see  2.1.3  below.  Cf.
private  succession  arrangements  given  statutory  effect  in  the  Lloyd's  Act
1871,  2.3.2  below.

39  See generally,  Allen, op. cit.; Alexander,  op. cit.; O'Connell, op. cit., p. 918.
40  The equivalent  provision  in  the  1982 Law  of the Sea Convention  is Art.77.
41  See O'Connell,  op. cit., p. 918.
42  A.  Korthals  Altes,  'Submarine  Antiquities:  A  Legal  Labyrinth'  [1976]  4
Syracuse  Jnl  of  Int  Law  and  Comm  77  at  p. 80,  argues  that  wrecks  are
resources.  Cf.  A.  Strati,  'Deep  Seabed  Cultural  Property  and  the  Common
Heritage  of  Mankind'  (1991) 40 ICLQ  859 at 869.

43  For  example,  Australia,  under  the  Commonwealth  Historic  Shipwrecks  Act
1976, and  Ireland,  under  the National  Monuments  (Amendment)  Act 1987.
44  Report  of the International  Law Commission  to the General Assembly,  11 th
Session,  GAOR  Supp No  9, UN  Doc  A/3159 (1956),  reprinted  in  [1956] 2
Yrbk  of  Int  L Comm 298.

45  D. Owen,  'The  Abandoned  Shipwreck  Act of  1987' (1988)  19 JMLC  499, at

p. 503.

46  Art.80  and  O'Connell., op.  cit.,  p. 918.  O'Connell suggests  (at  p. 918)  that
states  can  regulate disturbance  of  the  seabed  of  the continental  shelf  where
a  wreck  is  embedded  in  coral  and  presumably  this  might  extend  even  to
wrecks  embedded  in  sand  and  sediment,  as  these  could  be  interpreted  as
being  natural  resources  of  the  seabed.  Allen,  op cit., pp. 21 —22, was  being
rather optimistic in considering  that Arts.81 and 85 dealing with drilling and
tunnelling,  could  be used  to  regulate  salvage  operations  (except  in  a  most
minor  way).

47  See the  Protection  of Military  Remains  Act  1986, 2.1.4  below.
48  Cf.  Prott  and  O'Keefe,  op. cit., p. 96.

260

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

49  Article  59  provides  for  conflicts  between  state  rights  in  the  EEZ  to  be

resolved  on  the  basis of  equity.

50  Cf.  Prott  and  O'Keefe,  op.  cit.,  p. 100.  The  latter  refer  to  the  Council
of  Europe's  Parliamentary  Assembly  Recommendation  848  (1978)  on  the
underwater  cultural  heritage,  which  recommended  that  states  should  claim
a  200 mile cultural  protection  zone: Council  of  Europe  Doc. 4200-E.

51  Art.303  also  puts  a  general  duty  on  states  to  protect  archaeological  and

historical  objects  found  at  sea.

52  See generally,  Prott  and  O'Keefe,  op. cit., pp. 97-99.
53  See 2.1 and  2.2 below.
54  In  particular,  ss.518 —534. For  the definition  of  'wreck'  for  the purposes  of

Part  IX,  see 1.1  above.

55  There  are  similar  systems  in  other  jurisdictions,  e.g.  in  Norway  that  laid
down  by  the  Administration  of  Wrecks Act  1893: see S.  Braekhus,  'Salvage
of  Wrecks and  Wreckage:  Legal  Issues  arising  from  the  Runde  Find'  [1976]
Scandinavian Studies in Law 55, at  p. 56. In  New  Zealand,  a  receiver service
was  established  under  the  Shipping  and  Seamen  Act  1952. See  Davies,  op.
cit.

56  Merchant  Shipping  Act  1894, s.518.
57  Merchant  Shipping  Act  1906, s.72.
58  See further,  2.1.1  and  2.1.2  below.
59  See 2.3 below.
60  In  practice,  material  is usually  retained  by  the  finder  until  entitlement  to  it
is established. Since the early  1970s and  the rise in consciousness that  certain
wrecks  may  be  of  historical  value,  it  was  felt  that  the  finder  is  more  likely
than the receiver to have the facilities to carefully  preserve historical artefacts.
61  For  the  Crown's  prerogative  rights  to  unclaimed  wreck,  see  3.1  below.  For

further  details  of the statutory  provisions,  see 3.2  below.

62  Under  the Merchant  Shipping (Fees) Regulations  1990 (SI  1990 No.555) the
fee  was  7.5%  of  the  wreck's  value.  As  from  April  1991  the  fee  has  been
waived:  Merchant  Shipping  (Fees) Regulations  1991 (SI  1991 No.784).

63  In  the case of gold  and  silver coins, the salvor generally  receives 75% of net
proceeds,  the  reason  for  this  being  that  coins  are  of  interest  to  collectors
and therefore  have a very good commercial value. For salvage, see 4.1 below.

64  In  accordance  with  the Merchant  Shipping  Act  1894, s.522.
65  This  fact  was  acknowledged  in  a  Department  of  Transport  Consultative
Document  published  in  1984 which  contained  proposals  for  new  legislation
on  wreck.  These proposals  have never  been  implemented.

66  The  Act  protects  certain  wreck  sites  in  UK  territorial  waters  on  account
of  their  historical,  archaeological  or  artistic  importance:  see  further,  S.
Dromgoole,  'Protection  of  Historic  Wreck:  The  UK  Approach'  (1989)  4
IJECL  2 6 - 5 1,   9 5 - 1.

67  See 2.2  below.
68  See 2.3 below.
69  Vereenigde  Oostindische Compagnie (VOC). See 2.1.2  below.
70  She appears  to  have been  ten  metres longer  than  HMS  Victory: P. Marsden,

The Historic Shipwrecks of South-East  England, (1987), pp.  12-13.

71  Source: file on the wreck belonging to the Archaeology  Department,  Univer-

sity of  Southampton.

72  See 2.1.3 below.
73  Henry  VIH's  flagship  which  sank  in  the  Solent  in  1545  and  was  raised  in

1982.

74  For  details  of another  similar  donation,  see 2.1.3  below.

261

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas  Gaskell

75  See 4.  below.
76  See 3. below.
77  Braekhus,  'Salvage  of  Wrecks  and  Wreckage:  Legal  Issues  arising  from  the

Runde  Find'  op.  cit.,  at  p. 53.

78  For  example,  in  September  1992  a  wooden  ship  possibly  dating  from  the
Stone Age was  found  23 ft  below  street level during road  construction  work
in  Dover:  The  Independent,  17  October  1992.  Archaeologists  believe  that  it
was  left  at  the  edge  of  a  river  estuary  that  once  flowed  through  the  area:
The Independent,  12 October  1992.

79  Established  in  1856  as  'The  Association  for  the  Protection  of  Commercial
Interests  as  respects  Wrecked  and  Damaged  Property'  and  incorporated  by
Royal  Charter  in  1867.  In  practice,  it  operates  within  Lloyd's  and  the
Institute  of  London  Underwriters,  but  is  available  to  any  person  whose
interests  are  affected  by  perils  of the  sea.

80  It  is  evident  from  the  DTp  files  that  attempts  have  been  made  to  list  all
potentially  valuable  cargoes,  so  there  may  not  be  as  much  'treasure'  to  be
discovered  as  is sometimes  thought.

81  Another  source  is  the  World  War  I  and  World  War  II  records  of  losses
recorded  in  the five volumes  of  War  Loss  Books  of  Lloyd's, see e.g.  Lloyd's
War Losses  - 

the Second  World  War (1989) Vol. 1.

82  See  The  Times,  19 and  29 April  1986.
83  Wrecked  on  the  beach  three  miles  from  Hastings  in  1749.  The  Dutch  are
planning  an  ambitious  project  to  take  the  hull  of  the  Amsterdam  back  to
the  city  of  Amsterdam  and  there  display  it in  a  transparent  basin  as part  of
a  harbour-front  development:  J Gawronski  of  the  Amsterdam  Foundation,
in  a  presentation  given  to  the  Department  of  National  Heritage's  Advisory
Committee on Historic Wreck  Sites, at a meeting with its licensees, the Royal
Armouries,  25 November  1992.

84  Wrecked  off  the  Outer  Skerries in  1711. For  further  details,  see Van  Meurs,

op.  cit.,  p. 42.

85  The Dutch  government  took  over  the assets and  liabilities of the Dutch  East
India  Company  when  it  was  liquidated  in  1798.  See  Van  Meurs,  op.  cit.,
pp. 41 —42 for  details.

86  See 3.2  below.
87  See  The  Lusitania  [1986]  QB  384,  where  the  question  before  the  court  was:
who  had  better  title  to  these  unclaimed  contents,  the salvors  or  the  Crown?
See 3.2  below.

88  P. Marsden,  The  Wreck of  the  Amsterdam (1974).
89  Prior  to  1964 it  was  the  Admiralty  which  administered  these rights.
90  For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  Grace Dieu, see 2.1.1  above.
91  Material  recovered  must  be  reported  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Defence
within  12 months  and  the  reporting  requirement  under  the  Merchant  Ship-
ping  Act  1894  must  be  abided  by.  A  copy  of  the  Deed  of  Transfer  was
kindly  provided  by  P. Marsden,  Director  of  the Shipwreck  Heritage  Centre,
Hastings,  East  Sussex.

92  If  someone  wants  to  purchase  a  cargo,  in  order  to  salve  it,  the  Salvage
Association is asked to recommend  a price: 'For sale, 5,000 desirable wrecks',
The  Observer,  18  September  1988.  A  senior  Executive  Officer  involved  in
the  sales  was reported  as  saying:  'If  someone wants  a  wreck  to  dive off,  we
ask  them  to  suggest  their  own  price and  hope  they will be embarrassed  into
offering  something  substantial.'

93  Other  examples  of  East  Indiamen  include  the  Earl of Abergavenny sunk  off
Weymouth  in  1805;  the  Admiral  Gardner, sunk  in  the  Goodwin  Sands  in
1809; and  the  Hindostan,  which  sank  off  Margate  in 1803.

262

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

94  See US v Steinmetz  [1991] AMC 2099 at p. 2106. 'Kearsage was in construc-
tive  possession  of  Alabama,  positioned  across  Alabama's  bow  thwarting
escape and able to deliver unanswerable raking fire', according to Debevoise
D.J.,  at  p. 2106.

95  US v Steinmetz  [1991] AMC  2099 at  p. 2106. See further,  2.2 below.
96  Although,  at  the  time of  sinking,  the vessel was on  the high  seas since  the
French only established a  12 mile territorial limit in 1971:  Law No.71 —1060
(Dec.24,  1971). See J.  Ashley  Roach,  'France  Concedes  United  States  Has
Title to  CSS Alabama'  (1991) 85 AJIL 381.

97  In the same year an  agreement  was signed  by the two governments  relating
to  the  protection  and  study  of  the  wreck  and  its  artefacts.  For  further
details,  see J.  Ashley  Roach,  op. cit.

98  Earlier  salvage  operations  on  the  forward  and  midship  sections  led  to  the
recovery  of  various  items  but  the  gold  was  never  found  and  therefore
thought  to  be in  the  stern  section.

99  Giving  rise  to  the  tradition  'Women  and  children  first',  known  as  the

'Birkenhead  drill':  The Times, 14 March  1986.

100  Under  the War Graves and  National  Monuments  Act  1969 (South  Africa),
as amended. The permit  required  the salvors to  take proper  account  of  the
archaeological,  historical  and  cultural  aspects  of  the  wreck.  The  salvors
were  entitled  to  half  of  the  material  as  salvage  and  were  required  to  give
the  other  half  to  the  Monuments  Council  which  would  give most  of  it  to
the South  African  Cultural  History  Museum  and  a selection  to the relevant
regiments  (apparently  at  the  request  of  the  salvors).  For  details  of  recent
measures  to  improve  the  permit  system,  see  B. Werz,  'A  preliminary  step
to  protect  South  Africa's  undersea  heritage'  (1990)  19 UNA  4.

101  HMS  Birkenhead: Exchange  of  Notes, Cm 906, Treaty  Series No.3 (1990).
102  Agreement  Between  the  Netherlands  and  Australia  Concerning  Old  Dutch
Shipwrecks,  1972  Aust.  TS  No  18; appended  as  Schedule  1 to  the  Com-
monwealth of Australia's Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976. For further  details,
see  Prott  and  O'Keefe,  op.  cit.,  pp. 287-291,  319.  As  Prott  and  O'Keefe
point  out  (p. 319),  the  Agreement  does  not  state  that  the  Netherlands  did
have title  to  the vessels and  therefore  does  not  constitute  an  acknowledge-
ment  of  their  claim  by  Australia.

103  Between  1857 and  1861 bullion valued  at about  £40,000 was recovered.  For

further  details, see 2.3.2  below.

104  In  Streedagh  Bay, Co. Sligo:  The Irish  Times, 22 May  1985.
105  See the  Treasure Salvors, Cobb Coin and  Platoro cases, 4.6 below. See also,
A. Korthals  Altes, 'Sunken  Spanish  Treasures  in Anglo-American  Law', in
M.J.  Palaez, Derecho Comercial Comparado Trabajos en homenaje a Ferran
Vails, Taberner,  Vol. XI  (1989)  pp. 3137-3145.

106  Estatuto  nr. 60/62, 24 December  1962.
107  International  Law Association  Queensland  Conference,  Committee on Cul-

tural  Heritage  Law,  First  Report  (1990), p. 4.

108 Ibid.
109  See J.  Gronhagen,  'Marine  Archaeology  in  Finnish  Waters'  in  P.  Forsythe
(ed.),  Proceedings of  the  Sixteenth  Conference on  Underwater  Archaeology
(1985).

110  Prott  and  O'Keefe,  op. cit., p. 192.
111  As to  the meaning  of  'abandoned  shipwreck'  for  the  purposes  of  this  Act,

see 2.2 below.

112  See  further,  Prott  and  O'Keefe,  op.  cit.,  pp. 192-3  and  Vol.  3,  p. 440  el
seq.  A  potential  conflict  of  this  nature  was  the  reason  for  the  Agreement

263

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

Between Australia and The Netherlands Concerning Old Dutch Shipwrecks,
see further,  2.1.3 above.

113  C. Martin,  Institute of  Maritime  Studies, St. Andrews, in a presentation  to
the  Department  of  National  Heritage's  Advisory  Committee  on  Historic
Wreck Sites, at a meeting with its licensees, Royal Armouries, 25 November
1992.  The  vessel  is believed  to  have  been  part  of  a  royalist  invasion  fleet
during  the  English  Civil  War:  The Independent,  17 August  1992. The  site
was designated  under the  Protection  of  Wrecks Act  1973 in  May  1992.

114  As  amended  by  the  Environment  Protection  Act  1990  s.146.  Apparently

permission  is granted  only  on  condition  that  bodies  are  labelled.

115  Halsbury's  Laws  of England  (4th  edn.),  Vol.10  para.  1019.  For  detailed
discussions,  see  P. Skegg,  'Human  Corpses,  Medical  Specimens  and  the
Law  of  Property'  (1975) 4 Anglo-American  LR  412, P. Matthews,  'Whose
Body? People  as  Property'  [1983] CLP 193.

116  Skegg, and  Matthews,  op. cit.
117  See Elwes v Brigg Gas Company (1888) 33 Ch  D  562.
118  See 4.6  below.
119  The  law  of  salvage does  not  apply  to  live humans  and  there  is no  reason
to extend it to bodies, e.g. so as to recognise possessory rights of the salvor:
see 4.3 below. The removal of bodies for  scientific  research  may be covered
by  the  Human  Tissue Act 1961.

120  Although  success  in  the  damages  claim  seems  unlikely,  given  the  present
state  of  the authorities: cf.  Alcock v  Chief Constable of  the South Yorkshire
Police [1991] 4 All ER 907.

121  See Matthews,  op. cit., p. 218.
122  See, e.g. B. Penrose, Stalin's Gold(1982), p. 86, stating that HMS Edinburgh
had  been  designated  an  official  war grave in  1957 and  M. Middlebrook, P.
Mahoney,  Battleship (1977),  p. 326,  referring  to  the  Prince  of  Wales and
the  Repulse.

123  See 4.3 below.
124  Middlebrook  and  Mahoney,  op. cit., p. 326.
125  The Sunday  Times, 18 October 1981.
126  No  designation  orders have yet been  made.
127  Although  the  Act  also  applies  to  restrict  operations  on  foreign  military

vessels in  UK  waters: see. s.l(3).

128  In  1985 and  1986, Bills were introduced  in  the US  Congress  attempting  to

designate  the  Titanic as  a maritime  memorial.

129  The  distinction  in  salvage  law  between  a  vessel  which  is  derelict,  and  a

vessel  which  is not, is explained  at  4.3  below.

130  See,  for  example,  The Aquila  (1798)  I  C  Rob  36,  165  ER  87  per  Sir  W.
Scott  at  pp. 88,89; HMS  Thetis (1835)  3 Hagg  Adm  229,  166 ER  390 per
Sir  John  Nicholl  at  393;  Cossman  v  West  (1887)  13  App  Cas  160  at
pp.  180,181;  Bradley v Newsom  [1919] AC  16 (HL)  per  Lord  Finlay  L. C.
at  pp. 27,28.

131  This  has  not  always been  the case: see 3.1  below.
132  In  civil  law  systems  the  term  'dereliction'  is  used  to  denote  abandonment
or  relinquishment  of  the  right  of  ownership:  see  Braekhus,  'Salvage  of
Wrecks and  Wreckage', op. cit., p. 47. See also  The Lusitania [1986] QB 384
per  Sheen J.  at  pp. 388 — 9 where it  seems that  the  learned judge may  have
conflated  the  two  meanings of  the notion  of  derelict.

133  See,  in  particular,  Braekhus,  'Salvage  of  Wrecks  and  Wreckage',  op.  cit.,
for  an  excellent  discussion  on  this point.  See also, e.g.  The Tubantia [1924]

264

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

P 78, at p. 87 on intention, where Sir Henry Duke P. referred  to the Roman
law origins  of  the  principle.

134  See R.  Lanier,  'Abandon  Ship? The Utility  of Abandonment'  (1977-78)  9
JMLC  131, and  K.  Roberts,  'Sinking,  Salvage  and  Abandonment'  (1977)
51 Tul L Rev  1196, 1199. See also the sources cited  in N.  Palmer, Bailment
(2nd  edn.,  1991).

135  R.  Goode,  Commercial Law (1982), p. 58 (f.n. 41).
136  See R.  Grime, 'Abandonment:  Some Theoretical  Problems', in Problems of
the Shaft  al Arab (Institute  of  Maritime  Law,  Faculty  of  Law,  University
of Southampton,  1983) pp. 33 — 34. A. Bell, Modern Law of Personal Prop-
erty  in England and Ireland (1989), mentions  abandonment  in passing  only
(at  pp. 40, 68) but  seems  to  assume  it is possible.

137  See Elwes v Brigg Gas Co. (1886) 33 Ch  D  562, per  Chitty  J.  at  568-9.
138  Robinson v  Western Australian Museum  (1977)  51 ALJR  806, per  Stephen

J.  at  pp.  820-21.

139  Braekhus,  'Salvage  of  Wrecks  and  Wreckage',  op.  cit.,  pp. 51—52  has
suggested  that  this view is supported  by  the doctrine  of  laches. Cf.  Grime,
op.  cit.,  Palmer,  op.  cit.,  pp. 1431 — 1432,  f.n.  64.  Palmer  asserts  that  no
lapse  of  time,  however  great,  will  by  itself  extinguish  title,  but  later  seems
to accept  that  express abandonment  may  be possible in the case of wrecks,
leaving  open  the issue of  abandonment  implied  through  lapse  of time.

140  [1924] P  78, at  p. 87.
141  See e.g.  the  decision  in  The Egypt  (1932) 44  LI  L Rep  21. The Lutine,  2.3
below,  is an  example where  Lloyd's underwriters  were maintaining a  claim
some 60 years after  a ship was lost. US and UK  insurers have also asserted
a  claim  to  the  gold  on  board  the  SS  Central America which  sank  in  1857,
see 4.6  below  for  details.

142  [1986] 1 QB 384.
143  Ibid., p. 389 (emphasis  added).
144  See  R.  Olsen,  'The  salvor's  rights  and  duties  in  relation  to  property  re-
covered',  in  Proceedings of  the  International  Marine  Salvage Conference,
London  (1988),  p. 6.  A  court  must,  presumably,  decide  on  the  evidence
before  it.

145  [1975] 2 Lloyd's  Rep 338.
146  There  was  also  a  difficult  question  as  to  whether  East  or  West  Germany
was the lawful  successor in title. Such problems will increase with the  break
up  of  Eastern  European  states  such  as Yugoslavia  and  the  Soviet  Union.

147  (1977)  51 ALJR  806, at  pp. 820-821.
148  Jacobs  J. (p. 829) agreed.  Cf.  I.  Shearer  (ed.), O'Connell, op. cit., p. 318.
149  N. Rt.  346 (1970 N.D.  107). See Braekhus, 'Salvage of Wrecks and  Wreck-

age',  op. cit., p. 54.

150  J.  Ashley  Roach,  op.  cit.,  p. 381, citing  the  1980 Digest  of  United  States
Practice in International Law  999 — 1066, and  US  Navy,  The Commander's
Handbook on the Law  of  Naval  Operations, para.2.1.2.2.  (NWP9  (Rev A)/
FMFM  1-10,  1989).

151  [1991] AMC  2099. On  24  August  1992,  the  US  Court  of  Appeals  for  the
3rd Judicial Circuit rendered an opinion in favour  of the US but  apparently
avoided  several  of  the  important  issues  which  had  been  argued  on  behalf
of  Steinmetz.  Therefore,  in  September  1992  Steinmetz  filed  a  Petition  for
Rehearing.

152  See  O'Connell, op. cit., p. 912. US courts  have  nevertheless  been  prepared
to  apply  the  abandonment  theory  to  states,  see  Platoro  Ltd  Inc  v  The
Unidentified Remains of a  Vessel (1981)  518 F  Supp  816, 4.6 below.

265

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

153  Cf.  the  various  time  limits  set  out  in  the  Protection  of  Military  Remains

Act  1986.

154  U.S.  Department  of  the  Interior,  National  Park  Service,  Abandoned Ship-

wreck Act  Guidelines  (1989).

155  Ibid.
156  Marine  Insurance Act  1906  s.79(l).
157  Ibid. In  the  case  of  an  actual  total  loss  there  is  no  need  for  a  notice  of
abandonment  (s.62(7)), but  in  practice  a  shipowner  wishing  to  claim  for  a
total  loss will give notice, leaving it to be later determined  whether  the loss
was actual  or constructive.  See M. Mustill, J. Gilman  (eds.), Arnould's Law
of Marine  Insurance  and Average (16th edn.,  1981), Chap. 30.

158  Marine  Insurance Act  1906, s.61.
159  Marine  Insurance Act  1906, s.57(2).
160  Marine  Insurance Act  1906,  s.63(l).
161  Per  Langton  J.  (obiter) in  The Egypt (1932) 44 LI L Rep  21, at  p. 39.
162  Marine  Insurance Act  1906, s.62(5).
163  See Arnould, op. cit., p. 1061.
164  See Arnould, op. cit., pp. 1060 — 1061 on the relevance of the 'waiver clause',

whereby  the insurer is  said  not  to waive or  accept  abandonment  by acts of
recovering  property.

165  (1923)  28 Com  Cas 367.
166  This  is the  view apparently  supported  by  Arnould, op. cit., p. 1070.
167  Pesquerias y  Secaderos  de Bacalao de Espaha SA  v Beer [1946] 79  LI  L  R

417.

168  This view appears to be supported  by Greer J. in Oceanic Co v Evans (1934)
40  Com  Cas  108 at  p.  Ill  and  Cohen  L.J.  in  Blane SS  Co v  Minister  of
Transport [1951] 2 KB 965 at  pp. 990-1.  See also R.  Lambeth,  Templeman
on  Marine  Insurance  (6th edn.,  1986), pp. 452 — 3.

169  Cf.  The Crystal  [1894] AC 504.
170  See  Ocean St  Nav Co Ltd  v  Evans (1934) 40 Com  Cas  108, at  p. 111.
171  Columbus America Discovery Group v The  Unidentified, Wrecked and Aban-
doned  Sailing  Vessel  [1990]  AMC  2409  (reversed  on  appeal,  (1992)  337
LMLN  1).

172  p. 2440.  On  appeal,  it  seems  to  have  been  accepted  that  the  court  below
had  prima  facie  recognised  the  rights  of  the  insurers,  and  the  main  issue
was whether  these rights  had  then  been abandoned.  See further,  4.6 below.
173  See R.  Flowers, M. Wynn Jones, Lloyd's of London: An  Illustrated  History
(1974), pp. 114—118; H. Lay, A Textbook of the History of Marine Insurance
(1925),  p. 58.

174  Ibid.
175  It  would  also  seem  that  the  provision  was  not  designed  to  enable  the
proceeds  to  be  spread  amongst  existing  members,  but  to  further  more
general, if  not  charitable, aims.

176  In  1875  there  were  710  members  and  in  1924  only  1243  underwriting
members,  see Lay, op. cit., p. 57. Today,  there  are  almost  30,000  members
grouped  into  about  370 syndicates  (source: Lloyd's).

177  10/91,  shortly  to  be replaced.
178  At the  time, the White Star  Line was a British  company  (as required  under
the  Merchant  Shipping  Act  1894),  although  its  shareholding  had  been
acquired  in  1902 by  the  American  corporation,  International  Mercantile
Marine:  Allen,  op. cit., p. 15.

179  M.  Nash,  'The  Lusitania  and  Its  Consequences',  NLJ,  4 April  1986.

266

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

180  In an  article in  The  Times on  14 December  1985, Marcel  Berlins stated  that
the  underwriters,  in  paying  out  the  insurance  claim,  became  owners of  the
wreck.  With  respect, it  seems that  he was wrong  in  saying  this  because  the
underwriters  do  not  become  the owner  automatically,  they  have a choice.
181  White Star,  original  owners of the  Titanic, merged  with the Cunard  Steam-
ship  Company  in  1934 and  Cunard  later  became  part  of  Trafalgar  House.
The  French  government  have  recently  offered  for  sale  relics  from  the
Titanic,  giving  descendants  of  the  passengers  first  choice:  ''Titanic  sale
attacked  as  grave  robbing',  The  Times, 18 December  1992.

182  The Lusitania  [1986] QB 384.
183  Per  Sheen  J.  at  p. 386.
184  It  appears  that  the  government  was  a  reinsurer  from  the  Liverpool  and
London  War  Risks  Association  for  some  80%.  In  1962,  the  government
apparently  sold  its  title  to  the  wreck  to  'a  businessman':  The  Times,  14
November  1985.

185  Arnould,  op.  cit.,  pp. 1071 — 1072,  cites  with  apparent  approval  the  US
decision  of  White  Star  SS  Co  v  North  British  and  Mercantile  Ins  Co  Ltd
[1943] AMC  399, where an  insurer appeared  to have made such an election
by  declining  to  pay  for  wreck  removal.  In  those  circumstances,  it  was  not
entitled  to  proceeds  from  the  wreck.

186  A  typical  example  would  be  The  Coxwold  [1942]  AC  691, where  a  vessel
stranded  because  of  tidal  conditions,  while  carrying  war  stores.  She  was
closer  than  normal  to  land,  where  warning  lights were  dimmed.

187  See generally  J.  Butler,  R.  Merkin,  Reinsurance Law  (1992), Section  C.3.1.
188  Dig. XLI, I, 58; 2,21,1, as quoted  in F. Sanborn,  Origins of the Early English

Maritime  and Commercial Law  (1930, reprinted  1989).

189  Cod.  XI,  6,  I, as  cited  in  Sanborn,  op. cit.,  p. 16.
190  Dig.  XLVII,  9,  3 pr.,  as cited  in  Sanborn,  op. cit.,  p. 16.
191  Such  rights  were  known  as  'foreshore  rights'  or  'wreckers'  rights'.  See
Braekhus,  'Salvage  of  Wrecks  and  Wreckage',  op.  cit.,  p. 43.  See  also  K.
Goddard,  'Is  there  a  right  to  wreck?'  [1983]  LMCLQ  625.  In  the  US  the
term  'wreckers'  is  applied  to  legitimate  and  illegitimate  salvors  of  wreck:
see  Benedict,  op. cit.,  s. 133.

192  As Sanborn  calls it,  op. cit.,  p. 115.
193  Ibid.
194  See  1.1  above.
195  [1836] 3 Hagg  Adm 257.
196  According  to  Sanborn,  op. cit.,  p. 315.
197  Halsbury's  Laws  (4th  edn.),  Vol. 8, para.  1506, f.n.  1.
198  3 Edw.  I,  c.4.
199  Cited  in  Braekhus,  'Salvage  of  Wrecks  and  Wreckage',  op.  cit.,  at  p. 44.
This  rule was originally  laid down  by  Henry  III  in  1236, but  the Statute  of
Westminster  extended  the  time  for  claiming  the  shipwrecked  goods  to  a
year  and  a  day  (rather  than  the  original  three  months).  See  Sanborn,  op.
cit., p. 316; T. Twiss (ed), The Black Book  of the Admiralty,  Vol. 1 (reprinted
1985)  p. 85.  In  fact,  according  to  S. Moore,  History  of  the  Foreshore (3rd
edn.,  1888) p. 68, by the reign of  Edward  I the franchise  of wreck  had  been
granted out by the Crown over the greater part of the coasts of the Kingdom
and  there  was little  left  for  the  Crown.  See  futher,  3.1.2  below.

200  Braekhus,  'Salvage  of Wrecks and  Wreckage',  op. cit.,  p. 44.
201  Hale,  De  Jure  Maris,  as  cited  in  Moore,  op.  cit.,  p. 408.  The  whole  of
Hale's  De  Jure  Maris,  as  edited  by  Hargrave,  is  cited  in  Moore,  op.  cit.,
pp. 370-413.

267

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

202  As cited  in  Moore, op. cit., p. 408. See also  R.  Marsden,  op. cit., at  p. 355.
203  This  is  confirmed  by  R.  Marsden,  who  states  (op. cit.,  p. 361)  that  — in
respect  of droits  —  not much  regard  seems to have been paid  to the claims
of  the  owners  of such  property.

204  Hamilton  v Davis 5 Burr 2732, 98  ER 433.
205  See  e.g.  6 &  7 Will. IV, c.60,  s.7  (1836)  and  8 & 9 Viet,  c.86,  s.54  (1845).
See  also  Kennedy,  op. cit.,  p. 41  and  The Aquila (1798)  I  C  Rob  36,  165
ER  at  89.

206  See Twiss, op. cit. See also Sanborn,  op. cit., p. 117. Now see the  Merchant

Shipping  Act  1894 s.521.

207  'Likewise the admiral shall have and  take by virtue of his office  one moiety
of  every  manner  of flotsam  found  on  the  sea, whether  it be casks  of wine,
bundles  of  cloth,  sacks  of  wool,  or  any  other  thing,  and  the  takers  and
seisors  of  the  same the other  moiety.'  'Likewise  the admiral  shall  have  and
take  by  virtue  of his office,  one moiety  of every manner  of  lagan,  dragged
or  raised  from  the bottom  of  the  sea, whether  it be anchors,  tables, chests,
or  any  other  thing,  and  the  gainers  of  the  same  the  other  moiety'.  Twiss,
op. cit.,  p. 397.

208  R.  Marsden,  op. cit., p. 359.
209  Cf.  4.6  below.
210  For  details,  see  1.3 above.
211  A distinction  was drawn between  the grant  of rights to  wreccum maris and
the  grant  of  rights  to  adventurae maris: see  Moore,  op.  cit.,  pp. 467—469
and  R  v  Forty-nine  Casks  of  Brandy  (1836)  3  Hagg  Adm  257,  which
concerned  the  grant  by  Queen  Elizabeth  I  of  Corfe  Castle  in  Dorset,
including  '...wrecks  of  the  sea,  shipwrecks,...'  to  Sir  Christopher  Hatton,
K.G.,  Lord  Chancellor  of  England.  See also  Dunwich v Sterry  (1831)  109
ER  995; Halsbury's Laws, (th  edn.), Vol. 8, paras.  1506-1509.

212  P. Marsden,  The  Wreck of  the Amsterdam,  op. cit.
213  See  1.3  above.
214  [1986] QB  384.
215  Currently  set  by  the Territorial  Sea  Act  1987. Section  l(l)(a)  provides  for

a  territorial  sea  of  12 nautical  miles in  breadth.

216  De Jure  Maris,  as cited in Moore, op. cit., p. 410. See R.  Marsden,  op. cit.,

p. 353.

217  R.  Marsden,  op. cit., p. 359.
218  R  Marsden,  op. cit., p. 364.
219  M. Nash,  'The  Lusitania and  Its Consequences'  NLJ, 4 April  1986; see also

J.  Gibson,  'The  Lusitania  and  Ownership  of  Wreck'  (1986)  1 IJECL 323.

220  (1835)  1 Hagg  Adm 383, 166 ER  136.
221  See also  The  Thetis (1835)  3  Hagg  Adm  228, where  the  ship  was  sunk  off

Brazil.

222  [1986] QB  384, at p. 395.
223  [1986]  QB  384,  at  pp. 392-3.  Cf.  the  Treasure Salvors case  [1978]  AMC
1404,  at  pp. 1418  el  seq., which  assumed  that  the  Crown  did  have  such
rights,  see 4.6  below.

224  For  example,  it  appears  that  in  the  Netherlands,  a  bona  fide  purchaser

from  a  salvor  will acquire good  title  three years after  the loss.
225  See F.  Rose, 'Restitution  for  the Rescuer'  (1989) 9 OJLS  167.
226  See Falcke v Scottish Imperial Insurance Co (1886) 34 Ch  D  234, at  p. 248.
227  The  Two Friends (1799) 1 C  Rob  271, at  p. 277; 165 ER  174.
228  See  4.2  below,  on  the  question  of  whether  all  wreck  is  considered  as

maritime  property.

268

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

229  For  further  reference  on  the  elements  of  a  salvage  service,  see  D.  Steel,
F. Rose,  Kennedy's  Law  of  Salvage  (5th  edn.,  1985);  G.  Brice,  Maritime
Law of Salvage (1983); N. Gaskell, C. Debattista,  R.  Swatton,  Chorley and
Giles Shipping Law  (8th edn.,  1987), Chap. 24.

230  That  is not  to deny the possibility  of a contract  for  salvage: see further  4.4

below.

231  In  The  Five  Steel  Barges  (1890)  15  PD  142,  146,  Sir  James  Hannen  P.
managed  to  refer  both  to  the 'equitable  character'  of  the jurisdiction  while
stating  that  the right  to  salvage was a  'legal  liability'.  Although  sometimes
described  as  equitable,  salvage  rights  are  historically  unconnected  with
those  derived  from  the  Court  of  Chancery  and  the  central  tenets  are  not
derived  from  those  applied  by  the common  law courts:  see generally  Ken-
nedy,  op. cit., Chap. 2.

232  The  1910  Salvage  Convention  and  the  1989  Salvage  Convention,  see  4.5

below.

233  See further,  D. Jackson,  Enforcement of Maritime  Claims (1985), especially
Chap. 12; R.  Thomas,  Maritime  Liens  (1980),  especially  Chaps.  1 and  5;
W. Tetley, Maritime  Liens and Claims (1985), especially  Chaps.  1 and  8.

234  The  Civil  Aviation  Act  1982,  s.87(l)  extends  the  jurisdiction  to  aircraft
which are wrecked  in the sea. With the exception  of aircraft,  salvage  rights
do  not  extend  to  types  of  property  found  at  sea  which  cannot  easily  be
fitted  into the definition  of'ship'  in the Merchant  Shipping Act 1894, s.742.
Therefore,  they do not apply to archaeological  remains which do not derive
from  the wreck  of  a ship  or  aircraft.

235  See the Supreme  Court  Act  1981, s.20(l)(j),  21(3).
236  The Bold Buccleugh: Harmer v Bell (1850) 7 Moo  PCC 267.
237  See Jackson, op. cit., pp. 221 —3; Tetley, op. cit., p. 541 et seq., H. Staniland,

Comments, in [1989] LMCLQ  174, [1990] LMCLQ 491.

238  The Halcyon Isle [1981] AC 221. See also  The Russland [1924] P 55.
239  Certain  'public' claims, such as the expenses of the court official  responsible

for  arrest,  may  be afforded  the first priority  in most  systems.

240  See  The  Gustaf  (1862)  Lush  506,  at  p. 508,  167  ER  230,  at  p. 231;  The

Lyrma  (No.2)  [1978] 2 Lloyd's  Rep. 30, at  p. 33.

241  Maritime  Conventions  Act  1911, s.8.
242  See generally,  Kennedy, op. cit., p. 518 et seq.,  Brice, op. cit., p. 92  et  seq.,

pp.  114-118.

243  (1887)  13 App  Cas  160, at  p. 181.
244  See 2.2 above.
245  Cossman v  West (1887)  13 App Cas  160, per  Sir  Barnes Peacock,  at  p. 181,
even if the master and  crew have left  the vessel temporarily  for  the  purpose
of obtaining  assistance:  The Aquila (1798)  I  C  Rob  36,  165 ER  87, per  Sir
William  Scott,  at  p. 88.

246  Cossman v  West (1887)  13 App  Cas  160 at  p. 181.
247  S. Braekhus, 'Competing  Salvors'  [1967] Scandinavian Studies in Law  65 at

p. 80.

248  Ibid.  Note  that  interference  with  divers  authorised  to  work  on  a  site
designated  under  the  UK  Protection  of  Wrecks  Act  1973  is  an  offence:
s.l(6).

249  (1887)  13 App  Cas  160, at  p. 181.
250  The authorities  are inconclusive:  see Kennedy, op. cit., p. 520.
251  Braekhus, 'Competing  Salvors', op. cit.
252  Although  similar  results were achieved  in  The Fleece (1850)  3 W  Rob 278,

166 ER 966.

269

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas Gaskell

253  The  salvor  does  not  need  a  possessory  lien  where  there  is a  maritime  lien,
as  the  latter  is  inchoate  and  travels  with  the  ship.  (The  security  is  only
undermined  if  the vessel  travels  to  a  state  where  the  maritime  lien  cannot
be  enforced).

254  The mechanism  exists in salvage law to compensate superseded  salvors: see

e.g.  The Hassel [1959] 2 Lloyd's  Rep 82.

255  See  The  Tubantia [1924] P 78, at  p. 86.
256  The Association  and The Romney [1970] 2 Lloyd's  Rep  59, per  Dunn  J.,  at

p. 61.

257  [1924] P 78.
258  50 miles from  Britain and 20 — 27 miles from  France, Belgium and  Holland.
259  [1924] P  78, at  p. 89.
260  The  Tubantia [1924] P 78, per  Sir Henry  Duke  at  p. 90.
261  The  UK  Protection of Wrecks Act  1973 only prevents competition  between

'salvors'  on  a  small number  of designated  sites in  UK  territorial  waters.

262  [1970] 2 Lloyd's  Rep 59.
263  Although  decided  before  American  Cyanimid v  Ethicon  [1975] AC  396,  it

does  not  appear  that  the  result  would  have  differed.

264  Some  of  the  treasure  recovered  from  the  Association and  the  Romney  was
donated  to  the  Penzance  Maritime  Museum.  However,  the episode  caused
outrage  among  archaeologists  and  led  almost  directly  to  enactment  of  the
Protection  of  Wrecks Act 1973.

265  Columbus America Discovery Group v The  Unidentified, Wrecked and Aban-
doned Sailing  Vessel [1989] AMC  1955 (reversed  on  other  grounds,  (1992)
337 LMLN  1) and see M. King, 'Admiralty Law: Evolving Legal Treatment
of  Property  Claims to  Shipwrecks  in  International  Waters'  (1990)  31 Harv
Int  L J 313.

266  [1989] AMC  1955, at  p. 1958.
267  Ibid.  Moreover,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  possession  of  the
wreck  site,  the  wreck  itself  and  artefacts  within  it: cf.  Robinson v Western
Australian  Museum (1977)  51 ALJR  806, at  p. 821.

268  Of  particular  relevance  to  ancient  wrecks,  possession  may  be  difficult  to

prove  where  wreckage is scattered  for  some distance  over  the  seabed.

269  See Kennedy, op. cit., p. 297 et seq., Chorley and Giles, op. cit., pp. 453 — 454.
270  The  Lloyd's  Standard  Form  of  Salvage  Agreement  1990  — known  as  the
Lloyd's Open Form (LOF)  —  is the most common form used internationally
for  salvages  by  professional  salvors.  See further,  N.  Gaskell,  'Contractual
Remedies  and  the LOF'  [1986] LMCLQ  306.

271  Cf.  cases  such  as  The Texaco Southampton  [1983] 1 Lloyd's  Rep 94.
272  See Kennedy,  op. cit., p. 266 and  Castellain v  Thompson (1862)  13 CB (NS)

105,  143 ER 41.

273  See e.g.  The  Solway Prince [1869] P  120  where  the  contract  was  with  the

insurers  and  the  contractor  was unable  to  sue the  owners  in  rem.

274  It  was  reported  that  the  spectacular  finds  from  the  Dutch  East  Indiaman
Geldermalsen were to  be  split  10%  to  the  Dutch  government  and  90%  to
the  salvors:  The  Times, 29  April  1986.  With  other  ships,  such  as  the  de
Leifde,  the  Dutch government  accepted  25% of  the  gross,  see Van  Meurs,
op. cit., p. 42.

275  Penrose,  op. cit., p. 218.
276  Cf.  The  Association and  The Romney  [1970] 2 Lloyd's  Rep  59 and  see  4.3

above.

277  See  generally  on  this  issue,  F.  Berlingieri,  'The  Draft  of  a  New  Salvage
Convention  and  the  Salvage  of  Wrecks',  reproduced  as  an  Annex  to  the
IMO  Legal  Committee document  LEG/58/inf.2,  5 August  1987.

270

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic  Wrecks

278  See 2.2 and  3., above.
279  Berlingieri,  op.  cit.,  citing  C.  Abbott  (Lord  Tenterden),  A  Treatise of  the
Law  Relative  to  Merchant  Ships  and Seamen,  in  a  passage  from  the  fifth
edition  (the  last  for  which  Abbott  was  responsible)  which  was  restated  in
later editions.  Abbott  based  himself  upon  The Aquila (1798)  1 W Rob  36.
280  See e.g.  The Cadiz and the Boyne (1876) 3 Asp MLC 332,  The Egypt  (1932)

44 LI L Rep 21. But cf.  Simon v  Taylor [1975] 2 Lloyd's  Rep 338.

281  Berlingieri,  op. cit.
282  Ibid.
283  See N. Gaskell, 'The  1989 Salvage Convention  and  the Lloyd's Open  Form

(LOF)  Salvage Agreement  1990'  16 Tul Mar  LJ  1,  34-37.

284  Ibid.
285  See Kennedy, op. cit., p. 60, citing Castellain v Thompson (1862) 13 CB (NS)

105,  143 ER41.

286  See  Art.  30(l)(d)  of  the  1989  Salvage  Convention  and  cf.  O'Connell,  op.

cit., p. 908, f.n. 283.

287  See  e.g.  The  Rilland  [1979]  Lloyd's  Rep  455  and  Art.  13(1)  of  the  1989

Salvage  Convention.

288  See e.g. the  scheme of  the  Merchant  Shipping  Act  1894, s.521,  1.3  above.
289  See below.
290  See generally,  Palmer,  op. cit., Chap. 23.
291  [1982] QB  1004. See also Elwes v Brigg Gas Co (1886)  13 Ch D  562, which
concerned  a prehistoric  boat  embedded  in  the land, rather  than  at  sea.  See
also Van  Meurs, op. cit., pp. 40—41,  regarding  'wreck  formations'.

292  [1986] QB  384, see 3.2 above.
293  See  further,  Benedict on Admiralty  (1991),  seal58;  D.  Owen,  'Some  legal
troubles  with  treasure'  op. cit.; D.  Owen,  'The  Abandoned  Shipwreck  Act
of  1987' op.cit.; Alexander,  op. cit.; King,  op. cit.

294  [1978] AMC  1404 (Salvors I),  [1981] AMC  1857 (Salvors  III).
295  [1990] AMC  2409 (reversed  on  appeal,  (1992)  337 LMLN  1).
296  In  Benedict, op. cit.
297  See Benedict, op. cit.  In  the  latest  edition  at  s.158, Norris  would  limit  the
law  of  finds  to  long  lost  wrecks  such  as  the  Nuestra  Senora de Atocha  or
where  the owners  of  maritime  properties  have publicly  abandoned  them.

298  See e.g.  Salvors I  [1978] AMC  1404,  1411-1412.  Also  MDM  Salvage  Inc
v The Unidentified, Wrecked and Abandoned Sailing Kes.se/[1987] AMC  537,
Klein  v  The  Unidentified,  Wrecked and  Abandoned  Sailing  Vessel [1985]
AMC  2970, Platoro Ltd  Inc v  The  Unidentified Remains of a  Vessel (1981)
518  F  Supp  816,  Indian River  Recovery  Co v  The  China [1989] AMC  50,
Rickardv  Pringle [1968] AMC  1008,  Wiggins v 1100 Tons, More  or Less  of
Italian Marble  [1960] AMC  1774, Nippon Shosen Kaisha, KIK  v  US  [1964]
AMC  2032,  Chance  v  Certain  Artefacts  Found  and  Salvaged from 
the
Nashville a/k/a  The Rattlesnake  [1985] AMC 409.

299  [1981] AMC  1857, at  p. 1865.
300  [1990] AMC  2409, at  p. 2421. On  appeal, the majority  of  the court  did  not
expressly  disagree  with  such  a  formulation,  but  adopted  a  much  more
restrictive  application  of  it.

301  Cf.  the reluctance  of  the  High  Court  to  grant  a  declaration  in  The  Associ-

ation and The Romney,  above.

302  Cf.  The Lusitania [1984] QB 284, see 3.2 above.
303  See 2.2 above.
304  Norris  felt  obliged  to  concede  that  this  was  the  only  sort  of  case  where

abandonment  was possible.

271

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Sarah Dromgoole and Nicholas  Gaskell

305  [1990] AMC  2409 (reversed  on  appeal,  (1992) 337  LMLN  1).
306  On  appeal,  a  new  trial  was  ordered  on  this  part  of  the  case  as  the  trial

judge  had  denied  discovery.

307  See 2.3 above.
308  To this extent,  the assumption  made  by  the  majority  that  Kellam D.J.  had

found  a  prima  facie case  of  ownership  is  questionable.

309  Many  documents  were  destroyed  in  wartime  and  insurance  records  from
very early  cases  were also  burned  in  a  fire  at  the  Royal  Exchange  in 1838:
see Lay,  op. cit.  In  any  organisation  changes in  personnel  can  result  in old
documents  being accidentally  discarded.

310  Underwriters  do  not  consider  themselves  in  the  business  of  fitting  out
expensive  and  speculative  salvage  operations  and  are  happy  to  rely  on  the
entrepreneurialism  of  salvors.

311  Most  insurance  companies  would  have  management  minute  books  or  loss
books,  recording  simply  that  ship  X  sank  and  £Y  were  paid  out.  It  may
be rare for companies  to keep original documents from  before World War I.

312  See discussion  at 2.3  above.
313  Salvors III  [1981] AMC  1857, at  p. 1874.
314  See Alexander,  op. cit.,  pp. 17 — 19.
315  See Benedict, op. cit., s.158; Owen, 'The Abandoned  Shipwreck Act of 1987'
op. cit.  When  the Act  came  into  force  the  'submerged  lands'  accorded,  for
the most part, with the then existing three mile territorial limit. Even though
the  US  extended  its territorial  limit  to  12 miles  in  1988, this extension  did
not  extend  or  alter  existing  federal  laws:  A.  Giesecke,  'Shipwrecks:  The
Past  in  the  Present'  [1987] Coastal  Management  179 at  p. 183.

316  I.e.  those  not  embedded  and  not  included  in  the  National  Register:  see

Abandoned  Shipwreck  Act  of  1987 Sec.6.

317  See the  1982 Law  of  the  Sea  Convention,  Art.149,  1.2  above.
318  See  e.g.,  the  1989  Salvage  Convention  Art.30(l)(d),  the  1982  Law  of  the

Sea  Convention  Art.149,  1.2  above.

319  See  Dromgoole,  op.  cit.,  N.  Gaskell  'The  Enactment  of  the  1989  Salvage

Convention  in  English  Law: Policy  Issues'  [1990] LMCLQ  352,  357-8.

320  See 3.2  above.
321  Cf.  the  US  Abandoned  Shipwreck  Act  of  1987.
322  See Dromgoole,  op. cit.,  p. 50.
323  There  will  be  difficulties  in  deciding  whether  some  vessels are  of  historical
or cultural value. Changes in attitudes towards such concepts will inevitably
occur  and  some  comparatively  modern  vessels  may  soon  be  regarded  as
having  historical  significance.  Accordingly,  it may  be  increasingly  difficult
to  declare  that  wrecks  have  only  commercial  value.

324  Arising  because  of  the  nationality  of  the  original  owner,  the  place  of
registration  (or nationality  of)  the vessel, the  location  of the wreck  (whether
in  territorial  waters  of,  on  the  continental  shelf  of,  or  in  close  proximity
to,  a state).

325  Cf.  the  1982 Law  of  the  Sea  Convention  Art.149, see  1.2  above.
326  Dromgoole,  op. cit., pp. 106,  102-109.
327  The interests of such amateurs should  not  be ignored. Indeed, an increasing
awareness of the richness of the seabed  can  only encourage nautical archae-
ology.

328  Presumptions,  or  a  best  evidence  provision,  could  apply  where  the  exact
date  is  unknown.  The  Council  of  Europe's  Recommendation  848  (1978)
for  a  scheme  of  protection  of  the  underwater  cultural  heritage  of  Europe
recommended  that  all items that  had  been  beneath  the water for  more  than

272

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

Historic Wrecks

100 years should be covered by protective legislation: see Council of Europe
Doc.4200-E.

329  Environmental and wreck-raising issues should be dealt with too: see  further
S. Dromgoole, N. Gaskell, 'Interests in Wreck', in N. Palmer (ed.), Interests
in Goods, (in  press).

330  The  proper  body  to  co-ordinate  the  production  of  such  a  convention
should  be  the  UN,  but  there  could  be  political  difficulties  involving  inter-
organisation  rivalry  between  the  International  Maritime  Organisation
(IMO), the UN Educational Science and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO),
and  the UN  Conference  on  Trade and  Development  (UNCTAD).  Further,
all  the  'common  heritage  of  mankind'  issues  might  resurface  which  so
bedevilled  the production  of the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention.  It  would
have  been  better  if  commercial  wrecks  had  been  clearly  left  out  of  the
common  heritage  equation,  without  prejudice  to  the  fate  of  any  minerals
found  on  the  seabed.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323

273

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:01:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739193000323


