The Protection  of British  Heritage:
Woburn  Abbey  and  The Three
Graces
Sara E. Bush*

1  Summary

This article describes  the removal  of Canova's  sculpture,  The  Three
Graces, from  Woburn  Abbey  and  the  British  laws  that  determined
its  subsequent  treatment  and  ownership.  In  this  case,  the  group  of
laws intended  to protect  the integrity  of Woburn  Abbey's  Sculpture
Gallery was  deemed  to be less  important than the goal  of  retaining
the sculpture within the country. It is therefore  necessary to examine
the  relationship  between  the object  and  the building  and  the  effec-
tiveness  of the  laws designed  to preserve  objects  and  buildings  for
the  benefit  of  the  public.  This  article  examines  the  implications  of
the  laws  regulating  the  preservation  of  historic  buildings  and  the
export  of  works  of  art  for  definitions  of  cultural  property  and  na-
tional  patrimony.

2  The Three Graces at Woburn Abbey

The present  Woburn  Abbey  is the product  of  several  building  cam-
paigns  under  the  Dukes  of  Bedford.1  Around  1787, Henry  Holland
built  for  the  5th  Duke,  Francis  Russell,  the  conservatory  that  later
came to be used as a sculpture  gallery. From  1801 to  1803, Holland
added to the east end of the structure what came to be known as the
Temple of Liberty. This housed busts of Charles James Fox and the
Duke's  favorite  Whig politicians.2

John  Russell  succeeded  his brother  in  1802. From  1813 to  1815,
he bought  paintings  and Antique  and Neo-Classical  works of art  in
Italy  for Woburn Abbey. In the fall  of  1814, he visited the studio of
the  foremost  Neo-Classical  sculptor,  Antonio  Canova.  Canova  en-
joyed  the  patronage  of  many  British  collectors,  who  regarded  him
as an equal  of Michelangelo  and Bernini.3

In June  1812, Canova had been asked by Josephine  Bonaparte to
execute  a life-size  sculpture  of  the  Three  Graces,  the  mythological

*  Princeton University Press.

269

Sara  E.  Bush

daughters  of  Zeus.  It  was  nearly  completed  by  May  1814,  when
Josephine died. This sculpture was seen by the Duke during his visit.
He  attempted  to  buy  it,  but  this  was prevented  by  Josephine's  son,
and  this  sculpture  is  today  in  the  Hermitage.  The  Duke  then  paid
Canova  £3,000  to execute  a  second  sculpture.  This  second  version
is  similar  to  the  first  but  differs  in  detail.  Canova  considered  each
version  to be unique, and he described the Duke's as a "replica with
alterations."4

Canova  came  to  England  in  the  fall  of  1815.  After  seeing  the
Elgin  marbles  in  London,  he  traveled  to  Woburn  Abbey  to  advise
the  Duke  on  the  arrangement  of  The Three Graces and  the  Duke's
sculpture  collection.  The  extent  of  Canova's  influence  on  the  ar-
rangement  is  in  dispute. Nevertheless,  it  is  worth  speculating  as to
the  degree  of  his  input  because  of  what  it  would  reveal  about  the
relationship  between  The  Three Graces and  the  Sculpture  Gallery.
The  Duke  and  Canova  had  already  discussed  the  setting  for  the
sculpture  in  their  correspondence,  and  the  Duke  had  asked  Jeffrey
Wyatt  (later  Sir  Jeffrey  Wyatville)  to design  a new  addition  for  the
west  end of the Sculpture Gallery. Wyatt's drawings were  submitted
in  1816.  The  sculpture  was  completed  and  delivered  in  1817. By
1818, Wyatt had built an  octagonal, domed  "Temple of the Graces"
wrapped  around  a  skeleton  of  eight  antique  columns.  Devonshire
marble  laid  in  a  circular  pattern  on  the  floor  perfectly  outlined  the
cylindrical  plinth of  The Three Graces. The plinth was bolted to the
floor,  but the sculpture could be turned and viewed from  all angles.5
The  dating  ascribed  to  the  commission,  transport,  and  enshrine-
ment of  The Three Graces in the Temple varies according to  different
sources. This  difficulty  in establishing  the chronology  underlies the
difficulty  of establishing  the  relationship  between  the  sculpture  and
the architecture of the Sculpture Gallery in  1819. The 6th Duke may
have conceived of creating a second temple to complement that built
by  his  brother  and  thus  may  have  purchased  The Three Graces in
order  to  fulfill  this  imagined  design.  On  the  other  hand,  the  new
addition  to  the  Sculpture  Gallery  might  have  been  meant  only  to
serve as a backdrop to the sculpture, whose acquisition had triggered
its creation.  What is clear  is that the sculpture, prior to its arrival  in
England, was regarded as an independent work of art by a renowned
sculptor.  What  is  less  clear  is  whether  it  was  regarded  differently
once  it  was placed  in  the  Temple.6 Nonetheless,  The Three  Graces
clearly  occupied  a  special  place  within  both  the  physical  space  of
the Sculpture Gallery and the cognitive space of the sculpture collec-
tion. The theme of the Temple of the Graces  —  classical beauty and
poetry  -  complemented  the  5th  Duke's  statuary,  which  celebrated
Whig  philosophy.  The  two  Dukes'  collections  together  embodied
early nineteenth century Britain's belief in its inheritance of art from
ancient  Greece  and  politics  from  ancient  Rome.  The  assembly  of
works made a statement greater than that of any individual piece and
was the last notable  sculpture  collection  to continue the "dilettante"
tradition  of the eighteenth  century.7

270

Woburn  Abbey  and  The Three Graces

Antonio  Canova  (1757—1822),  The Three Graces.  Victoria  & Albert  Museum,  London,  United  Kingdom

271

Sara  E.  Bush

Until  the reign of the  13th Duke, the sculptures assembled by the
5th and 6th Dukes remained together in the Sculpture  Gallery. Most
were  removed  in  1968, when  the  Gallery  was turned  into  a restau-
rant.  The Three Graces left  Woburn Abbey in  1972 to appear in The
Age  of  Neo-Classicism  exhibition  at  the  Royal  Academy.  Although
the sculpture returned to Woburn Abbey after the close of the exhibi-
tion, it was not returned to the  Sculpture  Gallery.8

In  1979, the Duke, in the process of handing over the running of
Woburn  Abbey  to his  son,  the  Marquess  of  Tavistock,  offered  the
sculpture  to  the  Government,  under  the  Acceptance-in-Lieu  (AIL)
scheme, to offset  the capital transfer  tax.9 The value of the sculpture
was  established  at £1.2m  —  the  highest  price to date  for  a work of
sculpture.  Although  the  Government  and  the  Duke  agreed  on  the
valuation,  the  deal  was  derailed  by  differences  of  opinion  over
whether the sculpture could safely  be kept in situ.10 The Duke inter-
preted in situ to mean anywhere in Woburn Abbey. The advice  from
Anthony  Radcliffe,  then Keeper of Sculpture  at the Victoria and Al-
bert  Museum  (V&A), was  that  the  sculpture  was pre-eminent  only
when placed  in its Temple but that its safety  and the public's access
could  not  be  guaranteed  because  of  the  restaurant.  The  deal  fell
through  in 1983.

In  1985, the  sculpture again  left  Woburn Abbey to appear  in The
Treasure Houses of Britain exhibition in Washington, D.C. A tempo-
rary export  license had been  obtained  for the sculpture's removal to
the  United  States, and it returned  to Britain  (though  not to Woburn
Abbey)  at the  close of this exhibition.  Soon after,  it became known
that  the  sculpture  had been  sold  for  £1.25m  by  the  Trustees  of the
Bedford  Estate  in May  1985  —  prior to the exhibition  —  to a 1984-
registered Cayman Island company, Fine Art Investment and Display
Ltd.  (FAID). By June  1989, FAID agreed to sell the sculpture to an
overseas  party  (later  found  to  be  the  J.  Paul  Getty  Trust  in  Cali-
fornia11)  and  applied for  an export  license  from  the Department  for
Trade and Industry. This application  in turn triggered an inquiry into
the  legality  of the removal  of the sculpture  from  Woburn Abbey.

3  Fixtures  and Fittings  of Listed  Buildings

The  protection  of Britain's  historic  buildings  is carried  out  through
a  process  known  as "listing."  The  Secretary  of  State  for  National
Heritage has the statutory duty to compile a list of buildings possess-
ing  architectural  or historical  merit  and  to  supervise  their  protec-
tion.12  Listed  buildings  cannot  undergo  any  substantial  alteration,
extension,  or  demolition  that  has  not  been  approved  by  the  local
planning  authority  in  conjunction  with  the  Department  of  National
Heritage  (DNH)  and its statutory  consultees  (such  as English  Heri-
tage, the  Georgian Group, and the  Victorian  Society). Listed  build-
ings  are  graded  in terms of  importance,  Grade  I being  the  highest,

272

Woburn  Abbey  and  The Three Graces

Grade  II* the middle, and  Grade  II the  lowest.  Woburn  Abbey  was
listed as a Grade I building in 1952. In  1961, the property was resur-
veyed,  and  many  of the  outlying  buildings  on  the estate,  including
the  Sculpture  Gallery,  were  specifically  mentioned  in  the  new  list
description. The Temple of the Graces  is therefore  part of a Grade I
listed building.

At the time of the dispute over the removal  of  The Three  Graces,
the planning  legislation  governing the  listing process was the Town
and  Country  Planning  Act  1971.13  This  Act  addressed  the  issue  of
whether  ornaments  (such  as  urns,  fenders,  fireplace  fittings,  and
sculpture)  should be considered fixtures of a building (and  therefore
part  of a building, requiring  listed  building  consent  to be  removed)
or  fittings  (and  therefore  independent  of  a  building  and  thus  the
chattel  of  the  building  owner).  The  Historic  Houses  Association
(HHA)  vehemently  defends  the  latter  position  as  necessary  to pro-
tecting  the  interests  of  private  property,  as  the  value  of  any  object
—  in the sense of the price it might  fetch  on the open  art market  —
drops  once  it  is  classified  as  part  of  a  structure.14  Conversely,  the
removal  of such objects  can be said to  lower the historic, aesthetic,
and  monetary  value  of  the  building.  Those  who  protest  against  the
removal  of  such  ornamentation  argue that  maintaining  the  integrity
of the building requires maintaining the integrity of the historic dec-
oration.

The common law test for determining the status of personal prop-

erty  involves considering  the degree and purpose  of  annexation.

If  it  can  be  shown  that  the  intention  of  the  person  who  intro-
duced the object was to incorporate it on a permanent basis into
the  body  of  the  building  or the  grounds  as  part  of  the  overall
design then the object is likely to be a fixture. The law acknowl-
edges  that  intentions  can  be  difficult  to  establish  in  retrospect
and so puts considerable reliance on the physical  annexation of
an  object.15

The wording  of  the  Town  and  Country  Planning  Act  1971  was not
precise, and, not surprisingly,  conflicting  cases and decisions arose.
Section  54, sub-section  9 stated that a listed building  includes:

a.  Any object  or structure fixed to a building;
b.  Any  object  or structure  within  the curtilage  of the  building
which, although not fixed to the building, forms part of the land
and has done  so since before  1st July  1948.16

In other words, these objects or structures are protected by the listing
if  they  are physically  attached  to  the  supporting  fabric,  are  histori-
cally  associated  with  the  land,  or  fall  within  the  boundaries  of  the
property.'7

273

Sara  E.  Bush

The  legislation  thus  provided  a  definition  of  "fixture"  based  on
factors  other  than  the mobility  or  removability  of  an  object  and al-
lowed  consideration  of  the  historical  context  in which  the  building
and  ornamentation  were  conceived.18  As early as  1866, a judge had
written,

I think  it  does  not  depend  on  whether  any  cement  is  used  for
fixing  these  articles, or whether they rest by their own  weight,
but  upon  this  — whether  they  are  strictly  and  properly  part of
the  architectural  design  ...  and  put  in there  as  such,  as  distin-
guished  from  mere  ornaments  to be afterwards  added.19

Decisions in the courts have varied, with one upholding the integrity
of  a  listed  building  and  another  emphasizing  the property rights of
the  owner.

4  Listed  Building  Consent

In  June  1989, the  Office  of  Arts  and  Libraries  approached  Thomas
Radice, head  of  the  Heritage  Division  within the Department  of the
Environment  (DOE), to inquire whether  The Three Graces had been
included in the listing of Woburn Abbey and whether listing building
consent had been  sought for  its removal.20 This led the Secretary of
State for  the Environment,  Christopher  Patten, to study the question
of  whether  the  sculpture  qualified  as  a  fixture.  He  first  considered
whether the sculpture was permanently  attached to the structure. Al-
though  only  the  plinth  was bolted  to the  Temple's  floor,  Patten  de-
cided,  on  the  basis  of  an  initial  examination  of  the  list  description
and photographs, that the sculpture should be considered a fixture.21
By  July  1989,  the  Mid-Bedfordshire  District  Council  (MBDC)
had  not received  any  application  for  retroactive  listed building con-
sent for  the removal  of  The Three Graces. Criticism  of the MBDC's
failure  to  investigate  the  situation  began  to  mount  among  architec-
tural  historians  and  preservationists.  Under  pressure,  the  MBDC
scheduled  to  decide,  before  10 November,  whether  to initiate  listed
building  enforcement  proceedings.  On 7 November,  the MBDC de-
cided  not  to  begin  listed  building  enforcement  proceedings,  despite
the  urging  of  its  planning  and  legal  officers.22  Patten  now began to
consider whether he  should override the MBDC, as English Heritage
urged  him  to do.

Patten  made his  next  decision on the basis of the extent to which
the sculpture had been moved, the present character of the Sculpture
Gallery,  and  the  present  location  of  the  sculpture.  Given  that  the
Sculpture  Gallery  had  been  turned  into  a restaurant,  and  The  Three
Graces  had  not  been  in  the  Temple  since  1985, Patten  concluded
that he could understand how the statue could be considered chattel.
He concluded  that  its removal had not "caused that part of the listed

274

Woburn Abbey  and  The Three Graces

gallery to cease to be of  architectural  or historic  interest"23  and de-
cided  it  would  not  be  an  appropriate  use  of  his  powers  to  issue  a
listed  building  enforcement  notice.  This  decision  was  made  public
in a 7 December  1989 press  statement.24

What factors  caused Patten to doubt the applicability of the listing
legislation?  First,  in  the  1979-83  AIL  affair,  two  inconsistent  ap-
proaches had emerged in that although the sculpture could be consid-
ered an independent object capable of being acquired by the Govern-
ment,  its  preeminence  was  dependent  on  its  placement  within  the
Temple. Second, the MBDC had never acted upon the Duke's  failure
to obtain  listed building  consent  for  the  sculpture's  removal  for  the
1972  and  1985  exhibitions.  Third,  Patten  took  the  evidence  of  the
sculpture's  movements  around  Woburn  Abbey  as  indication  of  its
mobile,  "unfixed"  nature, rather  than  as the  result  of prior  failures
to obtain  listed building  consent.25

In January  1990, the pressure group  SAVE Britain's Heritage ob-
tained  leave  from  the  High  Court  to bring  proceedings  for judicial
review against  Patten.  SAVE Britain's  Heritage  wanted  to point out
that  it was Patten's  duty, not his choice, to  implement  the  law as it
stood and that he had failed  to carry out his statutory duties.26

Meanwhile,  Patten  continued  to  consider  how  to  determine
whether  an object  qualified  as  a fixture  or a fitting  and,  in the pro-
cess, created  a new criterion.  Rather than  the degree  of  attachment,
integrity of architectural  design, or existence of listed building regu-
lations,

[he] considered that it may in certain circumstances be relevant
to consider  ...  the weight  which  should  be given  to the possi-
bility  for  such  an object  to be  moved  to, and  displayed  in an-
other position,  or taken  away to where it could be viewed  and
appreciated  by  a wider  public,  or  whether  it  could  be,  or  had
ever been,  treated  as an  item  separate  from  the building  itself,
for  example, for tax purposes.27

Patten used information  in the Woburn Abbey guidebooks about the
sculpture's  movements  to support his argument  that if the  sculpture
could be moved, then  it could be moved with impunity. The goal of
maintaining  the  integrity  of  historic  structures  began  to  be  un-
dermined  by  the  idea  of  viewing  objects  without  reference  to  their
context.

On  3  May  1990,  the  DOE  submitted  a  new  affidavit  that  an-
nounced  that  the  sculpture  was  chattel.  Proceedings  in  the  High
Court  were  adjourned  to  enable  Patten  to  formulate  a  new  policy.
This process was completed by Michael Heseltine, who became Sec-
retary of  State for  the Environment  on 28 November  1990.

Heseltine  concluded  that  the  issue  turned  on  whether  The Three
Graces was "fixed  to the building on the date on which that building
was  listed,"28  although  he also  took  into  account  the history  of the

275

Sara  E.  Bush

sculpture  before  and  after  1961. First,  he  considered  the  fact  that
while the plinth was bolted to the floor,  the sculpture itself could be
lifted  off  the  plinth.29  Second,  he  detailed  the  movements  of  the
sculpture  within  Woburn  Abbey.  Third,  he  considered  whether  the
sculpture  had  been  treated  as  chattel  in  the  legal  correspondence
and  settlements  of the Bedford  Estate,  which  presented  conflicting
information.30  Fourth,  he  applied  the  common  law  test  relating  to
fixtures.  He  decided  that the degree  of  annexation  "was  not  great,"
because the plinth  had been  fastened  but not in a way that made its
"removal  particularly  difficult."  As  for  the  purpose,  Heseltine  de-
cided  that  "even  accepting  that  the  tempietto  was  specifically  built
or  modified  to house the  sculpture,  ...  this  [did] not  mean  that  the
sculpture  became  part of the building."31

On the basis of these considerations, Heseltine created a new  for-
mula  for  determining  the  nature  of  statuary  and  buildings.  Basing
this formula  on two suppositions of

[t]he unlikelihood that the sculpture put in a gallery for display
is intended  to become part of the building  ...  and  ...  the prob-
ability that  it was the tempietto  which was  designed to display
or  'show off'  the sculpture rather than the sculpture which was
commissioned  and  installed  as part  of  the  architectural  design
of  the  building,32  [he  concluded  that]  ...  [w]here  a  piece  of
sculpture  is  designed  to  be  an  ornament  or  enrichment  to  a
building,  it was to be considered  part of the building  and sub-
ject to listed building control, but where a building is designed
to house  a  sculpture  (as  in the  case  of  The Three Graces), the
piece  can be deemed a chattel.33

A 27 March  1991 press release from the DOE announced Heseltine's
decision that the sculpture was chattel. In July  1991, SAVE Britain's
Heritage  was  forced  to drop the judicial  review proceedings  after  it
ran  out of money.

Heseltine's  new  formula  did  not  address  all  the  elements  of  the
case.  First,  it  focused  on  the  chronology  while  not  accounting  for
the  cultural  history  that  informed  the  Temple  and  the  6th  Duke's
patronage.  Second,  it dealt  with  the  difficult  question  of  the  inten-
tions  of the  architect/owner/artist,  by substituting  a generalized  rule
that  did  not  respect  legal  precedents  regarding  the  integration  and
integrity  of  art  and architectural  design.  Third,  it  did  not  recognize
the  1952  and  1961  list  descriptions  as  the  primary  foundation  for
his  decision.  Finally, although  Wyatt's  Temple  had  been  created  to
house  The Three Graces, the Sculpture Gallery had been built  before
the 6th Duke met Canova. The sculpture could be said to have been
bought  in order to adorn an existing  structure  —  the  Sculpture Gal-
lery built  by Henry Holland.

In  September  1994, the  DOE  and  the  DNH  published  their  new
guide to  listed  building  legislation, Planning Policy  Guidance Note

276

Woburn  Abbey  and  The Three Graces

15. Although  the  information  in  PPG  15  is  not  legally  binding,  it
provides  an  indication  of how these  departments  currently  interpret
the law. In addition  to restating the need to consider the degree and
purpose  of annexation,  it addresses  the relevance  of whether  works
are meant to be seen  on their own or as part  of an overall  design.

It may be difficult  in  some  individual  cases  to decide  whether
a particular object or structure  is a fixture  or not.  Free-standing
objects,  e.g.  sculptures,  may  be  fixtures  if  they  were  put  in
place  as  part  of  an  overall  architectural  design;  this  could  in-
clude  objects  specially  designed  or  made  to  fit  in a  particular
space or room. But works of art which were placed  in a build-
ing primarily to be enjoyed  as objects  in their own right, rather
than  forming  part of the  land  or the building,  are not  likely  to
be properly  considered  as  fixtures.34

The  courts  continue  to  hand  down  conflicting  decisions  and  have
yet to provide an authoritative  definition  of fixtures  and  fittings.

5  Export  License  and  Acquisition

While  questions  remained  about  the  removal  of  The Three  Graces
from  Woburn Abbey, the next part of the story  —  the debate over its
sale  and  export  —  began  to  unfold.  In  1989,  the  Getty  agreed  to
buy  the  sculpture  for  £7.6m,  conditional  upon  FAID  obtaining  the
necessary  export  license. The process  for  obtaining  a license to ex-
port  objects  of  monetary  value  exceeding  the  limits  of  the  Open
General  Export  License  (OGEL)  follows  guidelines  created  by  the
1952 Waverley Committee. The process is administered by the DNH
and overseen  by the Department  of Trade and Industry (DTI).

The  exporter's  application  is  first  considered  by  an  Expert  Ad-
viser,  usually  the  curator  of  the  national  collection  of  the  relevant
field. If upon initial examination the object  is found  to be worthy of
further  inquiry,  the  Reviewing  Committee  will  review  testimony
from  the exporter and Export Adviser as to whether the object meets
the Waverley Criteria, which are:

1.  Is the object  so closely  connected  with  our  history  and  na-
tional  life  that its departure  would be a  misfortune?
2.  Is it of outstanding  aesthetic  importance?
3.  Is it of outstanding significance  for the study of some partic-
ular branch  of art, learning, or history?

If the  Reviewing  Committee  concludes  that the  object  satisfies  any
one of these three criteria, then the export license is deferred  for six
months or  less, during  which time public  collections  in Britain  can

277

Sara  E.  Bush

put  forward  an  equal  offer  for  the  object.  If  no  offer  is  made,  the
export  license  is granted.

The  application  for  The Three Graces was  received  mid-1989.35
The Expert  Adviser found  that the sculpture met all three Waverley
Criteria.  At  the  Reviewing  Committee's  meeting  in  June  1989, the
exporter's  representative argued that the sculpture had been in stor-
age  for  several  years  in  Britain,  that  it  would  be  displayed  among
the other Neo-Classical works owned by the Getty, that the sculpture
was  one  of  several  versions,  and  that  Britain's  public  collections
already  owned a number of works by Canova.36 The Expert Adviser
argued  that  the value of the sculpture  derived  from  its beauty, Neo-
Classical  style, artistic impact, and status as a commissioned  work.
The Reviewing Committee upheld the objection  of the Expert Ad-
viser,  "starred"  the  object  in  its report,  expressed  its  hope  that  the
sculpture  could  one  day  be  returned  to  the  Temple,  and  recom-
mended  to  the  DTI  a six-month  deferral.  It  also  made  an  unusual
further  suggestion:

if  fund-raising  were  in course and  negotiations  concerning  the
siting  of  the  statue were under  way, but  neither  had  been  con-
cluded  at  the  expiration  of  six  months,  [the  Minister  for  the
Arts]  should  consider  recommending  to  the  Secretary  of  State
for  Trade and Industry that the deferral  period  be  extended.37

Fundraising for the purchase price of The Three Graces was spear-
headed by the V&A and SAVE Britain's Heritage. Beyond the initial
pledge  of  £250,000  from  the  National  Art-Collections  Fund,  the
V&A  had trouble gathering large sums of money from  public dona-
tions and non-governmental  sources. Cash donations from  the public
totaled only £28,000. In December  1989, despite the lackluster  fund-
raising  campaign,  the DTI  heeded  the  recommendations  of the Re-
viewing  Committee  and of Richard  Luce, the Minister  for  the Arts,
and deferred  the export license for  a further  three months.

In  February  1990,  a  new  twist  developed.  Jacob  Rothschild  of-
fered  to acquire  The Three Graces on Britain's behalf. The proposed
scheme  involved  his buying  the  sculpture  for  the  estate  of his  late
aunt and then passing ownership to the National  Trust, in lieu of the
death duties on the estate. The sculpture would then be displayed at
Waddeston  Manor, a National  Trust property  and  former  Rothschild
house. Although  the Rothschild  scheme would  have resulted  in The
Three Graces  being  placed  on  "public"  display,  ownership  would
have  passed  first  to  Rothschild  and  only  then  to  the  Government,
which would have displayed the sculpture in a house belonging to a
private  charity. The government  did not  act upon  the suggestion. In
March, however, as the second deferral was about to expire, Nicholas
Ridley,  Secretary  of State for  Trade  and  Industry,  announced  a  fur-
ther  three-week  extension  and  introduced  a  ruling  that  private  in-
dividuals,  in  addition  to  public  collections,  could  make  offers  on

278

Woburn  Abbey  and  The Three Graces

objects  subject  to  a license  deferral.  In  May, he refused  to grant an
export license.

It appeared that the Scottish  financiers,  David and Frederick  Bar-
clay, would  be the  first  to benefit  from  this ruling.  They  offered  to
purchase  the  sculpture  for  £7.6m  and  guaranteed  that  it  would  be
kept on display  at the  V&A  for  25 years. Qualified  approval  came
from  the  House  of Lords, where  Lord  Rees argued  that  any  private
owner  acquiring  works  of  art  in  this  manner  should  be  under  an
"enforceable  obligation to give or sell the item in his lifetime, or by
his executors at his death, to a national institution."38 The Reviewing
Committee  wanted  further  stipulations  for  a private buyer,  suggest-
ing that

[h]e should only be permitted to acquire [the object] if he gives
a binding  legal undertaking  as to public  access, proper mainte-
nance, a minimum  period  of retention  and,  in the  case  of spe-
cific  collections  or  sets  of  objects,  the  maintained  integrity  of
the collection  ...  39

As one critic put  it, "[a] national  policy  which appears  to leave  the
salvation  of the nation's  treasures to public whim, or private  gener-
osity,  is perhaps  questionable."40  Despite  these  concerns,  any  legal
barrier  to  the  proposed  sale  to  the  Barclay  brothers  was  removed
with  the  March  1991  ruling  that  the  sculpture  was  chattel.  FAID,
however, began to press for interest payments on the £7.6m purchase
price; the Barclays refused,  and FAID rejected  their  offer.

On 23 September  1993, the Getty  once again  agreed to purchase
the  sculpture  from  FAID  for  £7.6m,  conditional  upon  the  issuance
of  an  export  license.  The  next  day,  FAID  sought  permission  from
the  DNH  to  apply  for  a  second  export  license.  The  DNH  granted
permission for FAID to apply for a license after reviewing the failure
of  the  Barclays'  offer.41  The  Reviewing  Committee  considered  the
application  in  November  and  recommended  to  Peter  Brooke,  the
Secretary  of  State  for  National  Heritage,  that  an  exceptional  18-
month deferral  be granted, with the expectation  that, during this de-
ferral,  purchasing  funds  would  become  available  from  the new Na-
tional  Lottery.  On  16  February  1994,  Brooke  extended  the  initial
deferral  but only until  5 August. At a press conference  to  announce
his decision, Brooke  said that there would be "no further  extension
beyond  August."42

The chance that a comparable  offer  would be made between Feb-
ruary  and August  seemed  bleak,  and  the Getty  hoped that  the  issue
would soon be settled. The V&A pledged to continue exploring ave-
nues for raising money but did not launch a public appeal.43 Instead,
it joined  forces  with  the  National  Galleries  of  Scotland  (NGS), di-
rected by Timothy  Clifford.  The V&A eventually  raised  £4.7m  (in-
cluding £500,000 from  the National Art-Collection  Fund and a £3m
matching  pledge  from  the  National  Heritage  Memorial  Fund),  and

279

Sara  E.  Bush

the  NGS  contributed  fl.lm.44  On  5 August  -  the  last  day  of  the
deferral  —  the V&A was £1.8m  short  of the purchase price.

On  9  August,  in  an  unexpected  move,  Stephen  Dorrell, the  new
Secretary  of  State  for  National  Heritage,  granted  a  further  three-
month  deferral.45  He  based  this  decision  on  the  importance  of  the
work  of  art  and  the closeness  of the V&A  to  its goal. His decision
immediately  brought  angry  reactions from  John  Walsh, the director
of  the  Getty,  and  Luc  Hafner,  the  Swiss  solicitor  for  FAID,  who
threatened:

I am going to ask for a judicial  review of this decision because
this  is  going  too  far.  We  will  ask  an  English  judge  to  say
whether this is fair and reasonable. As far as we are concerned,
the  Government  are  no  longer  sticking  to  the  rules,  they  are
changing  them from  day to day. This has now gone on for five
years.  We hope that the Getty Museum  will  soon be the proud
owner.46

On 30 August,  the Getty applied for  leave to seek judicial  review
of Dorrell's  decision, on the grounds of the irrationality  of Dorrell's
decision,  the  Getty's  legitimate  expectation,  and  the NHMF contri-
butions as an interference  with trade. The application, accusing Dor-
rell  of  acting  "unreasonably  and  unlawfully,"  came  before  Justice
Laws in the High Court on 9 September.47 On  13 September, Justice
Laws  refused  leave  for judicial  review,  ruling  that  Dorrell  had  not
acted  unfairly  and  that  the  money  pledged  for  the  sculpture's
purchase  using  NHMF  funds  did  not violate  the  Treaty  of Rome.48
He ordered  the  Getty  to pay  Dorrell's  legal  costs  but  allowed  it to
appeal.

Meanwhile, on  11 August  —  two days after  Dorrell's extension  —
J.  Paul  Getty  II, the  son of  the founder  of the  museum  but a long-
time  resident  in  England, had  made  a £lm  offer  to  the  V&A/NGS
campaign.  A glitch developed  the next  day, however,  when,  during
an interview  with the BBC, Clifford  insinuated that Getty had made
the  offer  out  of  a  spirit  of  revenge  against  his  late  father.  Getty
promptly  withdrew  the  offer.  Clifford  was  forced  to  make  a public
apology,  and,  after  a  cool  silence,  Getty  consented  to  reinstate  his
offer.

On  3  September,  the  V&A  confirmed  that  it  had  received
£800,000  from  the  Dutch-born  industrialist,  Baron  Hans  Heinrich
Thyssen-Bornemisza.  This gift  enabled  the V&A and NGS to make
a joint  offer  of £7.6m. The decision  in the High Court and the  fund-
raising success of the V&A and NGS appeared to conclude the case,
but  on  14 September  Hafner  reported  that he  still  had  "not yet de-
cided" to accept  the museums' joint  offer.49

The  Getty  renewed  its application  for  leave  for  judicial  review,
and the issue was addressed in October by Lord Justices Neill, Hoff-
mann, and Henry. The application  again centered  on the question of

280

Woburn  Abbey and  The Three Graces

whether  Brooke  had  promised  that  the  16 February  deferral  would
be  final  and  whether  Dorrell  had  acted  rationally  in  extending  it.
The decision went against the Getty, and Lord Justice Neill declined
to  give  leave  for judicial  review,  thus  extinguishing  the  possibility
of further  legal  action by the Getty  in the  British courts.50

This  ruling  brought  the  export  saga  to  a  close.  Although  FAID
was in no hurry to sell the sculpture to the V&A and the NGS, with
no export license there was little else it could do. On 23 November,
FAID  accepted  the joint  offer  of  the  V&A  and  the  NGS.  After  a
long  and  complicated  process,  The  Three Graces entered  a  public
collection.  It went  on  display  at  the  V&A  in January  1995, with a
relocation  to Scotland  in July  1995.

An  additional  outcome  of  this  case  was  the  Getty's  decision  to
review its policy of not competing with British institutions in buying
works  of  art  in the  United  Kingdom.51  There  remain  concerns  that
the  Getty's  experience  will  discourage  other  foreign  buyers  from
purchasing  works  and  working  within  an  export  system  involving
delays and apparently  mobile goalposts.

6  Systems  for  Protection

The  case  of  The  Three Graces  demonstrates  how  objects  can  be
defined  and treated  differently  under the various regulatory  systems
designed  to protect  them.  Having  examined  the mechanics  of listed
building  and  export  regulations,  this  article  will  now  evaluate  how
these processes determined the "cultural value" of The Three Graces.
By March  1991, the criteria for defining  a fixture had shifted  from
the degree and purpose of annexation  and the character of the space
to the chronology of the creation of the object and the space. Empha-
sis was continually  placed  on the capacity  of the sculpture to  stand
on  its  own,  not  the  change  in  the  character  of  the  listed  building
resulting  from  the  sculpture's  removal.  In  evaluating  the  sculpture
in the context of the listed buildings regulatory scheme, the govern-
ment concluded that the sculpture was not part of the nation's archi-
tectural  heritage  but  rather  a chattel  that  could  be  moved  and  sold
with  impunity.

The export  license  process  provided  an  opportunity  for  a second
viewing  of  The Three Graces in a new  light. When  evaluated  inde-
pendently  of its architectural  context  and according to the Waverley
Criteria,  the  sculpture  was  deemed  to  be  of  exceptional  value  and
an  outstanding  example  of national  patrimony.  The  export  laws re-
dressed the possible  loss of the sculpture from  Britain but could not
protect  the  integrity  of the  sculpture  and  its context.  The  export  li-
cense  system  is a tool  for  preventing  the removal  of an object  from
the  country  but  does  not  guarantee  that  the object  will  be  returned
to its original context  or even to a public  collection.

281

Sara  E. Bush

In  order  to  prevent  a  reoccurrence  of  a case  such  as that  of The
Three Graces, it would be helpful  to close the loopholes in the listed
building  and  export  license  systems. Three  suggestions  address this
situation.

The  first  suggestion  involves the  designation  of  certain  types  of
objects  as  fixtures  that  should  not  be  moved  or  removed.  In  June
1991, the Georgian Group organized a seminar on  The Three Graces
and  proposed  that  "a  limited  category  of  art  objects"  be  automati-
cally  included  in the building  listing.52 This would  include only:

[w]orks of art which were designed for a particular architectural
setting  and,  still  more  specifically,  which  would be  considered
by  competent  authorities  to be part  of the  original  conception,
and  hence  the  character,  of the  listed  buildings  in  which  they
are  found.53

Thus,  large  statuary  groups  could  be  protected,  regardless  of  the
degree  of annexation.  It was suggested  that the DOE

[s]hould  list individually  items of sculpture  within listed build-
ings  (as  is  done  already  for  sculpture  outside  buildings)  as  a
means of ensuring that any proposal to remove them  is  subject
to  proper  scrutiny.  There  is  apparently  no  impediment  in  the
existing  legislation  to such listing of internal  sculptures.54

The Georgian Group also hoped that these regulations would prevent
owners  from  moving  objects  and protect  the  historical  character  of
built  spaces.

The issue is not, as has previously been asserted by the Historic
Houses Association, whether owners of stately homes are to be
prevented  from  ever  selling  their  goods  and  chattels  to  raise
money, but the much narrower question of whether the removal
of items which are demonstrably part of the original  conception
of a listed building  should be subject  to proper  scrutiny  by the
competent  bodies  which  currently  comment  on  listed  building
applications, namely English Heritage and the national amenity
societies.55

When Patrick Cormack, a Conservative MP, approached the DOE
with  this  suggestion  on  behalf  of  the  Georgian  Group,  he  did  not
receive  a  favorable  reply.  Writing  on  Heseltine's  behalf,  Baroness
Blatch  responded  that  if there were any blur between  buildings  and
fixtures,  such  as would  occur if both were to be  listed,  "we  [would
be]  indeed  on  the way  to controlling  pictures  and  furniture,  as well
as  placing  unreasonable  burdens  on  owners  of  historic  houses."56
She  asserted  the  wisdom  of  retaining  the  existing  reliance  on  the
common  law  standards  of  degree  and  purpose  of  annexation.  She

282

Woburn  Abbey  and  The Three Graces

further  affirmed  that while clarification  might be useful, the question
of  determining  fixtures  remained  within  the  discretion  of  the  local
authority.57

The  second  suggestion,  provided  by  the  Reviewing  Committee,
was for  the  listing  of special  collections  of objects.  The  Reviewing
Committee urged adoption of a fourth  Waverley criterion "[t]o cover
objects  from  a collection  which  it  was  desirable  to retain  intact.  In
some cases such a criterion might be extended to cover items which
had  been  removed  from  their  important  original  context  but  which
might one day be restored to  it."58

This  suggestion  is  intended  to  prevent  the  dispersal  of  "special-
ized,  integral  collections,"59  including  collections  of  ethnographic
materials, books, and documents. However, the Reviewing Commit-
tee does not advocate listing of the entire contents of country houses,
only:

(a)  collections formed by a single collector who was significant
in the history of taste or as a historical  figure  himself;
(b)  collections  which  are  important  in  their  own  right  for  the
study  of  some  aspect  of  history  or  taste  even  if  the  collector
was not, and which are a rare survival or have been  assembled
in unusual  circumstances;
(c)  collections  where  the  furniture,  pictures  or  other  fittings
were put together at one time as part of an integral whole which
is an outstanding  example  of its kind  and are still preserved in
their original  setting.60

If  The Three Graces and  the  5th  and  6th Dukes'  collections  of an-
tique and contemporary statuary were reassembled within the Sculp-
ture  Gallery,  they  would  meet  all  three  criteria.  Along  with  these
other  sculptures,  The  Three Graces constituted  part  of  one  of  the
most  important  artifacts  of British taste and patronage.

The  third  suggestion  derives  from  the  work  of  James  Beck,  a
professor  of  art  history  at  Columbia  University.  Beck  founded  an
alert  group  called  Art  Watch  and  published  a  "Bill  of  Rights  for a
Work  of  Art."  This  document  asserts  the  right  of  a  work  of  art  to
enjoy  a  dignified  existence  in  its  original  abode  or  acquired  home
without  being  moved.  Beck  also  urges  adherence  to the  concept  of
the global  ownership  of cultural patrimony  with owners  performing
a custodial  role on the public's behalf.

Both the Temple of the Graces and The Three Graces would have
benefited  from  the  protection  that  this  Bill  of Rights  would  afford.
The purpose  of  listing  buildings  is  to  protect  the  nation's  architec-
tural  and  artistic  heritage.  In  order  to  do  that  and  to  protect  the
vision  of the  architect,  the  building  needs to  be  accorded  the  same
protective rights as a work of art. The implementation  of these sug-
gestions would clarify  the nature and value of objects located within
an architectural  context.

283

Sara  E.  Bush

7  Ownership, Access  and the Public

The goal of both listed building and export regulations is the protec-
tion of the nation's cultural treasures for the long-term benefit  of the
public.  Considerations  of  public  opinion,  public  access,  and  public
ownership all played a role in deciding the fate of The Three Graces.
The  case  was  framed  by  the  questions  of  who  should  own  the
sculpture and where it should be kept. The possibilities ranged  from
ownership  by  one family  with  no  public  access  to  ownership  by a
national  museum  with  complete  public  access.  The  feasibility  of
these possibilities was tempered by the desire of many that the sculp-
ture remain in its original context. This conflict  requires an examina-
tion  of the  role of the  art  museum  in both protecting  and  acquiring
objects.

The art museum preserves  cultural artifacts  for  study and display,
both now and for the future.  In this respect the role of the institution
is similar to that of listed building and export regulations which are
designed to protect national heritage within the country for the bene-
fit  of  present  and  future  generations.  In  general,  however,  the  art
museum's  commitment  is not to preserve  a work in situ,61  although
it  may  be  able  to provide  a  nurturing  environment,  scholarly  ex-
pertise, and  facilities  for  public access and education. Nevertheless,
many  art  historians  and  architectural  critics  maintained  that  The
Three Graces could  only  be  truly  appreciated  if it were  returned  to
the  Temple  of the Graces.62 As a corollary, the  question  remains as
to  whether  the  Getty  should  have  been  permitted  to  remove  the
sculpture from  its national context, once the ties between  the sculp-
ture  and  its Temple had  already  been severed. As one  commentator
noted,

[t]here  is a  strong  argument  that  The Three Graces belongs  in
the Sculpture Gallery  built  for  it at Woburn Abbey. If it cannot
be  returned  there,  does  it  matter where  it  goes  provided  it  is
both  accessible  and adequately housed?63

In January  1990, Elizabeth  Esteve-Coll,  then  Director  of the V&A,
expressed  the  opinion  that  the  correct place  for  The  Three  Graces
was  at  Woburn  Abbey.  Barring  that,  the  best  alternative  was  the
V&A,  as  it  housed  the  National  Collection  of  European  Sculpture
and provided a rich context within the museum itself for demonstrat-
ing the  sculpture's value and  national  importance.64

This  in  turn  leads  to  the  larger  question  of  whether  The Three
Graces,  in  or  out  of  the  Temple  context,  should  be  considered  an
object of national patrimony or international heritage. Scholars  from
around  the  world  became  interested  in the  sculpture's  fate.  The art
museum  can  symbolize  the preservation  of  objects  from  many cul-
tures, its encyclopedic blend making it a viable and worthwhile insti-
tution. In that light, it would have made sense for the Getty, with its

284

Woburn  Abbey  and  The Three Graces

own  extensive  collection  of  antique  and  Neo-Classical  statuary,  to
place  the  Canova  among works that  inspired  it or were  inspired  by
it.

Finally, the conditions  of the joint  acquisition  of the sculpture by
the V&A and the NGS are of concern to those who regard the sculp-
ture as delicate and its travel between the two institutions as posing
an unnecessary  risk. While shuttling the sculpture between  England
and Scotland will increase the number of people who are able to see
it and  will  emphasize  the  sculpture's  position  within  the  larger  art-
istic  heritage,  this type  of movement  may  not be  in the  sculpture's
best  interest.

Whatever  the  outcome,  many  in the  art  world  are  questioning
the  advisability  of  an  arrangement  whereby  this delicate  work
would be transported between Edinburgh,  [and] London  ...  ev-
ery  few  years.  Paul  Williamson,  keeper  of  sculpture  at  the
V&A, described  the circumstances  as  'far  from  ideal,'  particu-
larly  as  the  marble  contains  a  flaw  'which  needs  to  be  taken
extremely  seriously.'65

Sadly, the general public  —  whom these  laws and  institutions  are
supposed  to serve  —  showed  little  interest  in the case  of  The  Three
Graces. While  scholars wrote  endlessly  about  the aesthetic and his-
toric importance of the sculpture, donations to the V&A's campaign
—  the  most direct way of assessing the public's  commitment  to the
sculpture  —  totaled only £28,000. Thus, the legal structure may work
to  save  objects  for  the  benefit  of  the  public,  without  regard  to  the
public's  involvement  or demonstrated  concern.66

8  Conclusion

Based on the case of The Three Graces, it is possible to extract three
lines of inquiry.  First,  the concern  for  the  fate  of  The Three  Graces
arose  from  the  shift  of  scholarly  interest  away  from  pure  stylistic
analysis and toward  the social  history of the object  and a revival  of
interest in the work of Canova and Neo-Classical  sculpture.67 These
academic interests may not be in tandem with the tastes of the public
or with  the desires of historic  house-owners,  but  they  do trigger an
inquiry into the efficacy  of the regulatory systems that influence  the
legal, art historical, and cultural  status of an  object.

Second, if there is no consensus among academics and the public
as to taste  and priorities, then  there  is a question  as to who is most
fit to be the guardian  of the objects  that constitute the cultural  heri-
tage.  In  the  case  of  The Three Graces, museums  competed  against
private  owners, and  the different  constituent  bodies  of  the  Govern-
ment provided  conflicting  interpretations.

285

Sara  E. Bush

Third,  many  of the  questions  about how to define  this  sculpture
— whether as ornament, fixture,  fitting, or integral  part of the archi-
tecture  — arose out of the  need  to interpret the existing  legislation.
This  situation  would be alleviated  through  clarification  of the  le-
gislation that would take into account the conflicting case precedents
and  the influence  of the  art market.  Ideally,  this  legislation  would
be  flexible  enough to respond  to new  tastes  and new trends, while
protecting  the objects  and settings  that  constitute  Britain's  historic
and  cultural heritage.

Notes

1  For a  detailed  history  of the  building, see  NICHOLAS  PEVSNER,  BEDFORD-
\66ff

SHIRE  AND THE COUNTY  OF  HUNTINGDOM  AND PETERBOROUGH 
(1968);  APOLLO,  Dec.  1965, and APOLLO,  June  1988.

2  GERVASE  JACKSON-STOPS,  THE TREASURE  HOUSES  OF BRITAIN  -  FIVE HUN-
DRED  YEARS OF PRIVATE  PATRONAGE  AND  ART COLLECTING  541  (Washing-
ton,  D.C. and New Haven: National  Gallery of Art and  Yale University  Press
1985)  [hereinafter  JACKSON-STOPS,  THE  TREASURE  HOUSES].  See also  John
Kenworthy-Browne,  The Temple of  Liberty at Woburn  Abbey,  APOLLO,  July
1989,  at 27-32.  This article  discusses  the origins  of the  Temple of Liberty
in  the 5th Duke's  admiration  for Fox and the 6th Duke's  expansion  of his
brother's  efforts.  While  the exterior  of the  temple  was Greek,  the interior
atmosphere  was intended  to be Roman.

3  SAVE:  THE WOBURN  CANOVA  7 (Anna  Somers  Cocks  & Marcus  Binney,
eds.,  London:  SAVE Britain's  Heritage  1990)  [hereinafter  Cocks & Binney,
SAVE].

4  JACKSON-STOPS,  THE  TREASURE  HOUSES,  supra  note  2, at 541.
5  As  Josephine's  sculpture  had been  placed  on a rectangular  plinth,  there is
reason  to assume that this alteration  was made with deliberate  consideration
of the sculpture's ultimate resting  place. Kenworthy-Browne  asserted,  "[t]he
carved  pedestal  was made  exactly  to fit into  the pattern  from  all angles."
That  description  implies  that  the plinth (if not the figures)  was made  so  as
to  conform  to the design of the  building and to fit into a prior  architectural
design.  Cocks & Binney, SAVE, supra note 3, at 7.

6  Those  who saw Woburn  Abbey  tended  to describe  the sculpture  and  its

Temple  in the  same breath.  JACKSON-STOPS,  THE  TREASURE  HOUSES, supra
note  2, at 542.

7 Id.
8  7 July  1989 letter from  the Marchioness of Tavistock to Roger  White of the

Georgian  Group.

9  The AIL scheme  was  created  by the 1975 Finance  Act and is administered
by  the Museums  and Galleries  Commission.  It allows  the Government to
accept  an object  deemed  by the Treasury  (as advised  by the MGC) to  be
"pre-eminent  for its national,  scientific,  historic, and artistic  interests" as an
offset  against  the owner's capital  transfer  tax liability.  Museums and Galler-
ies Commission,  Report  1992-1993  49 (London:  HMSO  September  1993).
10  By the early  1980s, very  few in situ arrangements  had been  considered, as
they  are advantageous  to the owner  and  difficult  for the receiving  museum
to  supervise.  "Occasionally  offers  are made  on condition  that  the object

286

Woburn  Abbey  and The Three Graces

should remain  'in situ'  in a private house, where there is no public collection
...  In  1978 the  Department  of  Education  and  Science  agreed  that  objects
could  be left  in situ  in private  houses provided  (i) they  were  formally  allo-
cated to a public institution, and (ii) they could be loaned back to the private
house.  There  were  other  conditions  about  the care  and conservation  of the
object. The position was confirmed  in the 1983 edition of the Treasury mem-
orandum  which  makes provision  for cases where  'regard  shall be had to any
significant  association  it (the object) has with a particular  place.'" Museums
and  Galleries  Commission,  Report  1978-1983 33 (London:  HMSO  1984).

11  At first  it  was not known  that  this  party  was the Getty  Trust,  working on

behalf  of the Getty  Museum,  here referred  to jointly  as 'the Getty.'

12  Until  the creation  of the  DNH in April  1992, the Secretary  of State  for the
Environment  was responsible  for the listing  process.  Since  then,  the  DNH
has assumed responsibility for approving listed building consent  applications
and overseeing the listing process, while the Department of the  Environment
remains  responsible  for planning  oversight.

13  This replaced the Town and Country  Planning Act 1947 and has in turn been
replaced  by  the  Town  and  Country  Planning  Act  1990 and  the  Planning
(Listed  Buildings and Conservation  Areas) Act  1990.

14  Peter  Sinclair of the  HHA argued  that  if the case of The Three Graces set a
legal precedent  for the treatment of such sculptures as fixtures,  it would  lead
to an increase  of art  smuggling  from  Britain's  stately  homes. The Marchio-
ness of Tavistock  said, "It would  amount to persecution  of people who own
property."  THE TIMES, 29 October 1989.

15  30 October  1989 memo by C. A. R. Bird.
16  Quoted  in 30 October  1989 memo  by Bird.  Similar  provision  is now made
by  Section  1(5) of the  Planning  (Listed  Buildings  and Conservation  Areas)
Act 1990.

17  30 October  1989 memo by Bird.
18 

[A conservation  officer]  will  be aware,  of course,  that  from  the  1720s,
and to a limited  extent from a much earlier date, architects often  incorpo-
rated busts, ums, and sculpture into their designs. He will know that many
mid-eighteenth  century  interiors  were  often  constructed  around  themes
such  as Learning,  Art, or Science, and he will  know  of important  build-
ings  where  such  themes  are illustrated  by sculptured  busts  or figures re-
clining  on  pediments  or  overmantels,  or  simply  resting  on  pedestals or
within  niches.  Where  these  busts,  urns,  and  figures  were  conceived  as
part of the  architectural  ensemble,  commonsense  argues  that,  whether or
not  they  are movable,  they  should  be regarded  as part  of the building.
The law, it appears, readily  supports this.

Brian  Anthony,  What  is  a  Building?  ENGLISH  HERITAGE'S  CONSERVATION
BULLETIN,  Oct.  1987,  at  7.

19  Quoted in the 30 October  1989 memo by Bird.
20  3 April  1990  affidavit  by Thomas  Radice.
21 

[Patten]  tended  to the view  that the Statue  formed  an integral  part of the
listed  Sculpture  Gallery,  and, although  he considered  that  the issue was
not free from doubt, he took the view, on Counsel's  advice, that it should,
within the meaning of section  54(9) of the Act, be considered  to be fixed
to the building.

3  April  1990  affidavit  by Thomas  Radice.

22  THE INDEPENDENT,  8  Nov.  1989.
23  3 April  1990  affidavit  by Thomas  Radice.

287

Sara E. Bush

24  The decision  was also explained  by David Trippier, Minister for the Environ-

ment  and Countryside,  in the debate  that  day in the House of Commons:

[Patten]  is not satisfied  that  it is in general  an appropriate  use of listed
building  legislation  to control  what  would  widely  be thought to be chat-
tels. Nor is he satisfied  in the present case that it would be appropriate to
require  the return  of the  sculpture  to a  Sculpture  Gallery,  of which the
Temple  is a part,  which  has effectively  changed  in character.

7  December  1989 transcript  for  the House of Commons,  Hansard  Vol. 163,
Cols.  329-30.

25  This  point  was later made  by Lord  Crathorne,  chair of the Georgian  Group,

in the 15 May 1991  debate  in the House  of Lords. He remarked,

One  of the  disturbing  aspects  was  that  the Secretary  of State  seemed to
be  influenced  ...  by the  fact  that  the owners  of  The  Three Graces had
moved  it around  to several  different  locations in recent years. The impli-
cations  were  obvious  for  that  kind  of  object.  If  the  article  is  moved
around,  it undermines  the listed  building  consent  legislation.

15  May  1991 transcript  for  the  House  of  Lords,  Hansard  Vol. 528,  Col.
1619.  Legally,  such  movements  do not exempt  the owner  from  obtaining
listed  building  consent.  English  Heritage,  Fixtures  and Fittings  in  Listed
Buildings,  Jan. 1990, at 3.

26  5 February  1990  press  release  from  SAVE Britain's  Heritage.
27  3 April  1990 affidavit  by Thomas  Radice.
28  27 March  1991 letter  from  Thomas  Radice to Allen  & Overy.
29  This  distinction  could  lead  to an empty  plinth  being  considered  a part  of a

listed  building,  with  the sculpture  free  to be moved.

30  In 1910, the sculpture had not been  included in the Settlement, the document
which  detailed  which  articles  comprise the Bedford  Estate. This  meant  that
the  sculpture  was not then  regarded  as a  fixture.  In  1940 and in  1953, the
sculpture  had been  included  in the inventories of chattels prepared  upon the
deaths  of the  11th and  12th Dukes.  Yet, at some  time  before  1961, it had
come  to be  subject  to the  1910 Settlement.  In  1971, the sculpture  passed
into  the same  trust  as the land  (i. e., it became  non-chattel)  but passed out
again  between  1980 and  1984, before  being  sold  in  1985. 27 March 1991
letter  from  Thomas  Radice to Allen  & Overy.

31  27 March  1991 letter  from  Thomas  Radice to Allen  & Overy.
32  27 March  1991  letter  from  Thomas  Radice to Allen & Overy.
33  THE  ART NEWSPAPER,  April  1994.
34  DOE and DNH,  Planning  Policy  Guidance  Note  15, September  1994,  Sec-

tions  3.31-3.32.

35  The  applicant  was  Allen  &  Overy,  the  London  solicitors  for  FAID. The
purchaser  was indicated  to be a  party  in the USA,  whose  name  was known
by the Reviewing Committee  but withheld from  the report by request. Export
of  Works of Art  1988-89  -  35th  Report  of the  Reviewing  Committee Ap-
pointed  by the Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in December  1952 36 (London:
HMSO  October  1989).

36  Id.
37  Id. at 37. Only  one extension  had been  made  prior to the 1987-1988  year.
38  15 May 1991 transcript  from  the House  of Lords,  Hansard  Vol.  528,  Col.

1632.

39  Export  of  Works of Art  1993-94,  at 9.
40  Carolyne Shelbourn, Saving  graces  — the protection  of the national  heritage,

NEW  LAW  JOURNAL,   1 June  1990,  at  776.

288

Woburn  Abbey  and  The Three Graces

41  Geraldine  Norman,  Goddesses  in  Limbo:  Never  Has  a  Single  Work of  Art

Caused Such  Confusion,  THE  INDEPENDENT,  30 Jan.  1994, at 71.

42  James  Cusick,  "Three  Graces"  Decision  Delayed,  THE  INDEPENDENT,  17
Feb.  1994, at 8. At this time, Brooke also stipulated  that objects of consider-
able  importance  would,  from  July  1994,  be  eligible  to  receive  a  12-month
deferral.

43  Mike Ellison, Graces Get Six Months'  Grace, THE GUARDIAN,  17 Feb. 1994,

at 5.

44  Will  Bennett,  Tug-of-War over  "Three  Graces"  To Go  To Court:  Owners
Angry  as  Sale  is  Delayed  Again,  THE  INDEPENDENT,  10  Aug.  1994,  at  6
[hereinafter  Bennett, Tug-of-War].

45  Although  Brooke  had  not  mentioned  further  extensions  in  the press  release
that had  been  sent  to the  Getty, the issue  had  been  raised  at a press  confer-
ence  that  day.  According  to  the  testimony  of  a  reporter,  Brooke  responded
in the negative to the question  of whether there  would be any further  exten-
sions.  This  response  was  published  in  The Independent  the  following  day.
The  Getty  received  word  of  Dorrell's  9  August  decision  by  mail.  In  this
letter,  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  DNH,  writing  on  Dorrell's  behalf,
stated  that  this would be the  final  deferral.

46  Bennett,  Tug-of-War,  supra  note 44.
47  Dorrell Accused  over Sculpture,  THE  INDEPENDENT,  10 Sept.  1994, at 2.
48  Charles  Oulton,  Court  Ruling  Likely  to  End  Battle  for  Statue:  "Three

Graces"  Set  to Stay  in  UK, THE  INDEPENDENT,  14 Sept.  1994, at 5.

49  Graces'  Doubt,  THE  INDEPENDENT,  15 Sept.  1994, at 2. This attitude led the
Reviewing Committee to recommend  that "it should be a condition of apply-
ing  for  an  export  license  that  the  owner  should  agree  to  sell  the  object  if it
is found  to be of Waverley  standard and  a public  collection makes a match-
ing offer."  Export  of  Works  of Art  1993-94  -  40th Report  of the  Reviewing
Committee Appointed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in December  1952
8  (London:  HMSO  Dec.  1994).

50  Lord  Justice  Neill  dismissed  the  question  of  irrationality,  saying  that  Dor-
rell's  decision  to  reverse  Brooke's  stance  had  taken  into  consideration
Brooke's  reasoning  and had been  fully  explained by  Dorrell  in the letters to
the Getty and FAID's solicitors. He also dismissed the question of legitimate
expectation on the grounds that the Getty could not have been aware of what
transpired  at  the  February  press  conference,  and  that  neither  the  letter  from
Brooke  to the Getty nor the press release ruled  out the possibility of  further
extensions.  Finally,  he  found  no  problem  with  the  NHMF  pledge  to  the
purchase  fund.

51  The  Getty's  Policy  for  Acquisitions  states  that  "possible  conflicts  with  the
interests of other institutions with special concern  for those in the Los Ange-
les area shall  be taken  into consideration." The J. Paul Getty  Museum, "Pol-
icy for  Acquisitions," revised  12 September  1986. Sir Denis Mahon,  in a  16
September  1994  letter  to  The  Independent,  warned  that  Walsh's  previous
attitude  —  "It  is  well  known  in  museum  circles  that  Mr.  Walsh  has  since
behaved  impeccably, and indeed  has taken exceptional  steps on occasion  not
to stand  in this country's  way  in matters  of acquisition"  — could  change, to
the United  Kingdom's  detriment.

52  June  1991 letter from the Georgian  Group to participants  in its  seminar.
53  17 July  1991  letter  from  Patrick  Cormack,  MP,  to  Michael  Heseltine,  the

Secretary  of  State  for  the  Environment.

54  17 July  1991  letter from Cormack  to Heseltine.
55  3 July  1991 presentation  paper by the Georgian  Group.

289

Sara  E.  Bush

56  23 August  1991  letter from Baroness  Blatch  to  Cormack.
57  12 November  1991 letter  from  Baroness  Blatch  to  Cormack.
58  Export  of  Works of Art  1993-94, at 11.
59  Export  of  Works of Art  1988-89, at 51.
60  Id.
61  The  V&A  does  have  a commitment  to preserving  works  of  art  even  if they
must  remain  in  situ.  It  is severely  restricted  in this, however,  by  its  limited
staff  and  resources.  Nevertheless,  the  museum  may  acquire  an  object  with
an  eye to returning it to  its context  should  a change  in circumstances  permit
that.  Interview with Paul Williamson,  Keeper of Sculpture at the V&A, June
1995.  This  position  had  been  put  forward  in  January  1990  by  the  V&A's
Director,  Elizabeth  Esteve-Coll:

The National  Collection, in the fullest  sense, can never be just the  objects
in a single museum. That is why, increasingly, we are accepting responsi-
bility for objects kept and shown wherever the true interests of our histori-
cal  culture  require  them  to be. When  the time comes  and Woburn  Abbey
can  once  more  receive  The  Three Graces  in  its  true  home, the  sculpture
should  return  there.

Cocks  & Binney, SAVE, supra  note  3, at 3.

62  See the articles in Cocks & Binney, SAVE, supra note 3. Another suggestion
was  that  a  facsimile  of  the  Temple  be  built,  in  Edinburgh,  or  on  a  location
halfway  between  London  and  Edinburgh.  Dan  Cruickshank,  Three Virgins
Seeking  a  Home  to Grace, THE  INDEPENDENT,  8 Feb.  1995, at 25.

63  Elspeth  Moncrieff,  Three Graces  to Stay  in  UK, but not  Sold  Yet, MUSEUMS

JOURNAL,  Dec. 

1994.

64  Cocks  & Binney, SAVE, supra  note  3, at 3.
65  The  Hammer,  MUSEUMS  JOURNAL,  Oct.  1994,  at  13.
66  This mismatch  does not  worry  Paul  Williamson, who warned  of the risks  of
being  tied  to  what is popular  with  the public  at  any  one given  moment  and
reaffirmed  that  the museum  must  protect  what  is important  within  the disci-
pline  rather  than  what  is popular.  Interview, June  1995.

67  Interview  with  Malcolm  Baker,  Head  of  the  Research  Department  of  the

V&A,  June  1995.

290


