 (2006) 13:207–233. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2006 Revising the Concept for Cultural
Heritage: The Argument for
a Functional Approach
Tolina Loulanski*

Abstract: This article presents a more human, dynamic, and holistic
perspective of cultural heritage, closely referring to the currently observed
changes in its conceptual development. It argues that the conceptual focus of
cultural heritage has shifted alongside three interrelated and complementary
directions: 1) from monuments to people; 2) from objects to functions; and
thus 3) from preservation per se to purposeful preservation, sustainable use,
and development. The reappearing and alive functional heritage is discussed as
opposed to the objectified, glass-covered, and frozen heritage of the past by
referring to both practical and theoretical heritage domains. Conclusions are
drawn in favor of an adequate reexamination and readaptation of the
conceptual framework of cultural heritage, based on accepting its new
functional socioeconomic dimension and integrating multiple perspectives
from a variety of academic fields.

It has been named a heritage revolution, a heritage crusade, the ascent of history,
and a heritage revival. These trendy expressions signify one and the same phenom-
enon: the growing significance attributed to our valued past. Growth has recently
been witnessed in both interest and concern for heritage, as expressed by a variety
of groups such as local communities; governments; academics; owners; business
entities; developers; tourists; and others identified as heritage stakeholders, users,
or markets of heritage. To this increased number of people “having share in her-
itage now,” Lowenthal attributes the so-observed “heritage expansion” and its “ubiq-

*Hokkaido University, Graduate School of International Media and Communication, Sapporo, Japan.
Email: tolinaloulanski@yahoo.co.jp

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: I would like to thank Alexander Bauer and an anonymous reviewer for
their valuable comments on this article.

207

208

TOLINA LOULANSKI

uitous reach,” because heritage is increasingly perceived as human centered, socially
constructed, more of a public than a private good, and a common legacy belong-
ing to all mankind.1

The increase in heritage-interested groups has brought a growing number of
viewpoints, opinions, definitions, and attitudes to heritage, which has further com-
plicated its concept and field of study and increased the number of relevant issues
to deal with in theory as well as practice. The new reality has necessitated the
birth of heritage studies, another multidisciplinary field exploring the impact of
heritage on the present, and the development of new holistic approaches to ad-
dress the complexities and challenges related to heritage. However, cultural heri-
tage still “lacks a strong disciplined presence and correspondingly an agreed
framework of reference and research,” which can be considered a problem of crit-
ical importance in the field.2

Focusing in this particular direction, the article makes space for the future es-
tablishment of such a conceptual framework on the basis of evaluating and inte-
grating various perspectives. It suggests an updated and expanded vision of heritage3
and its contemporary meanings, highlighting its growing functional dimension. I
initially provide an overview of the evolving heritage concept and its primary in-
trinsic features. The next section discusses heritage in a broader socioeconomic
context, following the three interrelated axes alongside which its conceptual focus
has shifted 1) from monuments to people, 2) from objects to functions, and thus
3) from preservation per se to purposeful preservation, sustainable use, and de-
velopment. Further, an intensifying functional approach toward heritage is ob-
served in both theory and practice, illustrated by some new trends in heritage
thinking and policy, relevant notions from the social sciences field, and empiric
examples.

THE EVOLVING CULTURAL HERITAGE CONCEPT

The concept of heritage is susceptible to change and is actually changing. The new
environment and developments in heritage coupled with a variety of other soci-
etal factors have contributed toward the evolution and expansion of the cultural
heritage concept in both scope and direction. Heritage is increasingly described as
an evolutionary notion, possessing a multifaceted construct, with dynamism, com-
plexity, and multiplicity as its primary features.

Defining Heritage

Starting from its very definition, plenty of examples prove the many existing in-
terpretations, tensions, and subjectivity in searching for a more precise definition
for heritage. The vague label all things to all people and the general lack of an
accepted theory and ethic in heritage conservation are considered significant prob-

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

209

lems in heritage planning.4 Already established as a legitimate multidisciplinary
subject deserving adequate professional attitude, cultural heritage needs a better
conceptualization, tolerant of its modern perceptions, less controversial, and ef-
fective to work with. Nevertheless, the revised concept should never disregard the
inherent heritage diversity and its capacity to change in contents and meaning
within any one culture, as well as between cultures, through time and across space.5
In regard to definition, heritage practitioners most often rely on broad descrip-
tive demarcation of heritage, accounting for its many categories. UNESCO 6 pro-
vides one of the most exhaustive categorization of cultural heritage types:

• Cultural Heritage Sites
• Historic Cities
• Cultural Landscapes
• Natural Sacred Sites
• The Underwater Cultural Heritage
• Museums
• The Movable Cultural Heritage
• Handicrafts
• The Documentary and Digital Heritage
• The Cinematographic Heritage

• Oral Traditions
• Languages
• Festive Events
• Rites and Beliefs
• Music and Song
• The Performing Arts
• Traditional Medicine
• Literature
• Culinary Traditions
• Traditional Sports and Games

Furthermore, many other interpretative definitions focus on different aspects of
heritage. An illustration can be found in the chapter titles of the recent books on
heritage where it is correspondingly examined in a spatial context (in relation to
place, leisure, and tourism), as historical reality, literary place, national identity,
planned and conserved, informal and formal education, business, and finally de-
sign.7 However, the main controversy in defining heritage seems to originate in
its uneasy duality of being both a cultural and economic subject, possessing both
cultural and economic values, and performing both cultural and economic func-
tions. The term is loaded with two different meanings: on the positive side, her-
itage is understood as “culture and landscape that are cared for by the community”
and “passed on to the future to serve people’s need for a sense of identity and
belonging;” however, on the negative side, heritage is considered equal to the
“heritage industry,” which has become “synonymous with the manipulation (or
even invention) and exploitation of the past for commercial ends.”8 Yet no mat-
ter how difficult the relationship and coexistence between these traditionally dis-
tant perspectives and disciplinary languages may be, it is erroneous to disregard
or underestimate either one. On the contrary, heritage needs to bridge the gap
between culture and economy, bringing relevant economic and cultural ap-
proaches together in its realm, which may only be possible when heritage theo-
rists and practitioners alike broaden their horizons and acquire the bilingual and
even multilingual skills (should the third environmental dimension be also taken
into consideration) necessary to collaborate.

210

TOLINA LOULANSKI

Dynamism and Elasticity of the Concept

Yet instead of going deeper into defining heritage, I will focus on several repre-
sentative features of the heritage concept that can serve as markers in its substan-
tive outlining and support further argument for conceptual revision. The most
typical features are dynamism and elasticity. The definition of what makes up her-
itage is said to be “elastic” at its broadest, including “anything inherited from the
past,” and at its narrowest comprised of items of historic or cultural significance,
as judged by heritage experts and professionals; it is also referred to as a “dynamic
phenomenon growing and changing its structure over time” or “continuous pro-
cess during which new meaning and values are always being discovered.”9 The
heritage concept can be described as similarly dynamic, because in a much longer
temporal framework cultural heritage can be further identified as a process or human
condition, which has always been with people, who produce it according to their
contemporary concerns and experiences.10

Dynamism and elasticity of cultural heritage are not new aspects and can be
traced through time following the different periods of its conceptual develop-
ment. The last is illustrated in the scheme provided by Ashworth and Larkham,
who even in a limited temporal dimension well summarize the changing ap-
proaches toward heritage (Fig. 1).

The preservation approaches dominant in the first hundred years (1850–1960),
when the objects of preservation were separate artifacts and buildings from the
past, are gradually replaced by bigger entities like ensembles and whole areas, in-
cluding their modern functions as well. Thus, the conceptual focus has switched
to conservation, defined by Burke in 1976 as “preserving purposefully.” Heritage
represents the final contemporary perception in this evolution, where the relics of

FIGURE 1.

Steps in the evolutionary process: historical monument to heritage product.

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

211

history are already perceived as products, formed as a result of selection, inevitably
including the respective consumer demand toward them. The latter process is
known as “the commodification of the past,” in which various “heritage products”
intended for consumption by already specified markets are being purposefully cre-
ated or “assembled” through “interpretation and packaging” out of the existing
stock of “heritage resources.”11 As a result heritage is ultimately defined as “con-
temporary product shaped from history.”12

In fact, it is this dominant and persistent, constantly updated, contemporary link
in the modern perceptions of heritage that has defined it first as a product of the
present with an unbounded capacity to grow and expand; and it further compli-
cates attempts for a clearer and comprehensive conceptualization of heritage. Rather,
it presumes the continuous and ongoing evolution in the heritage conceptual
development.

Multiplicity and Dissonance

Multiplicity is another often-discussed feature of cultural heritage that can be ob-
served in different aspects. First, it may refer to the mere notion of heritage, which
so far has significantly broadened in meaning and range and is further expanding.
Already in 1979, with the launching of the Heritage Year in France, the French
Minister for Culture and Communication Jean-Philippe Lecat proclaimed a new
inclusive vision of heritage: “Heritage is no longer cold stones or the glass sepa-
rating us from exhibits in a museum. It is also the village lavoir, the little country
church, local dialects, the charm of family photos, skills and techniques, language,
written and oral tradition, humble architecture.” His view was later restated by
France’s former President Valerie Giscard D’Estaing: “[Cultural heritage] em-
braces everything that human effort has left us during the course of history, music,
dance and song, literature and folk customs, paintings and archives—in short, ev-
erything that bears witness to humanity down the path of time.”13

To more precisely and descriptively outline the broad definitional scope of cul-
tural heritage, scholars have identified several different heritage areas: landscapes,
monuments, artifacts, people, and activities, which can be further subdivided into
secondary categories. For example, heritage can be classified as built heritage (his-
toric cities, cathedrals, monuments, castles), living cultural heritage (people, fash-
ions, foods, customs), industrial heritage (industries and activities typical of a region
or place, like coal mining, lumber, textiles, etc.), personal heritage (regional aspects
that have value and significance to individuals or groups of people, like personal
objects, cemeteries, religious sites, etc.), or the so-called dark heritage (places of
war, wartime relics, etc.).14

Apart from the definitional scope of heritage, multiplicity is also typical of some
other dimensions of the complex heritage construct, such as scales (world, na-
tional, local, and personal), sectors of involvement in heritage conservation and
development (international, public, private, voluntary, professional, and ama-

212

TOLINA LOULANSKI

teur), and markets or users of heritage (owners, locals, governments, visitors, and
academics).15

Multiplicity growing into contestation and conflict is a theme conceptualized as
the theory of heritage dissonance. Dissonance is said to be “intrinsic to the nature
of heritage”; and rather than an “unforeseen and unfortunate by-product of the
heritage assembly process,” it should be regarded as an “inevitable” part of a “sys-
tem where selection is unavoidable.”16 The dissonance theory informs of the main
bones of contention in all heritage-related matters, such as heritage ownership;
the multiple, sometimes conflicting uses (and misuses) of heritage (because her-
itage can be also recognized as commodity, “multisold,” and “multiconsumed” on
different markets); and finally the so-called duality of heritage: being a resource of
both economic and cultural capital.17

The preceding discussion briefly outlined the heritage matrix with its multiple
dimensions, agents, interactions, and intrinsic dissonance. Although it is an elab-
orate and difficult formation to balance and maintain in harmony, nevertheless, it
seems wiser to agree with the argument that still “most heritage, most of the time,
and for most people [should be] harmoniously experienced, nondissonant and an
essential enrichment of their lives.”18 Theorists and practitioners agree that cul-
tural heritage with its many contestations, conflicts, and dissonances can still be
negotiable and successfully manageable on the basis of expanding our vision to-
ward it, achieving dialogue in both theoretical and practical terms, balancing in-
terests, and aiming at mutual gains. However, for the purpose of reaching such a
difficult consensus, inevitably there must be a common framework of reference
that recognizes and accounts for the rich, value-based diversity and the awakening
functional potential of heritage.

THE FUNCTIONAL HERITAGE

Currently, heritage is often identified as “the contemporary purposes of the past”
or “that part of the past that we select in the present for contemporary purposes,
be they economic, cultural, political or social.”19 In addition, as many researchers
in the heritage field assert, the value or worth attributed to heritage is found less
in its intrinsic qualities and merits than in a “complex array of contemporary val-
ues, demands and even moralities”20 that obviously vary to a certain extent with
time and may be susceptible to change.

The following text demonstrates that the concept of heritage evolves in accor-
dance with the changing needs and demands people convey toward it and that
there is a clear omnipresent move toward a people-centered, functional approach
in regard to heritage.21 The discussion will consecutively follow that movement
alongside the previously mentioned axes: from monuments to people, from ob-
jects to functions, and consequently from preservation to sustainable use and
development.

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

213

From Monuments to People

With the democratization of culture and its newly expanded socioanthropological
definition (according to which almost every human activity can be equally cul-
tural, and where every human product can be equally worth preserving) the dis-
tance between cultural heritage as monuments and people as its creators, guardians,
and users has been significantly reduced. Making a point for “a heritage of tran-
sience,” and against the historically dominant, outdated “cult of the [objectified]
monument,” heritage practitioner Miles Glendinning notes that the recognition of
heritage as a “social construction” and “a testament to change” rather than a sym-
bol of material endurance allows us to see it “with a new lightness.”22 In a similar
vein, a critique of the traditionally predominant tangible and state-led aspect of
heritage calls for a better connection between heritage, its management and plan-
ning, and communities’ real life; a better reflection of their values and percep-
tions; and adopting a wider, more inclusive and reactive “joint-up” approach.23
Heritage is broadly conceptualized as “the meanings attached in the present to the
past” and more particularly as “knowledge defined within social, political and cul-
tural contexts . . . that includes the material, the intangible and the virtual”; a me-
dium of communication and a means of transmission of ideas and values, which
produces and distributes cultural codes at both local and global levels.24 A recent
and particularly obvious illustration of this aspect is the “opening up” of muse-
ums with their newly raised positive social potential, educational and democratic,
acting as people’s universities and enhancing community lifelong learning.25

Indeed, cultural heritage has gradually gained the attribution of a surprisingly
wide variety of contemporary human values, thus predetermining the aforemen-
tioned shift in its conceptual development. Heritage is identified as such “only
because its heritage quality is valued by the contemporary generation, both for
itself and for passing on to the future.”26 The care of heritage has been redefined
as a people-centered, “forward-looking activity, in which there is an opportunity
to add value.”27 Alongside its scientific value, associated with specialized knowl-
edge or academic importance, heritage is appreciated in many other ways. Once
valued for being “old, beautiful or created by a major artist,” today heritage has a
more human face; it can also be “dark, painful, dramatic or unpleasant” (the
so-called discord value). It can be dissonant, reflecting cultural diversity rather
than national unity, and emphasize regional and local than national values
and distinctiveness.28 In other words, to make an analogy with Bender’s com-
ment on landscape, cultural heritage can be described as “polyvalent and multi-
vocal,” not just a recording but an active force creative of human agency and
action, sometimes facilitating and sometimes impeding it.29 Most of the time it
can be positive and culturally elevating; but sometimes it can be also a reposi-
tory of negative collective memory, mobilized for either positive purposes (e.g.,
Auschwitz, Hiroshima, The World Trade Center), or selectively neglected and even
destroyed.30

214

TOLINA LOULANSKI

Four main areas of heritage values or significance are commonly recognized:
economic, social, political, and scientific. English Heritage is the government agency
responsible for all aspects of the historic environment in England. One of its key
documents from 1997, Sustaining the Historic Environment, accounts for a richer
specter of values that can be attributed to heritage, broadly defined as “historic
environment” (Table 1).

Another important trend worth mentioning in the attributed significance grows
out of the newly ascribed links between cultural heritage and sustainable human
development, which by definition has its philosophy rooted in the reconciliation
between conservation and development goals and the better balance between eco-
nomic, social, and environmental aspects of development. In this context the mean-
ing of heritage expands even further to be conceived as an “integral part of the
environment,” contributing to “human well-being,” and becoming an important
indicator of the “quality of life.” With the acknowledgement that the environment
has an inherent cultural dimension inseparable from nature, conserving the nat-
ural environment and cultural environment are logically considered parts of the
same process. Hence, the emphasis in conservation has accordingly shifted from

Table 1

Heritage Values

• Cultural values: The historic environment helps define a sense of place and
provides a context for everyday life. Its appreciation and conservation fosters dis-
tinctiveness at local, regional, and national levels. It reflects the roots of our so-
ciety and records its evolution.
• Educational and academic values: The historic environment is a major source
of information about our ancestors, the evolution of their society, and the char-
acteristics of past environments. It provides a means for new generations to un-
derstand the past and their own culture. We can also use archaeology to learn
about the long-term impact (and sustainability or otherwise) of past human ac-
tivity and development, and use this knowledge when planning our future.
• Economic values: The historic environment can make a significant contribu-
tion to economic development by encouraging tourism, but more generally it
also supports viable communities by creating good environments where people
will prefer to live and work.
• Resource values: Longer-lived buildings usually make better use of the energy
and resources that were used during their construction, and reuse is usually more
economic than demolition and redevelopment. Conservation is inherently sus-
tainable.
• Recreational values: The historic environment plays a significant role in pro-
viding for people’s recreation and enjoyment. Increasingly, the past and its re-
mains in the present are a vital part of people’s everyday life and experiences.
• Aesthetic values: Archaeology and historic buildings make a major contribu-
tion to the aesthetic quality of townscapes and landscapes, enhancing the famil-
iar scene of our historic towns and villages, and giving historic depth and interest
in our countryside.

Source: English Heritage 1997.

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

215

“the conservation of discrete monuments in isolation to the sustainable manage-
ment of towns, cities and landscapes as a whole.”31

Although traditionally the preservation of cultural heritage was deprived of
any social meaning and largely an objective in itself, now it is boldly redefined as
an “essential tool for making concrete the global objective of sustainable devel-
opment of society, at the economic, social and environmental level.”32 Through
the magnifying lens of sustainable development and its principles, cultural heri-
tage with its important “contemporaneity value”33 and its unique integrative func-
tional and “socially progressive potential”34 can naturally come out as a dual
force, both an integral part and a vehicle toward sustainable development. Fur-
thermore, being totally compatible with the long-term perspectives of sustain-
able development, it can be recognized as an essential cultural, social, economic,
and environmental asset that can contribute to the sustainable functioning of
the three interrelated systems: nature, society, and economy.35

It is beyond the scope of this article to investigate and fully describe the wide-
ranging, value-based diversity of heritage. Rather, it is important to accept the im-
plication that it is necessary to be aware and recognize the coexistence of these
simultaneous values and be flexible in adopting different perspectives, rather than
simply claiming greater significance of one at the expense of another.

From Objects to Functions

It must be acknowledged that the aforesaid human-centered view has become in-
fluential just recently and has not traditionally been the lingua franca in the field
of heritage protection. Understandably, it can be rather uncomfortable and is ac-
tually contested by scholars who focus on the primacy of the heritage object, con-
sidering that it has a value existing independently of people that should not be
susceptible to any change. In this regard, for a more accurate positioning of the
previously presented thesis, it is necessary to mention the existence of two differ-
ent academic streams that totally conflict on the concept of heritage protection:
object-centrism versus functionalism.

Muller provides a concise discussion on both sides’ arguments. Although object-
centrism prioritizes the cultural object and views its protection as a value in its
own right, functionalism argues that cultural heritage cannot be identified as such
without referring to society and its meaning for societal processes. Object-centrists
insist that it is impossible to determine the function of a cultural object in society,
because “taking human interest and taste as a prime criterion means leaving the se-
lection of cultural heritage to subjective judgments.”36 Thus, even if some part of
the heritage is not considered worth protecting now, it may become tremendously
significant to future generations, as many examples from the past have already proved.
In this case, who is to say what should or should not be preserved? The doctrine of
object-centrists would mean protection of all heritage; and because that seems im-
possible in practical terms, at least it seems logical that some criteria need to be ap-

216

TOLINA LOULANSKI

plied. Therefore, the selection based on the found criteria will inevitably be, in some
sense, “human, thus imperfect” and “not totally divorced from today’s society.”37

And here start the grounds for the opposite functionalist view. Functionalists argue
that cultural heritage cannot exist independently of people, because it is a “purely
human construction,” made and defined by people. In other words, we live in a world
that is “socially constructed and so are the meanings and functions that are assigned
to objects.”38 Obviously, objects cannot and should not be hemmed in within the
category of entities frozen in time. In contrast, previous anthropological research and
the term mutability of objects points to the capacity of objects “to take on new val-
ues as they travel through different communities and various stages of commod-
itization.”39 Similarly, values ascribed to heritage “may change as physical elements
age, as meanings accumulate, and as uses evolve.”40 These insights suggest that even-
tually cultural heritage ceases to be just an object, but it becomes associated with
“whatever fulfils the function of cultural heritage.”41

Although the object-centric approach seems more sensible for guaranteeing the
rights of existence for all cultural heritage, and modern because it prioritizes the in-
tegrity of cultural heritage, it proves to be somewhat illogical and unrealistic; it would
be impossible to define heritage or culture independently from humans and their
history.42 Similarly, protection of cultural heritage becomes meaningless if it cares
only for objects instead of human beings, because “preservation is sought, not for
the sake of the objects, but for the sake of the people for whom they have a mean-
ingful life.”43 To illustrate that inherent link and essential unity between the tangi-
ble (objects) and intangible (living experience and practice) aspects of heritage in
the cultural life of communities, Prott exemplifies how the damage or decontextu-
alization of the former would inevitably lead to the damage or even destruction of
the latter and points to the need to preserve, with objects, the multiple human life-
styles through the “continued re-endorsement of value by use” within communi-
ties. Disuse would often lead to desecration of meaningful community objects such
as those used in ritual ceremonies, musical instruments or textiles as part of spiri-
tual practices, or worshipped religious sculptures of gods, that is why a more ade-
quate interpretation and protection of heritage is needed, based on prioritizing the
traditional values of people for whom it holds special social and cultural meanings.44
In the end, we may need to reiterate that the perspective of heritage is inevita-
bly rooted in the present and is much more about interaction with than preserva-
tion of the past. It is more about people of the present as creators of heritage, who
attribute meaning, value, and functions and select what is to become heritage from
“the infinity of the past.”45 In our time with awakening interest in the substantial,
however fairly dormant, socioeconomic potential of both culture and heritage and
with the increasing evidence of their powers, it is no surprise that the arguments
and approach of the functionalists tend to win over those of the object-centrists,
making the human factor the prevailing factor in heritage.

Functionalism proves to be the commonly accepted course of action in the realm
of heritage policy and practice as well, executed on all local, national, and inter-

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

217

national levels. To illustrate, a recent key document of the Council of Europe, For-
ward Planning: The Functions of Cultural Heritage in a Changing Europe, proves
the preceding tendency and provides some updated, operational definitions of her-
itage46 (Table 2).

The report explicitly emphasizes that the formulated new concepts and defini-
tions add to the older ones and do not replace them. The trends reveal a movement
toward wider definitions and a much wider role of heritage in society. From sep-
arate objects—architecture, archaeology, and movables—heritage has expanded to
landscapes, urban and rural areas, historic environment, and even place. Follow-
ing anthropology’s (though not exclusive to it) new trend of breaking the tradi-
tional boundaries between time, things, people, places, and spaces, cultural heritage
is similarly being reinvented, repositioned and reworked within a new, globally
and locally activated “dense and complex web of people/things/places.”47 It has
reappeared within a meaningful societal context, interpreted as a “continuous thread
which unites our society’s past, present and future.”48

An indicative example is the parallel between current trends in heritage in Japan
and France, where common temporal and spatial features in each country’s her-
itagization process are observed. One is the recent phenomenon of the approach-
ing past, where a heritage status is equally being attributed to things very old, old,
and not so old; “it is all past, no matter if it has happened two thousand years ago,
fifty years ago, or two days ago,”49 which may perfectly refer to heritage, as well. In
Japan, with things from the distant past, an image of the modern society can be
and is displayed in museums. Such is the case of the Municipal Museum in Mat-
sudo city, where the typical apartment house for newly married couples during
the 1960s is realistically reproduced to serve as evidence of the then-new Japanese
lifestyle. Similarly, in Hokudan town, Hyogo prefecture, the disorderly kitchen of
a real house damaged by the 1995 Kobe earthquake was preserved and displayed
in a memorial house. In a similar fashion, the drawing line between heritage and
present times in France becomes fuzzy, revealed by the current tendency of har-
monizing and preserving both old and new, as in the case of the Louvre with its
newly added Glass Pyramid and many other old buildings enhanced by modern
architecture and art. Another omnipresent feature worth mentioning relates to
the ever-expanding definition of heritage and the socially rooted accelerating pro-
cess of heritagization, which can be compared to an “automatic machine”50 that
seems to be working quite the same in both Japan and France. This way, the move-
ment of heritagizing suburban apartment houses inhabited by large immigrant
communities in France bears analogy with the movement by homeless Japanese
people, who have applied to the local authorities demanding a historical heritage
status for their cardboard dwelling houses.

Going back to the trends outlined in the report, the roles of heritage, seen before
in the narrow meaning of symbols of national unity and national pride, have grown
into a broader phenomenon, which can contribute to political ideals, economic pros-
perity, social cohesion, and cultural diversity. Alongside it, heritage has become more

h
t
t
p
s
:
/
/

.

w
w
w
.
c
a
m
b
r
i
d
g
e
o
r
g
/
c
o
r
e
/
t
e
r
m
s
.
 

h
t
t
p
s
:
/
/
d
o

i
.

.

o
r
g
/
1
0
1
0
1
7
/
S
0
9
4
0
7
3
9
1
0
6
0
6
0
0
8
5

l

D
o
w
n
o
a
d
e
d
 
f
r
o
m
h
t
t
p
s
:
/
/

 

w
w
w
.
c
a
m
b
r
i
d
g
e
o
r
g
/
c
o
r
e

.

.
 

U
n
i
v
e
r
s
i
t
y
 
o
f
 
B
r
i
s
t
o

l
 

i

L
b
r
a
r
y
,
 

 

 

o
n
1
3
M
a
r
 
2
0
1
9
a
t
 
2
1
4
4
5
6

:

:

 

j

 

,
 
s
u
b
e
c
t
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
C
a
m
b
r
i
d
g
e
C
o
r
e
 
t
e
r
m
s
 
o
f
 
u
s
e

 

,
 

a
v
a

i
l

l

a
b
e
a
t

 

Table 2

Broad Trends in Cultural Heritage Management

FROM

TO

Monuments
Buildings
Sites
National unity
Generate revenue from visitors
State
Authoritarian
Experts
Single discipline (e.g., buildings, archaeology)
Historical knowledge
Old
Aesthetic
National importance
Monocultural
Narrow range of values
Expert led
State led
Heritage sector
Designation
Separate conservation
Site based
Technical research

Landscapes
Urban areas
Historic environment/cultural heritage
Respect for cultural diversity
Wider economic benefits Social benefits
Region/locality
Democratization Participation
Facilitators
Multiskilled professionals
Management skills
Industrial heritage; postwar buildings
Commemorative value
Local distinctiveness
Values of different cultures
Wide range of values
Community led
Communities/the market/private sector
Environmental sector
Characterization
Integrated conservation
More strategic
Philosophical research

Definition of Heritage

Role of Heritage in Society

Decisions

Professionals

Significance

Interpretation
Responsibilities

Management Practices

Source: Clark 2000, 112.

2
1
8

T
O
L
I
N
A

L
O
U
L
A
N
S
K

I

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

219

democratic and a matter of public concern. Once top-down, authoritarian in style,
and largely made by experts, decisions related to heritage have become more open
and transparent, participatory, and locally and community centered.51 Yet, it must
be admitted that despite the sweeping globalization currents, disappearing bound-
aries, regional transformations, and decentralization processes that foster the au-
tonomy of regional and local entities and communities, the national scale still
remains the dominant heritage scale and the binding block between all other scales.
Apparently, the aforesaid trends look at heritage from a more practical viewpoint,
recognizing its increasing functional potential. They can be indicators of updated
heritage thinking, aimed at better articulating the heritage concept, reflecting more
truthfully its complexity and width, as well as its modern implications. However,
there are certain inevitable and significant differences between countries and re-
gions of the world in terms of the definition and meaning of heritage. For example,
some cultures in Africa, Asia, and the Americas attribute much higher value to in-
tangible than tangible aspect of heritage. Even in Europe alone, there is a unique do-
mestic nuance in the heritage terminology used in the different countries; “French
patrimoine is more personal than English heritage, German Erbgut more patriotic
than Italian lascito.”52 Still, it can be argued that the aforementioned expanding roles
and significance of heritage and the resulting functional approach are omnipresent
features in the field of heritage policy on a global scale.

The functional approach finds legitimation and additional support in some novel
theoretic notions originating from the social sciences’ domain, mainly from eco-
nomics and geography that are gaining recognition, even by the traditionally op-
posing economists and culturalists in the field of heritage studies, and are considered
promising for the establishment of a new agreed conceptual framework. Among
them are total social and economic values of heritage, heritage as a multivalent re-
source, heritage as social and cultural capital, and heritage as a factor in socioeco-
nomic development to name but a few.

TOWARD PURPOSEFUL PRESERVATION,
SUSTAINABLE USE, AND DEVELOPMENT

The current shift in the cultural heritage concept is characterized previously all by
the recognition that like other parts of human culture, heritage has an important
resource value. And although resource is a difficult term, being “one of those words
which are liberally used but elusive of definition,” it could be described as “an
attribute of the environment appraised by man to be of value over time within
constraints imposed by his social, political, economic and institutional frame-
work.”53 Having already mentioned some of the various primary values attrib-
uted to heritage, it is evident that “heritage can be visualized as a resource but
simultaneously, several times so”54 in several often overlapping areas: cultural, eco-
nomic, social, and political.

220

TOLINA LOULANSKI

Tunbridge and Ashworth provide a summary on the resource perspective of her-
itage, defining it as “resource upon which extensive activities or industries have been
constructed.” First, they describe it as a “cultural resource,” because it is either “in-
corporated into culture,” because “the artistic and craft productivity of the past is
included alongside modern artistic creativity in what is identified as culture,” or “be-
cause culture more broadly defined, . . . whenever it was produced, is viewed as her-
itage in the sense that it is regarded . . . suitable for assembly, preservation and
transmission to future generations as inheritance,” as in the case of museums. Sec-
ond, heritage is identified as a “political resource in the creation or support of states
at various spatial jurisdictional scales and the legitimation of their governments and
governing ideologies.” And third, it is an “economic resource supporting economic
activities, either directly as an industry in itself or indirectly as a contributor to the
locational preferences of other economic activities.”55

The perception of heritage as a multivalent resource logically leads to the issue
of its use. Heritage assets are increasingly used in their capacity of resources for a
variety of modern purposes. There are also critics who consider use among the
biggest threats to heritage, possibly leading to commercialization, exploitation, de-
valuation, and destruction; however, there are others who contend that “the great-
est successes in heritage preservation can occur when the heritage element is in
actual use, and thus capable of generating revenue to pay for its preservation” and
that “many if not most of the benefits [derived from cultural heritage] are realized
only in the course of [its] actual use.”56 This connection affords mention of one
of the promising approaches in heritage preservation and rehabilitation, espe-
cially in the case of historic buildings and historic cities, which is the “adaptive
reuse” approach, described as “combining . . . preservation with upgrading, and
above all a rejuvenation of the economic base.”57 However, except for being adap-
tive, use should be sustainable, primarily guaranteeing protection of the core val-
ues of heritage; otherwise it could easily deprive heritage of its cultural and social
meaning, and eventually destroy it.

WHAT HERITAGE USE?

Cultural heritage can be used in a variety of ways. Sometimes the use can mean a
restoration and renovation of a symbolic building to stand as a landmark or show
community achievements, as in the case of an old factory in Birmingham, En-
gland, transformed into a multimedia center employing 300 people; at other times
it can mean developing local festivals, as in Spoleto, Italy.58 Further examples of
heritage use are in Scotland, with the revival of traditional Gaelic music and dance
festivals, or as in the case of the small rural parish Arbuthnott, where a visitor
center was established by the local people to celebrate the life of its most famous
hero, Lewis Gibbon, author of an important series of novels during the 1920s and
1930s. The initiative has turned into a community business providing local em-

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

221

ployment and enhancing community identity and pride.59 English Heritage has
launched a project for the preservation and finding new uses of old cinemas that
have been successfully converted into mixed-arts sites, public houses, charismatic
churches, cinema complexes, shops, museums, nightclubs, leisure centers, and en-
tertainment and sport halls.60 An interesting example for combined public and
private use of cultural heritage is the case of Benedettini Monastery in Italy. After
surviving years of endangered existence caused by a shortage of funds for main-
tenance, it has started a new life as both a national cultural monument and a lo-
cation for the humanities faculty of the local university.61 As a resource heritage is
most intensively used in the cultural industries, tourism, education, publishing
and media, and e-commerce, with plenty of examples illustrating diverse cases of
use in industrialized and developing countries throughout Europe, America, Asia,
and other parts of the world.

It is essential to note that cultural heritage allows various kinds of direct and
indirect use, generating variety of benefits. Transforming the interior of a heritage
building into a museum, hotel, or restaurant is not the only possible way of using
heritage. In a key policy document to promote heritage use, the Japanese Agency
of Cultural Affairs (the government body responsible for cultural heritage matters
in Japan) emphasizes the public nature of heritage and releases comprehensive
guidelines about what heritage use should mean. According to these guidelines,
the public exhibit, provision of access, and dissemination of heritage with the main-
tenance of traditional heritage functions and utilities (as the continuous use of a
heritage house for residential purposes or of a temple for religious events), with
new-purpose heritage uses and functions, are all considered appropriate ways of
using heritage.62

Most recently, the great potential of information and communication technol-
ogies (e.g., digitization) has been widely discussed in the context of further “un-
locking the value” of cultural heritage and inventing new sustainable ways of using
it. These new developments may prove to have a substantial influence on the her-
itage industry and business in general, as revealed in The DigiCult Report of the
European Commission, “Technological Landscapes for Tomorrow’s Cultural Econ-
omy: Unlocking the Value of Cultural Heritage.” In this report scholars and profes-
sionals have suggested as relevant both offline and online (e.g., Internet) markets
for heritage and made an overview of a variety of possible heritage-based prod-
ucts and services (licensing images, copyright fees on reproductions, cultural CD-
ROMs, etc.) that could be supplied to both businesses and individual consumers.
Recently, the emergence of the virtual heritage has further elevated the expecta-
tions and imagination of heritage theorists and practitioners, posing one more
challenge for scholars. Virtual heritage is identified as an “object of knowledge,”
which “has the right to exist per se and has value independent of the material
existence of heritage . . . can bring new flows of goods (virtual goods) and ser-
vices, thus creating economic opportunities to communities.”63 However, it should
be noted that real heritage and virtual heritage are inseparable “two parts of a

222

TOLINA LOULANSKI

whole,” because virtual heritage is just a “new dimension of [the] real heritage
that makes sense only with the existence of the other form.” Yet, digitization could
be one good way to sustainably use heritage resources, because it possesses an “in-
finite operational capability . . . that can last forever, regardless of the kind of op-
eration performed on it” and can significantly add to the heritage value.64

THE CASE OF HERITAGIZED JAPANESE MEDIEVAL FOLDING

SCREENS RAKUCHU RAKUGAI

The following text refers to a somewhat peculiar but telling example from Japan
to demonstrate the increasing social relevance and functional potential of heritage
and its various uses. In Japan the intangible aspect of heritage has been tradition-
ally regarded as equally important, if not more so, compared to the tangible. The
object has always been behind the primacy of cultural and social meanings, his-
torical narratives, traditional and modern functions, transfer of knowledge, and
skills necessary for its interminable re-creation in the future. Japanese historic build-
ings, which are repeatedly rebuilt with traditional materials and in traditional ways
without compromising their authenticity, well illustrate that attitude.

The example that follows features the specific case of objects of art tradition-
ally deemed incompatible with any practical applications or modern uses. The
cultural heritage in mention is a unique category of medieval paintings, usually
executed on large folding screens, presenting views of Kyoto and its suburbs.
They are known as Rakuchu Rakugai screens, translated as “Inside-and-Outside-
of-Kyoto” paintings. They are considered one of the most brilliant genres of Jap-
anese art, depicting the old capital and its environs from a bird’s-eye perspective,
with historic landmarks, colorful festivals, and vivid street life portrayed in as-
tonishing detail. These encyclopedic visualizations include not only famous sce-
nic spots and important monuments but also people from all walks of life: men,
women, children, and elderly engaged in various routines of work, mercantile,
and leisure activities with their specific customs, costumes, and modes of trans-
portation. They served as settings for seasonal activities, festivals, and entertain-
ments in Kyoto and were inventively used as space and time dividers in the dark
halls of the military lords’ castles and later in rich merchants’ houses. Lavishly
decorated with gold, they symbolized power, political legitimacy, and ultimate
supremacy of the warlords who have commissioned their creation. Although the
style of the screens has changed through the years, reflecting changes in political
power and society under consecutive rules, invariably the great masters of paint-
ing have continually sought to immortalize the city in its most glorious times
and truthfully portray its various stages, moods, and shapes. Thus, now we can
become witnesses of Kyoto reviving from the ashes after long-lasting civil wars,
Kyoto rapidly developing, Kyoto maturing, and eventually Kyoto declining and
transforming.

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

223

Drawing on Greffe’s view of the expanded contemporary role of art and its ben-
eficial effect on the overall development of regions and countries, it can be dem-
onstrated that apart from their artistic, aesthetic, and cultural value, the screens
possess a unique development value in economic and social terms, plus an activity
value, with art as the starting point of different chains of activities.65 Our modern
perspective reveals a change in the perceptions toward the screens from beautiful
artistic items preserved and displayed in museums to a unique type of cultural
heritage with wider significance, conveying multiple meanings and messages to
people, with a variety of modern social and economic roles, purposes, and func-
tions attributed by our contemporaries in Japan. These changes verify enhanced
awareness and pride in local heritage, rediscovered cultural roots and identity, and
intended activation of the creative talents and skills of artists and entrepreneurs,
all of which results in invigorating cultural and social life and boosting the local
economy. Further, they help add to the attractiveness of place for both local citi-
zens and visitors and are imaginatively and wisely employed by all kinds of re-
sourceful entrepreneurs, capitalizing on their heritage value. Among others is a
publishing company that has developed a software employing one of the most
representative screens (not in display for a long time) as resource. The software
allows the viewer to thematically explore the screen in detail and through the vir-
tual reality (VR) recreation of old-days Kyoto to take a three-dimensional stroll
along its streets. This new technology is said to serve various purposes, from ed-
ucation and scientific research to sheer entertainment. Another is an interior de-
sign company, successfully merging traditional Japanese interior design styles and
materials with creative innovation. They reproduce Rakuchu Rakugai images and
motifs on various environments like walls, wallpapers, and furniture. Similarly, a
major Japanese textile company has recreated some of the screens in full size on
textile fabrics. Its tapestries adorn the halls of castles and hotel lobbies, conveying
the heritage message to visitors from Japan and abroad. Most recently, the Raku-
chu Rakugai theme was used in the marketing strategy of a major Japanese elec-
tronics company on its newest digital plasma television sets, launched just before
the start of 2006 Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) World
Cup in Germany. In the advertisement a television screen of a still Rakuchu Ra-
kugai painting suddenly transforms into a field with historic characters in original
outfit playing soccer. In its own interpretation the company perceives the screens
as the kind of media that used to send news to people in the past, while now it is
(or should be) replaced by plasma television screens.

The screens as a motif prove efficient in the tourism industry as well where they
are employed as miniatures of the place and the city and symbols of its unique char-
acter and distinctiveness. They appear as replicas in different public places such as
thematic museums, subway stations, municipal buildings, hotels, and galleries. An-
other peculiar area of new use for Rakuchu Rakugai is in science and education where
they have already become a common subject for research and a cross point to join
specialists working in isolated areas in multidisciplinary projects. The screens are

224

TOLINA LOULANSKI

gaining acclaim as valuable and reliable historic records and indispensable data
sources among scholars and researchers in history, archaeology and geography, so-
ciology and anthropology, cultural studies and art history, architecture and town
planning, design, and the like. Furthermore, they inspire and creatively empower
contemporary Japanese artists and artisans, who find the city theme meaningful and
compelling. Among them are a distinguished modern artist, who has devoted nearly
10 years to create a series of modern versions of the original screens, and a tradi-
tional textile dyer from Kyoto, who in reaction to the rapid modernization of the city-
scape has endeavored to recreate the classic image of a strong and powerful yet
delicate old Kyoto using traditional techniques. The latter has accomplished a col-
lection of 17 different designs and patterns, depicting famous scenic spots and land-
marks that decorate official and ceremonial kimonos and obi sashes.

The case of medieval Japanese folding screens has illustrated the widening spec-
trum of modern uses for heritage, as well as the increasing awareness and drive to
refer and build on it, which develops the heritage value even further. It has shown
that heritage is actually more about the present than the past and that it must be
alive and functional to retain its worth and integrity. To reiterate Handler, to save
it and conserve it for the future, we need to do something new today.66

RECONCILING HERITAGE AND DEVELOPMENT

The Rakuchu Rakugai example demonstrates the transformation of heritage from
single isolated objects, silently housed between museum walls, to much bigger,
all-encompassing representations of the whole city and its people, with a meaning
for society’s present and future. Undoubtedly, if put together for a common goal,
these locally powered and locality-empowering initiatives could serve the forma-
tion of a wider integrative community-based development strategy and could tes-
tify for an even bigger role for heritage in local, regional, and wider developmental
contexts. And indeed, more than just “the contemporary uses of the past,” heritage
is further identified as a powerful economic and social resource, a development
asset that can catalyze local-level development, provide employment, generate in-
come, revitalize local urban and rural areas, enhance environmental protection,
and strengthen communities’ social capital.67 It is accredited with significant re-
source and developmental values that additionally foster its use.

With the context and meaning of development rapidly evolving and culture mov-
ing to center stage, the old commodity-centered notion of economic develop-
ment, traditionally measured by the advancement of material well-being, is giving
way to a new people-centered strategy of human development, with environmen-
tal, social, and cultural development regarded as part of a bigger whole and de-
fined as sustainable human development. In this new context, the traditional divide
between heritage preservation and socioeconomic development (it is either his-
toric preservation or development)68 has gradually faded, leading to their desir-

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

225

able reconciliation. Heritage preservation is said to allow the community to
participate in the positive benefits of a globalized economy, while resisting the bad
impacts of globalized culture, and is thus acknowledged as an effective vehicle for
development, consistent with all principles of twenty-first century socioeconomic
development: globalization, localization, diversity, sustainability, and responsibil-
ity. Moreover, heritage preservation reinforces the senses of quality in communi-
ties (sense of place, identity, evolution, ownership or share, and community).69
Instead of being just a burden to national budgets, heritage is gradually trans-
forming into a significant “value-adding industry,” attracting investments with po-
tential to become “the most significant product of the 21st century, determining
communities’ future.”70 The tendency to reconcile heritage and development in
the field of policy has become characteristic on national, international, regional,
and local levels, in urban and rural environments; and in practice heritage assets
are already actively used for meeting a wide range of economic, environmental,
social, and community development objectives.

From an economic perspective, heritage is recognized as both engine and cata-
lyst of socioeconomic development in a theoretical framework, focusing on three
main economic dimensions. First, heritage is identified as “economic sector in it-
self,” often referred to as “the heritage industry . . . using resources, producing prod-
ucts, and generating returns in profits, [incomes] and jobs.” Second, it is also
considered “one element in economic development alongside others, frequently
exercising a catalytic or integrating role in development projects,” because of its
capacity to attract economic activities and accommodate economic functions. Fi-
nally, it is defined as an “instrument in the management of economies at various
spatial scales from the international to the local, as for example in the creation
and promotion of place images for dominant economic purposes.”71 In a broader
context, heritage as a hybrid knowledge grounds the elements of the current knowl-
edge economy and is able to moderate the hasty pace of urban change, making
urban environments more livable and distinct by conserving local culture and tra-
ditions, acting as a guide to shape new development.72

Nevertheless, the developmental role of heritage, especially in its economic as-
pect, still shows to be a controversial theme among scholars. The idea of relating
heritage to development and employing it for achieving development objectives is
considered inappropriate, absurd, or simply dangerous. Some critics argue that
economic development could have a parasitical effect on culture and that the her-
itage value in economic development can devalue other intrinsic heritage values;
others look at heritage and development as antagonistic and impossible to recon-
cile, considering the growing interest in heritage more as a symptom of a climate
of decline, and society’s failure to face the economic challenges of the present and
build a different future.73

The critic’s arguments are understandable and should not be ignored. Indeed,
to argue that cultural heritage can only enhance socioeconomic development, or
that development and increasing heritage investments can only foster heritage pres-

226

TOLINA LOULANSKI

ervation would be an oversimplification. Plenty of empirical evidence indicates
that cultural heritage can “both stimulate and retard socio-economic develop-
ment,” as also development may both “support and destroy heritage resources.”74
However, the point here is somewhat different. Instead of making final judgments
in favor of either divorcing or marrying both, it is more important to acknowledge
the necessity of reviewing the persisting one-dimensional, short-sighted, and sector-
or discipline-biased views and practices; accommodating new demands; and search-
ing for ways to successfully integrate heritage and development in sustainable man-
ner. Unlocking the economic and social potential of cultural heritage through its
use can be the most effective way to safeguard it, provided its core value is pre-
served and sustainability is guaranteed.

Such ideas have become widespread, particularly in the field of regional and
urban planning, with the growing recognition that heritage conservation is an in-
herent dimension of sustainable development in both industrialized and develop-
ing countries. A common perception among urban planners is that the sustainable
future of any historic place should be intrinsically linked to its past, not just in the
continuity of its tangible and intangible heritage but also in its living culture that
has created and still continues to shape its distinct character, townscape, and way
of life.75 The city of Kyoto proves the validity of such an argument. In its strategy
for rebirth, which has become Japan’s national policy as well, the city is compared
to none in the world for its exquisite natural features, 1,200-year history, rich con-
centration of culture and arts, and unwithering creative power. The people are
committed to preserve, restore, and create anew the cityscape and landscape of
Kyoto, bring back its streets to the good old days, bury disfiguring power lines, and
fully preserve rich green forests surrounding the city. And there could hardly be
any better reference and source for community empowerment and activation of
this rebirth strategy than the heritage of Rakuchu Rakugai. One of the first ini-
tiatives in this direction was to use Rakuchu Rakugai as a city map in a program
organized by Kyoto National Highway Office, with the support of the municipal
authorities and local universities, aimed to study and rediscover the city history by
walking along the old roads to experience them just as they were.76 So far more
than several hundred people, locals and visitors, have taken part in the explor-
atory tours; and many more have applied to participate. Except for local commu-
nity education and knowledge building, promotion of identity maintenance and
cultural continuity, and various planning and regeneration activities, the screens
are also used for democratic and civil rights education. They serve as a source of
reference in a public learning program on the issues of Japan’s medieval culture
and the discrimination of people in the past, with the aim of making insightful
reflections and links with the modern Japanese society.

Apparently the artistic creations referred to here have transcended to a higher
pluralistic semantic level and transformed into a unique hybrid type of heritage,
containing both tangible (artifacts) and intangible aspects (lively visualizing social
practices, community life, values, beliefs, etc.). Dissimilarly to Lowenthal’s claim

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

227

of the past’s foreignness, the past revealed through the Japanese Rakuchu Rakugai
is not a “foreign country” anymore.77 This past lives within the present and projects
itself onto the future. It will continue to be read in a modern way, constantly re-
invented, revisited, reevaluated, and reinterpreted. Kyoto from the screens is noth-
ing like a ghost town. On the contrary, it is reemerging and continues to flourish,
charged with vital creative energy and strong will for life. Its people, like the peo-
ple on the screens, are creators of their own destiny. The heartbeat of the city,
immortalized in Rakuchu Rakugai, was generously bestowed on them. They are
again committed to revive their city and give birth to a new culture, rooted and
inspired by their long historic traditions, and to new encounters and links be-
tween heritage, technology, industry, and everyday life.

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

This article, located within the vast and controversial realm of heritage concep-
tualization, has tried to outline the concept of heritage as a constantly evolving
and complex unity of perceptions, with dynamism, elasticity and multiplicity
emerging as its primary intrinsic features. Drawing on Brett’s comments about
history being “a verb” and “not an abstract noun,” which is “not given, but made,”
heritage is identified as a “cultural process,” and a “human condition” with people
always at its center.78 Likewise, it is described as “never inert,” because “people
engage with it, re-work it, appropriate it and contest it.”79 Surviving the long-
lasting cult of objects and monuments dominant in heritage thinking thus far,
heritage has finally re-emerged within a social context, as is increasingly perceived
as a “human” and “social construction,” more a “testament to change” rather than
a symbol of material endurance.80 Witnessing all these recently observed trends in
the conceptual development of heritage, it has been argued that the heritage con-
ceptual focus has thus shifted in a newer functional direction.

Already a territory of different domains—cultural, social, economic, and environ-
mental—the reexamination and readaptation of the heritage conceptual frame-
work would inevitably need to introduce and integrate multiple perspectives of
heritage, applying multidisciplinary methods and analytical tools. Although the
socioeconomic research of heritage is recent, updated integrative concepts like some
of those mentioned could significantly contribute for such a framework and are
likely to address the problem of undertheorization in the field. Already here, it is
undeniable that heritage not only exists but is also tightly bound within societal
and economic realities as well, having significant socioeconomic dimension and
functions. The latter should not be neglected as a fact by either heritage theorists
or practitioners, because as cultural economists agree, “economic factors shape
the possibilities of heritage conservation’s practice in fundamental ways, by influ-
encing decisions, shaping policy, encouraging or discouraging the use of heritage,
enabling conservation through financing, giving incentives to stewardship, and so

228

TOLINA LOULANSKI

on.”81 Obviously, under the present circumstances, ignoring the apparent func-
tional socioeconomic dimension of heritage for any reason could endanger the
survival of heritage more than help it.

Bridges between academic disciplines as well as between heritage stakeholders, sec-
tors, and scales are to be built to achieve a better understanding of the complex na-
ture of heritage and its multiple interactions. Only then it could become possible to
control, plan, manage, and sustain heritage; otherwise,“it will control us,” notes Lo-
wenthal, recognizing the huge potential of heritage for both good and evil.82 In the
end, however, a precautionary remark must be made: Despite the increasing ten-
dencies to place a heavy functional load on heritage and the elevated anticipations
of multiple arising benefits, heritage is not a magic wand or panacea for the many
aches and illnesses of our present-day societies. It remains vulnerable and mostly in
need of care. Moreover, because the theory of heritage is still rather young, mostly
preoccupied in catching up, and correcting front-leading policies and practice, the
danger of an overload and exhaustion of its highly praised potential is evermore real.
In this vein the issue of sustainability in terms of cultural heritage comes forth as an
issue of primary importance and a rich area for further research.

ENDNOTES

1. Lowenthal, The Heritage Crusade, 10, 3.
2. Pearce, “The Construction and Analysis,” 4:1.
3. The terms heritage and cultural heritage are used synonymously throughout the article for

readability.

4. Larkham, “Heritage as Planned and Conserved,” 85.
5. Graham, “Heritage as Knowledge,” 39:1004.
6. The Difficult Types of Cultural Heritage at UNESCO Culture Portal, available at 具www.unesco.

org/culture/heritage典, accessed August 17, 2005.

7. Herbert, Heritage, Tourism and Society.
8. Merriman, Beyond the Glass Case, 8.
9. Throsby, Economics and Culture, 75; Murty and Suchetam, Cultural Heritage: A Fusion, 1.
10. Daher, “Dismantling a Community’s Heritage,” 105–28; Harvey, “Heritage Pasts and Heritage

Presents,” 7:320.

11. Ashworth and Larkham, Building a New Heritage, 16.
12. Tunbridge and Ashworth, Dissonant Heritage, 20.
13. See Poirrier, “Heritage and Cultural Policy in France,” 9:219.
14. See Timothy and Boyd, Heritage Tourism, 3.
15. Ashworth and Howard, European Heritage Planning and Management, 16, 30, 60.
16. Tunbridge and Ashworth, Dissonant Heritage, 21.
17. Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge, A Geography of Heritage, 22.
18. Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge, A Geography of Heritage, 26.
19. Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge, A Geography of Heritage, 2.
20. Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge, A Geography of Heritage, 17.
21. The use of the term functional differs from the known functionalism perspective in anthro-
pology; and it is closer to the anthropological semiotic conception of culture, where culture is per-
ceived not so much as “things” but as “symbolic processes.” Hence, the cultural links to the past,
rather than being “physical” are conceived as “semiotic,” existing “only in the present and only within
present day semiotic activities.” Handler, “Cultural Property,” 3:355.

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

229

22. Glendinning, “Beyond the Cult of the Monument,” 70:15.
23. Turpenny, “Cultural Heritage, an Ill-defined Concept?” 10.
24. Graham, “Heritage as Knowledge,” 39:1003, 1006.
25. Merriman, Beyond the Glass Case, 1991.
26. Lichfield, Economics in Urban Conservation, 167.
27. Clark and Drury, “From Monuments to People,” 114.
28. Clark, “From Regulation to Participation,” 104.
29. Bender, “Time and Landscape,” 43:S103.
30. Meskell, “Negative Heritage,” 75:558.
31. See Clark and Drury, “From Monuments to People,” 114.
32. Pickard, European Cultural Heritage, 90.
33. Greffe, Arts and Artists, 163.
34. Pendlebury, Townsend, and Gilroy, “The Conservation of English Cultural Built Heritage,”

10:11.

35. Loulanski, Cultural Heritage in the Context of Sustainable Development, 2005.
36. As quoted in Muller, “Cultural Heritage Protection,” 7:397.
37. Muller, “Cultural Heritage Protection,” 7:398.
38. Muller, “Cultural Heritage Protection,” 7:398.
39. Glass, “Return to Sender,” 9:134.
40. Avrami, “Values and Heritage Conservation,” 15:19.
41. Muller, “Cultural Heritage Protection,” 7:399.
42. Muller, “Cultural Heritage Protection,” 7:405.
43. See Fechner, “The Fundamental Aims,” 7:378; Glass, “Return to Sender,” 9:126; and Prott, “The

International Movement of Cultural Objects,” 12:231.

44. Prott, “The International Movement of Cultural Objects,” 12:236.
45. Graham, “Heritage as Knowledge,” 39:1004.
46. See Clark, “From Regulation to Participation,” 112.
47. Bender, “Landscapes On-The-Move,” 76.
48. As quoted in Poirrier, “Heritage and Cultural Policy in France,” 9:219.
49. Ogino, The Sociology of Cultural Heritage, xv, my translation.
50. Ogino, The Sociology of Cultural Heritage, 14.
51. See Clark, “From Regulation to Participation,” 112.
52. Lowenthal, The Heritage Crusade, 4.
53. Lichfield and O’Riordan in Lichfield, Economics in Urban Conservation, 318.
54. Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge, A Geography of Heritage, 17.
55. Tunbridge and Ashworth, Dissonant Heritage, 34–35.
56. See Netzer, “The Economic Implications of Heritage,” 4:4; and Koboldt, “Optimizing the Use

of Cultural Heritage,” 56.

57. Serageldin, “Financing the Adaptive Reuse,” 70.
58. Landry, “Forward to the Past,” 4:8, 28.
59. See The Grassic Gribbon Centre in Arbuthnott at

centreinfo.htm典, accessed June 9, 2005.

具http://www.grassicgibbon.com/

60. See English Heritage, Picture Palaces, 17.
61. Pignataro and Rizzo, “The Political Economy of Rehabilitation,” 91–106.
62. See Japanese Agency for Cultural Affairs, Guidelines.
63. Zancheti, “Values, Built Heritage and Cyberspace,” 215:26.
64. Zancheti, “Values, Built Heritage and Cyberspace,” 215:25.
65. Greffe, Arts and Artists from an Economic Perspective, 20.
66. Handler, “Cultural Property and Culture Theory,” 3:355.
67. World Bank. “Culture in Sustainable Development,” 15.
68. Rypkema, Culture, Historic Preservation.
69. Rypkema, Culture, Historic Preservation.

230

TOLINA LOULANSKI

70. See Cernea, Cultural Heritage and Development, 45; and Ogino, The Sociology of Cultural Her-

itage, 277.

71. Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge, A Geography of Heritage, 155.
72. See Graham, “Heritage as Knowledge,” 39:1016; and Throsby, “Cultural Heritage as Financial

Asset,” 3.

73. See Mosetto, Moody, and Hewison as quoted in Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge, A Geog-

raphy of Heritage,155–156.

74. Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge, A Geography of Heritage, 156.
75. See Nasser, “Planning for Urban Heritage Places,” 17:467–479.
76. Available at Kyoto National Highway Office webpage (in Japanese) at 具http://www.kyoto.kkr.

mlit.go.jp/典 accessed February 17, 2006.

77. Lowenthal, The Past is a Foreign Country.
78. As quoted in Harvey, “Heritage Pasts and Heritage Presents,” 7:336.
79. Bender, “Introduction: Landscape-Meaning and Action,” 3.
80. Glendinning, “Beyond the Cult of the Monument,” 70:15.
81. See Mason, “Economics and Heritage Conservation,” 4.
82. Lowenthal, “The Heritage Crusade,” 2–3.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ang, Ien. “Intertwining Histories: Heritage and Diversity.” Australian Humanities Review. 具http://
www.lib.latrobe.edu.au/AHR/archive/Issue-December-2001/ang.html典 (2001) accessed August 4, 2004.

Ashworth, Gregory, and Peter Howard. European Heritage Planning and Management. Exeter, En-
gland: Intellect, 1999.

Ashworth, Gregory, and Peter Larkham, eds. Building a New Heritage: Tourism, Culture and Identity
in the New Europe. London: Routledge, 1994.

Avrami, Erica. “Values and Heritage Conservation,” Conservation (The GCI Newsletter), 15, no. 2
(2000): 19–21.

Bender, Barbara. “Introduction: Landscape—Meaning and Action.” In Landscape: Politics and Per-
spectives, edited by Barbara Bender, 1–18. Oxford: Berg, 1993.

———. “Landscapes On-The-Move.” Journal of Social Archaeology 1, no. 1 (2001): 75–89.

———. “Time and Landscape.” Current Anthropology, 43 supplement (2002): S103–S112.

Cernea, Michael. Cultural Heritage and Development: A Framework for Action in the Middle East and
North Africa, World Bank Publications, 2001.

Clark, Kate. “From Regulation to Participation: Cultural Heritage, Sustainable Development and Cit-
izenship.” In Forward Planning: The Functions of Cultural Heritage in a Changing Europe, 103–113.
Council of Europe, 2000. 具http://www.coe.int/T/E/Cultural_Co-operation/Heritage/Resources/ECC-
PAT(2001)161.pdf典 (2000) accessed August 17, 2005.

Clark, Kate, and Paul Drury. “From Monuments to People: The Functions of Cultural Heritage in a
Changing Europe.” In Forward Planning: The Functions of Cultural Heritage in a Changing Europe,
113–117.Council of Europe,2000.具http://www.coe.int/T/E/Cultural_Co-operation/Heritage/Resources/
ECC-PAT(2001)161.pdf典 accessed August 17, 2005.

Daher, Rami Farouk. “Dismantling a Community’s Heritage—Heritage Tourism: Conflict, Inequal-
ity, and a Search for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization.” In Tourism and Heritage Relation-

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

231

ships: Global, National and Local Perspectives, edited by Mike Robinson, 105–128. Great Britain:
Business Education Publishers, 2000.

English Heritage. Sustaining the Historic Environment: New Perspectives on the Future. London: En-
glish Heritage, 1997.

———. Picture Palaces, New Life for Old Cinemas. London: English Heritage, 1999.

European Commission. The DigiCult Report: Technological Landscapes for Tomorrow’s Cultural
Economy—Unlocking The Value of Cultural Heritage. European Commission, 2002. http://
digicult.salzburgresearch.at/downloads/dc_fullreport_230602_screen.pdf (2002) accessed August 17,
2005.

Fechner, Frank. “The Fundamental Aims of Cultural Property Law.” International Journal of Cultural
Property 7, no. 2 (1998): 376–394.

Glass, Aaron. “Return to Sender: On the Politics of Cultural Property and the Proper Address of
Art.” Journal of Material Culture 9, no. 2 (2004): 115–139.

Glendinning, Miles. “Beyond the Cult of the Monument.” Context 70 (2001): 15–18.

Graham, Brian. “Heritage as Knowledge: Capital or Culture?” Urban Studies, 39, no. 5–6 (2002):
1003–1017.

Graham, Brian, Gregory Ashworth, and John Tunbridge. A Geography of Heritage: Power, Culture
and Economy. London: Arnold, 2000.

Greffe, Xavier. Arts and Artists from an Economic Perspective. Paris: UNESCO Publishing, 2002.

Handler, Richard. “Cultural Property and Culture Theory.” Journal of Social Archaeology, 3, no. 3
(2003): 353–365.

Harvey, David. “Heritage Pasts and Heritage Presents: Temporality, Meaning and the Scope of Her-
itage Studies.” International Journal of Heritage Studies, 7, no. 4 (2001): 319–338.

Herbert, David. Heritage, Tourism and Society. Great Britain: Pinter, 1997.

Japanese Agency for Cultural Affairs. Guidelines on the Use of Cultural Properties (Buildings) [in Jap-
anese], 1996. 具http://www.bunka.go.jp典 (1996) accessed September 19, 2003.

Koboldt, Christian. “Optimizing the Use of Cultural Heritage.” In Economic Perspectives on Cultural
Heritage, edited by Michael Hutter and Ilde Rizzo, 50–73. London: Macmillan Press, 1997.

Landry, Charles. “Forward to the Past: Cultural Heritage as a Trigger for Renewal?” Urban Age 4, no.
4 (1997): 8, 28.

Larkham, Peter. “Heritage as Planned and Conserved.” In Heritage, Tourism and Society, edited by
David Herbert, 85–116. London: Pinter, 1997.

Lichfield, Nathaniel. Economics in Urban Conservation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Loulanski, Tolina. “Cultural Heritage in the Context of Sustainable Development.” PhD thesis pro-
posal, Hokkaido University, 2005.

Lowenthal, David. The Past is a Foreign Country. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

———. The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1998.

232

TOLINA LOULANSKI

Mason, Randall. “Economics and Heritage Conservation: Concepts, Values, and Agendas for Re-
search.” In Economics and Heritage Conservation, edited by Randy Mason, 2–18. Los Angeles: The
Getty Conservation Institute, 1999.

Merriman, Nick. Beyond the Glass Case: The Past, The Heritage and The Public in Britain. Leicester:
Leicester University Press, 1991.

Meskell, Lynn. “Negative Heritage and Past Mastering in Archaeology.” Anthropological Quarterly 75,
no. 3 (2002): 557–574.

Muller, Markus. “Cultural Heritage Protection: Legitimacy, Property, and Functionalism.” Inter-
national Journal of Cultural Property 7, no. 2 (1998): 395–409.

Murty, M.N. and Murty Sucheta. Cultural Heritage: A Fusion of Human Skill Capital and Social Cap-
ital. Institute of Economic Growth, University of Delhi Enclave, 2002. 具http://ieg.nic.in/dis_
mnm_60.pdf典 (2002) accessed November 5, 2004.

Nasser, Noha. “Planning for Urban Heritage Places: Reconciling Conservation, Tourism, and Sus-
tainable Development.” Journal of Planning Literature 17, no. 4 (2003): 467–479.

Netzer, Dick. “The Economic Implications of Heritage Preservation.” The Urban Age 4 (1997): 4.

Ogino, Masahiro, ed. The Sociology of Cultural Heritage: From the Louvre to Hiroshima Dome. [In
Japanese]. Tokyo: Shin-Yo-Sha, 2002.

Pearce, Susan. “The Construction and Analysis of the Cultural Heritage: Some Thoughts.” Inter-
national Journal of Heritage Studies 4, no. 1 (1998): 1–9.

Pendlebury, John, Tim Townsend, and Rose Gilroy. “The Conservation of English Cultural Built
Heritage: A Force for Social Inclusion?” International Journal of Heritage Studies, 10, no. 1 (2004):
11–31.

Pickard, Robert. European Cultural Heritage (Volume II). A Review of Policies and Practice. Stras-
bourg: Council of Europe Publishing, 2002.

Pignataro, Giacomo, and Ilde Rizzo. “The Political Economy of Rehabilitation: The Case of the Bene-
dettini Monastery.” In Economic Perspectives on Cultural Heritage, edited by Michael Hutter and Ilde
Rizzo, 91–106. London: Macmillan Press, 1997.

Poirrier, Philippe. “Heritage and Cultural Policy in France under The Fifth Republic.” International
Journal of Cultural Policy 9, no. 2 (2003): 215–225.

Prott, Lyndel. “The International Movement of Cultural Objects.” International Journal of Cultural
Property, 12 (2005): 225–248.

Rypkema, Donovan. “Culture, Historic Preservation and Economic Development in the 21st Cen-
tury.” Leadership Conference on Conservancy and Development, Kunming and Lijiang, China, Sep-
tember 12–18, 1999.

Serageldin, Ismail. “Financing the Adaptive Reuse of Culturally Significant Areas.” In The Challenge
to Our Cultural Heritage: Why preserve the Past? edited by Yudhishthir Raj Isar, 67–95. Smithsonian
Institution Press; Paris: UNESCO, 1986.

Serageldin, Ismail. Very Special Places: the Architecture and Economics of Intervening in Historic Cities,
23–35. Washington DC: World Bank, 1999.

Stanley-Baker, Joan. Japanese Art. United Kingdom: Thames & Hudson, 2000.

REVISING THE CONCEPT FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE

233

Throsby, David. “Cultural Capital.” Journal of Cultural Economics 23 (1999): 3–12.

———. Economics and Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

———. “Cultural Heritage as Financial Asset in Strategies for Urban Development and Poverty Al-
leviation.” International Conference for Integrating Urban Knowledge & Practice, Gothenburg, Swe-
den, May 29–June 3, 2005.
Timothy, Dallen J. and Stephen W. Boyd. Heritage Tourism. London: Pearson Education Limited/
Prentice Hall, 2003.

Tunbridge, John and Gregory Ashworth. Dissonant Heritage: The Management of the Past as a Re-
source in Conflict. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.

Turpenny, Michael. “Cultural Heritage, an Ill-defined Concept? A Call for Joined-Up Policy.” Inter-
national Journal of Heritage Studies 10, no. 3 (2004): 295–307.

World Bank. “Culture in Sustainable Development: A Framework for Action.” Washington, DC: World
Bank, 1999.

Zancheti, Silvio Mendes. “Values, Built Heritage and Cyberspace.” Museum International No. 215, 54,
no. 3 (2002): 19–28.


