    (2016)   23:  1– 31 . Printed in the USA. 
 Copyright © 2016                      

    The Destruction of Cultural Property 
in the Syrian Conflict: Legal Implications 
and Obligations 
       Emma     Cunliffe   *  

   Nibal     Muhesen    †   

   Marina     Lostal    ‡   

    

         Abstract:     This article comes as the conflict in Syria has entered its fifth year, 
bringing with it loss of life and the displacement of the Syrian people as well 
as extensive damage to, and destruction of, the country’s cultural heritage. 
This article will first provide an overview and explanation of the national 
and international legal framework for protecting cultural property in 
conflict as it applies to the Syrian State and the non-State actors involved, 
using examples from the whole conflict, including the recent actions of 
Da’esh. Second, we demonstrate that the destruction of all types of cultural 
property, regardless of its importance, can be considered a prosecutable 
violation of these laws, and we examine the possibilities for prosecution. 
Following from this discussion, we question whether the existing framework 
can be considered effective and consider the role the international heritage 
community can play.      

  *  Endangered Archaeology in the Middle East and North Africa ,  Institute of Archaeology ,  University 
of Oxford ,  United Kingdom ; Email:  emma.cunliffe@arch.ox.ac.uk  
   †   Archaeology and Heritage of Syria ,  Department of Cross-Cultural and Regional Studies ,  Carsten 
Niebuhr Center for Multi-Cultural Heritage ,  University of Copenhagen ,  Denmark  
   ‡   Lecturer in International Law ,  Hague University ,  The Netherlands  

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:     We are grateful to the University of Copenhagen and to Ingolf Thuesen, 
the head of the Department of Cross-Cultural and Regional Studies, for his continuous support for 
the work on Syrian archaeology and heritage. We are also grateful to Jack Williams, Georgia State 
University College of Law, for his comments on an early version of this article, and to Roger O’Keefe, 
for his comments on military necessity. 

1

 2   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

  The  destruction  and  protection  of  cultural  heritage  in  armed  conflicts  has  been 
a feature of war for thousands of years and has received increasing international 
focus over the last two decades. While cultural heritage is threatened during peace-
time, the severest damage takes place during social disorder and conflict, not only 
resulting in the loss of something unique and irreplaceable but also psychologically 
affecting the communities linked to it  1   and potentially causing increased violence.  2   
Furthermore,  it  is  linked  to  cultural  cleansing—the  removal  of  communities  by 
eliminating their presence in the landscape, leaving them with no “home” to return 
to, should such an event become possible.  3   Cultural protection, on the other hand, 
is increasingly linked to the recovery of psychological trauma and peace building 
during  and  after  conflict,  in  addition  to  the  economic  tourism  benefits  it  can 
provide.  4   

 In contrast, it is sometimes argued that the targeting of sites and monuments 
is irrelevant, given the other extensive human rights abuses that often accompany it. 
However,  international  humanitarian  law  (IHL),  which  is  the  body  of  interna-
tional law that regulates the conduct of armed conflict and seeks to limit its effects, 
protecting people who are not part of the hostilities, binds those involved in 
a  conflict to respect cultural property and promote its protection. The violation 
of this core obligation constitutes a war crime, and, under certain circumstances, 
its destruction may even amount to crimes against humanity, as explained by the 
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia:

  When perpetrated with the requisite discriminatory intent, [destruction] 
amounts to an attack on the very religious identity of the people. As such 
it manifests a nearly pure expression of the notion of “crimes against 
humanity” for all of humanity is indeed injured by the destruction.  5    

  The  conflict  in  Syria  has  led  to  hundreds  of  thousands  of  deaths,  millions  of 
displaced  people,  and  the  damage  and  destruction  of  the  country’s  cultural 
heritage. Although the generally accepted start date is 15 March 2011, “armed 
conflict” —the point at which a conflict moves beyond an internal disturbance and 
IHL becomes applicable—was not officially declared until June 2012.  6   The cultural 
heritage in Syria has been profoundly involved in the conflict since the beginning, 
when the eighth-century al-Omari mosque was shelled.  7   Reports of damage to 
historic mosques, churches, and archaeological and heritage sites have continued 
to mount, and by 27 June 2011, the first group, Le Patrimoine archéologique syrien 
en danger, had formed to record and raise awareness of the extent of the damage. 
Today,  Syria’s  heritage  is  still  continuously  exposed  to  various  actions  that  are 
resulting in partial or total destruction. 

 There is a national and international legal framework designed for cultural prop-
erty protection (CPP) in such situations, but (as will be shown) too often it is not 
applied or enforced, and it is little understood by most cultural heritage professionals. 
The Syrian conflict is particularly complex as it is asymmetrical (that is, internal and 
involving the State and non-State actors  8  ) rather than between State parties.  9   

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  3 

 This article will first provide an overview and explanation of the legal framework 
for protecting cultural property in conflict as it applies in Syria. Previous studies 
have focused on World Heritage sites  10   or on specific applications of law.  11   Second, 
we will demonstrate that the destruction of all types of cultural property, regardless 
of its importance, can be considered a prosecutable violation of law. Following 
from this discussion, we will question whether the existing framework can be 
considered effective and consider the role the international heritage commu-
nity can play.  

 THE NATURE OF THE DAMAGE 

 Syria contains some of the most globally varied and important cultural heritage in 
the Mediterranean: religion and tangible and intangible heritage have intertwined 
over many millennia. The country hosts six World Heritage sites, which are all now 
on the List of World Heritage in Danger, and 11 sites on the World Heritage Tentative 
List.  12   However, while it has been argued that Syria’s world heritage is deserving 
of special legal protection,  13   and international investigation has often focused on 
these conspicuous sites,  14   Syria also has a rich national and local heritage, reflect-
ing  the  diversity  of  its  population.  While  many  Syrians  whom  the  authors  have 
spoken to feel a keen sense of pride in their “universal heritage,” it is often national 
or local heritage that contributes most to a sense of identity,  15   and both have also 
been devastated.  16   Their loss should not be overshadowed by the destruction of 
the higher profile World Heritage sites, so this article will focus as far as possible 
on other examples. 

 The direct targeting and destruction of sites can have multiple causes: the preven-
tion of the location’s political use; accidental collateral damage in armed clashes; 
part of indiscriminate firing of guns and mortars at entire areas; or an obstacle to 
other targets and purposively targeted to clear a path.  17   In addition, many sites are 
reused, whether because they are conveniently located, provide a convenient exist-
ing structure for reuse, or are valuable for their historic and still current strategic 
vantage  points.  There  are  also  occasions  when  sites  are  deliberately  targeted  for 
their associations with specific cultural groups. 

 Looting,  and  the  ensuing  illicit  trade,  is  also  a  common  source  of  extensive 
damage. Even the removal of objects with shovels can cause extensive damage to 
the fabric of a site, and many sites have been bulldozed to enable easier access to 
saleable objects. These objects are as much a part of Syria’s heritage as the sites and 
museums  they  come  from,  and  once  stolen,  are  extremely  difficult  to  trace  and 
return, particularly since objects looted from sites are unrecorded. 

 While reoccupation and illegal building were problematic before the conflict,  18   
the deterioration of security has enabled an increase in these issues. The conflict 
has  led  to  a  massive  displacement  of  people  and  the  abandonment  of  entire 
villages. Desperate for shelter, groups of civilians have reoccupied ancient sites and 
even underground tombs and adapted them to their life. 

 4   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

 Lastly, it is important to emphasize the damage caused by iconoclasm, a specific 
form of damage that is increasing in the Syrian conflict. Although the seventeenth-
century term specifically means the “breaking of images,”  19   in current literature, 
it is usually given a wider definition that includes the destruction of specific reli-
gious and symbolic buildings for a religiously motivated purpose, rather than for 
a militaristic or social one.  20   There have been increasing documented outbreaks 
of violence against religious and ethnic objects and structures, committed by 
extremists. International attention, in particular, is now focused on the extremist 
group Da’esh (more commonly known as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIS)), who have destroyed monuments and sites as part of their campaign against 
idolatry—for example, in Raqqa, and at Heraqla.  21   In addition, they have been 
linked to the extensive looting and sale of many more artifacts to purchase weapons, 
causing some to question the religious motivations underlying their actions.  22     

 CULTURAL HERITAGE OR CULTURAL PROPERTY? 

 It  is  important  to  understand  that,  legally  speaking,  distinctions  are  frequently 
made between cultural property and the broader term cultural heritage, and both 
international  and  national  definitions  of  heritage  vary.  This  article  focuses  on 
physical heritage and so uses the legal definition for cultural property in the 1954 
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict 
(Hague Convention).  23   Article 1 specifies that cultural property includes:

  (a)  movable  or  immovable  property  of  great  importance  …  such  as 
monuments of architecture, art or history, whether religious or secular; 
archaeological sites; groups of buildings which, as a whole, are of his-
torical  or  artistic  interest;  works  of  art;  manuscripts,  books  and  other 
objects of artistic, historical or archaeological interest; as well as scientific 
collections and important collections of books or archives or of reproduc-
tions of the property defined above; (b) buildings whose main and effec-
tive purpose is to preserve or exhibit the movable cultural property … (c) 
centers containing a large amount of cultural property.  

    TREATY AND CUSTOMARY LAW 

 Changes  in  the  conduct  of  war,  both  ethical  and  operative,  have  resulted  in  a 
complex  legal  cultural  protection  framework  in  national  and  international  law. 
Building on their growing international acceptance, there is a gradually increasing 
body of precedent for prosecution and implementation. However, to the non-
specialist, the different legal terms and their implications remain confusing. There 
is  an  important  distinction  between  customary  international  law  and  the  more 
commonly known form of international law, called treaty law. International con-
ventions (“treaties”) are legal instruments negotiated, elaborated, and adopted by 
States. However, they rarely cover non-international (that is, internal) armed con-
flicts, are not always ratified by all States, and are therefore binding in principle 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  5 

only on State parties. Treaties only become binding on those States that decide to 
join. A signature expresses the intention of the State to comply with a treaty, but 
States must still ratify it or accede to it (usually involving national parliamentary 
approval) in order to be bound. 

 Therefore, not all international legislation of this type referring to CPP is binding 
on all parties involved in the Syria conflict. The country of Syria is only explicitly 
bound by the treaties it has ratified and less definitively by the treaties it has signed. 
How these treaties apply to non-State actors is complex and still being examined by 
legal experts. However, even if a State has not signed or ratified a convention, some 
treaties have become customary international law, which is binding on all States. 
According to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC):

  [It] is made up of rules that come from “a general practice accepted as 
law” and that exist independent of treaty law. Customary international 
humanitarian  law  is  of  crucial  importance  in  today’s  armed  conflicts 
because  it  fills  gaps  left  by  treaty  law  in  both  international  and  non-
international conflicts … To prove that a certain rule is customary, one 
has to show that it is reflected in state practice and that the international 
community believes that such practice is required as a matter of law.  24    

  Bearing this in mind, we will now present a brief overview of the key legal treaties 
and customary laws applicable in Syria, beginning with cultural heritage destruc-
tion in IHL, and then examine the more specific expressions of CPP in treaty law 
and then in domestic law. Through this overview, we will demonstrate the many 
ways the destruction of cultural property violates national and international law, 
even given the asymmetric nature of the conflict. However, it is not enough to 
have a legal framework, and the final section will examine the possibilities for 
enforcement.   

 INTERNATIONAL CUSTOMARY LAW 

 International human rights law (IHRL) includes the destruction of cultural heri-
tage, and Syria has acceded to / ratified many international conventions that it is 
therefore  obliged  to  comply.  The  1948  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights 
(ratified  by  Syria)  forms  the  basis  of  IHRL.  Article  27  states  that  “[e]veryone 
has the right to freely participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy 
the arts.”  25   As a declaration (compared to, for example, a convention), it is not 
binding, but the 1976 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights (ICESCR) (ratified by Syria) guarantees some of its rights.  26   According to 
the  ICESCR  Committee,  it  obligates  the  preservation  and  presentation  of  man-
kind’s cultural heritage (Article 15(1)(a)). The UN Human Rights Council made it 
clear that it is applicable in conflict situations.  27   It is debatable to what extent this 
applies to Syria’s entire cultural heritage, but since world heritage is “heritage of 
mankind as a whole,” the damage and partial destruction of all of its World Heritage 
sites must surely qualify as a violation. For example, military forces have occupied 

 6   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

parts of Aleppo, including the citadel and the Umayyad Mosque. This has led to 
the targeting of both sites, resulting in structural damage and the loss of the his-
toric Al-Wakfya library and the minaret of the mosque. One recent examination 
of 210 locations in the World Heritage site determined that 22 had been destroyed, 
48 were severely damaged, 33 were moderately damaged, and a further 32 had sus-
tained possible damage.  28   Causes included shelling impacts (which damaged, for 
example, the citadel glacis and destroying the minaret of the Umayyad Mosque), 
fires caused by shelling (which destroyed, for example, most of the ancient souq 
and  the  historic  Al-Wakfya  library),  and  the  use  of  explosives  to  target  military 
occupied buildings (which were detonated, for example, in the tunnels under the 
historic Carlton Hotel, destroying it) ( Figure 1 ).     

 The 1949 Geneva Convention and its three protocols (of which Syria is a party 
only to the first) are often cited in discussions of conflict legislation: they are con-
sidered a cornerstone of IHL and the subset of IHRL that applies to armed con-
flicts, setting baselines for the treatment of those uninvolved in the conflict.  29   In 
the context of CPP, they ban the “pillage” (that is, looting) of civilian properties, 
including cultural property, and prohibit acts of hostility against, the military 
use  of, or reprisals against historic monuments and works of art. However, it is 
with respect to these treaties that we see the first complexities of the asymmetric 
conflict. Syria is not party to Additional Protocol II, which extends the previous 

 

 

  FIGURE  1.  
    The destruction within the Ancient City of Aleppo, which hosts a very rich 
urban heritage, including mosques, shrines, and public places such as the  souk  and the 
 khans . Some of the city’s urban heritage has been severely affected, and some has almost 
vanished in the conflict. This photograph, showing rubble fills in the district of Sharia 
al-Sweiqa, was taken in early November 2012 ( © AP Images / Polfoto / Monica Prieto ).    

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  7 

statues  to  internal  conflicts,  so  this  important  legislation  is  not  applicable.  30   
Pillaging is nevertheless forbidden by the 1907 Hague Convention IV and the 
Regulations Concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land (Hague Regulations), 
which is considered to be an important part of the body of customary international 
law (Articles 28 and 47).  31     

 TREATY LAW 

 Today, the principal instrument for CPP is the 1954 Convention for the Protection 
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (Hague Convention) (ratified 
by Syria) and its additional 1954 First Protocol (ratified by Syria) and 1999 Second 
Protocol (signed but not ratified by Syria). These treaties complement the Hague 
Regulations. Also of international relevance is the 1970 Convention on the Means 
of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Owner-
ship of Cultural Property (UNESCO Convention) (ratified by Syria), while within 
Syria,  the  key  legislation  is  the  1963  Antiquities  Law.  32    The  1995  Convention 
on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects (UNIDROIT Convention), which 
would  provide  a  more  detailed  protection  framework,  has  not  been  signed  by 
Syria.  33   These tools are intended to help safeguard cultural property by preventing 
its destruction or use for military purposes and by providing systems of protection 
and rules for combatants or occupying forces when dealing with the transport and 
use of cultural property.  34   While there are inconsistencies in their approaches,  35   
the destruction of culture or cultural property is a war crime. 

 Lastly,  there  are  also  a  number  of  UN  Educational,  Scientific,  and  Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) conventions that deal with the importance and manage-
ment of heritage. For the most part, these conventions lack specific obligations, 
and it is not clear what level of protection is owed as a result of them; therefore they 
are accorded only a brief discussion. 

 The 1954 Hague Convention, the Hague Regulations, and the First and Second 
Protocols are the only legal instruments specifically concerned with the protection 
of  cultural  property  in  armed  conflict,  defining  cultural  property  and  outlining 
appropriate measures to undertake in peacetime and during conflict. All warring 
parties, including non-state actors, are bound to observe, as a minimum, the pro-
visions relating to respect for cultural property (Article 19(1)).  36   States also agree 
to prohibit and prevent pillage and vandalism directed against sites, to refrain from 
direct attack, seizure, or capture, and in cases of occupation, to support the local 
authority to protect sites. Using cultural property or its immediate surroundings 
for  military  purposes  that  may  expose  it  to  direct  attack  is  prohibited  except  in 
cases of “imperative military necessity” (Article 4). Additional articles include the 
use of a “distinctive emblem” that may be placed on cultural property to protect 
it from any attacks and the possibility of granting some cultural property “special 
protection”  (Articles  6  and  8).  In  addition,  each  State  party  agrees  to  prevent 
the exportation of cultural property if it occupies an area and to return cultural 

 8   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

property  to  the  competent  authorities  (Article  1  of  the  First  Protocol).  Neither 
treaty includes direct rules for enforcement, leaving this issue to the State parties. 
 Under the Second Protocol, rather than simply “ensuring respect,” parties must 
“do everything feasible” to verify objectives are not cultural property, take all fea-
sible precautions to minimize damage, and refrain from attacks that would cause 
incidental damage (Article 7a). The Second Protocol also contains clarification of 
“imperative military necessity” and rules for enforcement (Articles 6 and 15–21). 
There is also a revised system of “special protection,” called “enhanced protection” 
(Article 10), since the initial system was unfeasible. Most importantly, it applies all 
of its provisions to internal conflicts. Although Syria has not ratified the Second 
Protocol, it did sign it at the time of its adoption. According to the principles of the 
1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, State parties to these conventions 
have made a formal agreement to comply with the tenets.  37   A State that has signed, 
but not ratified, a treaty has stated its intent to ratify the treaty and is therefore 
obliged to refrain from “acts which would defeat the object and purpose” of the 
treaty. These obligations end if the State declares that it does not intend to become 
a party to the treaty (Article 18). Syria has made no such declaration. 

 A recent study carried out by the ICRC suggests that the basic principles of the 
1954 Hague Convention have become part of customary law and are applicable in 
internal conflicts.  38   The study was based on an examination and review of State 
practice and “belief that such practice is required, prohibited or allowed … as 
a matter of law.”  39   While there is no global agreement regarding which parts of the 
Hague Convention reflect customary law, the core provisions applicable to both 
State and non-State parties include: the responsibility of nations to protect cultural 
property in their own territory; the obligation to avoid targeting cultural sites 
(subject to the imperative military necessity waiver); the obligation to refrain from 
acts of reprisal against cultural property; and the obligation to prevent (members 
of the military from engaging in) theft, pillage, and the misappropriation of cul-
tural property.  40   

 Given the core provisions in the Hague Convention that are applicable in non-
international conflicts such as Syria, the potential list of violations is considerable. 
While there is no agreement about what constitutes “respect,” a number of sites 
appear to have been targeted for no obvious military reasons. In some cases, the 
damage has been so extensive that not only significant buildings but also large 
sections of entire cities have been reduced to rubble, as took place, as previously 
discussed, in Aleppo as well as in large areas of historic (and modern) Homs 
( Figure  2 ).  Many  more  sites  were  damaged  when  these  buildings  (and  the  sur-
roundings) were used for military purposes and then damaged even more when 
they  were  subsequently  targeted.  A  considerable  number  of  videos  and  images 
show the military (re)use of strategic locations such as citadels (for example, Homs 
or Qal’at al-Shmemis), high mosque minarets as sniper positions (such as the Abu 
Bakr Mosque in Daraa), and even the use of churches, museums, and historic houses 
as army barracks, training camps, and field hospitals (for example, the Museum of 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  9 

 

 

    The destruction within the city of Homs, showing clear evidence of the 

  FIGURE  2.  
lawless, systematic destruction of the urban landscape from heavy fighting. This pho-
tograph, which shows damaged buildings in the Jouret al-Chiyah neighborhood, was 
taken in early June 2013 by a citizen journalist and provided by “Lens Young Homsi” 
( © Polfoto / AP Images ).    

Ma’arat al-Nu’man, Idlib, or Deir Cherubim, Saydnaya). Aside from the damage 
caused  by  carelessness,  military  occupation  often  involves  the  digging  and  con-
struction  of  defensive  positions  and  tank  emplacements  in  the  archaeological 
layers, such as at Ebla,  41   Apamea, and Tell Jifar.  42   These actions fall under the pro-
hibition of acts of hostility directed against cultural property and the use of it and 
its surroundings for purposes that may lead to their damage or destruction (both 
of which may be waived for imperative military necessity).     

 Since military use is one of the greatest causes of damage to sites, the ‘impera-
tive military necessity’ waiver deserves a brief consideration. This exception is not 
defined in the 1954 Hague Convention itself. It was clarified in the Second Protocol 
to which Syria is not a party. It has been argued that the provision significantly 
undermines the provisions as a whole,  43   and the entire concept has been exten-
sively debated,  44   but no consensus has been reached. Marina Lostal has argued that 
the 1954 Hague Convention provides a stringent legal standard with respect to the 
prohibition of actions of hostility against cultural property, as a site must consti-
tute a “military objective”  before  the imperative military necessity waiver can 
be considered.  45   Given this, the many attacks upon civilian cultural property, and 
the first occupation of a site for military purposes, must be considered unlawful. 

 10   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

If a site is used for military purposes, under some circumstances it may then be 
lawful to attack the site. Of the various examples discussed earlier, conflict occurred 
at Homs citadel and Ebla (which both changed hands several times), Apamea, the 
Museum of Ma’arat al-Nu’man, and the Abu Bakr mosque only after the site was 
subject to military use. 

 The  determination  of  military  necessity  is  an  “open-textured”  international 
standard—that is to say, it has an unspecific definition—and investigations would 
be conducted by the State applying the standard  46   and interpreted by reference to 
the concept of the “military objective.”  47   Any international court or tribunal with 
jurisdiction over the matter can review it.  48   However, as modern technological 
capabilities advance, it is likely that the type of attack must also be considered, in 
addition to determining the necessity of the attack, to determine if excessive force 
resulting in destruction was used.  49   General Dwight Eisenhower wrote in his staff 
orders of 29 December 1943: “The phrase ‘military necessity’ is sometimes used 
where it would be more truthful to speak of military convenience or even of per-
sonal convenience. I do not want it to cloak slackness or indifference.” Detailed 
investigations are necessary on a case-by-case basis when the security situation 
allows. Aspects to consider should include military records and diaries and witness 
and  expert  testimonies,  along  with  other  information  that  may  help  to  provide 
insight  into  the  military  situation  at  the  time  of  the  incident.  It  is  important  to 
stress that the imperative military necessity test must not be made with hindsight 
but that it must take into account the circumstances of the time. 

 Article  6  of  the  Hague  Convention  suggests  marking  sites  with  a  distinctive 
emblem, but this is problematic. Directly identifying a place as important can asso-
ciate it with a particular culture and can render it a deliberate target (as happened in 
Croatia), leading to disagreement about whether to implement the provision since 
compliance could also result in destruction.  50   Fortunately, it is not mandatory, 
so there is no penalty for failure to comply. 

 The last aspect of the 1954 Hague Convention that requires elaboration is the 
prohibition and prevention of pillage (Article 4(3)). Illegal excavations and thefts 
have been extensively reported at sites (and, to a much lesser extent, at museums) 
across Syria.  51   Although looting is destructive, it has led in some cases to the site’s 
near-total  destruction,  such  as  at  Dura  Europos.  52    Official  sources  list  several 
museums that have been looted, but social media groups suggest the true number 
could be higher.  53   The majority of the items taken have been lost without a trace, 
even with international assistance. An eighth-century Aramaic golden statue was 
stolen from the museum of Hama at the start of the conflict: the theft was reported 
to Interpol and its image was circulated on the December 2012 list of most wanted 
missing objects, but the item was never located ( Figure 3 ).     

 According to the 1954 Hague Convention, States agree to prohibit and prevent 
the pillaging of sites. However, it has been argued that while the literal interpreta-
tion of this phrase seems to impose an obligation to prevent any pillage, including 
such action by the local population, it may actually only refer to acts committed by 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  11 

 

 

  FIGURE  3.  
    An Aramaic gilt bronze statue dating to the eighth-century  bc  was stolen from 
the museum of Hama in the early stages of the conflict. In December 2012, the statue was 
put on Interpol’s “The Most Wanted Works of Art” poster, and in May 2012, Interpol 
also called for vigilance about the looting of ancient mosaics in Syria (photograph from 
2009, courtesy of D. Osseman).    

the military of the State party.  54   While military parties may have been complicit in 
the looting at some sites—for example, in Apamea—the looting has been far more 
widespread  than  what  is  reported,  and  this  phrase  is  very  limiting.  55    However, 
under IHL, “each party to the conflict must protect cultural property (applicable 
in international and non-international armed conflict).”  56   This protection should 
include the prevention of looting as it can cause catastrophic site destruction, but 
this has not yet been explored within the legal framework and, instead, legal cases 
have only focused on the removal of objects.  57   

 The 1970 UNESCO Convention is the most broadly ratified treaty regarding 
illicit cultural property.  58   It clearly states that “the export and transfer of ownership 

 12   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

of cultural property under compulsion arising directly or indirectly from the 
occupation of a country by a foreign power shall be regarded as illicit.” It defines 
preventative measures State parties should take to prevent the import and acquisition 
of illegally exported cultural property and binds them to return objects if requested 
by the State party of origin. This latter provision covers only stolen inventoried 
objects,  and,  unfortunately,  illicitly  excavated  objects  are  excluded.  The  date  of 
the convention—1970—is usually taken as the date from which these provisions 
should be enforced. Objects that were illegally removed before this date are not 
covered. 

 Whilst Syria has ratified (but not implemented) the UNESCO Convention, it 
only  deals  with  looting  while  States  are  occupied  by  a  foreign  power.  All  States 
must participate in the fight against illicit trafficking, through increased vigilance 
against smuggling and by helping to restore stolen objects. The main difficulty is 
confirming that objects were looted from Syria. Not only is it extremely difficult to 
trace previously unknown objects taken directly from sites, but also not all museum 
collections have been inventoried. This latter point is a key requirement of the con-
vention, and the Syrian Directorate General of Antiquities and Museums (DGAM) 
are working to rectify this situation. In addition, recovery requires international 
co-operation, which is dependent upon the recognition of State parties by State 
parties. The United States, for example, does not currently recognize the Syrian 
government as a legitimate authority and has no diplomatic relations with them. 
Under these conditions, restitution may not be legally possible. After several years 
of pressure, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 2199 in February 2015, 
condemning the destruction of Syria’s heritage and reaffirming the importance of 
preventing the illicit traffic of Syrian artifacts, as it did in Iraq in 2003. Experience 
from Iraq in 2003 suggested that a similar prohibition reduced the amount of 
illicit material available on the international market.  59   This has since been fol-
lowed up by the adoption of the Operational Guidelines for the Implementation 
of the UNESCO Convention at the third Meeting of State Parties in May 2015 
as well as a UNESCO-sponsored workshop that is seeking ways to counter the 
illicit traffic of cultural objects.  60   However, the full implementation of both the 
UNESCO Convention and Resolution 2199 requires diplomatic relations to be 
implemented in all countries. While neighboring countries are working to repa-
triate recovered objects (with varying effort), the total is likely to be only a tiny 
fragment of those removed. 

 Furthermore, to establish accountability for such violations, and to determine if 
the Hague Convention is applicable, those responsible must be caught. The iden-
tity of the looters is largely unknown. The lack of centralized power in some areas 
has encouraged the emergence of organized groups who carry out both planned, 
selective  looting  and  un-planned,  “mob”-style  looting.  61    Some  are  armed  gangs 
incorporating several hundred people, many of whom may be foreigners. Other 
illegal excavations are conducted on a much smaller scale and are more likely to 
have been conducted by local people, with motivations including poverty, greed, 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  13 

and money to fund the conflict. The sale of artifacts to buy arms by combatants is 
particularly noteworthy  62   and has led to additional prosecutions. 

 At this point, it is worth returning to iconoclasm. Reports detail the destruction 
of historic Jewish and Islamic shrines, tombs, and representations of Islamic poets 
and caliphs in Raqqa, Damascus, Aleppo, Dera’a, and Idlib,  63   many of which hold 
(or held) the remains of significant figures. Numerous churches and mosques have 
also been attacked.  64   Actions include burning, vandalism, shooting, and stabbing 
of religious icons and historic documents; the looting of objects and statues; major 
structural damage; the blowing up of shrines, mihrabs, altars, and religious statues; 
and the removal of bells that called the community to prayer ( Figures 4  and  5 ). The 
scale is staggering—for example, almost 1,500 mosques have been targeted appar-
ently for various reasons, including religious extremism.  65           

 Iconoclasm  is  not  a  specific  crime,  but  it  represents  the  removal  of  people’s 
ability to participate in the cultural life of the community, as covered under gen-
eral IHL, and it causes cultural property damage as defined in the 1954 Hague 
Convention. Religious sites and objects are protected, therefore, from attacks and 
prohibited from military use like other importance cultural property. 

 Finally, there are also a number of international conventions that deal with the 
importance and management of various forms of heritage: the 1972 UNESCO Con-
vention  Concerning  the  Protection  of  the  World  Cultural  and  Natural  Heritage 
(World Heritage Convention) (ratified by Syria);  66   the 2003 UNESCO Convention 

 

 

    The destruction of the inside of the Khalid Ibn Al-Walid mosque in Homs. 

  FIGURE  4.  
It is believed to contain the tomb of the Muslim military leader Khalid Ibn Al-Walid. 
The inside of the mosque has been severely affected, and its roof has collapsed. In addi-
tion, the  mihrab  (niche) was also damaged ( © Polfoto / AP Images ).    

 14   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

 

 

    The destruction at the eighth-century  ad  Umayyad Mosque in Aleppo, which 

  FIGURE  5.  
caught fire in August 2012. Besides the severe damage to the prayer hall and the  mihrab  
(niche), precious Islamic and Pre-Islamic manuscripts were lost due to the conflagration 
that occurred in the library attached to the mosque in March 2013. The rubble at the 
corner of the photo indicates the place where the minaret stood ( © Corbis Image ).    

for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage (ratified by Syria );  67   and the 
2005 UNESCO Convention on the Protection and the Promotion of the Diversity 
of Cultural Expressions (ratified by Syria).  68   Although they represent binding con-
ventions, their content is mostly programmatic and provide best practice guide-
lines.  The  World  Heritage  Convention  operates  as  an  exception,  functioning  at 
an international level, and requiring State Parties to submit reports detailing the 
management of sites. Sites that are considered threatened can be placed on the List 
of World Heritage in Danger, as Syria’s have been, and potentially delisted.  69   

 There are also a number of declarations, of which the most relevant is the 
UNESCO  Declaration  Concerning  the  Intentional  Destruction  of  Cultural 
Heritage.  70   It includes a call to members to do everything they can to prevent acts 
of intentional destruction of cultural heritage and requests its members to become 
parties to both of the Hague Convention protocols. Declarations such as this one 
represent the opinion of the majority of the Member States of UNESCO, but 
they are not legally binding. However, they can prompt the adoption of another 
international treaty or domestic legislation and may also be relevant in proving the 
 opinion juris  of customary international law (that is, put very simply, any actions 
carried out by a State are considered to be practically a legal obligation anyway). 
In the case of Syria, such declarations have been largely ineffective with regard to 
the adoption of the 1954 Hague Convention—one permanent member state of the 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  15 

UN Security Council still has yet to ratify it—the United Kingdom—and only time 
will tell if it helps reduce looting. 

 It should be noted that many of these conventions and treaties were not written 
with long-term occupation by states or other parties in mind, as has happened in 
Syria, and so they have no provisions to deal with these situations. In fact, IHL is 
only now beginning to examine the legal ramifications of such actions, and new 
developments/precedent rulings will have to be made.   

 NATIONAL LEGAL PROVISIONS 

 Cultural  property  in  Syria  is  governed  by  the  1963  Antiquities  Law,  which  was 
amended in 1999, pre-dating several of the key international treaties and conven-
tions (although updates have been drafted.  71   The Antiquities Law (Arabic  q ā n ū n 
al-A ṯ  ā r ) explains the nature of Syrian heritage, regulating it with penalties in case 
of destruction or the failure to protect it: “It is prohibited to destroy, transform, 
and damage movable and immovable antiquities by writing on them, engraving 
them, or changing their features, or removing parts of them” (Chapter 1, Article 7). 
The Antiquities Law sets out laws against the forging and illicit traffic of Syrian cul-
tural heritage, attributing the ownership of all antiquities and artifacts to the State. 
Penalties for offences against the country’s heritage range from substantial fines 
to imprisonment for either short or long periods. Given this, all of the offences 
discussed above are crimes under the Antiquities Law, and some are more clearly 
elaborated.  The  Hague  Convention,  for  example,  prohibits  military  use  of  the 
undefined “immediate surroundings” of a site, while Chapter 2, Article 26, of the 
Antiquities Law states: “Heavy and hazardous industries, military facilities might 
not  be  built  within  500  meters  of  registered  immovable  archaeological  and  his-
torical properties.” However, the specification that facilities might not be “built” 
could be interpreted to allow the creation or placement of movable or temporary 
facilities, such as existing mobile weapons arrays or military storage. Similarly, 
unlike the Hague Convention, the Antiquities Law explicitly recognizes the crime 
of looting, and forgery is also prohibited. All objects belong to the State, and, there-
fore, forgeries, object removal (whether from a site or a museum), and the atten-
dant site destruction are all crimes. While forgeries might not seem problematic, in 
some cases, almost a third of objects seized were fake, tying up the resources of the 
bodies tackling the looting and encouraging market demand.  72   

 In addition, the conflict has led to the massive displacement of people and the 
abandonment  of  entire  villages.  Desperate  for  shelter,  groups  of  civilians  have 
reoccupied ancient sites and even underground tombs and adapted them to their 
life. This has resulted in new buildings that violate the integrity of the site, the 
removal of archaeological material for new buildings, rubbish dumps, looting, and 
the targeting of the sites. This is particularly prevalent across the limestone massif 
in Idlib and the Aleppo provinces, home to the “Dead Cities,” some of which form 
a World Heritage site, and at Bosra, where “the residents found the right moment 

 16   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

to push through illegal projects (construction in protected area), [and] it is diffi-
cult to assess today the extent of their illegal actions.”  73   The damage caused by 
the  re-occupation  of  such  sites  by  civilians  is  not  covered  under  international 
law, which relates to military forces, so those responsible are only accountable 
under State law. However, the changes made to the sites do fall under the regu-
lation of Chapter 1, Article 7, of the Antiquities Law with respect to destroying 
or  transforming  sites,  and,  as  such,  are  crimes.  Although,  given  the  likely  lack 
of viable alternatives for accommodation and shelter, it is questionable whether 
prosecution would be appropriate.   

 THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK: REMARKS 

 Cultural property clearly benefits from a system of legal protection that imposes 
the obligation to protect cultural property in times of armed conflict. However, 
the frameworks described are difficult to apply, and in the Syrian case, they have 
proven to be inadequate—various violations and offences to cultural and religious 
institutions and objects have taken place. The framework contains problems and 
a  lack  of  clarity,  relating  to  military  necessity  in  particular.  Furthermore,  the 
treaties that broaden the scope of the obligations to cover internal conflicts have 
not been ratified, such as Additional Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions, the 
Second Protocol to the Hague Convention, or the UNIDROIT Convention. Even 
when ratified, these international conventions have not necessarily been incorpo-
rated  into  domestic  legislation,  so  they  have  no  supporting  state  infrastructure. 
Nonetheless, given its age, the Syrian Antiquities Law is holding up relatively well, 
with some sections being clearer than the international legislation. The revisions to 
the Antiquities Law are eagerly awaited, as they are expected to incorporate more 
inclusive definitions of heritage as well as the obligations from conventions that 
have been drafted since 1963. It has been demonstrated that the Antiquities Law is 
complemented by the Hague Convention, and, in some ways, they shore up some 
of the weaknesses of each other. It is hoped that the revisions will seek the best of 
both. However, it is unclear how the new statutes will be implemented, given the 
difficulties in enforcing the current Antiquities Law in the deteriorating security 
situation. The fact that the destruction can be classed as violations (and, as will be 
shown, as war crimes) demonstrates that there is a legal set of obligations that do 
protect cultural property in conflict. These laws have proven to be effective else-
where (for example, during the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s operations in 
Libya).  74   Therefore, the problem is not with the legal framework but, rather, with 
its enforcement.   

 PROSECUTIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL LAW 

 National and international legal frameworks promote and enforce the standards 
and values of the societies that created them, attempting to promote these standards 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  17 

and  prevent  the  consequences  of  their  avoidance  by  means  of  punishment. 
As such, they represent the aspirations of those societies and should be enforced. 
However, the nature of the conflict in Syria presents a particular challenge for the 
enforcement of law. The conflict involves multiple actors, some of whom are part 
of groups with chains of responsibility, and others are individuals (or may as 
well be). Ideas of “territory” and, therefore, responsibility are constantly shifting. 
In addition, the conflict is ongoing, and priorities and resources are unsurprisingly 
focused on ending the conflict.  75    

 National Prosecutions 

 Nonetheless,  in  the  first  instance,  violations  involving  cultural  property  can  be 
tried in Syrian law courts as offences against the Antiquities Law, Article 28 of the 
Hague Convention, and IHL:

  Syria  is   obliged   to  investigate,  prosecute  and  punish  the  authors  of 
any  such  violations,  irrespective  of  their  allegiance  …  The  poten-
tial approaches to accountability … would have to be supplemented by 
national prosecutions in Syria at some point. Experience shows that only 
a very limited number of cases can be dealt with by other States or the 
international community.  76    

  However, internal prosecutions are likely to wait until the conflict is resolved and 
are ultimately likely to favor the victors in the conflict.   

 International Prosecutions 

 Therefore, should the international community feel it is necessary, parties can 
be held responsible for violations of IHL. Based on the precedents of the ad hoc 
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), a permanent, 
treaty-based  criminal  court  was  created  under  the  1998  Rome  Statute  of  the 
International Criminal Court (Rome Statute).  77   The International Criminal Court 
(ICC)  is  intended  as  a  last  resort,  investigating  and  prosecuting  only  where 
national courts have failed, and it is entirely independent. 

 The destruction of cultural property falls under Article 8 (which covers inter-
nal conflicts), which mandates that intentionally directing attacks against civilian 
objects or historic monuments that are not military objectives is classed as “war 
crimes.” However, Article 8 has been described as “anachronistic, incomplete and 
inconsistent” since it fails to distinguish between the types or scales of attacks on 
cultural property and imposes no criminal liability on individuals who utilize cul-
tural property for military purposes, nor does it define cultural objects, even to the 
extent of the Hague Convention.  78   Its definitions are more in keeping with the 1907 
Hague Regulations.  79   Illegitimate looting or plunder are accountable.  80   Yet despite 
the discrepancies between other international conventions and the Rome Statute, 
Article 21 of the statute states that the ICC must consider (1) its statutes, then 

 18   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

(2) where appropriate, applicable IHL, and then (3) general principles of law derived 
from national systems if they are not inconsistent with international systems. This 
suggests  that  Article  8  should  in  fact  be  interpreted  in  light  of  the  existing  legal 
framework and that the two are complementary. However, this weakness in the 
Rome Statute means that the specific prosecution of cultural violations is largely 
a result of the will and interpretation of the prosecutor, so only a prosecution will 
determine how useful the ICC is.  81   

 Deliberate attacks against cultural property during armed conflict, such as the 
destruction  that  occurred  during  the  Balkan  War  in  the  1990s,  in  Iraq  in  2003, 
and in Mali in 2012, were deemed by the respective tribunals—the ICTY, the Iraqi 
High  Criminal  Court,  and  the  ICC—to  be  potential  or  actual  violations  of  the 
laws of warfare incurring individual criminal responsibility and thus, constituting 
“war crimes,” setting a precedent for the prosecution of the destruction in Syria.  82   
The UN Human Rights Council has determined that many violations of IHL have 
occurred, including attacks against, and the pillaging and destruction of, cultural 
property, citing the Hague Convention and the Rome Statute and confirming some 
of the offences as war crimes.  83   In addition, iconoclasm falls within the ICC’s def-
inition of war crime against cultural objects, and the specific unreasonable nature 
of iconoclasm may be taken into account as an aggravating factor when sentencing. 
Therefore, there would be grounds for prosecution by the ICC should they gain 
jurisdiction over the situation. 

 However, although Syria signed the Rome Statute in 2000 and should respect 
the provisions, it has not ratified it. Without this step, or unless Syria declares 
acceptance of the ICC’s jurisdiction, the ICC will only have authority if the issue 
is referred to them by the UN Security Council. Given the divisions surrounding 
Syria in the UN Security Council, such unified action is unlikely. In 2013, 58 coun-
tries  sent  a  letter  to  the  UN  Security  Council  requesting  that  the  ICC  begin  an 
investigation into war crimes in Syria (referring to human rights abuses, not cul-
tural war crimes).  84   The referral was blocked by some Security Council permanent 
members, who stated that it might destabilize chances for a peaceful solution. 

 Even  should  a  prosecution  be  made,  there  are  limits  on  the  ICC.  Should 
a party fail to co-operate, the ICC can only refer the matter back to the Assembly 
of  State  Parties  (the  oversight  and  legislative  body  of  the  ICC)  or  to  the  UN 
Security Council. Furthermore, the ICC has no official police force: it is reliant 
on national authorities to apprehend suspects and transfer them to The Hague, 
requiring national co-operation.  85     

 State Prosecutions 

 Under  certain  circumstances,  a  third  option  exists.  Article  28  of  the  Hague 
Convention stipulates that all State parties must take all necessary steps to prose-
cute persons of whatever nationality who breach the convention, no matter where 
these violations took place (although whether such cases can actually be pursued in 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  19 

a particular country depends on its domestic laws).  86   While it is theoretically fea-
sible, whether this would actually take place is open to question. The willingness to 
investigate, prosecute, and punish crimes of this nature may be reinvigorated fol-
lowing the international outrage and condemnation of the deliberate destruction 
of historical sites occasioned by the Islamic State. If domestic prosecutions based 
on Article 28 do take place, however, they would be unprecedented.    

 WAYS FORWARD 

 There  are  difficulties  in  securing  the  prosecutions  necessary  to  enforce  the  CPP 
framework. Issues include the focus and possible bias of nationally located courts; 
the lack of jurisdiction of the ICC and inadequacies of Article 8 of the Rome Statute; 
and the lack of international unity. Assuming a prosecution was made, there are 
difficulties in apprehending those guilty of violations. Given the many actors and 
groups involved in the Syrian conflict as well as the dangerous security situation, it 
would be difficult to identify those responsible for violations and even more diffi-
cult to apprehend and transport them. State co-operation would be essential, but 
there are large areas of the country that the State currently has little control over. 
Yet these difficulties have been overcome before. 

 In practice, cases must either be tried within Syria or referred to the ICC by 
Syrians  or  the  United  Nations  (as  a  representative  of  States  outside  the  affected 
territory). At present, the UN Security Council has failed to react in a unified, con-
crete way, and prosecutions are unlikely to come from Syria. Given this impasse, 
a new ad hoc tribunal, similar to the ICTY, has been suggested by the UN Com-
mission of Inquiry that could focus exclusively on the Syrian situation.  87   This will 
present its own problems in implementation—for example, defining a new legal 
framework, finding appropriate facilities, recruiting personnel, and ensuring state 
co-operation—and all from scratch, which will be both timely and costly.  88   

 In 2013, the Chautauqua Blueprint was signed, which is a draft Statute for a 
Syrian Extraordinary Tribunal to Prosecute Atrocity Crimes.  89   It was intended to 
sit in Damascus with predominantly Syrian judges, which has called its neutrality 
into  question.  The  cultural  crimes  it  would  have  jurisdiction  over  mirror  those 
defined by the ICC, with all of its attendant problems.  90   It is hoped that if an ad hoc 
tribunal were to be created, omissions such as this could be rectified.   

 DA’ESH: A CASE STUDY 

 The  case  of  Syria  is  particularly  complex  due  to  the  large  number  of  non-state 
actors involved, many of whom have no official representation. It is therefore 
instructive  to  consider  the  most  prominent  of  them—Da’esh.  They  have  com-
mitted a number of prosecutable violations against cultural property within Syria, 
among many others,  91   including destroying the Assyrian Lion statues in Raqqa with 
a bulldozer; the destruction of the Temples of Bel and Baalshamin, seven funerary 

 20   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

towers, the triumphal arch,  92   and the likely mining of the citadel and theatre at 
Palmyra.  93    In  addition,  they  have  legalized  the  taxation  of  site  looting  and  cre-
ated a Ministry of Antiquities to officially control the looting of sites and the sale 
of objects, which has been confirmed by officials from the US State Department, 
Homeland  Security,  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,  the  US  Department  of 
Justice, and the United Nations at a conference held in September 2015 presenting 
newly declassified documents.  94   

 It would be necessary to gather significantly more evidence of Syrian destruction 
than is currently available. The limited (confirmed) cultural destruction in Syria 
(for example, of the Assyrian Lion statues), while tragic, could hardly be considered 
a “grave breach” of IHL (although the extensive damage in Iraq could). The extent 
of the looting is hotly debated (particularly since the state of most of the sites was 
unknown before they occupied it),  95   and many of the sites they have attacked were 
already occupied by a military force. The legality of the creation of the Ministry 
of  Culture  is  unclear,  but  there  are  possible  historical  parallels.  The  Einsatstab 
Rosenberg was a Nazi educational research institute and museum containing more 
than 21,000 artworks stolen from countries across occupied Europe. The Nuremberg 
Charter vested the International Military Tribunal with jurisdiction over the war 
crime of plunder, and “in the context of belligerent occupation, the Tribunal held 
the accused Rosenberg [Chief of the Institute] ‘responsible for a system of organ-
ised plunder of both public and private property through the invaded countries,’”  96   
for which he was found guilty.  97   

 Da’esh  has  declared  itself  a  state,  but  this  state  lacks  formal  recognition  and 
has  ratified  no  international  treaties,  raising  the  question  of  how  to  hold  them 
accountable. Neither Syria nor Iraq, the countries where the new “state” is based, 
are members of the ICC and are unlikely to cede to ICC governance, even to enable 
the prosecution of Da’esh. Whether Da’esh can be referred to the ICC has been 
discussed,  98   as this could constitute a “situation,” but current arguments are unde-
cided whether the group must be linked to territory. If not, it would open Da’esh 
up to prosecution for their actions globally, not just in Syria, but it also raises the 
question of the extent to which the state leaders are responsible for the actions of 
their members. If the ICC cannot prosecute, then the creation of an ad hoc tribu-
nal, as was established for Rwanda, would allow the enforcement of IHL by the 
United Nations with non-member states.  99     

 A ROLE FOR THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY? 

 Any cases prosecuted will require evidence. There are already a number of orga-
nizations working on war crime documentation, including Human Rights Watch, 
the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, and the Syria Justice and Accountability 
Center, but none have the specific remit of dealing with heritage. Activist groups, 
often utilizing social media, provide a large amount of information regarding the 
destruction of Syrian heritage, but many cannot be verified. Many are authentic 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  21 

and well intentioned,  100   but some, such as Da’esh, are using the conflict as a source 
of propaganda to promote themselves and debase their enemies. In January 2014, 
the United Nations stopped updating the death toll as it could no longer verify its 
information,  101   indicating the difficulties even for large organizations. 

 The DGAM has initiated a series of documentation and digitalization projects, 
providing some of the most reliable updates, but for obvious reasons as a state 
institution, they are remaining impartial and documenting only the damage, rather 
than the offences. Given the security situation and the decrease in resources, both 
physical and human, their documentation activities cannot be exhaustive. Local 
communities and unofficial bodies that are operating (for example, in Idlib) are 
also frequently unable to carry out proper documentation and protection work. It 
remains to be seen what role UNESCO will play, although throughout the conflict 
new projects have been announced to document and protect Syria’s heritage.  102   
Evidence suggests that the damage is greater than supposed. Reports at sites such 
as Ebla note that looters are tunneling into them.  103   Therefore, the extent cannot 
be known until it is possible to gain full access. 

 Many sites are occupied and re-occupied by competing parties as the conflict 
progresses.  Damage  reports  not  only  indicate  what  happened,  but  when  and 
potentially  who  was  responsible.  However,  given  the  many  caveats  involved  in 
modern methods to record damage, particularly involving social media, it remains 
to be seen whether they will be admissible in a court of law and how the caveats can 
be faced and dealt with. These problems are already making themselves felt in the 
field of human rights.  104   Regardless, the international community in general must 
accept the responsibility of documenting the violations occurring and address the 
difficult issue of responsibility.   

 CONCLUSIONS 

 Through the overview of CPP legislation and with reference to the Syrian exam-
ples, this article has demonstrated that there is a significant level of protection for 
cultural property in both domestic and international laws governing archaeology 
and heritage. At a national level, and where possible at an international level, the 
Syrian DGAM has worked within the existing framework of domestic and interna-
tional law, such as the World Heritage Convention, to try and protect its country’s 
heritage. However, many other parties have failed to comply, and there are numerous 
violations—in  particular,  the  utilization  and  targeting  of  heritage  sites  and 
monuments. Even the hands of the United Nations are tied and cannot offer Syria 
the support it needs. In May 2015, the United Nations unanimously adopted the 
resolution “saving the cultural heritage of Iraq,” but it deliberately omitted Syria, 
apparently for political reasons.  105   Given the lack of (or perhaps the impossibility 
of) the national or international enforcement of these frameworks during conflict, 
it  must  be  concluded  that  they  are  inadequate  for  cultural  property  protection. 
Even after the conflict, enforcement will undoubtedly remain problematic, and it is 

 22   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

doubtful to what extent, if any, prosecutions would act as a deterrent, particularly 
given that those involved in such war crimes are often involved in worse atrocities 
against the people whose heritage it belongs to, for which there does exist a body of 
prosecutions as precedent. 

 However, prosecutions are about more than determent. They serve justice. There 
remains a need to build up solid documentation to assist in potential prosecutions. 
This will be necessary for the future application of law in the country and to facil-
itate the preservation of heritage for future generations. Yet collecting documen-
tation apportions responsibility for potential offences, which could be extremely 
dangerous for those involved. Documentation is therefore best conducted by an 
independent party, and it is unfortunate that it is the Syrian people who have the 
best access to such information. It may also be highly detrimental to peace building 
since  parties  responsible  for  the  damage  are  likely  to  seek  to  avoid  culpability, 
threatening the probably fragile atmosphere of co-operation. This in turn raises 
moral quandaries regarding priorities—is the price of justice worth the potential 
loss  of  peace?  Others  have  argued,  however,  that  such  prosecutions  can  in  fact 
enhance the peace process, as it removes those individuals who are most likely to 
be obstructive to the proceedings.  106   

 While important, the available legal tools have not been effective in the pro-
tection of Syrian heritage, raising the question of whether force should be used. 
Ethical debates are only just beginning among the heritage community on whether 
this can be justified in this context,  107   but at the time of writing, events may 
overtake  them.  While  most  feel  that  human  lives  must  come  first,  making  it 
difficult to prevent the use and abuse of cultural heritage, an armed brigade has 
formed in Syria to protect the holy shrine of Sayyeda Seinab, outside Damascus,  108   
and Turkey has cited the protection of an Islamic tomb when sending a military 
convoy into Syria.  109   Now, as Da’esh control the strategically significant town 
of Tadmur, which contains the World Heritage site of Palmyra, the United States 
has reportedly agreed “that with the White House imprimatur, the UN Security 
Council  will  be  strongly  urged  to  etch  a  Chapter  7  ‘red-line’  around  Palmyra’s 
archeological  sites  and  defend  them  with  whatever  force  and  whatever  cost 
required.”  110   Most recently, UNESCO approved a strategy at their thirty-eighth 
General Conference for the Reinforcement of UNESCO’s Action for the Protection 
of  Culture  and  the  Promotion  of  Cultural  Pluralism  in  the  Event  of  Armed 
Conflict,  111   in which UNESCO agreed to encourage the inclusion of a cultural 
heritage component in UN peace-keeping forces’ training and operations: “Ulti-
mately, it  is  hoped  that  increased  awareness  of  [sic]  the  military  on  interna-
tional  humanitarian  cultural  heritage  law  will  lead  to  …  significant  cultural 
heritage  sites,  which  are  clearly  identified  and  protected  from  the  conflict.” 
This  explicitly  builds  on  the  precedent  that  was  created  when  the  UN  Secu-
rity Council established a peacekeeping mission in Mali, the Multidimensional 
Integrated Stabilization Mission, to ensure security and political stability. Its 
mandate included assisting “the transitional authorities of Mali, as necessary 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  23 

and feasible, in protecting from attack the cultural and historical sites in Mali, 
in collaboration with UNESCO.”  112   

 A final point concerns the future of the Syrian people. If Syria is to survive this 
conflict, when reconstruction starts people will need their shared heritage in which 
all Syrians, no matter how different, can find common cause. Heritage authorities 
will  face  challenges  such  as  the  invention,  implementation,  and  enforcement  of 
a complete body of state and legal structures pertaining to the CPP. This will be 
particularly difficult given the emigration or loss of numerous heritage and legal 
staff and the attrition of the infrastructure. The criminalization of attacks against 
cultural property, as well as the efforts to protect the country’s heritage, should 
not only be considered a Syrian issue but, rather, viewed from a global perspective 
as  a  concrete  threat  to  modern,  diverse  societies.  The  targeting  and  destruction 
of  cultural  property  and  heritage  in  Syria  can  be  viewed  as  attacks  on  the  very 
essence of humanity. Efforts to safeguard cultural heritage in Syria, and to bring 
those involved in its destruction to justice, should therefore also be perceived as a 
humanitarian effort.     

  ENDNOTES 

 1  .     Viejo-Rose and Stig Sørenson  2015 .  
 2  .     Isakhan  2013 .  
 3  .     E.g., Chapman  1994 .  
 4  .     Viejo-Rose  2013 ; Viejo-Rose and Stig Sørenson  2015 .  
 5  .     Prosecutor  v.  Dario  Kordic  and  Mario  Cerkez  (Trial  Judgment)  IT-95-14/2-T  (26  February 

  
  
  
  
  
2001).  
 6  .     Arimatsu and Choudhury  2014 .  
  
 7  .     Human Rights Watch  2012 .  
  
  
 8  .     In  this  context,  State  is  distinct  from  state.  A  State  (often  referred  to  as  a  State  party)  is 
a country that is formally recognized internationally and which can sign international treaties and 
conventions.  
 9  .     Several  other  States  have  recently  become  involved  in  the  Syrian  conflict—for  example, 
  
Russia, France, the United Kingdom—and in at least one case have been accused of damaging 
a World Heritage site. However, given the constraints of space, this article will focus on Syria and the 
non-State actors involved there, rather than the other State parties. See Ana Maria Luca and Myra 
Abdallah, “How Russia Bombed a UN Heritage Site in Syria,” 10 May 2015,  https://now.mmedia.me/
lb/en/reportsfeatures/565993-how-russia-bombed-a-un-heritage-site-in-syria  (accessed 1 November 
2015).  
 10  .     Lostal  2015 .  
  
 11  .     Gerstenblith  2014 .  
  
 12  .     While  only  11  sites  have  been  nominated,  they  make  up  12  submitted  nominations  on  the 
  
World Heritage Tentative List, as Dura Europos (8 June 1999) and Mari, Tell Hariri (8 June 1999) 
were submitted separately, but have a twelfth nomination as a joint submission (Mari and Europos-
Dura sites of the Euphrates Valley (23 June 2011).  
  
 13  .     Lostal  2015 .  
  
 14  .     E.g., Amnesty International and American Association for the Advancement of Science  2013 ; 
World Heritage Committee  2013 ,  2014 ; Abdulkarim  2014 ; Cunliffe et al.  2014 ; Wolfinbarger et al. 
 2014a ,  2014b .  
  

 15  .     Kila  2012 .  

 24   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

 16  .     E.g.,  Cunliffe   2012 ;  Association  for  the  Protection  of  Syrian  Archaeology,   http://www.

 31  .     Hague Convention IV on Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land and its Annex: 

 25  .     Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 12 October 1948, UN Doc A/810 at 71 (1948).  
 26  .     International  Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and  Cultural  Rights,  16  December  1966,  993 

 27  .     O’Keefe  2014 . UN Human Rights Council, Resolution 6/1, 27 September 2007.  
 28  .     Cunliffe et al.  2014 .  
 29  .     Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, 1125 UNTS 3.  
 30  .     Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the Protec-

 17  .     Cunliffe  2014 .  
 18  .     International Council on Monuments and Sites  2011 .  
 19  .     Boldrick, Brubaker, and Clay  2013 .  
 20  .     Kila  2013 .  
 21  .     Cunliffe et al.  2014 .  
 22  .     Howard, Prohov, and Elliott  2015 . Given the constraints of this article, only brief attention is 

  
apsa2011.com  (accessed 30 May 2014).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
given to Da’esh as they are largely treated as a non-State actor.  
  
 23  .     Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, 14 May 
1954, 249 UNTS 240 (Hague Convention). The term cultural “property” is now widely considered 
to be deficient. See Prott and O’Keefe ( 1992 ) for its failure to incorporate diverse forms of heritage. 
However, “cultural heritage” has yet to receive widespread implementation or to be legally tested.  
  
 24  .     International  Committee  of  the  Red  Cross,  “Customary  International  Humanitarian  Law,” 
29 October 2010,  http://www.icrc.org/eng/war-and-law/treaties-customary-law/customary-law/
overview-customary-law.htm  (accessed 13 May 2014).  
  
  
UNTS 3.  
  
  
  
  
tion of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts, 8 June 1977, 1125 UNTS 609.  
  
Regulation concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land 1907, 187 CTS 227.  
  
 32  .     Convention  on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Preventing  the  Illicit  Import,  Export  and 
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, 14 November 1970, 823 UNTS 231. Antiquities Law, 
26 October 1963, Decree no. 222.  
  
 33  .     Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects, 24 June 1995, 2421 UNTS 457. 
There is a range of international laws and examples dealing with prosecutions for illegally removed 
objects seized outside the country of origin, but these are outside the scope of this article.  
  
  
 2011 ; Ehlert  2014 .  
 36  .     Gerstenblith  2014 .  
  
 37  .     Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 23 May 1969, 1155 UNTS 331.  
  
 38  .     Henckaerts  2005 .  
  
 39  .     Ibid.,178.  
  
 40  .     Gerstenblith  2010 ,  2014 ; Henckaerts  2005 .  
  
  
 41  .     C.J. Chivers, “Grave Robbers and War Steal Syria’s History,”  New York Times , 6 April 2013, 
 http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/07/world/middleeast/syrian-war-devastates-ancient-sites.html?_
r=0&adxnnl=1&adxnnlx=1381999297-uZkVl2qRT6D6kiJ7dGErwA  (accessed 17/10/2013). See also 
Patrick Cockburn, “The Destruction of the Idols: Syria’s Patrimony at Risk from Extremists,”  The 
Independent , 11 February 2014,  http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/archaeology/news/the-
destruction-of-the-idols-syrias-patrimony-at-risk-from-extremists-9122275.html   (accessed  20  May 
2014).  
 42  .     Casana and Panahipour  2014 .  
  
 43  .     Gerstenblith  2010 , 9.  
  
 44  .     Bogliolo  2012 .  
  
  
 45  .     Lostal  2012 . The definition of military objective is provided in Article 52(2) of Additional Pro-
tocol I and considered to be part of customary international law: “[M]ilitary objectives are limited 

 34  .     Prott and O’Keefe  1992 .  
 35  .     For a full discussion, see Prott and O’Keefe  1984 ; Toman  1996 ; O’Keefe  2006 ; Kila  2012 ; Frulli 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  25 

 46  .     O’Keefe  2008 ,  2014 .  
 47  .     See Lostal  2012 , 470.  
 48  .     For examples of discussions and court rulings, see O’Keefe  2006 , 130, 131.  
 49  .     For example, in Libya, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization selected more focused ordnance 

 54  .     Gerstenblith  2010 , 9.  
 55  .     Ali  2013 .  
 56  .     Henckaerts  2005 , Annex.  
 57  .     Ibid.  
 58  .     For a full commentary on this treaty, see Prott and O’Keefe  1988 ; O’Keefe and Patrick  1997 ; 

to those objects which by their nature, location, purpose or use make an effective contribution to 
military action and whose total or partial destruction, capture or neutralization, in the circumstances 
ruling at the time, offers a definite military advantage.”  
  
  
  
  
when attacking a military target to protect a site. See Kila  2012 .  
 50  .     Kila  2012 .  
  
 51  .     Abdulkarim  2014 .  
  
 52  .     Cunliffe et al.  2014 .  
  
  
 53  .     E.g., “Appel à la préservation des musées syriens adressé aux institutions internationales 
et à la communauté internationale,”  Le patrimoine Syrien archéologique en danger , 30 April 2012, 
 https://www.facebook.com/notes/le-patrimoine-arch%C3%A9ologique-syrien-en-danger-
%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%A2%D8%AB%D8%A7%D8%B1-%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B3%
D9%88%D8%B1%D9%8A%D8%A9-%D9%81%D9%8A-%D8%AE%D8%B7%D8%B1/appel-
%C3%A0-la-pr%C3%A9servation-des-mus%C3%A9es-syriens-adress%C3%A9-aux-institutions-
internationa/311246265610371  (accessed 30 May 2014).  
  
  
  
  
  
O’Keefe  2007 ; UNESCO  2011 .  
  
 59  .     Brodie   2008 ;  compare  Sam  Hardy,  “Syria/Lebanon:  Syrian-Lebanese  Antiquities-for-Arms 
Trade,”  Conflict Antiquities Blog , 12 May 2013,  http://conflictantiquities.wordpress.com/2013/05/12/
syria-conflict-funding-lebanon-illicit-antiquities-trade/  (accessed 01 May 2014).  
  
Lessons Learned to Implementation,” 3 June 2015, United Nations Headquarters, New York.  
  
 61  .     Cunliffe  2014 .  
  
 62  .     Aryn Baker and Majdal Anjar, “Syria’s Looted Past: How Ancient Artifacts Are Being Traded 
for Guns,”  Time World , 12 September 2012,  http://world.time.com/2012/09/12/syrias-looted-past-
how-ancient-artifacts-are-being-traded-for-guns/  (accessed 12 September 2012); see also Hardy, 
“Syria/Lebanon.”  
 63  .     E.g., Association for the Protection of Syrian Archaeology (APSA), “Alep Henano: Destruction 
  
la coupole du Meqam Cheikh Yebreq,” YouTube,  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eEBE3Issjuw  
(accessed 1 July 2013); Robert Fisk, “Syria’s Ancient Treasures Pulverised,”  The Independent , 5 August 
2012,  http://www.independent.co.uk/opinion/commentators/fisk/robert-fisk-syrias-ancient-treasures-
pulverised-8007768.html  (accessed 6 August 2012); “Damage at the Tomb of Shaykh Abdallah 
Sirajuddin,”   Free  Halab  Blog ,  26  November  2012,   http://freehalab.wordpress.com/2012/11/26/damage-
at-the-tomb-of-shaykh-abdallah-sirajuddin/ ; “Shaykh al-Yaqoubi Condemns the Bombing of Shrines 
in Aleppo,”  Free Halab Blog , 24 November 2012,  http://freehalab.wordpress.com/2012/11/24/shaykh-
al-yaqoubi-condemns-the-bombing-of-shrines-in-aleppo/  (both accessed 13 May 2014); Human 
Rights Watch  2012 .  
  
 64  .     E.g., Human Rights Watch  2012 ; Mediawerkgroep Syrie, “Desecrated Churches in Homs,” 17 June 
2012,   http://mediawerkgroepsyrie.wordpress.com/2012/06/17/desacrated-churches-in-homs-pdf/  
(accessed 1 December 2012).  
  
 65  .     By mid-2013. The date of a report by Syrian Network for Human Rights,  Targeting Mosques , 
11 June 2013,  http://sn4hr.org/public_html/wp-content/pdf/english/Targeting%20Mosques%20
by%20Syrian.pdf  (accessed 30 May 2015).  
  
1972, 1037 UNTS 151 (World Heritage Convention).  

 66  .     Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, 23 November 

 60  .     Workshop on “Countering the Destruction of and Trafficking in Cultural Property: From 

 26   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

 67  .     Convention for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage, 17 October 2003, 2368 UNTS 3.  
  
  
 68  .     Convention on the Protection and the Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, 
20 October 2005, 2440 UNTS 311. Due to the complexities of underwater ownership and the fact 
that  conflict  rarely  affects  underwater  sites,  the  UNESCO  Convention  on  the  Protection  of  the 
Underwater Cultural Heritage, 2 November 2001, 41 ILM 40 (2002) will not be discussed here.  
  
 69  .     For a detailed discussion of the extent to which the definition of heritage in the World Heritage 
Convention is legally binding in armed confllicts, and the legal implications for the protection of 
World Heritage sites. See Lostal  2015 .  
  
 70  .     Declaration Concerning the Intentional Destruction of Cultural Heritage, Paris, 17 October 2003, 
 http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=17718&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.
html  (accessed 10 May 2014).  
  
 71  .     Directorate General of Antiquities and Museums (DGAM), “Completing New Draft Law 
on  Protection  of  Syria’s  Archaeological  Heritage,”   DGAM ,   http://www.DGAM.gov.sy/index.
php?d=314&id=1114   (accessed  13  May  2014).  Perhaps  in  support  of  this,  during  2014,  legal 
experts, officials from the DGAM, and other official Syrian bodies collaborated with UNESCO in 
order to shed light on the expected benefits of the application of the Second Protocol of the Hague 
Convention in the Syrian case.  
  
 72  .     Suleiman Al-Khalidi, “Syrian Violence Threatens Ancient Treasures,”  Reuters , 20 February 2013, 
 http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/02/20/uk-syria-crisis-antiquities-idUSLNE91J01C20130220  
(accessed 21 February 2013).  
 73  .     World Heritage Committee  2013 , 115.  
  
 74  .     Kila  2012 .  
  
  
 75  .     For a full discussion of the prosecution of cultural crimes, see Carcano  2013 ; Ehlert  2014 . For 
brevity, this article will not discuss the sentencing of cultural crimes. It is extremely difficult to estab-
lish the value of heritage. (For some examples of methods used, see Darvill, Saunders, and Startin 
 1987 ; Darvill and Fulton  1998 ; Isakhan  2014 ). In addition, it is likely that, as concepts of cultural her-
itage and cultural property are refined in the heritage and legal spheres, value discussions will change.  
 76  .     Human Rights Council  2013 , 124.  
  
 77  .     Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court, 17 July 1998, 2187 UNTS 90.  
  
 78  .     Gottlieb  2004 , 857.  
  
 79  .     Frulli  2011 .  
  
 80  .     O’Keefe  2006 , 348.  
  
 81  .     Carcano  2013 .  
  
  
 82  .     See Art. 3(d) of the Statute of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Respon-
sible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the 
Former Yugoslavia since 1991, 25 May 1993, 32 ILM 1159 (1993); Arts. 13(b)(14) and 13(b)(17) of 
the Statute of the Iraqi Special Tribunal, 10 December 2003.  
  
  
news.admin.ch/NSBSubscriber/message/attachments/29293.pdf  (accessed 30 May 2015).  
  
 2013 .  
  
 86  .     Human Rights Watch, “Syria and the International Criminal Court: Questions and Answers,” 
September  2013,   http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/related_material/Q&A_Syria_ICC_Sept2013_
en_0.pdf  (accessed 30 May 2015).  
  
 87  .     Human Rights Council, “Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic: Press Conference,” 
 http://webtv.un.org/media/press-conferences/watch/commission-of-inquiry-on-the-syrian-arab-
republic-press-conference-geneva-17-march-2015/4116607036001#full-text  (accessed 30 May 2015).  
 88  .     Human Rights Council  2013 , 125.  
  
  
 89  .     Chautauqua  Institution,   “ The  Chautauqua  Blueprint  for  a  Statute  for  a  Syrian  Extraordi-
nary  Tribunal  to  Prosecute  Atrocity  Crimes,”  September  2013,   http://insct.syr.edu/wp-content/
uploads/2013/09/Chautauqua-Blueprint1.pdf  (accessed 30 May 2015).  

 83  .     Human Rights Council  2013 , 22.  
 84  .     Thomas Gürber, Letter to the President of the UN Security Council, January 2013,  http://www.

 85  .     For other problems regarding the enforcement of cultural property protection, see Lenzerini 

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  27 

 92  .     These events are confirmed in the regular reports published online by the ASOR Cultural Her-

 95  .     See the many articles debunking Da’esh myths by Sam Hardy in his  Conflict Antiquities Blog , 

 90  .     For a more detailed discussion, see Lostal  2015 .  
  
  
 91  .     In fact, there have been at least 50 incidents of varying severity attributed to Da’esh in Syria 
alone. See “ISIS Destroys Mausoleums in Syria’s Palmyra,”  Al-Arabiya News , 23 June 2015,  http://
english.alarabiya.net/en/News/middle-east/2015/06/23/ISIS-destroys-Islamic-mausoleums-in-Syria-
s-Palmyra-.html  (accessed 10 November 2015).  
  
itage Initiative,  http://www.asor-syrianheritage.org/reports/  (accessed 10 November 2015).  
 93  .     Reported in  The Independent  on 21 June 2015 and again in  Sputnik News  on 6 October 2015 
  
(where the theatre is incorrectly identified as the amphitheater). Neither incident is verified; it may 
even be the same report. See Alexander Sehmer, “Isis Fighters ‘Plant Mines’ around Ancient Palmyra 
Site,”   The  Independent ,  21  June  2015,   http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/isis-
fighters-plant-mines-around-ancient-palmyra-site-10335128.html   (accessed  10  November  2015); 
and  Sputnik  News,  “ISIL  Rigs  Palmyra’s  Ancient  Roman  Amphitheater  with  Explosives,”   Sputnik 
News ,  06  October  2015,   http://sputniknews.com/middleeast/20151006/1028118213/palmyra-syria-
isil-theater.html  - ixzz3nuKaUFFX (accessed 10 November 2015).  
  
 94  .     The event was Conflict Antiquities: Forging a Public/Private Response to Save Iraq and Syria’s 
Endangered Cultural Heritage, which was held 29 September 2015 and organized by the Department 
of  State  and  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art.  In  addition  to  podcasts  of  the  event,  some  slides 
and documents have been released, and several blogs have summarized the event. The UK Blue 
Shield website has collated all the links into one place for those wishing further information,  http://
ukblueshield.org.uk/events/previous-events/conflict-antiquities-forging-a-publicprivate-response-
to-save-iraq-and-syrias-endangered-cultural-heritage/  (accessed 10 November 2015).  
  
 https://conflictantiquities.wordpress.com/  (accessed 10 November 2015).  
 96  .     O’Keefe  2010 , 337.  
  
 97  .     Nowlan  1993 .  
  
  
 98  .     Alexander Skander Galand, “The Situation Concerning the Islamic State: Carte Blanche for the 
ICC if the Security Council Refers?”  EJIL: Talk! Blog , 27 May 2015,  http://www.ejiltalk.org/the-situation-
concerning-isis-carte-blanche-for-the-icc-if-the-security-council-refers/  (accessed 30 May 2015).  
  
 99  .     Anthony Moreland, “In the Absence of Sovereignty, How Will ISIS Be Held Accountable for 
Their Crimes?”  National Security and Armed Conflict Law Review , 10 February 2015,  http://nsac.law.
miami.edu/absence-sovereignty-isis-held-accountable/  (accessed 30 May 2015).  
    100  .     Perini and Cunliffe  2014a ,  2014b ,  2015 .  
    101  .     Kashmira Gander, “UN to Stop Updating Death Toll in Syria Conflict,”  The Guardian , 07 January 
2014, 
 http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/un-to-stop-updating-death-toll-in-syria-
conflict-9045096.html?origin=internalSearch  (accessed 13 May 2014).  
    102  .     UN News Centre, “With Syria’s Culture Near ‘Point of No Return’: UN Agency to Create Safeguard 
Observatory,”  UN Website ,  http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=47911  - .U4jFOvldWoP 
(accessed 30 May 2014).  
    103  .     Abdulkarim  2014 ; see also C.J. Chivers, “Grave Robbers and War Steal Syria’s History,”  New York 
Times , 6 April 2013,  http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/07/world/middleeast/syrian-war-devastates-
ancient-sites.html?_r=0&adxnnl=1&adxnnlx=1381999297-uZkVl2qRT6D6kiJ7dGErwA  (accessed 
17 October 2013).  
    104  .     Centre for Human Rights and Global Justice, “2012–14 Initiative on Human Rights Fact-Finding, 
Methods and Evidence,”  NYU School of Law Webpage ,  http://chrgj.org/project/2012-14-theme-human-
rights-fact-finding-methods-and-evidence/  (accessed 30 May 2015).  
    105  .     Cara Anna, “Syria: Europeans Block It from UN Culture Protection Measure,”  Associated Press , 28 
May 2015,  http://news.yahoo.com/syria-europeans-block-un-culture-protection-measure-201902142.
html  (accessed 15 June 2015).  
    106  .     Human Rights Watch, “Syria and the International Criminal Court: Questions and Answers.”  
    107  .     Sam  Hardy,  “Should  Cultural  Monuments  Become  an  Active  Issue  of  the  Human  Rights 
Agenda?”  Conflict Antiquities Blog , 12 May 2013,  http://conflictantiquities.wordpress.com/2014/04/12/

 28   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

amnesty-international-political-violence-cultural-property-community-persecution/  (accessed 01 May 
2014).  
    108  .     M.  Karouney,  “Shi’ite  Fighters  Rally  to  Defend  Damascus  Shrine,”   Reuters ,  03  March  2013, 
 http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/03/03/us-syria-crisis-shiites-idUSBRE92202X20130303?feed
Type=RSS&feedName=worldNews&utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=
Feed%3A+Reuters%2FworldNews+%28Reuters+World+News%29  (accessed 14 April 2014).  
    109  .     C.  Labrousse,  “Turkey  Army  Convoy  Entered  Northern  Syria  to  Protect  Tomb,”   Arab 
Chronicle , 24 April 2014,  http://the-arab-chronicle.com/turkey-army-convoy-entered-in-northern-
syria/  (accessed 25 April 2014).  
    110  .     Franklin Lamb, “The Fall of Palmyra,”  Counterpunch , 21 May 2015,  http://www.counterpunch.
org/2015/05/21/the-fall-of-pamyra/  (accessed 30 May 2015).  
    111  .     UNESCO  2015 , 7, point 35.  
    112  .     Doc. S/RES/2100 (2013), para. 16(f); Doc. S/RES/2164 (2014), para. 14(b).   

  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

    Abdulkarim  ,    Maamoun  .   2014 .   Annual  Report  2013 .   Damascus :   Directorate  General  of  Antiquities 
and Museums .  

    Ali  ,   Cheikhmous  .  2013 .  “Syrian Heritage under Threat.”   Journal of Eastern Mediterranean Archae-
ology and Heritage Studies   1 , no.  4 :  351 –66.  

   Amnesty International and American Association for the Advancement of Science .  2013 .  Conflict in 
Aleppo, Syria: A Retrospective Analysis . Geospatial Technologies and Human Rights Project.  London 
and Washington, DC :  Amnesty International and American Association for the Advancement 
of Science .  

    Arimatsu  ,   Louise  , and   Mohuba     Choudhury  .  2014 .  The Legal Classification of the Armed Conflicts in 
Syria, Yemen and Libya . International Law Series.  London :  Chatham House .  

    Bogliolo  ,   Luis Paulo  .  2012 . “Rethinking Military Necessity in the Law of Armed Conflict.” Unpublished 
PhD diss., University of Brasilia and London School of Economics and Political Science,  http://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2201129 .  

    Boldrick  ,   Stacy  ,   Leslie     Brubaker  , and   Richard     Clay  , eds.  2013 .  Striking Images, Iconoclasms Past and 
Present .  Farnham, UK :  Ashgate Publishing .  

    Brodie  ,    Neil  .   2008 .   “The  Market  Background  to  the  April  2003  Plunder  of  the  Iraq  National 
Museum.”   In   The  Destruction  of  Cultural  Heritage  in  Iraq ,  edited  by    P.  G.      Stone  ,    and    Joanne   
  Farchakh-Bajjaly  ,  41 – 54 .  Woodbridge, UK :  Boydell Press .  

    Carcano  ,   Andrea  .  2013 .  “The Criminalization and Prosecution of Attacks against Cultural Property.”  
In  War Crimes and the Conduct of Hostilities: Challenges to Adjudication and Investigation , edited by 
  F.     Pocar  ,   M.     Pedrazzi  , and   M.     Frulli  ,  78 – 97 .  Cheltenham, UK :  Edward Elgar .  

    Casana  ,   Jesse  , and   Mitra     Panahipour  .  2014 .  “Satellite-Based Monitoring of Looting and Damage to Archae-
ological Sites in Syria.”   Journal of Eastern Mediterranean Archaeology and Heritage Studies   2 , no.  2 :  128 –51.  

    Chapman  ,   John  .  1994 .  “Notes: Destruction of a Common Heritage: The Archaeology of War in 
Croatia, Bosnia and Hercegovinia.”   Antiquity   68 , no.  1 :  120 –26.  

    Cunliffe  ,   Emma  .  2012 .  Damage to the Soul: Syria’s Cultural Heritage in Conflict .  Palo Alto, CA :  Global 
Heritage Fund .  

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  29 

    ——— .  2014 .  “Archaeological Site Damage in the Cycle of War and Peace: A Syrian Case Study.”  
 Journal of Eastern Mediterranean Archaeology and Heritage Studies   3 , no.  2 :  229 –47.  

    Cunliffe  ,    Emma  ,    Wendi      Pederson  ,    Manuel      Fiol  ,    Traci      Jellison  ,    Caryn      Saslow  ,    Einar      Bjørgo  ,  and 
  Giovanni     Boccardi  .  2014 .  Satellite-based Damage Assessment to Cultural Heritage Sites in Syria .  Geneva : 
 UN Institute for Training and Research .  

    Darvill  ,   Timothy  , and   Andrew K.     Fulton  , eds.  1998 .  MARS: The Monuments at Risk Survey of England, 
1995 .  Bournemouth, UK :  School of Conservation Sciences, Bournemouth University .  

    Darvill  ,    Timothy  ,    Andrew      Saunders  ,  and    Bill      Startin  .   1987 .   “A  Question  of  National  Importance: 
Approaches to the Evaluation of Ancient Monuments for the Monuments Protection Programme in 
England.”   Antiquity   61 , no.  3 :  393 – 408 .  

    Ehlert  ,   Caroline  .  2014 .  Prosecuting the Destruction of Cultural Property in International Criminal Law: 
With a Case Study on the Khmer Rouge’s Destruction of Cambodia’s Heritage .  Leiden :  Brill .  

    Frulli  ,   Micaela  .  2011 .  “The Criminalization of Offenes against Cultural Heritage in Times of Armed 
Conflict: The Quest for Consistency.”   European Journal of International Law   22 , no.  1 :  203 –17.  

    Gerstenblith  ,   Patty  .  2010 .  “The Obligations Contained in International Treaties of Armed Forces to 
Protect Cultural Heritage in Times of Armed Conflict.”  In  Archaeology, Cultural Property, and the 
Military , edited by   L. W.     Rush  ,  4 – 14 .  Woodbridge, UK :  Boydell Press .  

    ——— .  2014 .  “Beyond the 1954 Hague Convention.”  In  Cultural Awareness in the Military: Develop-
ments and Implications for Future Humanitarian Cooperation , edited by   R.     Albro  ,   and   B.     Ivey  ,  83 – 98 . 
 New York :  Palgrave Macmillan .  

    Gottlieb  ,    Yaron  .   2004 .   “Criminalizing  Destruction  of  Cultural  Property:  A  Proposal  for  Defining 
New Crimes under the Rome Statute of the ICC.”   Penn State International Law Review   23 :  857 .  

    Henckaerts  ,   Jean-Marie  .  2005 .  “Study on Customary International Humanitarian Law: A Contribu-
tion to the Understanding and Respect for the Rule of Law in Armed Conflict.”   International Review 
of the Red Cross   87 , no.  857 :  175 – 212 .  

    Howard  ,    Russell  ,    Jonathan      Prohov  ,  and    Marc      Elliott  .   2015 .  “Digging  in  and  Trafficking  Out:  How 
the  Destruction  of  Cultural  Heritage  Funds  Terrorism.”   CTC  Sentinel,  Combating  Terrorism 
Center , 27 February 2015,  https://www.ctc.usma.edu/posts/digging-in-and-trafficking-out-how-the-
destruction-of-cultural-heritage-funds-terrorism .  

   Human Rights Council .  2013 .  Report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the 
Syrian Arab Republic .  Washington, DC :  UN General Assembly, Human Rights Council .  

   Human Rights Watch .  2012 .  “They Burned My Heart.” War Crimes in Northern Idlib during Peace 
Plan Negotiations .  Washington, DC :  Human Rights Watch .  

   International Council on Monuments and Sites .  2011 .  Ancient Villages of Northern Syria (Syrian Arab 
Republic) . No 1348. Advisory Body Evaluation. 10 March.  Paris :  UNESCO .  

    Isakhan  ,   Benjamin  .  2013 .  “Heritage Destruction and Spikes in Violence: The Case of Iraq.”  In 
 Cultural Heritage in the Crosshairs. Protecting Cultural Property During Conflict , edited by   J. D.     Kila  ,   
and   J. A.     Zeidler  ,  219 –48.  Leiden :  Brill .  

    ——— .   2014 .   “Creating  the  Iraq  Cultural  Property  Destruction  Database:  Calculating  a  Heritage 
Destruction Index.”   International Journal of Heritage Studies   1 , no.  1 :  1 – 21 .  

 30   

 EMMA CUNLIFFE ET AL

    Kila  ,   Joris D  .  2012 .  Heritage under Siege: Military Implementation of Cultural Property Protection Fol-
lowing the 1954 Hague Convention, Heritage and Identity .  Leiden :  Brill .  

    ——— .  2013 .  “Inactive, Reactive, or Pro-active?”   Journal of Eastern Mediterranean Archaeology and 
Heritage Studies   1 , no.  4 :  319 –42.  

    Lenzerini  ,   Federico  .  2013 .  “The Role of International and Mixed Criminal Courts in the Enforcement 
of  International  Norms  Concerning  the  Protection  of  Cultural  Heritage.”   In   Enforcing  International 
Cultural Heritage Law , edited by   F.     Francioni  ,   and   J.     Gordley  ,  40 – 64 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

    Lostal  ,    Marina  .   2012 .   “The  Meaning  and  Protection  of  ‘Cultural  Objects  and  Places  of  Worship’ 
under the 1977 Additional Protocols.”   Netherlands International Law Review   59 , no.  3 :  455 –72.  

    ——— .  2015 .  “Syria’s World Cultural Heritage and Individual Criminal Responsibility.”   Interna-
tional Review of Law   3 :  1 – 17 .  

    Nowlan  ,   Jacqueline  .  1993 .  “Cultural Property and the Nuremberg War Crimes Trial.”   Humanitaeres 
Voelkerrecht   6 , no.  4 :  221 –23.  

    O’Keefe  ,   Patrick J  .  2007 .  Commentary on the UNESCO 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting 
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property .  Powys, UK : 
 Institute of Art and Law .  

    O’Keefe  ,   Roger  .  2006 .  The Protection of Cultural Property in Armed Conflict .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press .  

    ——— .  2008 .  “Protection of Cultural Property.”  In  The Handbook of International Humanitarian 
Law , edited by   D.     Fleck  ,  433 –74.  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

    ——— .  2010 .  “Protection of Cultural Property under International Criminal Law.”   Melborne Journal 
of International Law   11 :  339 –92.  

    ——— .  2014 .  “Protection of Cultural Property.”  In  Oxford Handbook of International Law in Armed 
Conflict , edited by   A.     Clapham  , and   P.     Gaeta  ,  492 – 520 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press .  

    O’Keefe  ,   Roger  , and   J.     Patrick  .  1997 .  Trade in Antiquities .  Paris :  UNESCO .  

    Perini  ,    Silvia  ,  and    Emma      Cunliffe  .   2014a .   Towards  a  Protection  of  the  Syrian  Cultural  Heritage: 
A Summary of the International Responses (April 2014 —September 2014) , Vol.  2 .  Girona, Spail : 
 Heritage for Peace .  

    ——— .  2014b .  Towards a Protection of the Syrian Cultural Heritage: A Summary of the International 
Responses (March 2011–March 2014) , Vol.  1 .  Girona, Spain :  Heritage for Peace .  

    ——— .  2015 .  Towards a Protection of the Syrian Cultural Heritage: A Summary of the National and 
International Responses (September 2014 —September 2015) , Vol.  3 .  Girona, Spain :  Heritage for Peace .  

    Prott  ,   Lyndel V.  , and   Patrick J.     O’Keefe  .  1984 .  Law and the Cultural Heritage .  Abingdon, UK :  Profes-
sional Books .  

    ——— .  1988 .  Handbook of National Regulations Concerning the Export of Cultural Property .  Paris : 
 UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) .  

    ——— .  1992 .  “‘Cultural Heritage’ or ‘Cultural Property.’”     
 1 , no.  2 :  307 –20.  

LEGAL IMPLICATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS  

  31 

    Toman  ,   Jirí  .  1996 .  The Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict: Commentary on 
the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and Its Protocol, 
Signed on 14 May, 1954 in The Hague, and on Other Instruments of International Law Concerning Such 
Protection .  Paris :  UNESCO .  

   UNESCO .  2011 .  The Fight against the Illicit Trafficking of Cultural Objects. 1970 Convention: Past and 
Future: Information Kit .  Paris :  UNESCO .  

    ——— .  2015 .  Item 4.11 of the Provisional Agenda 38 C/49: Reinforcement of UNESCO’s Action for the 
Protection of Culture and the Promotion of Cultural Pluralism in the Event of Armed Conflict. Thirty-
Seventh Session .  Paris :  UNESCO .  

    Viejo-Rose  ,   Dacia  .  2013 .  “Reconstructing Heritage in the Aftermath of Civil War: Re-Visioning the 
Nation and the Implications of International Involvement.”   Journal of Intervention and Statebuilding: 
Special Issue on Cultural Interventions   7 , no.  2 :  125 –48.  

    Viejo-Rose  ,   Dacia  , and   Marie Louise     Stig Sørenson  .  2015 .  “Cultural Heritage and Armed Conflict: 
New  Questions  for  an  Old  Relationship.”   In   The  Palgrave  Handbook  of  Contemporary  Heritage 
Research , edited by   E.     Waterton  ,   and   S.     Watson  ,  281 –96.  Basingstoke, UK :  Palgrave Macmillon .  

    Wolfinbarger  ,   Susan  ,   Jonathan     Drake  ,   Eric     Ashcroft  , and   Kathryn     Hanson  .  2014a .  Ancient History, 
modern  destruction:  Assessing  the  current  status  of  Syria’s  World  Heritage  Sites  Using  High  Resolu-
tion Satellite Imagery .  Washington, DC :  American Association for the Advancement of Science and 
Smithsonian Institution .  

    ——— .  2014b .  Ancient History, Modern Destruction: Assessing the Status of Syria’s Tentative World 
Heritage Sites Using High-Resolution Satellite Imagery , Part 1.  Washington, DC :  American Association 
for the Advancement of Science and Smithsonian Institution .  

   World Heritage Committee .  2013 .  Item 7B of the Provisional Agenda: State of Conservation of World 
Heritage Properties Inscribed on the World Heritage List. Convention Concerning the Protection of the 
World Cultural and Natural Heritage. Thirty-Seventh Session . Doc. WHC-13/37.COM/7B.ADD.  Paris : 
 UNESCO .  

    ——— .  2014 .  Item 7A of the Provisional Agenda: State of Conservation of the Properties Inscribed on 
the List of World Heritage in Danger. Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and 
Natural Heritage. Thirty-eighth Session . Doc. WHC-14/38.COM/7A.Add.  Paris :  UNESCO .    


