War and Cultural Property: 

The 1954 Hague Convention and the

Status of U.S. Ratiﬁcation

 -*   **

In May of 1954, the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict (Hague Convention) was adopted in an attempt to curb the destruction of movable and im-
movable cultural property during war. Recent conflicts, such as the continuing war in the Balkans,
remind us that the Hague Convention is as relevant today as it was ﬁfty years ago. Although this
Convention is the most comprehensive and internationally recognized treaty to protect cultural prop-
erty in time of war, the United States remains one of the few signatories that has yet to ratify it. In
January 1999, former President William J. Clinton forwarded the Hague Convention to the Sen-
ate with the recommendation that it ratify the Convention and part of Protocol I. Although this pre-
sented perhaps the ﬁrst real opportunity in nearly half a century for the United States to join one hun-
dred countries and ratify the Hague Convention, its fate remains uncertain. Generally oriented
towards the United States’ policy and practice, this article broadly discusses the Hague Convention,
its history, its weaknesses and strengths, and the current status of U.S. ratiﬁcation.

The humanising of war! You might as well talk of humanising hell!

Admiral Sir John Fisher, during the 1899 Hague Peace Conference

Decisions were imparted by legal considerations at every level. The law of
war proved invaluable in the decision-making process.

General Colin Powell, after the 1991 Persian Gulf War

*Ph.D. candidate in the Archaeology and Social Context program at Indiana University, Bloomington.

**Veteran of the United States Army and graduate of Indiana University, Bloomington, currently
employed as Program Director, Indiana Department of Veterans Affairs. The Authors would like to
thank Brian Donahoe, Ricardo J. Elia, Patty Gerstenblith, Karen D. Vitelli, Jane C. Waldbaum, and sev-
eral anonymous reviewers for taking the time to read and comment upon earlier drafts of this article.
We are also indebted to Patrick Boylan, Jan Hladík, Senator Richard Lugar and his staff, Andras Riedl-
mayer, a handful of employees of the U.S. Department of Defense, UNESCO, and the United States
Congress for responding to our repeated inquiries. Of course, any errors remain our own.

International Journal of Cultural Property, Vol 10, No. 2, 2001, pp. 217– 245
© 2001 International Cultural Property Society

217

218  -   

1 

The twentieth century produced some of the most destructive wars in the history
of humankind. Millions of lives were lost, and millions more dislocated by wars
within and between nations. While these conﬂicts resulted in staggering numbers
of casualties, the loss and disruption of human life were not the only consequences
of armed conﬂicts. Wars have also led to the destruction of cultural property—
the very objects that embody and reﬂect the human experience, and that give shape
to individual, ethnic, and national identity. In recent conﬂicts such as the war in the
former Yugoslavia, where observers witnessed the calculated eradication of mosques,
churches, monasteries, and public monuments, we are again reminded of the inti-
mate connection between violence against people and the destruction of their ma-
terial world. As John Chapman has commented on this conﬂict, “[I]n a cultural
war, the conquest of territories and the ‘ethnic cleansing’ of settlements is insuf-
ﬁcient. Nothing less than the destruction of past historical identities is needed.”1
It is perhaps a paradox of our age that in the midst of so many terrible con-
ﬂicts more effort has been placed on establishing and enforcing laws of war than
ever before in history. Of the many international conventions, treaties, and decla-
rations that were adopted in the last century and that focused on war and cultural
property, the 1954 Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event
of Armed Conﬂict (the Hague Convention) is among the most important. The
Hague Convention is one of the few measures available to nations to ensure the
protection of their own cultural property, not only in times of peace, but also in
the tragic event of armed conﬂict. In January 1999, former President William J.
Clinton recommended to the United States Senate that it ratify the Hague Con-
vention, nearly ﬁfty years after the treaty’s inception. Since the president’s propo-
sition, however, the Senate has ignored the issue of ratiﬁcation, and the treaty has
languished in the Committee on Foreign Relations.

Over the years, numerous articles have appeared to assess the practical and
philosophical  aspects  of the  Hague  Convention.  Nevertheless,  the  constantly
changing nature of war and the application of the Hague Convention to it, as well
as the perpetually shifting political tides, give reason to review this vital document
once again. This seems especially true with respect to the recent United States pol-
icy changes that occurred at the end of the Clinton administration. As it is difﬁ-
cult to separate contemporary politics from historical precedent, this article will
offer a comprehensive history of the events surrounding the Hague Convention, as
well as an analysis of the details particular to the treaty. These issues, past and pres-
ent, are generally oriented towards the United States’ position on the Hague Con-
vention. Our intent is not to ignore the signiﬁcant contributions other countries
have made to this treaty, but to make readers aware of the critical juncture at which

   :    219

the United States has entered. The United States’ hesitation to ratify the 1954
Hague Convention is critical not only for domestic matters but also for the myr-
iad international concerns that arise from having such an active and potentially de-
structive military not bound by the most comprehensive and internationally rec-
ognized treaty to protect cultural property in times of armed conﬂict.

2     “ ”
For millennia armies and marauders around the world have indulged in the loot-
ing, pillaging, and wholesale destruction of cultural property during times of war.
A number of noted historians, legal scholars, and social scientists have chronicled
the patterns of pillaging throughout history to illuminate the ways in which es-
teemed cultural sites and monuments turn into the “spoils” of war.2 There is, for
instance, the Roman dictator Sulla, who in the ﬁrst century B.C. returned tri-
umphantly from wars in the East, laden with gold, silver, and gems, as well as Greek
marble sculptures. Consequently he “established a precedent for the strange pas-
sion for collection of ancient Greek sculpture as a method of vaunting an indi-
vidual’s cultural pretensions and power.”3 Connecting himself to this ancient prac-
tice,  in  1798 Napoleon  Bonaparte  paraded  through  Paris,  surrounded  by  his
captured treasures. In turn, perhaps emulating their sovereign, Napoleon’s troops
also indulged in pillage, as some were recorded as bragging that they would leave
the inhabitants of conquered lands with “only their eyes to weep.”4 One historian
has written that for “those on the receiving end, an incursion by these unpaid,
unfed, undisciplined hoards seemed to be not liberation but an ‘invasion of bar-
barians’ with the sole object of pillaging and looting.”5These instances are just two
of many culled from history that illustrate how the destruction and plunder of
cities and artifacts were habitually perceived to be a natural element of war’s prac-
tice.  Indeed,  in  observing  that  the  ancient  Assyrians,  Babylonians,  Romans,
Vikings, and Crusaders all partook in pillaging as a part of battle, one begins to
see that more recent cases, from Nazi Germany to modern Croatia, are not a de-
parture from times past but rather a continuation. As Jeanette Greenﬁeld has sug-
gested, “[T]he act of plundering in time of war is ancient, timeless, and pandemic.
. . . The history of the world is in part the history of wars, and so it is easy to cite
endless examples of ‘spoils of war.’”6

Legally enacted laws for conduct during warfare, jus in bello,7 as well as social
rituals delineating war practices were not so rare in antiquity,8 but seldom did these
laws speciﬁcally address the protection and preservation of cultural property. One
may see this, for instance, in the formulation of ancient Greek laws on inter-state
warfare, which at least considered the “inviolability of sacred places,” such as those
under protection of the gods, but nevertheless did not attempt to constrain acts of
looting, pillaging, or vandalizing.9 For centuries, and in many places, the destruc-

220  -   

tion of what we now term “cultural property” was not even an issue worthy of se-
rious consideration, as the appropriation of cultural objects was considered an in-
tegral aspect of war. In fact, laws of war in Europe during the Middle Ages and
the early modern period were occasionally established, not to disallow but to sanc-
tion and regulate a “fair” system to distribute booty.10 Robert Stacy argues:

War was conceived in law as a kind of joint-stock operation; by serving in
the war a soldier acquired a legally enforceable right to share in its proﬁts,
gained chieﬂy through plunder and ransom. . . . The precise customs govern-
ing the division of spoil varied from country to country, but everywhere this
distribution created a legally recognized, heritable, and assignable right to
property in the captured objects.11

In other words, many early laws of warfare codiﬁed the act of plunder as a legal
and just part of battle and its aftermath. Even—as Geoffry Best asserts—in the
historical cases in which a dictum existed that sought to order or limit the de-
struction of nonmilitary objects, “there is plentiful evidence from all wars that sol-
diers in all but the most extraordinarily disciplined and law-observing armies have
looted whenever opportunity has offered and have considered the pursuit of loot
a kind of soldier’s natural right.”12 Further complicating the issue, early seven-
teenth-  and  eighteenth-century  European  laws  of war  often  did  not  apply  to
“rebels,” “inﬁdels,” and “savages”—that is, they were not used in colonial locales
where European nations fought, because indigenous peoples were not seen as fully
human.13 For their part, many indigenous groups employed a highly ritualized form
of warfare, often a kind of rite de passage that minimized the violence against persons
and property.14 One may even show that the recent unease about looting and war
is not particular to the Western world but appears in many cultures and times, from
written Islamic law that forbids any attack on civilian targets to pre-colonial Africa,
where places of religion, culture, and art were protected during battle.15

Even as examples of war and pillage abound, a real concern about the status
of cultural property during conﬂicts, and restitution afterward, may be found as
a thread running throughout Western history. A familiar example is a group of ﬁg-
ures known as the Tyrannicides, which were removed from Athens in 480 B.C. but
then repatriated to Athenians with the defeat of the Persians in 331 B.C.16 While
most Roman despots indulged in looting, Cicero is known to have forced a former
Roman praetor to pay forty-ﬁve million sesterces to Sicilians in restitution for the
despoliation of public monuments and temples.17 Generations later, the 1815 Con-
gress of Vienna compelled the French empire to return multitudes of objects that
Napoleon  had  pillaged  from  north  Africa,  as  well  as  conquered  territories  in 
Europe.18 Notwithstanding these efforts, it is important to bear in mind that for
millennia, particularly in Europe, plunder was considered an intrinsic aspect of
war, not a deviation from it.

   :    221

Even with this long tradition of pillage, in the mid-1800s a heightened and
collective pan-European concern for the protection of cultural property during
war emerged because of both changing social views and a transformation in the na-
ture of war itself. Speciﬁcally, most nineteenth-century European countries expe-
rienced a broad surge of nationalism, a strong peace movement, and a pride in
spreading humanitarianism in the public sphere, whereas armies metamorphosed
from small groups of professional soldiers with minimally destructive arms to
large armies with compulsory military service and a more powerful arsenal of
weapons.19 The ubiquity of new media, such as photography, introduced the real-
ity of war to a European public unfamiliar with its brutalities and swiftly inspired
the paradoxical attempt to tame war while (or perhaps because) war itself was be-
coming increasingly menacing.

Despite the growing disquiet in Europe, it was not a European country that
ﬁrst attempted to codify the protection of cultural property during armed conﬂict
but the United States, with the Instructions for the Governance of Armies of the
United States in the Field, or “Lieber Code,” drafted for the Union Army by Dr.
Francis Lieber.20 Issued in 1863 as General Order 100 under President Lincoln, this
code contained four articles (31, 34, 35 and 36) of 157 that speciﬁcally aimed at en-
suring that cultural property remain safe from bombardments and misappropria-
tion by the victor. Although the Lieber Code was adopted during the U.S. Civil
War and was composed by a lawyer in the United States, its inﬂuence spread to nu-
merous countries, including France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, Russia,
and Spain, during their attempts to develop laws of warfare.21

In the summer of 1899, representatives from twenty-four countries convened
at the Hague, Netherlands, by invitation of Czar Alexander II of Russia. Alexan-
der II hoped to continue the work of the conference in Brussels in 1874, where ﬁf-
teen European countries had attempted to produce a law of war but failed to ad-
vance a convention to the diplomatic stage.22The result of the 1899 conference was
a series of conventions and declarations that constituted the ﬁrst systematic code
on the laws of war agreed to by an international community in a binding multi-
lateral document.23 While the 1899 Hague Conference may be regarded as unsuc-
cessful in that it failed to adequately promote peace through a reduction of ar-
maments,24 it provided a foundation for the protection of cultural property in
times of war, upon which later conventions were built. Speciﬁcally, Convention
(II) of the 1899 conference prohibited pillage and seizure by invading forces (Ar-
ticles 23, 28 and 47) and required armies to take all necessary steps to spare edi-
ﬁces  devoted  to  religion,  art,  science,  and  charitable  purposes,  hospitals,  and
places where there were sick and wounded, provided these buildings were not used
at the same time for military purposes (Art. 27).25 Article 27 also stipulated that
the besieged ought to “indicate these buildings or places by some particular and
visible signs, which should previously be notiﬁed to the assailants.” In the end,

222  -   

twenty-four countries signed the convention and forty-eight ratiﬁed or acceded 
to it.26

In 1907, nearly ﬁfty world powers gathered at the Hague—by invitation of
President Roosevelt on behalf of the Czar—to extend the laws of the 1899 Con-
vention.27 On October 18, 1907, forty-one countries signed the Hague Convention
on Land Warfare. Only thirty-four countries ever ratiﬁed it, including the United
States.28 The  1907 Convention  revised  and  expanded  the  1899 agreement;  the 
section on cultural property was not signiﬁcantly altered, although the phrase “his-
toric monuments” was added to the list of protected ediﬁces in Article 27. Addi-
tionally, Convention (IX) concerning the bombardment by naval forces was cre-
ated, in which Article 7 stipulated that  “a town or place, even when taken by
storm, may not be pillaged.” Although the 1907 Convention was bold in its objec-
tives, and weak in its actual effectiveness, it provided essentially the only legal pro-
tection for cultural property during two world wars.

A third planned Hague convention was canceled when World War I erupted.
The 1907 Hague Convention was put to the test for the ﬁrst time during this con-
ﬂict and for the most part failed to protect cultural property.29 The 1907 Hague
Convention tacitly assumed wars in the twentieth century would mimic nineteenth-
century warfare, but the massive geographic scale and horrendous destructiveness
of World War I were entirely unprecedented. Technological innovations such as
long-range artillery and aerial bombings created indiscriminate destruction over
vast  areas  while  millions  of soldiers  haphazardly  bombed  and  shot  their  way
through Europe. The burning of the library at the University of Louvain, Belgium,
in  1914 and  the  crippling  damage  by  aerial  bombardment  to  the  cathedral  of
Reims, where generations of French royalty were crowned, serve as poignant illus-
trations of the Convention’s inability to prevent the intentional, as well as the un-
planned, ruin of cultural property.30 Lawrence Kaye has pointed out that, as a por-
tent of things to come, the 1907 Convention was only belatedly employed in the
treaties at the end of World War I to effect the reconciliation between nations.31
The Convention was applied most notably in the Treaty of Versailles of 1919,
which enabled the return of objects, or reparations in their place; the treaty in-
cluded speciﬁc language that required Germany to refurnish the Louvain library.
The Treaties of St. Germain (1919), Trianon (1920), and Riga (1921) all had simi-
lar requirements grounded on the principles of the 1907 Convention.

In the aftermath of the First World War, government ofﬁcials and museum
personnel began to reconsider the methods of protecting cultural property dur-
ing armed conﬂict. In 1922, the Washington Conference created a commission to
address  air  warfare.  Although  a  convention  was  never  signed,  many  countries
agreed to a “zone of protection” around monuments of historical value.32 Over a
decade later, twenty-one countries signed (eleven ratiﬁed) the pan-American 1935
Washington Pact for the Protection of Artistic and Scientiﬁc Institutions and of

   :    223

Historic Monuments, also known as the Roerich Pact. Unlike its precursors, this
treaty focused entirely on the preservation of cultural property.33 Regrettably, the
Roerich Pact was limited in impact because only States in the Americas were sig-
natories, but it inﬂuenced later international efforts by expanding the deﬁnition of
“cultural property” to include all institutions devoted to science, art, education,
and culture, making almost any building associated with these endeavors neutral in
times of war.

Across the Atlantic, a renewed interest in the protection of cultural property
during armed conﬂicts was concurrently growing. In 1937, the International Mu-
seums Ofﬁce (IMO) held a meeting in Paris to draft an international convention.
Unlike previous treaties, the IMO draft focused on the physical sheltering of ob-
jects from inadvertent bombings by balancing the needs of the military with the
need to protect objects from annihilation. In the autumn of 1938, a draft was sub-
mitted for review to the Assembly of the League of Nations. While governments
were being contacted and the draft was being studied, war broke out, and all efforts
towards  an  international  convention  were  indeﬁnitely  suspended.  For  another
world war, the 1907 Hague Convention would bear the weight of legally protect-
ing cultural property.

During World War II, cultural properties suffered not only from the greater
destructiveness of new weapons, but also from unprecedented pillaging by the
powers of Europe—most notably the Nazi regime. It is now believed that through
pillage and appropriation alone the leaders of the Third Reich conﬁscated, muti-
lated, or destroyed a truly countless number of objects. Karl Meyer has described
the destruction in Leningrad alone:

[N]ot since the Goths and Vandals had Europe witnessed so spiteful an
assault on other people’s cultural treasures. The ancient cathedral at
Novgorod was ravaged, Pushkin’s house ransacked, Tolstoy’s manuscripts
burned, and elsewhere museums, churches, libraries, universities, and
scientiﬁc institutes were robbed and destroyed. Most of the Nazi plunder
has never been recovered.34

As the fortunes of war shifted, however, it is now clear that the Nazi pillage did
not go without retribution. Germany now claims that the Russians looted ap-
proximately 200,000 art objects, two million books, and  “three kilometers” of
archival materials.35 Both Germany and Russia, despite their commitment to the
1907 Hague Convention, engaged in plunder bluntly described as  “as unprece-
dentedly thorough as their violence against human beings.”36 Nevertheless, the
1907 Hague Convention was not totally disregarded: unlike that of the First World
War, where the Convention was invoked only following the conﬂict, some evidence
exists that leaders during this war occasionally employed the treaty to prevent out-
right looting and the destruction of cultural sites. For instance, Count Franz

224  -   

Wolff-Metternich—a civilian art historian placed for a time as head of the Ger-
man arts-and-monuments protection ofﬁce, known as Kunstschutz—foiled the re-
moval of objects from Paris for a time with objections grounded on Article 46 of
the 1907 Hague Convention.37 Also, United States strategists adhered to the prin-
ciples of the 1907 Convention when they opted not to bomb Kyoto, Japan, even
with its industrial facilities, because of the city’s cultural heritage.38 Undeniably,
these few instances pale in comparison to the ultimate failure of the 1907 Hague
Convention  to  prevent  the  obliteration  and  misappropriation  of incalculable
pieces of art, documents, artifacts, and entire monuments.39

The Allied countries took some measures to curb the destruction and loot-
ing of cultural property, as evidenced with the 1943 American Commission for the
Protection and Salvation of Artistic and Historic Monuments in the War Areas,
and  the  1943 Declaration  of London,  which  was  eventually  widely  adopted
throughout Western European nations.40The Declaration granted to the Allies the
right to nullify or void any transfer of or trafﬁc in property in territories involved
in the war, irrespective of whether or not the objects were culled from “evident
plunder or of apparently legal transactions.” In the winter of 1943 General Eisen-
hower, Commander-in-Chief of the Allied Forces, ordered his own troops to re-
spect cultural heritage when possible, afﬁrming “‘that [European] heritage truly
symbolizes the civilization which the Allies went to war to defend.’”41 Eisenhower
followed with an ampliﬁcation of previous directives on May 26, 1944: “‘in the
path of our advance will be found historical monuments and cultural centers
which symbolize to the world all that we are ﬁghting to preserve. It is the respon-
sibility of every commander to protect and respect these symbols whenever pos-
sible.’”42 These steps taken by the Allied forces were laudable, but it was, in prac-
tical terms, perhaps too little, too late.

Tragically, we now know that the atrocities of World War II were many and
most crimes were graver than stolen paintings and gutted libraries, yet the system-
atic plundering and eradication of cultural property was a devastating crime per-
petrated against thousands of individuals and, arguably, humanity as a whole. Al-
though  multitudes  of objects  and  monuments  were  completely  demolished,
restitution of some surviving cultural property began immediately following the
war—often called for in the peace treaties themselves, as was the case for Roma-
nia, Finland, Bulgaria, and Hungary.43 Additionally, in 1945 Nüremberg prosecu-
tors deﬁned the plunder of art as a war crime, in part based on international
treaties and declarations, such as Article 56 of the 1899 and 1907 Hague Conven-
tions, which state that “all seizure of, destruction or willful damage done to insti-
tutions of this character, historic monuments, works of art and science, is forbid-
den and should be made the subject of legal proceedings.”44 With the use of a
detailed inventory of art objects, conspirators such as Alfred Rosenberg and Her-
mann Goering were convicted on the tribunal’s conclusion that “the conscience of

   :    225

the civilized world [is] against the plunder of public and private property, wanton
destruction not justiﬁed by military necessity.”45 Despite these initial attempts to
resolve the conﬂicts over plunder and questions of ownership, scholars, art collec-
tors, museums, and the public today continue to suffer the consequences of the
systematic looting that occurred throughout Europe during the 1930s and 1940s.46
This lasting effect can be seen in the peculiar controversies over Schliemann’s trea-
sures of Troy (“Priam’s Treasure”), now in Russia, and the lingering mystery of the
Amber Room from the Catherine Palace in Tsarskoe Selo, still unaccounted for de-
spite the tireless search.47

In the wake of the Second World War, the United Nations Educational, Sci-
entiﬁc, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) was founded in 1945. This agency
was charged with the international protection of cultural property and immedi-
ately set to work on creating a tangible means to prevent the kinds of acts that had
just left Europe denuded of its historical and cultural treasures.48 Etienne Clément
has described how UNESCO, taking over the role of the League of Nations, began
its long task,

founded on the signiﬁcant reaction of the international community after the
Second World War which can be summarized in the words “never again”
and which led to the adoption of major instruments of international law
such as the United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and the Geneva Conventions on Humanitarian Law.49

It was in this climate of internationalism and action that at UNESCO’s ﬁfth Gen-
eral Conference, in 1950, the Italian delegation ofﬁcially proposed an international
convention based on a revised draft of the 1938 IMO treaty.50 As we will soon see,
there were many contentious issues, and, although models already existed from pre-
vious treaties, compromises did not come easily. In turn, it took four long years for
participating countries to study closely the matter of war and cultural property
and to revise a suitable draft of the Convention.

3  1954     
       
 

On May 14, 1954, at the Hague in the Netherlands, thirty-seven countries signed
the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conﬂict. The intention of the 1954 Convention is to maximize the protection of
cultural property, such as books, artwork, antiquities, monuments, and buildings
devoted to education and science, during times of peace and, in particular, in the
event of armed conﬂicts. The Hague Convention’s central position is that “dam-

226  -   

age to cultural property belonging to any people whatsoever means damage to the
cultural heritage of all mankind, since each people makes its contribution to the
culture of the world.” Underlying this argument are two rather complex issues.
First, it may be charged that international treaties on cultural property, such as the
Hague Convention, ignore human suffering and tacitly place greater worth on the
inanimate than on human life.51 In contrast, one might claim that the Hague Con-
vention recognizes the intimate connectedness between humans and the objects
they produce, and the deep values and symbols people imbue in material culture.
It is in this sense that Frank G. Fechner advocates renaming “cultural property
law” to the larger scope of “cultural protection law”: “[C]ultural property law
does not protect primarily things, but human beings. . . . If human rights, espe-
cially the right to life, are disregarded, there will be no respect for cultural objects
either.”52 Similarly, Markus Müller asserts that “[w]here human rights are not re-
spected, cultural property is usually not protected.” He adds, “[t]he reverse holds
true as well—destruction of the cultural heritage often means an attack on cul-
ture.”53Thus it can be said that the cultural object is not of absolute primacy—pas
une primauté de l’objet—as material culture would not exist without humans, and hu-
mans could not thrive without the material life that forms an integral part of their
identity, livelihood, and history. 

Second, a fundamental premise of the Hague Convention is a universalist view
of cultural  property,  which  allows  the  international  community  to  consider 
monuments and objects as constituting a part of “common” human culture, irre-
spective of the property’s geographic location or place of origin, individual rights,
or national jurisdiction.54 The universalist framework in which the Hague Con-
vention is situated potentially conﬂicts with varying claims of “ownership” in-
stantiated by individuals, particular groups, and nation-states. That is, some per-
son may claim to own an item with broad cultural value,55 whereas certain groups,
such as some Native American nations in the U.S., lay collective claims to cultural
property.56 Furthermore, numerous countries maintain that the government as rep-
resentative of its people owns all cultural property within its borders (for example,
Greece, Turkey, and Mexico). Nevertheless, this potential conﬂict between uni-
versalist and particularist frameworks may be only a philosophical disputation, as
in practical terms it seems reasonable to accept multilayered claims of value that
permit some objects to have signiﬁcance to all of humanity, as well as particular
nation-states, groups, or individuals. As Thomas Fitschen succinctly explains this
notion:

“[C]ommon” cultural heritage is not, in a legal sense, common property of
all, nor does it fall under some kind of joint international administration or
lose its particular relevance for the culture which originated it. The term
“common heritage” acknowledges, however, a common duty of all States to

   :    227

protect and preserve the treasures falling under this category in the interests
of the world community as a whole.57

The Hague Convention consists of the following parts: General Provisions re-
garding protection, Special protection, Transport of cultural property, Personnel,
the distinctive emblem, Scope of application of the Convention, Execution of the
Convention, Final provisions, and Regulations for its Execution, Protocol I, and
the 1999 addition, Protocol II. The ﬁrst portion is referred to as the Convention,
and it is ratiﬁed (or acceded to) separately from the Protocols. Neither the 1954
Protocol nor the 1999 Protocol is a formal part of the Convention, because the
United States, the United Kingdom, and several other powers disingenuously in-
sisted that they could not ratify the Convention if Protocol I was included, and,
although the parts were separated, neither the U.S. nor the U.K. has ratiﬁed the
Convention.58 Of further note, at the ﬁrst meeting of the states party to the Con-
vention in 1962, including the 1954 Protocol in the Convention was proposed, but
this proposal was not accepted.

The Convention establishes the logical foundations, regulations, responsibil-
ities of participating countries, and overall role of UNESCO. The Convention
ﬁrst requires countries to protect cultural property in times of peace through phys-
ical measures such as the creation of shelters for items that can be transported, the
raising of distinctive emblems to facilitate recognition of protected places, and the
inclusion of items in the International Register of Cultural Property Under Spe-
cial Protection. The Convention obliges States Parties to establish in peacetime,
within their armed forces, specialized services on the protection of cultural prop-
erty (Art. 7[2] of the Convention). Additionally, it requires signatories to institute
training programs on the Convention for both military and civilian personnel who
may come in contact with cultural property in times of armed conﬂict. The sec-
ond feature of the Convention provides rules of conduct for armies at war, in re-
lation to cultural property. Behavior such as looting and pillaging are condemned
outright, reprisals are prohibited (Art. 4[4] of the Convention), and other actions
remain more situational, as Article 4(1) of the Convention provides that the de-
fender not use cultural property and its immediate surroundings, or the appliances
in use for its protection, for military purposes, and that the attacker refrain from
any act of hostility against such property.59

Protocol I establishes procedures for the return of cultural property after hos-
tilities have ceased and expressly prohibits the appropriation of cultural property
as war reparations. This Protocol prevents the exportation of cultural property and
requires the immediate return of objects to responsible authorities should objects
be removed from their place of origin. If broadly read, Protocol I offers relatively
extensive guidelines for the restitution of cultural property after its removal from
an occupied territory by a belligerent party. In particular, Thomas Fitschen has

228  -   

shown how this Protocol provides that there cannot be a “safe” international art
trade of objects removed from a territory during armed conﬂict.60The second Pro-
tocol, which was adopted in May 1999, will be discussed shortly, as its central aim
is to remedy many of the unforeseen shortcomings of the original 1954 treaty.

Notably, the United States government took an active role in the creation of
the Hague Convention. Indeed, somewhat ironically, several parts were included in
the Convention speciﬁcally to accommodate U.S. sentiments, yet the U.S. is one of
the few signatories that has not ratiﬁed the treaty.61 For example, the concept “im-
perative (or unavoidable) military necessity” (Art. 4[1] and Art. 11[2]) was added
to allow contracting parties to break the treaty in cases of military necessity. It ap-
pears this waiver arose from the possibility of having to use nuclear weapons, in
which case the U.S. government did not want to be restrained by the Convention.62
Other countries agreed to this clause, apparently thinking that if countries could
uphold the general ideas of the Convention without placing themselves in an awk-
ward moral or diplomatic corner, more countries would be enticed to support the
Convention.63

While the United States has not legally bound itself to the Hague Conven-
tion, it regards its principles as part of customary international law and claims to
have incorporated the treaty into its ﬁeld manuals and general approach to war-
fare.64 This signiﬁes that the U.S. effectively employs the principles outlined in the
Convention, even without ratiﬁcation, which allows the U.S. military to implement
“its own permutations of that convention to suit situations of military necessity,”65
that is, principally, the potential use of nuclear arms, or even conventional bom-
bardments. However, the United States does remain under the obligations of the
1907 Hague Convention and the 1935 Roerich Pact. As with the 1954 Hague Con-
vention, the U.S. is under no formal obligation to comply either with the provi-
sions of Protocols I and II or with the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, because
it has not joined them.

The 1954 Hague Convention—which was intended to complement the 1899
and 1907 Hague Conventions and the 1935 Roerich Pact—remains the most com-
prehensive international treaty speciﬁcally protecting cultural heritage in times of
war. As of March 8, 2001, one hundred countries, most recently China and Panama,
have either ratiﬁed or acceded to the Convention, and eighty-three countries have
ratiﬁed or acceded to Protocol I. The 1954 Hague Convention has been invoked
in a number of conﬂicts, such as in 1969 Honduras and El Salvador, 1971 India and
Pakistan, 1974 Cyprus and Turkey, 1970s Cambodia and Thailand, 1980s Middle
East,66 1991 Persian Gulf War, and the 1991 (and continuing) conﬂict in the for-
mer Yugoslavia.67

   :    229

4   :
    

One of the major, but necessary, points of contention was the inclusion of the
phrase, “military necessity,” which in actually has long been a controversial concept
in the practice of war.68 The deﬁnition of “military necessity” is not given in the
treaty, remaining dangerously vague; however, this problem is addressed in the new
Protocol II, which will be discussed shortly. The phrase “military necessity” ap-
pears in Article 4(2), which states that “the obligations mentioned in paragraph 1
of the present Article may be waived only in cases where military necessity imper-
atively require[s] such a waiver.”The paragraph mentioned here (Art. 4[1]) contains
the essence of the Convention, which obliges States Parties to refrain from using
cultural property in a way which might expose it to destruction or damage in the
event of armed conﬂict, as well as from any act of hostility directed against such
property. The phrase “military necessity” is applied once again in Article 11(2). In
this article it does not deal with imperative military necessity applicable to gener-
ally protected cultural property, but rather it concerns unavoidable military neces-
sity, which is applicable only to cultural property under special protection. The
clause here, as it stands, allows an ofﬁcer in command of a division or larger unit
to lift the provisions of the Hague Convention for an indeterminate length of
time, or, in the terms of the Convention, “such time as that necessity continues.”
The party that invokes “military necessity” needs only to make an effort when-
ever circumstances permit to notify the opposing party within a reasonable time in
advance of the decision to withdraw immunity. In short, this clause essentially re-
lieves any State Party of its responsibility to the Convention so long as it deter-
mines the “necessity” to do so. The problem here is obvious: since this clause is
vaguely deﬁned and thus open to diverse interpretations, a country in time of war
is essentially free to claim that any violation of the Convention is a “military ne-
cessity.” On this point, General Eisenhower commented years ago in the midst of
the Second World War: “[T]he phrase ‘military necessity’ is sometimes used where
it would be more truthful to speak of military convenience or even of personal
convenience. I do not want it to cloak slackness or indifference.”69

The next point of contention during the original drafting of the Convention
was the effort to hold States Parties responsible through uniﬁed law for property
under their protection.70 Participating countries could not agree on portions of the
Convention that attempted to unify international law for the return of, and as-
signment of responsibility for, endangered cultural property. Hence, mostly at the
insistence of the United States, these articles concerning the return of cultural
property were separated from the body of the Hague Convention and placed in
Protocol I. This division allowed countries to become party to the Convention
without subjecting themselves to the requirements mandated by Protocol I.

230  -   

Apart from structural problems within the Hague Convention, operational is-
sues also inadvertently weaken and limit the overall effectiveness of the treaty. For
instance, a feasibility problem plagues the regulation within the Hague’s General
Provisions, which require signatories to prepare their cultural properties during
peace through physical measures and inclusion of items in the International Reg-
ister of Cultural Property Under Special Protection. Although this mandate is not
in itself problematic, compliance issues arise because of the inability to force
countries to fulﬁll peacetime obligations. Indeed, very few of the High Contract-
ing Parties have registered their nation’s cultural properties,71 and apparently even
fewer have established physical protection of cultural property from possible de-
struction during war. Since the Hague Convention is almost entirely dependent on
good faith, there simply is no mechanism by which to punish states that remain un-
able to act on the treaty’s mandates. The reasons countries have not fulﬁlled these
peacetime duties are often explicable and legitimate—ranging from conﬂicting
opinions over which sites and objects to include and which to exclude as cultural
property, to simple lack of funding, to fears of abuse of the Convention by ene-
mies.72The last rationale has tragically materialized in the former Yugoslavia, where
cultural sites have allegedly been obliterated precisely because they represent the pat-
rimony of the enemy.73 This being the case, the Hague Convention requirements,
such as that a special blue and white ﬂag be raised at important sites (see Articles
6, 10, and 16), apparently served to attract bombing rather than deter it.74 As men-
tioned, cost is also a major stumbling block when one considers the amount of
money and resources involved in compiling a register list, especially when most
countries have budgets that barely support the protection of cultural property
from looting and development. In point of fact, the United States Department of
Defense (DOD) established the Legacy Program in the early 1990s to inventory all
cultural sites found on DOD lands. The program promised to establish a basis for
a nationwide listing of cultural property and could later serve to fulﬁll the Con-
vention’s mandates. However, the program vanished as quickly as it surfaced, ap-
parently due to a lack of funding or government interest.

The central weakness in both the structure and application of the Hague
Convention, perhaps like most international treaties, is that it requires active and
uniﬁed participation from all States Party to it. Admittedly, not all states inter-
pret the Hague Convention in the same way, and the Convention could often be
abused with little or no recourse for the injured party. To illustrate this point, one
must look only at the Persian Gulf War.

In the fall of 1990, Iraqi Department of Antiquities ofﬁcials entered several
Kuwaiti museums and transferred approximately 25,000 objects to Baghdad.75 Al-
though the Iraqi personnel reportedly were careful to document each object and
meticulously pack everything for the long journey, the removal of the items was a
violation of Article 4(3) of the 1954 Convention. However, the Iraqi government

   :    231

claims they moved the items in accordance with the Convention, which states that if
cultural property in an occupied area is in danger and local authorities are unable
to protect it, the occupying power may remove the items to a safe location (Art.
5[2]). It is unclear whether the removal of these items was done with or without the
permission of Kuwaiti museum ofﬁcials.76 Nevertheless, during the Persian Gulf
crisis, Kuwait ﬁled a complaint with UNESCO and requested assistance.77 The
matter went before the UN Security Council, which passed a resolution asking
Iraq to return the objects to Kuwait. At the end of the war, all the objects were in
fact repatriated.78 In the ﬁnal analysis, Iraq fulﬁlled its obligations under the 1954
Hague Convention, but whether or not Iraq’s ﬁnal actions were a reﬂection of its
original intentions is still unclear. And if Iraq had refused to return the objects?
UNESCO would have had few options to pressure the Iraqi government other
than through diplomatic channels. The Hague Convention, like most international
treaties,79 depends upon governments’ good faith efforts to adhere to it because of
its moral imperatives, rather than because of threat of concrete sanctions.

5   :
    

The shortcomings considered above are intended only to illustrate some areas of
contention that have hindered the effectiveness of the Convention in the past.
Clearly the Hague Convention is not ﬂawless, but it still remains the most cohe-
sive, thorough, and recognized treaty that speciﬁcally protects cultural property
during armed conﬂict. In an analogous situation, the well-known and respected
Geneva Conventions are not necessarily considered useless because they have not
always been able to prevent atrocities in the past and probably will not be able to
in the future. The Geneva Conventions remain powerful treaties because they are
an international statement on the value of human life, and furthermore, there are
many cases where the Geneva Conventions have prevented injustices. In the same
way, the 1954 Hague Convention need not be jettisoned because of its ﬂaws, be-
cause in spite of them it is a statement on the value humanity places on cultural
heritage and has tremendous potential to protect those stated values.80

International conventions on cultural property such as the Hague Conven-
tions not only serve as a symbol of the values inculcated in cultural property, but
also they function as a tangible guide for behavior and a means to deﬁne deviation
from certain principles. That is, international treaties may be used to justify re-
proving or punishing individuals, groups, or nations who fail to adhere to accepted
modes of conduct. Although the legal issues surrounding the Nüremberg Trials are
certainly complex,81 it is clear that the establishment and widespread ratiﬁcation of
the 1907 Hague Convention played a vital role in deﬁning the destruction of cul-

232  -   

tural property as a crime of war.82 Even before this, the 1907 Hague Convention
was also applied in treaties following the First World War.83 More recently, on Feb-
ruary 22, 2001, the United Nations International Criminal Tribunal included the
intentional destruction of the ancient city of Dubrovnik in 1991 as part of a six-
teen-count indictment. In a news release, UNESCO Director-General Koïchiro
Matsuura stated:

[T]his sets a historic precedent as it is the ﬁrst time since the judgments of
the Nüremberg and Tokyo tribunals that a crime against cultural property
has been sanctioned by an international tribunal. . . . This indictment
concerns a breach of the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conﬂict. It shows that the
international community will not sit idly by and condone crimes against
cultural property.84

Chapter 3 of Protocol II also now strengthens the potential use of the Convention
in the prosecution of war criminals. Although the damage is already done to cul-
tural property, one may argue that prosecution serves as a deterrent to belligerent
parties, and it might impart a small sense of justice for victims.

A clear strength—which was alluded to in the previous section—is that the
Hague Convention attempts to resolve concerns not only reactively, but also proac-
tively. Historically, this has been an issue, as Caroline Moorehead describes how
the Nazi “looter’s task was made considerably easier by the Soviet unprepared-
ness [sic] and confusion and the fact that the safekeeping of art had not been a
priority.”85 Assuming States Parties to the Convention (or at least some) follow it,
cultural property will be protected by physical measures in the event of armed con-
ﬂict. Additionally, states must establish training programs on the Hague Conven-
tion for military personnel and individuals involved with the protection of cultural
property. There is also an effort among States Parties for the identiﬁcation and im-
provement of marking cultural property. At the same time, the Hague Convention
addresses the very real problems surrounding the destruction of cultural property
during and after conﬂicts and provides sensible and useful tools for states. With
the addition of Protocol II, the Hague Convention emerges as a cohesive and pow-
erful treaty that promises to prevent extensive damage to cultural property in times
of war.

6  :     

Beginning in the early 1990s, a series of expert meetings was held to reevaluate the
ever changing nature of warfare and the ability of the 1954 Hague Convention to
prevent various atrocities, particularly in light of the events surrounding the Iran-
Iraq conﬂict, the Persian Gulf War, and the Balkans conﬂict.86 In part as a result of

   :    233

these meetings, on March 26, 1999, one hundred years after the ﬁrst Hague Peace
Conference  and  Convention,  Protocol  II  of the  1954 Hague  Convention  was
adopted.87This overdue addition to the Hague Convention offers new solutions to
many of the problems experienced in the past. The new Protocol constitutes a sub-
stantial “face lift” to the Convention, while maintaining the spirit and basic form
of the original Convention. Protocol II has been summarized elsewhere,88 so we
will mention only a few points that substantially move the Hague Convention for-
ward by responding to past limitations of the treaty.

Chapter 2 (Art. 6) clariﬁes the phrase “imperative military necessity” estab-
lished in Article 4 of the Convention, greatly reducing potential misuse of this
concept. Now a waiver on the basis of “imperative military necessity” may be in-
voked only if “cultural property has, by its function, been made into a military ob-
jective” and “there is no feasible alternative available to obtain a similar military ad-
vantage to that offered by directing an act of hostility against that objective.”The
concept is restricted further by incorporating a time element (Art. 6[b]), increas-
ing the decision level (Art. 6[c]), and reafﬁrming the advisability of advance warn-
ing (Art. 6[d]). This chapter also restricts even further what an occupying power
may do to existing cultural property in an occupied territory. Although the nar-
rowing of this clause does not ensure that it will not be abused, the new deﬁnition
gives military leaders better criteria from which to judge whether “imperative mil-
itary necessity” applies.

Chapter 3 establishes a new category of protection for the most important
sites, monuments, and institutions. “Enhanced Protection,” as it is called, limits
even further the “unavoidable military necessity” clause with respect to these cul-
tural sites (cf. Art. 13 of the Second Protocol). Chapter 4 introduces a mandate to
prosecute those who violate the Hague Convention (or the cultural protection pro-
visions of the 1977 Additional Geneva Provisions) in either civilian or military
courts. Additionally, a provision for universal international jurisdiction opens the
possibility of criminal prosecution anywhere in the world (or, at the very least, in
countries that have ratiﬁed Protocol II) and makes some crimes extraditable. This
Chapter sets forth, for the ﬁrst time, the notion of serious violations (Art. 15) and
other violations (Art. 21) and deals with procedural issues such as jurisdiction or
prosecution. Also, Chapter 6 creates institutional arrangements by which States
Parties will meet biannually. Under this chapter, a new committee, the Commit-
tee for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conﬂict, will
convene annually to monitor and promote the provisions of the Hague Conven-
tion, consider the “exceptional protection designation,” and oversee a newly es-
tablished fund to support fulﬁlling the obligations set forth by the Convention.

It is important to note that Protocol II, like Protocol I, must be ratiﬁed or ac-
ceded to by each country for it to take effect. Unfortunately, years could pass be-
fore a substantial number of countries ratify this important addition.

These chapters in Protocol II respond to many of the limitations of the

234  -   

Hague Convention that have frustrated parties in the past. While Protocol II un-
doubtedly reduces the likelihood of the destruction to cultural property in the fu-
ture, enthusiasm should be tempered by recalling that the 1954 Hague Convention
itself aspired to solve the problems of the 1907 Hague Convention but failed to do
so and that the 1907 Hague Convention also failed to substantially improve upon
the 1899 Hague Convention. In other words, Protocol II should be viewed not as
a panacea but as another step in reﬁning solutions to a complex and continually
evolving problem.

7    .. 

The United States has long taken an active role in the creation and enforcement of
international law pertaining to cultural property. The historical record—from the
Lieber Code, which sparked this movement, to the early Hague Conventions, to
the creation of the American treaties during the interwar years, to the drafting of
the 1954 Hague Convention—lucidly demonstrates that the United States gov-
ernment has recognized not only the value of cultural property to living people
but also the need for international laws to ensure the preservation of it for future
generations. As we have already seen, the United States was a participant in the
adoption of the 1954 Convention, and a number of adjustments were made to sat-
isfy its position. Yet despite all this, four years after the international conference,
in 1958, the executive branch of the U.S. government opted not to forward the
Convention to the Senate for ratiﬁcation.89 In retrospect, one can see the chang-
ing nature of world affairs at this time—fears of nuclear annihilation, and real di-
visions growing wider between East and West—that would lead to reticence on
the part of the U.S. government to limit its options in any way. Surely the glacial
pace of the ratiﬁcation process and the distancing of the Second World War’s hor-
rors and injustices also did not help maintain the momentum of the Convention
in the United States.

In early 1972, during Richard M. Nixon’s tenure as president of the United
States, members of the College Art Association (CAA) passed a resolution to
“support in principle the purposes of the Hague Convention of 1954,” as well as
to voice their concern over the “repeated failure to submit the Convention to the
United States Senate for ratiﬁcation.”90 In response to this call for ratiﬁcation,
Ronald J. Bettauer, then attorney in the Ofﬁce of the Legal Adviser Department
of State, sent to the president of the CAA a letter detailing the U.S. position at
that time.91While recognizing the “worthwhile provisions” of the Convention, Mr.
Bettauer offered two explanations for the reluctance for U.S. ratiﬁcation. The ﬁrst
reason involved the potential inability to adhere to the Convention in the event of
nuclear war, or even during conventional bombardment. The second justiﬁcation

   :    235

was based on the apparent fact that the U.S. Department of Defense had already
taken “all possible measures to provide protection to important cultural property.”
There is undeniably support for the notion that nuclear weaponry would be im-
possible to employ without violating the Convention, but this argument is also a
bit of a red herring, ﬁrst because Article 11(2), which was included at the instance
of the U.S., would potentially mediate this problem; and, secondly, because nuclear
war during the 1970s—or even today—would most certainly have meant nuclear
holocaust, making the Hague Convention the least of our worries. The argument
that the U.S. has already taken steps to protect cultural property is also mislead-
ing because the 1954 Hague Convention is unquestionably the most widely recog-
nized international document on this matter, so if the U.S. has not ratiﬁed it, then
it has not taken every possible measure. One must also wonder why it would be so
problematic to ratify the Convention if the U.S. has in fact already incorporated
it into military practice.

Despite this unimpressive position, the U.S. apparently never seriously recon-
sidered  ratiﬁcation  until  the  early  1990s.  Following  the  Persian  Gulf War,  the
United States Senate Appropriations Committee called for a study to investigate
the protection of natural and cultural resources during armed conﬂict.92 The en-
suing  report—carried  out  by  a  joint  panel  of the  Department  of State  and 
Department of Defense—presented to the House and Senate Appropriations
Committee in early 1993 stated that the 1954 Hague Convention was under recon-
sideration. In an article that appeared soon afterwards, Keith Eirinberg proposed
three reasons for the potential shift in U.S. policy.93 First, he points out that the
advances in military bomb and missile technology allow for extremely accurate and
contained explosions, which minimize the probability of collateral damage and
hence allow the U.S. to faithfully follow the provisions set out by the Hague Con-
vention.94 Furthermore, Eirinberg suggests the use of nuclear weapons seems ex-
tremely unlikely in the current geopolitical climate and so becomes an even less
compelling justiﬁcation. Second, the author highlights the contradiction between
the avoidance of ratiﬁcation and the fact that the United States military already in-
corporates the Convention into its ﬁeld manuals, that the U.S. military has suc-
cessfully applied the principles of the Convention, and that it is already obliged
to adhere to the 1907 Hague Convention. Finally, Eirinberg posits that the United
States’ failure to ratify the Convention has severely limited the government’s abil-
ity to effectively address crises concerning cultural property in other nations, as
well as to fully participate in future amendments to the Convention.95

On January 6, 1999, after at least six years of consideration, President Clin-
ton forwarded the Hague Convention to the Senate with the recommendation that
it ratify the Convention and part of Protocol I.96 In regards to Protocol I, Presi-
dent Clinton suggested that the Senate exercise its right under section III not to
bind itself to section I of the Protocol, thereby negating any responsibility for for-

236  -   

eign cultural property under the United States’ control. In effect, the president’s
recommendation calls for acceptance of the Hague Convention, but not Protocol
I. In his statement, President Clinton points to two basic reasons for his support
of ratiﬁcation. First, Clinton wrote that U.S. “military policy and the conduct of
operations are entirely consistent with the Convention’s provisions.” He added, “In
large measure, the practices required by the Convention to protect cultural prop-
erty were based upon the practices of U.S. military forces during World War II.”
Essentially this recognizes that the United States military currently incorporates
many of the principles and practices outlined in the Convention and that it has
since  the  Second World War—even  before  the  1954 Hague  Convention  was
drafted. It is fascinating to observe that it was exactly this same argument used by
the Nixon administration to justify not ratifying the Convention.

Second, Clinton asserted that “a number of concerns that resulted in the orig-
inal decisions not to submit the Convention for advice and consent have not ma-
terialized in the decades of experience with the Convention since its entry into
force.” One may assume that this refers chieﬂy to the concerns about the Conven-
tion’s limiting the use of nuclear weaponry and possibly conventional bombard-
ments. It remains unclear, however, whether Clinton was suggesting that nuclear
war is no longer a real possibility, or whether he was positing that the Convention
would not in practice hinder the option of nuclear war or particular bombard-
ments, because the U.S. could invoke “military necessity.”

Clinton’s announcement also made reference to Protocol II, which was then
being drafted: “I am also mindful of the international process underway for review
of the Convention. By becoming a party, we will be in a stronger position to shape
any proposed amendments and help ensure that U.S. interests are preserved.” Al-
though this consideration is now immaterial because Protocol II has already been
adopted, it is signiﬁcant in that the administration here was recognizing that the
United States has been forced to participate on the fringes of international cul-
tural property and war issues in part because it is only a signatory to the Conven-
tion. In turn, the United States’ position has not only substantially impaired its
own ability to shape future amendments and protocols but has also weakened the
Convention itself, because the world’s most potentially destructive military is not
bound by the 1954 Hague Convention.

Upon receiving this recommendation from the executive branch of the gov-
ernment, the United States Senate unanimously consented to send the treaty to the
Committee on Foreign Relations.97 Since that time, the committee has not acted
on ratiﬁcation, ignoring Clinton’s call to “give early and favorable consideration to
the Convention and the Protocol and give its advice and consent to ratiﬁcation and
accession.”With the closure of the Clinton administration and the commencement
of George W. Bush’s term as president of the United States, the future of the rat-
iﬁcation process, as well as the new administration’s policy on war and cultural

   :    237

property, remains unclear.98 Despite the uncertainty that accompanies the new ad-
ministration, it is important to recognize that the Hague Convention has moved
into an important stage in the ratiﬁcation process. Although President Clinton of-
fered only partial support, this was—and perhaps still is—the ﬁrst real oppor-
tunity in almost half a century for the United States to join one hundred countries
in ratifying the 1954 Hague Convention.

  :   

This article outlines the Hague Convention’s conception, historical context, intent,
shortcomings, and potential. The problems with the application of the Conven-
tion are readily apparent, and certainly there are many, from the potential confu-
sion over the phrase “military necessity,” to the paucity of enforcement, to the fail-
ure of countries to make preparations in times of peace. In contrast to these
problems, the Convention has also served not only as a symbol but also as a prac-
tical guide to effect appeals, maintain lines of communication, present missions,
mediate between belligerents, punish deviants, and offer restoration and reconcil-
iation after the cessation of hostilities. Indeed, since the adoption of the ﬁrst
Hague Convention, there has been much debate over whether or not these treaties
may be considered a “success” or “failure.” Those like Admiral Sir John Fisher
hold that humanizing war is comparable to humanizing hell and so from the be-
ginning presume all laws of warfare to be inherently unachievable. But there are in-
dividuals, such as General Colin Powell, who contend that as laws guide people
outside of war, so too laws may effectively guide behavior during armed conﬂicts.
Along the spectrum between these views, there is a position that recognizes the
complexity and difﬁculty of these issues and recognizes that, concerning any as-
pect of war and violence, there will probably be few, if any, incontestable “suc-
cesses” or “failures.”War is fundamentally virulent and ferine, and as we have seen
throughout history, lessening these features is far from an easy task. Consider that
in the mid-1990s, States Parties to the 1954 Hague Convention met, and even while
in the midst of hearing the horror stories emerging from the Balkans, they reaf-
ﬁrmed their view that “the Hague Convention remains one of the essential in-
struments of international humanitarian law.”99 More than blind optimism or the
rhetoric of international politics, this and other such statements reﬂect the widely
held belief that the 1954 Hague Convention is essential and necessary,100 and that
while it may not always ﬁnd “success,” it still has tremendous practical value and
power as an international statement on the importance the global community
places on cultural heritage.

The United States is now in a position to revitalize the Convention, as the
treaty may enter into the advanced stages of ratiﬁcation. The 1954 Hague Conven-
tion is not a perfect treaty, but the United States has much to gain in terms of har-

238  -   

monizing its military practices and ofﬁcial policy, as well as better positioning it-
self within the international community. With the addition of Protocol II, the
Hague Convention becomes almost exponentially strengthened, leaving few rea-
sons for the United States to postpone ratiﬁcation of the Convention and its Pro-
tocols. Nevertheless, with the recent changes in the executive branch of the U.S.
government, as well as the political make-up of the Committee on Foreign Rela-
tions, it is unclear whether or not the issue of ratiﬁcation of the Convention will
remain moribund on Capitol Hill.

In conclusion, we might offer the words of Michael Howard, who, comment-

ing on the nature of warfare in the early twentieth century, wrote, 

[T]his was total war of a kind that had been barely seen in Europe since the
Dark Ages, though it had not been unknown in the New World: war, not
just for the overthrow of the adversary’s political power, but for the physical
destruction of his entire society.101

It is this total war that now characterizes the condition of our age, and it is in this
context that the Hague Convention seeks to quiet the violence against humans and
their material world. Against this backdrop one may begin to see why the Con-
vention is limited, but also why its existence is so imperative.



1. John Chapman, Destruction of a Common Heritage: The Archaeology of War in Croatia,
Bosnia, and Hercegovina, 68 Antiquity 120, 122 (1994).
2. Russell Chamberlin, Loot! The Heritage of Plunder (Facts on File, New York 1983); Dario Gamboni,
The Destruction of Art: Iconoclasm and Vandalism since the French Revolution (Reaktion Books, London
1997); Judith Grant, A Pillage of Art (Roy Publishers, New York 1966); Jeanette Greenﬁeld, The
Spoils of War, in The Spoils of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of
Cultural Property 34, 34–38 (Elizabeth Simpson ed., Harry N. Abrams, New York 1997); Edward
J. Martin, A History of the Iconoclastic Controversy (MacMillan, New York 1978); D.N. Osman, Oc-
cupiers’Title to Cultural Property: Nineteenth-Century Removal of Egyptian Artifacts, 37 Co-
lumbia Journal of Transnational Law 969, 969–1002 (1999); Louis-Jacques Rollet-Andriane, Precedents,
31:1 Museum 4, 4–7 (1979); Jiri Toman, The Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict
(Dartmouth Publishing, Hants, Mass., 1996); Sharon A.Williams, The International and National Pro-
tection of Movable Cultural Property: A Comparative Study (Oceana Publications, New York 1977).
3. Grant, supra note 2, at 15.
4. Simon Schama, Patriots and Liberators: Revolution in the Netherlands 1790 –1813 11 (Knopf, New
York 1977).
5. As cited in Karma Nabulsi, Traditions of War: Occupation, Resistance, and the Law 24 (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford 1999); see also Gunther Rothenberg, The Age of Napoleon, in The Laws of
War:  Constraints  on  Warfare  in  the  Western  World 86,  86–97 (Michael  Howard,  George  J.  An-
dreopoulos, and Mark R. Shulman eds., Yale University Press, New Haven 1994).

   :    239

6. Greenﬁeld, supra note 2, at 34.
7. On the distinction between jus ad bellum and jus in bello, see G.I.A.D. Draper, Wars of National
Liberation and War Criminality, in Restraints on War: Studies in the Limitation of Armed Conflict 135,
135–62 (Michael Howard ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford 1979). Of particular relevance,
Draper states that “[b]oth the Hague Conventions of 1907 and the present Geneva Conven-
tions of 1949 are imbued with humanitarian principles, and reject any idea of their unequal ap-
plication based upon the legality of the ‘cause’ for which the belligerents have resorted to armed
conﬂict” (id. at 138–39).
8. William T. Divale, Warfare in Primitive Societies (Clio Press, Santa Barbara 1973).
9. Josiah Ober, Classical Greek Times, in The Laws of War: Constraints on Warfare in the Western World
12, 12–26 (Michael Howard, George J. Andreopoulos, and Mark R. Shulman eds., Yale Uni-
versity Press, New Haven 1994).
10. Robert C. Stacy, The Age of Chivalry, in The Laws of War: Constraints on Warfare in the Western
World 27, 27–39 (Michael Howard, George J. Andreopoulos, and Mark R. Shulman eds., Yale
University Press, New Haven 1994); Geoffrey Parker, Early Modern Europe, in The Laws of War:
Constraints on Warfare in the Western World 40, 44–51 (Michael Howard, George J. Andreopoulos,
and Mark R. Shulman eds., Yale University Press, New Haven 1994).
11. Stacey, supra note 10, at 31–32, 34.
12. Geoffry Best, Restraints on War by Land Before 1945, in Restraints on War: Studies in the Limi-
tation of Armed Conflict 17, 25–26 (Michael Howard ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford 1979).
13. Michael Howard, Constraints on Warfare, in The Laws of War: Constraints on Warfare in the West-
ern World 1, 5–8 (Michael Howard, George J. Andreopoulos, and Mark R. Shulman eds., Yale
University Press, New Haven 1994).
14. Divale, supra note 8.
15. Toman, supra note 2, at 3–7.
16. Jeanette Greenﬁeld, The Return of Cultural Treasures 278–79 (2nd ed., Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge 1996).
17. Rollet-Andriane, supra note 2, at 4.
18. Hector Feliciano, The Lost Museum: The Nazi Conspiracy to Steal the World’s Greatest Works of Art
26–27 (Basic Books, New York 1997); Greenﬁeld, supra note 16, at 108, 199, 278–81. Further ex-
amples of early treaties that upheld similar notions include the treaties of Münster (Art.
LXIX) 1648; Isle des Faisans (Art. LIX) 1659; Whitehall 1662; Nimwegen (Art. XX) 1678 and
(Art. XIX) 1679; Lunden (Art. XII) 1679; Ryswick (Art. II and VI) 1697; Utrecht (Art. VI)
1713; and Paris (Art. VII) 1783.
19. Michael Howard, Restraints on War 23 (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1979); Dietrich
Schindler and Jiri Toman, The Laws of Armed Conflicts v (Sijthoff and Noordhoff, Alphen aan den
Rijn 1981).
20. Williams, supra note 2, at 15–16; Karl E. Meyer, Who Owns the Spoils of War, in Archaeolog-
ical Ethics 137, 148 (Karen D. Vitelli ed., AltaMira Press, Walnut Creek, Calif., 1996); see Geof-
fry Best, Humanity in Warfare: The Modern History of the International Law of Armed Conflict (Weiden-
feld  and  Nicolson,  London  1980);  Richard  Hartigan  ed.,  Lieber’s  Code  and  the  Law  of  War
(Precedent, Chicago 1983).

240  -   

21. Toman, supra note 2, at 7.
22. Geoffry Best, Peace Conferences and the Century of Total War: The 1899 Hague Confer-
ence and What Came After, 75 International Affairs 619, 625–26 (1999); see Nabulsi, supra note 5.
23. Although in fact a series of agreements, the Hague Convention is often spoken of as a sin-
gle and coherent document. Here, we will follow this practice and use the Hague Convention
to generally refer to the conference and resulting documents, unless speciﬁcally stated other-
wise. Leslie C. Green, The Contemporary Law of Armed Conflict 32 (Manchester University Press,
Manchester 1993).
24. Best, supra note 22; Calvin DeArmond Davis, The United States and the First Hague Peace Con-
ference 209–13 (Cornell University Press, Ithaca 1962).
25. This is Convention (IV) in the 1907 conference.
26. When a country becomes a signatory to the convention this denotes that a country has ini-
tially agreed to the contents of the treaty and is bound to it—in accordance with Article 18(a)
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969—only in that a State is obliged to re-
frain from acts which would defeat the object and purpose of a treaty. A country remains com-
pelled to adhere to the convention in this way whether it has signed the treaty or has exchanged
instruments indicating the treaty may be subject to ratiﬁcation, acceptance, or approval and
remains so until the country has made its intention clear not to become a party to the treaty.
Depending on each country’s respective constitutional procedures, the convention is then ac-
ceded to, ratiﬁed, accepted, or approved by the government (i.e., these terms are essentially syn-
onymous and vary merely to suit the proclivity of individual states), which means that it has
legally agreed to adhere to the convention. Only states-signatories of the Hague Convention
may ratify the Convention (Art. 31 of the Convention), but other states may either adhere to
the Convention (Art. 32 of the Convention) or, in case of succession of states, succeed to the
Convention. Protocols are measures separated from the body of the convention and are ratiﬁed
independently. Finally, it should be noted that some countries use the term “ratiﬁcation” to
refer to the separate, internal process of endorsing a convention of international law.
27. James Brown Scott, The Hague Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 vii (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York 1918).
28. See James Brown Scott, Instructions to the American Delegates to the Hague Peace Conferences and Their
Official Reports (Oxford University Press, New York 1916).
29. Williams, supra note 2, at 18–19.
30. Lawrence M. Kaye, Laws in Force at the Dawn of World War II: International Conventions
and National Laws, in The Spoils of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Re-
covery of Cultural Property 100, 100 (Elizabeth Simpson ed., Harry N. Abrams, New York 1997);
Caroline Moorehead, Lost and Found: The 9,000 Treasures of Troy 246 (Viking, New York 1994).
31. Kaye, supra note 30, at 102–3.
32. André Noblecourt, Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict 4 (UNESCO,
Paris 1958).
33. Schindler and Toman, supra note 19, at 653–55.
34. Meyer, supra note 20, at 140.
35. Konstantin Akinsha and Grigorii Kozlov, Beautiful Loot: The Soviet Plunder of Europe’s Art Trea-

   :    241

sures 251 (Random House, New York 1995); Wilfried Fiedler, Legal Issues Bearing on the Resti-
tution of German Cultural Property in Russia, in The Spoils of War: World War II and Its After-
math: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property 175, 175–80 (Elizabeth Simpson ed.,
Harry N. Abrams, New York 1997).
36. Akinsha and Kozlov, supra note 35, at xi.
37. Lynn M. Nicholas, The Rape of Europa: The Fate of Europe’s Treasures in the Third Reich and the Sec-
ond World War 125 (Vintage Books, New York 1995).
38. Keith W. Eirinberg, The United States Reconsiders the 1954 Hague Convention, 3 Interna-
tional Journal of Cultural Property 27, 35 (1994).
39. Also see Chamberlin, supra note 2; Nicholas, supra note 37; Elizabeth Simpson ed., The Spoils
of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property (Harry
N. Abrams, New York 1997).
40. Lyndel V. Prott, Principles for the Resolution of Disputes Concerning Cultural Heritage
Displaced During the Second World War, in The Spoils of War: World War II and Its Aftermath: The
Loss, Reappearance, and Recovery of Cultural Property 225, 226 (Elizabeth Simpson ed., Harry N.
Abrams, New York 1997).
41. Cited in Noblecourt, supra note 32, at 6.
42. Quoted in John H. Merryman and Albert E. Elsen, Law, Ethics, and the Visual Arts  (rd ed.,
Kluwer 1998).
43. Noblecourt, supra note 32, at 6.
44. See Feliciano, supra note 18, at 149; Meyer, supra note 20, at 144; Wilfried Fiedler, Safeguard-
ing of Cultural Property During Occupation—Modiﬁcations of the Hague Convention of
1907 By World War II?, 5 Legal Aspects of International Trade in Art, International Sales of Works of Art,
175, 175–83 (Martine Briat and Judith A. Freeberg eds., Kluwer Law International, the Hague
1996); Tami Davis Biddle, Air Power, in The Laws of War: Constraints on Warfare in the Western World
140, 155 (Michael Howard, George J. Andreopoulos, and Mark R. Shulman eds., Yale Univer-
sity Press, New Haven 1994).
45. Cited in Moorehead, supra note 30, at 286.
46. Simpson, supra note 39.
47. I. Kolasa, Where Have All the Volumes Gone? A Contribution to the Discussion of “Cap-
tured Cultural Property” and “Trophy Commissions,” 57 College and Research Libraries 501, 501–12
(1996); Moorehead, supra note 30; Akinsha and Kozlov, supra note 35; see also Karl E. Meyer, Dig-
ging Berlin’s Chamber of Horrors, 45:4 Archaeology 24, 24–29 (1992).
48. Schindler and Toman, supra note 19, at 657.
49. Etienne Clément, Some Recent Practical Experience in the Implementation of the 1954
Hague Convention, 3 International Journal of Cultural Property 11, 11–12 (1994).
50. Noblecourt, supra note 32, at 8.
51. See Prott, supra note 40, at 225; see also the debate offered in Merryman and Elsen, supra note
42, at 34–39.
52. Frank G. Fechner, The Fundamental Aims of Cultural Property Law, 7 International Journal
of Cultural Property 376, 378 (1998).

242  -   

53. Markus M. Müller, Cultural Heritage Protection: Legitimacy, Property, and Functionalism,
7 International Journal of Cultural Property 395, 405 (1998).
54. For a general discussion of this issue, see the classic article on internationalism and na-
tionalism, John H. Merryman, Two Ways of Thinking about Cultural Property, 80 American
Journal of International Law 831, 831–53 (1986).
55. For example, Gillett G. Grifﬁn, In Defense of the Collector, 169:4 National Geographic 462,
462–65 (1986).
56. For example, William L. Merrill, Edmund J. Ladd, and T.J. Ferguson, The Return of the
Ahayu:da: Lessons for Repatriation from Zuni Pueblo and the Smithsonian Institution, 34
Current Anthropology 523, 523–67; see also S. Harding, Justifying Repatriation of Native American
Cultural Property, 72 Indiana Law Journal 723, 723–74 (1997).
57. Thomas Fitschen, Licit International Art Trade in Times of Armed Conﬂict, 5 International
Journal of Cultural Property 127, 127 (1996).
58. See id. at 132.
59. It is important that these two categories of obligations be read in light of further interna-
tional treaties, such as Protocol I of the four Geneva Conventions (cf. Article 52, General pro-
tection of civilian objects; Article 53, Protection of cultural objects and of places of worship;
Article 57, Precautions in attack; Article 58, Precautions against the effects of attacks) or the
Second Protocol to the Hague Convention (cf. Chapters 2 and 3).
60. Fitschen, supra note 57.
61. David A. Meyer, The 1954 Hague Cultural Property Convention and Its Emergence Into
Customary International Law, 11 Boston University International Law Journal 349, 349–89 (1993);
Lyndel V. Prott, The Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict (The Hague Convention 1954) (paper presented at the Fifth Symposium Licit Trade in
Works of Art, Vienna, Austria 1994).
62. In fact, Soviet, Byelorussian, and Ukrainian declarations made at the 1954 meeting conveyed
a concern about the dearth of reference to nuclear weapons in the Convention. Apparently,
these references were omitted in the—erroneous—hope that if the treaty did not appear to
delimit the use of arms of mass destruction, then more nations would be enticed to ratify the
Convention. See Meyer, supra note 61, at 353.
63. Eirinberg, supra note 38, at 32.
64. Eirinberg, supra note 38; Department of Defense, Conduct of the Persian Gulf War: Final Report
to Congress 0-2 (April 1992), Pursuant to Title V of the Persian Gulf Conﬂict Supplemental Au-
thorization and Personnel Beneﬁts Act of 1991, Public Law 102-25 (1992).
65. Meyer, supra note 61, at 373.
66. See generally Clément, supra note 49; Toman, supra note 2; Kiﬂe Jote, International Legal Protec-
tion of Cultural Property (Juristforlaget, Stockholm 1994). On Honduras and El Salvador, India
and Pakistan, and Cyprus and Turkey, see A. Bernard Knapp and Sophia Antoniadou, Archae-
ology, Politics and the Cultural Heritage of Cyprus, Archaeology Under Fire: Nationalism, Politics, and
Heritage in the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East 13, 13–43 (Lynn Meskell ed., Routledge Press,
London 1998). On Cambodia and Thailand, see Russell Ciochon and Jamie James, The Glory
That was Angkor, Archaeological Ethics 117, 117–27 (Karen D. Vitelli ed., AltaMira Press, Walnut
Creek 1996); Denise Haywood, Standing Back to Help Better, 54 The Art Newspaper 24, 24 (1995);

   :    243

Greenﬁeld, supra note 18, at 282-287. On the Middle East see Meyer, supra note 61, at 364–68.
67. The conﬂict in the former Yugoslavia has reportedly taken a heavy toll not only on human
life but also on cultural property. Apparently, some sites were destroyed as a form of “ethnic
cleansing” while other sites were damaged solely as a by-product of armed conﬂict. Notably,
on April 19, 1999, the International Committee of the Blue Shield—a consortium of the In-
ternational Council on Archives (ICA), International Council of Museums (ICOM), Inter-
national Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS), and International Federation of Li-
brary Associations and Institutions (IFLA)—issued an appeal to all parties involved in the
conﬂict in the Balkans to adhere to the Hague Convention and the pending Protocol II. See
Chapman, supra note 1, at 120–26; M. Keba M’Baye, Destruction of Cultural Property Report,
Annex XI, 5/1994/674/Add.2 (Vol. 5), Final Report of the UN Commission of Experts Es-
tablished Pursuant to Security Council Resolution 780, 1992 (1994); Nicholas Adams, Archi-
tecture as the Target, 52 Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 389, 389–90 (1993); Jerrilynn
D. Dodds, Bridge over the Neretva, 51:1 Archeology 48, 48–53; James Wiseman, Legacy of Me-
dieval Serbia: Masterpieces of Art and Architecture in the Wake of War, 52:5 Archaeology 10,
10–13, 77. On the relationship between heritage and atrocity, see Brian Graham, G.J. Ashworth,
and J.E. Tunbridge, A Geography of Heritage: Power, Culture, and Economy 68–73 (Arnold Publish-
ers, London 2000).
68. For an excellent and concise summary on this, see Paul Kennedy and George J. Andreopou-
los, The Laws of War: Some Concluding Reﬂections, The Laws of War: Constraints on Warfare in
the Western World 214, 218–19 (Michael Howard, George J. Andreopoulos, and Mark R. Shulman
eds., Yale University Press, New Haven 1994).
69. Cited in Merryman and Elsen, supra note 42, at 35.
70. Prott, supra note 61, at 17.
71. A source at UNESCO reported to us that only Germany, Holy See, and Netherlands have
submitted lists for the register, but cf. Clément, supra note 49, at 2.
72. Information on the Implementation of the Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conﬂict, UNESCO CLT-95/WS/13 (1995).
73. Jack Rosenberger, UN to Prosecute Culture Crimes? 82:10 Art in America 35, 35 (1994).
74. See Bonnie Burnham, Architectural Heritage: The Paradox of Its Current State of Risk, 7
International Journal of Cultural Property 149, 152–54 (1998); Greenﬁeld, supra note 16, at 187; Meyer,
supra note 61. In contrast, it seems that the distinctive emblem may have in part saved the Na-
tional Museum in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, from destruction: see Clément, supra note 49, at 14.
75. McGuire Gibson and A. McMahon, Lost Heritage: Antiquities Stolen from Iraq’s Regional Museums,
Fascicle 1 (American Association for Research in Baghdad, Chicago 1992). Both Iraq (1967) and
Kuwait (1969) ratiﬁed the 1954 Hague Convention.
76. Cf. id. at vi and Clément, supra note 49, at 17.
77. Meyer, supra note 61, at 375.
78. It should be noted that the United Nations created the UN Return of Property Unit,
which supervised the handing over of property, including cultural property.
79. See James L. Brierly, The Law of Nations 342 (Oxford University Press, New York 1963).
80. In real terms, the 1954 Hague Convention in part empowers UNESCO to assist the bel-
ligerents through letters of notiﬁcation, maintaining open lines of communication, sending

244  -   

special envoys, and offering technical assistance. For additional positive examples, see Clément,
supra note 49.
81. Nabulsi, supra note 5, at 12–13.
82. Fiedler, supra note 35.
83. Kaye, supra note 30.
84. UNESCO News Release, March 13, 2001.
85. Moorehead, supra note 30, at 252.
86. Other meetings reﬂect similar concerns, including the proposed Convention on the Prohi-
bition  of Hostile  Military  Activities  in  Internationally  Protected  Areas;  see Wolfgang  E.
Burhenne, The Prohibition of Hostile Military Activities in Protected Areas, 27 Environmental
Policy and Law 373, 373–76 (1997); also see the so-called New Brunswick Resolution at the con-
ference, entitled Art, Antiquity, and the Law: Preserving Our Global Cultural Heritage, pro-
duced in the fall of 1998.
87. Protocol II was open for signature by all High Contracting Parties at the Hague from May
17, 1999, until December 31, 1999, by which time thirty-nine countries had signed.
88. Jan Hladík, Diplomatic Conference on the Second Protocol to the Hague Convention for
the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conﬂict, The Hague, Netherlands
(March 15–26), 8 International Journal of Cultural Property 526, 526–29 (1999). This section was also
based on a preliminary report the authors received via email from Patrick Boylan, head of a
nongovernmental delegation to the most recent conference.
89. Eirinberg, supra note 38, at 28.
90. Cited in Merryman and Elsen, supra note 42, at 33.
91. Merryman and Elsen, supra note 42, at 33–34.
92. Miriam Horn, The Vanishing Past, September 21 U.S. News and World Report 87, 87 (1992).
93. Eirinberg, supra note 38.
94. In fact, the implications of new technology for international cultural property law have
been discussed before. Twenty-ﬁve years ago, in an article by Richard Miller, he stated that the
U.S. never ratiﬁed the Hague Convention out of fear that the Convention’s provisions would
restrict aerial bombardments, as well as nuclear weapons (p. 92). The author then goes on to
tentatively suggest that new precision bombs might lessen this anxiety. While precision (e.g.,
laser and GPS guided) weapons may in fact provide a new means to lessen “collateral dam-
age” to civilians and cultural sites, we remain skeptical in the face of the sobering experience
of the Gulf War. Precision weapons reportedly played an especially important role in the Gulf
War as Iraq commonly placed military targets adjacent to civilians and, often, cultural monu-
ments.  Despite  the  media’s  focus  on  high-tech  weaponry,  of the  allegedly  88,000 tons  of
bombs—the equivalent to seven Hiroshimas—dropped over Iraq, only 7,400 tons (8%) were
precision or “smart” bombs. The remaining 80,600 tons were dropped by B-52s, which typically
ﬂew at forty thousand feet and dropped forty to sixty bombs at a time—a method all too rem-
iniscent of the carpet bombing of WWII. This blind bombing created very good odds for hit-
ting a large percentage of Iraq’s 10,000 known archaeological sites. In addition, even a smart
bomb that directly hits its target may damage adjacent sites through ground vibrations, bomb
splinters, and thermal effects. Thus, while improved precision weaponry might lessen collateral
damage when it is used, it is far from perfect, and even in today’s high-tech environment, con-

   :    245

ventional bombardments still pose a real threat to cultural property. See Richard I. Miller, The
Law of War (Lexington Books, Lexington 1975); R. Clark, The Fire This Time 74 (Thunder’s
Mouth Press, New York 1992); Paul Zimansky and Elizabeth C. Stone, Mesopotamia in the
Aftermath of the Gulf War, 45:3 Archaeology 24, 24 (1992); McGuire Gibson, Iraq Since the Gulf
War, January Culture Without Context 6, 6–8 (1998); Human Rights Watch, Needless Deaths in the
Gulf War (Human Rights Watch, New York 1991); Arlene K. Fleming, Securing Sites in Time
of War, 44:3 Archaeology 43, 43 (1991); Susan Pollock and Catherine Lutz, Archaeology Deployed
for the Gulf War, 14:3 Critique of Anthropology 263, 263–84 (1994); Noblecourt, supra note 32, at
45–48; Conduct of the Persian Gulf War, supra note 64, at 98, 100, 613.
95. These problems have repeatedly surfaced in recent years. For instance, the United States has
had a much muted voice in United Nations resolutions, such as UN Security Council Reso-
lution 771, where the U.S. helped investigate possible war crimes committed by Serbia, the res-
olution directed towards Iraq during the Gulf War, the 1990 resolution calling for respect from
belligerents for the temple complex at Angkor Wat, and a 1987 censure offered by the U.S.
Deputy Permanent Representative to the UN, leveled at the Soviet Union for its actions in
Afghanistan, including violations of the 1954 Hague Convention (see Meyer, supra note 65.).
Furthermore, the status of the Hague Convention was put in peril during the Gulf War, be-
cause several of the coalition leaders—including the U.S. and the U.K.— never ratiﬁed the
treaty. Most recently, the United States’ lack of ratiﬁcation meant that it could not fully par-
ticipate in the creation and adoption of Protocol II.
96. See Meyer, supra note 61, at 388; Mark Rose, 52:3 Archaeology 16, 16 (1999). When this article
was submitted, an online copy of former President Clinton’s recommendation was available at,
<www.pub.whitehouse.gov/urires/I2R?urn:pdi//oma.eop.gov.us/1999/1/7/3.text.1>.
97. Treaty Document Number 106-1.
98. The Bush administration’s stance has not been publicly offered, and our repeated inquiries
to the White House and the Foreign Relations Committee were rebuffed. In a personal com-
munication (1999) from Senator Richard Lugar (R. IN), he stated in overly simplistic terms
that the Hague Convention and Protocol’s ratiﬁcation depend upon, “the amount of support
or opposition [from the public].” In a later personal communication with Senator Lugar’s of-
ﬁce (2001), we were informed that the issue of ratiﬁcation is, in fact, on the Senate Foreign Re-
lations Committee calendar, but that it is not considered a high priority. A number of sources
also told us that so long as Senator Jesse Helms (R. NC) sits on the Foreign Relations Com-
mittee, the Convention and the Protocols will not be ratiﬁed. One person we spoke with ex-
pressed his belief that Senator Helms will not act unless the White House pushes the issue.
This claim, however, could not be substantiated.
99. Jan Hladík, Conference Report: Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conﬂict of 1954,
5 International Journal of Cultural Property 339, 341 (1996).
100. For instance, immediately following the bombing of Dubrovnik in late October 1991, an
appeal to stop the shelling based on the principles of the 1954 Convention was unanimously
approved by 163 countries attending a General Conference of UNESCO in Paris. See Meyer,
supra note 61, at 380.
101. Howard, supra note 13, at 8.


