International Journal of Cultural Property (2008) 15:271–296. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2008 International Cultural Property Society
doi:10.1017/S0940739108080168

Historical Threads: Intellectual
Property Protection of Traditional
Textile Designs: The Ghanaian
Experience and African Perspectives
Josephine Asmah*

Abstract: Defining the relationship between folklore and intellectual property
continues to be an ongoing debate. Some challenges in defining this relationship
center on the main characteristics of intellectual property, namely, the eligibility
criteria and limited protection period that make the current construction of
intellectual property incompatible with folklore protection. However, countries
like Ghana have been using the intellectual property system as one of its tools to
protect folklore. This article focuses on traditional textile design protection in
Ghana, establishing the importance and significance of these designs in Ghana’s
history and culture and why Ghana is determined to protect these designs. After
examining Ghana’s efforts and the obstacles in its path as it uses the intellectual
property law system to protect traditional textile designs, the article argues that
there should be regional cooperation and international protection to strengthen
individual national efforts.

INTRODUCTION

Folklore protection continues to be a subject of international, regional, national,
and scholarly debate. At the basic level, the debate centers on three main issues:
(1) whether folklore should be protected; (2) if the answer to the first issue is in
the affirmative, then the next question is which aspects of folklore should be pro-
tected; and, finally; (3) how it should be protected. These questions have been
part of the focus of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) over
the past few decades. The WIPO’s initiatives include drafting model laws1 and
model provisions2 jointly with the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cul-

*University of Ottawa. Email: jasma052@uottawa.ca

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The author would like to thank Kezia D. Awadzi, PhD, from the Univer-
sity of Florida, Gainesville, FL, and the anonymous reviewers, for their helpful comments.

271

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

272

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

tural Organization (UNESCO); conducting fact-finding missions3; and ongoing
attempts to draft an international treaty in this area.4

Attempts to legislate in this area are hampered by the diverse and sometimes
opposing angles to this issue. One argument advanced in favor of folklore protec-
tion is that it is only fair that the global system affords as much consideration and
protection to what traditional communities and some developing countries value
(i.e., their folklore) as it does to the intellectual property of developed countries.5
Intellectual property refers to creations of the mind; and the main categories for
rights in these creations are copyright, patent, industrial designs, and trademarks.
From an intellectual property perspective, however, and stemming largely from
the origins of the intellectual property system being rooted in western epistemol-
ogy, the current construction of intellectual property with its eligibility criteria
and limited duration is not wholly compatible with folklore protection.6 Never-
theless, there is an undeniable similarity between some folklore works and the
works protected under the intellectual property law system.7

Countries like Ghana and other former colonies whose introduction to the in-
tellectual property system was during the colonial period face numerous obstacles
in their quest to protect folklore. This article examines intellectual property and
traditional textile protection from an African perspective. Many African countries
have traditional textile designs.8 The choice of Ghana and the kente designs9 is
motivated by the fact that the Ghanaian kente design is one of the most well-
known traditional designs from Ghana and the African region. Further, it is high
on Ghana’s list of the folklore it wants to protect. The article uses the kente de-
signs to illustrate the importance of traditional textile designs as well as explore
national and regional perspectives on intellectual property protection of tradi-
tional designs. There are few studies that address the issue of traditional designs
and intellectual property protection internationally as well as from a Ghanaian
and African perspective. Thus, this article will contribute much needed analysis in
this area. Although there is a great body of literature analyzing the philosophical
justifications for intellectual property10 and why it is or is not suitable for folklore
protection, an in-depth analysis of that field is beyond the scope of this article.

Against this background, the first part of the article examines the nature and
significance of traditional textiles. Next, it focuses on the kente traditional de-
signs, followed by an examination of unauthorized traditional design commer-
cialization concerns. Then the article analyzes of intellectual property protection
of kente designs in Ghana. Next is a discussion of regional perspectives. Finally,
the article examines folklore and human rights.

NATURE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF TRADITIONAL TEXTILE DESIGNS

In this section cloth, fabric, and textiles are used interchangeably. Further, because
the designs in question are used in textiles, traditional textiles and traditional tex-
tile designs are used interchangeably.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

273

Characteristics of Traditional Textile Designs

There are several characteristics distinguishing traditional textile designs from other
textile designs. One characteristic of traditional textiles is that they are regarded as
having been developed by communities, not by an individual. Although it is not
always possible to date when they were created, the relevant community has cus-
tomarily been producing the textiles for a long period of time, usually dating back
several centuries, and may still be producing it. Also, the art of making the textile
has been preserved and transmitted from one generation to the next. In addition,
even within a country, a particular textile design may be associated with a specific
indigenous community or with a particular region of a country. Some types of
fabrics and designs may be distinct to a particular ethnic group or region of a
country. The requisite knowledge about a textile can identify which part of the
country it comes from and even the ethnic group that produces it or is in charge
of producing it.

These characteristics apply to what is generally referred to as folklore of which
traditional art and design forms a part. One legal writer has described folklore as
having the following common characteristics:

• It is passed from generation to generation, either orally or through imitation.
• It is generally not attributable to any individual author or set of authors.
• It is being continually used and developed within the indigenous community.11

Although there are various definitions of folklore, this article adopts the defi-
nition of folklore in the WIPO-UNESCO Model Provisions12 unless otherwise
stated. The WIPO-UNESCO Model Provisions define folklore or “expressions of
folklore” as “productions consisting of characteristic elements of the traditional
artistic heritage developed and maintained by a community in the country or by
individuals reflecting the traditional artistic expectations of such a community.”13
The WIPO has also described folklore as a part of traditional knowledge14 while
defining traditional knowledge as covering “tradition-based literary, artistic or sci-
entific works; performances; inventions; scientific discoveries, designs; marks; names
and symbols; undisclosed information; and all other tradition-based innovations
and creations resulting from intellectual activity in the industrial, scientific, liter-
ary or artistic fields.”15 Thus folklore could be defined as traditional cultural knowl-
edge a definition, which arguably omits scientific knowledge.

However, the term folklore does not have unquestioned universal acceptance,
and there are criticisms about the appropriateness of using the term folklore to
refer to the cultural heritage and expressions of indigenous and traditional com-
munities. Dissatisfaction with the term centers mainly on its association with rural,
lower, disadvantaged, illiterate, or uncivilized societies.16 Further, there are some
historical negative overtones attached to folklore based on its association with
myths, superstitions, and similar terms. In Australia, for example, there is an aver-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

274

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

sion to the word folklore with a preference for the expressions “traditional knowl-
edge” or “cultural expressions of indigenous peoples.”17 Despite this controversy,
this work uses the term folklore because that is the term used in the Ghanaian
legislation.

Before moving on, the following important points must be made. First, tradi-
tional does not necessarily mean old or a lack of novelty,18 because works are con-
tinually transformed. Second, the fact that these works are generally regarded as
originating from a community does not mean that the contributions of specific
individuals cannot be recognized. As one commentator argues, it is an oversim-
plification or an example of generalizing to state that traditional knowledge tends
to be handed over from one generation to the next and does not have a “clearly
identifiable individual inventor.”19 Similarly, although in traditional communities
works tend to be created by groups, it is possible for individuals in the commu-
nity to be singled out for their exceptional talent or recognized as creators.20 Kamal
Puri, for example, concludes on this point that it is feasible for there to be an
identifiable author, an author who “can be readily identified for the purposes of
protection under the copyright system.”21

Significance of Traditional Textile Designs

As a part of folklore, traditional textiles have a lot of significance in ethnic com-
munities, a significance that might extend to the country in question. This signif-
icance is summarized as follows:

1. They are part of the cultural heritage of the communities. Dr. Erica-Irene
Daes, chair of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, provided a
useful definition of heritage:

“Heritage” is everything that belongs to the distinct identity of a people
and which is theirs to share, if they wish, with other peoples. It includes
all of those things which international law regards as the creative pro-
duction of human thought and craftsmanship, such as songs, stories,
scientific knowledge and artworks. It also includes inheritances from the
past and from nature, such as human remains, the natural features of
the landscape, and naturally-occurring species of plants and animals with
which a people has long been connected.22

Applying this to the subject of this article, the community has inherited the
textile or art of textile making from their ancestors which knowledge they
will transmit to future generations.

2. They form a part of and could be a marker of identity.23
3. They can be a means of communication and instruction in a community.
4. In some communities, the production of the textiles may be a good source

of revenue for the community and the country.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

275

5. The preservation of the textile designs are in effect the preservation of cul-

ture and global diversity.

Against this background, the next section examines one traditional textile
design: the kente.24 The terms kente designs, kente, and kente cloth are used
interchangeably.

THE KENTE DESIGNS

The kente cloth is an important part of Ghana’s cultural heritage. Although the
kente’s exact origin is unknown, kente designs clearly date back several centu-
ries.25 The term kente has its roots in the term kenten, meaning basket. This name
was given to the cloth because it resembles the woven designs of a basket. Kente is
a handwoven cloth woven on a horizontal treadle loom.26 The art and knowledge
of kente weaving has been practiced for centuries in Ghana and passed from one
generation to the next. The cloth is traditionally woven by the Ewe and Asante
ethnic groups.27 The Asante cloth is woven in the villages near Kumasi and around
Bonwire and Ntonso; and the Ewe Kente is woven around Kpetoe, Denu, Wheta,
and Agbozume in the Volta Region of Ghana. Although these ethnic groups pro-
duce similar kente cloth, the differences in the cloths made by these two ethnic
groups are in the weaving styles.28 Kente weaving tends to be a family business.29
However, the fact that folklore tends to be communally produced does not ne-
gate the possibility of identifying an individual’s contribution to the creation. With
respect to kente weaving, Betsy Fowler writes about a Ghanaian artist who pro-
duces kente designs used to mark events in tribal life.30 Examples like these are
evidence of the fact that, even under the communal umbrella, there is a degree of
individual creativity; and in some cases some individuals can be identified for the
designs they create.

Kente designs have a lot of symbolism and significance in Ghana. Kente pat-
terns are unique, and each has its own name. In addition, kente cloths have rich
vibrant colors. Colors are very symbolic in Ghana; consequently, the colors for the
cloths are chosen according to the story or message the cloth is meant to com-
municate.31 The complex and intricate designs in kente cloths have deep symbolic
meanings. The key thing is that the kente cloth is more than just a cloth:

Kente cloth came to represent the history, philosophy, ethics, and moral
values in African culture. . . . In a total cultural context, kente is more
important than just a cloth. It is a visual representation of history, phi-
losophy, ethics, oral literature, moral values, social code of conduct, re-
ligious belief, political thought and aesthetic principles.32

Under Akan traditional protocol, kente is reserved for important occasions. A
ceremonial cloth, the kente was originally reserved for royalty and worn during

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

276

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

important occasions and ceremonial events.33 With time, its use spread to non-
royals. However, its value as a ceremonial cloth has not decreased; it is still re-
served for important occasions such as weddings, naming ceremonies, and state
functions:

In many cases the use of Kente has a sacred intent. It may be used as a
special gift during such rites and ceremonies as child naming, puberty,
graduation, marriage, and soul-washing. It may also be used as a symbol
of respect for the departed souls during burial rites and ancestral re-
membrance ceremonies. Its significance as a symbol of prestige, gaiety
and glamour is evident during such community celebrations as festivals
and commemoration of historical events, when people proudly wear the
best of their Kente Cloths to reflect the spirit of the occasion.34

Its importance in Ghanaian society is seen in the fact that in 1960 Ghana pre-
sented the United Nations with the largest known Kente cloth on record.35

With Ghana having more than 70 diverse ethnic groups, one might question
how the folklore produced by two ethnic groups is regarded as the folklore of the
country as a whole. In Ghana’s response to a WIPO Questionnaire in 2001, Ghana’s
assistant copyright administrator mentioned that expressions of folklore in Ghana
are regarded as the cultural heritage of Ghana and the property of the source com-
munity.36 Thus, folklore is supposed to be a unifying factor and give these diverse
groups a common heritage as Ghanaian citizens. China expressed a similar senti-
ment in a document submitted to WIPO in 2002 where Chinese folklore is re-
ferred to as “just like a shining treasure house that symbolizes national unity and
bridges China with the world.”37

While mentioning the significance of kente to Ghana, it is noteworthy that kente
use is being adopted in other parts of the world. For example, African Americans
in the United States have adopted it to signify their identity and ties to Africa.38
However, and as is described in the following text, the production and use of kente
in other parts of the world is a controversial issue.

UNAUTHORIZED TRADITIONAL DESIGN

COMMERCIALIZATION CONCERNS

Indigenous and traditional communities are becoming increasingly concerned about
how to preserve their culture from commercial exploitation by outsiders.39 Sev-
eral factors have contributed to this situation including new technologies; global-
ization, a consequence of which is increased contact with foreigners; and the
recognition of the potential economic value to be derived from commercializing
traditional art. However, unauthorized exploitation can harm the community in
various ways. One legal scholar commenting on the unauthorized commercializa-
tion of indigenous artworks states that “[g]iven this special place of art in the
indigenous community, one can appreciate the additional harm caused by the un-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

277

authorized reproduction of artworks. Use of these images by outsiders violates
many of the principles governing the use and creation of art.”40 Because of the
exploitation, traditional communities are trying to find ways to protect and pre-
serve their culture.

Ghana is becoming increasingly concerned about the appropriation41 and un-
authorized commercialization of kente. One Ghanaian copyright official stated that
this illicit exploitation is conducted especially in the United States and Asia.42 These
imitations tend to be mass produced by factories, whereas the original and au-
thentic Ghanaian kente is locally handmade, more expensive, and of a superior
quality. In addition, imitations of kente are readily available in foreign markets
such as in the United States. Ghana also has to deal with regional compliance be-
cause it appears that other African countries may be producing and marketing
kente imitations.43 If these practices are not arrested, they could result in Ghana
losing this aspect of its culture.44

The cultural appropriation of the kente cloth could be injurious to Ghanaian
culture in several ways. As stated in the previous section, Ghanaians have woven
the kente cloth for centuries. The people making unauthorized reproductions of
the cloth in Asia and the United States are depriving Ghanaians in Ghana of a
means of livelihood. They are tapping into a market to which they are not enti-
tled. There is also the danger of these textiles being exported to Ghana and com-
peting with Ghana’s local industry. Economic history shows that unfair competition
from imported products has the capacity to kill a local industry. Furthermore, this
cloth is prestigious and symbolic in Ghana, worn on special occasions. Worn and
used out of its cultural setting, there is the danger that this cloth will be devalued
and become commonplace. Moreover, the cloth may be inappropriately used be-
cause the wearer does not attach as much meaning to it as does the Ghanaian.45
One Ghanaian scholar observed that “something that is sacred in one country,
should not be used as a table cloth in another.”46

As Boateng observes on this point:

The use of kente for items like umbrellas, beach balls, and furnishings is
considered to degrade a cloth that is normally reserved for ceremonial
use.

It is at this point, where for African Americans kente is “anything you
want it to be,” that the issue of globalization becomes most pertinent,
for the kente in question is usually not the hand-woven product that is
only obtainable from Ghanaian craftsmen, but imitations thereof. Within
the global economy, sophisticated communications and reproduction
technology give an advantage to producers who have the resources to
quickly access market information and turn it to their advantage. Thus
East Asian and other producers (some within Africa) undercut indig-
enous producers of kente, adinkra, and other handmade textiles. Their
ability to profit from this is partly due to consumers’ acceptance of their
imitations. The relationships between African Americans and Ghana-
ians around cloth are thus mediated by these third parties, to the disad-
vantage of the original producers.47

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

278

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

In sum, the examination in this section established Ghanaian concerns about
the unauthorized production of kente designs regionally and internationally and
about the need to find a solution to this issue.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION

As mentioned earlier, although there is an undeniable similarity between the sub-
ject matter of folklore and intellectual property works, there are difficulties in
attempting to incorporate folklore into the existing intellectual property law cat-
egories. These difficulties stem from two main facts: (1) that the intellectual prop-
erty law system, being a western construct, was not designed for folklore protection;
and (2) currently, folklore does not fit neatly into the eligibility criteria for in-
tellectual property protection. In fact, some scholars have questioned the wis-
dom of traditional communities using the intellectual property law system to
protect folklore because in doing so, they might have to define or redefine them-
selves through an alien lens. Nevertheless, there are two main reasons for the
intellectual property law system attraction: (1) the similarity between intellectual
property works and folklore, as mentioned earlier in this section, and (2) the
fact that the intellectual property law system is reasonably well established. Thus,
from the point of view of a society trying to protect its cultural heritage, it is
more advisable to use the current intellectual property law system as a protec-
tion tool while waiting for an international agreement in this area, as opposed to
taking no action.

The section continues by examining Ghana’s use of the intellectual property
law system to protect its traditional textile designs, as a case study of the African
situation.

International Intellectual Property Landscape

Ghana’s international intellectual property relations can be grouped into two pe-
riods: pre-independence and the post-independence era. Like many former Brit-
ish colonies,48 Ghana’s introduction to the intellectual property system came from
Britain. For example, Ghana’s first copyright legislation was a British statute, the
Imperial Copyright Act of 1911,49 which came into force in 1912 and was appli-
cable to the whole of the British Empire. Thus, as is the case with other former
African colonies, the introduction of the intellectual property law system into Ghana
did not take into consideration the differences between Ghanaian society, culture,
communal nature, and values on the one hand and that of Britain on the other.50
Likewise, some international treaties to which Britain was a party were applied
to Ghana. For example, Britain adhered to the Berne Convention for the Protec-
tion of Literary and Artistic Works (the Berne Convention) 1886 for itself and its

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

279

colonies and possessions. However, since independence, Ghana has signed and rat-
ified some of the international intellectual property agreements in its right.

Ghana’s international obligations have grown since independence. First, from
August 22, 1962, it became bound by the Universal Copyright Convention (UCC)
1952 and its protocols 1 and 2. Second, Ghana ratified the Berne Convention in
1991. Thus, until 1991 when Ghana ratified the Berne Convention, the UCC played
a dominant role in Ghana’s international copyright obligations. This is clear from
the fact that Ghana’s first two post-independence copyright legislation, the Copy-
right Act, 1961 (Act 85), and the Copyright Law, 1985 (P.N.D.C. Law 110), are
silent on the Berne Convention but mention Ghana’s obligation to protect works
of UCC parties.51 In 1976 it became a member in its own right of the Paris Con-
vention for the Protection of Industrial Property.52

Ghana’s international obligations have expanded even further since the 1990s.
Ghana became a World Trade Organization (WTO) member on January 1, 1995,
and was bound to implement the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intel-
lectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement)53 from January 1, 2000.54 Ghana signed
the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) on May 23, 1997, and is reported as having
played a leading role in its conclusion.55 Ghana ratified the WCT on August 18,
2006, and the WCT entered into force in Ghana on November 18, 2006.56 Ghana
has also signed the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), is a party to it, and
has ratified it.57 The Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)58 entered into force in Ghana
in February 1997, and Ghana became a signatory of the Patent Law Treaty (PLT)59
on June 2, 2000.

Domestic Intellectual Property Regime

During the past decade, Ghana has embarked on an ambitious plan to expand its
intellectual property law regime partly in an attempt to meet its TRIPS obliga-
tions. During the past decade, Ghana has drafted bills for parliament’s consider-
ation in several areas. The bills either revise existing intellectual property legislation,
in areas including copyright60 and patents, or aim to introduce legislation in areas
hitherto not provided for, such as geographical indications and layout (topogra-
phies) of integrated circuits. Some new laws that have been passed include the
Copyright Act, 2005 (Act 690),61 and the Trademarks Act, 2004 (Act 664).62

Kente and Traditional Designs Protection

Copyright plays a prominent role in Ghana’s intellectual property system; since
independence Ghana has passed more copyright than other intellectual property
legislation. However, folklore protection in formal legislation began not with the
intellectual property system but with textile legislation in the 1960s and 1970s such
as the Textile Designs (Registration) Decree, 1973 (N.R.C.D. 213),63 which for-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

280

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

bade the registration of textile designs “if the design is substantially made up of
well-known indigenous traditional motifs” (section 2(2)(d)). The Industrial De-
signs Act of 2003 (Act 660) repealed and replaced this decree. The Copyright Law,
P.N.D.C. Law 110 of 1985,64 with its folklore protection provisions, marked the
beginning of a relationship between folklore and Ghana’s intellectual property sys-
tem. The introduction of folklore protection into Ghana’s intellectual property
system can be regarded as an indication that Ghana was beginning to think about
which of its resources and cultural heritage were important and worthy of pro-
tection. P.N.D.C. Law 110 was repealed with the passage of the Copyright Act,
2005 (Act 690).65

Copyright Protection Under Act 690

Ghana’s copyright legislation, Act 690, specifically protects folklore. Other Afri-
can countries protect folklore under formal legislation such as Ivory Coast in
1978, Nigeria in 1992,66 and Togo in 1991. These efforts are not surprising in
view of international initiatives and model laws exploring the relationship be-
tween folklore and intellectual property such as the Tunis Model Law67 and the
WIPO-UNESCO Model Provisions.68 As WIPO has observed, although these two
international initiatives are not binding, they have influenced the development
of national laws on folklore protection.69 Another reason from the Ghanaian per-
spective is the similarity between intellectual property law and control of folk-
lore under customary law principles.70 Intellectual property protection does not
mean that customary law principles have been eclipsed; rather, intellectual prop-
erty law protection should be regarded as an addition to or a strengthening of
the customary law principles.71

An analysis of Ghana’s Copyright Act reveals that the act has a dual role be-

cause it protects the following:

• The traditional copyright works such as literary works, artistic works, musical
works, sound recordings, audiovisual works, choreographic works, derivative
works, and computer software or programmes (Act 690, s. 1. (1))

• Folklore

Although the traditional works must comply with eligibility criteria such as orig-
inality, reduction to material form, conditions on the author’s nationality, and other
publication guidelines,72 these eligibility criteria do not apply to folklore.73

With the traditional works, authors have economic and moral rights in their
works. Works of individuals are protected during the author’s life and for 70 years
after the author’s death. The term of protection is 70 years from the time the work
was made or first published for other works such as those of a body corporate.74
Moral rights exist in perpetuity, however. Act 690 also provides for permitted used
of works.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

281

It is an infringement for a person to deal with a copyright protected work in a
manner that adversely affects the author’s economic or moral rights. The civil sanc-
tions for copyright infringement include injunctions and damages for the infringe-
ment while the criminal sanctions include fines and prison terms. Parties also have
the option of negotiating a settlement of a dispute (Act 690, s. 48).
Act 690: Folklore Copyright Provisions

Under Act 690 (s. 76) folklore

means the literary, artistic and scientific expressions belonging to the
cultural heritage of Ghana which are created, preserved and developed
by ethnic communities of Ghana or by an unidentified Ghanaian au-
thor, and includes kente and adinkra designs, where the author of the
designs are not known, and any similar work designated under this Act
to be works of folklore.

The protection of folklore under copyright in Ghana originated with the former
copyright legislation, the Copyright Law, 1985 (P.N.D.C. Law 110). Although these
two pieces of legislation had similar definitions of folklore, the main difference
between the two definitions is that under Act 690 kente and adinkra designs are
specifically mentioned in the legislation as works of Ghanaian folklore.75

Folklore protection under Act 690 has the following main features. The act pro-
tects folklore against reproduction, “communication to the public by perfor-
mance, broadcasting, distribution by cable or other means” and against “adaptation,
translation and other transformation” (Act 690, s.4.(1)), whereas folklore rights
are vested in the president “on behalf of and in trust for the people of the Repub-
lic” (Act 690, s.4.(2)). The perpetual duration the act grants to works of Ghanaian
folklore (Act 690, s.17) means that such works will never be part of the public
domain.76 Act 690 establishes a National Folklore Board (Act 690, s. 59) whose
duties are to maintain a register of Ghana’s folklore and to “promote activities for
the dissemination of expressions of folklore within the Republic and abroad.”77
People who want to use folklore for uses that fall outside the permitted uses in
section 19 must obtain the National Folklore Board’s prior consent and pay a fee
(Act 690, s. 64(1)).78 Such fees are to be paid into a fund, which is to be estab-
lished by the minister with the accountant general’s approval and managed by the
National Folklore Board for the purposes of preserving and promoting folklore
and promoting indigenous arts (Act 690, s. 64(3)(a) and (b)). Offences under the
Copyright Act concern the sale or distribution of imported works of Ghanaian
folklore without the written permission of the National Folklore Board (Act 690,
s. 44).79 At present, Ghana’s copyright legislation does not protect foreign folklore.
Evaluation

Although Ghana and other countries protect folklore in formal legislation, many
factors militate against their success in protecting their folklore. There is tension
in seeking overseas compliance of customary laws80 as well as in trying to ensure

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

282

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

compliance overseas for copyright legislation that protects folklore. As Kamal Puri
has analyzed in relation to intellectual property protection of Aboriginal cultural
heritage in Australia, it is not always easy to reconcile Aboriginal customary law
with its group ownership with the Anglo-Saxon legal system with its personal rights
and an individual artist’s intellectual property.81

In addition to the aforementioned challenges, another contributory factor is
the perception that folklore is part of the public domain.82 From a strict Western
perspective, folklore forms a part of the public domain. However, in other parts of
the world, like Ghana, folklore does not form a part of the public domain. There
is this struggle between what belongs to the commons and what does not, and this
plays out in the folklore area as well.

Writing on the use of kente and adinkra designs, Boateng gave some insight
into the commercialization and use of Ghanaian folklore in the United States. She
describes a conversation she had with a U.S. vendor in Champaign, Illinois, who
was surprised that adinkra symbols have legislative protection in Ghana. The ven-
dor said when the vendor inquired about the copyright implications of using adin-
kra symbols in her business card in the early 1990s, U.S. officials informed the
vendor that this was an item of folklore that was a part of the public domain. This
was despite the fact that Ghana’s copyright law with its provisions on folklore pro-
tection had been in existence for five to six years.83 Another scholar mentions the
lack of recourse for a Ghanaian artist when J.C. Penney reproduced some of his
traditional designs on bedsheets and sold them to the American public.84

With copyright in folklore being vested in the Republic of Ghana and with the
establishment of a National Folklore Board to administer proceeds from folklore
use, it remains to be seen how the proceeds will be administered and whether
folklore producers will benefit from the proceeds.85 A few solutions that have been
identified in other countries include provisions in licences, agreements, and con-
cessions between the owners of the folklore and the potential users.86 Writing on
the Ghanaian situation in 2004, before the passage of Act 690, Boateng stated that
there is a need for the government, with the copyright holder of folklore to be
accountable and ensure that producers of folklore benefit from its mass exploita-
tion. She commented further that in the view of some kente and adinkra produc-
ers in Ghana, the state is not trustworthy enough as the copyright holder and “the
custodian of their interests.”87 Although it is too early to evaluate the effect of Act
690 on this issue because the act does not state the formula that will be used in
administering the proceeds, this is an area that the government must address in
the coming years. This is because international instruments such as the CBD em-
phasize the importance of benefit-sharing agreements.88

In sum, this section establishes how the perception of folklore in some coun-
tries as public domain items can enable the infringement of another country’s
laws. It also shows the difficulty that countries like Ghana encounter when trying
to protect their folklore in places where folklore is generally not protected. This is
strengthened by the absence of an international agreement and international

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

283

enforcement in this area. In conclusion and in fairness to this piece of legislation,
it is impossible for national legislation alone to resolve this challenge conclusively.
The very nature of the challenge dictates a regional and international solution.

REGIONAL PERSPECTIVES

Folklore protection is an important issue in Africa because of the significance of
folklore in Africa. As mentioned earlier, some African countries are using intellec-
tual property legislation to protect folklore. Shyllon asserts, “Folklore provisions
in post-colonial legislation in the African states must be seen as an attempt to
cater for the peculiar needs of these countries whose civilization and tradition are
oral.”89

One lesson that can be learned from the Ghanaian experience is that alone,
provisions in national legislation on folklore protection are insufficient to ensure
compliance overseas. The question then remains of what steps countries like Ghana
should take to move forward in folklore protection? Is the answer in a regional or
international arrangement; and if so, in which order?

One law scholar has proposed that a regional solution might have greater suc-
cess than a “more encompassing global treaty” for folklore protection in Africa.90
His proposal is based on a consideration of the differences between African coun-
tries on the one hand and developed nations on the other.91

In the African context, there is certainly some merit in the establishment of a
regional arrangement on folklore. It has already been mentioned that several Af-
rican countries protect folklore under intellectual property. A regional arrange-
ment on folklore is advisable because it would strengthen these efforts. The case
for the regional argument is stronger when it comes to folklore policy making
because it gives greater weight to national efforts. There are already several re-
gional organizations in Africa under whose umbrella this issue could be tackled.
These include the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)92
and in the intellectual property areas the African Regional Intellectual Property
Organization (ARIPO),93 formed among English-speaking Africa, and the Afri-
can Intellectual Property Organization (OAPI),94 formed among French-speaking
Africa. There is also the African Union (AU), formerly the Organization of Afri-
can Unity.

However, these intellectual property groupings do not establish a common and
uniform folklore policy for the region. On March 2, 1977, the OAPI was created
by the adoption of a convention signed in Bangui.95 The Bangui Agreement was
revised on February 24, 1999,96 to comply with TRIPS. The OAPI has extensive
provisions on folklore protection in its Annex VII.97 However, ARIPO does not
address folklore.98 Since its establishment by the Lusaka Agreement in Zambia on
December 9, 1976, ARIPO has adopted two protocols: the Protocol on Patent and
Industrial Designs within the Framework of the African Regional Industrial Prop-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

284

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

erty Organization (Harare Protocol)99 and the Banjul Protocol on Marks.100 More-
over, and as the name implies, ARIPO’s focus is on cooperation among English-
Speaking Africa in industrial property matters. Thus, there is a gap in this area in
relation to policy and cooperation in folklore issues.

Another initiative is the African Union Model law for the Protection of the Rights
of Local Communities, Farmers and Breeders and for the Regulation of Access to
Biological Resources101 (African Union Model Law), a draft agreement on biolog-
ical resources. Although the African Union Model Law was drafted in response to
the CBD102 and article 27.3(b) of the TRIPS Agreement,103 it is an example that
could be followed with respect to regional folklore policies.

One scholar analyzing African initiatives and the African Union Model Law com-
ments that the “development of national laws based on the model law has been
slow even though the idea of the sui generis option has been accepted.”104 He
continues that this is partly caused by the problem of adapting it to national pol-
icy objectives and observes that most Africans are not aware of the existence of
this law, nor of international agreements such as the CBD or the TRIPS Agree-
ment. Furthermore, he suggests the following:

National governments and the international community should learn to
be more participative, strategically patient and democratic in their
decision-making processes. They should ensure that those most likely to
be affected by these legislative imperatives not only understand the is-
sues involved, but actually get a fair hearing and participate in the whole
process. There is a need for more widespread discussion of the Model
Law at national, subregional and regional levels on the continent to more
realistically elicit the reaction, support or otherwise of Africa.105

Although model laws are nonbinding, the attempt to legislate on a regional basis
is commendable; and this initiative is probably expandable into the folklore realm.
Likewise, the success of regional policies on folklore protection in Africa will also
require education and consultations at the various levels of African society.

Basically, and in view of the differences between the meaning of folklore in the
African context and in other parts of the world where folklore might be regarded
as part of the public domain, it is advisable that folklore protection form a part of
African regional policy. This suggestion is made against the background that Af-
rican countries have already recognized the importance of cooperation through
organizations like ARIPO. However, the most important reason for this sugges-
tion is that it will give national African folklore initiatives a force that the indi-
vidual countries cannot achieve on their own.

There are three possible ways of addressing this:

1. This could be done under the umbrella of the existing regional intellectual

property organizations.

2. A new regional organization could be formed being an amalgamation of the

existing intellectual property organizations.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

285

3. A new organization could be formed for African folklore, such as the African

folklore organization.

Of these three possible alternatives, the second and third points are a better solution
than the first one. It is better that the issue is dealt with by the whole region as op-
posed to it being settled according to language groupings. Ghana, for example, al-
though an English speaking country, has French-speaking countries as its neighbors.
As one legal scholar commenting on the African situation from an intellectual

property and trade angle has observed:

The ARIPO and the OAPI establish two different systems that do not
project the realities of a unified African objective. Perhaps a more effec-
tive African intellectual property regime may be pursued through a pro-
cess of reviewing the existing sub-regional trade initiatives within the
African region in order to make the system more workable or indeed
introducing intellectual property within the existing sub-regional trad-
ing initiative, such as the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).106

In addition to the previous recommendations listed, this process might be fa-
cilitated if African countries keep a registry of their folklore. For example, Ghana
has already instituted this measure, and other non-African countries such as India
and China also have registers of their folklore. Some writers have commented that
traditional peoples may not want to disclose folklore that is sacred. A determina-
tion of whether sacred folklore should or should not be included in the registry is
not within the scope of this article. That is for the country in question to decide.
However, folklore that can be disclosed should be disclosed as a starting point.
With time, the registry could translate into a regional one if future events neces-
sitate such a measure.

During its ninth session (April 24–28, 2006), WIPO’s Intergovernmental Com-
mittee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and
Folklore (IGC) identified some of the recurring issues in discussions on the pro-
tection of traditional knowledge as including the nature of traditional knowledge,
the description and definition of traditional knowledge, and the identify of the
owners and other beneficiaries.107 This shows that there are still many questions
to be answered before an international agreement can proceed. Thus, having a
regional agreement or some policy on these areas would certainly aid international
efforts. This does not mean that international efforts should not proceed without
a regional agreement, however.

FOLKLORE AND HUMAN RIGHTS

Folklore protection through the human rights framework is regarded as one via-
ble option and arguably better than the use of the intellectual property system.108

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

286

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

To what extent is the protection of folklore a human rights issue? Some inter-
national documents such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948
(UDHR)109 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR)110 recognize rights in intellectual property.111 “Today, the right
to the protection of interests in intellectual creations is recognized explicitly as a
human right in the UDHR, the ICESCR, and many other international or regional
instruments.”112 The CBD underlines the importance of protecting and preserv-
ing traditional knowledge. Although there is some research on this area,113 a human
rights framework for folklore protection has not been studied in depth; and there
is a need for more research in this area. The main question is this: Do countries
have a human rights obligation to protect folklore? Although an in-depth analysis
of this question is not within the scope of this paper, this section focuses on ar-
ticle 15(1)(b) and (c) of the ICESCR.114

Article 15(1) of the ICESCR recognizes cultural rights and intellectual property
rights. One author argues that it recognizes cultural human rights.115 Nwuache
asserts that article 15(1)(b) and 15(1)(c) “constitute the right to intellectual prop-
erty.”116 Haugen argues that although from the wording of article 15(1)(c) this
article was meant to apply to individual authors, developments in intellectual prop-
erty show that it might also apply to minorities.117 Yu argues that although the
drafters of articles 27 of the UDHR and 15(1)(c) of the ICESCR as well as the
general comment number 17 on article 15(1)(c)118 may not have had traditional
communities in mind, this does not mean that an interpretation of these articles
cannot be extended to include collective rights.119

In sum, one can therefore conclude that provisions in international documents
such as article 15(1) of the ICESCR can cover intellectual creations of communi-
ties as well. Based on this analysis, I argue that the protection of folklore, in this
case traditional cultural designs, it also a human rights issue.120 Considering ef-
fective folklore protection as a human rights issue strengthens the case for folklore
protection. How countries deal with this issue will vary,121 because there are no
international regulations on the protection of traditional cultural expressions. How-
ever, with the ongoing work of WIPO and other organizations might soon result
in an international solution.

CONCLUSION

This article analyzes the protection of traditional textile designs under the intel-
lectual property law system. In focusing on the kente traditional designs in Ghana,
the article establishes the importance of these designs to Ghanaian society as well
as some of the obstacles in the path of protecting traditional designs. The future
of folklore and intellectual property protection in African countries like Ghana
will be strengthened by increased regional cooperation. In particular, there is a
need for regional policy in this area as opposed to current intellectual property

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

287

groupings along language lines, groups that reflect Africa’s past colonial history
and may not work well in the present circumstance. African countries and local
communities will have to resolve the issue of equitable benefit sharing of the pro-
ceeds from folklore use. This is not an easy task in view of the lack of uniformity
among indigenous and traditional communities as well as differences in their re-
lationships with their respective governments. Thus to deal with equitable benefit
sharing, the governments must work with the different groups to come to a work-
able solution within their unique situations.

The article also argues that effective folklore protection requires an international
solution. The WIPO and other organizations have already taken various steps in
the past few decades to define the relationship between folklore and intellectual
property and to draft a treaty in this area. These efforts suggest that an inter-
national solution will soon be found.

ENDNOTES

1. The Tunis Model on Copyright for Developing Countries of 1976. The Tunis Model Law on
Copyright for Developing Countries is reprinted in WIPO (1976) 12 Copyright: Monthly Review 165.
The Tunis Model Law on Copyright for Developing Countries of 1976 protected folklore indefinitely.
See WIPO, Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Tradi-
tional Knowledge and Folklore, Tenth Session Geneva, November 30 to December 8, 2006, “Options
for Giving Effect to the International Dimension of the Committee’s Work,” Document prepared by
the Secretariat, WIPO/GRTKF/IC/10/6, October 2, 2006. Available at http://www.wipo.int/edocs/
mdocs/tk/en/wipo_grtkf_ic_10/wipo_grtkf_ic_10_6.doc (accessed August 13, 2007) at 5.

2. Model Provisions for National Laws on the Protection of Expressions of Folklore Against Il-
licit Exploitation and other Prejudicial Actions, 1982 (WIPO-UNESCO Model Provisions). Avail-
able at WIPO http://sct.wipo.int/tk/en/laws/pdf/unesco_wipo.pdf (accessed August 17, 2007). This
is reprinted in (1982) 16 (4) Copyright Bulletin 62. For a definition of the meaning of expressions
of folklore, see “Traditional Cultural Expressions (or Expressions of Folklore)” in WIPO Glossary of
Terms. Available at http://www.wipo.int/tk/en/glossary/ (accessed August 18, 2007).

3. The WIPO conducted several fact-finding missions in 1998 and 1999 to explore the relation-

ship between folklore and intellectual property.

4. Draft Treaty for the Protection of Expressions of Folklore Against Illicit Exploitation and Other
Prejudicial Actions of 1984. The Draft Treaty is of use for historical reference only because no coun-
try adopted it. For a brief discussion of this Draft Treaty, see Kuruk, “Protecting Folklore Under,”
817. Attempts to draft an international treaty are being continued by WIPO’s Intergovernmental
Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore.
This committee was established in 2000.

5. On this point, see for example, Drahos, “Towards an International Framework,” 8–9, com-
menting on developing-country arguments on folklore in relation to TRIPS and developed countries.

6. On this point, see for example, Massey and Stephens, “Intellectual Property Rights,” 54.
7. See Kuruk, “Protecting Folklore Under.”
8. For more information on African textile designs, see for example, Sieber, African Textiles and

Decorative Arts; Kuruk, “Protecting Folklore Under.”

9. A discussion on the kente designs appears later in this article.
10. See for example, Hughes, “The Philosophy of Intellectual Property”; Hettinger, “Justifying
Intellectual Property”; Drahos, A Philosophy of Intellectual Property; Fisher, “Theories of Intellectual
Property”; Trosow, “The Illusive Search.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

288

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

11. Farley, “Protecting Folklore of Indigenous Peoples,” 9.
12. Supra note 2. The WIPO Secretariat also uses this definition, see “Traditional Cultural Ex-

pressions (or Expressions of Folklore)” in WIPO Glossary of Terms, supra note 2.

13. WIPO-UNESCO Model Provisions, section 2.
14. Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge, and Folklore, available at
WIPO, http://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/stuides/publications/genetic_resources.htm/ (accessed Au-
gust 14, 2007).
15. Traditional Knowledge and Cultural Expressions, WIPO, available at http://www.wipo.int/
globalissues/cultural/background/index.html (accessed August 14, 2007) at 2. This was the defini-
tion WIPO used in its fact-finding missions in 1998 to 1999.

16. See Kuruk, “Protecting Folklore Under.”
17. See Michael Blakeney’s comments in “Panel II: The Law and Policy of Protecting Folklore,

Traditional Knowledge, and Genetic Resources” (2002).

18. Barsh, “Indigenous Knowledge and Biodiversity,” 74–75.
19. Downes, “How Intellectual Property Could Be a Tool,” 258.
20. Downes, “How Intellectual Property Could Be a Tool, 258–59.
21. Puri, “Preservation and Conservation,” 16.
22. Erica Irene-Daes, “Study on the Protection of the Cultural and Intellectual Property of In-
digenous Peoples,” U.N. Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and protection of Minor-
ities, U.N. Doc. E/CN.e/Sub.2/1993/28, July 28, 1993, para. 24 (quoted in Roht-Arriaza, “Of Seeds
and Shamans,” 260).

23. As Kamal Puri states, “For indigenous peoples of the Pacific, culture is the lifeline for their
survival and prosperity. Without cultural identity, their social, emotional and political matrix in
likely to crumble into pieces. Its continued practice is vital for social and political harmony among
indigenous peoples” (“Preservation and Conservation,” 6).
24. For pictures of the kente designs, see Sieber, African Textiles and Decorative Arts, 198; Boateng,
“African Textiles and the Politics,” 222; “Akan Kente Cloths,” Marshall University, available at http://
www.marshall.edu/akanart/cloth_kente.html (accessed August 21, 2007).
25. One reference states that it dates back to the twelfth century; see http://www.africawithin.
com/tour/ghana/kente.htm (accessed August 21, 2007). Another source mentions that “the history
of kente weaving extends back more than 400 years.” Ghana Embassy in Japan, “Ghana National
Cloth-Kente,” available at http://www.ghanaembassy.or.jp/general/native.html (accessed August 21,
2007).

26. The looms are used to weave four-inch strips of the cloth, which are then woven together to

form larger garments.

27. Ghana has more than 70 different ethnic groups and languages. However, they tend to be
divided into five major ethnic groupings: Guan, Ewe, Ga-Adangbe, Mole-Dagbani, and Akan. These
groups have subdivisions with common cultural, historical, linguistic, and other ties. However, there
is still a lot of diversity between the various ethnic groups. The Ashanti (sometime written as As-
ante) belong to the Akan group.
28. There are for example differences in the weft designs of the cloths. See “Akan Kente Cloths,”
Marshall University, available at http://www.marshall.edu/akanart/cloth_kente.html (accessed Au-
gust 21, 2007) at 3. See also “Patterns and Symbols in Kente and Korhogo cloths,” available at http://
www.africancrafts.com/davilojo/kandk/kandk.htm (accessed August 21, 2007).

29. Men usually weave it, but women can play a role in sewing the strips together.
30. Fowler, “Preventing Counterfeit Craft Designs,” 126–27.
31. On this point, see Salm and Falola, Culture and Customs of Ghana. “The many colors of kente
cloth represent various human traits and connote status (gold), vitality (yellow), renewal (green),
and spiritual purity (blue),” 118.
32. See “Kente,” available at http://www.ghana.com/republic/kente/ (accessed March 24, 2003)
at 1. See also “Ghana National Cloth-Kente,” Ghana Embassy in Japan, available at http://www.
ghanaembassy.or.jp/general/native.html (accessed August 21, 2007).

33. See, for example, Salm and Falola, Culture and Customs of Ghana, 117.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

289

34. See http://webusers.anet-chi.com/⬃midwest/history.html (accessed March 24, 2003). See also
“Ghana National Cloth-Kente,” Ghana Embassy in Japan, available at http://www.ghanaembassy.or.jp/
general/native.html (accessed August 21, 2007).
35. It measures 12 ⫻ 20 feet and is called tikoro nko agyina—one head does not constitute a
council. See “Akan Kente Cloths,” Marshall University, available at http://www.marshall.edu.akanart/
cloth_kente.html (accessed August 21, 2007).
36. WIPO, “Questionnaire on National Experiences with the Legal Protection of Expressions of
Folklore: Response of Ghana,” (WIPO, Questionnaire Ghana) 8, available at http://www.wipo.int/
tk/en/consultations/questionnaires/ic-2–7/ghana.pdf (accessed June 7, 2007). The assistant copy-
right administrator also mentioned, “Individual artists whose works are based upon folklore also
have copyright protection in respect of those works.” There is little information available on how
this works in practice.

37. WIPO, Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Tra-
ditional Knowledge and Folklore (2002) “Current Status on the Protection and Legislation of Na-
tional Folklore in China, Document submitted by the Delegation of China” WIPO/GRTKF/IC/3/14,
(Annex), 1.

38. See Salm and Falola, Culture and Customs of Ghana, 123; Boateng, “African Textiles and the

Politics.”

39. Puri, “Protection of Expressions,” 7.
40. Farley, “Protecting Folklore,” 10.
41. For an in-depth discussion of appropriation and cultural appropriation, see Ziff and Rao,

Borrowed Power; Scafidi, Who Owns Culture?

42. See WIPO, Questionnaire Ghana at 10, supra note 36.
43. See Boateng, “African Textiles and the Politics,” 221–22.
44. “Also, cultural sovereignty is infringed when cloth designs that Ghanaians regard as part of
their cultural heritage are appropriated and exploited without any respect for Ghana’s prior claim as
the country of origin of these designs” (Boateng, “African Textiles and the Politics,” 224).

45. Betsy Quick, writing on the use of kente for everyday objects, states that “there was in effect
a line drawn in the sand; either kente was viewed as sacred, as special or it was viewed as anything
you want it to be. Often Ghanaians took the former stance; African Americans the latter” (quoted in
Boateng, “African Textiles and the Politics,” 221).

46. Discussion with Dr. Kezia D. Awadzi PhD, University of Florida at Gainesville in July 2007.
47. Boateng, “African Textiles and the Politics,” 221.
48. A British colony from 1874, Ghana became independent on March 6, 1957.
49. Imperial Copyright Act, 1–2 Geo. V, c 46.
50. On this issue in relation to African colonies generally, see Adewopo, “The Global Intellectual

Property System,” 750–51.

51. See for example, the schedules in these two pieces of legislation which list the parties to the
52. The full text of the current version of this convention is available at WIPO, http://www.wipo.int/
53. The full text of the TRIPS Agreement is available at http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/

Universal Copyright Convention.
treaties/en/ip/paris/trtdocs_wo020.html (accessed August 13, 2007).
trips_e/t_agm0_e.htm (accessed August 13, 2007).

54. Ghana was unable to meet this deadline. Ghana’s minister of justice, Nana Akuffo-Addo, la-
mented that “due to the complexity of the issues at stake and our own limited capacity and expertise
in the matters of intellectual property law, we have been unable to comply with the deadline” (Safo,
“Trade Related Intellectual”).

55. Mould-Iddrisu, “Development and Current Status,” 3–4.
56. WIPO, Treaties Database.
57. See http://www.cbd.int/convention/parties/list.shtml (accessed June 7, 2007).
58. The full text is available at http://www.wipo.int/pct/en/texts/articles/atoc.htm (accessed Au-
59. The full text is available at http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/plt/ (accessed August 18, 2007).

gust 18, 2007).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

290

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

60. By 1997 the Copyright Office had drafted the Copyright Bill. In drafting the Copyright Bill,
the Copyright Office referred to several sources including WIPO’s Model Copyright Laws and copy-
right laws from countries like Nigeria, Sweden, the United States, the United Kingdom, Malawi,
and Malaysia. They also consulted with experts from WIPO’s Copyright Legislation Division and
the Drafting Section of Ghana’s Attorney General’s Department (Bosumprah, “The New Copyright
Bill”).
61. Ghana Copyright Act, 2005 (Act 690) available at WIPO, http://www.wipo.int/tk/en/laws/
pdf/ghana_copyright.pdf/. For a discussion of copyright in Ghana prior to the Copyright Act, 2005
(Act 690) see Amegatcher, Ghanaian Law of Copyright.

62. The first trademark legislation was in 1965, The Trade Marks Act, 1965 (Act 270) and it was
based on the British law.
63. Textile Designs (Registration) Decree, 1973 (N.R.C.D., available at WIPO, http://www.wipo.int/
clea/docs_new/pdf/en/gh/gh004en.pdf [accessed March 20, 2008]). Section 23 of this legislation de-
fined a textile design as “any pattern or ornamental feature applied to a textile article by printing
weaving, or other similar process.”

64. Ghana Copyright Law, 1985 (P.N.D.C. Law 110). This was unlike Ghana’s 1960 copyright leg-

islation which basically copied the U.K. legislation and did not protect folklore.

65. Copyright Act, 2005 (Act 690). The relevant sections of this act are sections 4, 17, 19, 44, 54,

64, and the Interpretation section.

66. For a discussion of the Nigerian situation, see Adewopo, “Protection and Administration of
Folklore in Nigeria.” On the African situation, see generally Shyllon, “Conservation, Preservation.”
On the Tunisian example, see Zografos “The Legal Protection.”

67. Tunis Model Law, see supra note 1.
68. WIPO-UNESCO Model Provisions, see supra note 2.
69. WIPO, “Options for Giving Effect to the International Dimension of the Committee’s Work,”

see supra note 1.

70. Kuruk, for example, comments on similarities between intellectual property rights and cus-
tomary law rules in some African communities (Kuruk, “African Customary Law,” 8). Ghana’s for-
mer copyright administrator, Betty Mould-Iddrisu, has described the control the chief of the Ashanti
had over the use of designs as a type of copyright, which originated from the importance of their
traditional cloths (see Kuruk, “Protecting Folklore Under,” 785, note 108).

71. See Kuruk, “African Customary Law,” 20.
72. It should also satisfy the following conditions: be created by a Ghanaian citizen or by some-
one ordinarily resident in Ghana; be published in Ghana, but if published outside Ghana it should
be published in Ghana within 30 days of its publication; or be a work Ghana has an international
treaty obligation to protect (Act 690, s. 1. (2)).

73. The eligibility criteria for a work to qualify for copyright protection are one of the hurdles
confronting the protection of traditional cultural heritage. The Ghanaian Copyright Act appears to
bypass this hurdle. For a discussion on the obstacles the eligibility criteria pose to the protection of
Aboriginal culture, see Puri, “Preservation and Conservation,” 14–17.

74. The term of protection under P.N.D.C. Law 110 was the life of the author plus 50 years and

in the case of other works, 50 years after the work was published.

75. In fact, this is the first time that examples of works of Ghanaian folklore are specifically men-
tioned in Ghana’s copyright legislation. Commenting on P.N.D.C. Law 110, Boateng writes the following:

Indeed the revision to the law has been partly attributed to the fact that imita-
tions of local handmade adinkra and kente textiles were being mass-produced
by East Asian textile factories without the payment of royalties to Ghana for the
use of cloth designs that the country considered to be part of its culture. (“Af-
rican Textiles and the Politics,” 212)

76. Act 690, section 38 defines works which are in the public domain.
77. Act 690 at section 63 (f). The functions of the National Folklore Board may be regarded as a

bit controversial.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

291

78. The Copyright Law, 1985, achieved some success in protecting Ghanaian folklore when in
1990 musician Paul Simon signed an agreement with the Copyright Office and paid the Copyright
Office for using a Ghanaian musical folklore. In 1990 the Ghana Copyright Office granted Paul
Simon permission to use “Yaa Amponsah,” a Ghanaian musical tune for his work “Spirit of Voices,”
which was included in the album, Rhythm of the Saints. See Amegatcher, Ghanaian Law of Copyright,
22; Amegatcher “Protection of Folklore,” 35–36.

79. Commenting on a similar provision in P.N.D.C. Law 110, Ghana’s former acting copyright
administrator stated that this provision was meant to protect Ghanaians from foreigners wishing to
exploit Ghanaian folklore (Amegatcher, Ghanaian Law of Copyright, 109).

80. See Kuruk, “Protecting Folklore Under.”
81. Puri, “Preservation and Conservation,” 14.
82. From an intellectual property perspective, public domain works are those that either predate
the intellectual property law system, that fall outside the scope of protectable intellectual property
subject matter, or whose term of protection has expired. See also Shyllon stating how folklore is
public domain material from the European copyright perspective and thus “it is free for anyone to
use and/or distort, a concept that is not conducive to its protection” (Shyllon, “Conservation, Pres-
ervation,” 37).

83. Boateng, “African Textiles and the Politics,” 220, 224.
84. Fowler, “Preventing Counterfeit Craft Designs.”
85. Massey and Stephens, writing on the Canadian situation, give examples of developments in
the museum and other fields whereby a percentage of proceeds from the sale of traditional designs
go to the source communities. The Canadian Museum of Civilization established a fund into which
a percentage of the proceeds from such sales were to be paid and the use of these proceeds negoti-
ated with the traditional communities (Massey and Stephens, “Intellectual Property Rights,” 57).

86. See for example, Aguilar, “Access to Genetic Resources.” Costa Rica’s Biodiversity Act, for ex-
ample, protects a sui generis community intellectual right. Commenting on Costa Rica’s Biodiversity
Act, the author states:

This law recognizes the right of local communities and indigenous peoples to
oppose access to their resources and related knowledge, for cultural, spiritual,
social, economic or other reasons. The basic requirements for access also in-
clude the conditions of technology transfer and equitable sharing of benefits, if
any, agreed in the licences, agreements and concessions, as well as the type of
protection of related knowledge required by the representatives of the place where
access is to materialize.

Aguilar, “Access to Genetic Resources,” 180. However, the author argues that despite the fact that the
law’s aim is to protect traditional knowledge, the language of the law is weak.

87. Boateng, “African Textiles and the Politics,” 225.
88. The Convention on Biological Diversity, available at http://www.cbd.int/convention/
convention.shtml (accessed April 2, 2008) at article 8(j). Article 15 of the Convention on Biological
Diversity, on access to genetic resources, also mentions benefit sharing.

89. Shyllon, “Conservation, Preservation,” 41.
90. Kuruk, “Protecting Folklore Under,” 841.
91. Kuruk, “Protecting Folklore Under,” 776, 841.
92. See ECOWAS, available at http://www.ecowas.int/ (accessed August 14, 2007). ECOWAS was
formed in 1975 and has 15 members: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, La Côte d’Ivoire, Gambia,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo.
93. For more information about ARIPO’s history and objectives, see ARIPO, available at http://
www.aripo.org/articles.php?lng⫽en&pg⫽12/ (accessed August 14, 2007); “ARIPO was mainly estab-
lished to pool the resources of its member countries in industrial property matters together in order
to avoid duplication of financial and human resources.” Currently, ARIPO has 16 members and 14
potential members. See ARIPO-membership, available at http://www.aripo.org/articles.php?
lng⫽en&pg⫽14 (accessed August 14, 2007).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

292

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

94. This is also known as the Organisation Africaine de la Propriété Intellectuelle. For more
information and the history of this organization, see Organisation Africaine de la Propriété
Intellectuelle/African Intellectual Property Organization, available at http://www.oapi.int/en/OAPI/
historique.htm/ (accessed August 14, 2007).

95. The OAPI has 16 member states: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central Africa, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal,
Chad, and Togo. The Bangui Agreement revised the previous Libreville Agreement, and it legislates
on patent rights in its member states. See Organisation Africaine de la Propriété Intellectuelle/
African Intellectual Property Organization, available at http://www.oapi.int/en/OAPI/historique.htm/
(accessed August 14, 2007).

96. African Intellectual Property Organization, Agreement Revising the Bangui Agreement of
March 2, 1977, on the Creation of an African Intellectual Property Organization (Bangui [Central
African Republic], February 24, 1999), WIPO, available at http://www.oapi.wipo.net/doc/en/bangui_
agreement.pdf (accessed August 17, 2007).

tains extensive provisions on folklore protection.

97. Annex VII of the Bangui Agreement is on Literary and Artistic Property. This Annex con-
98. See http://www.aripo.org/ (accessed August 14, 2007). For some perspectives on these Afri-
can groupings, see Kuruk, “Protecting Folklore Under”; Adewopo, “The Global Intellectual Property
System”; Ekpere, “The African Union Model Law.”
99. It was adopted in 1982 and entered into force in 1984. It was also amended in 1999. See
About ARIPO-Legal Framework, ARIPO, available at http://www.aripo.org/articles.php?lng⫽
en&pg⫽61 (accessed August 14, 2007). “The Protocol empowers the ARIPO Office to receive and
process patent and industrial design applications on behalf of states party to the Protocol.”

100.

The Banjul Protocol on Marks, which was adopted by the Administrative Coun-
cil in 1993, establishes a trademark filing system along the lines of the Harare
Protocol. Under the Banjul Protocol an applicant may file a single application
either at one of the contracting states or directly with the ARIPO Office and
designate states in the application where he wishes his mark to be protected. . . .
Since 1997 the Protocol has been extensively revised in order to make it com-
patible with the TRIPS Agreement and the Trademark Law Treaty as well as make
it more user-friendly.

About ARIPO-Legal Framework, available at http://www.aripo.org/articles.php?lng⫽en&pg⫽61 (ac-
cessed August 14, 2007).
101. For more on this, see “Traditional Knowledge-TK initiatives,” ARIPO, available at http://
www.aripo.org/articles.php?lng⫽en&pg⫽79 (accessed August 14, 2007). It was adopted in 1998. “This
Model Legislation innovates by expressly empowering a tradition community to control its genetic
and biological resources via the adoption of the prior-consent principle and benefit-sharing regime.
Farmers’ rights and privileges, community intellectual rights, and breeders’ rights have been provided.”
102. See “Traditional Knowledge-TK initiatives,” ARIPO, available at http://www.aripo.org/

articles.php?lng⫽en&pg⫽79 (accessed August 14, 2007).

103. Ekpere, “The African Union Model Law,” 234.
104. Ekpere, “The African Union Model Law,” 235.
105. Ekpere, “The African Union Model Law,” 236.
106. Adewopo, “The Global Intellectual Property System,” 769.
107. WIPO, Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Tra-
ditional Knowledge and Folklore (2006), The Protection of Traditional Knowledge: Revised Objectives
and Principles, WIPO/GRTKF/IC/9/5, at 5. Available at http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/tk/en/
wipo_grtkf_ic_9/wipo_grtkf_ic_9_5.pdf (accessed June 7, 2007). The annex of this document con-
tains the Revised Provisions for the Protection of Traditional Knowledge-Policy Objectives and Core
Principles.

108. Nwuache, “The Protection of Expressions.”

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

293

109. Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, available at http://www.unhchr.ch/udhr/lang/eng.htm (accessed April 2, 2008). Article 27
provides the following:

1. Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy

the arts and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits.

2. Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interests resulting

from any scientific, literary, or artistic production of which he is the author.

110. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, United Nations Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, available at http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/
a_cescr.htm (accessed March 20, 2008).

111. Yu, “International Rights Approaches”; Helfer, “International Rights Approaches.”
112. Yu, “Challenges to the Development.”
113. Haugen, “Traditional Knowledge and Human Rights”; Nwauche, “The Protection of

Expressions.”

114. Article 15 of the ICESCR states the following:

1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone:

(a) To take part in cultural life;
(b) To enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its applications;
(c) To benefit from the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any

scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author.

2. The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present Covenant to achieve the full
realization of this right shall include those necessary for the conservation, the develop-
ment and the diffusion of science and culture.

3. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to respect the freedom indispens-

able for scientific research and creative activity.

4. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the benefits to be derived from the
encouragement and development of international contacts and cooperation in the scien-
tific and cultural fields.

115. Haugen, “Traditional Knowledge and Human Rights,” 673.
116. Nwauche, “The Protection of Expressions,” 232.
117. Haugen, “Traditional Knowledge and Human Rights,” 674.
118. For further analysis of General Comment No. 17, see Haugen, “General Comment No. 17.”
119. Yu, “Challenges to the Development,” 16–18.
120. Haugen, “Traditional Knowledge and Human Rights,” for example, concludes that “adequate
protection of traditional knowledge is an obligation under international human rights law” [foot-
note omitted] (Haugen, “Traditional Knowledge and Human Rights,” 675). In arriving at this con-
clusion, he also analyzes the provisions of Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.

121. Nwauche, “The Protection of Expressions,” 233.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Adewopo, A. “Protection and Administration of Folklore in Nigeria.” SCRIPT-ed 3 (2006). Available
at http://www.law.ed.ac.uk/ahrc/SCRIPT-ed/vol3-1/editorial.pdf (accessed August 22, 2007).

———. “The Global Intellectual Property System and Sub-Saharan Africa: A Prognostic Reflection.”
The University of Toledo Law Review 33 (2002): 749.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

294

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

Aguilar, G. “Access to Genetic Resources and Protection of Traditional Knowledge in Indigenous
Territories.” In Trading in Knowledge: Development Perspectives on TRIPS, Trade, and Sustainability,
edited by C. Bellmann, G. Dutfield, and R. Melendez-Ortiz, 175–83. London: Earthscan Publica-
tions, 2003.

Amegatcher, A.O. Ghanaian Law of Copyright. Accra: Omega (Law) Publishers, 1993.

———. “Protection of Folklore by Copyright: A Contradiction In Terms.” Copyright Bulletin 36 (2002):
33–41.

Barsh, R.L. “Indigenous Knowledge and Biodiversity.” In Cultural and Spiritual Values of Biodiversity,
edited by D.A. Posey, 73. London: UNEP and Intermediate Technology, London, 1999.

Boateng, B. “African Textiles and the Politics of Diasporic Identity-Making.” In Fashioning Africa:
Power and the Politics of Dress, edited by J. Allman, 212–26. Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
2004.

Bosumprah, B.K. “The New Copyright Bill, Existing International Treaties and P.N.D.C. Law 110.”
Paper presented at the National Forum to Discuss the New Copyright Bill at the Teachers’ Hall,
Accra, October 3, 1997.

Downes, D.R. “How Intellectual Property Could Be a Tool to Protect Traditional Knowledge.” Co-
lumbia Journal of Environmental Law 3 (2000): 25–82.

Drahos, P. A Philosophy of Intellectual Property. Aldershot: Dartmouth, 1996.

Drahos, P. “Towards an International Framework for the Protection of Traditional Group Knowl-
edge and Practice.” Paper prepared for the Commonwealth Secretariat, Geneva, Switzerland,
February 4–6, 2004. Available at http://r0.unctad.org/trade_env/test1/meetings/tk2/drahos.draft.doc
(accessed August 21, 2007).

Ekpere, J.A. “The African Union Model Law for the Protection of the Rights of Local Communities
Farmers and Breeders and the Regulation of Access to Biological Resources.” In Trading in Knowl-
edge: Development Perspectives on TRIPS, Trade, and Sustainability, edited by C. Bellmann, G. Dut-
field, and R. Melendez-Ortiz, 232–37. London: Earthscan Publications, 2003.

Farley, C.H. “Protecting Folklore of Indigenous Peoples: Is Intellectual Property the Answer?” Con-
necticut Law Review 30 (1997): 1–57.

Fisher, W.W. “Theories of Intellectual Property.” edited by S. R. Munzer. In New Essays in the Legal
and Political Theory of Property. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Fowler, B.J. “Preventing Counterfeit Craft Designs.” In Poor People’s Knowledge: Promoting Intellec-
tual Property in Developing Countries, edited by J.M. Finger and P. Schuler, 113–31. Washington, DC:
World Bank, 2004.

Haugen, H.M. “General Comment No. 17 on ‘Authors Rights.’” The Journal of World Intellectual
Property 10 (2007): 53–69.

———. “Traditional Knowledge and Human Rights.” The Journal of World Intellectual Property 8
(2005): 663–77.

Helfer, L.R. “Toward a Human Rights Framework for Intellectual Property.” UC Davis Law Review
40 (2007): 971.

Hettinger, E.C. “Justifying Intellectual Property.” Philosophy and Public Affairs 18 (1989): 31.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

THE GHANAIAN EXPERIENCE AND AFRICAN PERSPECTIVES

295

Hughes, J. “The Philosophy of Intellectual Property.” Georgetown Law Journal 77 (1988): 287.

Kuruk, P. “African Customary Law and the Protection of Folklore.” Copyright Bulletin 36 (2002):
4–32. Available at http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001277/127784e.pdf (accessed on June 7,
2007).

———. “Protecting Folklore Under Modern Intellectual Property Regimes: A Reappraisal of the
Tensions Between Individual and Communal Rights in Africa and the United States.” The American
University Law Review 49 (1999): 769–48.

Massey, R., and C. Stephens. “Intellectual Property Rights, the Law and Indigenous Peoples’ Art.”
Copyright Bulletin 32 (1998): 49–62. Available at http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0011/001162/
116222eb.pdf#116203 (accessed April 2, 2008).

Mould-Iddrisu, B. “Development and Current Status of Copyright Protection in Ghana.” Paper pre-
sented at the WIPO National Seminar on Copyright and Neighboring Rights for Law Enforcement
Agencies, organized by WIPO in cooperation with the Government of the Republic of Ghana, Accra,
May 26, 1997.

———. “Panel II: The Law and Policy of Protecting Folklore, Traditional Knowledge, and Genetic
Resources.” Fordham Intellectual Property, Media and Entertainment Law Journal 12 (2002): 753.

Nwauche, E.S. “The Protection of Expressions of Folklore Through the Bill of Rights in South Af-
rica.” Script-ed 2 (2005): 263. Available at http://www.law.ed.ac.uk/ahrc/script-ed/vol2-2/folklore.asp
(accessed April 2, 2008).

Puri, K. “Preservation and Conservation of Expressions of Folklore.” Copyright Bulletin 32 (1998):
5–36. Available at http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0011/001162/116222eb.pdf#116200 (accessed
March 20, 2008).

———. “Protection of Expressions of Indigenous Cultures in the Pacific.” Copyright Bulletin 33 (1999):
6–34. Available at http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001225/122508eb.pdf#122501 (accessed
March 20, 2008).

Roht-Arriaza, N. “Of Seeds and Shamans: The Appropriation of the Scientific and Technical Knowl-
edge of Indigenous Local Communities.” In Borrowed Power: Essays on Cultural Appropriation, ed-
ited by B. Ziff and P.V. Rao, 255–87. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1997.

Safo, A. “Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) a Sell Out, Say Experts,” Public Agenda
(Accra), Global Policy Forum, 2002. http://www.globalpolicy.org/socecon/bwi-wto/wto/2002/1116trips.
htm (accessed on June 7, 2007).

Salm, S.J., and T. Falola. Culture and Customs of Ghana. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2002.

Scafidi, S. Who Owns Culture? Appropriation and Authenticity in American Law. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 2005.

Sieber, R. African Textiles and Decorative Arts. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1972.

Shyllon, F. “Conservation, Preservation and the Legal Protection Of Folklore in Africa: A General
Survey.” Copyright Bulletin 32 (1998): 37–48. Available at http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0011/
001162/116222eb.pdf#116202 (accessed March 20, 2008).

Trosow, S.E. “The Illusive Search for Justificatory Theories: Copyright, Commodification and Cap-
ital.” Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence 16 (2003): 217.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168

296

JOSEPHINE ASMAH

Yu, P.K. “Challenges to the Development of a Human Rights Framework for Intellectual Property.”
http://www.peteryu.com/torremans.pdf (accessed April 1, 2008).

———. “Reconceptualizing Intellectual Property Interests in a Human Rights Framework.” UC Davis
Law Review 40 (2007): 1039.

Ziff, B., and P.V. Rao, eds. Borrowed Power: Essays on Cultural Appropriation. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 1997.

Zografos, D. “The Legal Protection of Traditional Cultural Expressions: The Tunisian Example.” The
Journal of World Intellectual Property 7 (2004): 229–42.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:52:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739108080168


