Breach of Trust Over Gifts  of
Collections
Selby  Whittingham*

1  Introduction

Just  as  portraits  are  the  outcome  of  a  contest  between  artist  and
sitter,  so  gifts  to  museums  are  the  subject  of  a tug-of-war  between
donor  and  recipient.  One  frequent  bone  of contention  is the gift  of
collections  made  on condition  that  they  be kept  together  and  (usu-
ally) bear the donor's name. That is the subject  of this article.

It  might  be  thought  that  the  proper  response  to  such  offers  is
simple: either the museum should accept the gift  and the conditions,
or  it  should  refuse  both.  But  there  is  a temptation  for  the  museum
to fudge  the question  and to try to have  its cake and eat it.

While some major  European  museums  were created  almost com-
plete  from  pre-existing  royal  collections,  perhaps  supplemented  by
loot,  those  in  America  and  Britain  have  had  to  be  built  up  from
scratch. That could have been done by purchase. But these capitalist
and thrifty  countries have not looked with favour  on such a socialist
or  state  approach.  Build  the  museum,  said  the  founders  of  the
National  Gallery  in  London  or  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art in
New York, and patriotic citizens will rush to fill  it with gifts  of their
collections.1  And  so  they  did,  usually,  as  one  might  expect,  with
conditions attached as the price of their  contribution.

But these museum founders  also had another belief. This was that
the  museum  should  be  educational.  This  meant  that  its  contents
should  illustrate  their  subject  comprehensively  and  intelligibly  and,
therefore,  that  they  should  be  arranged  chronologically  with  any
gaps  being  filled  in by  acquisitions.2  But  that  required  a policy  of
purchase,  not one of random  gifts,  least  of all  of a series of collec-
tions  each  to  be  kept  together  and  apart.3  So these  giant  museums
were  founded  on  a giant  flaw  and contradiction,  and  this has given
birth  to  all  sorts  of  fudging,  manoeuvring  and  misrepresentation  in
order to fix  the problem  and disguise the truth.

The problem  was recognised  early  on. In  1855 an  English  writer
on  the Louvre  said that  with  its old  administration  'its  general  rule

*  Editor, J. M. W. Turner R A.

255

Selby  Whittingham

was to accept as little as possible, in order to avoid the double incon-
venience of being obliged to receive presents without real value, and
to  submit  to  conditions  imposed  by the donor'.4  One gift  had  been
the  'Standish  Gallery',  a  collection  made  by  an  Englishman  who
had  been  disappointed  in  his  hopes  for  a  baronetcy  and  who  had
consequently  transferred  his  favours  from  London  to Paris.  'It  con-
sisted  of  paintings  of different  schools, of drawings, of engravings,
and  of  books;  ...  it  had  no  particular  character,  and  contained  no
very  remarkable  object.'5  So  in  1848, when  there  was  a reorganis-
ation of the museum based on a chronological  arrangement, the col-
lection  was  handed  over to  the  exiled  Louis  Philippe, under  whose
aegis it had  arrived.  Since  then the  Louvre has accepted  collections
on condition  that  they  be kept together,  and still  shows  some, but it
has had  a  less pressing  need to do so than have poorer museums.6

In  Britain  the  problems  of  inferior  paintings  and  of  collections
were  dealt  with  in  two  National  Gallery  Acts,  of  1856  and  1883.7
The first  gave powers in the case of gifts  or bequests to select works
for  acceptance  by  the gallery, those not  selected  to form  part  of the
Residuary  Estate  of  the  Testator.  The second  provided  that  'where
any  such  gift  or  bequest  is  made  on  condition  that  the  articles  so
given  or bequeathed  should  be  kept  together'  the National  Gallery
should have power  to disregard that and to lend such works after  25
years  had  elapsed  from  the  date  of the  receipt  of the  collection.  In
the  1992 Museums and  Galleries Act the period has been lengthened
from  25  to  50  years.8 The  reason  for  the choice  of  25  years  in the
first place was that the  1883 Act was aimed specifically  at removing
the  restrictions  imposed  by  conditions  attached  to  two  collections,
one received  in  1848 and the other  in  1856.

The question  arises whether  such retrospective  legislation  can be
justified.  And,  if it  is, whether the donors or their heirs should have
a  right  to  claim  back  the  works  thereby  bereft  of  their  protecting
conditions,  following  the procedure  adopted  by the Louvre  in  1848
and  indeed  by the  1856  Act.

It  is  noteworthy  that  these  Acts  did  not,  and  do  not,  govern  all
British  national  museums,  but  only  the  National  Gallery  and  more
recently  the  Tate  Gallery  and  National  Portrait  Gallery.  Thus  the
British  Museum  and  Victoria  and  Albert  Museum  are not  similarly
exempt  from  obedience  to  the  conditions  of their  benefactors.  And
today  the  Victoria  &  Albert  Museum  has  notices  in  its  rooms pro-
claiming how  it has  been faithful  to its donors' wishes in the matter
of keeping  their collections  together. And the recently retired  direc-
tor  of  the  British  Museum  has  voiced  his commitment  to the  same
principle.9 That may  reflect  a different  culture. Whereas the National
Gallery  has  since  almost  its  beginnings  aimed  to  show  a  balanced
and  chronological  survey,  the  British  Museum  has  come  to  realise
that  for  its collections that  is an impossible  quest.10

The  picture  has  been  confused  by  the  fact  that  museums  make
claims for  what  they  do which turn out not to be always completely

256

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

true.  Whereas  absolute  accuracy  in  dating  objects  is  demanded  of
curators, the truth become more elastic when fidelity  to donors' con-
ditions  is  at  issue.  If  one  wants  to  verify  whether  collections  are
indeed kept 'distinct and entire' (as the phrase used to be), it is quite
easy  to  see  if  distinctness  is  adhered  to,  but  to  check  entirety  one
needs to tick  off  each  item  on  display  against  the  inventory,  some-
thing that takes time and is rarely undertaken by outsiders. And then
comparing  the  actual  situation  with  the  precise  wording  of  the do-
nor's  deed  of  gift  presents  difficulties,  both  because  the  wording
may  not  be readily  available  and  because  interpretation  comes  into
question.

The issues will be better understood, if individual cases are taken.
I  have  chosen  ones  which  illustrate  the  diversity  of  circumstances
and how one example has acted  as a precedent  for  another.  I begin
with  a  university  museum,  then  consider  two  large  national  ones
and  a  large  municipal  one,  and  conclude  with  some  smaller  more
independent  institutions.

2  The University  Galleries  (Ashmolean Museum),

Oxford

2.1  The Chantrey  Gift,  1842
In  1796  Dr  Francis  Randolph  died  bequeathing  £1,000  to  Oxford
University to house the Arundel-Pomfret  collection of antique sculp-
ture. This sum grew to £5,000 and with that, university  funds  and a
legacy from  Sir R Taylor was built  1839-45  an edifice  with a dual
function  —  the  University  Galleries  (now  the Ashmolean  Museum)
and  the  Taylorian  Institute.  The  first  were  to  be  a  picture  gallery
above  and  sculpture  galleries  below.  How  were  these  to  be  filled,
was the question  immediately  asked.  'To  purchase, would, we  fear,
require  larger  funds  than  could  be  raised.  Something  may  be  ac-
quired,  in  the  course  of  time,  by  liberal  bequests,  and  perhaps  this
is the only source to be much relied  upon.'11

On 25 November  1841 Sir Francis Chantrey died leaving the bulk
of his fortune  for a National  Gallery of British Art, but without say-
ing  in his  will  what  should  be done  with  his own  sculptures.  On 6
April  1842 his widow wrote to the Vice-Chancellor  of Oxford  Uni-
versity  offering  these  to  it.  Of  the  models  or  casts  for  Chantrey's
own  sculptures  the  large  figures  were  offered  'on  condition  that  a
permanent place be assigned  to them  in the Western  Sculpture Gal-
lery', and those for his busts, if the lecture room of the Taylor build-
ings, suggested by the architect, could be assigned to them; and she
also  offered  the  casts  Sir  Francis  had  of  antique  sculptures,  if  his
own works were  accepted.12

The  Vice-Chancellor  put  these  proposals  to  Convocation  on  28
April  1842 with  little  alteration.  A specific  place  for  the  busts  was

257

Selby  Whittingham

not  given,  apparently  as  there  was  difficulty  about  the  University
Galleries spilling  over into the Taylorian. But conditions for the stat-
ues were  unchanged,  except  that  it was undertaken

that  if  it  should  ever  be  necessary  to remove  the  larger  Casts
from  the  place  selected  for  their  reception,  a  Room  of  equal
dimensions  connected  with the above named  Sculpture  Gallery
shall  be provided  for  them, in which  the whole Collection, un-
der  the  name  of  the  Chantrey  Collection,  shall  be  always  kept
together.13

This was slightly  confused,  as a room the size of the Western Sculp-
ture Gallery evidently could not hold the whole collection.  However
Convocation  accepted  the gift,  and the works were  installed.  Forty-
one  large  works  by  Chantrey  were  put  in  the  Western  Sculpture
Gallery,  named  'The  Chantrey  Gallery',  and the busts were  divided
between  the  main  picture  gallery  above  and  a  'sub-gallery',  never
envisaged by the  architect  as a gallery, but which also showed some
of  the  Pomfret  marbles.  The  rest  of these  were  housed  in the  main
sculpture  gallery,  The  Randolph  Gallery,  which  had  been  intended
for  them  together  with Chantrey's casts after  the antique.

Lady Chantrey  did not die until  1875, and this arrangement lasted
for  some time, in the case of the busts for about 20 years, and of the
Chantrey Gallery  until  1867, when it was taken over by the drawing
school, and most of the Chantreys moved into the adjacent  Randolph
Gallery,  from  which  the Antique  casts were removed,  though  some
were  back  there  by  1882. In  1888 it  was announced  that the  Chan-
treys  would  be  removed  to the New  Schools, but  that was  stopped.
But  in  1890 they  were moved  to the newly-created  'sunk  court'.  In
1894 it was proposed  to use that for the Antique casts and move the
Chantreys  to a basement  store.

Objection  was  made by EWB Nicholson, Bodley's  Librarian  and
ex-officio  Visitor  of  the University  Galleries. According  to him  the
Visitors  were  wrongly  represented  as proposing  to move the  Chan-
treys  on  the  authority  of  the  Hebdomadal  Council,  whereas  in  fact
they  suggested  applying  to  the  Court  of  Chancery  with  a  view  to
getting  relief  from  the  conditions.  For  they  agreed  'it  is  clear  that
the  understanding  on  which  the  gift  was  accepted  is  not  being  ad-
equately  observed.'  In  fact  Nicholson  published  a pamphlet  attack-
ing  the  proposals  in  1896  and  these  were  defeated  on  15  January
1897. He wrote that the works had been driven  from  room to room.

"Ce  n 'est  que  le premier pas  qui  coiite," and  the  University,
having once publicly violated its public promise to Lady Chan-
trey,  will  make  no  difficulty  about  turning  the  Chantrey  casts
into  the  limbo  of  the  disused  Old  Convocation  House  in  St
Mary's  Churchyard,  or  scattering  them  in rooms  and  passages
and dark  cellars  of the New  Schools.14

258

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

However  the  Chantreys  remained  in  limbo  and  Nicholson  suffered
declining health  and died  in  1912. In  1905 Sir Charles Holmes,  fu-
ture  Director  of  the  National  Gallery,  made  a  report  claiming  that
the models were unfit to exhibit, having deteriorated because of their
own composition,  a claim that  a recent  Keeper, Dr Nicholas Penny,
has described  as  'flamboyantly  dishonest'.15

The works were no longer on view, and in  1939 the Visitors pro-
posed to make way for an air-raid shelter by demolishing the statues.
The heads of the statues together with the busts were preserved.  Dr
Penny comments:

No single voice of protest is recorded.. .Silence in these circum-
stances  from  those  in  whose  care  the  casts  were  —  or  should
have been  —  was complicity  in their  fate.16

In the  1980s efforts  were made to rescue and restore what remained,
and  by  the  end  of  1989  sixteen  busts  were  sent  on  long  loan  to
Belton House in Lincolnshire. But that is not at all what Lady Chan-
trey had stipulated for the collection  and the University  had agreed.
Various defences of this are offered.  Dr Penny has argued that the
works  were  accepted  before  any  curators  for  the new museum  had
been  appointed,  and  'in  any  circumstances  it  is  inconceivable  that
any director of the University Galleries would have considered sacri-
ficing to  these  casts  over  half  the  space  available  for  sculpture.'17
But he has no evidence for that. The galleries needed filling, and the
gift  supplied that  deficiency.

Part  of  his  objection  rests  on  the  premise  that  a  permanent
posthumous exhibition  'is a very demanding test for an artist'  which
others,  such  as  Turner,  have  not  met.  One-man  retrospective  exhi-
bitions, however,  are frequent  and popular.

In Chantrey's case, he argues that his limitations become apparent
when  his works  are  seen  together,  and  so they  are  better  seen  dis-
persed  (in his own  gallery  Chantrey  had  interspersed  Antique  casts
among  his  own).18  Nicholson  had  remarked  that  if  Chantrey  had
been  a Greek  and  portrayed  gods  and  goddesses,  his works  would
have been much better treated. Though Chantrey had a great contem-
porary reputation  as a portrait  sculptor,  he was  looked down  on by
some  as  a  sculptor  of  the  figure,  and  for  that  reason  an  objection
was made in 1846 to acceptance of the gift.19  When Samuel Rogers,
the collector, was asked its value, he  answered

'As  a collection  of historical  portraits, they  are of great  value;
as works of art, that,''  snapping his  fingers.20

In  1905 Sir Charles Holmes  said:

In  its  present  condition  the  collection  is  of  very  little  artistic
value, and  its  exhibition  in a  prominent  place  would  certainly
lower the prestige of the galleries.21

259

Selby  Whittingham

But the condition was the responsibility of the museum. Whether the
works that replaced the Chantreys were of so much greater interest is
a moot point. Dr Penny has described the antique works of the Arun-
del-Pomfret  collection  as  'largely  mediocre  and  extensively  re-
stored.'22

What  is  not  disputed  is that  the  collection  was  accepted  on  con-
ditions  and  that  these  have  been  disregarded  and  the  works  partly
destroyed  as a further  consequence  of that  disregard.

3  The National  Gallery,  London

3.1  The Vernon  Gift,  1847
Robert  Vernon  (1774-1849)  built  up  a collection  of  British  paint-
ings to which the public had some access at his house in Pall Mall.23
In  1847 he finally  decided to offer  it to the National Gallery against
the advice of some of his friends,  who doubted whether the National
Gallery  would  carry  out  his  wishes.  He  told  the  National  Gallery
that  it  could  take  which  pictures  it  wanted,  but  on  condition  that
they  'shall be exhibited  in a room or rooms set apart exclusively  for
them,  to  be  called  "The Vernon  Gallery'".24  These provisions, that
the collection when accepted should be kept  'distinct and entire' (to
use  the phraseology common  at the time), were  evidently  modelled
on  the  arrangements  obtaining  at  Oxford  with  respect  to the  Chan-
trey Gallery, at the British Museum with regard to the Royal Library,
given  by  George  IV,  and  those  at  the  Louvre  with  regard  to  the
Standish  Gallery.25
Lord Ashburton replied for the Trustees that they were 'not prepared
to say  ...  they would devote any rooms exclusively to this purpose',
but  gave  the  assurance  that  'they  will  keep  Mr Vernon's  collection
together,  so  that  they  may  be  distinguished  from  other  pictures  in
the  Gallery,  as  "The  Vernon  Collection'".26  This  assurance  was
repeated  in  three  further  letters,  such  as  that  from  G  Saunders
Thwaites,  the  Gallery's  Secretary,  to  Vernon's  nephew,  Vernon
Heath,  of  19 December  1847:

...and  Mr  Vernon  is  assured  that  the  trustees  will  adopt  such
measures  as  may be necessary  for  carrying  into effect  the ob-
jects contemplated  in Mr Vernons letters, either by setting apart
a Room,  or  Rooms, for  the  reception  of his  collection  of  Pic-
tures,  or  of  keeping  Vernon's  collection  together,  so  that  they
may be distinguished from  other pictures in the Gallery as "the
Vernon  Collection".27

The  Deed  of  Gift  was  signed  on  22  December  1847, but  made  no
mention  of any conditions.28

George Jones, Keeper of the Royal Academy, let it be known that
he  objected  to  this  act.29  He  was  adviser  to  Vernon  and  appointed

260

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

by  Sir Francis  Chantrey  and  J M W Turner  executor  of  their wills.
These  three,  Chantrey,  Turner  and  Vernon,  developed  schemes  for
public  collections  and to help  artists  more or  less at the  same time
and on similar lines.30

To objections  that  he had no binding  guarantees, Vernon  pointed
out  that  he  had  letter  of  assurance  from  the  National  Gallery.  But
these seemed inadequate to Jones and apparently also to Turner, who
in  a  codicil  he  signed  next  summer  made  firm  stipulations  for  his
main bequest to the National  Gallery.

The  National  Gallery  lacked  space  and  was  paralysed  over  the
question  whether  it  should  remain  on  its  existing  site  or  move  to
another. So permanent accommodation  for the Vernon Gift,  and also
for  Turner's  Turners  in  1856,  could  not  be  provided  until  the  site
question  was resolved a decade later. So both collections went tem-
porarily  to  Marlborough  House  and  then  to  South  Kensington,  the
Turners returning to the main National  Gallery building in  1861 and
the Vernon Gift  in  1876.

At  first  the  latter  was  kept  together,  but  after  the  1883  National
Gallery Act some, like  the Turners, were  lent  out to provincial  mu-
seums, a policy which remained in force until  1948, and others were
dispersed  or put  in store. Vernon  Heath  missed  the perfunctory  de-
bates  over  the  1883  Bill  and  only  in  1894  realised  what  had  hap-
pened. He wrote a letter of protest to The Times, which printed also
a  reply  from  the  Director,  Poynter,  trying  to justify  what  had  hap-
pened, and giving the current situation: of the  157 pictures, 92 hung
at the  National  Gallery,  seven  were  in  store  there  and  79 were  out
on long loan in the provinces.31

Vernon Heath replied by quoting the opinion of an unnamed emi-

nent barrister:

The statute Mr Poynter cites  [the  1883 Act] is not, so to speak,
retrospective enough to override the assurance given to Mr Ver-
non  in  1847; and even  if  it were, an  Act of parliament  should
not be taken advantage of to commit a breach of an undertaking
which formed  the basis of a splendid gift  to the nation.

Heath added:

Could Mr Vernon have foreseen that which has happened, could
he have imagined that such an Act would have been passed, his
pictures would never have become national  property.

There  matters  rested.  The  collection  was  assigned  to  as  its  chief
home  the Tate Gallery  after  that became the main repository  of the
early  as well  as the  later  British  pictures.  Long before  that  the pic-
tures,  praised  at  the  time  of  the  acceptance  of  the  gift,  had  been
disparaged  for  the  deterioration  in  the  condition  of  many  and  for
their  low  artistic  quality  except  in  a  few  cases,  such  as  the  four

261

Selby  Whittingham

Turners, which  became merged  in the Turner collection. As a token
recompense  for not showing the works together, Vernon's name was
painted  on  the  frames,  though  the recent  cleaning  of  some of those
has removed  that wording.

Until  the  1954 National  Gallery  and Tate Gallery  Act the collec-
tion,  though  mainly  at the  Tate Gallery,  remained  in the  ownership
of the National Gallery. In  1957 five works, including ones by Chan-
trey  and  Lawrence, the  latter  a portrait  of  one  of  the  instigators  of
the  collection,  were  transferred  to  the  ownership  of  the  National
Portrait Gallery, and in  1956 a French painting was transferred  back
to that of the National  Gallery.

In  1980  the  Tate  Gallery  showed  only  thirty  of  the  165  works,
and  even  for  its  special  temporary  exhibition  on  the  collection  in
1993 it showed only 77. For over a century  many have remained in
store, with  the  result  that they  have  perished  there, six  in the  flood
at  the Tate in  1928, three at other times.

This tale raises various question.  Were the undertakings given by
the  National  Gallery  in  1847  legally  binding?  A  similar  question
might be posed with regard  to Turner's Turners, but the fact  that an
Act  was passed  in  1883 aimed  specifically  at these  two  collections
suggests  that  there was at any rate  sufficient  uncertainty  to warrant
putting  the  legal  position  beyond  doubt.  Then  was  such  retrospec-
tive  legislation justifiable  on  either  moral  or  legal  principles?  And,
even  if it was, did the donor's heirs have a legal right to institute an
action for  the repossession of the collection? (So far as I know they
did  not  try  to, but  legal  moves  were  made  in Turner's  case). Then,
what  was  meant  by  the  assurance  that  the  National  Gallery  'will
keep Mr Vernon's collection together'?  Was it enough that it should
remain  in  the  same  building?  Or  in  the  possession  of  the  Nation?
That hardly  squares with Vernon's own expressed wish and with his
refusal  to join  with  Sheepshanks  in  creating  a  'National  Gallery  of
British Art' out of their joint collections.32 The natural  interpretation
of  the  words  is  that  the National  Gallery,  while  not  undertaking  to
assign  specific  rooms  exclusively  to  the  Vernon  Gift,  did  agree  to
hang  the  works  'distinct  and  entire'  in  the  same  place.  Vernon's
desire was evidently that of other donors, that his collection be seen
as an  entity  given by a named  individual. The National  Gallery and
Tate Gallery have acted on the opposite principle that works  should
be arranged  according to their subject  or authorship, not their prov-
enance.

3.2  The Turner  Bequests and Turner's  Turners,  1851—6
J  M  W  Turner  (1775-1851)  made  two  bequests  to  the  National
Gallery.33 The first, made by his wills of 1829 and  1831, is irrelevant
to  the  subject  of  this  article,  except  that  the  National  Gallery  has
always felt  bound to honour its terms, though they have been  incon-
venient to it and contrary to its principles of arrangement. For Turner

262

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

left  two  of  his  works  to  hang  between  two  named  pictures  by
Claude,  necessitating  the  disruption  of  the  National  Gallery's  ar-
rangement,  followed  since  1853, by school and century.

The  second  bequest  was  contemplated  in  1830 and  embodied  in
a codicil executed in  1848. This gave his finished pictures (by which
he almost certainly meant only oil paintings) to the National  Gallery

provided  that  a  Room  or  Rooms  are  added  to  the  present
National  Gallery  to  be  when  erected  called  'Turner's  Gallery'
in which  such Pictures are to be constantly  kept deposited  and
preserved...

In the  interval,  1832—48, he left  his pictures apart  from  the two of
the first bequest, to be kept together at the almshouse for artists, for
the creation of which he left  money by his will.

On  the  grounds  that  the  latter  provision  infringed  the  Mortmain
Statutes,  the  will  and  codicils  were  challenged  by  the  next-of-kin
and  others.  In  1856  the  Court  of  Chancery  made  an  Order  giving
effect  to a compromise agreed between the executors, National Gal-
lery and Royal Academy, whereby the last and the next of kin shared
the  money  that  had  been  willed  for  the  almshouse  and  it  was  ac-
cepted by all

that  all the  Pictures, Drawings,  and  Sketches  by the  Testator's
Hand, without  any Distinction  of finished or unfinished,  are to
be deemed as well given  for  the Benefit  of the Public

and the Court ordered that these  'be retained by the Trustees for the
time being of the National Gallery  accordingly.'

The effect  of this was that the National  Gallery  received,  instead
of  some  100  finished  oils,  over  300  oils  and  many  thousands  of
drawings  and  watercolours.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  gallery
had  an  acute  problem  of  lack  of  space.  There  was  now  also  the
question of how much of the collection it should display, if the space
problem should be solved. Clearly not all the drawings. Of the unfin-
ished  oils  it  decided  to  show  only  five  as  examples,  the  Keeper
(Wornum)  thinking  most  of the  rest  rubbish.  (The  Director  thought
more  highly  of  their  value).  Of  the  finished  oils  it  showed  all,  as
Turner's wording had clearly intended, though some thought that his
reputation  would  be  better  served  if  some  were  not  shown,  and  in
fact  from  1861  some  of  these  were  placed  for  reasons  of  space  in
the Board Room, where public access was restricted.

At first the  history  of  the  collection  was  similar  to  that  of  Ver-
non's, except that  complaints  over  failure  to meet the conditions  in
Turner's  case  reached  the  House  of  Lords  as  soon  as  1857.  These
complaints, repeated  periodically  ever since down to the present, at
first were mainly levelled at the failure  to build an extension  for the
collection  and to keep it at the National  Gallery in Trafalgar  Square

263

Selby  Whittingham

(did  Turner's  words  'the  present  National  Gallery'  stipulate  that?),
and this century  at the  failure  to show  it together.

On  19 March  1847 Lord  St  Leonards,  an  authority  on the law of
property,  rose  in  the  House  of  Lords  to  complain  that  'there  was
a  general  notion  that  his  [Turner's]  testamentary  dispositions  were
altogether  void  and binding  upon  no one'. He went on:

As  to  the  pictures,  even  supposing  that  the  terms  of  the  will
were  to  some  extent  inoperative  in  law, he  contended  that  the
nation having got possession  of the pictures was bound to com-
ply with the conditions. But there was nothing  in the decree of
Vice  Chancellor  Kindersley  to  favour  the  view  which  seemed
to be taken by Sir C Eastlake  [Director of the National Gallery].
That decree  declared  that  the  finished  pictures were well given
by Turner to the Trustees of the National Gallery, which implied
that  the  nation  could  not  hold them  except  by  complying with
the  conditions.

In  fact  Kindersley  had  said  that  all  the  works  were  'well  given',
though  Turner  only  bequeathed  the  finished  oils,  a  confusion  per-
petuated  ever  since  by  calling  the  collection  "The Turner  Bequest.'
I  have  thought  it  clearer  to  call  it  'Turner's  Turners'.  Whether  St
Leonards was right  or not  in his interpretation  of the Vice-Chancel-
lor's words and of their  legal  effect  is a question which has divided
lawyers ever since, though never fully  discussed by them, and is one
which  has never been  settled  in  a court of law.34

However  his  efforts  led  to  the  appointment  in  1861  of  a  Select
Committee  of the House of Lords, made up of lawyers, gallery trus-
tees and ministers, to consider what should be done about the Turner
and Veraon  Collections.35  It did not have time  to pronounce  on the
latter, but it unanimously  overruled the curators' wish for  latitude in
treating  Turner's  wishes  and  insisted  that  the  Turners  were  bound
to  be  housed  at  the  National  Gallery  in  Trafalgar  Square,  whither
accordingly  they  were  moved  that  year  with  all  the  finished  oils
shown  together  as  far  as  possible  in  one  room  until  circumstances
allowed  rooms  to be built  specially  for  them.

In the  1860s plans for a new  National Gallery incorporated  rooms
for  Turner's  oils and watercolours  (numbers unspecified).  But when
plans for a complete new building were abandoned at the end of that
decade,  schemes  were  made  for  extensions  not  for  the  Turners  but
for  other pictures,  and  from  1870  onwards  proposals  were made to
reduce  the  number  of  Turners  on  view,  a  plan  successfully  chal-
lenged by St Leonards, but achieved after  his death by the  1883 Act.
In  1897 the Tate Gallery opened with Sir Henry Tate's own collec-
tion  and  the  National  Gallery's  more  modern  British  pictures,  and
from  1905  some  of  Turner's  Turners,  mainly  unfinished  oils  from
store,  were  sent  there,  at  first  temporarily  and  then  on  a  virtually
permanent basis. In  1907-10 the Duveen wing was added to the Tate

264

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

for the Turners not still on loan in the provinces, and a representative
selection  of seventeen  was retained  by the National  Gallery.  Objec-
tions  were  made  then  and  since  that  this  further  infringed  Turner's
conditions.  One  of the trustees, Alfred  de Rothschild,  took  the opi-
nion  of  Counsel,  who  said  that  further  legislation  would  be  re-
quired.36  But  the  Law  Officers  argued  successfully  that  the  fiction
could be maintained that the works were being lent only temporarily
to  the  Tate,  whereas  the  Duveen  wing  was  of  course  built  on  the
assumption  that  they  would remain  there permanently.  Descendants
of Turner's heir-at-law (who received by the  1856 decree the artist's
freeholds,  while  the  personal  estate  including  the  works  of  art  had
been claimed and partly received by the next-of-kin)at  the same time
took  the  opinion  of  Counsel,  who  seems  to  have  agreed  that  they
had a case for getting Turner's wishes enforced  in the courts, but the
cost prevented them from  proceeding.37

Since  1954 the Turners  at the Tate have been  vested  in the Trus-
tees of the  Tate  Gallery  and those  at the National  Gallery  (now re-
duced  in number to  seven, besides  the two of the  first  bequest,  but
including some of the best) in its Trustees. In 1987 the Clore Gallery
wing to the Tate opened  as a replacement  for  the Duveen  wing, but
based  on exactly the same principles.

Yet the erroneous claim that Turner's wishes have at last been met
is still  repeated.  In fact  rooms have  been built, but  for  only  part  of
the  second  bequest,  and  not  at  the  National  Gallery.  The  finished
pictures  are  not  kept  together,  and  the building  is called  the  'Clore
Gallery',  not  'Turner's  Gallery'.

The  question  is not  whether  the  conditions  are  met,  as  the  1883
Bill  was enacted partly with the purpose of getting  out of that obli-
gation. That was done partly because space for the whole  collection
did not exist. But today it does, at the Clore Gallery, so the question
is  whether  the  1883  precedent  should  be  followed  blindly,  or  the
matter  should be reconsidered  in the light of new circumstances.

The other  consideration  in  1883 was the desirability  of  a general
art gallery showing a balanced survey without any one artist prepon-
derating  too  greatly.38  But  that  is  the  objective  of  the  Tate  Gallery
also.  The  reason  why  it  has  been  eager  to  hang  on  to  the  Turners,
whereas the National was not, is that it has been a gallery of National
Gallery cast-offs,  and the Turners have grown into a major  attraction
('the jewel  in the crown')  compensating  for  the lacklustre  nature of
the rest of  its collections, though  these have got more exciting  over
the years.

Thinking that the Turners were dragged down by the other collec-
tions,  such  as  the  Chantrey  Bequest,  and  for  other  reasons  some
advocated  an  independent  Turner  Gallery.  The  Clore  Gallery  was
conceived  of  as  a compromise  between  that  and  a  fully  integrated
wing,  achieving  neither  aim  properly.  There  is  also  a  fundamental
flaw  in the idea of a wing. For even  if it comes in the right place in
the sequence  of British  Art to show Turner in his age, which  it cur-

265

Selby  Whittingham

rently does not, the collection  would still be out of proportion to the
rest.  Moreover  in a rapidly  expanding gallery  like the Tate which is
always having to radically  rearrange its collections to accommodate
additions,  sooner  or  later  a  fixed  wing  will  get  out  of  sequence.
The  progressive  capitalist  ideology  argues  that  museums  are  living
organisms  which  must  either  grow  or  die  (ignoring  the  exceptions
which disprove this  law). Whereas the model that Turner had  before
him was of a gallery such as that at Munich, which is basically static,
founded  on a royal  collection,  and has been  able to accommodate a
Rubens  Gallery  fixed  in the same position  for  a century  and a half.
The  Tate  Gallery  even  more  than  the  National  Gallery  has  been
the product of private enterprise, largely created and built by private
citizens.  In  1910 the Duveen  wing was built with the donors'  stipu-
lation  that  it  always  be  used  for  British  art,  following  Sir  Henry
Tate's  rule  for  the  original  parts  of the  Tate. A later  Duveen  exten-
sion  was  limited  to modern  foreign  art only, but that condition  was
lifted  by  agreement  with  the  donor.  No  formal  deed  of  gift  for  the
Clore  Gallery  exists, but  its donors  are  said  to  have  demanded  that
it  be used  for  Turner  only.  What happens  then,  if  it  is  decided  that
putting  the  Turners  at  the  Tate  infringes  Turner's  conditions?  Do
those prevail  or the Clore  Family's?

Which  of  the proffered  solutions  would come nearest  to Turner's
wishes?  That  is  the  question.  It  may  be  claimed  that  Turner's first
preference  was  for  his  'Gallery'  to  be  at  the  National  Gallery,  and
that  keeping  some  of  his  pictures  there  is  in conformity  with  what
he wanted.  But he  is represented  there  by his first  bequest  (the two
oils  with  the  two  Claudes).  If  he  had  thought  that  inadequate,  and
that  his  other  wish,  to  keep  the  remaining  finished  oils  together,
should  be  subordinated  to  making  good  that  inadequacy,  then  he
would have left  more pictures to the National Gallery in  1832, when
he  decided  to  house  his  Turner's  Gallery  at  his  almshouse.  But all
the  evidence  suggest  that  Turner's  overriding  priority  was  to  keep
the other pictures, except  for some which he sold to raise money for
the almshouse,  together.

Various alternatives are possible. One could house the hundred or
so  pictures  in  the  National  Gallery  as  Turner  stipulated,  but  that
would  please  neither  the National  Gallery  nor his public today, and
maybe  not  even  Turner.  The  rest  of  the  collection  would  be  put
nowhere else, and he had  contemplated,  in pursuance of keeping his
works  together,  the  idea  of  including  watercolours  and  unfinished
oils in his Turner's  Gallery. It is arguable that he would  be  gratified
that  we now  do more  than  he asked, as the Tate says, but that is no
reason  to  think  that  he  would  be  satisfied  that  we also  do so much
less than he asked in other ways. A separate gallery in close proxim-
ity  to the  National  Gallery,  without  the disadvantages  of being  part
of it, would  seem to be the  solution that best meets all the interests,
and  one  much  nearer  to  what  Turner  stipulated  than  what  we have
today.

266

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

Could  such  a  change  be  enforced  through  the  courts?  The  cost

has so far  ruled out an attempt.

If nothing  is  done, presumably  the  heirs  to  the  next-of-kin,  who
were in effect  treated  (along with the Royal  Academy?) as Turner's
residuary  heirs  by  the  1856  court  order,  would  have  a  right  to re-
claim the works, on the grounds of non-performance  of the trust and
maybe  also  because  the  assumptions  of  the  1856  compromise,  by
which  they  partially  surrendered  their  claims,  had  not  been  hon-
oured.  And  the  three  charities  which  Turner  appointed  as  benefici-
aries if his second bequest should fail could also have a claim. They
were  not  parties  to the  1856 compromise, but  that  did  not  exclude
their  subsequently  taking an interest. In  1861 they were told  falsely
by the National Gallery that Turner's conditions, including the build-
ing  of  an  extension  (not  even  planned  then), had  been  carried  out.
Of course  wings have been built  since, but only with the  disregard
of other conditions.

This has been  a complicated  story  which cannot  be told  in a  few
lines, which  partly  accounts  for  the  fact  that  it has been  told  incor-
rectly  so often.  But, though it has unique features,  it is also illustra-
tive of a general  pattern of events.

3.3  The Wynn Ellis Bequest,  1875
Wynn  Ellis  (1790-1875),  who  had  been  an  MP  and  'an  advanced
Liberal  in  polities',  by  his  will  directed  that  his  modern  pictures
should  be  sold  but  that  his  old  masters  should  be  offered  to  the
National  Gallery.  'The conditions', said  The Times, 'are generous in
themselves  and well  considered.'

They  are  that,  provided  the  Trustees  of  the  National  Gallery
accept  the  gift,  the  whole,  or,  as  we  understand,  a  sufficient
portion  of them  shall, within  two years  of such acceptance, be
placed  in the  National  Gallery,  Trafalgar-square,  and  not else-
where,  in  an  apartment  by  themselves,  which  shall  be  dis-
tinguished by the testator's name, and that the pictures shall be
so kept together for  not less than ten years, after  which period,
if  it  shall  be  desired  to  separate  them,  this  may  be  done, pro-
vided  each  bears  the  name  of  Mr  Wynn  Ellis  on  the  frame.
Besides, if the Trustees deem any picture in the Wynn Ellis  gift
to  be unsuited  to the National  Gallery,  they  shall  be  at  liberty
to  decline  them,  and  these  works  may  be  sold  for  the  benefit
of the estate of the  deceased.39

From  the  collection  of  403 pictures  94 were  selected  and  accepted
on Ellis's conditions. They were inventoried as nos. 927—1020, and
shown together for ten years, after which they were dispersed among
the gallery's  other pictures.

267

Selby  Whittingham

The  collection  was  a  mixed  one,  some  works,  in  the  opinion  of
The Times, being  'almost  worthless'  and others  'unquestionably pre-
cious'. Most, but not all, belonged to the Dutch  School. Possibly the
variable nature of the collection combined with the reaction to earlier
gifts  affected  Ellis's  stipulations.

3.4  The Henry  Tate Offer,  1889
In  October  1889 Henry  Tate  wrote  to  the  Trustees  of  the  National
Gallery  offering  his collection  of modern English paintings on con-
dition  that  the  pictures  should  be kept together  in a room  or  rooms
devoted  entirely  to  their  reception.40  This  offer  was  rejected,  not
because  of  the  gallery's  lack  of  space,  as  Tate  suggested,41  but,  as
the  Financial  Secretary  to the  Treasury  explained  to him  in a  letter
of 26 June  1890, because

This  condition...,  to which no limit of time is assigned,  would
have  violated  the  historical  and  educational  system  on  which
the works in the National Gallery are arranged, and would have
set a precedent  for  breaking the gallery into a series of smaller
and  independent  collections.42

Tate's  proposal  was  warmly  opposed  by  J  C  Robinson,  a  former
Keeper  at the  South Kensington Museum, whose acceptance of such
conditional  gifts  he  deplored.

Very  little consideration,  I think, will make it evident that  gifts
saddled with such hampering conditions should not be accepted
by  the  nation.  I  myself  hope  that  the  trustees  of  the  National
Gallery  will  accept  these  pictures  only  if  left  entirely  free  to
dispose of them  as they may find expedient.43

And  The Times insisted on the right of the National Gallery to select
what  it  wanted:

...It  cannot  be  denied  that  a  large  proportion  of  such  gifts  as
those  made  by  Mr  Sheepshanks  Mr Vernon,  Mr Jacob  Bell  —
shall  we  add, by the great Turner himself?  -  were not such as
would  have been  accepted  if the Director  at the time had been
free  to  act with  a fastidious  regard for  the interests of the Gal-
lery  ...  It  may  well  be  argued  that  the  trustees  in  accepting  a
whole  gallery of modern works might possibly find themselves
judged,  forty  years  hence,  as  we judge  the  Trustees  who  ac-
cepted  and hung all the late Mr Vernon's pictures.44

This  adumbrates  a  frequently  used  ground  for  ignoring  the  con-
ditions  attached  to  gifts  -  that  the  gifts  were  somehow  forced  on
unwilling  galleries.  But what  is the evidence for  that? The National

268

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

Gallery  freely  accepted  Vernon's  offer,  and  was  allowed  by  the
donor to select which pictures it wanted. If what is meant is that the
curators were overruled by the Trustees, then  what  is the evidence?
Eastlake  seems  to  have  welcomed  the  acceptance  of  more  of Ver-
non's  and Turner's pictures than was necessary.45 And testifying  be-
fore the  1850 Select Committee on the National  Gallery he said that
if collections were of sufficient  merit, they  should be accepted even
if it was stipulated  that they should be kept  together.

503. When individuals give collections, do they not sometimes
stipulate they shall be kept together?  —  Yes; it was so stipulated
in the instance of the Vernon Collection, but not as to any other.
504. Do you think  it would be a wise  regulation  to make, that
no pictures  should be received accompanied  with such a stipu-
lation?  —  It would depend much upon the magnitude and merit
of  the  collection;  I  should  be  sorry  to  fetter  the  givers  of pic-
tures.
505. Would it not prevent a great many pictures being given, if
an  individual  thought  that  they  would  be  separated,  and  no
longer  associated  with  his name?  —  No, I do not  see that any
reasonable objection  could be raised to that, because every pic-
ture would be inscribed with name of the giver, and their being
spread about would be rather an advantage  than otherwise.
506. You do not think that a person who gives a fine  collection
of pictures wishes to have it kept  together  and recorded  under
the name of his gallery?  —  Not unless the  gallery  is important
enough, as I said before,  to warrant  such a condition.
507.  Would  it  be  wise  to  make  a rule,  that  in case  of  persons
giving  their  pictures  with  such  a condition,the  pictures  should
not be received?  —  It is one of those questions which the Trus-
tees  would  have  to  consider;  such  a  condition  might  be  pro-
posed when the pictures were of inferior  merit, and in that case
it would be unreasonable to comply with it.
508. The complying or not with the  condition  would be a pre-
liminary question with regard to the arrangement  of pictures by
schools, would  it not?  -  Certainly, it would  interfere  with it.46

Evidently Eastlake's main concern was to keep out inferior  pictures,
not  to mount an historical  display. To that end he was quite willing
to seek escape  from  the letter of Turner's  wishes.47

Meanwhile Henry Tate changed his proposals to one for a separate
gallery on the lines of the Musee du Luxembourg  in Paris,48 and in
due course the government  provided  the site  on Millbank  on which
the  Tate  Gallery  was  built,  being  placed  under  the  Trustees  of the
National  Gallery.

3.5  The Mond Bequest,  1909/23
Ludwig  Mond  (1839—1909),  the  millionaire  of  liberal  tendencies,
made  a  collection  of  Italian  paintings  under  the  guidance  of  J  P

269

Selby  Whittingham

Richter.  By  a codicil  of 26 November  1908, he offered  the National
Gallery  first  choice of 56 listed pictures provided  that it took 3/4 of
them  and  that  they

shall  be exhibited  in one or more of the rooms  of the National
Gallery  (whether  a  room  or  rooms  existing  when  the  pictures
are  offered  to  them  or  a  room  or  rooms  altered  or  erected  as
hereinafter  provided)  under  the  name  of  the  Mond  collection
and  shall  for  ever  remain  substantially  united  in  such  room  or
rooms or in any room or rooms in the National Gallery to which
they  may  be  transferred.

If  such  room or rooms did  not exist, then his Trustees could  defray
the  cost  of  building  such.  The pictures  not  selected  were  to  be  put
in  groups  and  offered  to  other  museums  and  if  they  exceeded  40
they  were  to be kept  'substantially  together'.49

His  wife  was  left  a  life  interest  in  the  works.  She  died  in  May
1923,  and  the  National  Gallery  agreed  to  the  terms  of  the  bequest
'though they involve a departure from  custom and prevent the distri-
bution  of  the  widely  differing  pictures  among  the  suitable  depart-
ments.'50 (In fact most of the works were Italian and of the  14th and
15th  centuries).  The  works  were  exhibited  together  and  opened  to
the public  on 7 October  1924, and  in  1925—8 a room  for  them was
built,  now  numbered  Room 30.

That  arrangement,  however,  did  not  outlive  the  Second  World

War, after  which

so  many  rooms  were  suffering  from  bomb  damage  that  it was
impossible to display the collection together. When in  1957 the
Gallery  had been restored the Trustees were minded to keep the
pictures dispersed, and it was agreed with the Mond family  that
the Mond Room would remain so named and that a book listing
the  pictures  should  be  available  to  the  public,  as  is  the  case
today.  In  the recent  redecoration  of the old building, we have
taken  the  opportunity  to  mark  our  gratitude  to  the  Monds  by
writing  the name of the room  very visibly  on the  frieze.51

The  'Mond  Room'  still  appears  in  plans  of the  National  Gallery  in
the  1960s,  but  not  today,  when  the  room  houses  'State  Portraits'.
Dr Mond's heirs, the Barons Melchett, apparently have not objected.
The National  Gallery's  Report for  1958—9 complained that it had
had  no  major  bequests  since  Mond's  and  blamed  this  on  high  tax-
ation.  More  recently  it  has  had  large  gifts  of  money  (from  Getty,
Sainsburys  and  others) and has bequests promised.  Still today, as in
1958/9,  two  thirds  of  the  collection  has  been  given.  But  one  may
wonder  whether  it might  not  have  received  more  in the  three-quar-
ters of a century  after  Mond's  death, when other collections went to
institutions such as the Courtauld  Institute of Art, if donors had been
given  more  grounds  for  confidence  that their wishes would  prevail.

270

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

If,  in the Mond case, the deciding consideration  has been the wishes
of the donor's  family,  why  in other  cases, such as the Vernon  Gift,
Turner and Lane Bequests, have the wishes of those donors' respec-
tive families  not been  consulted?

3.6  The Lane Bequest,  1915
Sir Hugh Lane (1875 — 1915), born a British subject and an Irishman,
was  a dealer  in, and  collector  of,  old  masters  and modern  pictures.
His bequest of 39 mainly French Impressionist pictures has been the
subject  of much  controversy  ever since he died, and  some points in
that are relevant  to the present  enquiry.52

On  18 January  1908 The Dublin Municipal Gallery of Modern Art
(today  the  Hugh  Lane  Municipal  Gallery  of  Modern  Art)  was
opened, and  Lane wrote:

I have ... deposited here my collection of pictures by Continen-
tal artists, and intend to present the most of them, provided that
the  promised  permanent  building  is  erected  on  a  suitable  site
within the next  few years.53

But  it  was  not.  Lane  had  strong  ideas  on  the  question  of  site, and
many  Dubliners  did  not  share  these.  So  Lane  lent  the  pictures  to
London instead  and on  11 October  1913 made a new will:

I bequeath  .. any modern  pictures of merit  ...  that I possess to
the Dublin  Gallery of Modern  Art, other than the group of pic-
tures  lent  by  me  to  the  London  National  Gallery,  which  I be-
queath  to  found  a  collection  of  Modern  Continental  Art  in
London.
I bequeath the remainder of my property to the National Gallery
of  Ireland  (instead  of the  Dublin  Modern  Art Gallery  ...)  ...  I
hope  that  this  alteration  from  the  Modern  Gallery  to  the
National  Gallery  will  be  remembered  by  the  Dublin  Munici-
pality  and  others  as an  example  of  its want  of public  spirit in
the  year  1913,  and  for  the  folly  of  such  bodies  assuming  to
decide  on  questions  of  Art  instead  of  relying  on  expert  op-

In  London  the  National  Gallery  decided  only  to  exhibit  fifteen  of
the  39  works, omitting  some  of  what  are  now  considered  the  best.
Annoyed now with London, Lane on 3 February  1915 added a codi-
cil, though  without  having  it witnessed:

The  group  of  pictures  now  at  the  London  National  Gallery,
which  I had  bequeathed  to  that  Institution,  I now  bequeath  to
the  City  of  Dublin,  providing  that  a  suitable  building  is pro-
vided for  them  within five years of my death.55

271

Selby  Whittingham

On  7 May  1915  Lane  was  drowned,  and  London  claimed  the  pic-
tures,  on  the  grounds  that  only  the  will,  and  not  the  codicil,  was
valid. D S MacColl (formerly  of the Tate Gallery) and Robert C Witt
(connected  with  the  National  Gallery)  —  the  two  people  who  had
supported  the  overturning  of  Turner's  conditions  — claimed  that
Lane  had  really  wanted  to  the  end  the  pictures  to  go  to  London.56
Others  argued  that he did  not  really  mind  where  they  went  to. The
Irish  were  convinced  that  he  had  wanted  them  to  go  to  Dublin.
Maybe  Lane  was  not  so  exclusively  a  nationalist  as  many  of  his
compatriot  champions,  and  certainly  he  favoured  the  idea  of a col-
lection  of  modern  art  in  London,  but  the  weight  of  the  evidence
strongly  suggests  that his final  wish  was in favour  of Dublin  rather
than  London.57

In  1926 an extension to the Tate Gallery, paid for by Lord Duveen,
no  friend  of  Lane's,  and  housing  the  Lane  pictures,  was  opened.
Meanwhile  in  1924 a  committee  of  three  MPs  had  been  appointed
to consider  the rival claims  of London  and Dublin.  Its report  found
that  in  signing  the  codicil  Lane  'thought  he  was  making  a  legal
disposition.'  But  the modification  of  his will  by  Act  of  Parliament
to take account  of this would be  'extraordinary  and  unprecedented'.
It added:

Not  only  has  the  London  Gallery  legal  possession  of the  pic-
tures,  but  on  the  assurance  that  such  possession  would  be  in
perpetuity  it has secured the gift  of a gallery  in which  the pic-
tures  are to be housed.  To stultify  an assurance on the strength
of  which  the  gift  was  offered  would  be  a breach  of  faith  with
the  donor.58

From  the  start  many  accepted  that  Dublin  had  a  moral  claim  and
advocated  the  rotation  of the pictures between  Dublin  and  London,
as  has  now  happened.  But  this  compromise  was  long  opposed  by
many  of the Irish. W B Yeats wrote  in  1916:

Any  such  breaking  up  of the  collection  would  have  been  con-
trary  to  Sir  Hugh  Lane's  wishes...  In  1913, in  reply  to a pro-
posal  to  exhibit  in  the  National  Gallery  upon  loan  a  portion
of  his  collection  he  writes:  'I  should  never  have  dreamed  of
submitting  my  pictures  for  selection  to  Members  of  the
Board.'59

But what Lane had objected  to was the National Gallery claiming to
be  a better judge  of merit  than  he  was  and  proving  that  it was  not
by omitting  some of the best pictures. He had gone on:

There  are  pictures  of  comparatively  small  importance  in  the
collection  about  which  I  would  not  have  quarrelled,  and  one
picture, the  large Puvis  de Chavannes, would  ...  gain  in  effect
if isolated from the rest and hung  separately.60

272

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

However,  when  Lord  Moyne  raised  the  issue,  when  the  National
Gallery and Tate Gallery Bill was being debated in  1953, he argued:

I  suggest  that  it  is  almost  as  serious  an  offence  against  the
wishes of  Sir  Hugh Lane  to divide up the group  of thirty-nine
pictures as to retain them  in London.  [The Bill would have the
effect  of  dividing  the  ownership  between  the  National  and
Tate]...  A collector  selects  one  picture  to  set  off  against  an-
other, and his collection cannot be truncated without marring his
achievement. If anything would make Sir Hugh Lane turn in his
grave it would be to know that his collection  was split up, and
especially to know that some of it was not displayed at all.61

But,  though  in  general  it  may  be  desirable  to  keep  collections  to-
gether,  it  may be  doubted  whether  that  was  Lane's  main  consider-
ation. And by  1979 Lord Moyne seems to have accepted the rotation
of the pictures between  Dublin and  London.62

The  1924  Committee  had  argued  that  had  Lane  'been  spared  to
witness  the  growth  of the  new  Gallery  at  Millbank  no doubt  could
be  entertained  that  he  would  have  destroyed  the  codicil.'63  But,  as
time has gone on, that line of argument, never very convincing, has
become even less so. The Lane pictures are no longer in the Duveen
rooms,  and,  thanks  mainly  to  Samuel  Courtauld,  London  is  now
much better supplied with Impressionist paintings. So that the oppo-
sition to Dublin's claims from  even such as McColl and Witt weak-
ened somewhat.64  Dublin had been Lane's first and almost certainly
his last choice, and now is less richly endowed with such works than
is  London.  So  why  not  hand  them  over  to  Dublin?  Apart  from
national and institutional  self interest, the argument has become one
about legal  precedent.

This was taken  up by E L Mallalieu  Q C in a later debate on the
1953—4 Bill. He moved an amendment  which  would give effect  to
Lane's  codicil,  and  pointed  out  that  the  claim  that  wills  had  never
been  altered  by  Acts  of  Parliament  was  disproved  by  examples  to
the  contrary.  'The  will  of  the  artist  Turner  was  completely  altered
by Act of Parliament.'65 To this the Financial  Secretary to the Treas-
ury,  Henry  Brooke,  replied:  'I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  any
precedent for altering by an Act of Parliament a will where the ben-
eficiaries  were  not  in  agreement  that  it  should  be  altered.'66  This
accurately reflected the greater influence  which live institutions have
than  have dead benefactors.  Mallalieu  maintained  that the real ben-
eficiary  was  the  British  nation,  not  the  National  Gallery.67  Brooke
went on to refer  to the  1924 Committee,  saying  'I  think  we should
be very  chary  indeed  about upsetting  their considered  conclusions',
as 'they went into the matter nearer to the time in question, and with
far  greater  thoroughness  than  any  of  us  can  possibly  have  done  in
the last few hours.'68 'We should'  he went on,  'be  interfering  rather
seriously  with the expressed wishes of testators.'69

273

Selby  Whittingham

The only consistency  in all  this was to preserve the status quo and
the  interests  of  the  National  Gallery.  In  1883  Turner's  wishes  had
been  seriously  interfered  with by an  Act,  in complete  contradiction
to the opinion  of an  earlier  committee,  which had  indeed  gone  into
that  matter  much  more  thoroughly  than  did  the brief  parliamentary
debates of  1882-3. Then, as  subsequently, parliament  saw its  func-
tion  to  rubber  stamp  the  'expert'  opinion  of  the  National  Gallery
rather  than  to  act  as  a  court  of  law.  Yet the  Lane  case  shows  that
the issues involved can be ones of self-interest  and prejudice  as well
as, and  perhaps  more  than,  expertise. And the National  Gallery  had
not been  very  expert  either  in  evaluating pictures or in dealing with
a  potential  benefactor.

4  The Victoria & Albert  Museum

The museum  was born  out  of  the spirit  of free  trade and  radicalism
which  flourished  after  the Reform  Bill of  1832 and had a more utili-
tarian  and educational  ethos  from  the start than had the British  Mu-
seum.  It  was  also  very  dependent  on  gifts  of  collections  as  it grew
hugely  in the  19th century from  its early days as the South Kensing-
ton  Museum.

4.1  The  Sheepshanks  Gift,  1857
One  of  the  first  major  gifts  was  that  of  John  Sheepshanks
(1787—1863), made by a deed of gift  of 2 February  1857 after  con-
sultation  with the museum's  first  Keeper of Paintings, Richard Red-
grave, amongst others. An earlier proposal had been that the pictures
should  be kept  at his own  house  at Rutland  Gate and that  Redgrave
should be the paid resident  curator of them, but Redgrave persuaded
him  that  that  was  a bad  idea.70  So  Sheepshanks  wrote  to  Redgrave
on 6 August  1856 proposing that the collection be given to the  future
V&A  on three  conditions, adding that the collection,  'may be made
a  supplement  to  the  Vernon  Gallery,  or  Mr.  Turner's  bequest,  if  it
should be desirable in either case'  (those and Redgrave's charges all
being then partly  at Marlborough  House).71

The  ideas  behind  the  gift  were  explained  by Henry  Cole, the Di-

rector of the  South  Kensington  Museum,  in  1860:

Mr.  Sheepshanks  has  an  abhorrence  of trustees; he dislikes  the
noise  and  crowd  and  clatter  and  dirt  of  Trafalgar-square;  and
he  gave  those  pictures  on  three  conditions;  first,  that  there
should  be  an  individual  responsible  personally  for  their  man-
agement, and that they should not be under a Board of trustees;
secondly,  that  a  decent  building  should  be  erected  before  he
gave them, feeling  that the Vernon and Turner pictures had been
shabbily  used; and  his third  condition  was, that they  should be
exhibited  in the  neighbourhood  of the parks.72

274

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

In fact  the deed of gift  stipulated that the gallery  should be built  'at
once',  and  its  construction  began  on  25  November  1856  and  the
Queen  opened  it on 20 June  1857.

The  last  of the nine  conditions  in the  deed  of gift  stipulated  that
the  collection  should  not  be  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  1856
National  Gallery Act,

And in case of such interference  on the part of the Legislature,
or if the terms and conditions as herein expressed be not strictly
adhered  to, then  the  conditional  gift  hereby  made  of  the  said
pictures and drawings, in favour of a National Gallery of British
Art, the  Schools  of  Art,  and the  public  generally,  shall  wholly
cease, and the ex-officio  trustee  for  the time being  shall there-
upon hold the said pictures and drawings in trust for the Univer-
sity of Cambridge, to be added to, and for  ever thereafter  form
part of the Fitz-William  Collection  in the said  University.73

In  1861  Turner's  Turners  returned  from  South  Kensington  to  the
National  Gallery's  main  building,  and  the  Vernon  Gift  followed  in
1876. In  1897 the Tate Gallery  opened  on Millbank,  and for  a time
there existed two National  Galleries of British Art in name and actu-
ality.  However  the  one  at  South  Kensington  dropped  the name  and
virtually ceased to acquire oil paintings, and it was recommended in
1908 that the ones which it had should be transferred  to the National
and  Tate Galleries. That  recommendation  was endorsed  in  1914 by
the  Curzon  Committee  on  the  National  Gallery,  but  was  not  acted
on.74  In  1944  the  Massey  Committee,  composed  of  Directors  and
Trustees of the National  Gallery, Tate Gallery and V&A, made pro-
posals  for  rationalising  the  collections  of  fine  art  of  all  three,  but
these  were  largely  rejected  by  the  Standing  Commission  on  Mu-
seums & Galleries  in an addendum of  1945 on the grounds that the
proposals  involved  the  disregard  of  terms  of  bequests  and  'the
clearly expressed  wishes of a testator  should not be set aside'.75

In  1950  Sir Leigh  Ashton  of the V&A,  one  of the  signatories  of
the Massey  Report, and author  of a major  reorganisation  of the V&
A on chronological  lines in  1948, commented, with particular  refer-
ence to the Sheepshanks  Collection:

His will, which  is unusually  liberal  and unrestrictive, provided
for  temporary  loans  to  suitable  places  inside  and  outside  Lon-
don, but  it  is doubtful  whether  the recommendations  made  by
the Massey  Report that the collections  should be transferred  to
the  Tate  Gallery  in toto could  possibly  be  implemented,  short
of  legislation,  which  would  have to move contrarily  to the ex-
pressed  wish  of  the  benefactors;  the  same  is  equally  true  of
the gifts  and bequests of Miss Isobel  Constable and Mr. Henry
Vaughan.76

275

Selby  Whittingham

But  legislation  would  come  up  against  Sheepshanks'  stipulation
against such interference. In fact his gift was liberal and unrestrictive
in  only  one  main  respect,  embodied  in  the  third  provision  of  his
deed  of  gift:

The  said  pictures  and drawings  shall  be deposited  in such gal-
lery  [to  be  called  "The  National  Gallery  of  British  Art"]  with
any  other  pictures  or  other  works  of  Art  that  may  be  sub-
sequently  placed  there  by  other  contributors,  as  it  is  not  my
desire that my collection of pictures and drawings shall be kept
apart,  or bear my name as such.

Ironically  his  gift,  by  incorporating  such  a  strong  defence  against
the  overturning  of  its  provisions,  has  acted  as  a  defence  of  other
gifts  and bequests made on the condition that they be kept together
and  bear  the  donor's  name.  Meanwhile  Sheepshanks'  own  con-
ditions,  though  they  may  not  have  been  overturned  by  legislation,
have  become  increasingly  ignored.  They  do  not  form  part  of  a
National  Gallery  of British Art, the achievement  of which  was long
one of his major  objectives. The V&A is now governed by Trustees,
and  not  a single  Minister.  And it  is situated  in one of the most pol-
luted  parts  of  London,  and  certainly  not  'in  an  open  and  airy  situ-
ation'  and  'free  from  the  inconveniences  and  dirt  of the main thor-
ough fare  of the metropolis.'  Yet no move has been made to  transfer
the  works  to  the Fitzwilliam  Museum, no doubt  partly because  that
museum  would  not wish to have  them.

More  surprisingly  no determined  attempt  was  made  to  get  round
Sheepshanks'  conditions  by  way  of  temporary  loans.  It  had  been
proposed that the overlapping fields of the British Museum and V&
A  might  be  dealt  with  in  that  way,  but  that  came  up  against  the
British Museum Act which provided that whatever was placed in the
BM  should  remain  there  for  ever.77

Guarantee  of adherence to Sheepshanks'  conditions was provided
by  his  friend  Redgrave  so  long  as  he  remained  at  the  V&A.  Red-
grave, meanwhile,  took  an  interest  in the  question  of trying to deal
with  the  National  Gallery's  problems.  In  1861  he  proposed  that  a
new  Act should  be passed, which  should  include the following  pro-
visions:

3d.  That  when  persons  give  or  bequeath  to  the  nation  collec-
tions  of  pictures  or  works  of  art,  subject  to  the  absolute  con-
dition  of being kept together as a whole  —  if they are thought
worthy  of being accepted  for the public  -  space will be  found
for  them  in the galleries at South  Kensington.
4th. That a clause be inserted in the new Act  ..., providing, that
unless  there was express  stipulation, barring  such procedure in
the  will  or  deed  of  gift  by  which  pictures  or works  of  art  are
conveyed  to the public, they  shall, after  being  exhibited  to the

276

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

public, as a whole, at  South  Kensington,  for  the  space of  [five
years],  be  subject  to  the  conditions  in  clause  I  [allowing  the
National  Gallery  to  hang  works  at  South  Kensington  or  circu-
late them to provincial  and other museums].78

Redgrave  further  outlined  his  ideas  two  years  later,  repeating  his
belief  that  the National  Gallery  should not  include  works  by  living
artists or 'more pictures by any one artist than are sufficient  properly
to  represent  him  according  to  his  rank  and  position  with  regard  to
the art of all ages'.79 He went on:

Would  it  be  possible,  while  the  general  collection  of  British
pictures  should  remain  at  South  Kensington,  an  arrangement
could  be entered  into  by which  the National  Gallery,  —  wher-
ever  placed  —  should  select  from  time  to  time  representative
works  of  the  most  eminent  painters  from  any  of  these  collec-
tions, the rest,  combined  with the  works  of British  artists,  for-
ming a separate  gallery?

His  ideas  form  the  basis  of  what  has  since  happened,  except  that
Redgrave  never proposed  that  legislation  should be  enacted  which,
as  in  1883,  would  retrospectively  overturn  the  conditions  of  tes-
tators,  though  he  was  keen  to  relieve  the  National  Gallery  of  the
burden of the Vernon and Turner collections. (He argued that putting
Turner's  Turners  at  South  Kensington  was  in  conformity  with  Tur-
ner's  wishes,  a  view  rejected  by  the  1861  Select  Committee).  His
proposals were more useful  for the future  than for dealing with what
had happened.  With regard  to the latter  he was questioned  by Lord
St Leonards in 1861:

Lord  St. Leonards: Your opinion  is, that a man to whom  a be-
quest has been  made, subject  to conditions, may retain  the  gift
and reject  the  conditions?
Richard  Redgrave:  If the power  were  known  beforehand  there
would  be no difficulty.  There  is an  Act of  Parliament  [he pro-
poses]  which  declares  beforehand  that  you  intend  so  to  deal
with bequests.80

As a sop to donors, his proposed  2nd clause was that:

2d.  That the name  of all  donors of pictures or works of art be
prominently and permanently affixed  to them, in whichever
public collection  they may be placed.

That was to be done with regard to the Vernon and other collections
as a substitute  for  keeping  them  together  in rooms  named  after  the
donor. But Redgrave's proposals would only have allowed that if his
Act had been passed  before  Vernon's Gift  had been  accepted.

277

Selby  Whittingham

4.2  Other  Gifts  and Bequests
A  liberal  aspect  of  Sheepshanks'  conditions  was  that  they  allowed
his  works  to  be  seen  on  Sundays.  Whereas  a  later  donor  declared,
'It  is my desire  ...  that the said pictures  shall  not be exhibited  on a
Sunday  ...'81  This was Mrs Elizabeth Ellison, widow of the collector
of  British  Watercolours,  Richard  Ellison  (1788-1859).  By  a Deed
of  Gift  of  24  April  1860  she  gave  some  of  those  watercolours  to
South  Kensington.  Originally  the  fifth  clause  stated  that  'the  said
pictures shall be exhibited to the public as constantly as the oil paint-
ings  in  the  charge  of  the  Science  and  Art  Department.'  But  Mrs
Ellison  agreed  to  a  change  of  the  wording  to:  'The  said  paintings
shall  be  deposited  in and kept as part  of the National  Collection  of
Water  Colour  Paintings  at  Kensington  commenced  by  the  Depart-
ment  of  Science  and  Art  until  a  separate  and  permanent  room  or
rooms be  erected  by such  department  for  the purpose  (an  object  so
much to be desired) and shall be as constantly exhibited to the public
as the other Paintings under the charge of that Department  ... '82 The
third clause said that the Ex-officio  Trustee, in whose possession the
works were vested, 'shall be advised and assisted on matters relating
to  the  preservation'  of  them  by  the  President  of  the  Water  Colour
Society.  This,  the  Victoria  & Albert  Museum  now  argues,  implied
that regard to the danger of fading from permanent exhibition should
be  heeded.  So  it  is right  that  they  are  not  shown  all  the  time;  and
in  fact  they  are  'as  constantly  exhibited  to  the  public  as  the  other
[watercolour]  Paintings  under  the  charge  of  the  Department.'  But
certainly  the  condition  relating to Sundays  has  not been  religiously
followed.  In  1873 a  second  group  of  watercolours  was  the  subject
of  a  Deed  of  Gift  in  the  names  of  the  Rev.  C. P. Terrot  and  Miss
M. Terrot, 'acting under the express direction of our late sister, Eliza-
beth  Ellison.'

The Rev. Alexander  Dyce (1798-1869)  left  his collection  of pic-
tures,  works  of  art and  books  to the  museum  by  his  will,  in  which
he  said  that  he  'had  regard  to  the  gift  of  the  Sheepshanks  collec-
tions'.  Like  Sheepshanks  he left  his  to  the  government  minister  in
charge of education, but on the different  condition

That a proper and sufficient  separate room or gallery in or near
to the Public Buildings built or about to be built for the Depart-
ment  of  Science  and  Arts,  now  called  the  South  Kensington
Museum, or elsewhere, be set apart or provided for the purpose
of  holding  my  said  collection  (to be  called  'The  Dyce Collec-
tion').

These conditions are inscribed on a board now displayed in the Print
Room together  with a similar one for  the  Sheepshanks  Gift.

There  is  now  no  Dyce  Room,  though  his  books  are  kept  as  a
separate  entity  in  the  Library,  as  are  those  of  John  Forster

278

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

(1812 — 76), and  separate  seats are reserved  for  the readers of these
two collections.

Just before  Dyce's  death  the museum  received  the  collections  of
the  Rev.  Chauncey  Hare  Townshend  (1798-1868),  left  to  it  with
power to  make  selections  from  it.  Some or  all  of his  mainly  Swiss
paintings are shown together  in the Cole wing.83

The South Kensington  Museum continued  to grow greatly. It also
became  subject  later  in  the  century  to  the  charge  of  maladminis-
tration.84  One complaint,  made by Beresford  Hope amongst  others,
was that  it had  accepted  too much and become a ragbag of all  sorts
of things.85 A related  complaint,  made by its sometime  Keeper,  Sir
J. C. Robinson, was, as we have seen, against the policy of accepting
collections given on the condition that they be kept together, perhaps
the most  notable  being  that  of John  Jones  in  1883. Another  former
curator, Anna  Somers Cocks, has commented:

As was customary  with donations and bequests to the museum
up  to  the  First  World  War, Jones  stipulated  that  his  collection
should  be  kept  together,  not  scattered  around  the  relevant  de-
partments.  This has its disadvantages, preventing the works of
art  from  being  put  into their proper  artistic  context  with  other
works of the same period, but as the years go by these individ-
ual collections  become more  interesting  precisely  as groups of
objects  epitomising  the taste of the day.86

And  today  such  collections  are  on  the  whole  shown  together  with
notices proclaiming how this is done in fidelity  to the conditions of
their donors. In fact  the conditions have not always been adhered to
fully,  being  nibbled  at  round  the  edges,  but  they  have  not  had  a
coach  and horses driven through them by Act of Parliament as have
those relating to gifts  to the National Gallery. Of course the V&A is
not a specialised museum as the National Gallery is, and so it cannot
be  arranged  in  one broad  chronological  swoop,  and  so can  accom-
modate  groups  more  easily  without  doing  violence  to  its  grand
purpose.

For the purposes  of this  article there  is no need to consider  these
collections  in detail, but  some  may be listed  to  illustrate  what hap-
pened.

John Jones (1799-1882)  by his will of 4 December  1879 left  his
pictures and  works of art  'to  be kept separate  as one collection  and
not  distributed  over  various  parts  of  the  said  Museum  or  lent  for
exhibition.'87  In  1963  Frank  Davis  commented:  "The  terms  of  the
bequest  have  been  carried  out,  if not  wholly  to  the  letter  —  a  few
things  are  on  loan  to  other  departments  of  the  museum  and  others
are  in  reserve  —  in  a  most  imaginative  manner.'88  How  the  con-
ditions were decided appears to be unknown, but the Director of the
Museum, Sir Philip Cunliffe  Owen, gave Jones advice on the matter,

279

Selby  Whittingham

and  one  wonders  if  he  offered 
agreement.89

inducements  to  get  Jones's

Constantine  Alexander  Ionides  (1833-1900)  made  a  similar  be-

quest  by a will  of 31 August  1899:

If  at  my  death  my  estate  (not  including  ...  )  shall  be  of  the
value  of  £150,000  at  least  I  give  free  of  legacy  duty  All  my
pictures  both  in oil  and  water  colours  and  crayon  or  coloured
chalks (but subject as to my family portraits to the interest here-
inbefore  given to my  said wife)  and  all  my etchings  drawings
and engravings to the South Kensington Museum for the benefit
of  the  nation  to be  Kept there  as one  separate  collection  to be
called  "The Constantine Alexander  Ionides  Collection'  and not
distributed over the Museum or lent for exhibition. And I desire
that the said Etchings Drawings and Engravings shall be framed
and glazed by and  at the  expense of the  authorities  of the Mu-
seum  so that  Students there can easily  see them.90

Ruskin  had  framed  some  of  Turner's  watercolours  at  the  National
Gallery  so that they could be viewed  in the study rooms, as well as
exhibited in the main galleries, with some ease and safety.  The  Times
commented  in a rather misleading  report:

Two  important  conditions  are  attached  to  the  bequest  - 
the
first,  that  the  collection  shall  be  kept  together  in  the  Victoria
and  Albert  Museum  and  exhibited  in  a room  or  rooms  and be
termed  'The  Constantine  Ionides  Collection';  the  second,  that
every  object  is to be exhibited  and nothing hidden. This  seems
to involve  ...  the framing  and hanging of a vast number of fine
prints  which  have  hitherto  been  religiously  retained  in  port-
folios. It will be interesting to learn how far the South Kensing-
ton  authorities will  be able, on practical  grounds, to accept  the
stipulations  of the will.91

In  1963  Davis  noted  that  'part  of  it is  displayed  as a  collection  by
itself.'92 Recently there were on view together 64 or 65 oil paintings.
A notice  stated  that Ionides

left  his  whole  collection  of  over  a  thousand  works  ...  Apart
from  the  oil  paintings  shown  here which provide  a unique op-
portunity  of  seeing  one  man's  collection  as  it  was  formed  a
century ago, his drawings, watercolours  and prints can be stud-
ied in the Print Room on the floor above.

George  Salting  (1836-1909),  like  some  earlier  benefactors  of  the
museum,  such  as  Isobel  Constable  (d. 1888)  and  Henry  Vaughan
(1809—99), was not concerned to keep his whole collection together

280

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

in  one  place,  but  left  groups  from  it  to  different  museums.  By  his
will of  14 October  1889 Salting gave

unto  the  nation  my  art-collections  —  namely,  my  pictures  or
such  as they, the Trustees, may select for the National  Gallery,
and  my  other  collections  whether  in  my  chambers  or  at  the
South  Kensington  Museum  [to which  he had made  loans since
18741, to be kept at the said Museum, and not distributed over
the various sections, but kept all together according to the vari-
ous specialities  of my exhibits... And as regards my prints and
drawings, which I leave to the nation, I desire that the Trustees
of the  British  Museum  shall  select  any  that  they  deem  worthy
of being added to the National  collections  ...  93

The will gave rise to a dispute in the courts as to whether his minia-
tures should go to the V&A or BM, which was settled in the V&A's
favour.  The  1911  General  Guide  to  the  V&A  said  that  the  part  of
his collection  received by the V&A was  'now  exhibited together in
accordance  with  the  terms  of  his  will'  in  three  rooms  on  the  first
floor  and two on the second.94  It has  since been  moved.

When the will was drawn up, the South Kensington  Museum was
divided into nine sections, one of which was the Art Museum, which
in  1896  was  itself  divided  into  sections  with  further  subdivisions
made in  1908. According to the Minutes of the Rearrangement Com-
mittee  of  March  1908  the  Director  'reported  that  he  had  seen  Mr
Salting  and  had  learnt from him  that  he  was  not  unwilling  that  his
Collection  should  be  divided  and  that  the  separate  portions  should
be arranged  with the Museum  Collections  to which  they were most
closely  related.'  By the time  of his death  much  of the bequest  was
on loan to the Museum and displayed  by material. Then advice was
sought  from  the  Treasury  Solicitor  on the meaning  of the will, and
he gave an opinion, dated  11 April  1910, saying that

the  terms  of  the  late Mr  Salting's  Will  do not  require  that  the
whole of his Art Collections  should be massed  together  in one
room  or adjoining  rooms at the South Kensington  Museum but
are  satisfied  by the objects  constituting  each  special  collection
being  kept  all  together  and  not  distributed  over  the  section  of
the Museum devoted to objects of that special character. I think
that in the phrase  'not distributed over the various sections' the
adverb  'over'  points  to  a distribution  over  various  portions  of
each  section, and that the  word  'amongst'  or  'between'  would
have  been  more  appropriate  had  it  been  sought  to  restrain  a
division  between  the  different  sections.  And  it  is  difficult  to
give  any  satisfactory  meaning  to  the  words  'according  to  the
various  specialities  of  my  exhibits'  except  as  corresponding
with  the preceding words  'the  various sections', and recognis-
ing  that  each  special  collection  was  to  be  in  its  appropriate

281

Selby  Whittingham

section,  though  its  individuality  was not to be lost and merged
in the general collection of that speciality by a distribution over
different  parts of the  section.95

To  conclude,  the  present  policy  of  the  V&A  seems  to  be  to  show
collections  together  insofar  as  the  conditions  stipulate  that,  though
some latitude has been employed in interpreting some conditions. A
plan  of  the  museum  of  some  years  ago,  omitting  the  Henry  Cole
wing  for  paintings  and  drawings,  mentions  only  two  names  of do-
nors  of  collections:  'Rooms  4—7. Europe  1700-1800  (includes  the
Jones  Collection).'  'Rooms  133 — 145. Ceramics  (...  Schreiber Col-
lection  ...)' However  recent  donors  of  rooms or a garden  are com-
memorated:  'The  Pirelli  Garden';  'Japan: The Toshiba Gallery', etc.
Why did benefactors  such as Salting stipulate that what they gave
should  be  kept  together?  On  the  whole, even  when  they  split  their
collections  between  different  museums, they  kept  those  devoted  to
particular  subjects  together.  But  a  major  objective  must  have  been
that  of  enshrining  the  donor's  name  and  memory  more  effectively
than  just  by  commemorating  these  on  the  labels  of  individual  ob-
jects.

5  The Metropolitan  Museum  of Art, New York

The Metropolitan,  established  in  1870 and moving to its present lo-
cation  in  1880,  is not  a national  museum,  but  one  largely  financed
by  private  benefactors  and  partly  by the city  of New  York. For my
account of the collections left to it I rely heavily on Calvin Tomkins'
1970 history  of the museum.96

Its first Director (1879—1904) was Louis Palma di Cesnola,  who
had  made  a  collection  of  antiquities  in  Cyprus.  When  some  of  it
reached  London, the British  Museum  offered  £10,000  for  part  of it,
but  Cesnola  refused,  insisting  that  the  collection  must  remain  to-
gether  as a whole. But he accepted  the offer  of the President  of the
Metropolitan  to buy it for  $60,000 of his own money. He hoped that
his  fellow  trustees would raise the sum by public subscription. Ces-
nola  explained  his wishes:

What  I desire above all  is that my collection  should  remain all
together and be known  as the Cesnola Collection  ...  I have the
pride of my race, and that of a Discoverer who wants his name
perpetuated  with  his work  if possible.97

Miss  Catharine  Lorillard  Wolfe  (d. 1887) left  a collection  of  French
pictures  with  an  endowment  of  $200,000  to  preserve  and  increase
the collection.  According  to her will, the gift  was made

upon  express  condition  that the trustees and managers  ...  shall
provide  and  set apart  exclusively  for  the said collection  a suit-

282

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

able,  well-lighted  fire-proof  apartment,  gallery  or  separate
space,  where  the  paintings  and  water  colour  drawings  herein
mentioned  shall  be  properly  arranged  and  displayed;  and pro-
vided also, that said collection shall be designated and continue
to be known  as  'the Catharine  Lorillard  Wolfe  Collection.'98

On this Tomkins  commented:

The Wolfe bequest set a pattern and a problem that has endured
for a century  ...  The Metropolitan has had its share of benefac-
tors who have sought to make their benefactions  reflect  'in per-
petuity' their illustrious names and matchless taste. Perhaps the
trustees  could have held  out firmly  against  all  such  conditions
from  the beginning, and thus saved themselves a lot of trouble
later on, but at this period  and for  some time to come they did
not feel  wealthy or secure enough to hold out. They took what
they  could  get,  and  passed  on  the  problems  of  restrictive  be-
quests to their successors, who have often  managed adroitly, it
must be noted, to circumvent  the  conditions"

Edward  C. Moore  (d. 1891)  left  works  of  art  and  books  to  be  kept
together and preserved  as a separate collection  in the museum.100

A  new  policy  on  gifts  was  enunciated  in  the  35th  Report,  for

1905, which would put an end to such conditional ones.101

In  1906 George A. Hearn,  a trustee  who had  given  24 American
pictures, now  offered  to present  27 more  with  $150,000  wherewith
to buy paintings by living  American  artists. But he wanted  the mu-
seum  to  keep  his  gift  together  permanently  in  a  room  bearing  his
name. As a compromise  the museum  accepted  a  'moral  obligation'
to keep the  Hearn  pictures together  in one gallery  for  not  less than
25  years  and  Hearn  himself  agreed  that  the  museum  could  sell  or
exchange any of the pictures he had given for better examples. Five
years later he gave an additional  51 pictures and $100,000.l02

In  1906 J. Pierpont Morgan acquired the Hoentschel Collection of
works of art, and on his initiative a wing was completed  in  1909 to
house this; which to begin with was deposited on  loan.103

In  1909 Benjamin Airman (d. 1913) said he had considered leaving
his  collection  to  the  museum,  but  was  deterred  by  the  museum's
new policy. An alternative was to found an 'Altman Museum of Art'.
However the Metropolitan  agreed to make an exception  in his case.
The  museum  agreed  to  'provide  and  permanently  maintain  ...  one
suitable  room  of  sufficient  size  to  contain  all  my  paintings,  rock
crystals,  Limoges  enamels,  and  one  other  suitable  room  to  contain
my Chinese porcelains, said rooms to be adjoining  and opening into
each other.'  There were to be no other works in either room. If any
of these  or other  conditions  were  broken,  the  entire  collection  was
to go to an Altman Museum of Art for which contingency funds  had
been set aside.104 Tomkins comments  on the sequel:

283

Selby  Whittingham

Although  the terms of the bequest have been  interpreted  rather
ingeniously  since 1913 (the two adjoining  rooms giving way to
a  somewhat  meandering  procession  of  Altman  pieces  through
several  galleries), by and large the Altman  gift  has remained a
monument  to one man's taste and a living proof that  flexibility,
where  museums are concerned,  is sometimes the better part of
principle.105

In  1913 J. P. Morgan I died, and  in  1917-18  J. P. Morgan  II gave a
large part  of his  collections to the museum, and  it was exhibited  in
a  wing  renamed  the Pierpont  Morgan  Wing  in  1918, where  it  was
supposed  to  be  kept  together  for  the  next  50  years.  However  in
1943 J. P. Morgan II cancelled this restriction  and agreed to the col-
lection  being  distributed throughout  the  museum.106

In  1917 the  President,  Robert  W de Forest,  announcing  the  Isaac
Dudley  Fletcher bequest, made a statement clarifying  the museum's
policy  on  conditional  gifts.  Recognizing  'the  desire  of  donors  for
some  lasting  recognition  of  their  gifts,'  he  said,  the  Metropolitan
would label each object with the donor's name, group together those
objects  that  naturally  belonged  together,  identify  the  donor  in  its
catalogues and handbooks, and exhibit the entire collection together,
if  the  donor  wished,  for  a  limited  time  —  in the  case  of  Fletcher's
collection, for  one year. But, de Forest concluded, the museum  'can-
not wisely prevent the proper arrangement of its growing collections
as  an  integral  whole  by  accepting  gifts  conditioned  on  perpetual
segregation.'107

When  the  Verplanck  heirs  insisted  that  their  furniture  be  housed
permanently  in a room bearing the family  name, a compromise was
agreed  in  a  pledge  to  return  the  furniture  whenever  the  museum
found  itself  unable  or unwilling  to  meet  this  condition,  'thus  pro-
ving',  commented Tomkins, 'once  again that the best museum poli-
cies  are made to be bent.'108

Henry  Havemeyer 

(1847—1908)  and  his  wife  Louisine
(1855 — 1920) and their children  were praised  in a recent editorial in
The  Burlington  Magazine  for  not  creating  a  'donor  mausoleum'  at
the Metropolitan.109 Louisine explicitly wished the works to be inte-
grated  in  the  museum's  departments.  The  sole conditions  made by
her  children  were that each  object  be  labelled  as belonging  to  'The
H. O. Havemeyer  Collection'  and  that  they  be  for  'permanent  dis-
play'.110

Michael  Friedsam  (d. 1931),  a  business  associate  of  Altman,  left
his collection  of paintings and works of art to  'be kept together and
separate  and  apart by itself, just  as  Altman's  had  been.  What hap-
pened  was different,  however, as Tompkins explains:

A  special  committee of trustees  persuaded  his executors  to in-
terpret  the terms of the bequest  so liberally  that this restriction
miraculously  disappeared. In accepting the collection, the trus-

284

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

tees  referred  to  Friedsam's  'well-known  and  practically  ex-
pressed interest in education,'  which somehow made it possible
for  'the  influence  of the  collection  ...  [to] be promoted  in the
widest degree without the hampering conditions usually associ-
ated with restricted gifts.'  Friedsam's Italian, Flemish, and Ger-
man paintings, his prints, Chinese porcelains, tapestries, medie-
val  and  Renaissance  sculptures,  and  other  works  of  art  were
distributed  throughout  the  museum,  and  although  there  is  still
one  small  gallery  devoted  exclusively  to  his  pictures,  no  one
would ever know it. Few episodes have demonstrated so clearly
the value of having  lawyers on  board.'''

Robert Lehman  (d.1969)  left  his 3,000  works of art to the museum,
and these have been housed in a separate wing of their own, suitably
identified, and forever inviolate from contamination by alien objects,
as Tomkins put  it. Lehman  had not wanted  his collection  dispersed
throughout the museum, as J. P. Morgan's had been, and he contem-
plated  establishing a separate private  museum  for  it, as Henry  Clay
Frick  had  done.  However  the  Metropolitan  was  determined  to  win
it  for  itself  — its  value  was  estimated  at  $100  million  — and  it
succeeded.112

It  is  anticipated  that  Walter Annenberg  will  bequeath  to  the mu-
seum a group of French Impressionist  paintings which he has stipu-
lated  shall  remain  together  in  perpetuity  in  their  own  rooms.  The
museum  showed  a  scale  model  of  the  new  galleries  as  a  way  of
tempting Annenberg to make his gift,  and this has been followed  by
a complete redesign of the  19th century galleries, which had opened
first  in  1980.  Acceptance  of  Annenberg's  terms  and  the  idea  of  a
separate  collection  had  provoked  criticism,  but  the  result  has  met
with  some  approval.  For  the  Annenberg  pictures  'are  not  isolated
from  their brethren, so it  is often  impossible  for  the unaware  to tell
where  an Annenberg  Cezanne  begins  and  a Havemeyer  or  Stephen
C. Clark  Cezanne  ends.'113  This  might  seem  to  defeat  the  purpose
of  keeping  the  donations  separate.  And  even  if  the  arrangement  is
now  a  satisfactory  compromise,  one  wonders  how  long  it  will  last
and  both  objectives  —  Annenberg's  and  the  museum's  —  continue
to be met.114

The  plans  in  the  1992  Blue  Guide to New  York show  rooms  de-
voted  to  three  collections  —  those  of  Altman,  Robert  Lehman  and
Jack & Belle Linsky (1982)  -  but no others.

The pattern follows that experienced at the Victoria & Albert Mu-
seum,  though  the  Metropolitan  has  continued  to  welcome  con-
ditional gifts of collections to a greater extent than has the V&A this
century. The policy  seems to be that advocated  by Eastlake  in  1850
—  of  accepting  that  collections  should  be  kept  together,  if they  are
of sufficient  importance to warrant that, or, put another way, if they
are  so tempting  that  the  museum  prefers  to waive  its objections  to
that principle to risking losing the  gift.

285

Selby  Whittingham

That seems to have been  the case with the collection of Mrs Belle
Linsky, about  which  a curator,  and  former  British  museum  director,
commented:

What I could not break down was her insistence that her works
of art be  preserved  as  an  integral collection.  A number  of peo-
ple fear  death  less than  they  fear  anonymity.115

6  Independent  or Quasi-Independent  Museums of

Collections

The  obvious  alternative  to  giving  a  collection  to  form  part  of  an
existing  museum  is  to  constitute  it  as  a  separate  museum  in  itself.
This  is what  Sir John  Soane chose  to do in  1833, when  he obtained
an  Act  of  Parliament  establishing  his  house  and  collections  as one,
though  Sir  Robert  Peel  unsuccessfully  urged  that  the  collections
would  be better  as part  of  the  British  Museum.116

Many  well  known  examples  followed  in  America,  Britain  and
France (e.g. the Frick Collection, Wallace Collection, Musee Jacque-
mart-Andre).  There  have  been  fewer  created  since  the  1930s,  per-
haps because even the very  rich no longer live in town palaces read-
ily convertible  into  museums.  But  museums  continue  to be  created
from  the  unsold  works  of  individual  artists  or the products  of  por-
celain  and  other  factories.

In the last case the manufacturer  may provide a continuing  finan-
cial  support.  But  in  other  cases  a  crucial  question  is  whether  the
original endowment will be  sufficient  to preserve the museum's con-
tents  and purposes  intact.  Restrictions  on how charitable  funds  may
be  invested  invariably  mean  that  eventually  inflation  will  diminish
their  worth.  A  current  example  is  that  of  the  Barnes  Foundation,
though  it  is  disputed  how  far  there  is  a  genuine  shortage  of  funds
and  how  far  the  claim  that  there  is  has  been  used  as  a  pretext  for
subverting  the  founder's  stipulations.117

An alternative is to leave  the collection to the state or municipality
or some  institution  other  than  a museum. But that too can leave the
collection  open to depredation  or breach of trust. As examples I will
take  some artists'  collections which have either been left  to existing
institutions  or have  been  set up as separate museums.

6.1  The Flaxman  Gallery  (University  College, London),  1847
Like  other  sculptors  John  Flaxman  (1755 — 1826)  died  leaving  the
plaster  models  from  which  his finished  works  were made.118 These
passed to Maria Denman, who  was at once his sister-in-law, adopted
daughter,  heir  and  executrix.  She  kept  the  collection  entire  despite
offers  for  some  of  the  choicer  models.  Then  she  offered  it  to  the
Government  on  condition  that  it provided  a suitable building, but it

286

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

declined the offer.119  Then University College London agreed to give
the  models  house  room,  but  the  cost  of  installation  under  its  dome
had to be met by subscription.120 No deed of gift has been published.
In  1941 nearly  100 models were destroyed by bombs. Then of the
123  remaining  39  were  re-set  in  the  Flaxman  Gallery  and  others
elsewhere,  and  81  were  sent  on  long-term  loan  to  the  Victoria  &
Albert  Museum.  These  included  the  St Michael,  which  had  formed
the  centre  piece  of  the  Gallery,  and  which  had  been  subjected  to
student vandalism  in the  1960s.121

Of the plasters lent to the Victoria & Albert Museum 75, including
the  St  Michael,  were  to  be  returned  in  1993, and  plans  have  been
made  to  restore  the  Gallery  to  its  original  appearance  with  the  aid
of  a grant  from  the  Henry  Moore  Foundation,  though  more  money
has still to be  raised.122

Presumably  the loan to the Victoria  & Albert Museum was made
(a) because of shortage of space and  funds,  (b) because they would
be safer at the V&A, (c) because more people would see them there,
(d)  and because  Flaxman  might  be  seen  there  in the  context  of his
contemporaries.  But  such  an  action  defeated  the purpose  of the  ef-
forts of the founders of the Gallery, which was to keep the collection
intact.

6.2  The Gibson  Gallery  (Royal  Academy of Arts, London),  1866
John Gibson R. A. (  1790-1866) also left a collection of his models,
together  with  some  finished  sculptures. These  he bequeathed  to the
Royal Academy with money to pay for their housing by a codicil to
his will of 22 March  1865. The previous year he had  written  to the
R. A.'s  President,  Sir  Charles  Eastlake,  with  his  proposals.  He  had
made  similar  bequests  to the  R. A,, by  his will  of  5 May  1855, but
now  he  gave  in  addition  £32,000.  These  bequests  were  made  on
condition  that the Academy

shall  set  apart  upon  the  ground  held  and  occupied  by  them  at
the time of my death or upon the ground which  after  my death
may be granted them or which they may be permitted to occupy
or  use  for  the  purposes  of  the  Royal  Academy  sufficient  and
convenient  space  to  arrange  and  preserve  my  said  Works  of
Marble  Models  and  Plasters  hereinbefore  mentioned  so  that
they  may  be  seen  by  the  Students  of the  said  Royal  Academy
and by the public as hereinafter  stated  ...l23

The Royal Academy received  about £40,000 from  Gibson, and with
part of this added  a story  to its building  at a cost of some £34,000.
This  contained  the  Gibson  Gallery  on  the  East  and  on  the  West
three galleries intended for the display of the Diploma Works, which
opened respectively  in  1876 and  1878.124 In  1939 at the outbreak of
war the Gibson works were moved out and never returned. The room

287

Selby  Whittingham

had been made unusable through minor bomb damage until  1954. In
1987 it was converted  into the Library.

Complaints  were made before  1876 about  the delay  in  providing
the  Gallery.125  And  when  it  opened  it  was  claimed  that  it  was  too
small for the collection,126 though the Art Journal said that the space
was  'exactly  the  dimensions  he  [Gibson]  desired.'127  However
G. D. Leslie R. A. observed:

I am  sure that, if Gibson could  see  it, he would  himself  gladly
have  two-thirds  of the  casts  removed,  which  would  allow  the
remainder, the pick of the lot, to be so arranged that they could
be better  seen.128

By  that  date,  1914, there was  an  increasing  tendency  to  give more
space  to  works  of  art,  and  that  was  to  affect  the  changes  to  the
Flaxman Gallery. In France the models of David d'Angers have been
moved  out  of  the  Musee  des  Beaux-Arts  at  Angers,  to  which  the
sculptor gave them, into a separate museum, but preference has been
given to showing the collection  spaciously  to showing it entire.129

As part  of  the  alterations  to the  top  story  of the  Royal  Academy
for  the  new  Sackler  Galleries (replacing the Diploma  ones) and Li-
brary  space  has  been  found  for  a  few  of  the  Gibson  models  at the
top  of  the  staircase.  Meanwhile  a group  of  his  sculptures  has been
sent on long loan to the National Portrait  Gallery's  outpost at Bod-
elwyddan  Castle  in North Wales, though these are not portraits, but
figures  of cupids  and the like.130

To  say  that  these  developments  meet  the  artist's  wishes  seems
disingenuous.  He  left  sufficient  money  to  show  the  whole  ad-
equately,  and  made  it  clear  that  the  collection  was  to  be  viewable
regularly  'both  by the  Students  of  the  said  Royal  Academy  as also
on the  occasion  of the Annual  Exhibition  by the public  visiting the
said  Exhibition...'

6.3  Musee Gustave Moreau, Paris,  1898
Gustave Moreau (1826—98), a leading Symbolist painter, by his will
of  10 September  1897 left  his house  and  its contents  to the French
State  on  certain  conditions,  notably  that  it  'keep  this  character  of
wholeness (ensemble) which allows one to appreciate the totality of
the  work  and  efforts  of the  artist  during  his  life.'131  This  followed
other  examples  of  an  artist's  unsold  works,  with  or  without  his
house, being  kept  together  in a posthumous  museum.132  The house
and collections were accepted, and this now forms one of the Musees
Nationaux.  For a long time it had the same  curator  and was starved
of resources, but today it is being restored and comes under a senior
curator  at  the  Musee  d'Orsay,  the  national  gallery  of  works  of  the
artist's  period.

288

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

In  an  article  in  Country Life  in  1992  it  was  reported  that  some
of  the  best  pictures  from  the  Gustave  Moreau  Museum  had  been
commandeered  for  the  Musee  d'Orsay.  'This  perhaps  does  the
painter  a disservice'  was  the  article's  comment.133  The curator  has
said on that:

I  have  borrowed  for  the  short  period  of  several  months  one
work  and  at  the  end  of  1986  two  works  —  belonging  to  the
Musee Gustave Moreau for the Symbolist rooms [of the Musee
d'Orsay]  with the exception of the important  loan of L 'Appari-
tion from  October  1986 to  17 March  1987 for  the  opening  of
the Musee  d'Orsay  it concerned  for  most of the time works at
the moment  in reserve  or returning  from  restoration.  That  can
only draw attention  to the Musee Gustave Moreau, the number
of visitors to which  has much  increased  since  1986. Since  last
year  [1992]  there  has  been  no  work  from  the  Musee  Gustave
Moreau  on  loan  to  the  permanent  exhibition  rooms  of  the
Musee d'Orsay  ...  [I remind you] it is not a case of  'requisition'
but of  loans  for  a limited  period  by  Ministerial  order  with  my
agreement and after  advice of the Committee of Curators of the
Direction  des Musees de France.134

Supposing that  such  loans  are reasonable, where does one draw the
line  between  what  is  reasonable  and  what  is  not?  How  many  pic-
tures, of what  importance  and  for  how  long might be  loaned?  And,
if such loans are good publicity  for the museum, should they not be
extended? And is the Minister an adequate representative  of the do-
nor's wishes and counterbalance to the curatorial  interests and those
of the Musee  d'Orsay?

6.4  Fundacion  Gala-Salvador  Dali, Figueres,  1983
Salvador  Dali  (1904—89), the  publicity-seeking  Surrealist  artist,  in
1960 was asked  by the  mayor of the town  of his birth,  Figueres, to
give a picture to its museum. But Dali said that he wanted to create
a whole museum  in its ruined theatre.135  This was to be a 'Theatre-
Museum',  where  children  would  not  be  bored  as  they  were  in  the
Louvre, and where holiday-makers  coming to  Spain would all  have
to stop.136

By a short will  of 20 September  1982 he left  all his works to the
Spanish  State  'to  keep, make public and protect.'137  The Fundacion
Gala-Salvador Dali was set up commemorating the names of himself
and his wife. Its object  was to  'reunite  in Spain the greatest  number
possible  of my creations  and works of every  nature.'  It was also to
make  Figueres  a  'Cultural  and  Museum  Mecca  of  Spain  and  of the
World."38

After  his death  there was a dispute about where the works should
go. And then  in  1992 an agreement was reached whereby the Foun-

289

Selby  Whittingham

dation  would  administer all the works, but ten—fifteen  of the paint-
ings  would  be  displayed  permanently  in  Barcelona's  Museum  of
Modern Art, and 52 (including three masterpieces, which Dali is said
to have  wanted  to remain  at Figueres) would  go to the Reina  Sofia
Art Centre  at Madrid, the remainder  staying  at Figueres.139

The present mayor of Figueres, Sr. Maria Lorca i Bard, a member
of the  Foundation, has objected  to the removal  of works from  Figu-
eres and has compiled  a dossier on the dispute, putting forward mo-
ral, aesthetic and legal arguments against what has happened.140 The
legal  case  has  also  been  put  by  the  Catalan  notary,  D. Jose  Maria
Puig  Salellas,  in articles published  in  1990. He argued that one has
to take  all  Dali's  wishes together,  including  those  for  Figueres, and
not just  the wording giving the works to  Spain.141

Dali  discussed  his  ideas over  many  years  with  friends,  and  so it
should be possible to establish what those were. Clearly the museum
was  intended  partly  as  a memorial  to himself  (he  was  buried  in  it,
as  was  Thorvaldsen  in  his  at  Copenhagen).  He  also  intended  it  to
attract  visitors  to Figueres, just  as Canova  had  intended  in the case
of  his  Church-Museum  at  his  birthplace,  Possagno.  But  Dali  had
also involved the Spanish head of state, General Franco, in his plans
and made the  Spanish  State the recipient of his  gift.

It may be pointed out that the aim of attracting visitors to Figueres
is being achieved. Over half a million come each year, providing the
major  part  of  the  town's  income.  But  the  removal  of  major  works
cannot  be  regarded  as  a trivial  loss. And  objectors  have  seen  their
removal  as just  another  case  of the  centre  making  depredations  on
the provinces.

In  1960,  when  the  Picasso  Museum  was  founded  at  Barcelona,
some  Picassos  belonging  to the  city  and  hitherto  hung  in the  Mu-
seum of Modern Art there were then moved to the Picasso Museum,
a  transfer  in the  contrary  direction  to that  in the  Dali  case.142 Then
Picasso  was  still  alive,  and  no  doubt  it  was  hoped  to  attract  gifts
from  him to the new museum, founded by his friend  Jaime Sabartes.
And  indeed  that  happened.

7  Solutions  to the Problem

7.1  Preventative  Measures
A  precaution  Dali  might  have  taken  would  have  been  to  leave  his
works  not  to the  Spanish  State but  to his  Foundation.  This  is what
the Van  Gogh  heirs  did  with  regard  to  Van  Gogh's  works.  For the
Rijksmuseum  Vincent  Van  Gogh  at  Amsterdam,  which  opened  in
1973, the Dutch State assumed the cost of constructing and operating
the museum,  the  City gave the land, and the  Van Gogh  Foundation
gave  the  contents  on permanent  loan,  an  arrangement  which  seems
to work, even  if the curators would naturally prefer that they should
have  sole control.

290

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

The  same  idea  has  been  followed  by  Mr  and  Mrs  A. Reynolds
Morse,  who  started  collecting  the  works  of  Dali  fifty  years  ago,
gradually  getting  rid  of  works  by  other  artists.  'We  decided',  said
Mr  Morse,  'that  keeping  the  collection  intact  was  vital  because  it
showed ... Dali's growth from  a Catalonian youth to a  world-famous
figure.'143  How  were  they  to  do  this?  At  first  they  exhibited  the
works on their own premises. Then they  offered  them to museums,
'but  no  art  museum  —  large  or  small  —  would  guarantee  to  keep
this collection  intact.  The right  to sell  all or most of the works was
an inescapable condition of every proposition.' Finally the collection
has been  housed  in the  Salvador  Dali Museum, which  opened  at St
Petersburg,  Florida,  in  1982. The museum,  in a building  converted
from  an existing building at a cost of $2'/2 million, is funded  by the
State  of  Florida,  and  the  collection  is  held  for  the  benefit  of  the
people of Florida.  But

The museum itself is run by the Salvador Dali Foundation, Inc.,
with  the  express  aim  of  protecting  it  from  all  the  vagaries  of
museum  professionalism,  on  the  one  hand,  and  from  changes
in cultural  policies by political parties on the other.

Such  an  arrangement  should  avoid  the  Scylla  of  the  dwindling  en-
dowment of private museums and the Charybdis of depredations by
public authorities  with complete control.

If,  however,  collections  are  left  outright  to public  bodies, then  it
would be wise to add a clause saying that they should go to another
body,  if  the  conditions  of  the  bequest  are  not  adhered  to.  But  that
can only be a limited  sanction,  as the case of the  Sheepshanks  Gift
shows. What would  also  help  would  be  if the terms  of the  bequest
and the understanding  on which  it  was received  were  published  by
the  recipient  and  made,  through  modern  information  retrieval  sys-
tems,  permanently  accessible.  To  this  should  be  added  full  infor-
mation on the current status of all items in the bequest  -  how many
works are loaned,  sold, destroyed,  damaged,  not on view etc. These
regulations could be accepted  as part of the codes of practice of the
Museums & Galleries  Commission, Museums Association  etc. As it
is, it  is usually  hard  to establish  the  full  facts,  and  these  are some-
times  misstated,  as  has  happened  in  the  case  of  Turner's  main  be-
quest.  Official  histories  commonly  gloss  over  such  details.  One  of
the British Museum does not even  mention the Waddesdon  Bequest
left  to it by Baron  Ferdinand de Rothschild (1839-98)  on condition
that  it be kept apart  in a specially  named  room.144

Donors  for  their  part  could  associate  to  create  some  fund  and
organisation  which  would  champion  their  interests  after  they  are
dead  and  act  as  a  counterbalance  to  all  the  organisations  naturally
opposed or indifferent  to them.

Meanwhile the museums should adopt a consistent policy and de-
cide whether or not to accept  such conditional  gifts.  Most museums

291

Selby  Whittingham

have too little  space to  show what they have, and so the  acceptance
of new  collections is usually  to the detriment,  temporary  or perma-
nent,  of  old  ones.  It  has  been  objected  that  by  making  rejections
they  'risk  public  reproach',  but  a greater  motive  is  the  museum's
lust  to  acquire  which  it  shares  with the  collector,  and which  is not
an  unmitigated  blessing.  If  gifts  were  consistently  refused,  then
either donors would become less restrictive in their conditions or the
collections  would  find  other  homes or  they  would  be  sold  and be-
come material  for future  collections. The alternative to such a policy
is  the  present  situation,  where  truth,  legality  and  the  works  of  art
become  the victims. Let us  look at the defence  of this.

7.2  Are donors'  conditions  adhered to?
From  the  examples  we  have  considered  it  appears  that  conditions
are more  honoured  in  the  breach than  in the  observance.  Of course
this  is  denied,  or  it is  said  that  restrictions  are  obeyed  as  far  as  is
possible.  But  a  sensible  person  would  treat  such  protestations  with
scepticism, given  the interest  of the authorities  in breaking the con-
ditions  and the pressure  on them to deny that they are doing so. On
the  one  hand  they want  the  freedom  to do  as they  like, and  on the
other  they  want to encourage  future donors.

We have seen that it has been public policy in Britain to disregard
donors' wishes on occasion. That has been the wish of curators  from
the time of Eastlake onwards. It was carried  into effect  by the  1883
National  Gallery Act and by the pretence that the Turners sent to the
Tate Gallery  in  1910 were  merely being loaned.  In  1908 an  official
report  on  the  Victoria  &  Albert  Museum  advocated  transferring  its
paintings to the National  or Tate Gallery. It said:

The  Committee  are  aware  that in  the  case  of  a number  of the
bequests, including  that of Mr. Sheepshanks...  conditions exist
which  render  an  absolute  transfer  difficult,  if  not  impossible.
The  Committee,  however,  understand  that  some  of  the  Mu-
seum's  paintings  are  at  present  lent  to  other  public  galleries;
and  possibly  the  principle  of a  more  or  less  permanent  loan
may  be  further  extended  as a solution  of  the  legal  difficulties
in the way  of  transfer.145

Similar  ideas  were advocated  in  1915 by a National  Gallery  report,
which went  even  further,  in advocating the sale of works, to permit
which  a  Bill  nearly passed  through  Parliament  in  the  next  year.146
Chief protagonists of this course were Lord Curzon, a Trustee of the
National  Gallery  and  Sir  Robert  Witt,  a  lawyer  and  himself  later a
Trustee. Witt had a book published in  1911 in which  he stigmatised
donors  as  tiresome  and  ignorant  and  advocated  making  some  con-
ditions  'ipso facto  void'  because  of their  'essentially  unreasonable
nature'.  Collections  should  not  be  kept  together,  and  the  donors'

292

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

names should merely be commemorated on labels.147 This view was
supported  in an editorial  in The Burlington Magazine, which argued

that a reasonable time-limit should be placed to the period dur-
ing which  a collection  must be kept together,  if so enjoined  by
the testator;  that  every  object  accepted  as a bequest  should be
labelled  with  the  testator's  name,  if  this  wish  be  indicated  in
the  will;  and  that  no  object,  accepted  as  a  bequest,  should  be
alienable,  except  as  a  loan  to  some  other  public  institution  in
the public  interest.148

This  summarises  what  has  been  public  policy  for  the  art  galleries,
as opposed to the museums, down to the present. In 1944 the Massey
Report advocated changes on the lines of the  1915 Report, but these
met  with  the  disapproval  of  the  Standing  Commission  on  National
Galleries  and Museums,  and Acts  of Parliament  have  followed  that
of  1883 in simply putting a time limit to donors'  conditions.

The British tendency  has been to seek a via media between  com-
plete  adherence  to  and  complete  abandonment  of  donors'  stipu-
lations (in effect  nearer to the latter than to the former), while claim-
ing that their wishes are met or met as near as is possible. Americans
have  sometimes  been  more  straightforward,  one  reportedly  saying
that  'You can't  make an omelette without breaking  wills.'149

8  Should  Donors'  Conditions be Adhered  to?

Part of this ambivalence derives from  disagreement over how sacro-
sanct wills are. Left-wing politicians sometimes question the sanctity
of property,  and  liberals  have asked  if the past  should tyrannise the
present. Thus the former  Labour Minister, Michael  Stewart, wrote:
To a socialist,  the  idea  that  a democratically  elected  government
in  1973  is  constrained  in  what  it  can  do  by  the  provisions  of  a
century-old  private  will  smacks  more  than  a  little  of  the  rid-
iculous.150

Others have wondered whether works of art should be treated like
other  chattels  or  like  intellectual  property.  For  centuries  a  writer's
copyright  has been  limited to a period of years after  his death. And
in  1833  J. S.  Mill  challenged  the  idea  that  charitable  endowments
should  be  sacrosanct  in  perpetuity.151  His  arguments  were  so  suc-
cessful  that  by  1869  he  could  claim  to  have  defeated  that  'super-
stition', and ever since they have had considerable  influence.152

Mill raised  various questions  to support  his contention.  How can

a donor know  —  or we know  —  what he would want 500 years  after
he  had  died?  What  right  has  any  man  to  such  power  as  to  control
property  for  eternity?  Is  not  the good  of the  living  more  important
than  the wishes of the dead?

293

Selby  Whittingham

He suggested that donors' conditions should be inviolable for only
50 or  100 years,  and this  presumably  provided  the justification  for
the  1883 National  Gallery Act, though that made the limit 25 years,
as it was directed against gifts (Vernon's and Turner's) received only
27-35  years  earlier.

However  Mill, though  a utilitarian,  was also  an  individualist  and
recognised  that governments  are fallible  and that  supposedly  eccen-
tric  wills  can  be  productive  of  new  initiatives.  'What  the  improve-
ment  of mankind  and of all their works most imperatively  demands
is  variety,  not  uniformity.'153  But  the  effect  of his proposals  would
be  to  make  every  museum  subject  to  the  same  conventional  ideas
after  the elapse of 50 years or so. His belief was that society  should
be governed by a striving towards progress. But matters of taste are
subject  to  oscillation  rather  than  progress,  and  to  minorities  taking
views different  from those of  majorities.

Meanwhile  Mill  conceded that respect for  wills and property was
not mere superstition, but that any deviation  'not  called  for  by high
considerations  of  social-good'  'runs  counter  to  a  feeling  so  nearly
allied  to  those  on  which  the  respect  for  property  is  founded,  that
there  is  scarcely  a possibility  of infringing  the one without  shaking
the other.'154  Respect should be paid, however, not to the letter of a
donor's  wishes,  but  to  their  spirit.  For  circumstances  change.  But
that  is  a consideration  with  little  application  in our case.  The point
of  keeping  a collection  together  as a memorial  to  its creator,  or be-
cause its constituent elements relate to each other, remains the same
over the centuries. If the donor's  restrictions  are objectionable,  they
are  objectionable  from  the  start.  If  objections  are  commonly  not
made then but later, it is not because of changing circumstances, but
because  the  recipient  thinks  that  the  passage  of  time  has  made  his
possession  more  secure  and the need to satisfy  the donor less.

The other main excuse for ignoring the donor's wishes  —  that the

public's  interests  are more important  —  begs various  questions.

8.1  The Public  Interest
Changes  to  the  donor's  conditions  are justified  by  reference  to the
public  interest.  But how are the public's wishes  ascertained?

Is  it  ever  asked?  Usually  its  self-appointed  spokesmen  are  just
those experts who have such an interest in ignoring the donor's ideas
in favour  of their own.

It may  be  claimed that  the public prefers  museums  that  are logi-
cally  and  intelligibly  arranged  and  ones  which  are  changing  and
constantly offering  something new. But anecdotal evidence  suggests
that  many  like  best museums  which  are  small  and  have  a  personal
touch;  that  is, they  reject  the  assumption  —  that  a  museum  should
be large, didactic and all-embracing  —  which makes  systematisation
desirable. So when Chretien de Mechel in  1784 reorganised the Bel-

294

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

vedere  at  Vienna  according  to  chronology  and  school,  that  did  not
find universal  approval.

Mechel left  no doubt as to the pedagogical  character of his new
installation.  'A great public collection of this type [is] more for
one's instruction than delight.'  There existed, however, a whole
faction  of  Viennese  who  preferred  to  have  their  senses  de-
lighted;  they  insisted  that  'an  exhibition  is  more  impressive
when  all  kinds  of  paintings  are  presented  together'  and  they
cherished  the  'effects  of  contrast.'155

Such conflicts of taste are timeless, and at no time is there a uniform
public  preference.

The  grounds  for  keeping  collections  together  are  not  always  the
same. The collection  may be diverse, and in that case it may be the
taste  of  the  collector  or of his  time  which  is  interesting.  Or it may
be devoted to a single  subject,  in which  case the preservation  of its
integrity will be mainly of interest to the specialist, though even the
general public may resent the best works being removed to the capi-
tal or even to a different  museum  within  the capital. But, of course,
the public  is never consulted  in any such moves, and museum trus-
tees often  do not even deign to answer objections made by members
of the public, to which  they are little or not at all answerable.

No  doubt  the  public  appreciates  change  and  novelty.  But  it  also
relishes  what  has  been  fossilised  —  at  Pompeii  or  in  the  Pyramids
or  the  Sistine  Chapel.  And  museums  exist  partly  to  preserve  what
has gone out of fashion. The trouble has arisen  —  as the Tate Gallery
has  shown  —  from  trying  to  combine  two  different  ideals  in  one
museum  —  the  exhibition  gallery  devoted  to  novelty  and  the  mu-
seum designed to show a permanent collection permanently. Greater
clarity about objectives, leading to different  types of museum, would
benefit  both the museums and their donors.

9  Official  Dishonesty

As it is, museums will protest that they are carrying out the donor's
wishes, when it is evident that they are not.  Self-deception  so easily
occurs  in  such  a situation,  as Jane  Austen  brilliantly  showed  in the
opening  chapters  of  Sense  and  Sensibility, where  Mr  Dashwood's
son at first  recognises a moral obligation  to give money to relatives
and then, under  the  influence  of his wife, finds specious  arguments
to progressively  reduce the  amount  until  he decides he  should give
nothing  at all.

Professors  Merryman  and  Elsen  have  cautioned  the  prospective
donor  to be on his or her guard  against  museum  directors, curators
and trustees.

295

Selby  Whittingham

They  are  out  to get  the most  for  their  museums  with  the  least
commitment to the collector. Under their suave, solicitous man-
ners lie strongly beating avaricious hearts (selflessly  avaricious
on  behalf  of  their  museums;  institutional  avarice  is  the  most
ruthless  kind).  They will  not  give  away  the  store.  They  will
interpret  everything  that  is  said  in  favour  of  their  museum's
interests.  In  case of  a  subsequent  dispute, their  memories  will
support  their museum's  side.156

The naive might  think that the curator,  as scholar,  is devoted  to the
pursuit of truth. But as official,  he wears a different  hat, and pragma-
tism  rather than truth becomes the chief virtue. John  Walker,  former
Director  of  the  National  Gallery  of  Art  at  Washington,  and  a  stern
critic  of  the  National  Gallery  at  London's  failure  to  fulfil  Turner's
wishes,157  has put the matter  with  admirable  candour when  he was
faced  with the offer  of the  Samuel  Kress  collection:

...  Mr. Mellon had insisted  a clause be inserted  into the Act of
Congress  establishing  the  Gallery  which  stated  that  'No  work
of  art  shall  be included  in the  Permanent  Collection  ...  unless
it be of similar high standard of quality to those in the collection
acquired  from  the donor[Andrew  Mellon].' Was it true that the
collection offered  by Mr. Kress met the intention of Mr. Mellon
as  expressed  in this  clause?  The truth  was that  it did  not!  But
this  I  could  not admit  ...  I was  in a dilemma.  Mr. Mellon  had
donated  only  125 paintings  and  twenty-three  pieces  of  sculp-
ture.  We were about to open  a vast building, designed  to pro-
vide  well  over a hundred  galleries, with  148  'items'...Imagine
Congress being asked to provide  funds  for  one work of art per
room!  Politicians, like nature, abhor a vacuum  ...  David Finley
and  I  had  pleaded  with  Sam  Kress  for  fewer  paintings  and
sculpture  to keep  the  level  of  quality  as high  as possible. But
he  had  no  intention  of  modifying  his  terms.  He  held  all  the
cards, and we knew it. We accepted what he wanted to send to
Washington,  or his  collection  remained  in  New  York.  I  really
had  no  choice.  I had  to  lie.  There  was,  however,  a  Jesuitical
justification  for my lie, on  which  I relied. Andrew  Mellon  had
acquired  two  or  three  weak  paintings,  which  were  as  undis-
tinguished  as  anything  in  the  Kress  Collection.  Couldn't  one
argue, bearing these Mellon duds in mind, that the Kress works
of  art  were  of a similar  high  standard  of  quality  to  (some of)
'those  in  the  collection  acquired  from  the  donor'?  With  this
rationalization, which still makes me shudder, I signed the  affi-
davit  and  put myself on record  that the Kress gift  met Andrew
Mellon's  stipulations.158

Defence  of  this  action was  that  in  the  end  it  was justified.  Twenty
years later only  131 of the 393 works  in the Kress gift  were shown.

296

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

In this, Samuel Kress's brother co-operated, and meanwhile Andrew
Mellon's  son,  a  friend  of  Walker,  apparently  raised  no  objections.
And of course necessity and eventual public benefit  are used to jus-
tify  other  infringements  of donors'  conditions. What, we are asked,
is  the  alternative  to  disregarding  Vernon's  wishes?  Do  we  really
want  inferior  pictures  to displace  better  ones  and to have  a  gallery
in which rational arrangement is disrupted? But to this may be coun-
tered,  has  there  not  been  a  downside?  Works have  been  destroyed
as a  consequence  of  relegation  to the  cellars,  and we have  lost  the
coherence  of a collection,  however  flawed,  made during  one of  the
greatest  periods  of  British  art.  In  other  cases  I  have  discussed  the
losses are arguably  greater.

10  Do the  Courts Protect  Donors?

Whose  rights  do the  courts  set  out  to defend  -  those  of the  donor
or  those  of  the  public?  Or  do  they  try  to  achieve  a  compromise
between the two? An American  writer  says that  'courts tend to  fav-
our the perpetuation  of charities' rather than to order the transfer  of
a gift  to the residuary  legatees when the conditions are  infringed.159
So, when  Mr Scofield  Thayer  left  works  'for  permanent  exhibition'
to two museums, the court ruled that  'permanent  exhibition'  did not
mean what any normal person would take that to mean but  'available
upon reasonable  request.'160  Part of the argument  for  that  view  was
that some, though not all, of the works would have been harmed  by
permanent  exhibition.  But  in  another  case,  when  the  Louvre  ac-
cepted a work by B. G. Cuyp for regular display and kept it in store,
the French courts decided that the donor's heirs should have it back,
and the Louvre then had to buy  it back  from  them.161

This illustrates one problem of recourse to the courts: uncertainty.
Another is subjectivity.  Circumstances may change, it is argued, and
so conditions may be varied by the court so that the donor's  wishes
may be more effectually  carried  out.

But  the  plea  of  changed  circumstances  can  be  used  with  little
justification  and  so  as  to  defeat  the  donor's  wishes.  The  humbug
involved  in this was  satirised  by  Anthony  Trollope  in  The Warden,
where the lawyer  Sir Abraham  Haphazard, answers the doubt of the
Warden  of  the  almshouse  that  matters  'are  not  arranged  according
to the wish of the founder',  by saying  'None of such institutions are,
...  nor can they  be. The  altered  circumstances  in which  we  live  do
not  admit  of  it.'  This  cynical  remark  is  used  to justify  the  partial
perversion  of the whole purpose of the almshouse, the benefit  of  its
poor bedesmen.

Further, if one condition  is lifted  so that  a particular  disagreeable
consequence may be avoided,  this may  open  the way to all  sorts  of
other consequences not  intended  by the court or even originally the
museums.  We have  seen  how  this  happens  in the  Chantrey,  Turner
and other cases.  'Ce n 'est que le premier pas qui coute', as was said

297

Selby  Whittingham

with regard to the first. The only  remedy for this offered  is renewed
recourse to the courts at further  great  expense.

If  expense  constitutes  the  third  impediment  for  donors  and  their
heirs, the fourth  is that standing to sue is  a restricted right not always
open  to  the  heirs, though  apparently  there  is a trend  in America  to
extend  such rights.162

Of  course  the  heirs  may  not  have  the  donor's  wishes  at  heart.
Members of families  (one thinks of the Gettys) may disagree. In the
case  of  the  Tate  Gallery,  the  value  of  having  that  so named,  some-
thing never stipulated by the founder,  clearly outweighs the  infringe-
ments which have occurred to his stipulations in the eyes of the Tate
family  and  of  Tate  &  Lyle.  But  others  who  might  care  about  Sir
Henry Tate's  ideas would  have  even  less  standing to sue.

Meanwhile  in  Britain  the  uncertainty  is increased  by the  lack  of
case law, and so any litigation must be more than usually hazardous.
There is clearly  a need  for  greater  clarification.

11  Conclusion

Recently  in  Britain  the  Chief  Charity  Commissioner  has  written:
'We  believe  that  benefactors  thinking  of  making  bequests  to  mu-
seums and  galleries  can  do  so with  confidence  that charity  law will
protect  their  intentions.'163  But  when  have  British  donors  or  their
representatives  successfully  brought  such  issues  to  court?  Why, in-
deed,  have they not ever come to  court?  Presumably  this is because
of  the  cost  involved  and  doubts  about  the  standing  of potential  liti-
gants  and  about the outcome.

Cases  brought  in America  have  not  always  been  encouraging. In
1989 a court  permitted  the  Philadelphia  Museum  of Art to  relocate
the collection of the lawyer John G. Johnson, enabling it to integrate
that into the museum's permanent collection, though that was clearly
not what Johnson had intended.164  And litigants contesting the disre-
gard  of Albert  C. Barnes'  wishes  have  faced  an uphill battle.

That  case  illustrates  how  subjective  and  prejudiced  the  treatment
of such matters can be. Barnes wanted to  set up an educational insti-
tution  with  access  restricted  for  much  of  the time  to its  students so
that their classes could be held undisturbed.  But because the core of
the  institution  is  a  gallery  of  pictures,  it  has  been  argued  that  it
should be as freely  open to the public as  any other public gallery.165
The American  courts  have  favoured  that  view on the whole.166 The
Burlington Magazine has  commented:

It  is  surely  right  that  his  [Barnes']  angry  shadow  should  not
get  in the way of what Rewald  has  called  'the artist's right and
function  to address himself to all humanity'. And yet his flawed
vision  has  an  undeniable  power.  It  would  be  a loss  if his prin-
ciples  of display were  altogether  abandoned  in any new instal-
lation.167

298

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

But  that  view  would  support  compelling  unrestricted  access  to  all
art  —  in the royal collection  and pictures in embassies  or wherever.
It  also  shows  no  sympathy  with  Mill's  plea  for  tolerance  of  eccen-
tricity. Instead  it hints at what is surely a major  factor  in the dispute
—  the personal  animosities that  surrounded Barnes.

In  1833  Mill  began  by  remarking  that  the  questions  of  endow-
ments  were  entangled  with  attachments  and  antipathies,  but  that  it
was wrong to decide them by such personal  matters. He went on to
observe that  some

can  witness  the most  absolute perversion  and  alienation  of the
endowment from  its destined ends, by the slow, silent creeping-
in  of  abuse  in  the  hands  of  the  trustees  themselves,  and  not
feel  the  slightest  discomposure.  Wherefore?  — Because  their
solicitude was not for the objects  of the endowment, but for the
safety  and  sacredness  of  'vested  rights.'168

It is equally clear that in disputes over the fate  of collections people
are often  not consistent  and are swayed  by their own personal  likes
and dislikes.

In the case  of the  sale  of  pictures  from  Royal  Holloway  College
opposition  was  voiced  by  the  Museums  &  Galleries  Commission,
National  Art-Collections  Fund  and  Museums  Association,  who  said
that  the  sales  infringe  Holloway's  wishes  (though  that  is  not  very
clear)  and  that  donors'  wishes  should  be  respected.169  But,  when
other  infringements  are brought  to their attention,  they  do not want
to know. It is evident that they are not concerned about the interests
of the donor, but only to use those as a cry to support their campaign
against  cuts  in  public  funds  leading  to  such  sales  or  some  other
action (like the imposition of entrance charges) of which they disap-
prove.

The collectors too are in a muddle. Walter Annenberg, the author
of the conditional  gift  to the Metropolitan  Museum  of Art, has been
represented  as  the  arch-destroyer  of  Barnes'  conditions 
for  the
Barnes  Foundation.170  Meanwhile  the collector  and would-be  bene-
factor,  Sir  Denis  Mahon,  as  Trustee  of  the National  Gallery  appar-
ently  made no objection  to that gallery's  disregard  of the wishes of
its  earlier  benefactors.  Yet  he  has  from  time  to  time  effectively
threatened  to  rescind  his  bequests  to  British  galleries  when  the
government  has  followed  policies  for  museums  of  which  he disap-
proves.171  When  Trustees  of another  gallery  disregarded  conditions
that  supposedly  guarded  against  making  charges  to  see  it,  Mahon
exclaimed  that  'benefactors  cannot  rely  on  any  protection  from
Boards of Trustees',172 a fact evident since at least  1883 with regard
to his own gallery but  ignored  by him.

The  art  world  is  now  largely  governed  by  art  historians,  and  so
its  values  are  largely  theirs.  At  one  time  public  galleries  were  run
mainly  by  artists,  and  indignation  has  been  expressed  by  the  his-

299

Selby  Whittingham

torians  that  they  followed  artistic  rather  rather  than  historical  prin-
ciples  in matters  of arrangement.173  But  why  is one principle  more
valid  than  another?

Of course museums may, if they wish, follow  what principle they
like,  and  try to  form  a collection  accordingly.  But they have to pay
a  price,  in  refusing  gifts  which  do not  conform  to that  policy.  But,
as a primer states,

Unfortunately,  even  among those  who should  know better,  the
offer  of an attractive gift,  even though tightly bound, can bring
on  a  sudden  case  of  myopia.  While  there  can  be  defensible
exceptions,  a  good  general  rule  is  to  accept  only  unrestricted
gifts.174

But, as we have seen, that is unlikely to happen. Gifts  have come to
be  regarded  as  the  lifeblood  of many  museums,  and  directors  fear
that they might  die without them.  So new conditional  gifts  continue
to  be  accepted,  old  ones  to  have  their  conditions  ignored,  and  the
pious remark  that  'obviously  the donors'  wishes  should be respect-
ed'  continues  to be repeated.175

Acknowledgements
I would  like  to thanks those  curators  and  others who have read  the
sections relating to their institutions in draft  and given me their com-
ments:

J. W. Close  and  Susan  Lambert  (Victoria  & Albert  Museum); Dr
Susan  Foister  (National  Gallery,  London);  Sydney  C. Hutchison
(Royal  Academy  of Arts);  Jeanie  M. James  (Metropolitan  Museum
of Art); Nicola Kalinsky (University College London); Mme Genevi-
eve  Lacambre  (Musee Gustave Moreau  and Musee  d'Orsay);  Senor
Maria  Lorca  i  Bard  (L'Alcalde  de  Figueres);  Arthur  MacGregor
(Ashmolean Museum).

I  have  also  benefited  from  discussions  with  Dr  Frank  Atkinson,
Dr Peter Cannon-Brookes, Mrs Dyveke Helsted, Mme Vivienne Hu-
chard, Kenneth  Hudson, Mrs Mary Lightbown, Professor  Massimili-
ano Pavan,  Mrs Margaret Richardson, Alec  Samuels.

Notes

1  Calvin Tomkins, Merchants and Masterpieces:  The Story  of the Metropolitan
Museum  of  Art  (1970).  In  Britain  this  was  advocated  by  Prince  Albert  and
Sir  Robert  Peel.

2  Ibid, p. 215. Another  influence  was the  universalist  theories  of  Diderot  and
the  Encyclopedists  (David  M  Wilson,  The  British  Museum:  Purpose  and
Politics,  1989, pi3).

300

Breach  of Trust  Over Gifts  of  Collections

3  When  discussing  the  future  of  the  National  Gallery,  Dr  G  Waagen  of  the
Berlin  Museum  said that the 'principal  means' of filling gaps  'are, of course,
by purchase'  (Art Journal,  April  1853, p  124).

4  Bayle  St John,  The Louvre,  or, Biography  of a Museum,  1855, p  129.
5  Ibid p 273; Literary  Gazette, 30 October  1841, p 705; Le  Cabinet de  I'Amat-

eur  et de  I'Antiquaire,,  1,  1842, pp 209—14.

6  The  Louvre's  orientation  guide  in  1990  showed  only  Carlos  de  Beistegui's

collection  (1953)  and  two others.

7  19 & 20 Victoria  c.29  and 46  & 47 Victoria  c.4.
8  This applies to the National  Gallery, Tate Gallery  and National  Portrait  Gal-

lery only.

9  David  M Wilson  (see note  2 above), p  126 quoting the museum's  Founding

Fathers, who on  15 March  1753 laid  down

Fundamental  Principles from which the Trustees do not  think they can
in Honour  or Conscience  depart:
1st.  That  the  collection  be  preserved  entire  without  the  least  dimin-

ution  or  separation.

2nd  That  the  same be  kept  for  the use and  benefit  of the  Public,  who
may  have  free  access  to  view  and  peruse  the  same  at  all  stated
and  convenient  seasons  agreeably  to  the  Will  and  Intentions  of
the  Testator,  and  under  such  restrictions  as  the  Parliament  shall
think  fit.

Wilson seems to have been influenced  by attempts by the Greek  Government
to  recover  the  Elgin  Marbles.  He  adds  that  'the  Museum  has  on  occasion
declined  to take a legacy...to  which  unacceptable  conditions  were  attached'
(p. 27).

10  Ian Jenkins, Archaeologists & Aesthetes,  1992, chapter 4, 'The Chain of Art'.
On the difference  between the British Museum  and the National  Gallery, see
David  M  Wilson,  'National  Museums',  in  Manual  of  Curators hip,  ed  John
M A Thompson,  1984, p 57.

11  'Proposed  Galleries  for  Pictures  and  Statues  at  the  University  of  Oxford',

Blackwood's  Magazine,  XLVI1, March  1840, p  364.

12  Nicholas Penny, 'Chantrey, Westmacott and Casts after  the Antique', Journal
of  the  History  of  Collections,  III,  2,  1991, p  256.  His  history  of  events  is
largely  followed  here,  though  I have  disagreed  with  some  of  his  interpret-
ation  (Ibid  V,  1,  1993, pp  89-92).

13  Charity gift: Notice of 25 April of a Convocation on 28 April,  1842 (Bodleian
Library,  MS  Top  Oxon  c. 202  f.  36);  Gentleman's  Magazine,  June  1842,
pp 638-9.

14  E W B Nicholson,  Council, Lady  Chantrey, and the Bodleian,  1896, pp  6 -7
(bodleian  Library,  G A Oxon  4°  119 (13)).  Penny  wrongly  implies  that  this
was written  in  1894 at one point  (p 262).

15  Penny  (see note  12 above), p 262.
16  Ibid, p263.
17  Ibid, p 256.
18  On  Chantrey's  gallery  at  his  home  in  London  see  The Original  Picture  of
London,  26th  ed.,  ed  J  Britton,  c  1828, p 322;  Peter  Cunningham,  London:
Past and Present,  2nd  ed,  1850, p 46.
19  Penny  (see note  12 above), pp  256-7.
20  Diary,  Reminiscences,  and  Correspondence  of  Henry  Crabb  Robinson,  ed

Thomas  Sadler,  1869, II, p 221  note.

21  Penny  (see note  12 above) p262.
22  Ibid, p 257.

301

Selby  Whittingham

23  On  Vernon's  gift  see  Vernon  Heath,  Recollections,  1892;  Robin  Hamlyn,
Robert  Vernon's Gift: British  Art for  the  Nation  1847,  Tate  Gallery,  1993;
Selby  Whittingham,  'Vernon's  Gift,  Integrity's  Loss', Modern  Painters,  VI,
2,  Summer  1993, pp  7 0 - 2.

24  Vemon  Heath, Recollections,  pp  19-20.
25  On  Standish  and  Chantrey  see above. On George  IV, see J Mordaunt  Crook,
The British  Museum:  a  case  study  in architectural  politics,  Pelican  Books,
1973,  p  69.  The  Rev  William  Holwell-Carr  (1758-1830)  had  bequeathed
his  old  masters  to the National  Gallery  '  on this  stipulation,  however,  that a
gallery  should  be  provided  where  they  may  be  properly  seen  and  justly
appreciated'  {Gentleman's Magazine, CI,  1 April  1831, p  370).

26  Heath  (see  above, note  23), pp  19-20.
27  National  Gallery, Letter  Book  1826-1851; cf Minute Book, 2,  11 December

1847-18  December  1854, p 3.

28  The  Deed  of  Gift  is published  in Heath  (see  above, note  23), pp  350—3.
29  George  Jones,  Sir  Francis  Chantrey, R  A,  1849,  pp  206—9;  Athenaeum,

1129,  16 June  1849, p  626.

30  Ibid.
31  The  Times, 24, 25, 29 August  1894.
32  Sir  Henry  Cole  in Journal  of  the Society of Arts,  VI,  3 March  1858, p 237;
Kathryn  M Heleniak,  'William  Mulready, R A (1786-1863)  and the  Society
of  Arts,  IF, Journal  of  the  Royal  Society of Arts,  CXXIV,  1976, p 558.

33  On  the  Turner  bequests  controversy,  see  A  J  Finberg,  The Life  of  J  M  W
Turner, R  A,  1st  ed  1939,  2nd  ed  1951, chapter  37,  "The  Turner  Bequest'
and  (1951)  pp  329ff,  338,  415,  422-4;  (Al  Weil),  77ie  Case for  a Turner
Gallery,  The  Turner  Society,  June  1979; Alec  Samuels,  'Turner's  Will', The
Conveyancer  and Property  Lawyer, 46,  July-August  1982, pp  249—52;  P J
O'Keefe  and  L  V  Prott,  Law  and  Cultural Heritage,  III  1989,  pp  305-8;
Selby Whittingham, An  Historical  Account of the  Will ofJ  M  W Turner,  R A
,  J  M  W  Turner,  R A,  Publications,  1st ed  1989, 2nd  ed  1995; Selby  Whit-
tingham,  The Fallacy of  Mediocrity: The Need for  a  Proper  Turner Gallery,
J  M W Turner,  R A, Publications,  1992.

34  I am indebted  for the comments of Sir Robert Megarry and Mr Alec Samuels.
35  Turner and  Vernon Report.  The  full title is: Parliamentary  Papers, Report  of
the Select  Committee  of the  House of Lords admitted  to consider  and  report
in  what  manner  the conditions  annexed  by the Will  of the late  Mr Turner, R
A, to the  Bequest  of his  pictures to the Trustees of the National  Gallery  can
best  be carried  out: And  ...  then  to consider and  report the measures  proper
to  be  taken  with  respect  to  the  Vernon  Gallery,  and  prospective  measures
proper  to be taken with  respect to any future  Gifts  of the same kind,  30 July
1861.

36  Opinion  of  Mr  C  M Warmington,  K C,  and  Mr  John  Henderson  (National
Gallery  files).  S  Whittingham,  Fallacy (see  note  33  above),  Appendices,  I,
17.

37  Information  from  the  late  Mr  Ivor  Turner,  descendant  of  Turner's  heir-at-
law,  and  the  papers  of  Mr  Charles  Mallord  William  Turner,  solicitor  and
descendant  of the  next-of-kin.

38  'Too  large  to  be  housed  at  the  National  Gallery  and  out  of  balance'  in  the
words of Michael  Compton, 'The national galleries', Manual  ofCuratorship,
ed  John  M A Thompson,  1984, p 62.

39  The Times, 6  December  1875, lc.
40  The Times, 27  June  1890,  10c. A summary account  of Tate's  offers  is given
in John  Rothenstein  and  Carlos Peacock,  'The Tate Gallery',  in  The Nation s
Pictures,  ed.  Anthony  Blunt  and  Margaret  Whinney,  1950, pp  67 ff.

302

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of Collections

41  The Times, 21 June  1890, 12a. However  the Keeper,  C L Eastlake,  nephew
of Sir Charles, later implied that it was a matter of space only ('The Adminis-
tration of the National  Gallery (A Retrospect)',  The Nineteenth  Century, De-
cember  1903, p 944. Other details in this article are not accurate).

42  The Times, 27 June  1890,  10c.
43  The Times,  19 March  1890, lOe. Cf 29 July  1890,  12d.
44  The Times, 13 March  1890, 9d. Sheepshank's gift  was to the South  Kensing-
ton  Museum. Jacob  Bell  (1810-59)  bequeathed  eighteen  pictures  by Land-
seer and others to the National  Gallery,  later transferred  to the Tate  Gallery.
45  On 25 August  1847 Eastlake  argued  against excluding any of Vernon's  nine
Stothards  (Balliol  College,  Jenkyns Mss II. 1). Easlake  was not in charge of
the National Gallery  1847-55, but was a trustee  in  1850. The Keeper in the
interim,  Thomas  Uwins,  seems  to  have  shared  Eastlake's  views,  and was
quite subordinate to the Trustees (Sarah Uwins, A Memoir of Thomas Uwins,
1858, I, p 129).

46  Parliamentary  Papers,  House of Commons,  Report of the  Select  Committee

on the National  Gallery, 25 July  1850, p 34.

47  On  Eastlake's  inconsistencies  over  the  main  Turner  bequest  see  S  Whit-
tingham  (note 33 above)  and the Turner and Vernon  report  (note 35 above).

48  The Times, 21 June  1890, 12a.
49  The Times, 3 January  1910, 8 a-b.
50  Sir Charles  Holmes, Director of the National Gallery, in The Times, 13 Nov-

ember  1923,  10c.

51  Dr Susan  Foister, per  littpres to the author, 1994.
52  The Irish viewpoint is given with some objectivity by Thomas Bodkin, Hugh
Lane and His Pictures, 3rd ed., Dublin  1956. (The 1st ed 1932, was reviewed
from  the  English  standpoint  by D S MacColl  in  The Burlington  Magazine,
March  1933). And also by Lady (Augusta) Gregory, Sir Hugh Lane: His Life
and  Legacy,  Gerrards  Cross,  1973 (a  collection  of  items  mainly  from  the
1920s). More recently a short piece by the Hammer appeared in the Museums
Journal,  February  1994, p  10, followed  by  letters  from  Neil  Mac  Gregor,
Director  of the National  Gallery,  (April) and Selby  Whittingham  (July).

53  Bodkin, op cit p 22.
54  Ibid, p 37.
55  Ibid, p 43.
56  Witt in  The Times,  14 December  1916,  7e.
57  Bodkin, op cit, pp 4 5 - 7.
58  Report  of a  Committee  appointed  to consider  certain  questions  relating  to
thirty-nine  pictures  bequeathed  under  the  Will of  he  late  Sir  Hugh  Lane,
HMSO,  1926. The report  was signed  on 28 January  1925 by J  W  Wilson,
George  H Barnes and Major  John  W Hills.

59  The Times, 28 December  1916, lie.
60  Sarah  Cecilia  Harrison,  Inquiry  Concerning  the Continental  Pictures  of Sir

Hugh Lane,  1926: The Next Step,  London  1927, p 15.

61  Hansard,  House of Lords, 8 December  1953,  1014.
62  Lord  Moyne,  'A  tale of 39 pictures', Daily  Telegraph, 6 August 1979.
63  This reasoning was particularly attacked by the Irish, with some justification

(Bodkin,  op cit p 53).

64  Ibid pp 78ff, 95.
65  Hansard,  House of Commons,  5 November  1954,  738.
66  Ibid,  757.
67  Ibid, 763. The beneficiaries  in  Lane's  case,  he  said,  were  some  trustees in
Dublin (he made other bequests  to Dublin) and the House of Commons.  'It

303

Selby  Whittingham

is a legal  fiction  of the worst  order  ... to  call  in aid the fact  that the pictures
are nominally  left  to the  trustees  of a particular gallery  when  the real  inten-
tion  was  to  leave  them  to the  nation.'

68  Ibid,  767-8.
69  Ibid, 783.
70  F M Redgrave, Richard Redgrave,  1891, p  164.  Sheepshanks  had for  some
time  been  living  at Rutland  Gate, Kensington,  where  his collection,  in three
rooms  and  a  well-lighted  gallery,  was  viewable  by  a  letter  of  introduction
(Peter  Cunningham,  London:  Past and Present,  2nd  ed,  1850,  pp 434—5).
As  Sir  Henry  Cole noted  in  his  diaries  (Ms  in  Victoria  &  Albert  Museum
Library),  Sheepshanks  made  different  proposals, eg.
4  April  1852.  Sheepshanks...suggested  that  the  ends  of  the  Crystal  Palace
should  be  used  for  his  Pictures  & Vernons.  Intended  to  leave  them  Mul-
ready  &  J H Robinson  as  Trustees.
7  May  1852. He  said he  would  give his collection  to the National  Gallery  if
placed  at Kensington  Barracks.
12 September  1852. Discussed Trusteeship of his Collection. Would not give
it  to the  Board  of the National  Gallery but three  persons  —  To be  elected.

71  Redgrave  (see  note 50 above), pp 164—5.
72  Parliamentary  Papers,  House  of  Commons, Report  of  the  Select  Committee

on  the  South  Kensington Museum,  1  August  1860, §201.

73  The  Deed  of  Gift  is printed  in  Board  of  Education,  South  Kensington,  The
National  Gallery  of British Art,  Victoria and Albert Museum,  I, Catalogue of
Oil Pictures  by British Artists,  1907, pp  vii-xi.

74  Report  of  the  Committee on  the  Functions of  the National  Gallery  etc  (The

Massey  Report), HMSO,  1946, pp  16-17.

75  Ibid, p 33.
76  Leigh  Ashton,  "The Victoria  and  Albert  Museum',  in  The Nation's  Pictures,

ed  Anthony  Blunt and Margaret  Whinney,  1950, p 98.

77  South  Kensington  Museum  Report  (see  note  72  above)  §1650,  referring  to

26 Geo  2 c 22.

78  Turner  and  Vernon Report  (see  Note 35  above), p 49.
79  Report  of  Inspector  General  of  Art,  Uth  Report  of  Science  & Art  Depart-
ment,  for  1863, Appendix, p  146; reprinted in Catalogue of National  Gallery
of British Art at South Kensington,  I, Oil Paintings, new ed.,  1863, pp 23-4.

80  Turner  and  Vernon Report  (see  note 35 above), p  124, § 195.
81  South  Kensington  Museum  Report  (see  above  note  72), p  173, Appendix  C

No  13.

82  For this  and  the  following  information  on  the  Ellison  Gift  I am  indebted  to
J  W  Close,  Assistant  Director  of  the  Victoria  &  Albert  Museum  (letter,  14
December  1993).

83  Information  from  Susan  Lambert,  letter,  10 February  1994.
84  M H Spielmann,  'The Faults of South Kensington  Museum  Exposed', Maga-

zine  of Art,  1897-8, October  1898, pp  666-9.

85  A J  Beresford  Hope in Report  of the Royal Academy  Commission,  1863, pp
456—7,  where  the  South  Kensington  Museum  was  described  as  'a  Noah's
ark'.

86  Anna  Sommers  Cocks,  The  Victoria &  Albert  Museum:  The Making  of  a

Collection,  1980, p 151.

87  Handbook  of  the Jones  Collection  in the  South  Kensington  Museum,  1883,

ppl-2.

88  Frank  Davis,  Victorian  Patrons  of the Arts:  Twelve Famous  Collectors  and

Their Owners,  1963, p  64.

89  Denys  Sutton,  'The Jones  Collection', Apollo,  XCV, March  1972, p  7.

304

Breach  of Trust Over  Gifts  of  Collections

90  Will, Somerset  House.
91  'A  Great  Artistic  Bequest',  The Times, 23 July  1900,  9f.
92  Davis (see note  88 above), p 83.
93  "The Salting  Collection',  The Times, 25  December  1909, 6 a-c.
94  Victoria & Albert Museum:  General Guide to the Collection,  1911, p 53.
95  Information  from  J  W Close (cf note  82 above).
96  Calvin  Tomkins, Merchants and Masterpieces:  The Story  of  the Metropoli-

tan Museum of Art,  London,  1970.

97  Ibid, p 55.
98  Ibid, p 72.
99  Ibid, pp  7 2 - 3.
100  Ibid, p 86.
101  Ibid, p  100.
102  Ibid, pp  100-1.
103  Ibid, p  166.
104  Ibid, pp  173-4
105  Ibid, p  174.
106  Ibid, pp  180-1.
107  Ibid, p  189.
108  Ibid, p 201.
109  'Freer,  Barnes  and  the  Havemeyers',  The Burlington  Magazine,  CXXXV,

June  1993, p 379.

110  Tomkins (see above  note 96), p 209.
111  Ibid, p 234.
112  Ibid, pp  356-8.
113  Paul  Jeromack,  'Why  the  Met  has  abolished  John  Pope-Hennessy's  hang

after  only  thirteen  years',  The Art Newspaper, 31 October  1993, p  13.

114  'His  bequest  is  one  of  the  largest  in  the  history  of  the  Met  and  utterly
public-spirited', has been the comment of the present  Director,  Philippe de
Montebello ('Interview:  The World in his Hands', Modern Painters,  Spring
1994, p 65). He also remarked:  'We've turned down donations  certainly of
works  of art  when  the  conditions  were  such  that  the  integrity  of  the  insti-
tution  would  have  been  compromised.  The  condition  we  would  never  ac-
cept  is: "You  must accept  my  attribution."  Or  if a whole  collection  had  to
be kept  together  but  too  many  of  the objects  were  of  insufficient  quality.'
{Ibid,  p 64).

115  John  Pope-Hennessy,  Learning to Look,  1991, p 264.
116  (John  Summerson),  A  New Description  of  Sir John  Soane's  Museum,  5th
revised  ed,  1981, p  69;  Susan  Feinberg  Millenson,  Sir  John  Soane's  Mu-
seum,  1987, chapter  8.

117  A F Brown,  The Barnes  Case, X,  Grand Scam: How the  Trustees Faked It:
Renovation Budgets and other Hoaxes, published by the author,  1993; And-
rew  Decker,  'Future  Shock  at  the  Barnes',  ARTnews,  Summer  1992,  pp
106-11.

118  The  basic  history  is given  in  Talfourd  Ely,  Catalogue  of  the  Works in  the
Flaxman  Gallery,  University  College,  London,  1900;  Margaret  Whinney
and  Rupert  Gunnis,  The  Collection  of  Models  by  John  Flaxman  R  A  at
University College London,  1967.

119  Mary Webster,  'Neo Classicism  in Celebration',  Country Life, 4 May  1978,

pp  1236-8.

120  Art Journal,  May  1851, p  150; cf  March  1841, p 97.
121  Information  from  the  present  curator, Nicola  Kalinsky.
122  Michael  Hall,  'In  the  Right  Setting',  Country Life,  21  November  1991, pp

98-9.

305

Selby  Whittingham

123  From  the  will,  Principal  Probate  Registry,  Somerset  House.  For  his  1864

letter,  see  W T  Whitley,  Art in England  1821-1857,  1930, p 264.

124  Sidney  Hutchison,  The History  of  the Royal  Academy  1768-1986,  1986, p

113.  Further  details  from  the author  per  litteras.
125  The Times,  letters,  30  April, 2, 6, 7 May  1872.
126  The Builder,  2  December  1876, pp  1163-4.
127  Art Journal,  1874, p  29.
128  G  D  Leslie,  The Inner  Life  of the Royal Academy,  1914, p 251.
129  (Viviane  Huchard),  Calerie  David d 'Angers,  1989.
130  RA  Magazine,  20,  August  1988, p 11.
131  Genevieve  Lacambre, Maison d'artiste,  maison-musee:  L'exemple  de  Gus-

tave  Moreau,  1987,  p  47  (an  exhibition  at  the  Musee  d'Orsay).

132  Listed  in  Christine  Hoh-Slodczyk,  Das Haus  des  Kunstlers  im  19 Jarhun-
dert,  Munich  1985;  Selby  Whittingham,  The  World Directory  of  Artists'
Museums,  1993.

133  'Small  Museums  of  Paris',  Country  Life,  2 April  1992, p 66.
134  Mme  Genevieve  Lacambre  per  litteras, 3 March  1993.
135  Meredith  Etherington-Smith,  Dali,  985, pp  417-18.
136  Amanda  Lear,  My  Life  with  Dali,  Virgin  Books,  1985, pp  161-2,  172.  He
showed  her  the  Picasso  Museum  at  Barcelona  as  an  example  of  what  he
did  not  want.

137  Dossier  de  la  Posicion  del  Alcalde  Lorca  sobre  la  Question  del  Legado

Dali,  Figueres,  28  March  1990, document  1. The wording  reads:

Instuye  heredero  universal  y  libre  de  todos  sus  bienes,  derechos  y
creaciones  artisticas  al  Estado  Espanol,  con  el  fervoroso  encargo  de
conservar,  divulgar  y proteger  sus obras  de  arte.

138  ibid, document  2.  this  reads

reunir  en  Espana el  mayor niimero posible  de mis creaciones  y obras
de  toda  indole  para  que aqui tengan  que ser  visitadas  y estudiadas.

See  also  Ramon  Guardiola  Rovira, Dali y  su  museo,  Figueres,  1984.

139  'Final  decision  on  carve  up of  Dali estate  in Spain',  The Art Newspaper,  16

March  1992.

140  Cited  in  note  137  above.
141  D Jose  Maria  Puig  Salellas,  'La  ultima  voluntad  de  Dali',  La  Vanguardia,

2 and  3  March  1990.

142  Rosa  Ma.  Subirana,  The Picasso  Museum at Barcelona,  2nd ed,  1975, p 11.
143  A  Reynolds  Morse,  Dali:  The Salvador  Dali  Museum  Collection,  1991, p

7,  for  this  and  the  following  quotations.

144  Eg, in Edward  Miller,  That Noble Cabinet: A History of the British  Museum,
1973; it is mentioned  by Marjorie  Caygill,  The Story of the British  Museum,
1981,  p  46,  with  the  claim  that  'the  donor's  wishes  have  been  observed'.
But,  if  they  had  not  been,  would  it?  There  are  no  full  histories  of  the
National  Gallery and  Tate Gallery,but such as there are omit any embarrass-
ing  episodes.

145  Board of Education,  The  Victoria & Albert  Museum, (Art Division), Report

of  the  Committee  of  Re-Arrangement,  29 July  1908, p  14.

146  S  Whittingham,  The  Fallacy  of  Mediocrity  (see  note  33  above),  pp  6 1 -3

and  appendices  21 —2.

147  Robert  C Witt,  The Nation  and its Art  Treasures, 1911, pp 5 7 - 9.  The pass-

age  in  full  runs  as  follows:

There  is  not  one  of  our  national  collections  which  is  not  at  the  mo-
ment  under  the  incubus  of  the  dead  hand  in  the  shape  of  conditions
imposed,  which  have since  become  inconvenient  in the extreme.  It is

306

Breach  of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

suggested  that  some  of  these  of  an  essentially  unreasonable  nature
should be made ipso facto  void and of no effect,  and that  others more
consonant  with  equity,  but  for  special  reasons  with  which  testators
are  usually  unacquainted,  of  serious  disadvantage  to  the  collections,
should be capable of modification  after  a period of years. Falling into
the first class  is such a stipulation  as that a bequest  must be accepted
and  exhibited  in  its entirety  or not  at  all.  The consequence  is that in
the case  of  a  collection  containing  both  masterpieces  and  rubbish  (a
not uncommon  event  in the circumstances  of modern collections) the
nation  must  suffer  in order to benefit,  the  standard  of quality  be low-
ered  in  order  that  the  collection  may  be  enriched.  Under  the  other
heading  would  fall  such  conditions, either express or implied,  as that
the  collection  must  be  shown  substantially  all  together  in  one  room
or  suite  (Mond  Bequest,  National  Gallery;  Dyce,  Forster,  Jones, and
Ionides  Collection,  Victoria  and  Albert  Museum),  or  that  it  be  not
shown  on  Sunday  (Ellison  Bequest,  Victoria and  Albert  Museum), or
that  it  may  never  be  exhibited  on  loan  elsewhere,  considerations
which,  however reasonable  from  the point  of view  of the  benefactor,
diminish  to  an  extraordinary  degree  the  value  of  the  bequest  to the
public.  In  so  far  as  these  conditions  are based  upon  the  quite  natural
desire  for  posthumous  fame,  there  are  means  of  satisfying  such  a
feeling  by  giving  prominence  to  the  bequest  on  labels  and  in  other
farms  which  need  not  rob  the  donor  of  his  due  reward,  while  yet
preserving  the  historical  or  chronological  character  of  the  arrange-
ment.  In  so  far  as they  depend  upon  such  matters  as the  Sabbatarian
views  of  the  testator  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  accommodate  them  to
the changes  in public  sentiment  on  these  matters.

148  Cf  Robert  C  Witt,  'The  Trustees'  Report  on  the  National  Gallery  (Cd

7878-9)',  The Quarterly  Review, CCXXIV, 445,  1915, pp 344  ff.

149  A  F  Brown,  The Barnes  Case,  XX,  November  1993,  p  3,  quoting  John

Higgins.

150  in  The New Statesman,  quoted  by Albany  in the Sunday  Telegraph, 4 Nov-

ember  1973.

151  'The  Right  and  Wrong  of  State  Interference  with  Corporation  and  Church
Property',  Jurist,  February  1833, reprinted  in  Mill, Dissertations  and Dis-
cussions,  2nd  ed,  1867, I, pp  1-41.

152  'Endowments',  The  Fortnightly  Review,  NS,  XXVIII,  1 April  1869,  pp

377-90.

153  Ibid, p 379.
154  Mill,  'The  Right  and  Wrong'  (see note  151), p 36.
155  Germain  Bazin,  The Museum Age, Brussels,  1967, p  159.
156  John Henry Merryman  and Albert  E Elsen, Law, Ethics and the  Visual Arts,
2nd  ed,  1987, II, p 616 ('The  Art of  Donating  Art'). Earlier  Karl  E Meyer,
The Plundered  Past,  London  1974, p  192, wrote:

This competitive zeal can make the curator and director more ruthless
than  the  collector,  since  the  museum  worker  has  a  larger  sense  of
virtue, a  feeling  that  what  he  is doing  is for  the public  and  the cause
of art. There is a parallel  in the competition  among monks and priests
in  the  Middle  Ages,  who  contended,  often  unscrupulously,  for  the
relic of saints and of the Saviour Himself, the pious end always justi-
fying  dubious  means.

157  John Walker,  Turner, New York,  1976, pp 38-41,  'Betrayal'. Walker argued
both  against  the  treatment  of the  bequest  by  the  National  Gallery  and  that

307

Selby  Whittingham

the  Vice-Chancellor  in  1856  'had  no  right'  to enlarge  the bequest  in disre-
gard  of  Turner's  distinction  between  finished  and  unfinished  works.

158  John  Walker,  Self-Portrait  with  Donors:  Confessions  of  an  Art  Collector,
Boston,  1969, pp  139-40.  When  Calouste Gulbenkian  offered  his  collec-
tion, which  also did not meet  Mellon's  specifications,  with  a condition  that
it be kept together, the proposed  solution  was an  'additional  building' {ibid,
P 247).

159  Marie C Malaro, A Legal Primer on managing Museum Collections,  Smith-

sonian  institution  Press,  1987, p  112.

160  Ibid, p  108.
161  The Art  Newspaper, reports, June  and  October  1991.
162  Malaro, op  cit  pp 25-9.
163  Letter,  The  Times, 17 November  1993.  Frequently  a  paragraph  from  the
1964 Cottesloe  Report (Committee  of Enquiry into Sales  of  Works of Art by
Public  Bodies)  is cited:

The  basic  principle  on  which  the  law rests  is that  when  private  per-
sons  give  property  for  public  purposes  the  Crown  undertakes  to  see
that  it  is  devoted  to  the  purposes  intended  by  the  donor  and  to  nor
others. When a work of art is given to a museum or gallery for general
exhibition  the public  thereby  acquires  rights  in  the  object  concerned
and  these rights cannot  be  set  aside. The  authorities  of  the  museum
or gallery  are not  the  owners  of such an  object  in the  ordinary  sense
of  the  word:  they  are  merely  responsible,  under  the  authority  of  the
Courts,  for  carrying out  the  intentions of the donor. They  cannot  sell
the object  unless authorised  to do so by the Courts, or by the  Charity
Commissioners  or the  Minister  of Education  on behalf of the  Courts,
because  they  themselves  have  nothing  to  sell.  If  they  attempt  a  sale
in breach of trust  it is the function  of the Attorney General to  enforce
the  trust  and  protect  the  rights  of  the public  in  the  object  by  taking
proceedings  in the  Chancery  Division'.

164  Philadelphia  Inquirer, 21 October  1993. The earlier history of the collection
and  its  legal  problems  is  given  in  George  and  Mary  Roberts,  Triumph of
Fairmount:  Fiske  Kimball and  the  Philadelphia  Museum  of Art,  Philadel-
phia  and  New  York, chapter  9,  'Johnson's  Will'.

165  Glbert  M Cantor,  The Barnes  Foundation:  Reality v Myth, 2nd ed, Philadel-
phia,  1974. See also Howard  Greenfeld,  The Devil and Dr Barnes,  Penguin
Books, Harmondsworth,  1987; Hilton  Kramer,  'Barnes' "Confused  Values"
World  Tour  Ready to Roll',  New  York Observer,  14 December  1992.

166  See  Cantor  and  Greenfeld  (see  note  165).
167  Editorial, June  1993.
168  Op  cit  (see  note  151 above), pp  8 - 9.
169  Letters  in  The  Times,  11  November  1992  (Museums  &  Galleries  Com-
mission), 22  December  1992 (Museums  Association):  The Independent,  24
November  1992  (National  Art-Collections  Fund).  See  also  those  from  the
Charity  Commission  (The Independent,  29 September  1992) and  Sir  Denis
Mahon  (The  Times, 11 March  1993). At first  editorials  condemned  the  sale
(The  Independent,  17 November  1992),  but  then  doubted  if  any  issue  of
breach  of  trust  was  really  involved  (The  Guardian and  The  Independent,
24  February  1993; The Times, 26  February  1993). However  objection  con-
tinued  to be  made to the  sales  by  the  museum  lobby.

170  A  F  Browne,  The Barnes Case,  1993, passim.
171  George Hutchinson, in  The Times, 24 November  1973; Denis Mahon, letter,

The  Times, 28 November  1973.

308

Breach of Trust  Over  Gifts  of  Collections

172  Ibid.
173  Ian Jenkins, Archaeologists  & Aethetes,  1992;  Andrew  McLellan,  Inventing

the Louvre,  Cambridge, 1994.

174  Malaro, op cit, p 103.
175  'Times  to  loosen  grip',  editorial,  The  Times, 23  July  1973. Cf  editorial,
followed  by  remarks  by  Sir  Denis  Mahon,  'Disposing  of  disposal',  The
Burlington  Magazine,  CXXX,  October  1988; and  'Betrayal  of Trust', edi-
torial, Ibid, CXXXV, January 1993.

Since the completion  of this article  there has appeared  Richard  Shone,  'Owners
and  Donors',  The Spectator,  22 October  1994, pp. 51—2, in  which  the  author
argues  for  keeping  intact  some  collections  because  they  are  'so  personal', but
also  for selling  others  which  are so  awful.

309


