The People's  Republic  of  China
and the  Illicit  Trade  in  Cultural
Property:
Is the  Embargo  Approach  the
Answer?
J. David Murphy*

1  Introduction

"Cultural property" may be loosely defined  as a category of property
that  includes works  of art  and  archaeological,  historical  and ethno-
logical objects  which are generally considered  as being the material
evidence  of a certain  stage of civilisation.1  The trafficking  in stolen
or  illegally-exported  art  and  cultural  objects  is  a  problem  of  im-
mense  international  proportions  -  thought  to be  third  only to drug
and arms smuggling, or perhaps even in second place.2 As respected
commentators have  observed:

"[T]he  publicity  surrounding  the  volume  of  the  art  trade,  its
soaring prices, the aggressive promotion by auction houses and
the  continual  emphasis  on  the  record-breaking  sums  reached,
have  done  much  to  promote  cultural  property  as  a  lucrative
field  for  dishonest  activities,  and  to  attract  illicitly  acquired
goods  to  the  auction  and  sales  rooms  of  the  'art  market'
states".3

And:

"[t]he respectable part of the art world  [can] no longer pretend
that  the  looting  of  ancient  art  [is]  a  matter  involving  only  a
few  obscure peasants,  corrupt  local  officials  and  unscrupulous

*  B. A.,  LL. B.  (Toronto),  M. Sc.  (London);  Barrister,  Solicitor,  Notary  Public
(Ontario);  Solicitor  of the  Supreme  Court  of  England  and  Wales; Solicitor  of
the Supreme Court of Hong Kong; Faculty of Law, University of Hong  Kong.
This article  is based  on  a  paper  delivered  at the  Lawasia  Conference  held  in
September  1993 in Colombo, Sri Lanka. It was previously published in (1993)
2 Asia  Pacific  Law  Review 53.

227

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

J. David  Murphy

dealers. Splendid national treasures, stolen and mutilated,  [can]
within  a  few  years  find  their  way  into  the  halls  of  America's
most  sumptuous  museums".4

Antiquities  are  thought  to  be  the  largest  single  class  of  item
smuggled  out of the People's Republic of China.5 With the memory
of  the  removal  to  Taiwan  in  1949  of the  treasures  of the  National
Museum  all  too  vivid  in  the  minds  of  Chinese  officials,  they  now
face  the  spectre  of  wholescale  removals  of  artifacts  by  smuggling
networks.  The  Preamble  to  a  1982  Standing  Committee  decision6
painted  a  graphic  picture  of  "economic  criminal  activities  such  as
seeking  exorbitant  profits  through  smuggling  ...  theft  and  sale  of
precious  cultural  relics  ...  and  state  personnel  who  participate  in,
protect  or connive  at these criminal  activities...".

Statistics from  the China  State Bureau of Cultural Relics indicate
that  over  40,000  tombs  were  reported  plundered  in  1989 and  1990
alone.7 PRC customs officials  themselves  claim  to have  intercepted
since  the  early  1980s  70,000  pieces  bound  for  the  "transit  states"
of  Hong  Kong  and  Macau.  Apart  from  clandestine  excavations,  a
significant  proportion  of  the  outflow  comes  direct  from  museum
thefts  and even thefts from government facilities used to store pieces
confiscated  or surrendered to the state.8 There are accounts of details
and  photographs  of  important  relics  in  Chinese  museums  being
faxed  to dealers, in anticipation of later "delivery" through theft  and
smuggling  networks.9

It is one of the ironies of the cultural property trade that the finan-
cially  poor  or  developing  countries  are  the  "art  rich",  "supply",  or
"source" countries, while the wealthy, developed countries are most
often  the  "art  poor",  "market"  states.  Though  in  most  respects  de-
veloping  countries  encourage  foreign  trade  with  a  view  to  foreign
exchange  and  domestic development,  the pattern  does not hold true
where cultural property  is involved  —  at least at the official  govern-
mental  level.  Cultural  property  is  usually  regarded  by  developing
countries  as  an  inappropriate  subject  matter  for  trade.  The  reasons
given  are  sometimes  anthropological  and  historical,  but  are  very
often purely nationalistic, without much regard for whether there are
any  religious,  cultural  or  social  reasons  why  the  relics  in  question
have  significance  for  today's  cultures.  As Professor  Merryman  has
observed,  "...the  basic  questions  about  cultural  property  policy  are
submerged  under  layers of prejudice,  rhetoric and romance".10

The  question,  "Who  owns  the past?" is a difficult  and  explosive
one, bound  up with political, economic,  social  and  legal  currents.11
Most developing  states face  an  internal  tension that  is not often  ap-
preciated  when  issues  of  trade  policy  are  being  considered:  on  the
one hand there are official  policies aimed  at preventing most,  if not
all, cultural relics from  leaving the state; and, on the other, there are
economic  forces  from  without  and within that  seek to force  an out-
flow by whatever means.12

228

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

People's  Republic  of China  and the  Illicit  Trade  in Cultural  Property

This  is  perhaps  related  to  another  phenomenon  identified  by  de
Varine  —  (predominantly)  Europeans  have  failed  to understand  the
essential  values  of  non-European  cultures,  while  at  the  same  time
non-Europeans  have  been  assaulted  with  non-traditional  values  as
part of the developmental  process.

"This  has  led  to  a  sudden  discovery  of  'primitive  art'  at  the
very  moment  when  its  creators  are  turning  away  from  it  in a
search  for  the  symbols  of  so-called  modern  civilization.  The
trend  to  invest  cultural  goods  with  materialistic  values,  which
began in Europe ana the U. S., is thus  spreading rapidly to "the
rest of the  world".13

Taking  the  PRC  as  an  example,  this  paper  highlights  some  of  the
legal and practical  issues raised by the most prominent method em-
ployed by developing countries to stop the outflow  of cultural relics,
the domestic  export embargo.

2  The Inadequacy  of International  Efforts

One type of nationalist-internationalist  dichotomy in the area of cul-
tural property is represented by the opposing positions of those who
for  economic  or other reasons favour  freer  trade in relics, and those
who for political or other reasons favour a retention of national relics
within national boundaries. It should be observed that the first group
is  comprised  of  several  constituents:  the  "enlightened"  art  experts
who  feel  that the rules as to the  international  movement  of cultural
property should be dictated by considerations of science; the acquisi-
tors  -  dealers,  collectors,  museums  -  who  are  driven  by  money
and  prestige;  and  the  participants  in  the  domestic  theft  and  smug-
gling  process  who  are  only  driven  by  money,  and  for  whom,  as
likely  as  not,  the  object  has  no  real  cultural  meaning  —  for  them
"national  patrimony" means merely a resource to be exploited.

Even  for  those ,who espouse  some  type  of  protection  of  cultural
patrimony,  there  is .another  form  of  "internationalism"  that  merits
attention  —  the various attempts that have been made in international
forums  to  curb  the  illicit  traffic  in  cultural  property  resulting  from
theft  or breach  of  domestic  export  laws.  A treatment  of  this  broad
topic  is  well  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper;  all  that  will  be  at-
tempted here is a brief mention of the most notable developments.14
These include  a few  international  conventions, bilateral  treaties and
voluntary  repatriations;  and  General  Assembly  and  UNESCO  pro-
nouncements.  Generally  it can  be  said  that  their  real  impact  on the
illicit  trade  in  artifacts  has  been  minimal.15  Apart  from  the  usual
political  difficulties,  efforts  in  this  area  have,  not  surprisingly,  run
full  tilt into private  property  considerations.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

229

J. David Murphy

Perhaps  the  most visible  international  undertaking  was  the  1970
UNESCO  Convention.16  This  was  largely  an  initiative  on  the  part
of  "source"  states  to  stem  the  "haemorraging"  that  could  only  be
stopped  with  the  assistance  of  the  developed  market  states.  It  is
really the only international cultural property treaty in the civil area;
international  efforts  prior  to  1970  focussed  mainly  on  the  conse-
quences  of wars.  In contrast  with,  say, the  1954 Hague  Convention
for  the Protection  of Cultural  Property  in the Event of Armed  Con-
flict,17  the UNESCO Convention is essentially nationalist and reten-
tionist  in  scope  -  aiming  at  enlisting  the  cooperation  of  market
states  to  protect  the  interests  of  source  states;  its  thrust  is  not  to
preserve  a "common human  culture".

The  PRC  acceded to  the UNESCO  Convention  in  1989. Though
the  PRC  is  a  classic  source  state  and  the  Convention  attempts  to
curb the traffic  in stolen and illegally exported cultural property, the
Convention  will  not  likely  be  of  much  practical  assistance  to  the
PRC. While  the  developing  countries  would  originally  have  out-
lawed  all  international  movement  of  cultural  property,  they  were
forced  to abandon that position; and the final version of the Conven-
tion  must  be  regarded  as  reflecting  a  very  moderate  compromise
position.  As  it  is, very  few  of  the  leading  market  states  (or  transit
states,  such  as  Switzerland)  have  ratified  the  Convention.  This  is
perhaps the most glaring reason for  its  failure.

The  weaknesses  in  the  Convention's  provisions  can  be  briefly
summarized. The definition  of "cultural property"18  is thought to be
too  broad  and  vague,  particularly  since  it  relies  upon  a  subjective
designation  by  each state  ("specifically  designated  by  each  state  as
being of importance") rather than on objective criteria. It is not clear
whether  such  designation  must  result  from  prior  inclusion  in  some
national  inventory,  or whether  the  decision  can  be  left  until  export
(the  so-called  "passport"  approach).  These  difficulties  impact  di-
rectly on the provisions in Article 6 for an export certificate  regime.
Portions of the Convention are merely rhetorical, for example art-
icles that  simply affirm  intentions or declare practices  illicit. Article
5  obliges  states  parties  to establish  a  system  of  "national  services"
such  as  inventories, regulations,  institutions,  technical  services  and
the  like  to  preserve  the  cultural  heritage.  These  requirements  only
raise  a  double  difficulty  for  developing  states,  such  as  the  PRC,
given the potentially huge volume of sites and artifacts  involved and
the small resources allocable to the problem.19  The addition in Arti-
cle  5  of  the  qualification,  "as  appropriate  for  each  country",  sig-
nalled the difficulty  most developing countries anticipated in  finding
the  means  to  develop  any  sort  of  effective  domestic  preservation
programme.

The main operative provisions  of the UNESCO Convention were
meant  to  be  those  in Article  7(a)  —  obliging  market  states  to  take
steps to prevent  their museums and similar institutions from  acquir-
ing illegally-exported  cultural property from  another state party; and

230

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

People's  Republic  of  China  and  the  Illicit  Trade  in Cultural  Property

Article 7(b) — prohibiting the import of cultural property stolen from
a  museum,  public  monument  or  institution,  and  obliging  market
states  to  take  steps  to  return  it.  These  provisions  are  prospective
only, and cover a rather small class of cases (though arguably Article
7(b) covers objects  most  likely to be,essential  to the national patri-
mony  and for which the provenance is likely to be known). A well-
developed  documentation  system  is  essential  for  enforcement,  and
this may well be lacking in the source states. Enforcement  measures,
in practice; must be consistent with national  legislation; indeed,  the
Convention reverts to a territoriality theory of enforcement  -  states
are free to interpret  their own obligations.20

More recently,  efforts  have been made through Unidroit,  initially
through a working group of experts and later with full  governmental
representation  (including  the  PRC)  to  draft  a  convention  that  ad-
dresses private  law issues raised by the UNESCO  Convention.  The
main  concern  is the  bona fide  purchaser  rule  in  civil  law  countries
—a legal principle  that  undoubtedly  facilitates  the  illicit  movement
of art.

These  deliberations  have  resulted  in  a preliminary  draft  Unidroit
Convention  on  Stolen or Illegally  Exported  Cultural  Objects.21  The
primary  aim  of  the  draft  convention  is  to  put the  responsibility  on
the  buyer  to  verify  that  an  object  is being  legally  traded;  failure  to
do  so will' lead to the object  being returned.  Stolen objects  will  be
returned to the original  owner,  subject  to limitations provisions  and
compensation being paid to the buyer where necessary diligence was
shown.  As to  illegally  exported  cultural  property,  such  objects  will
be returned, but only where their export has injured certain important
defined  cultural interests of the state requesting their return; the pro-
cess involves a request to a court in the market  state.

The preliminary  Unidroit  draft  is the  most  imaginative  and posi-
tive recent step toward finding  a solution to illicit trade. The  drafting
process continues and a new convention in this area is, however,  far
from  a reality.  Market  states  can be  expected  to remain  leery  about
any perceived  exercise  of extraterritoriality  and restraint  on  market
forces. In addition, it remains to be seen whether the civil law juris-
dictions  -  most  notably  European  market  states  -  will  react posi-
tively.

3  The Domestic  Export  Embargo  Approach

In the absence of any workable international scheme of  enforcement,
most developing nations have resorted to embargo legislation of one
form  or another  —  usually  a prohibition  of the  export  of privately-
owned  works  of  art  classified  in  some  way  as  "national  treasures"
or the like.22

Beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper  are  situations  involving  simple
theft,  arguably  the  least  complicated  ethically  if  not  legally;23  and

231

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

J. David  Murphy

so-called  "rhetorical  ownership  laws" —  domestic laws making des-
ignated  relics,  monuments,  contents  of  tombs  and  other  items  the
property  of  the  state  so  that  a  "national  (or  notional)  theft"  will
trigger  the usual private  law remedies.24

Embargo or "national retention"  legislation  may take the form  of
a  total  prohibition,  in which  case  there  will be no licit  international
market  for a state's relics. Other variants may involve a total prohib-
ition of listed objects with a permit requirement  for other objects, or
a  scheme  based on export permits  for  broad classes of goods.

The  PRC's  1982 Cultural  Relics Law generally  "places under the
state's protection" broad defined  classes of cultural property.25 Apart
from  deeming classes of objects such as unexcavated relics to be the
property  of the  state,26 the  PRC  regime  imposes  restrictions  on the
private sale of relics "in private collections" and forbids private sales
to  foreigners.27  State  organs  are  involved  in  the  grading,  and  de-
cisions  on  the  sale,  of  all  cultural  relics.  Chapter  VI  of  the  1982
Cultural  Relics  Law reads as  follows:

"Taking Cultural  Relics out of China
Article  27.  Cultural  relics to be exported  or to be taken out of
the country  by individuals must be  declared  to the  Customs in
advance  and examined  by the department  for  cultural adminis-
tration  of  a province,  an  autonomous  region  or a  municipality
directly  under the  Central  Government  designated  by the  state
department for cultural administration before  export  certificates
are granted. Cultural relics leaving the country must be shipped
out at designated ports. Cultural relics which, after  examination,
are not permitted  to leave the country  may be requisitioned by
the state  through  purchase.

Article 28.  It shall be prohibited to take out of the country any
cultural  relics  of  significant  historical,  artistic  or  scientific
value,  with  the  exception  of  those  to  be  shipped  abroad  for
exhibition  with the approval  of the  State  Council."28

In  addition,  "valuable  cultural  relics" and  "ordinary  cultural  relics"
appear  as  prohibited  or  restricted  exports  in  the  Prohibited Import
and Export  Goods List and Restricted Import and Export Goods List
promulgated  on  1 March,  1993  by  the  General  Administration  of
Customs  (superceding  earlier  lists  in which  cultural  relics  similarly
appeared).

The  rationale  for  this  sort  of  embargo  legislation  in  developing,
source  states  is  said  to  be  the  need  to  "protect"  the  objects  of  art
and the cultural heritage they represent. However, there are in reality
many  elements  involved:  the cultural, historic  or ethnological  value
of  the  relic;  archaeological  considerations,  such  as  preventing  the
unscholarly  destruction  of the only records of a civilization; preser-
vation  of  the  integrity  of  the  work  and  its  physical  safety,  such  as

232

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

People's  Republic  of China  and  the  Illicit  Trade  in  Cultural  Property

from  vandalism;  the  economic  interests  — the  benefits  for  the
national  economy from regulated  sales or, alternatively, tourism; lo-
cal artistic  interest;  and nationalistic  hoarding  instincts.29

The retentive  embargo mentality  is firmly  entrenched  in the PRC
as  in most source  states. A senior  official  of the Palace Museum  in
Beijing  felt  that  opening  up  relics  outlet  channels  such  as  through
open  auction methods  "is to increase  opportunities  for  relics  smug-
gling  with  terrible  results".30  Similarly  a  spokesman  for  the  State
Administration  for  Cultural  Relics  was  of  the  view  that  "it  is  not
practical  to  raise  funds  for  relics  protection  by  selling  relics",  and
"the  opening of a free antique  market  is not the way to curb  smug-
gling, but on the contrary will result in more leaks"31  —  this despite
statistics  that  the  State  Administration  for  Cultural  Relics  now  has
approximately  10 million  separate  relics  in  storage,  of  which  only
about  1% are in the "most precious" category.

There  is,  however,  a  substantial  body  of  opinion,  based  on  the
economics  and  realities  of  the  international  art  market,  that  the
source  states,  by  attempting  to  implement  embargo  regimes,  are
doing nothing more than exacerbating the problem of the illicit out-
flow  of cultural  property."

The developing states typically have no real domestic market, and
their museums have limited resources with which to acquire  artifacts
held  privately.32 The  absence  of  a  licit  market  in  effect  ensures the
existence  of  an  illicit  market.  Nafziger  has  noted  the  irony.of  the
situation:

"This  emerging  threat  [i. e.  cultural  nationalism]  to  the  shared
values  of  cultural  diffusion  and  the  advancement  of  scientific
knowlege has arisen from  the restrictions which were provoked
by the threat  of promiscuous  trafficking  in artifacts  and pillag-
ing  of  archaeology/ The  current  regime  may  be  creating  more
problems than  it is resolving."33

•

A situation that encourages an illicit market brings with it criminalis-
ation and corruption.34 Paradoxically the bribe-takers would support
strict  retention  laws  and  oppose  legalisation  of  export,  in  order  to
protect their  illicit  income. 

•  • 

The museologists  argue  that  retention  or  "protection"  legislation
leads to illicit traffic  which defeats  the purpose of protection  insofar
as  it  results  in  amateur  removals,  the  loss  of  information,  and  the
damaging  of sites and works.35

Embargo or retention  legislation  is toothless, absent the resources
to enforce  the laws, and meaningless unless there exist the means to
preserve,  catalogue  and  display  the  relics  that  the  state  means  to
protect.36  Having regard to such bureaucratic requirements, it might
be  said  that  embargo  legislation  makes  even  less  sense  for  de-
veloping  states  than  for  developed  states  in  that  in  the  former  the
"protected" resources are very often  unowned, found  —.indeed, ex-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

233

J. David  Murphy

cavated  —  relics  rather  than  identifiable  owned  objects  as  in Euro-
pean  countries.

The  art  world  knows  that  embargo  legislation  in  developing
source nations does not prevent export; it only ensures that the  traffic
goes  underground.  Arguably,  the  tighter  the  export  control,  the
stronger  the  illicit  market,  and  the  process  spirals  despite  rhetoric
that retention regimes are necessary to curb the black market. In the
end, export controls only add costs  —  social and otherwise  —  to the
inevitable  exports.

4  A Preferred  Approach

In  large  part,  the  problem  of  the  illicit  traffic  in  cultural  property
results  from  economics:  demand  exceeds  supply  in  market  states,
and supply  exceeds demand  in source states. Many observers of the
process  argue that the solution must also be economically  based:

"...  the  prevailing  sentiment  in  most  industrialised,  importing
nations is still very much in favour of allowing the marketplace
to operate  without  intervention. The rationale for a free  market
in cultural property can be expressed in economic theory which
argues  that  allocating  this property  to  the buyer  who  pays  the
most  for  it assures that the property  will  come to rest with the
person  who  has  the  superior  use  and  thus  assuring  the  maxi-
mum benefit  to society".37

Of  course  the  market  view  that  the buyer  who  pays  the  most  must
have  the  greatest  interest  in  protection  fails  to  consider  the  intan-
gibles  involved,  such  as  the  importance  of  the  maintenance  and
transmission  of  a  domestic  culture.  The  pure  economic  approach
fails  to  take  account  of  the  interests  of  future  generations  because
they  have  no  impact  on  current  markets.  Arguably  such  market
choices  are  unfair  for  developing  nations  where  cultural  property
protection  considerations  must  compete  with  public  welfare  needs
in  a  struggle  for  limited  resources.38  Unrestrained  market  rhetoric
cheapens  the  ethnological,  historical  and  cultural  importance  of  of
the  most  significant  art  objects.  Even  J. S. Mill  argued  for  inalien-
ability  where  the  laws  of  property  "have  made  property  of  things
which  ought not to be  property...".39

While the operation of the market probably ensures optimum pro-
tection  in  the  limited  sense  that  those  willing  to  pay  probably  are
willing and able to conserve, there are numerous other variables that
must  be  taken  into account.  Certainly  trade  restrictions  must be re-
examined  on a cost-benefit  approach, but the goals  —  often  compet-
ing ones  —  must be made clear. These would  include prevention of
pillage  of  sites, protection  of  the  most  significant  and  essential  as-
pects  of  national  patrimony, maintaining  a  link  between  art  and  its

234

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

People's  Republic  of China  and the Illicit  Trade  in Cultural  Property

geographical-historical  milieu,  preservation,  both  domestic  and in-
ternational  display  and education,  fostering  of reciprocal  trade, and
avoidance  of over-extending  customs  regimes  beyond  any realistic
prospect  of  enforcement.

Such an approach  inevitably  necessitates a process  of ranking  —
not just  a ranking  of values  to guide  the creation  of new legal re-
gimes, but also a ranking of the art objects themselves according to
their  importance,  having  regard  to the values.40  Some  argue for an
international  regime  that  would  oblige  importing  states  to  regulate
imports  according  to  a  universally-recognised  scheme  of  values
leading to a categorization  of an object's  "significance".41  Realisti-
cally, however, given the failure  of standardisation  efforts  at the in-
ternational  level, developments must occur  —  if they are to occur at
all  —  at the domestic  level in the source states.

It  is argued  that  the export  policies  of the source  states  must be
guided by the same sort of cost-benefit  approach, taking into account
a scheme of values that ranks art objects  according to their  cultural
significance.  What is required is a process of judicious selection that
may  result  in  the  export  of  all  but  the  most  culturally  significant
items.  A  country's  comparative  poverty  becomes  an  argument
against, rather than for, stricter national  controls.

The  developing  art-rich, nations  should  treat  cultural  property as
an exploitable national resource, not to be hoarded absolutely, but to
be "mined" as a source of income. As Bator has observed, "the best
way to keep art is to let a lot of it go".42 The income from  the sale
of excess relics can be made available to finance  preservation of the
most culturally  significant  pieces, training of curators, and scientific
exploration  efforts.  Once  international  demand  is  satisfied  by the
creation of a sizeable liqit market, the profit  is cut out of illicit  traf-
ficking  and the concomitant  anti-social  behaviour  is reduced.  In a
perfect  model, money would be channelled toward preservation and
study  rather  than  to bribes.  Scientists  would  replace  thieves,  or at
least the illicit "archaeologists" could be "harnessed".43  Enforcement
regimes would be. kept to a manageable  size.

Export  legislation  in  developing  source  states  should  allow  for
significant  exchange, or lending programmes, not only as a reflection
of  the notion  of "cultural  comity"  but also  because  preservation in
a market state to ensure the retention of the integrity of the collection
is presumably  better  than  loss  of the  collection  through  neglect in
its  state of origin.44  In addition,  there  should  be scope to allow the
release into trade of less significant  or excess material as a trade-off
for  financial  assistance  for exploration  and preservation.45

This sort of approach,  which has at its core the substantial  relax-
ation  of  export  controls  in  accordance  with  the  application  of  a
scheme  of values  that  would  dictate  the retention  of only the most
significant  objects, would, it is argued, achieve the stated  objectives
of embargo  legislation  better than  embargo legislation  itself.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

235

J. David Murphy

This must be  so in the PRC especially  —  perhaps now the classic
source  state,  suffering  from  extensive  plundering  of  graves;  theft
from  archaeological sites and museums; attendant corruption; smug-
gling  networks  originating  with  peasants  for  whom  the  relics  have
economic but not cultural significance;  insufficient  resources to cope
with  classification,  protection,  preservation  or  enforcement;  and  a
surplus  of relics  at all  levels  of cultural  importance.

There are indications that the PRC is at least attuned to the econ-
omic  arguments.  As early  as  the  1960  Provisional Regulations on
the  Protection  and Administration  of  the  Cultural Heritage,  there
appeared  a  legislative  attempt  to isolate  items  of "considerable his-
torical, artistic  or  scientific  value".

In a  1974 Circular46  a group of ministries proposed  that:

"The  cultural  relics  department  shall  guard  against  the  one-
sided mentality of caring only about collection while neglecting
export and shall adopt a more active approach  in assessing and
selecting  cultural  relics that  are exportable  and supply them to
foreign  trade departments  for  export."

Significantly,  in a joint pronouncement  the  Supreme People's  Court
and the  Supreme People's Procuratorate  decreed  in  1987 that:

"...we  should use the ranking of relics as the basis for determi-
nation.  Consideration  should  also  be  given  to  factors  such  as
quantity, measurable price/value  etc. of the cultural relics".47

Chapter  IV  of the  1982 Cultural  Relics  Law obliges  state  museums
and  other  institutions  to  "classify  the cultural  relics  in  their  collec-
tion  by  different  grades,  compile  files  for  the  relics  kept  by  them,
establish  a  strict  system  of  control  and  register  the  relics  with  the
relevant  department  for  cultural  administration".  "Grade  One" cul-
tural  relics  alone  are  the  responsibility  of  the  state  department  for
cultural  administration.48  It is  generally  conceded,  however,  that  at
the  moment  the  PRC has  insufficient  resources  to  devote  to  a seri-
ous, comprehensive and scientific  ranking exercise that would allow
an orderly  determination  of appropriate  export  outflows.

Nonetheless, there are recent indications that the state is prepared
to engage in international sales of excess relics. The leading example
was  the  "Beijing  International  Auction"  held  in  October  1992, the
first  such  event  since  the  Communist  takeover.  Significantly,  the
expressed  aim was to stem the flow  of smuggled items. The auction
attracted  about  500  potential  buyers  including  Asian  and  Western
dealers and collectors and "around 20 affluent  Beijingers".49 A wide
range  of  items  was  on  offer,  but  only  about  15% were  pre-1795
pieces.  The  sale  was  limited  to  items  classified  as  Grade  2  or  3.
Quality  and  condition  were  generally  low,  and  estimates  (and  pre-
sumably  reserve  prices)  unrealistically  high.  The  sale  prices  were

236

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

People's  Republic  of China  and  the Illicit  Trade  in Cultural  Property

low and many reserve prices were not reached. The auction  —  mile-
stone  though  it  was  -  pointed  up  the  PRC  officials'  ignorance  of
current  trends  in the  world  art trade  and  of  the  significant  gulf be-
tween  the  market  values  of  the  best  pieces  and  the  rest,  and  their
general  lack of knowlege of what constitute  museum quality relics.
The PRC experience  is not untypical  of that  of many  developing
source  states.  In  the  PRC's  case  it  is perhaps  ironic  that  the  recent
symbolic effort  to relax its retentive policies, represented by the Bei-
jing  auction,  should  only  serve  to  expose  its  underdeveloped  con-
sciousness  of  the  workings  of  the  international  art  market,  itself  a
result  of  its  official  policy  of  retention.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the
inevitable  economic.and  political  changes to come  in the PRC  will
facilitate  a move away from  an embargo mentality.  Such a develop-
ment can only enhance the PRC's ability to preserve its own cultural
patrimony, while at the same time making its cultural heritage avail-
able for  appreciation  by the rest of the world.

,  mm,

«•

iR. r 

•«E.  ft.  ».  a:  tg.  a. 

ft.  

"=2se
m
a.
; w».

Customs  Officers  seiz-
ing relics  and  arresting
smugglers. From the
PRC magazine Cus-
toms.  Illustration by
courtesy  of J.  David
Murphy.

237

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

J. David Murphy

Notes

1  See  P. Lalive,  "A  General  View  of  the  Law  Relating  to  Cultural  Property"
(1988)  13  International  Legal  Practitioner  18.  See  also  the  extended  defi-
nition of "cultural property" contained  in Article  1 of the UNESCO  Conven-
tion  on  the  Means  of  Prohibiting  and  Preventing  the  Illicit  Import,  Export
and  Transfer  of  Ownership  of  Cultural  Property  1970,  823  UNTS  (herein-
after,  "the  1970  UNESCO  Convention").

2  For  background  and  statistics  see  K. T.  Burke,  "International  Transfers  of
Stolen Cultural  Property: Should Thieves Continue to Benefit  from  Domestic
Laws  Favoring  Bona  Fide  Purchasers?"  (1990)  13  Loyola  L. A.  Intl.  &
Comp.  L. J.  427  and  studies  cited  therein;  and  Degraw,  "Art  Theft  in  Per-
spective" (1987)  31 Intl. J. Offender  Therapy  & Comp. Criminology  1, 3.

3  L. V.  Prott,  "International  Control  of  Illicit  Movement  of the  Cultural  Heri-
tage:  The  1970  UNESCO  Convention  and  Some  Possible  Alternatives",
(1983)  10  Syr.  J. Int.  L.  &  Comm.  333  at  345;  and  see  generally  L. V.
Prott  and  P. J.  O'Keefe,  Law and  the Cultural Heritage  Vol.3 — Movement,
Butterworths  1989.

4  P. Bator,  "An  Essay  on  the  International  Trade  in  Art"  (1982)  34  Stanford

L. R. 275.

5  Hereinafter,  "PRC". See  M. Duckworth,  "The  Painting  Market  in Asia: Pro-

gress  and  Promise" Art Asia  1992 at 11.

6  Decision  Concerning  the  Severe  Punishment  of  Criminals  Who  Seriously
Undermine  the Economy, adopted  8 March,  1982 by the 22nd  Session of the
Standing Committee of the Fifth  National People's Congress. See also the  16
December,  1974 Circular Concerning the Opinion on Strengthening  Cultural
Relics  Commercial Administration  and Implementing  the Policy  on the Pro-
tection  of  Cultural  Relics,  promulgated  by  the  State  Council  approving  the
Opinion  of  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Trade,  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  and
the  State  Administration  for  Protection  of  Cultural  Relics,  referring  to  the
problem  of the  "frenzy  of  digging  up tombs  for  buried  treasures".  See  also,
J.  David  Murphy, "An Annotated  Chronological  Index  of  People's  Republic
of China Statutory and Other Materials Relating to Cultural  Property" (1994)
1  IJCP  159.

7  South  China  Morning Post,  December  10, 1992.
8  Window, October  30,1992.  According  to  a  February  5,  1993  account  in  the
South  China  Morning Post  the  Macau  police  recovered  and  returned  7  rare
Chinese  antiques  worth  Hong  Kong  $20  million  that  had  been  stolen  from
a  museum  in  Kaifeng  City, Henan  Province  in  1992.

9  South  China  Morning Post,  December  10,  1992.
10  J. Merryman,  "The Retention  of Cultural  Property" (1988)  21 U. Cal. Davis
L. R. 477 at 482. And see M. F. Lindsay, "The  Recovery of Our  Archaeolog-
ical  Heritage"  (1990)  22  Case  W. Res. J. Int.  L.  165. Interestingly,  even  the
fledgling  archaeological  movement  in  the  PRC  has  been  affected  by  the
vagaries  of  politics  —  for  example,  used  as  a  tool  of  anti-American  propa-
ganda  and,  during the "Great  Leap  Forward",  subordinated  to  the  principle
of  "hou-chin  pao-ku"  ("paying  more  attention  to  the  present  than  to  the
past").

11  See  J. Merryman  and  A. Elsen,  Law,  Ethics  and  the  Visual Arts  (2nd  ed.),
Philadelphia:  University  of  Pennsylvania  Press,  1987  at  46.  See  also  R. A.
Morris,  "Legal  and ethical  issues  in  the  trade  in  cultural  property"  [1990]
N. Z. L. J.  40.

238

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

People's  Republic  of China  and the  Illicit  Trade  in  Cultural  Property

12  Historically,  for  African  and  Asian  states  in particular,  the pillaging  of  cul-
tural  relics  was  equated  with  colonialism,  and  the  cultural  property  issue
became  central  to  the  struggle  for  independence.  Gradually,  however,  the
rhetoric  of  anti-colonialism  has  given  away  to  notions  of  "national  patri-
mony" and  even to the relationship  of a state's art treasures to the  "common
heritage of mankind", though still predominantly with a view to nationalistic
protection. See-D. N. Thomason, "Rolling  Back History: The United Nations
General  Assembly  and  the  Right  to  Cultural  Property"  (1990)  22 > Case
W. Res. J. Intl. L. 47.

13  H. de Varine, "The Rape and Plunder of Cultures: An Aspect of Deterioration
of the Terms  of Cultural  Trade  Between  Nations" (1983)  139 Museum  152.

14  See generally  Prott  and  O'Keefe,  supra.
15  See  G. Graham,  "Protection  and  Reversion  of  Cultural  Property:  Issues  of
Definition  and  Justification"  (1987)  21 International  Lawyer  755; and  S. A.
Williams,  "National  Treasure  Status:  An  Objective  International  Decision,
or a Subjective National Categorization?" paper delivered at the IBA  Confer-
ence,  Buenos  Aires,  1988.

16  See  discussions  in  J. Merryman,  "Two  Ways  of  Thinking  About  Cultural
Property"  (1986)  A. J. I L.  831; and  M. F. Bolano,  "International  Art  Theft
Disputes:  Harmonizing  Common  Law  Principles  with  Article  7(b)  of  the
UNESCO  Convention"  (1991-92)  15 Fordham  Int.  L. J.  129.

17  249 UNTS  240
18  In  Article  1.
19  The PRC has recognised the need for such facilities:  see, for example, Chap-
ter  IV  of  the  Law  of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  on  the  Protection  of
Cultural  Relics  adopted  at  the  25th  Meeting  of  the  Standing  Committee  of
the  Fifth  National  People's  Congress,  November  19,  1982  (hereinafter,  the
"1982  Cultural  Relics  Law"); however  it is extremely  doubtful  whether  suf-
ficient  resources  will  be  found  in  the  near  term  even  to  approximate  the
ideals  and  standards  set  forth  therein. -

20  See K. S. Jore, "The Illicit Movement of Art and Artifact:  How Long Will the
Art  Market  Continue  to  Benefit  From  Ineffective  Laws  Governing  Cultural
Property?"  (1987)  13  Brooklyn  J. Int.  L.  55,  68.  For  criticisms  of  the
UNESCO  Convention,  see  A. P.  Prunty,  "Toward  Establishing  an  Inter-
national  Tribunal  for  the  Settlement  of  Cultural  Property  Disputes:  How to
Keep  Greece  from  Losing  Its  Marbles"  (1984)  72  Georgetown  L. J.  1155;
B: Burnham,  "Review"  in  (1983)  15  NYU  J. Int.  L.&  P.  1021,  1023;  and
P. Lalive, supra  at 24, who argues  that the Convention  "shows  a remarkable
lack  of  understanding  of,  or  concern  for,; the  realities  of  comparative  law
and private  international  law".  Indeed, Article 7 does not come to grips with
the  bona  fide  purchaser  doctrine  found  in  the  civil  law  systems  of many  of
the market  and  transit  states.

21  See  L. V.  Prott-,  "The  Preliminary  Draft  Unidroit  Convention  on. Stolen  or
Illegally  Exported  Cultural  Objects"  (1992),  41  I. C. L Q.  160;  and
R. Crewdson,  "Putting  Life  into  a  Cultural  Property  Convention  —  UNID-
ROIT:  Still  Some  Way to  Go" (1992)  17 Int.  Legal  Pract. 45.

22  See  generally  L. V.  Prott  and  P. J.  O'Keefe,  supra,  esp.  chs.  8  and  9;  P. J.
O'Keefe,  ""Export/Import  Laws  — Problems  of  Drafting  and  Implemen-
tation"  in International  Sales  of  Works of Art ICC Geneva  1990 at  57. Note
that  measures  "imposed  for  the  protection  of  national  treasures  of  artistic,
historic  or  archaeological  value"  are  expressly  excepted  from  the  GATT
regime: Art. XX (f), provided  "that  such measures are not applied  in a man-
ner  which  would  constitute  a  means  of  arbitrary  or  unjustifiable  discrimi-

239

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

J. David  Murphy

nation  between  countries  where  the  same  conditions  prevail,  or  a  disguised
restriction".

23  For an indication of the private law and conflict  of laws difficulties  surround-
ing  theft  of  art  and  relics,  see  S. Rodota,  "The  Civil  Law  Aspects  of  the
International  Protection  of Cultural  Property" cited  in Merryman  and  Elsen,
Law,  Ethics  and  the  Visual Arts  Vol.1,  at  113; G. Reichelt,  "The  Protection
of  Cultural  Property",  Study  LXX-Doc.l  Unidroit  1986,  and  Study  LXX-
Doc.4  1988;  S. N.  Nott,  "Title  to  Illegally  Exported  Items  of  Historic  or
Artistic  Worth",  (1984)  33  I. C. L Q.203;  K. T.  Burke,  supra;  P. B.  Carter,
"Transnational  Trade in Works  of Art: The Position  in English  Private  Inter-
national  Law"  in  International  Sales  of  Works of  Art  ICC  Geneva  1985;
M. F.  Bolano,  supra;  Autocephalous  Greek-Orthodox  Church  of  Cyprus
v. Goldberg  & Feldman Fine  Arts  Inc.  917  F.2d  278  (9th  Cir  1990); Wink-
worth  v. Christie  Manson and  Woods Ltd.  [1980] All  E. R.I 121.

24  For  an  indication  of the  legal  problems  —  including  those  of  expropriation
and  extraterritoriality  — see  J. S.  Moore,  "Enforcing  Foreign  Ownership
Claims  in  the  Antiquities  Market"  [1988]  Yale  L. J.466;  and  J. Merryman,
supra  in  (1988)  21  U. C. Davis  L. R.  477.  Article  4  of  the  1982  Cultural
Relics Law provides that "all  cultural relics remaining underground or in the
inland waters or territorial seas within the boundaries of the People's Repub-
lic  of  China...sites  of  ancient  culture,  ancient  tombs  and  cave  temples...
memorial buildings, ancient architectural  structures, stone carvings, etc. des-
ignated  for  protection  by  the  state...and  cultural  relics  in  the  collection  of
state organs, armed forces, enterprises owned by the whole people and public
institutions  shall  be owned by  the state".

25  Article  2. The provisions  of this  legislation  are often  mirrored  in  legislation

of provinces,  autonomous  regions and  municipalities  within  the  PRC.

26  ibid., Article 4.
27  ibid,  Articles  24, 25.
28  See also  the Measures on  the Administration  of Export  Verification for  Cul-
tural Relics  announced by the Cultural Department February 27,  1989. These
supplement  Articles 27 and 28 by providing  somewhat more detail on  verifi-
cation (i. e. classification)  procedures, designated selling units, and the requi-
sition  by purchase.

29  For useful  discussions of the underlying  value patterns  see Bator, supra;  and
J. H.  Merryman  and A. E.  Elsen,  "Hot  Art:  A  Reexamination  of  the  Illegal
International  Trade  in  Cultural  Objects"  (1982)  12 J.  of  Arts  Management
and  Law  5.

30  Relics  expert  Shan Shiyuan  quoted  in Beijing  Review,  Vol. 35, no. 46, Nov.

16-22,  1992 at 32.

31  ibid., ax  5.
32  Contrast  the  situation  of  many  Asian  source  states  with  that  of  the  source
(and  market)  state  of  Japan,  for  example,  whose  domestic  collectors  have
the  resources  to  compete  with  foreign  buyers,  which  has  tax  incentives  to
induce  donations  to the  state,  and  whose  restrictions  on  exports  are  suffic-
iently narrow to make effective  enforcement  feasible,  with the result that the
foreign  market  is  satisfied  generally  through  legal  means:  see  C. F.  Sayre,
"Cultural  Property  Laws  in India  and  Japan" (1986)  33 UCLA  L. R. 851.

33  J. A. R. Nafziger,  "An Anthro-Apology  for  Managing the International  Flow

of  Cultural  Property" (1982)  4  Houston  J.  of  Int. Law  189 at  194.

34  See,  for  example,  explicit  references  in the  Circular on  Cracking  Down  on
Activities  Involving  Smuggling  and  Illegal  Excavation for  Cultural  Relics,
issued by the State Council  26 May,  1987, which, interestingly,  addresses in

240

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

People's  Republic  of China and the  Illicit Trade  in Cultural  Property

the same breath the "damaging of state cultural heritage" and the "corrupting
of social values" associated  therewith.  Illicit  traffic  can  occur  at the  official
or  unofficial  level.  During  the  1980s  in  a  bid  for  foreign  currency,  PRC
officials  discreetly  allowed  a  flow  of  antique  pottery  out  through  Hong
Kong. There  is a report  of an  individual  museum  official  in Hunan  province
stealing  over  1800  cultural  relics:  Sun  Fei,  "Using  the  Criminal  Law  as  a
Means of Protecting the Historic .Relics of our Motherland" (1983)  1 Studies
in  Law  1.8, 23.

35  In the PRC as in many source states, the real "source" of relics is the peasant
classes  whose  grave-robbing,  excavations  or thefts  are often  the first step in
a sophisticated  smuggling network.  In  1986 in Henan province, for  example,
peasants .allegedly  robbed  500  graves  dating  from  the  First  to  the  Fourth
Centuries  B. C. Ofcourse,  the "extreme" internationalist  position  holds that
illicit  trafficking  may  be  a  good  thing  in  that  amateur  digs  may  disclose
relics  otherwise  never recovered,  and  smuggling  may  save  works  otherwise
neglected,  thereby  "spreading" culture. 

,

36- See  the  very  telling  admissions  in  Trial Measures  on  the Administration  of
Exports  of  Cultural  Relics  with  Special  Permission,  approved  and  promul-
gated  by  the  State  Council  July  31,, 1979 ("in  assessing  cultural  relics  to be
exported, any objects  whose authenticity  is hard to determine  at the moment
or disputable  shalLnot.be  exported  for  the time being  so that  the outflow  of
important  cultural relics out of carelessness  can be avoided"); and see Meas-
ures  on  the  Administration  of  Export  Verification for  Cultural  Relics,  an-
nounced  by the Cultural  Department  February  27,  1989, article 27, as to the
rather-small  staff  numbers  deemed  necessary  for  a  "verification  unit".  Sun
ft\,,supra,  observes  that  in  many  cases  curators  or  staff  of  PRC  museums
are  simply  unable  even  to identify  losses  after  thefts.

3.7  Morris, supra, at 41.  See also  P. Bator, supra; and  J. H.  Merryman  and  A. E.

Elsen, supra  (1982)  12 J. of Arts Management  and  Law  15.

38  See  generally  J. Moustakas,  "Group Rights  in  Cultural  Property:  Justifying

Strict  Inalienability"  (1989)  74 Cornell  L. R.  1179.

39  J. S.  Mill, Principles  of Political  Economy,  Book  II  ch.ii  at 218  (W. Ashley

ed.  1909)  cited  in  Moustakas,  supra.

40  See J. A. R. Nafziger,  supra.
41  See  Bator,  supra sA 330 ff;  W. P. Buranich,  "The  Art  Collecting  Countries
and  Their  Export  Restrictions  on  Cultural  Property:  Who  Owns.  Modern
i  Art?" (1988)  19 Cal. Western  Int. L. J.  153 and Bolano,supra.  Some would
supplement  such  a  regime  with  a  supranational  adjudicative  institution  to
determine  "cultural  significance":  see  Prunty,  supra;  or  a  UNESCO-super-
vised  register  to  be  used,  in  a  manner  similar  to  a  land  register:  see  E. C.
Schneider,  "Plunder  or  Excavation?  Observations  and  Suggestions  on  the
Regulation  of Ownership  and  Trade  in the  Evidence of Cultural  Patrimony"
(1982) 9 Syr. J. Int. L. & Comm.  1. An economic analysis would dictate that
it  is more  effective  and  efficient  for the  buyer  or  the  market  state to  police
the  traffic  than  the poor  source  nations:  see  J. S.  Moore, supra  [1988] Yale
L. J. 466.

42  P. Bator, supra  at 322.
43  For  an  example  of  this  see  A. Hawkins,  "The  Euphronios  Krater  at  the
Metropolitan  Museum:  A Question  of Provenance" (1976) 27 Hastings  L. J.
1163.

44  The  importance  of  cultural  exchanges  is  actually  espoused  by  UNESCO
despite  its  nationalist  leanings:  see  references  to  the  "common  heritage  of
mankind" in the UNESCO Recommendation  at the  19th General  Conference

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317

241

J. David  Murphy

at  Nairobi,  1976;  see  also  the  1979  General  Assembly  Resolution  34/64
suggesting  that  states  have  a  right  only  to a "representative"  collection.

45  There  have  been  recent  developments  of  this  sort  in  the  PRC:  see,  for  ex-
ample,  exchange  programmes  such  as  the  June  1,  1992  PRC-Japan  Agree-
ment for the Dunhuang Caves Cultural Relics Protection, Research and Exhi-
bition  Centre; and the June  10,  1992 PRC  -  Italy Establishment  of the Xian
Cultural  Relic  Protection  and  Restoration  Centre  Agreement.  PRC  treasures
such  as  terracotta  warriors  and  the  gold-threaded jade  suit  have  even  been
loaned  to  Taiwan:  Beijing Review,  Vol.35, No. 46, Nov.  16—22,  1992 at 33.
A  desirable  international  effort  would be a world fund  to assist  preservation,
exploration,  scientific  study,  inventory  compilation  and  the  like  in  de-
veloping  source  states,  of  a  kind  similar  to  the  fund  established  in  the
UNESCO  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  the  World  Cultural  and  Natural
Heritage.

46  Circular  Concerning  the Opinion on Strengthening  Cultural Relics  Commer-
cial  Administration  and  Implementing  the  Policy  on  the  Protection  of  Cul-
tural  Relics,  promulgated  December  16,  1974 by  the  State  Council  approv-
ing the Opinion  of the Ministry of Foreign Trade, the Ministry of  Commerce
and  the  State  Administration  for  Protection  of  Cultural  Relics,  para  3.  See
also  Trial Measures on the Administration  of Exports  of Cultural Relics  with
Special  Permission,  approved  and  promulgated  by  the  State  Council  July
31,  1979,  referring  to  overstocking,  the  large  number  of  replicas,  and  the
types  of  items  that ought  not  to be  retained.

47  Explanation  of Several  Questions  Concerning  the Applicable  Law  in Hand-
ling  Cases of Stealing,  Illegally Recovering,  Dealing  in, and Smuggling  Cul-
tural Relics,  issued by the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme  People's
Procuratorate,  November  27,  1987.

48  See also  Chapter  VI of the Beijing  Municipal Administrative  Regulations  on
the  Protection  of  Cultural Relics,  adopted  at the  37th  Meeting  of the  Stand-
ing Committee  of the Eighth  Beijing  Municipal  National  People's  Congress,
7  July,  1987.

49  See  accounts  in  Beijing  Review,  Vol. 35,  no. 46,  Nov.  16-22,  1992  at  32;
and  Window, October  30,  1992.  In  February  1991, officials  of  the  PRC's
China  Historic  Museum  donated  60  pieces  of  choice  porcelain  relics  to  the
Hong  Kong Museum  of Art in appreciation  of anti-smuggling work by Hong
Kong's law enforcement  agencies: South  China Morning Post,  April 9, 1991.
It  is  interesting  to  compare  and  contrast  the  Russian  experience  before  and
after  glasnost:  see  J. Berkowitz,  "A  Look  Into  Glasnost's  Impact  on  the
Soviet  Art  World" (1991)  11 Loyola  Int.  Law  J. 453.

242

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Bristol Library, on 13 Mar 2019 at 21:04:34, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0940739194000317


