IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 69

When Data Become People:

Archaeological Ethics, Reburial, and

the Past as Public Heritage 

lawrence j. zimmerman*

In the United States, consideration of archaeological ethics has been relatively recent and con-
cerned primarily with deﬁning professionalism. By declaring that the past is a public heritage,
claiming that archaeologists should be its stewards, and moving toward a positivist scientiﬁc ap-
proach, American archaeology has alienated its public. Prompted by pressure from Native
Americans on the reburial issue, the Society for American Archaeology has attempted to ad-
dress the problems by proposing an ethics code, but outsiders are likely to see the contradictions
between stated principles and practice. These issues are examined from the perspective of the re-
burial issue, offering the possibility that an ethnocritical archaeology might provide mechanisms
that will allow archaeologists to be more truly accountable and, in the long term, better stew-
ards of the past. 

as a discipline, archaeology in North America is only a bit over a
century old. Pressures to make it a professional and scientiﬁc ﬁeld have dom-
inated most of its concerns with ethical practice. Only during the past two
decades have notions that the profession might be accountable to something
other than archaeology itself pushed the ﬁeld toward a broader view of ethics.
Groups of non-archaeologists, ranging from collectors to indigenous people,
have demanded attention to their interests in the past and their particular ap-
proaches to knowing it. Many archaeologists, often under extreme pressure
from these groups, have become aware that ethical practices must guide their
views. 

There is little question that the greatest pressure came from Native Amer-
icans1 concerned about archaeology’s treatment of the dead that many Indians
view as their ancestors. At many times, confrontation between Indians and ar-
chaeologists over reburial issues has been heated, and in fact, such confronta-
tions continue, as in the case of the so-called Kennewick skeleton.2 At the

*Adjunct Professor of Anthropology at the University of Iowa and Research Associate in the 
Ofﬁce of the State Archaeologist of Iowa. He has served as editor of Plains Anthropologist, South
Dakota Archaeology, World Archaeological Bulletin, and as an associate editor of American Antiquity. A past
Executive Secretary of the World Archaeological Congress, he now serves as a member of the 
Society for American Archaeology Ethics Committee.

© 1998 International Cultural Property Society

69

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 70

same time, many archaeologists have recognized that the profession must deal
with these concerns, and ethics codes are starting to incorporate accountabil-
ity as an important tenet. 

Many archaeologists see this as threatening the scientiﬁc foundations of
the ﬁeld, if not the viability of the ﬁeld itself. Those who feel this way tend
to view the past as a public heritage, and agree that no special privilege of ac-
cess or control should be granted to any group that might claim it.3 They also
worry that recognizing the ways of knowing the past used by such groups will
compromise the greater validity that a scientiﬁc archaeology can bring to 
understanding the prehistoric past.4

Archaeology thus ﬁnds itself in something of a complex dilemma. Amer-
ican archaeology sees itself as a scientiﬁc discipline devoted to a stewardship
of the past it promotes as being a public heritage. At the same time, it wishes
to recognize accountability to that public. The dilemma derives from the fact
that the public is not just one group, but many, often with differing, usually
unscientiﬁc, views of the past and ways of knowing or respecting it. To whom
can archaeology be accountable, given such diversity?

In this article, I review archaeological ethics and ethics codes and archae-
ology’s struggle with what ethical practice is. American archaeology has been
involved in a slow, difﬁcult shift from an ethic that was almost exclusively ac-
countable to the database (the archaeological record and its conservation) and
science toward a greater accountability to contemporary people. My discussion
is guided by the difﬁcult question, For whom do we do archaeology? I exam-
ine archaeology’s notion of the past as a public heritage in the face of demands
by particular groups. The approach, especially in last section of the article, is
reﬂexive, with examples largely drawn from North America and the reburial
issue. Though some5 would probably label me as such, I am neither antiscience
nor anti-archaeology, but, in fact, the opposite. Archaeology is science, but a
historical science.6 That means that it has limits and must work inferentially,
not always being able to function in a positivist sense, using a strict, scientiﬁc
method. As well, an ethical, accountable archaeology attempts to understand
the ways in which people process their pasts, recognizing that they may have a
substantially different view of stewardship of the past than archaeologists. I
contend that a failure to acknowledge these different viewpoints puts archae-
ology at greater jeopardy than does anything else. Archaeology has put people
into the background, turning them into objects for study, declaring the people
of the past extinct. That is the primary realm of archaeology’s ethical disquiet. 

1 how people
became data
and the past
became public
heritage

Archaeology’s struggle with deﬁning ethical practice, and its consequent jeop-
ardy, stems from efforts to deﬁne itself as a professional ﬁeld. As this process
continued, the past was becoming a public heritage, sometimes with archae-
ologists promoting the idea, and people were turning into data. A brief review
shows that these processes were thoroughly entwined. 

lawrence j. zimmerman

70

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 71

1.1 moundbuilders and developing professionalism 
Archaeology in North America is young, only about 150 years old, if one is
generous with its beginnings. The establishment of the Smithsonian Insti-
tution in 1846 and the Peabody Museum at Harvard in 1866 might mark its 
beginnings. More realistically, the establishment in 1879 of the Bureau of Eth-
nology (later changed to the Bureau of American Ethnology in 1894) and the
National Museum within the Smithsonian in the same year should be reck-
oned as its start. With rare exception, the archaeology done before that time
was done by antiquarians, usually educated amateurs, who were obsessed by
questions about the origins of many fantastic earthworks observed in the east-
ern part of the continent. 

Part of their quest was aimed at documenting a European—or at least
not American Indian—origin for them as part of the Moundbuilder myth,
which saw the earthworks built by an earlier and extinct race of people. Much
of their excavation can best be described as looting, mostly in search of arti-
facts that might demonstrate such a prehistory for personal or local museum
collections.7 The earliest individuals to be considered professional archaeolo-
gists worked hard to demolish the Moundbuilder myth, demonstrating that
the earthworks had been built by the ancestors of American Indians. 

1.2 disappearing indians 

In the process of debunking this myth, early archaeologists began to success-
fully distance themselves from amateur and antiquarian approaches. Systematic
excavation and analytical methods allowed them to build a solid, descriptive
database that would allow a better interpretation of the past. Ethnography 
became closely linked to archaeology as scholars were determined to docu-
ment Indian life before, as they thought at the time, Indians disappeared.8 Dif-
ferent from anthropology and archaeology in Europe, the two ﬁelds in the
United States essentially became subdisciplines of a more broadly deﬁned
ﬁeld of anthropology, integrally linked by its beginnings to the study of Na-
tive Americans.

Soon thereafter, as the Moundbuilder myth declined, archaeology began
to specialize, with scholars focusing their studies on building archaeological
chronologies of North American regions. Interest in Indian ethnology waned,
with only a few archaeologists gaining an appreciation for Indian views of the
past.9 For Indians, the next sixty years was often a struggle simply to survive.
A range of programs, from allotment of tribal lands to termination to relo-
cation, was enacted to absorb the culture into the dominant society. Land, re-
ligion, language, and social structure all became targets for intervention by the
dominant society. For many archaeologists, as for other members of their so-
ciety, Indians were essentially gone. In truth, however, they hadn’t disappeared
at all, and in regard to archaeology, they seemed to have no complaint, or for
that matter, any response at all.

when data become people

71

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 72

1.3 toward a public heritage

At the turn of the century, a nationwide conservation movement developed to
save the natural wonders of the country, and it linked the protection of an-
cient Indian sites to a defense of nature. Congress passed the Antiquities Act
in 1906 to protect Indian sites on federal lands, and the past was on its way to
becoming a public heritage. By the time scholars founded the Society for
American Archaeology (SAA) in 1934, the professional ﬁeld was starting to
grow, and it was put to use during the Great Depression. Public funds were
used to excavate and analyze archaeological materials around the country as
part of the Works Progress Administration and the Civilian Conservation
Corps. After World War II, due to a number of factors, there was rapid ex-
pansion of anthropology departments, where many new archaeologists re-
ceived training. By the late 1940s, major federal funding of archaeological 
excavations quickly developed as part of the River Basin Surveys program.
This program was geared toward salvaging archaeological remains along rivers
and streams where government agencies, especially the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, planned major dam and reservoir projects. Archaeologists located
thousands of sites and tested or excavated many of them.10 These salvage 
programs continued until the late 1960s, expanded by the highway salvage ar-
chaeology programs developed in conjunction with construction of the in-
terstate highway system.

From the salvage programs, there was a relatively smooth transition into
a new subﬁeld within archaeology, Cultural Resources Management (CRM).
The late 1960s and early 1970s saw the emergence of a range of laws meant to
protect the natural environment. The laws incorporated protection of archae-
ological, historical, and paleontological sites as part of the natural and his-
torical  environment. The  SAA  lobbied  hard  for  passage  of the  laws. The 
Historic Sites Preservation Act of 1966 created the National Register of His-
toric Places and the President’s Advisory Council on Historic Preservation,
with its Section 106 review process that gave the council a review function to
determine the impact of federal actions on National Register properties. The
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 required preparation of environ-
mental impact statements for federal projects, including the impact on ar-
chaeological sites. The 1974 Archaeological and Historical Conservation Act
provided funding to preserve and recover signiﬁcant archaeological informa-
tion from threatened sites. As Thomas Patterson documents, these laws es-
tablished the federal infrastructure for CRM in the United States and the
foundations for state laws.11

The impact of CRM on archaeology has been profound. Now small-
scale, individual archaeological entrepreneurs, major companies, and university
laboratories are becoming involved in projects that are often ﬁnancially lu-
crative. In many ways, there was also a divergence of CRM from academic 
archaeology, which led to the 1975 founding of a separate organization, the

lawrence j. zimmerman

72

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 73

Society of Professional Archaeologists. There was also a substantial expansion
in the primary archaeological literature. These trends continue today, though
perhaps not with the intensity of the 1970s.

1.4 stewards of the past and 

the conservation ethic

The credo of CRM is essentially conservation, an idea that the archaeological
record is a public trust, a “human, cultural heritage that has a wide signiﬁ-
cance; ‘as one important record of the human past, archaeological materials
should be used for the beneﬁt of all people.’”12 Archaeologists see themselves
as advocates for the archaeological record, whose task is to protect archaeo-
logical sites and data. In that sense, an idea of stewardship has been part of an
archaeological ethic from its beginnings as a professional ﬁeld. Archaeologists
have decried the looting of sites and the trafﬁcking of antiquities. Some have
gone so far as to suggest that archaeologists should not even use data gathered
from looted materials in the antiquities market.13 Archaeological professional
standards for excavation and analysis are all about deriving the greatest infor-
mation beneﬁt from the archaeological sites. Many archaeologists recognize
that new technologies will provide even greater information potential and 
advocate never completely excavating a site, but rather saving some for future
excavation. 

The idea of stewardship of the past is powerful for archaeologists, even
to the point of practitioners believing that they can save the past for the fu-
ture. The idea of destruction of archaeological sites and data is anathema.
When, for example, American Indians have reburied human remains, some ar-
chaeologists have likened it to “book burning”14 with others suggesting that
we all lose “if Native Americans rebury their pasts.”15 Most archaeologists
would probably subscribe to what Mark Lynott was told by his supervisor
when he took a job with the Midwest Archaeological Center of the National
Park Service in 1978. His job was to advocate for the archaeology of the region
and “if you don’t do it, nobody will.”16

1.5 archaeological theory and 

objectifying the past

Stewardship, in its extreme form, focuses all importance on objects and
sites from the past. Though archaeologists might recognize that the past is
a public heritage, the public is somehow removed from the formula, as the
quote from Lynott’s supervisor seems to recognize, in that archaeologists
seem to believe that no one but archaeologists will advocate for the past.
If the public doesn’t seem to care, one might ask for whom archaeologists
do archaeology—other archaeologists? In such a complex notion of stew-
ardship, the public is moved to the background, and that allows archaeol-
ogy to key in to the objects. 

when data become people

73

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 74

Archaeological epistemology has essentially bolstered this process. As ar-
chaeologists developed their systematic excavation and analytical methods, the
attention was on providing detail about the objects. What was the precise re-
lationship of one object to another, that is, what was the context of the ob-
ject? In efforts to classify and describe artifacts and features, the attention is
to the detailed characteristics of the artifact, such as ﬂaking patterns on stone
tools.

By the late 1960s, as CRM was beginning to take shape, archaeology be-
gan a new analytical and theoretical approach that expanded the kinds of data
archaeologists sought. Cultures were looked at in terms of adaptation to en-
vironment, so most excavators began to employ techniques that would allow
recovery of data to reconstruct environment. These “ecofacts” promoted even
greater attention to objects. Statistical methods saw a huge upsurge in use,
sometimes as heuristic ﬁshing trips, in the hope that cultural patterns might
be ascertained from statistical relationships of traits of artifacts.

All this attention to the object was tied together epistemologically in what
has been called the new archaeology or processual archaeology.17 Archaeology
became increasingly reliant on an approach that was more explicitly scientiﬁc
than any archaeology before it, with a goal of trying to determine general laws
about human behavior from the archaeological record. The approach was pos-
itivist in that there was believed to be a single, knowable past that could be de-
rived from the study of material objects. The authority for the approach was
the universality of the human experience linked directly to the idea of the past
as a public heritage. How could archaeologists hope to determine general laws
of human behavior if it were not?

Although there is now a  “post-processual” archaeology, processual ar-
chaeology is still the dominant epistemology in American archaeology. Those
who have criticized the approach see it as dry and depersonalizing, lacking real
meaning about the lives of people. Some, like Miller and Tilley, recognize that
“archaeology may be held to tend toward ‘fetishism’ . . . that relationships be-
tween people may be represented as though they were relationships between
objects.”18 Most laypeople do not understand such approaches, and it is a fun-
damental complaint among Indian people that their ancestors are treated as
objects. 

All concern with ethics was initially geared toward protection of the archae-
ological record and toward an idea of professionalism. There was no need for
codiﬁed ethics before because prior to World War II, the discipline was small,
with most practitioners aware of one another and each other’s background and
abilities.19 Only after the upsurge in salvage archaeology did concerns for stan-
dards emerge. In 1954, the SAA structured a committee to deﬁne levels of ap-
propriate activity and responsibilities based on experience and training, but
didn’t wish to deﬁne the difference between professional and amateur archae-

lawrence j. zimmerman

74

2 development
of archaeo-
logical ethics
codes in the
united states

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 75

ologists or to set up criteria by which the status of any particular individual
could be determined.20

By 1960, the pressure for action on ethics and standards grew and led the
SAA to develop what was called Four Statements for Archaeology. The ﬁrst deﬁned
archaeology. The second discussed methods, stating that “disregard of proper
archaeological methods provides grounds for expulsion from the Society.”The
third generally addressed the need for ethics, stressing continued availability of
records and competent reporting. As well, it provided censure for trafﬁcking
in artifacts, excavating without permission, and willful destruction, distortion
or concealment of archaeological data. The fourth statement reviewed proper
training for archaeologists.21 All the statements were geared toward protection
of the archaeological database. These ideas remained the guiding ethical prin-
ciples for the SAA until early this decade.

As CRM began to develop, several archaeologists concerned with profes-
sional standards in the burgeoning ﬁeld founded the Society of Professional
Archaeologists (SOPA) in 1976, mostly to meet a perceived need by the ar-
chaeological community and the federal government to identify archaeologists
who met standards of professional training and conduct. Essentially it was a
registry, and many archaeologists did not join. SOPA took the lead in ethics
by promoting its Standards of Research Performance and Code of Ethics, maintaining a
dialogue on ethics in its newsletters and publishing papers on ethical prac-
tice.22 SOPA’s ethics code saw a responsibility to the public and stated that
members should “actively support conservation of the archeological resource
base” and  “be sensitive to, and respect the legitimate concerns of, groups
whose culture histories are the subjects of archeological investigations.”23

Since that time, other groups, such as the American Cultural Resources
Association (ACRA),24 have developed ethics codes, and, like ACRA’s, most
tend to mirror SOPA’s. Also relevant are actions of the American Anthropo-
logical Association (AAA). The AAA is independent of the SAA, but many
archaeologists are members of both. In the early 1970s, the AAA responded to
concerns about the Vietnam War, Project Camelot, and concerns about the
role of anthropologists in scientiﬁc colonialism25 by adopting Principles of Pro-
fessional Responsibility. A section entitled “Relations with Those Studied” states
the following:

In research, the anthropologist’s paramount responsibility is to those
they study. When there is a conﬂict of interest, these individuals must
come ﬁrst. Anthropologists must do everything in their power to
protect the physical, social, and psychological welfare and to honor 
the dignity and privacy of those studied.26

Many Native Americans have wondered, if anthropology is the overarching
discipline covering archaeology and physical anthropology, why this statement
does not seem to apply to them and their ancestors. The AAA has studied re-

when data become people

75

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 76

visions to its ethics code, and a new one is in draft.27 The language is not as
direct, with the statement above now reading: “Anthropological researchers
have primary ethical obligations to the people, species, and materials they
study and to the people with whom they work.” Nonetheless, whatever the
version, it is a statement on obligations to people.

By 1990, the SAA began to feel urgency for an assessment of archaeolog-
ical ethics. Lynott attributes this to the fact that archaeology had grown well
beyond the conﬁnes of academia due to CRM. He also notes its coincidence
with “an increased expression of interest among native people or First Na-
tions in the archaeological record and the practice of archaeology,” particularly
in regard to the impact of repatriation legislation, suggesting that it  “sent
tremors through the discipline.”28 In response, the SAA Executive Board ap-
pointed Alison Wylie and Mark Lynott to chair a task force on ethics. 

With funding from the National Science Foundation and the National
Park Service, the task force organized a three-day workshop in late 1993 where
participants drafted six principles of archaeological ethics. These principles
were presented at a forum at the 1994 annual meeting of the SAA, with posi-
tion papers on each of the principles and commentaries from ﬁve discussants.
The principles, discussant comments, and additional statements were pub-
lished as a special SAA report.29 After taking additional comments, the Ex-
ecutive Board added two principles and agreed that the principles should be
put up for a vote by the membership, now pending. The eight principles begin
with stewardship of the archaeological record as key to the others. The second
is accountability, the important point of it being that archaeologists must
make a good faith effort to consult actively with affected groups. The third
condemns commercialization. The fourth insists on public education and out-
reach and speciﬁcally mentions Native Americans “who ﬁnd in the archaeo-
logical  record  important  aspects  of their  cultural  heritage.” Principle  ﬁve 
relates to intellectual property, but in the sense that archaeological materials
are public heritage, rather than personal. The others relate to the need for pub-
lic reporting and publication, keeping good records and preserving materials,
and providing adequate training and support resources. In addition to the pro-
posed code, for the ﬁrst time in its history, the SAA established a standing
ethics committee to provide ongoing analysis and guidance for matters of pro-
fessional ethics.30

The ethical codes developed by the SAA and other groups seem fairly in-
nocuous on the surface. To insiders, they may even seem like worthy, in fact,
noble, goals. Providing such goals is, of course, one important function of
ethical codes. They are conservative, attempting to keep the discipline on a rel-
atively narrow pathway of professional practice. At the same time, ethical
codes function as protective devices to make outsiders aware that the profes-
sion is concerned with proper practice and behaving properly. In other words,

lawrence j. zimmerman

76

3 the reburial
issue and
ethical
dilemmas

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 77

it helps keep outsiders from harshly criticizing the discipline by saying that the
ﬁeld is attending to its own problems of professional behavior.

The problem for most large professional bodies is that they are diverse in
both interest and attitudes toward proper professional behavior. For archae-
ology, Alison Wylie notes that the contexts of archaeological activities are so
complex, that “the dilemmas posed by competing commitments will not be
resolved by establishing a simple rule for or against certain kinds of contro-
versial practice.”31 She suggests that conﬂicts may only be resolved as archae-
ologists discuss ethics as part of implementation of research designs. Ethical
codes thus become generalized to core values with which almost all the prac-
titioners agree, but they really don’t resolve ethical dilemmas. Nor do they help
to solve the problems in regard to how outsiders see the profession. Outsiders
may be able to see what they consider to be glaring contradictions. Nowhere
is this more apparent than with the repatriation and reburial issues.

3.1 stewardship of what past?

Archaeology’s core principle of stewardship presents major problems. Ar-
chaeologists, as implied in the sentiment of Lynott’s National Park Service job
supervisor discussed above, tend to believe that they are the only ones who re-
ally care about the past. One of the key problems here is that a largely posi-
tivist science believes that there is only one past to care about. I have written
about this elsewhere,32 but non-archaeologists may also care deeply about the
past. It just may not be the same past that archaeologists care about. The past
of archaeologists is wrapped up in the material, the artifacts they ﬁnd, and the
places in which they ﬁnd them. For many tradition-oriented Indians, for ex-
ample, there is a very different past from that of archaeologists. It is not about
objects, but people. It is not about linear periods of time or cultural phases,
but about an oral tradition that contains lessons about life and a past that may
be very nonlinear. Some archaeologists have gone so far as to suggest that if ar-
chaeology is not done, then the ancient Indians will have no past. Clement
Meighan, in discussing the reburial issue, reﬂects the attitude of many archae-
ologists:

The archaeologist is deﬁning the culture of an extinct group and in 
presenting his research he is writing a chapter of human history 
that cannot be written except from archaeological investigation. If
archaeology is not done, the ancient people remain without a history
and without a record of their existence.33

Though the pasts of Indians and archaeologists most assuredly overlap in
some ways, Indians may be stewards of a largely different past. 

Some outsiders might wonder about the true concern of archaeologists
for the archaeological record and its preservation. Over the years, Indian peo-
ple  have  posed  many  questions  to  me  about  these  contradictions.  Simple

when data become people

77

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 78

problems involve the fact that many excavated collections have remained on
museum or laboratory shelves, never analyzed. Though archaeologists fret
about this problem, they continue to excavate sites instead of clearing up the
backlog. Archaeologists decry the destruction of sites, but in the process of
their CRM work, they are willing to write off sites as insigniﬁcant so that
construction projects can continue. This might be seen as stewardship, but
with a dollar sign attached. When archaeologists dig sites that are not threat-
ened by construction, they seem willing to destroy sites by their very excava-
tion, in order to advance their profession or career. Archaeologists promote
the idea that archaeological sites are nonrenewable resources, but aren’t hu-
mans creating new archaeological sites all the time? If that is true, and if a goal
of archaeology is to develop general principles about human behavior, can’t
these be developed by studying these newly formed sites? 

Are archaeologists really saving anything? David Lowenthal suggests that

preservation is an illusion: 

The more we save, the more we become aware that such remains are
continually altered and reinterpreted. We suspend their erosion only to
transform them in other ways. And saviours of the past change it no
less than iconoclasts bent on its destruction.34

Surely, at base level, archaeologists accept this concept when they agree that
new technologies will allow new insights into human remains or other ar-
chaeological  materials.  After  all,  it  is  a  fundamental  precept  of scientiﬁc
method that old interpretations are replaced by new. Thus, the past is not a
ﬁxed point on a linear timeline, but always in ﬂux.

It is equally insulting to Indian people to suggest that they do not care
about their pasts or what archaeologists do. Many archaeologists have asked
why Indians did not complain or seem concerned about archaeology until
recent years, contending that their apparently recent concern was primarily
“political.”35 The answer may be straightforward: Indians were too busy sur-
viving. Traditional leaders and elders were often gone or had been stripped
of any power to challenge what was happening, though many recognized
that what was happening was wrong. Potowatomi archaeologist Ben Rhodd
has implied that Indian people understood that digging sites and especially
disturbance of the dead put the world “out of balance,” causing many of the
problems Indian people and other people face.36 There was also recognition
on the part of some elders of some nations that direct confrontation was
disrespectful.  Miles  Richardson  suggests  this  in  a  compelling,  autobio-
graphical short story about a museum exhibit of a mound excavation,37 and
Merrill, Ladd, and Ferguson note abhorrence of confrontation as the dom-
inant style of the Zuni in their quest to have their Ahayu:da returned from
the Smithsonian.38

As a discussant on the SAA ethics panel in 1994, I posed some of these

lawrence j. zimmerman

78

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 79

matters to the audience by asking a few questions that seem to apply.39 Who
appointed us as stewards of the past? Are we self-appointed? Is the past really
a public heritage or is declaring it to be so only a convenient way for us to jus-
tify our professional existence? Indians have consistently asked these questions
in recent years, and, sadly, archaeologists seem to have few answers.

3.2 accountability to whom?

The idea that archaeologists are accountable to the public is certainly reason-
able if the past is a public heritage. The past is theirs; by and large the public
pays for it through the laws that protect cultural resources and even pays for
most of the non-CRM excavation in the country. Few archaeologists would
disagree. The SAA’s accountability principle goes on to say that responsible re-
search should include

[A] commitment to make every reasonable effort, in good faith, to
consult actively with affected group(s), with the goal of establishing a
working relationship that can be beneﬁcial to all parties involved.40

The problem is that there is really no deﬁnition of what consultation means
and certainly no way of assessing its effectiveness. Accountability to American
Indians was forced on archaeologists by law through the Native American
Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), and many archaeologists
have interpreted it as being simply notiﬁcation that work will be ongoing.
Many Indians think that is not enough. There has been only limited involve-
ment of Indians in setting research agendas unless Indians themselves are run-
ning the archaeological program, as is the case with some of the southwest-
ern nations such as the Navajo, Hopi, and Zuni.41

Accountability is largely meaningless as long as there is no real deﬁnition of
what it means and no mechanisms to implement it. Accountability and consul-
tation are not as hard to deﬁne as one might think. In 1989 and 1990, the World
Archaeological Congress (WAC), in the Vermillion Accord and The First Code of
Ethics made great progress in doing so. WAC included indigenous people in its
governing body since its beginnings in 1986. In 1989, at an Intercongress on ar-
chaeological ethics and the treatment of the dead, indigenous people and ar-
chaeologists reached a brief agreement called the Vermillion Accord.

The Vermillion Accord contains six clauses:

3.2.1 The Vermillion Accord 

1. Respect for the mortal remains of the dead shall be accorded to all 
irrespective of origin, race, religion, nationality, custom, and tradition.
2. Respect for the wishes of the dead concerning disposition shall be
accorded whenever possible, reasonable, and lawful, when they are
known or can be reasonably inferred. 

when data become people

79

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 80

3. Respect for the wishes of the local community and of relatives or
guardians of the dead shall be accorded whenever possible, reasonable,
and lawful.
4. Respect for the scientiﬁc research value of skeletal, mummiﬁed, and
other human remains (including fossil hominids) shall be accorded
when such value is demonstrated to exist.
5. Agreement on the disposition of fossil, skeletal, mummiﬁed, and
other remains shall be reached by negotiation on the basis of mutual 
respect for the legitimate concerns of communities for the proper
disposition of their ancestors, as well as the legitimate concerns of
science and education.
6. The express recognition that the concerns of various ethnic groups,
as well as those of science are legitimate and to be respected, will permit
acceptable agreements to be reached and honored. 

Much of the discussion at the Intercongress centered on the idea that in-
digenous  peoples  and  archaeologists  did  not  understand  what  the  other
group really wanted. Much was said of each group fearing the other. The Na-
tive American people present continually raised the concept of respect, and
that concept eventually became part of every clause of the ﬁnal Vermillion
Accord.

The  accord  insists  that  agreement  on  the  disposition  of the  dead  be
reached by respectful mutual negotiation. Some felt the accord did not go far
enough or provide enough protection for either indigenous rights or science.
Nor did it provide formal mechanisms through which negotiations could be
made. However, the accord did accomplish recognition by all parties of the
rights of others concerned in the issue. Importantly, it represented the ﬁrst
time that indigenous people formally recognized the rights of science and ed-
ucation. Although no one thought the accord was perfect, it received wide
recognition  and  has  been  used  as  a  baseline  in  a  number  of disputes  in
Canada, the United States, and Australia.42

3.2.2 First Code of Ethics

One of the indigenous participants in the Intercongress determined that the
accord did not go far enough in terms of actual practice. At the World Ar-
chaeological Congress 2 in Venezuela the following year, he gathered a group
of indigenous representatives and one non-indigenous archaeologist to discuss
a possible ethics code that might help operationalize the accord. That group
proposed an ethics code for archaeology’s dealings with indigenous peoples.
The WAC Executive and Council adopted the code.43

The code consists of two parts, eight “Principles to Abide By” and seven

“Rules to Adhere To.”They are as follows:

lawrence j. zimmerman

80

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 81

principles to abide by:

Members agree that they have obligations to indigenous peoples and
that they shall abide by the following principles:
1. To acknowledge the importance of indigenous cultural heritage,
including sites, places, objects, artifacts, and human remains, to the
survival of indigenous cultures.
2. To acknowledge the importance of protecting indigenous cultural
heritage to the well-being of indigenous peoples.
3. To acknowledge the special importance of indigenous ancestral
human remains, and sites containing and/or associated with such
remains, to indigenous peoples.
4. To acknowledge that the important relationship between indigenous
peoples and their cultural heritage exists irrespective of legal ownership.
5. To acknowledge that the indigenous cultural heritage rightfully
belongs to the indigenous descendants of that heritage.
6. To acknowledge and recognize indigenous methodologies for 
interpreting, curating, managing, and protecting indigenous cultural
heritage.
7. To establish equitable partnerships and relationships between
Members and indigenous peoples whose cultural heritage is being 
investigated.
8. To seek, whenever possible, representation of indigenous peoples in
agencies funding or authorizing research to be certain their view is
considered as critically important in setting research standards,
questions, priorities, and goals.

Rules to Adhere To:
Members agree that they will adhere to the following rules prior to,
during, and after their investigations:
1. Prior to conducting any investigation and/or examination, Members
shall with rigorous endeavor seek to deﬁne the indigenous peoples
whose cultural heritage is the subject of investigation.
2. Members shall negotiate with and obtain the informed consent of
representatives authorized by the indigenous peoples whose cultural 
heritage is the subject of investigation.
3. Members shall ensure that the authorized representatives of the
indigenous peoples whose culture is being investigated are kept
informed during all stages of the investigation.
4. Members shall ensure that the results of their work are presented
with deference and respect to the identiﬁed indigenous peoples.
5. Members shall not interfere with and/or remove human remains 
of indigenous peoples without the express consent of those concerned.

when data become people

81

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 82

6. Members shall not interfere with and/or remove artifacts or objects
of special cultural signiﬁcance, as deﬁned by associated indigenous
peoples, without their express consent.
7. Members shall recognize their obligation to employ and/or train
indigenous peoples in proper techniques as part of their projects, and
utilize indigenous peoples to monitor the projects.

This code should not be taken in isolation from the Vermillion Accord,
and it should be understood that much of the code derives from many points
raised by indigenous peoples in the reburial debate. I believe most of the code
is not too hard to live with. Most of the elements are a simple expression of
cultural relativism and respect.

Principle 5 causes some problems in that many archaeologists contend
that archaeological materials are a public heritage and do not belong to any
particular group, especially if demonstrating the connection to a particular
group is difﬁcult or of considerable antiquity. Principles 7 and 8 might also
cause difﬁculty in that they make indigenous peoples equal partners in re-
search. Principle 8 especially may cause difﬁculty for archaeologists in that
some will be reluctant to relinquish any control of their research project to
anyone else, indigenous or not, on the grounds of academic freedom. On the
other hand, principle 8 is good in that it actually demands that members take
active steps toward involving indigenous peoples in research decision-making
processes.

Most of the “Rules To Adhere To” are straightforward. Many archaeolo-
gists and indigenous people would point out that identifying all pertinent in-
digenous groups and their authorized representatives is difﬁcult. There seemed
to be a consensus among the indigenous peoples present at the meeting that
they are aware of the problems, but that the important issue is that the ar-
chaeologist makes a determined effort to inform and involve indigenous peo-
ples. This may involve not only informing ofﬁcials, but also making contact
with traditional leaders. As well, time frameworks to accomplish consultation
may need to be expanded over what might normally be considered comfort-
able to many.

Most North American archaeologists would not likely support such a
code, but this has not been true elsewhere. In Australia, where interaction be-
tween Aboriginal people and archaeologists has been as difﬁcult, the Aus-
tralian Archaeological Association adopted a code virtually identical to WAC’s
in late 1990.44 The community of Australian archaeologists is substantially
smaller and less diverse than in the United States, no doubt making passage of
such a code far easier.

lawrence j. zimmerman

82

4 changing
archaeo-
logical ethics
by changing
archaeology 

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 83

I suspect that for bodies such as the SAA to adopt an ethics code like that of
WAC or the Australian organization would be nearly impossible. Feelings still
run very high about the passage of NAGPRA, with some calling it an “un-
mitigated disaster” for archaeology, putting “ethnicity and religious belief on
an equal footing with science.”45 Importantly, it recognizes that the past is not
a public heritage, but one that recognizes the rights of particular groups to
control a past they claim as their own. This, of course, stands in almost direct
opposition to what is apparently a fundamental archaeological ideology about
the past in which American archaeology has a huge investment. Still, limited
codes such as that of the SAA, even though they lack much precision, will
cause people to consider their responsibilities and accountabilities. 

For archaeology to progress as far as I would like it to would require a
substantive shift in the way archaeology operates. Archaeology would have to
move away from a positivist scientiﬁc position toward a more humanistic ap-
proach,  one  that  I  have  called  ethnocritical  archaeology.46 This  approach 
directly involves indigenous people (or any other affected group) in the ar-
chaeological  process,  working  together  with  archaeologists  to  set  research
agendas and perhaps even getting involved in the excavations and analyses. In-
formation offered by the groups, such as oral tradition, is considered equally
with excavated material evidence. The approach can still be scientiﬁc, with
clearly deﬁned rules, by negotiating the methods and procedures to be fol-
lowed and by indicating the empirical and logical components of reasoning.
Procedures might even be negotiated to deal with conﬂicting evidence or ﬁnd-
ings. This admittedly more modest scientiﬁc approach is placed fully in a so-
cial context where it can be useful to archaeology, but completely accountable
to a speciﬁc public. 

Certainly, archaeology can continue as it has been, or it can even fully 
reject  such  an  approach.  If it  does,  the  consequences  should  be  clear—
archaeology will see continued erosion of its position with its various publics.
Archaeology could choose to see a shift in both ethics and practice as an op-
portunity, recognizing that the result will be a very different kind of archae-
ology. If it should choose this course, in some ways it will be a ﬁeld that will
be better informed about the past. A more accountable archaeology, thor-
oughly engaged with its publics, may also ﬁnd a public more willing to consider
a more purely scientiﬁc approach. Ultimately, this might make archaeologists
even better stewards of the past by fully enlisting its publics in protection of
sites.

In the end, ethics codes are no panacea to archaeology’s difﬁculties with
Native Americans or any other group. Such codes of practice must still be in-
dividually translated and enacted. I prefer to think of them in terms that 
Alison Wylie  suggests.47 Ethical  codes  such  as  that  of the  SAA  or WAC
should be considered as “ceilings” of ethical behavior rather than as “ﬂoors”
of professional conduct. 

when data become people

83

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 84

notes

Alison Wylie, in her written work and in conversation, has helped me a great deal in my
understanding of ethics. Mark Lynott and Alison Wylie afforded me the opportunity to
participate in the Society for American Archaeology’s ethical considerations. The opin-
ions presented here have beneﬁted from many discussions with Randy McGuire, Jane Hu-
bert, Leonard Bruguier, Hirini Matunga, Maria Pearson, Jan Hammil, Christine Lovell-
Jones, Claire Smith, Tom Biolsi, Peter Ucko, Tom Patterson, Mark Leone, Kurt Dongoske,
Tristine Smart, and Brian Molyneaux. This should not be understood, however, as any en-
dorsement by them of these opinions. 
1. In this paper, I will be using Native American, American Indian, and Indian interchangeably.
I fully understand that various groups and individuals have preferences and that the terms
have “political” connotations. Likewise, I generally use the term archaeology, but it may in-
clude human osteologists and physical anthropologists who work on human remains, and
museum specialists whose work includes prehistoric American Indian materials. 
2. For more detail, see the Case Studies section of The Repatriation and Reburial site on the
World Wide Web at http://www.uiowa.edu/~anthro/reburial/repat.htm.
3. G. A. Clark, NAGPRA and the Demon-Haunted World, 14(5) Society for American Ar-
chaeology Bulletin 3 (1996). 
4. Ronald J. Mason, Letter to the Editor, 15(1) Society for American Archaeology Bulletin 3 (1997).
5. Id. at 3.
6. Stephen J. Gould, The Panda’s Thumb: More Reﬂections in Natural History 27‒28 (W. W. 
Norton & Company, New York 1980).
7. See Gordon R. Willey and Jeremy A. Sabloff, A History of American Archaeology 39‒47 (W. H.
Freeman and Company, New York 1993).
8. Randall H. McGuire, Why Have Archaeologists Thought the Real Indians Were Dead
and What Can We Do about It? in Indians and Anthropologists: Vine Deloria, Jr. and the Critique
of Anthropology 63‒91 (Thomas Biolsi and Larry Zimmerman eds., University of Arizona
Press, Tucson 1997).
9. Bruce G. Trigger, Archaeology and the Image of the American Indian, 45 American An-
tiquity 662‒76 (1980).
10. Roger Grosser, Federal Involvement In Great Plains Archaeology, Special Publication of the
South Dakota Archaeological Society 8, 57‒64 (1981).
11. Thomas C. Patterson, Toward a Social History of Archaeology in the United States 108‒10 (Har-
court Brace College Publishers, Fort Worth 1995).
12. Mark J. Lynott and Alison Wylie, Stewardship: The Central Principle of Archeologi-
cal Ethics, in Ethics in American Archaeology: Challenges for the 1990s 29 (Mark J. Lynott and 
Alison Wylie eds., Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C. 1995).
13. Alison Wylie, Archaeology and the Antiquities Market: The Use of “Looted” Data,
in Ethics in American Archaeology: Challenges for the 1990s 17‒21 (Mark J. Lynott and Alison
Wylie eds., Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C. 1995).
14. See, for example, the comments of Ethne Barnes in a transcript of Bones of Contention,
a  BBC  Horizon  production,  at  http://www.uiowa.edu/~anthro/reburial/bbcbones.
html.
15. Clark, supra note 3 at 3.

lawrence j. zimmerman

84

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 85

16. Lynott and Wylie, Stewardship, supra note 12 at 28.
17. For a good summary of processual archaeology, see Colin Renfrew and Paul Bahn, Ar-
chaeology: Theories, Methods, and Practice 448‒450 (Thames and Hudson, London 1996).
18. Daniel Miller and Christopher Tilley, Ideology, Power, and Prehistory: An Introduc-
tion, in Ideology, Power, and Prehistory 3 (Daniel Miller and Christopher Tilley eds., Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge 1984).
19. Charles R. McGimsey III, Standards, Ethics, and Archaeology: A Brief History, in
Ethics in American Archaeology: Challenges for the 1990s 11 (Mark J. Lynott and Alison Wylie eds.,
Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C. 1995).
20. Id.
21. Id.
22 Predicaments, Pragmatics, and Professionalism: Ethical Conduct in Archaeology (J. Ned Woodall ed.,
Society of Professional Archaeologists, Oklahoma City 1990).
23. Society of Professional Archaeologists, Code of Ethics for SOPA Members. Society of
Professional Archaeologists Web Site, at http://www.smu.edu/~anthrop/sopa.html#CODE_
OF_ETHICS.
24.  American  Cultural  Resources  Association,  Code  of Ethics,  ACRA  Web  Site,  at
http://www.mindspring.com/~wheaton/Ethics.html.
25. Dell Hymes, The Use of Anthropology, in Reinventing Anthropology 49 (Dell Hymes ed.,
Vintage Books, New York 1974).
26. American Anthropological Association, Principles of Professional Responsibility,
American Anthropological Association Web Site, at http://www.ameranthassn.org/ethstmnt.htm.
27. American Anthropological Association, Code of Ethics of the American Anthropological Asso-
ciation, Final Draft, March 1, 1997, American Anthropological Association Web Site, at http://
www.ameranthassn.org/ethcode.htm.
28. Mark Lynott, Archaeological Ethics and Practice, 62 American Antiquity 590 (1997).
29. Ethics in American Archaeology: Challenges for the 1990s (Mark J. Lynott and Alison Wylie eds.,
Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C. 1995).
30. Lynott, supra note 28 at 592‒93.
31. Alison Wylie, Ethical Dilemmas in Archaeological Practice: Looting, Repatriation,
Stewardship, and the (Trans)formation of Disciplinary Identity, 4(2) Perspectives on Science
179 (1996).
32. Larry J. Zimmerman, Human Bones as Symbols of Power: Native American Views of
“Grave-robbing” Archaeologists, in Conﬂict in the Archaeology of Living Traditions 211‒16 (Robert
Layton ed., Unwin Hyman, London 1989).
33. Clement Meighan, Archaeology and Anthropological Ethics, 26:9 Anthropology Newslet-
ter 20 (1985).
34. David Lowenthal, The Past Is a Foreign Country 410 (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge 1985).
35. Clark, supra note 3 at 3.
36. Ben K. Rhodd, Reburial in South Dakota: Two Perspectives, in Preservation on the Reser-

when data become people

85

IJCP.07 Zimmerman  11/4/98 10:52 AM  Page 86

vation: Native Americans, Native American Lands and Archaeology 369‒75 (Anthony Klesert and
Alan Downer eds., Navajo Nation Archaeology Department, Window Rock, AZ 1990).
37. Miles Richardson, The Museum, 20 Southern Review 919‒27 (1984).
38. William  Merrill,  Edmund  Ladd,  and T.  J.  Ferguson, The  Return  of the  Ahayu:da:
Lessons for Repatriation from Zuni Pueblo and the Smithsonian Institution, 34 Current
Anthropology 523‒67 (1993).
39. Larry J. Zimmerman, Regaining Our Nerve: Ethics, Values, and the Transformation of
Archaeology, in Ethics in American Archaeology: Challenges for the 1990s 65‒66 (Mark J. Lynott
and Alison Wylie eds., Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C. 1995).
40. Lynott, supra note 28 at 592.
41. For examples, see several papers in Native Americans and Archaeologists: Stepping Stones to Com-
mon Ground (Nina Swidler, Kurt Dongoske, Roger Anyon, and Alan Dower, eds., AltaMira
Press, Walnut Creek, CA 1997).
42. Jane Hubert, Dry Bones or Living Ancestors? Conﬂicting Perceptions of Life, Death,
and the Universe, 1 International Journal of Cultural Property 105‒27 (1992).
43. For a full account of the code’s origins, see Larry Zimmerman and Leonard Bruguier,
Indigenous People and the Word Archaeological Congress Code of Ethics, 2:1 Public Ar-
chaeology Review 5‒9 (1994).
44. Iain Davidson, Preface, in Archaeologists and Aborigines Working Together ix, 83 (Iain David-
son, Christine Lovell-Jones, and Robyne Bancroft eds., University of New England Press,
Armidale, NSW 1995). 
45. Clark, supra note 3 at 3.
46. Larry J. Zimmerman, Remythologizing the Relationship between Indians and Ar-
chaeologists, in Native Americans and Archaeologists: Stepping Stones to Common Ground 54‒55 (Nina
Swidler, Kurt Dongoske, Roger Anyon, and Alan Dower eds., AltaMira Press, Walnut
Creek, CA 1997).
47. Wylie, supra note 32 at 592‒93.

lawrence j. zimmerman

86


