 (2006) 13:393–408. Printed in the USA.
Copyright © 2006 ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums
As approved by the 21st General Assembly of ICOM in
Seoul, Republic of Korea, 8 October 2004

The cornerstone of ICOM is the ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums. It sets mini-
mum standards of professional practice and performance for museums and their
staff. In joining the organisation, ICOM members undertake to abide by this Code.

1. MUSEUMS PRESERVE, INTERPRET AND PROMOTE THE NATURAL

AND CULTURAL INHERITANCE OF HUMANITY

Principle
Museums are responsible for the tangible and intangible natural and cultural her-
itage. Governing bodies and those concerned with the strategic direction and over-
sight of museums have a primary responsibility to protect and promote this heritage
as well as the human, physical and financial resources made available for that purpose.
Institutional Standing

1.1 Enabling Documentation

The governing body should ensure that the museum has a written and pub-
lished constitution, statute, or other public document in accordance with
national laws, which clearly states the museum’s legal status, mission, per-
manence and nonprofit nature.

1.2 Statement of the Mission, Objectives and Policies

The governing body should prepare, publicise and be guided by a state-
ment of the mission, objectives and policies of the museum and of the role
and composition of the governing body.

Physical Resources

1.3 Premises

The governing body should ensure adequate premises with a suitable envi-
ronment for the museum to fulfil the basic functions defined in its mission.

1.4 Access

The governing body should ensure that the museum and its collections are
available to all during reasonable hours and for regular periods. Particular
regard should be given to those persons with special needs.

393

394

DOCUMENTS

1.5 Health and Safety

The governing body should ensure that institutional standards of health,
safety and accessibility apply to its personnel and visitors.

1.6 Protection Against Disasters

The governing body should develop and maintain policies to protect the
public and personnel, the collections and other resources against natural
and humanmade disasters.

1.7 Security Requirements

The governing body should ensure appropriate security to protect collec-
tions against theft or damage in displays, exhibitions, working or storage
areas and while in transit.

1.8 Insurance and Indemnity

Where commercial insurance is used for collections, the governing body
should ensure that such cover is adequate and includes objects in transit or
on loan and other items that are the responsibility of the museum. When
an indemnity scheme is in use, it is necessary that material not in the own-
ership of the museum be adequately covered.

Financial Resources

1.9 Funding

The governing body should ensure that there are sufficient funds to carry
out and develop the activities of the museum. All funds must be ac-
counted for in a professional manner.

1.10 Income-Generating Policy

The governing body should have a written policy regarding sources of in-
come that it may generate through its activities or accept from outside
sources. Regardless of funding source, museums should maintain control
of the content and integrity of their programmes, exhibitions and activi-
ties. Income-generating activities should not compromise the standards of
the institution or its public. (See 6.6).

Personnel

1.11 Employment Policy

The governing body should ensure that all action concerning personnel is
taken in accordance with the policies of the museum as well as the proper
and legal procedures.

1.12 Appointment of the Director or Head

The director or head of the museum is a key post and when making an
appointment, governing bodies should have regard for the knowledge and
skills required to fill the post effectively. These qualities should include
adequate intellectual ability and professional knowledge, complemented
by a high standard of ethical conduct.

DOCUMENTS

395

1.13 Access to Governing Bodies

The director or head of a museum should be directly responsible, and have
direct access, to the relevant governing bodies.

1.14 Competence of Museum Personnel

The employment of qualified personnel with the expertise required to meet
all responsibilities is necessary. (See also 2.19; 2.24; section 8).

1.15 Training of Personnel

Adequate opportunities for the continuing education and professional de-
velopment of all museum personnel should be arranged to maintain an
effective workforce.

1.16 Ethical Conflict

The governing body should never require museum personnel to act in a
way that could be considered to conflict with the provisions of this Code
of Ethics, or any national law or specialist code of ethics.

1.17 Museum Personnel and Volunteers

The governing body should have a written policy on volunteer work that
promotes a positive relationship between volunteers and members of the
museum profession.

1.18 Volunteers and Ethics

The governing body should ensure that volunteers, when conducting mu-
seum and personal activities, are fully conversant with the ICOM Code of
Ethics for Museums and other applicable codes and laws.

2. MUSEUMS THAT MAINTAIN COLLECTIONS HOLD THEM IN TRUST

FOR THE BENEFIT OF SOCIETY AND ITS DEVELOPMENT

Principle

Museums have the duty to acquire, preserve and promote their collections as a
contribution to safeguarding the natural, cultural and scientific heritage. Their
collections are a significant public inheritance, have a special position in law and
are protected by international legislation. Inherent in this public trust is the no-
tion of stewardship that includes rightful ownership, permanence, documenta-
tion, accessibility and responsible disposal.
Acquiring Collections

2.1 Collections Policy

The governing body for each museum should adopt and publish a written
collections policy that addresses the acquisition, care and use of collections.
The policy should clarify the position of any material that will not be cat-
alogued, conserved, or exhibited. (See 2.7; 2.8).

396

2.2 Valid Title

DOCUMENTS

No object or specimen should be acquired by purchase, gift, loan, bequest,
or exchange unless the acquiring museum is satisfied that a valid title is
held. Evidence of lawful ownership in a country is not necessarily valid title.

2.3 Provenance and Due Diligence

Every effort must be made before acquisition to ensure that any object or
specimen offered for purchase, gift, loan, bequest, or exchange has not been
illegally obtained in, or exported from its country of origin or any inter-
mediate country in which it might have been owned legally (including the
museum’s own country). Due diligence in this regard should establish the
full history of the item since discovery or production.

2.4 Objects and Specimens from Unauthorised or Unscientific Fieldwork

Museums should not acquire objects where there is reasonable cause to be-
lieve their recovery involved unauthorised or unscientific fieldwork, or in-
tentional destruction or damage of monuments, archaeological or geological
sites, or of species and natural habitats. In the same way, acquisition should
not occur if there has been a failure to disclose the finds to the owner or
occupier of the land, or to the proper legal or governmental authorities.

2.5 Culturally Sensitive Material

Collections of human remains and material of sacred significance should
be acquired only if they can be housed securely and cared for respectfully.
This must be accomplished in a manner consistent with professional stan-
dards and the interests and beliefs of members of the community, ethnic or
religious groups from which the objects originated, where these are known.
(See also 3.7; 4.3).

2.6 Protected Biological or Geological Specimens

Museums should not acquire biological or geological specimens that have
been collected, sold, or otherwise transferred in contravention of local, na-
tional, regional or international law or treaty relating to wildlife protection
or natural history conservation.

2.7 Living Collections

When the collections include live botanical or zoological specimens, spe-
cial consideration should be given to the natural and social environment
from which they are derived as well as any local, national, regional or in-
ternational law or treaty relating to wildlife protection or natural history
conservation.

2.8 Working Collections

The collections policy may include special considerations for certain types
of working collections where the emphasis is on preserving cultural,
scientific, or technical process rather than the object, or where objects

DOCUMENTS

397

or specimens are assembled for regular handling and teaching purposes.
(See also 2.1).

2.9 Acquisition Outside Collections Policy

The acquisition of objects or specimens outside the museum’s stated pol-
icy should only be made in exceptional circumstances. The governing body
should consider the professional opinions available to it and the views of
all interested parties. Consideration will include the significance of the ob-
ject or specimen, including its context in the cultural or natural heritage,
and the special interests of other museums collecting such material. How-
ever, even in these circumstances, objects without a valid title should not
be acquired. (See also 3.4).

2.10 Acquisitions Offered by Members of the Governing Body or Museum

Personnel
Special care is required in considering any item, whether for sale, as a do-
nation, or as a tax-benefit gift, from members of governing bodies, mu-
seum personnel, or the families and close associates of these persons.

2.11 Repositories of Last Resort

Nothing in this Code of Ethics should prevent a museum from acting as
an authorised repository for unprovenanced, illicitly collected or recov-
ered specimens or objects from the territory over which it has lawful
responsibility.

Removing Collections

2.12 Legal or Other Powers of Disposal

Where the museum has legal powers permitting disposals, or has acquired
objects subject to conditions of disposal, the legal or other requirements
and procedures must be complied with fully. Where the original acquisi-
tion was subject to mandatory or other restrictions these conditions must
be observed, unless it can be shown clearly that adherence to such restric-
tions is impossible or substantially detrimental to the institution and, if
appropriate, relief may be sought through legal procedures.

2.13 Deaccessioning from Museum Collections

The removal of an object or specimen from a museum collection must
only be undertaken with a full understanding of the significance of the
item, its character (whether renewable or non-renewable), legal standing,
and any loss of public trust that might result from such action.

2.14 Responsibility for Deaccessioning

The decision to deaccession should be the responsibility of the governing
body acting in conjunction with the director of the museum and the cu-
rator of the collection concerned. Special arrangements may apply to work-
ing collections. (See 2.7; 2.8).

398

DOCUMENTS

2.15 Disposal of Objects Removed from the Collections

Each museum should have a policy defining authorised methods for per-
manently removing an object from the collections through donation, trans-
fer, exchange, sale, repatriation, or destruction, and that allows the transfer
of unrestricted title to any receiving agency. Complete records must be
kept of all deaccessioning decisions, the objects involved, and the disposal
of the object. There will be a strong presumption that a deaccessioned item
should first be offered to another museum.

2.16 Income from Disposal of Collections

Museum collections are held in public trust and may not be treated as a
realisable asset. Money or compensation received from the deaccessioning
and disposal of objects and specimens from a museum collection should
be used solely for the benefit of the collection and usually for acquisitions
to that same collection.

2.17 Purchase of Deaccessioned Collections

Museum personnel, the governing body, or their families or close associ-
ates, should not be permitted to purchase objects that have been deacces-
sioned from a collection for which they are responsible.

Care of Collections

2.18 Collection Continuity

The museum should establish and apply policies to ensure that its collec-
tions (both permanent and temporary) and associated information, prop-
erly recorded, are available for current use and will be passed on to future
generations in as good and safe a condition as practicable, having regard
to current knowledge and resources.

2.19 Delegation of Collection Responsibility

Professional responsibilities involving the care of the collections should be
assigned to persons with appropriate knowledge and skill or who are ad-
equately supervised. (See also 8.11).

2.20 Documentation of Collections

Museum collections should be documented according to accepted profes-
sional standards. Such documentation should include a full identification
and description of each item, its associations, provenance, condition, treat-
ment and present location. Such data should be kept in a secure environ-
ment and be supported by retrieval systems providing access to the
information by the museum personnel and other legitimate users.

2.21 Protection Against Disasters

Careful attention should be given to the development of policies to pro-
tect the collections during armed conflict and other human-made or nat-
ural disasters.

DOCUMENTS

399

2.22 Security of Collection and Associated Data

The museum should exercise control to avoid disclosing sensitive personal
or related information and other confidential matters when collection data
is made available to the public.

2.23 Preventive Conservation

Preventive conservation is an important element of museum policy and
collections care. It is an essential responsibility of members of the mu-
seum profession to create and maintain a protective environment for the
collections in their care, whether in store, on display, or in transit.

2.24 Collection Conservation and Restoration

The museum should carefully monitor the condition of collections to de-
termine when an object or specimen may require conservation-restoration
work and the services of a qualified conservator-restorer. The principal
goal should be the stabilisation of the object or specimen. All conserva-
tion procedures should be documented and as reversible as possible, and
all alterations should be clearly distinguishable from the original object or
specimen.

2.25 Welfare of Live Animals

A museum that maintains living animals should assume full responsibility
for their health and well-being. It should prepare and implement a safety
code for the protection of its personnel and visitors, as well as of the an-
imals, that has been approved by an expert in the veterinary field. Genetic
modification should be clearly identifiable.

2.26 Personal Use of Museum Collections

Museum personnel, the governing body, their families, close associates, or
others should not be permitted to expropriate items from the museum
collections, even temporarily, for any personal use.

3. MUSEUMS HOLD PRIMARY EVIDENCE FOR ESTABLISHING

AND FURTHERING KNOWLEDGE

Principle

Museums have particular responsibilities to all for the care, accessibility and in-
terpretation of primary evidence collected and held in their collections.
Primary Evidence

3.1 Collections as Primary Evidence

The museum collections policy should indicate clearly the significance of
collections as primary evidence. The policy should not be governed only by
current intellectual trends or present museum usage.

400

DOCUMENTS

3.2 Availability of Collections

Museums have a particular responsibility for making collections and all rel-
evant information available as freely as possible, having regard to restraints
arising for reasons of confidentiality and security.

Museum Collecting & Research

3.3 Field Collecting

Museums undertaking field collecting should develop policies consistent with
academic standards and applicable national and international laws and treaty
obligations. Fieldwork should only be undertaken with respect and consid-
eration for the views of local communities, their environmental resources
and cultural practices as well as efforts to enhance the cultural and natural
heritage.

3.4 Exceptional Collecting of Primary Evidence

In exceptional cases an item without provenance may have such an inher-
ently outstanding contribution to knowledge that it would be in the public
interest to preserve it. The acceptance of such an item into a museum col-
lection should be the subject of a decision by specialists in the discipline
concerned and without national or international prejudice. (See also 2.11).

3.5 Research

Research by museum personnel should relate to the museum’s mission and
objectives and conform to established legal, ethical and academic practices.

3.6 Destructive Analysis

When destructive analytical techniques are undertaken, a complete record
of the material analysed, the outcome of the analysis and the resulting re-
search, including publications, should become a part of the permanent record
of the object.

3.7 Human Remains and Materials of Sacred Significance

Research on human remains and materials of sacred significance must be
accomplished in a manner consistent with professional standards and take
into account the interests and beliefs of the community, ethnic or reli-
gious groups from whom the objects originated, where these are known.
(See also 2.5; 4.3).

3.8 Retention of Rights to Research Materials

When museum personnel prepare material for presentation or to docu-
ment field investigation, there must be clear agreement with the sponsor-
ing museum regarding all rights to such work.

3.9 Shared Expertise

Members of the museum profession have an obligation to share their
knowledge and experience with colleagues, scholars and students in rele-
vant fields. They should respect and acknowledge those from whom they

DOCUMENTS

401

have learned and should pass on such advancements in techniques and
experience that may be of benefit to others.

3.10 Co-operation Between Museums and Other Institutions

Museum personnel should acknowledge and endorse the need for co-
operation and consultation between institutions with similar interests and
collecting practices. This is particularly so with institutes of higher edu-
cation and certain public utilities where research may generate important
collections for which there is no long-term security.

4. MUSEUMS PROVIDE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE APPRECIATION,

UNDERSTANDING AND MANAGEMENT OF THE

NATURAL AND CULTURAL HERITAGE

Principle

Museums have an important duty to develop their educational role and attract
wider audiences from the community, locality, or group they serve. Interaction
with the constituent community and promotion of their heritage is an integral
part of the educational role of the museum.
Display & Exhibition

4.1 Displays, Exhibitions and Special Activities

Displays and temporary exhibitions, physical or electronic, should be in ac-
cordance with the stated mission, policy and purpose of the museum. They
should not compromise either the quality or the proper care and conser-
vation of the collections.

4.2 Interpretation of Exhibitions

Museums should ensure that the information they present in displays and
exhibitions is well-founded, accurate and gives appropriate consideration
to represented groups or beliefs.

4.3 Exhibition of Sensitive Materials

Human remains and materials of sacred significance must be displayed in a
manner consistent with professional standards and, where known, taking
into account the interests and beliefs of members of the community, ethnic
or religious groups from whom the objects originated. They must be pre-
sented with great tact and respect for the feelings of human dignity held by
all peoples.

4.4 Removal from Public Display

Requests for removal from public display of human remains or material of
sacred significance from the originating communities must be addressed
expeditiously with respect and sensitivity. Requests for the return of such

402

DOCUMENTS

material should be addressed similarly. Museum policies should clearly de-
fine the process for responding to such requests.

4.5 Display of Unprovenanced Material

Museums should avoid displaying or otherwise using material of question-
able origin or lacking provenance. They should be aware that such displays
or usage can be seen to condone and contribute to the illicit trade in cul-
tural property.

Other Resources

4.6 Publication

Information published by museums, by whatever means, should be well-
founded, accurate and give responsible consideration to the academic dis-
ciplines, societies, or beliefs presented. Museum publications should not
compromise the standards of the institution.

4.7 Reproductions

Museums should respect the integrity of the original when replicas, repro-
ductions, or copies of items in the collection are made. All such copies should
be permanently marked as facsimiles.

5. MUSEUMS HOLD RESOURCES THAT PROVIDE OPPORTUNITIES

FOR OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES AND BENEFITS

Principle

Museums utilise a wide variety of specialisms, skills and physical resources that
have a far broader application than in the museum. This may lead to shared re-
sources or the provision of services as an extension of the museum’s activities.
These should be organised in such a way that they do not compromise the museum’s
stated mission.
Identification Services

5.1 Identification of Illegally or Illicitly Acquired Objects

Where museums provide an identification service, they should not act in
any way that could be regarded as benefiting from such activity, directly or
indirectly. The identification and authentication of objects that are believed
or suspected to have been illegally or illicitly acquired, transferred, im-
ported or exported, should not be made public until the appropriate au-
thorities have been notified.

5.2 Authentication and Valuation (Appraisal)

Valuations may be made for the purposes of insurance of museum collec-
tions. Opinions on the monetary value of other objects should only be given
on official request from other museums or competent legal, governmental

DOCUMENTS

403

or other responsible public authorities. However, when the museum itself
may be the beneficiary, appraisal of an object or specimen must be under-
taken independently.

6. MUSEUMS WORK IN CLOSE COLLABORATION WITH THE

COMMUNITIES FROM WHICH THEIR COLLECTIONS

ORIGINATE AS WELL AS THOSE THEY SERVE

Principle

Museum collections reflect the cultural and natural heritage of the communities
from which they have been derived. As such, they have a character beyond that of
ordinary property, which may include strong affinities with national, regional, local,
ethnic, religious or political identity. It is important therefore that museum policy
is responsive to this situation.

Origin of Collections

6.1 Co-operation

Museums should promote the sharing of knowledge, documentation and
collections with museums and cultural organisations in the countries and
communities of origin. The possibility of developing partnerships with mu-
seums in countries or areas that have lost a significant part of their heritage
should be explored.

6.2 Return of Cultural Property

Museums should be prepared to initiate dialogues for the return of cultural
property to a country or people of origin. This should be undertaken in an
impartial manner, based on scientific, professional and humanitarian prin-
ciples as well as applicable local, national and international legislation, in
preference to action at a governmental or political level.

6.3 Restitution of Cultural Property

When a country or people of origin seeks the restitution of an object or
specimen that can be demonstrated to have been exported or otherwise
transferred in violation of the principles of international and national con-
ventions, and shown to be part of that country’s or people’s cultural or
natural heritage, the museum concerned should, if legally free to do so, take
prompt and responsible steps to co-operate in its return.

6.4 Cultural Objects From an Occupied Country

Museums should abstain from purchasing or acquiring cultural objects from
an occupied territory and respect fully all laws and conventions that regu-
late the import, export and transfer of cultural or natural materials.

404

DOCUMENTS

Respect for Communities Served
6.5 Contemporary Communities

Where museum activities involve a contemporary community or its heri-
tage, acquisitions should only be made based on informed and mutual con-
sent without exploitation of the owner or informants. Respect for the wishes
of the community involved should be paramount.

6.6 Funding of Community Activities

When seeking funds for activities involving contemporary communities, their
interests should not be compromised. (See 1.10).

6.7 Use of Collections from Contemporary Communities

Museum usage of collections from contemporary communities requires re-
spect for human dignity and the traditions and cultures that use such ma-
terial. Such collections should be used to promote human well-being, social
development, tolerance, and respect by advocating multisocial, multicul-
tural and multilingual expression. (See 4.3).

6.8 Supporting Organisations in the Community

Museums should create a favourable environment for community support
(e.g., Friends of Museums and other supporting organisations), recognise
their contribution and promote a harmonious relationship between the com-
munity and museum personnel.

7. MUSEUMS OPERATE IN A LEGAL MANNER

Principle
Museums must conform fully to international, regional, national and local legis-
lation and treaty obligations. In addition, the governing body should comply with
any legally binding trusts or conditions relating to any aspect of the museum, its
collections and operations.
Legal Framework

7.1 National and Local Legislation

Museums should conform to all national and local laws and respect the
legislation of other states as they affect their operation.

7.2 International Legislation

Museum policy should acknowledge the following international legislation
that is taken as a standard in interpreting the ICOM Code of Ethics for
Museums:
• Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict (“The Hague Convention” First Protocol, 1954, and Second Pro-
tocol, 1999);

• Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (UNESCO, 1970);

DOCUMENTS

405

• Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna

and Flora (Washington, 1973);

• Convention on Biological Diversity (UN, 1992);
• Convention on Stolen and Illicitly Exported Cultural Objects (UNIDROIT,

1995);

• Convention on the Protection of

the Underwater Cultural Heritage

(UNESCO, 2001);

• Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage

(UNESCO, 2003).

8. MUSEUMS OPERATE IN A PROFESSIONAL MANNER

Principle

Members of the museum profession should observe accepted standards and laws
and uphold the dignity and honour of their profession. They should safeguard the
public against illegal or unethical professional conduct. Every opportunity should
be used to inform and educate the public about the aims, purposes, and aspira-
tions of the profession to develop a better public understanding of the contribu-
tions of museums to society.

Professional Conduct

8.1 Familiarity with Relevant Legislation

Every member of the museum profession should be conversant with rele-
vant international, national and local legislation and the conditions of their
employment. They should avoid situations that could be construed as im-
proper conduct.

8.2 Professional Responsibility

Members of the museum profession have an obligation to follow the poli-
cies and procedures of their employing institution. However, they may prop-
erly object to practices that are perceived to be damaging to a museum, to
the profession, or to matters of professional ethics.

8.3 Professional Conduct

Loyalty to colleagues and to the employing museum is an important pro-
fessional responsibility and must be based on allegiance to fundamental
ethical principles applicable to the profession as a whole. These principles
should comply with the terms of the ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums
and be aware of any other codes or policies relevant to museum work.

8.4 Academic and Scientific Responsibilities

Members of the museum profession should promote the investigation, pres-
ervation, and use of information inherent in collections. They should, there-

406

DOCUMENTS

fore, refrain from any activity or circumstance that might result in the loss
of such academic and scientific data.

8.5 The Illicit Market

Members of the museum profession should not support the illicit traffic
or market in natural or cultural property, directly or indirectly.

8.6 Confidentiality

Members of the museum profession must protect confidential informa-
tion obtained during their work. In addition, information about items
brought to the museum for identification is confidential and should not
be published or passed to any other institution or person without specific
authorisation from the owner.

8.7 Museum and Collection Security

Information about the security of the museum or of private collections
and locations visited during official duties must be held in strict confi-
dence by museum personnel.

8.8 Exception to the Obligation for Confidentiality

Confidentiality is subject to a legal obligation to assist the police or other
proper authorities in investigating possible stolen, illicitly acquired, or il-
legally transferred property.

8.9 Personal Independence

While members of a profession are entitled to a measure of personal in-
dependence, they must realise that no private business or professional in-
terest can be wholly separated from their employing institution.

8.10 Professional Relationships

Members of the museum profession form working relationships with nu-
merous other persons within and outside the museum in which they are
employed. They are expected to render their professional services to oth-
ers efficiently and to a high standard.

8.11 Professional Consultation

It is a professional responsibility to consult other colleagues within or out-
side the museum when the expertise available in the museum is insuffi-
cient to ensure good decision-making.

Conflicts of Interest

8.12 Gifts, Favours, Loans, or Other Personal Benefits

Museum employees must not accept gifts, favours, loans, or other per-
sonal benefits that may be offered to them in connection with their duties
for the museum. Occasionally professional courtesy may include the giv-
ing and receiving of gifts, but this should always take place in the name of
the institution concerned.

DOCUMENTS

407

8.13 Outside Employment or Business Interests

Members of the museum profession, although entitled to a measure of
personal independence, must realise that no private business or profes-
sional interest can be wholly separated from their employing institution.
They should not undertake other paid employment or accept outside com-
missions that are in conflict, or may be viewed as being in conflict, with
the interests of the museum.

8.14 Dealing in Natural or Cultural Heritage

Members of the museum profession should not participate directly or in-
directly in dealing (buying or selling for profit) in the natural or cultural
heritage.

8.15 Interaction with Dealers

Museum professionals should not accept any gift, hospitality, or any form
of reward from a dealer, auctioneer, or other person as an inducement to
purchase or dispose of museum items, or to take or refrain from taking
official action. Furthermore, a museum professional should not recom-
mend a particular dealer, auctioneer, or appraiser to a member of the public.

8.16 Private Collecting

Members of the museum profession should not compete with their insti-
tution either in the acquisition of objects or in any personal collecting
activity. An agreement between the museum professional and the govern-
ing body concerning any private collecting must be formulated and scru-
pulously followed.

8.17 Use of the Name and Logo of ICOM

The name of the organisation, its acronym or its logo may not be used to
promote or endorse any for-profit operation or product.

8.18 Other Conflicts of Interest

Should any other conflict of interest develop between an individual and
the museum, the interests of the museum should prevail.

GLOSSARY

APPRAISAL

The authentication and valuation of an object or specimen. In certain countries the term is
used for an independent assessment of a proposed gift for tax benefit purposes.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The existence of a personal or private interest that gives rise to a clash of principle in a work
situation, thus restricting, or having the appearance of restricting, the objectivity of decision
making.

CONSERVATOR-RESTORER

Museum or independent personnel competent to undertake the technical examination, pres-
ervation, conservation and restoration of cultural property. (For further information, see ICOM
News, vol. 39, n81 (1986), pp. 5–6.)

408

DOCUMENTS

CULTURAL HERITAGE

Any thing or concept considered of aesthetic, historical, scientific or spiritual significance.

DEALING

Buying and selling items for personal or institutional gain.

DUE DILIGENCE

The requirement that every endeavour is made to establish the facts of a case before deciding
a course of action, particularly in identifying the source and history of an item offered for
acquisition or use before acquiring it.

GOVERNING BODY

The persons or organisations defined in the enabling legislation of the museum as responsible
for its continuance, strategic development and funding.

INCOME-GENERATING ACTIVITIES

Activities intended to bring financial gain or profit for the benefit of the institution.

LEGAL TITLE

Legal right to ownership of property in the country concerned. In certain countries this may
be a conferred right and insufficient to meet the requirements of a due diligence search.

MINIMUM STANDARD

A standard to which it is reasonable to expect all museums and museum personnel to aspire.
Certain countries have their own statements of minimum standards.

MUSEUM*

A museum is a non-profit making permanent institution in the service of society and of its
development, open to the public, which acquires, conserves, researches, communicates and
exhibits, for purposes of study, education and enjoyment, the tangible and intangible evidence
of people and their environment.

MUSEUM PROFESSIONAL*

Museum professionals consist of the personnel (whether paid or unpaid) of museums or in-
stitutions as defined in Article 2, paras. 1 and 2, of the ICOM Statutes,who have received
specialised training, or possess an equivalent practical experience in any field relevant to the
management and operations of a museum, and independent persons respecting the ICOM
Code of Ethics for Museums and working for museums or institutions as defined in the Statute
quoted above, but not persons promoting or dealing with commercial products and equip-
ment required for museums and museum services.

NATURAL HERITAGE

Any natural thing, phenomenon or concept, considered to be of scientific significance or to be
a spiritual manifestation.

NON-PROFIT ORGANISATION

A legally established body—corporate or unincorporated—whose income (including any sur-
plus or profit) is used solely for the benefit of that body and its operations. The term “not-
for-profit” has the same meaning.

PROVENANCE

The full history and ownership of an item from the time of its discovery or creation to the
present day, through which authenticity and ownership are determined.

VALID TITLE

Indisputable right to ownership of property, supported by full provenance of the item since
discovery or production.

ENDNOTE

* It should be noted that the terms “museum” and “museum professional” are interim definitions for
use in interpreting the ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums. The definitions of “museum” and “profes-
sional museum workers” used in the ICOM Statutes remain in force until the revision of that document
has been completed.-


